THE Sum of the four Evangelists comprehending both the course of the
history, and also the several points of doctrine set forth in the same,
pointing forth as it were with the hand, that JESUS is CHRIST, the only,
perfect, and sufficient Savior of all the faithful.

Written in Latin by the reverend, learned, and godly father, Master Henry
Bullinger Minister of the Church of Zurich.

Translated into English for the profit of the unlearned by John Tomkys.

Matthewe 17.5. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye
him.

Seen and allowed according to her Majesty's Injunctions.

Imprinted at London for William Ponsonby at the sign of the Bishops head.
1582.

To the reverend Father in God, William Bishop of Couentrie and Liechfielde.
THE material temple at Jerusalem, Reverend Father, although it were very
stately and sumptuous, yet was it so artificially framed, that when the
building came to the setting up, 1. Kin. 6.7.
there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron heard in the house
while it was in building, because the stone was hewn perfectly already,
before it was brought thither.

Wherein, although we have in great admiration the wisdom of Solomon, by
whose direction the building was taken in hand, the circumspection of the
Lords, which over saw the work, the cunning of the maso^s, which squared the
stones, and the plenty of stones, which sufficed so huge a building, yet must
it needs be granted, that the office of those, which carried the stone, and
transported the same, from the place, where it was framed, to the place, where
the temple was erected, was greatly necessary, and to very good purpose in
this gorgious work. The like proportion is observed in the building of the
spiritual temple of God, 1. Cor. 3.16 and 1. Cor. 6.19. 1. Pet. 2.5.
which is every faithful Christian, Mat. 16.16. and 1. Pet. 2.7.
builded by faith upon Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 3.11
being the only foundati-of the same. For Christ, being the wise Solomon in
deed, directs the work by his holy spirit, good christian Princes by
wholesome laws, like good overseers, take order that the work may go forward,
learned and godly preachers, as cunning masons, continually square plenty of
stones, that is, make many godly Sermons, and write su^drie learned books
perfectly agreeing with the square of gods word, Gala. 6.16.
the only rule of spiritual builders, which being translated from tongue into
tongue by the diligence of interpreters, the porters or cariers in this
spiritual work, it comes to pass, that God his elect are builded up by
little and little into a spiritual temple for GOD him self to dwell in, with
great quietness of conscience, which although it be sensibly felt
inwardelye by the faithful believer so builded, yet is it not perceived
outwardly by the wicked raging world, which is no part of this building. How
greatly the ancient Israelites ioyed at the erection of the material temple,
Gala. 6.16.
the many oblations, 1. Kin. 8.61 etc.
which Solomon offered to the Lord, and the solemn feast, which he and all
the people held, most manifestly do declare. How much more then ought we to
offer up unto God Romans 12.1.
the oblations of a godly life, and to joy continually in our hearts,
considering that it has pleased him in Jesus Christ to build us up by his
holy spirit for an holy temple unto him self? Now for so much as it is the
duty of every christian man in his calling, and according to his ability
received of the Lord, to further this joyful work, I, (acknowledging
otherwise mine imbecillitie,) have transported by painful travel into mine
own Country three several stones, well squared in a foraine land by that
godly and learned builder master Henry Bullinger Minister of the Church of
Zurich; by translating into English: first forth of French a godly Sermon of
the Lords Supper, then forth of Latin, a learned treatise touching the
worthiness of holy Scripture, and lastly forth of the same tongue, this
present work insuyng. What moved me to translate the two first treatises, I
have sufficiently showed in mine Epistles dedicatorie prefixed before the same.
It rests therefore that I declare my purpose in this my present interprice.
I rest in hope, that those my cuntreymen, which have diligently read over my
second travail, (that I say nothing of the profect, which they may gather of
the first,) I mean the discourse of the authority of the Scripture etc. have
learned thereby to have due regard of Gods holy word, as of a most excellent
treasure, whereby God sitting in heaven vouchsafes to talk with us dwelling
upon earth: and that they are thereby effectually moved with a fervent desire
to read the Scripture. Wherefore following my purpose, which is according to
my duty to profit my country, and to forder the Lords building. I have
translated presently for the help of the unlearned in reading the Sriptures,
The sum of the four Evangelists, wherebie we may learn not only the
general end of the Gospelles, which is, that Jesus is Christ, the only, and
sufficient Savior of mankind, but also the particular purpose of every
Chapter, yea almost of every verse. By this direction the unlearned are not
led, as are superstitious papists, into the labyrinth of obscure schoolmen,
to be devoured by that monstrous Minotaurus the Roman Antichrist, but guided
in the pathway, that leads to life everlasting, to the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, by whom we are delivered from the tyranny of the Devil, and restored
to the favor of God. And that the diligent reader might receive by the reading
hereof no small profecte, I have noted in the margent, by the direction of the
Alphabeticall letters, those verses of the text of the Evangelists, from
chapter to chapter, whereunto every part of this Sum is answerable, besides
other notes, (profitable I trust) which there also I have put down. Much
about the time, that I finished this my simple travel, reverend Father, your
Lordship was elected by God his providence Bishop of this Diocese.
Whereupon, not having determined to whom I might dedicate this work, I
resolved with my self to offer it to your Lordeshippe, as a present, wherewith
God has abled me being one of your diocese, to bid you welcome into our
country. I doubt not, but as it has pleased GOD to make you among us the
chief patron of his cause, so will you vouchsafe favorably to accept these
my labors tending only to the advancement of the same. GOD long preserve
your Lordeshippe in good health, increase his gracious gifts in you, and of
his infinite mercy so assiste you with his holy spirit, that you may
carefully look unto us your flock, and prosperously proceed in all your
good doings, to our comfort, and to his glory. From mine house in Bilston
the fourth of June. 1581.

Your Lordshippes at commandment John Tomkys.

The Sum of the Gospel by Saint Matthew.
MATTHEW sets forth in the first chapter the kindred and parentage of Christ
the Lord, The first chapter. From the first verse unto the 18.
showing of who^ he was descended true man after the flesh and according to the
oracles of the Prophets. From the 18. verse unto the end of the chapter.
Unto the declaration of his stock he joins his concepcion and nativity,
proving that Christ the Lord was purely conceived of the holy Ghost, and not of
the seed of Joseph, and borne of the pure Virgin Marie. The second chapter.
The su^me of the whole chapter.
Then he shows that this Christ was borne for the Jews and the Gentiles:
and that the Jews care not much for Christ, but the Gentiles diligently seek
him, find him, and worship him. From the 1. verse to the 3.
For God, to declare by some famous appearaunce and notable show this mystery
of salvation given to the world, immediately after the incarnation of the
Lord stirs up Eastern men, even the The great learned and wise men among
the Persians were called Magi.
Magies, that is to say chief and wise men, who iourneying from the East by
the provocation of a star, come to Jerusalem to seeks the king and redeemer
of the world, where when as by their plain report it was made known, that
the Messiah the king of Israel was borne, In the 3. ver.
king Herod being afraid In the 4. ver.
calls together all the wise men of the Jews, and commands them to
search diligently the oracles of the Prophets touching the birth and
country of the Messiah. From the giver. unto ye 8.
They answer forthwith that the captain of Israel should be borne in
Bethlehem a city of Jury. From the 8. ver. unto the 11
Therefore the wise men take their journey to Bethlehem, In the 11. ve.
where they find the Lord his Masshiah in Hebrew, is as much to say as
Anointed in English.
Messiah very poor and of small reputation, yet, do they reuere^tly worship
him, and honor him with mystical presents, and witness by this their deed,
first that this child, although he seem to be of contemptible condition, is
the Lord of all men, and the king and deliverer both of the Jews and
Gentiles: secondly that the same ought to be woorshipped and honored of all
men. From the 16. ver. unto the 19
The mean season that old serpent the Devil practices his ancient arts.
For he stirs up Herod the king of the Jews, to destroy Christ the true
king of Israel in the beginning of his grouth. Therefore the cruel and
ambitious tyrant through cruelty not heard of before fills the coasts of
Bethlehem with the most innocent blood of infantes, if by chance in this
slaughter of infantes, being two years old or under, he might destroy the
king of Israel also: From the 12. ver. unto the 16
but this abominable and wicked hope deceived that most vile and filthye
wretch. For the Lord is conveyed by the counsel of the Angel of the Lord
into Egypt, From the 19 ver. unto the end of the chapter.
where he lay hid until the vengeance of GOD had destroyed that wicked
murderer. The mystical sense of the 2. Chapter.
which things were forewarning tokens of the kingdom of Christ, and of the
affairs to come of the Church, wherein Christ ye only salvation, the appointed
king over all the world, is always assaulted of the wicked, and yet does he
the mean while work the salvation of the faithful, and by suffering
continually obteineth the victory: and yet so, that the Godly notwithstanding
are exercised with continual temptations and afflictions to their own profit
and glory. A brief argument of the third and fourth chapter.
The third and fourth Chapter set forth unto thee, reader, a clearer and
plainer manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ the Savior of the world. For
the Father does not now show his Son to a few and to certain chosen for the
purpose, or by one or two revelations, as hitherto we saw he did: but made
him known to all the world, and that by innumerable and most evident
demonstrations and proofs, and proposed him to be beholden most manifestlye
with all his treasures. The 3. chap.
From the first verse unto the thirtienth.
For first he calls forth John the son of Zachary the priest, the very
Helias promised in the Prophets, a man of most holy life, and of very great
authority among the people of the Jews, and makes him his messenger to
preach the coming of his son into the flesh, and too prepare the minds of
all men, that they might be the more ready to receive Christ, when he came.
Therefore this Helias (John the Baptist) comes forth, and exhorts all men
to repentance, and to prepare themselves for the Lord against his coming. In
the 2. chap.
For he adds expressly, that the kingdom of heaven is at hand, What is
mea^t by the kingdom of heaven.
that is to say, that that time approached, yea was present, wherein GOD by his
Prophets had promised, that he would power forth by his Son all the
treasures of his grace and gifts upon men, and that he would reign in
them. In the 6. ver.
Unto this doctrine he adds the famous and holy Sacrament of Baptism,
whereby he might represent even visibly the mysteries of GOD, to the
woorshippers of GOD, and geather together into one body the faithful people,
and graffe them into Christ. In the verse.
And then the heavenly father calls forth also his own son forth of
Galilee, where he lay hid hitherto, into Jury, that, because the minds of
the common people seemed now sufficiently prepared by the baptist to receive
Christ, he himself might come forth in open view now, declaring and showing
himself to the world no longer by the testimony of others, but by his own
doctrine, and by his own virtues. Therefore the Lord comes into Jury unto
Iordane, where John taught and baptized into Christ, and he also is baptized
of John.

In the 14. and 15. verse.
Moreover the Baptist acknowledges forthwith the Savior of the world, and
therefore witnesses in most manifest words, that this very self same is
the Son of GOD, the lamb of GOD, which should take away the sins of the
world, of whom hitherto he spoke, for whom he commanded all men to wait,
and now repeating the very self same thing fervently, he sends all men to
Christ only. In the 16. ve.
Furthermore ye heavenly father adds hereunto from heaven his honorable and
strange witness. For after that the heavens were opened, and the holy Ghost
was lighted upon the head of Christ in the visible likeness of an heavenly
dove, he says, as it were poynting forth his finger toward Christ, In the
17. ve.
and also adding thereunto a most clear voice, This is my dearly beloved
Son, yea and so thoroughly beloved, that for his sake only, I am now thoroughly
pleased and reconciled to the world, wherewith for their sins I was most
grievously offended. The 4. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 12.
And he, after so excellent a testimony did not forthwith preach him self,
and set forth himself to be beholden and inioyed of all men, but entering
into the barries, or wreastling place of most strong temptations, wherein Adam
fighting unhappily was subdued, he now the second Adam, contending more
happelye, both conquereth Satan the co^querour, and taught us also to conquer
him being conquered: From the 12 ver. unto ye 18.
and now being conqueror, comes forth at the last with great authority,
as the Lord of the Devil, and of all things, and promises his woorshippers
life, and every good thing, yea and the kingdom of heaven also, preaching the
grace of GOD, and the forgiveness of sins, and exhorting all men to the
amendment of life.

From the 18. verse unto the 23.
Furthermore that we might understand, that this promising of life, and
preaching of grace does not only pertayne to the men of that age, but also
unto all men, which should come after, even to the end of the world, he
chooses to him self Disciples, whom he might appoint witnesses in the world
of all things, which he spoke and did, and whom he might thorowely teach the
mysterye of life, that they being perfectlye instructed, might commend both
by lively voice and by writings living for ever, the treasures of the grace of
God, bestowed through Christ upon all the world and in all ages, and that
they might as it were distribute the same. From the 23. verse to the end of the
chapter.
He adds heereunto notable and great benefits, in curing by his virtue and
power all diseases, although incurable. The use of the Miracles of Christ.
For so does he declare unto us all, not only in words, but also even by
his virtue and power, that he is even such, as his doctrine sets him
forth, that is to say, the Savior of the world, which both is willing and
able to save them which woorshippe him: and therefore they also ought to
commit themselves by faith to him only. A brief remembrance of the
contents of these two chapters before going.
These be the holy and wholesome documentes, which thou learnest in these
two chapters, so that the very majesty and profit of so great a matter may
cause thee to be studious and diligent, except thou be altogether a stock. A
brief repetition of the fourth chapter.
Among other things, which Matthewe has set forth unto us in this fourth
chapter before going he has given us a certain taste of the sermons of the
doctrine of Christ touching repentance, and forgiveness of sins, that is
to say, of the mysterye of the Gospel and grace of GOD, I mean of the
acknowledging and confessing of our sins, and of the turning from our sins
to the living GOD, through the faith of Jesus Christ, whereby we obtain
remission of our sins and everlasting life, so many of us as believe with all
our hearts: A brief argument of the 5.6 and 7. chapters.
now the same Author Matthewe goes forward and expounds in the three
chapters following other chief places also of the doctrine of Christ, not using
now his accustomed briefness, that is to say, regestring only the sum of
the Lord his talk, but setting forth at large, Christ his whole sermon,
even as it was made by himself, that we might thereby judge more certainly
and rightly of all the doctrine of Christ, and that after repentance and
remission of sins, being two chief points of our religion, we might also
more fully understand other very excellent places of Christian religion. The
quality of Christ his Sermon.
The oration or sermon of Christ is spent in teaching and expounding, and in
some places also in giving of precepts, being therefore diverse and made of
diverse matters. The 5 chap.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 17.
For first he disputes plainly of the true blessedness or happiness,
showing in what things it does consist, and in the mean season privily
confuting the foolish and corrupt opinions of the common people touching the
true felicity. From the 17. ver. unto the end of the chapter.
Then he comes to purge the law. For the Pharisees had corrupted it with
their traditions, and made it obscure with their false expositions. Therefore
he shows manifestly by certain examples taken forth of the law, which is
the natural sense of the law, and what the law of GOD requires of us,
setting forth with all the difference of true and counterfaite righteousness.
The 6. chap.
A brief argument of ye first part of the 6. chap. From ye 1. ver. unto the 19
And because he reasoned of righteousness, and emonge all the works of
righteousness the most excellent are alms, or mercifulness, or
bountifulness, also prayer or a fervent talking with God, and fasting, or the
chastising of the body, and of our flesh, therefore our Lord purges these
works of righteousness, or exercises of godliness, from hypocrisy,
wherewith the Pharisees had polluted them, restoring them to their ancient and
natural beauty, From the first verse unto ye 5.
and showing most woorthily how we should give our alms aright, From the
5. verse unto the 16.
how we should pray truly, From the 16. verse unto ye 19
and how we should fast religiously. A brief reason of the treatise against
covetousness in the end of the chapter.
Herevppon forsomuche as it is most manifest, that none other affection does
so greatelye withdraw us from all godliness and righteousness, as the desire
of having, and the ouermuche curious carfulness for meat, drink, and cloth,
and other things needful. From the 19 verse unto the end of the chapter.
Therefore in the fourth place he disswadeth us by his grave speech from
covetousness, and plucketh up aptlye ouermuche carfulness, that is to say,
wicked mistrust, forth of the hearts of his servants, and ingraffeth again
faith toward GOD, and a faithful desire of religion and righteousness. The
seventh chapter.
From the 1. verse unto the 7.
Afterward signifiyng with great faithfulness and diligence, that the rash
judgment of men touching other men, I mean backebyting and sclaundering,
ought to be avoided, he teaches us to use our tongue moderately and rightly.
For there springs no less troubles forth of the abuse of the tongue, than
forth of covetousness and the desire of having. From the 7 verse unto the 12.
Moreover because all these things are made perfect in us by divine virtue
through the benefit of grace, not through our own strength, therefore the
Lord does exhort, profitably and in place, his worshippers to faithful
prayers, whereby they may crave, that strength may be given them of God, least
at any time they faint in doing their duty. Besides this he makes most clear
and most large promises, promising that he will hear the prayers of the
faithful, ye thereby he may the more kindle and inflame in ye godly the desire
to pray. In the 12. verse.
And drawing into a brief sum all these things hitherto most ple^tifully
proposed, he says: All things, whatsoever ye would that me^ should do to you,
do ye even so to the^, for this is the law and the Prophets In the 13. and 14.
verses.
The^ proposing two ways, and showing the manner, the reason, and the end of
both the ways, he exhorts us all to enter into that way, which indeed is
the straighter and rougher, but yet leads us in unto life everlasting. From
the 15. verse unto the 21.
Again because he had spoken of the way, through the which men go to
destruction, he gives diligent warding forthwith, least any where the godly
should be led out of the way to their destruction, by the practices and
deceiptfulnesse of false Prophets, whom he paynteth forth in their colors,
least they should deceive the simple with their goodly show, and least the
godly should be plucked from the way of truth into the encumbrances of
heresies, and unto their utter ruin. From the 21. verse. unto the 24.
At the last concluding this most divine sermon, he shows plainelye in the
last place, that none outward show does profit any man to the making perfect
of godliness, From the 24. verse unto the end of the chap.
therefore he gives us to understand that it is not sufficient for the
obtaining of godliness and everlasting life, to hear and understand the
word of GOD, or to brag with lofty words, except we express the same
also by the most holy works of faith and virtues: and this does he declare
by a feyned narration or a very proper parable, and sets it forth before
all men's eyes, exhorting every one of us to the true study of true
godliness, which has the continuing and most sweet fruit of everlasting
life. The conclusion of the exposition of the sermon.
And this is the argument and sum of all the oration, which our Lord and
savior Christ made to all people in the mountain. Thereof Saint Augustine
says: It appears that this sermon conteyneth perfectlye all those precepts
wherewith Christian life is instructed. Augustine.
Matthew his purpose in the 3. chap. last before going.
Matthewe has recited in the three chapters before going the whole sermon of
Christ, that he might give us a taste, and as it were geather together the
sum of all the doctrine of Christ, His purpose in the 2. chapters following.
and in these two chapters following he sets forth plainlye the virtue and
the exceeding great power of Christ, by geathering together very many his
myraculous benefits, and proposes the same power being so set forth to
be diligently considered of all men The use of the miracles of Jesus Christ.
that thereby all the world may geather that Jesus Christ is the living,
true, and almighty son, of the living and almighty GOD: and that he is not
only almighty, but that he is also most bountiful, which came to convert,
to heal, and to save sinners. This does he prove, I say, most evidently by the
most divine and most strange miracles wrought by Christ, whereof this is the
sum. The eight chapter.
From the 1. verse unto ye 5.
First he cleanses the Leper, which made suit unto him. From the 5. verse unto
the 14.
Then he restores to life and perfect health a certain Centurion his
servant, being ready to give up the Ghost forthwith, and as it were dead.
In the 14. and 15. verse.
After this he heals Saint Peter his wives mother lying sick of a fever:
From the 16. verse unto the 19.
and to be brief cuteth all the infirmities of all.

From the 23. verse unto the 28.
Moreover rebuking the very Sea, being a most barbarous Element, and raging with
cruel tempests, he made it more calm than any oil. From the 28. verse unto
the end of the chapter.
Straight way after he draws unto him by his hid virtue, two possessed with
Devils, who breaking into pieces all their boltes and chains, were very
troublesome to passengers, and could not be kept in order by the skill or
strength of any, forth of these miserable creatures he casts a whole legion
of devils and restores them to their first health.

The 9. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 9.
Furthermore, he so delivered from a most grievous disease, a man sick of a
palsy lying in a bed, not a man, but more truly ye miserable carcass of a
man, that forthwith he standing on his feet walked lustily, which hitherto
was borne of others, and to make short, he him self bare his bed strongly on
his shoulders, whereby whilst he was sick he was stayed up. In the 9. ver.
And then is Leui (otherwise called Matthew) called to repentance, From the 10.
ver. unto the 14
and also a great hope is opened unto sinners, which turn to Christ. From the
20. ver. unto ye 23.
After these things were thus done, the incurable disease of the woman, which
was pitifully diseased with an issue of blood, is cured. In the 18. and 19.
ver. and from the 23. ver* unto the 27.
Also Iairus his daughter, which was dead, is called back to life. From the 27
ver. unto the 32
And two blind men receive their sight, From the 32. ver. unto the 35.
and a certain man in very miserable plight is delivered from a dumb Devil.
In the 35 ver.
Neither wrought he these few miracles only, but going through all cities and
villages, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, he healed all sicknesses
and all diseases among the people. what we must learn by these miracles.
By all these miracles Matthew the apostle declares unto us, and proves as it
were by most strong and vnrefutable arguments and testimonies, that Christ is
the true son of the true God, the Lord of all things, I mean of all
elements, of all diseases and afflictions, of all sins, of the Devil, and of
death it self: and that therefore he came into this world, that he might
make us the Lords of all things, and the sons of God, namely if we receive
him with true faith. The manner of Matthew his writing.
Therefore Matthew his purpose is, not only to describe by the deeds of
Christ, the virtue of Christ, and that he is the bountiful and liberal
bestower of all good things, but also to paint forth their faith and all their
manners which received the benefits of Christ. What we must learn of them,
upon who^ Christ wrought his miracles.
For of them, as of lively examples, we learn what manner of faith ours ought to
be, and how we should behave our selves; that we may be made partakers of
the benefits of God, that is to say, how we may become the sons of God,
and the Lords of things, who^ neither sin, nor death, nor the devil
himself can hurt, if we following their examples, do those things, which
they did. Certain points omitted purposely in the narration before going.
Now he intermedleth among these miracles certain things in the 8. Chapter
touching the In the 8 chap. the 11. and 12. ver. and the 19.20.22. and 22.
verse.
calling to the faith of the Gospel, and in the 9. chapter concerning In the
9. cha. From the 14. unto the 18 ver.
fasting, and certain other things, which also make to the setting forth of
the virtue of faith, and of the power and gentleness of the Lord. The deeds
and words of Christ.
And it is a very evident and familiar kind of doctrine to teach by history
or examples, that is to say, rather by deeds then by words: therefore the
three first Evangelists do more often handle the doings of Christ then
declare his sayings. And in deed Christ seems unto us to be much more
lively, when he works miracles than when he teaches. For although his
doctrine had a divine efficacy and force also, yet do his deeds after a sort
excel, exercising and approving that which is taught. Let no man therefore
contemn ye former Evangelists in comparison of John, because he seems to be
more often occupied and. more dilligent in opening the words of Christ: whose
words also have their majesty: for the holy Ghost has directed the minds
and pens of all the Evangelists to this purpose, that we might have, forth
of four authors of sufficient credit, a most certain and undoubted history
of all the words and deeds of Christ. What order Matthew uses
It appears also by those things, which have been handeled hitherto, that
Matthew in the beginning used a natural order, and somewhat after an
artificial, and that he goes forward now chiefly in this order, because it is
most fit to teach by. For he seems to have a care, not so much to set
forth faithfully that which was said and done by the Lord, as to place every
thing in his own place and order, and fitly to teach by fit order, and
chiefly to move the minds of the hearers, yea and to ingraffe most deeply
Christ, and faith in Christ. A brief rehearsal of those things which
Matthew has handled hitherto.
Hitherto Matthew has reported a certain abridgement of all ye doctrine of
Christ the Lord, whereby he plentifully instructed his worshippers in true
godliness: hereunto he has joined certain of his greatest miracles, even
divine and wonderful works, whereby he has declared that he is the mighty
and gentle Lord of all things, which can make the^ also, that stick unto him
by true faith, Lords of sin, of death, of Satan, and of all things else. In
this business he had chosen to himself witnesses, whom hitherto he made both
be holders and hearers of all his matters, as well of his sayings, as of his
doings: to this end verily, that they might afterward bring forth into all
the world the charge of common salvation, now conceived and laid up in their
minds. From the 36. ver. unto the end of the chapter.
And now they seemed sufficiently instructed in the rudiments and principles of
faith and of Christian religion, therefore it was convenient yt they should be
further exercised therein, and by the means thereof prepared to greater matters:
The 10. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 7.
and therefore they are sent forth of the Lord him self to preach the
Gospel now to the people of Israel only, From the 7. ver. unto the 16
and are instructed in certain commandments. For the Lord does diligently
prescribe what they ought to do, and what their office is: In the 16.17 and 18.
verses.
And he shows the^ also what they shall suffer, yea how perilous a thing it
is to be a minister of the word in a corrupt and unthankful age. From the 19.
verse unto the end of the chapter.
Therefore he comforts his disciples worthily and finely with furnished talk,
teaching them how they ought to continue consta^tly in all adversities in true
godliness, and to overcome all evils. The 11. cha.
In the 1. ver.
Afterward Matthew shows, how the Lord Jesus himself, who only is commended
and enjoined to the true preachers of God his word to be preached by the^,
disclosed himself, and made himself known to be the true Messiah, ye only
expected salvation of the world: which verily is the first and most sure
foundation of all the Lord his preaching. From the 2. ver. unto the 16
In the same place also is set forth the praise of John the Baptist, that is
to say a most clear example of a very good minister, proposed to al those,
which are desirous to do their duty aright. From the 16. ver. unto the 25
And forthwith is adjoined an excellent example of a sermon of the Lord.
First, how he rebuked the stubborn unbelief of his own nation, and left a
pattern of accusation and reproof to his ministers. In the 25. and 26. ver.
Then how he preached the kingdom of God to men of a better hope. In the 27.
ver
He showed that he has the power of all things, and that he is the fountain
of all goodness, which cannot be drawn dry, which is willing and desirous
to be drawn, In the 28.29. and 30. ver.
and therefore he inuiteth all men unto him, and promises to grant rest unto
all me^, in what distress so ever they be. The 12. cha.
From the 1. verse unto the 9.
Then does he diligently handle the question of the religious keeping of ye
Sabbath, and admonishing by the way yt bou^tifulnes and the inward worshipping
of God, is more allowed of God, than the outward keeping of the Saboth. From
the 9. verse to the 14.
Moreover yt bountifulnes, which lately he commended, he shows to a certain
miserable man very greatly afflicted with a withered hand, which he restored to
him sound. From the 14. verse unto the 22.
And because he could soften the hardness of the people of the Jews neither by
any benefits, nor by any miracles, for so much as they did oftentimes conspire
against him, he departs from the^ for a time, practicing nothing more bitter
or more sharp against them, if peradventure they might be overcome with
gentleness and long suffering, prescribing by ye very same deed of his a form
to his ministers, what they should do also in the like cases and with such manner
of men. But he shrinketh not from his office, he leaves not off to do good,
neither forsakes he the undertaken defense of the truth, yeeldyng no whit at
all in these points to his enemies. In the 22. and 23. verses.
Therefore he delivers from the Devil one possessed with a Devil, which was
brought unto him, being blind and dumb, and restores unto him the use of his
tongue and of his eyes: In the 24. verse.
and because the Pharisees did detract this divine deed, ascribing it to the
working by the Devil, From the 25. ver. unto the 30
the Lord takes upon him the defense of the truth, and proves by most strong
arguments, yt his miracles, works, yea and all his doings were wrought by the
power of God and not of the Devil, and that therefore the kingdom of heaven
was now come. And here does he again most plainly set forth that, which
lately we said was the chief point of our religion, namely, that Jesus is
Christ. From the 30. ver. unto the 46
And forthwith ha^deling his adversaries, as they deserved, he rebukes the^
most gravely. For he shows at large their want of belief, or rather their
ungodliness, and declares what shall become of the conte^ners of the kingdom of
God. From the 46 ver. unto the end of the Chapter.
Lastly he puts back his mother and his cousins, which were desirous to
speak with him, by a somewhat hard answer, signifiing thereby, yt the least
must not be yielded to carnal affections, so often as the affairs of the
kingdom of God are in handeling. A brief repetition of the 3. chapters last
before going.
In the three chapters last before going, Matthew has entreated of the
Ministers of God his word, and of certain chief points of our religion: The
matter bandeled in the 2. chapters following.
and now does there follow a more plentiful treatise of the word of GOD,
of the virtue, fruit, and price thereof: which is fitly knitte to the matter
before going. For the ministry of the word of God is occupied in the very
word of God. And this treatise is set forth in parabolicall speeches and
similitudes, that at the least by this means the minds of the godly might be
stirred up to the searching forth of the truth and mysteries of God. The 13.
cha.
From the first verse. unto ye 24.
And the first parable, proposed touching him which sowed seed in the field,
shows that there be diverse kinds of hearers of God his word, and that God
does not allow all the hearers of his word, but them only, in whom the seed
prospers until it bring forth due fruit. From the 24 verse. unto ye 31.
Forthwith by an other parable, that is to say by the similitude of the tares,
he points forth as it were with the finger an other fault also and plague of
tilled land, teaching in the mean season, how good seed may be preserved
sound. In the 31.32 and. 33. verses. In the 34. and 35. verses is showed the
cause why Jesus spoke by similitudes.

From the 36 unto the 44. verse christ repoundeth the parable of the tares.


After this by two other similitudes, taken from the grain of mustarde seed
and from leven, he shows how great the power of the word of God is, and
how evidently it works in them by whom it is received, although it seem to
the world vile and contemned. In the 44, 45 and 46. verses.
In the fourth place by two other similituds, proposed touching a treasure
hid in the field, and a most precious pearl, he signifies that the price
of God his word is so great, that in comparison hereof we ought to contemn
all things in the world, although they be never so precious, yea that we
ought, with the very loss of all our goods, to provide us the word of God.
From the 47 verse unto ye 51
Again in setting forth the similitude of the net cast into the sea, he
shows plainly what shall become of them especially, which intermedle them
selves in the assembly of the godly, and yet are hypocrites and counterfeite
godliness, teaching the mean while that we must not lightly condemn any
forthwith, but leave every one to his own judge. In the 51 and 52. verses.
When as he had set forth these things after this manner, he commands his
ministers also diligently to way the similitudes, and for the playner setting
forth of the truth, and of the glory of the kingdom of GOD, and for the
profit of the Church, to use all the kinds of elocution and apt speech. From
the 53. verse unto the end of the chapter.
And although the Lord taught in such sort, that no man was able to accuse
either his faithful dealing or his diligence, yet was he little regarded and
accepted of his country men, which contemned and laughed to scorn the heavenly
doctrine of godliness. But he bare this with a valient mind, giving an
example to all his ministers, that they may also take the matter patiently, if
the world also little regard them. The 14. cap
From the first verse unto the 13
And then does Matthewe forthwith set forth the wonderful example of that
very good man John the Baptist, who also was very evil rewarded of Herod for
his faithful service, being most pitifully beheaded of him. From the 13 verse
unto the 22.
After this he fed in the wilderness by his divine power a great multitude of
men, which with merueylous feruentnes thirsted the preaching of the word: showing
by ye miracle, yt the faithful folowers of ye word of God shall want nothing at
any time, especially of those things which are necessary and not
superfluous. And by the same fact he taught his disciples to help the
faithful people having need. From the 22. verse unto the end of ye chap.
Lastly he delivers his disciples, which were in peril of the storms of the
sea and of a great tempest, and which looked for nothing else but most present
death: declaring so unto his, that he is he, which can deliver all from all
perils, and can save al men by his power and grace, chiefly the ministers of
his word. Therefore if the cruel and fearful example of John did any whitte
terrify them, these two great and goodly benefits of God do confirm and
comfort them again. The 15. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 21.
Unto the treatise of the word of God is fitly joined by Matthewe the
disputation touching the traditions of men, or the ordinances and constitutions
of Fathers, as contrary to the word of God. Christ teaches us manifestly to
contemn them, if they tend to the contumely, derogation, and contempt of God
his word. And because the Pharisees the patrons and defenders of men's
traditions, were offended at this wholesome doctrine of the Lord, the Lord
shows forthwith, that no accomptes at all ought to be made of such kind of
offense, and of such kind of men: declaring the mean season, that man is not
defiled with outward things, but rather with those evil things, which
proceed out of the closets of the heart. From the 21. verse unto the 29.
After that withdrawing himself from those indurate and unthankful men, he
departed into the country of the Gentiles, where forthwith a woman of
Syrophenissa being endued with a most strong faith made a most earnest request
unto him: in whom there is set forth most manifestly both a merueylous
example of true faith, and also the effect thereof. For after the reproof of
false doctrine, which is the mother of false faith, there is set forth with
great diligence in these 15, 16, and 17 chapters, as was also in the 8, and 9
chapters, true faith in the Lord, and the true nature of faith, and also in
the same are opened the chiefest articles of our faith. From the 29. verse unto
the end of the chapter.
Moreover returning again into Galilee, he feeds again the common people,
which followed him, showing by this benefit also, that it is he, which can
feed both the soul and the body, and that therefore this food must be
sought for by faith only and most earnestly at ye hands of the shepherd
Christ. The 16. chapter.
From the first verse unto ye 5.
Afterward he repelleth and puts back the Pharisees requiring a sign,
whereby he might prove himself to be ye Messiah, by showing them the sign of
his death and of his resurrection: From the 5. verse unto the 13.
then does he command his disciples to beware of the doctrine of the Pharisees
and Sadduces: ye which thing althoug he had taught in the beginning of ye 15.
chapt. yet both he here speak of it again in the 16 chapter, as a matter very
necessary for ye Church. From the 13. verse unto the 21.
After that returning to the commendatio^ of faith, he lays ye foundation of
faith, builds the Church upon the foundation, and points forth as it were
with the finger, which is the true faith of the Catholic Church, and which is
the true and right confession, showing also how the same may be planted. From
the 21 verse unto the end of the chapter.
Where unto he forthwith adioyneth a most manifest doctrine of his passion and
resurrection, also of the deniyng of one his self and of the bearing of his
cross after Christ, and of the judgment to come, that is to say, of the
greatest articles of our faith, and of the holy duty of Christians, a doctrine
altogether pertaining to the perfectness of faith. The 17. chapter.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 14.
Again least any should be offended at this sorrowful doctrine full of labors
and pains touching the bearing of the cross, Matthewe adioyneth here unto
immediately the glorious transformation of Christ the Lord in the mountain,
whereby he partly gave us a taste of what sort he should be in his glory, and
what the manner of the glory to come is, which is prepared for the^, which
faithfully and patiently bear the cross of Christ: and partly he shows also
most evidently, that he is very Christ promised in the law and the prophets,
that he might confirm the faith of all which believe in him. And he proposed
those things so manifestly to his disciples, that they did now plainly
understand, that Jesus was Christ, and that therefore they did move the
question of the coming of Helias the messenger of the Messiah, where unto the
Lord answering forthwith, affirmed plainly that he was ye Messiah, and that
John Baptist was Helias. From the 14 verse unto the 19.
Lastly he restored a certain Lunatike man unto his father, which made suit
for him, declaring again by the same benefit, that he is the king of his
people, and the conqueror of the Devil: From the 19 verse unto the 22.
showing also how great the power of faith is, and how great the evil of
unbelief is, concluding that by temperance and abstinence proceeding from a
true faith, the force of the Devil is chiefly broken. In the 22. and 23.
verses
And herunto does he forthwith adioyne the preaching and forshewing of his
death and passion, not without great and plentiful fruit. Whereof Matthew
entreated last, and whereof he speaks next
Faith in the Lord Jesus being well taught, and the true knoweledge of the
kingdom of the Son of God being well obtained, whereof Matthewe has
hitherto entreated at large, he passes now wisely to those things, which
almost stand in the outward conversation of man, and which notwithstanding
perteyne to the kingdom of Christ. From the 24 verse unto the end of the cha.
Of the which kind the question concerning the Magistrate is: What Christians
owe unto him? The Lord shows therefore by his own example, what we ought
to do herein rightly. The 18. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 7.
Like unto this is the question touching ecclesiastical pre-eminence: Who
should be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Here the Lord withdraws
the minds of his disciples from ambition and from the disputations raised
touching the primacie and chief authority, and teaching the^ most diligently
humility. From the 7. verse. unto ye 15.
Then does he adioyne hereunto a profitable admonition for the avoiding of
offense: In the 15. and 16. verses
where he entreats also of brotherly admonition, From the 17. verse unto the
21.
of reproving offenders openly, and From the 21. verse unto the end of the
chapter.
of forgiving a trespass, wherein gravely persuading all men, he sets
forth a most goodly parable concerning the same matter. The 19. cha.
From the first verse. unto ye 10.
Having finished these things, he disputes of divorce: he restores and
reformeth the old and holy institution of holy matrimony: In the 10.11 and
12. verses.
he recites the kinds of chaste men, showing that single life is the
singular gift of God. In the 13.14 and 15. verses.
And because marriage was ordained of God chiefly for the procreation of
children, he shows next after the restitution of marriage, how children are
esteemed of God. From the 16 verse unto the 21.
He brings forth also the example of a certain young man, to teach us
thereby, that it belongs to young men also to seek the kingdom of God, and
that God his desire is, yt youth be well brought up. And there is showed, which
is the way to heaven: From the 21. ver. unto ye 27.
Also what the use of riches is, and with what mind we must possess earthly
wealth. From the 27. verse unto the end of ye chap.
Moreover by occasion of the Lords talk, there rises now an other
disputation about the reward of virtues, and how modestly they ought to think
of them selves, which look for rewards. The 20 chap
From the 1. verse unto the 17.
And that he might fasten this more deeply in the minds of all men, he uses
the similitude of a man that was an householder, which hired laborers into his
vineyard, whereby he touches the Jews secretly, and does somewhat shadow
forth the receiving of the Gentiles. In ye 17.18. and 19. verses.
Again least any, being puffed up with pride by the name of reward, should
suppose that he is justified by his own works, the Lord preaches diligently of
his own death and resurrection, that we may understand that we are justified
thereby. From the 20 verse unto the 24
And although he often repeted these things with great gravity, yet does ye
flesh, aspiring continually to honors, seek not those things which are of
God, but which are of men. For the mother of zebedee his children, her sons
not being ignorant thereof, asks chief authority of the Lord for her
sons. In the 24. verse.
Hereupon the other disciples envy them, and contend among themselves sharply
and most ambitiously. From the 25. unto the 29.
But the Lord reduces al their minds to humility, drawing out that same most
hurtefull poison with most evident arguments. From the 29 verse unto the end
of the chapter.
Lastly he restores sight to the blind, which craved the mercy of God, to
this end, that he might declare by all means, that he came into the world to
help and save men. Whereof Matthew spoke before, and whereof he entreats now.
Matthew described last before, what the Lord did hitherto in Galilee, and in
his journey from Galilee, as he went up to Jerusalem, and now does he show
what he did in the holy and royal City it self.

And the nearer he draws to his cross and death, the more lively does he
show his wholesome strength, and most holily sets forth his worthy power and
grace. The 21. cha.
From the 1 verse unto the 8.
For entering now into the holy city with a very new and humble pomp, he
shows most clearly that he is the very king and deliverer of Israel looked
for. From the 8. verse unto the 12.
He is received with wyllyng minds and honorably of the common people, that
we also may learn thereby to receive the Lord truly and religiously. From the
12. verse unto the 17.
And he did in the temple offices very kinglike and priestlike, whereat the
Pharisees and priests almost burst in sunder for spite and hatred.

For first purging the temple from filth, and reforming ye holy worshipping of
God, he thrust the buyers and sellers out of the temple: then taking care for
the poor, he heals the sick. In the 17. verse.
And when these things were happily accomplished he goes forth of the city,
In the 18, and 19. verses.
and curses ye fig tree, which brought forth no fruit, which forthwith
withering, shadowed forth by a certain token, what was imminent to ye holy
city. In the 20, 21 and 22. verses.
Although the Lord by occasion thereof does teach his disciples true faith,
and commend unto them faithful prayers. From the 23 verse unto the 28.
And returnyng to the temple, as belonged unto his princely office, he taught
diligently, and sharply contended with the enemies of true religion. For
whereas they asked, by what authority ye Lord did those things, which he
did, he brydleth them with a contrary question, yea he does most gravely
accuse them of disloyalty and impenitent life. From the 28 ver. unto the 33
For unto this purpose does he bring forth a parable framed touching two
sons, comparing his enemies unto Publicanes and harlottes, that he might
show, that these were more religious and more blessed the^ they. From the 33
verse unto the end of the cha.
Here unto does he forthwith adioyne an other similitud of an householder,
which let out his vineyarde to husband men or farmers, whereby he does
lively paynt forth the benefits of God and the peuish and shameless
unthankfulness of the people of the Jews, whose punishment forth with he
shows, namely that the Jews should be cast off, and that ye Gentiles should
be received into their place. The 22. chap
From the first verse unto the 15.
And unto the same purpose also perteyneth the similitude, which he put forth
touching them that were bydden to the wedding, sharply reproving the
disobedience and unbelief of the nation of the Jews, for ye which they were
to be cut off and to be forsaken. From the 15. verse unto the 23.
These things being finished, Matthewe goes forewarde, and sets forth
plainly certain grave, sharp, and profitable questions or disputations
handeled between the Lord and the lawyers. First of this: whether tribute
ought to be paid to Caesar? From the 23 verse unto the 34.
Then, whether the dead rise again, and how they rise again? From the 34
verse. unto ye 41.
Moreover, what the chiefest commandment in the Law is: what the end and
matter of the law and of the Prophets is? From the 41. verse unto the end of
the chap.
Afterward, how Christ, for so much as he is the son of David, after ye
flesh, can be also his Lord? All these things does our Lord in respect of his
priestly office expound most religiously, most learnedly, most plainly, and
greatly to the profit of the faithful.

The 23. chap
From the 1. ver. of the chap. end of the same.
Lastly, when as he saw the Pharisees and the rest of the rulers of the people
to be altogether blind, indurate, and incurable, he inuayeth most sharply
against them, accusing them of most grievous and unruly offenses: he adds
the punishment of their mischiudus deeds, and the most terrible destruction of
the people and of the city. Al these things did our Lord openly, with great
authority in the temple, instructing his Church hereby profitably, diversely,
and in many points. A remembrance of those things which have bin spoken of
before.
Our Lord has hitherto by the way and yet often spoken of the overthrow of
the people of the Jews and of the city Jerusalem: wherein he comprehended
both the casting off of the Jews out of the fellowship of God, and also the
profanation of the temple, of the priesthood, and of all ye woorshipping,
after the ceremonial law The 24. cha.
From the first verse unto the 42.
* And because these things seemed strange and incredible, namely that God
would profane and forsake that people descended from holy parents, and that
place, and that worshipping, and that holy preisthoode, he does more fully
expound unto his disciples, which inquired there of, the judgment and
destiny hanging over the people and city, lively describing, what wonderful
matters and strange tokens, what troubles, calamities, and miseries should go
before that destruction: and of what manner, how cruel, horrible, and fearful
that ruin should be. Forthwith by occasion of the destruction of the city, he
reasons also of ye destruction of the world, or of the finishing of ye world,
and of ye glorious coming of the son of man to judgment: From the 42. verse
unto the end of ye chap.
exhortyng all men to sober and diligent watchfulnes, proposing rewards to the
watchful, and threatening punishment to the slouthful and sleepie. The 25 chap
From the first verse unto the 31.
Which things forthwt he plainly shows by most comely and most plentiful
similitudes, handeling as well the parts of the watchful as of the sleepie.
From the 31. verse unto the 46.
Lastly Matthewe adioyneth a description, or as if it were a certain figure of
the judge to come, and of his last judgment: wherein ye last sentence is
pronounced by the same judge against al man kind, joyful to the good, but most
sorrowful to ye evil. For this matter is thus concluded: In the last ver of the
chapter.
And these shall go away into everlasting pain: but the righteous into life
eternal. A brief argument of that which follows.
After all these things there is placed, as the finishing and the most perfect
accomplishing of al our salvation, the most holy, and most profitable history
of the passion and redemption of Christ the Lord: wherein he fully executes
all ye offices as well of a priest, as of a king, and in a brief su^me does
propose his greatest force to be beholden of al men. For he teaches diligently
both by all his words and by all his deeds, he instituteth his famous
sacrament, he prays most fervently, he sacrifices for sin, he purges
sinners, he delivers, he pitieth, he defends his servants, and he treads
down and punishes the wicked, showing every where incredible humility, and
declaring sometime no small glory, when as all the elements, being troubled at
his death, showed most plain tokens as it were of their great sorrow. Matthew
handeleth all these things in a goodly order, and in a pure, plain, and lively
style. The 26. chap.
In the 1. and 2 verses.
For first he shows the time wherein he suffered, and proposes the su^me of
his passion. From the 3. ver. unto the 1^
Then he describes some causes of the Lord his death, proceeding partly from
the envy and malice of the Priests against Christ, and partly from the
covetousness and horrible treason of Judas, which sold his Lord to the Senate
of Bishops. From the 17. ver. unto the 26
Having finished the causes, he comes unto the description of his last
supper: wherein above all things he foresheweth his Disciples both his death,
and also that he should be both betrayed and sold of his own: Moreover he
provoke by many means the mind of Judas the traitor to repentance: but in
vain. From the 26 ver. unto the 30
After this he instituteth in it the renowned Sacrament of his body and blood,
the remembrance of his death, wherein we may see the brief sum of our
salvation and of all godliness. In the 30. ver.
When as he had supped, he went out with his disciples unto the mount of
Olives, In the 31. and 32. verses.
In the way he foresheweth the great offense, with should rise among his disciples
because of him. In the 33.34 and 35. verses.
But they being bold enough and rash enough, and not acknowledging enough
their own infirmity, do promise constancy and great faith, Peter specially,
unto whom notwithstanding the Lord foretells his most filthy fall. In the
36.37 and 38. verses.
In the garden of the mount of Olives he is merueilously vexed, and pitifully
tormented with the fear of death. In the 39. verse.
In the mean season he prays earnestly and constantly, commiteing both
himself and all his business to God and to his holy will. From the 40. verse
unto the 47.
Then does he diligently waken his Disciples being a steep: In the 47. verse.
and whilst he was occupied therein, Judas the traitor comes, bringing
with him a rowte of most wicked and most filthy varlets: In the 48. and 49.
verses.
forthwith he kisseth his master, and with a kiss betraieth his Lord to his
most wicked enemies. In the 50. verse.
For the chief Priests servants fall upon ye Lord, take him, bind him, and
oppress him. From the 51. ver. unto the 55
In the mean season Peter fights unhappily for his master, and is stayed by
his master: In the 55. verse.
who also forthwith sharply reproves the open, grievous, and most wicked
reproach of the chief Priests servants then offered unto him. In the 56. ver
And whilst these things were thus in doing, all the Disciples fly from the
Lord. In the 57. and 58. verses.
But he is brought away to Caiphas the high Priest into the consistory. In
the 59.60 and 61. verses
Two things were chiefly handeled there. The Lord is accused before the
Priests and the counsel, false witnesses are brought forth, From the 62 ver.
unto the 65
the Lord his cause is handeled most unjustly, In the 65. and 66. verses
and at the last he is condemned, In the 67. and 68. verses.
buffetted, and most unworthily spit upon. From the 66. verse unto the end of
the chapter.
And withal the filthy and shameful denying of Peter is plentifully
described. The 27 cap.
In the 1 and 2. verses.
And when as the sentence of condemnation was pronounced against him, he is
brought forthwith from the Priests, and forth of the Consistory or hall of
the high priest, into the judgment Hall, unto Pontius Pilate the Roman
Deputy, unto whom he is delivered as the most wicked of all men, and as one
having deserved a most vile death. In the 3.4. and 5. verses.
The mean while Judas the traitor examining himself more deeply, and waying
his most cruel and wicked offense more rightly, goes into the temple,
restores the traitorous money to the Priests, despaireth and most horribly
hangs himself. From the 6. ver. unto the 11
The Priests with the bloody money buie the potters field to bury strangers in.
From the 11. ver. unto the 27
Moreover Pontius Pilate the deputy of the Romans inquireth diligently the
cause, and the chief points of the accusation laid against the Lord by the
Priests: and he understands forthwith, that the envy of the Priests was
the cause: therefore he both pronounces him innocent, and judges, that he
ought to be set fully at liberty: whereupon he tries sundry and many ways
to let him loose, which had committed none evil. The priests are most
wickedly earnest to the contrary, they accuse, they urge, they lie, they
threaten, yea and they persuade and prick forward the common people, and at the
last they overcome the judge being weeried with their importunate cries, to let
them do with the Lord what they list, and to deliver him to his soldiers to be
crucified. From the 27 ver. unto the 35
The souldierrs therefore most cruelly and most unworthily whippe the son of
God with scourges, they crown him with a crown of thorns, they worship him
in contempt, they laugh at him, and spit upon him: then they lay his cross
upon his shoulders, and lead him being half dead unto the place of execution.
From the 35. ver. unto the 45
There they crucify him in the midst between two most wicked thieves, they
part his garments as a certain spoil, and setting all pity and curtisie
aside, they mock him suffering most bitter torments, as thoogh he had bin
deceived of his hope in God. From the 45. ver. unto the 51.
But he, in so many and so great reproaches and torments, continuyng constantly
in perfect faith and patience, and sacrificyng most holyly for the sins of
all the world, cries to God the father, unto whom also, at the last yielding
up the Ghost, be commits his most holy soul. From the 51. ver. unto yt 54.
And forthwith, after he had given up the Ghost, the veil in the temple of
Jerusalem is rent in two pieces, and certain strange wonders are wrought both
in heaven and earth: In the 54, 55 and 56. verses.
wherewith the Centurion an Heathen being moved, does openly witness, that
this Jesus, although he were crucified, was the true son of God. From the 57
verse unto ye 62
After this Joseph of Arimathea, a man of very great credit and dignity,
comes to Pilate, and entreats, yt the body of Jesus might be given to him,
that he might bury it. Pilate grants it willingly, therefore the body of the
Lord is buried most worthily. From the 62 verse unto the end of the chapter.
Moreover ye chief of the Jews fearing that the Lord would rise again,
request also of Pilate that a band of soldiers might be given them to watch
the sepulcher: when they had received this band, they beset the grave most
strongly, and least there might be any deceit wrought, they seal the stone or
cover of ye sepulcher, namely that they might retain and stay the living Lord
among the dead. The matter contained in the last Chapter.
Matthew describes in this last chapter the glorious resurrection of Jesus
Christ the Lord from the dead. The 28. cha.
In the 1. and 2. verses.
The Angel of the Lord comes down from heaven, he rolleth back the stone
from the door of the grave, ye earth shakes with an earthquake, and the glorious
body of the Lord restored to life comes out forthwith. In the 3. and 4.
verses.
Moreover because ye angel did shine like lightning, the keepers being amassed,
wtstand not the Lord rising again, but think it best to provide for themselves
by fleeing away. In the 5.6. and 7. verses.
The mean while come the women to see ye sepulcher, bringing with the^ the
sweet odours, which they had prepared. Unto the^ appears the foresaid angel
of the Lord, and teaches the^ that Christ was risen in deed, commanding them
to depart forthwt, and to report the resurrection to the disciples. In the 8.9.
and 10. verses.
Whilst they were going their way, ye Lord himself met the^, showing himself
plainly unto the^ restored to life, and commanding the^ to declare his true
resurrection unto his disciples. In the 11. verse.
Whilst these things were in doing, those soldiers ye keepers of the
sepulcher, who^ lately we said left their standing and fled, came into the
city, and declared to ye chief Priests those things, which they had seen,
how ye Angel came down from heaven, and rolled back the stone: how Christ
came forth alive again, and how bright and fearful ye form of ye angel was.
From the 12 ver. unto the 16
At with news yt priests and pharisees being astonished and raging, bribed the
soldiers with money, who lying, as they were taught, spread abroad among the
common people this foolish report, that whilst they slept, forsooth the
disciples came and stole his body forth of the Sepulchree. In the 16.17 and
18. verses.
But the Lord Jesus offering himself to be beholden most manifestly of his
Disciples in Galilee, confirms them in the truth of faith. In the 19. and 20.
verses.
And because all things which hitherto have been declared in this book
concerning the doctrine, the deeds, the death and the resurrection of Christ,
do perteine to the common salvation of all mankind, therefore he sends
forth his Disciples as messengers into all the world, commanding them to
baptize and to preach the Gospel to every creature, promising the mean while
that he, although in body he go up to heaven, will be with his, and with his
holy Church continually and unto the end of the world.

Here ends the Sum of the Gopell by Saint Matthewe.
The sum of the Gospel by Saint Mark
SAint Mark begins the history of his Gospel with the baptism and
doctrine of John Baptist, The 1. chap. In the 1. and 2. verses.
From the 3 verse unto the 7.
showing what he taught, In the 7. and 8. verses.
what he witnessed of Christ the Lord, how he behaved himself, In the 9.
ver.
and how he baptized Christ the Lord. In the 10 and 11. verses.
Here unto he joins forthwith, how Christ was anointed and revealed or
made known, In the 12 and 13 verses.
how he was exercised and provoked with grievous temptation, In the 14 and 15
verses,
lastly how he came abroad, and preached ye kingdom of God. From the 16 verse
unto the 21.
He takes unto him self forthwith from the beginning of his preaching
witnesses of his deeds and words, calling some of them disciples, whom he
might fashion and make instructors of all the world, for so much as he came to
lighten all the world with the doctrine of truth, and to redeem the same from
the power of sin, of death, of hell, and of Satan. In the 21. and 22. verses.
Hereunto he joins the most great effect and virtue of Christ his doctrine.
For all men are astonished at his doctrine. From the 23. ver. unto the 28.
Satan is restrained and cast out, who gives place to Christ with fear.
From the 28. ver. unto ye 40.
Afterward Christ himself, and the almighty power of Christ is described
by his deeds. For he heals all diseases, From the 40 verse unto the end of
the chap.
he puts away all evils, The 2. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 13
he forgiueth sins, From the 13. ver. unto ye 18.
he justifies sinners and restores them to their soundness. In the 1. chap.
the 40. ver. and in the 2. chap. the 3, and 4. verse.
The mean while diverse examples are set forth to the faithful, in them
which come to Christ to crave his help, how we also ought to come unto
Christ. From the 18 ver. unto ye 23.
Forthwith the Lord purges the fastinges, From the 23. verse. to the end of
the chap.
and holy days of his people from the erroures of the Pharisees, The 3. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 13.
and the mean season he shows his strength, proouing himself to be the
Son of GOD. From the 13. ver. unto the 20
Now when as by this means he had sufficiently won the hearts of his
disciples, that they might now begin to understand the virtue of Christ
the Son of GOD, he chooses forth of them twelve, unto whom he inioyneth
the charge of preaching the Gospel, and furnishes them with the power of
woorking miracles. From the 20 ver. unto the 31
Then he shows, that the success of the Gospel, and the miracles of the
Gospel ought to be ascribed to the power of GOD, not to Satan, or to magike.
From the 31 ver. unto the end of the chap.
And he shows by his own example, what manner of men the preachers of God
his word should be, namely such as have renounced flesh and blood, and which
are the sons of GOD. The 4. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the end of the chap.
By which occasion he reasons forthwith plentifully of the seed, forth of
which the sons of God grow, that is to say, of the hearing or learning of
God his word, of the effect, force, success, and fruit of GOD his word.
All the which things he proposes inwrapped and covered with most elegant
parables. He adds also the diseases, faults, and perils, whereunto God his
seed is subject, setting forth every where in the mean season the virtue of
Christ. A remembrance of that which was spoken before.
In the chapters before going many things have been disputed touching the word
of God. The matter contained in the 5 6 and 7 chapters.
But the only and most certain purpose of the 5, 6, and 7 chapters is Jesus
the Savior of the world, and faith in him. The 5 chap.
From the first verse. unto the end of the chap.
Therefore that the name of Christ the Savior might be more famous, and that
the faith in him might be more commended to all Saints, Mark places in the
5. chapter three notable histories, whereby he sets forth evidently the
power and virtue of Christ, and teaches faith in Christ. The 6 chap.
From the first verse unto the 4.
Then does he return again to the word of God, and to the preaching of ye
word. For he brings in the Lord preaching in his own country, In the 4, 5,
and 6 verses.
who also sharply accused the unthankfulness of his own people. In the 7
verse
Heereunto he joins in goodly order the sending forth of the disciples to
the office of preaching, From the 8 verse unto the 12.
and sets forth the precepts, wherewith he instructed them being ready to
depart. In the 12 and 13 verses.
And then does he also touch the obedience and diligence of the disciples.
From the 14 verse unto the 30.
Forthwith he sets forth the worthy history of Saint John ye Baptist,
wherein is proposed a notable example of a good and faithful Preacher, and
also declares what his end was. From the 30 ver. unto the 45.
Again to the comfort of his ministers, and for the instruction of all the
faithful, the Lord fed much people in the wilderness, From the 45. verse
unto the end of the chapt.
and delivered his disciples being in peril upon the sea. What may be learned
by the doings of christ spoken of in this chap. before going.
For so does the Lord witness, that he is the food of the faithful, that he
is the chief shepherd, that he gives shepheardes, that he delivers those,
which call upon him, from all dangers, and that he brings them into a quiet
haven. And this much touching the doctrine of the truth: The 7 chap.
From the 1 verse unto ye 14.
heereunto Mark joins a treatise of men's traditions. The Lord teaches to
beware of them and to avoid them. From the 14 ver. unto ye 24.
Notwithstanding leaving forthwith the teachers of men's traditions, he turns
to the people, and expounds to them, which is the true pureness of the
mind, which is the end of the doctrine of Godliness, even that the mind of
man may be purged. From the 24 verse unto the 31.
Lastly by the example of the woman of Sirophenissa true faith in Christ is
taught, From the 31 ver. unto the end of the chapter.
as also by healing the deaf stammerer, is taught how great the goodness and
virtue of the Lord is. The 8. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 11
Because faith is the chiefest virtue of Christians, Mark adioyneth certain
things, whereby he teaches again and confirms the faith of the godly by
the words and deeds of the godly, healing affection, which greatly
disturbeth faith, and deeply ingraffeth the care of things present, yea
mistrust it self. In the 11. and 12. ver.
Hereunto he joins an example of ye unbelief of ye Pharisees, showing yt
unbelief is a most heinous offense and wickedness. From the 12. verse. unto 22.
He commands his disciples to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. From the
22. ver. unto the 27
Afterward he opens the eyes of a blind man, that it may appear even
thereby, who opens the eyes of the mind of the godly. From the 27 ver. unto
the 31
After this there is added an example of the true confession of the Christian
faith. In the 31, 32 and 33. ver.
Where the Lord discusseth many things touching ye mysteries of faith, how
salvation is procured for us by his own death: From the 33 ver. unto the end
of the chapter.
and he reasons also of the denying of one his self, or of the mortification
of the flesh. The 9. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto ye 14
Unto these things is adjoined the transfiguration of the Lord, that hereby
all they, which contemn this present life, may have a taste of the life to
come. From the 14. ver. unto the 30
Afterward it is showed by a notable deed, that Jesus is the Messiah the
Savior of the world, which came to deliver forth of the power of ye Devil
ye faithful believers, which watch diligently with prayers and fastinges
against his lying in wait. From the 30 ver* unto the 38
And now does he also commend to his disciples, modesty and humility of mind,
From the 38. ver. unto the 42
admonishing the mean while, that we condemn no man, or utterly cast of
any: From the 42 verse unto the end of the chap.
where he disputes also of offense, and of ye necessity and use of
correction. The argument of the 10. and 11. chap.
Now does Saint Mark describe in certain chapters, certain chosen and
worthy speeches of the Lord, uttered touching hard and very necessary
points for the framing of holy life aright, that thereby ye godly may learn,
how to behave themselves godly in this world. The 10 cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 13
And first he disputes of marriage, which, being defiled with ye traditions of
ye pharisees, he purges, restoring it to ye natural perfection thereof. From
the 13 ver. unto the 17
The^, because children are ye fruit of marriage, in ye second place he
entreats of them, showing what we should think of the^, as touching their
salvation, teaching yt they must be brought to God. From the 17. ver. unto the
23
In the third place is set forth the famous talk of the Lord with a very
rich young man: whereby sundry things are learned: namely that God is the
chief good: which is the way to heaven: how great ye misery and folly of man
is. From the 23 ver. unto the 28
For he teaches how hardely rich men enter into the kingdom of God. From
the 28 ver. unto the 32
After this he entreats of the reward of virtues, and of their modesty,
which receive the rewards. In the 32, 33 and 34. verses.
Forthwith he puts his disciples in remembrance of the mystery of his
passion. In ye 35, 36, and.37. verses.
In ye same place it appears manifestly in the request of James and John, how
hawtie the flesh is. For these two request, that primacie may be granted the^
of the Lord in the kingdom of Christ: In the 38, 39 and 40. verses.
whom notwithstanding he so brideleth, From the 41. ver unto the 46
that he weedeth out of the rest also ambition and envy, and sows in them
modesty and humility. From the 46. verse unto the end of the chapter.
As also in the history of Bartimeus he beats into them faith. The 11. cha.
From the first verse unto the 12.
After these things he entering into the city of Jerusalem with royal pomp,
shows that he is the true and expected Messiah, the king and priest of God
his people. From the 15. verse unto the 20.
Therefore in discharge of his office he threw the buyers and sellers out of
the temple. In the 13. and 14. verses.
Forthwith he curses the fig tree, wherein he shadoweth forth the
sorrowful destinies of Jerusalem, From the 20 verse unto the 27.
and teaches faith again. In the 27. and 28. verses.
The Pharisees and the chief of the Jews oppose themselves against him, and
ask him by what authority he does that, which he does? From the 29. verse
unto the end of the chap.
Whom he beats down most mightily with a contrary question. The 12. cha.
From the 1. verse unto the 13.
Lastly he foresheweth them the judgment of God, namely their destruction and
casting of, which they should suffer for their own fault, and not because God
is hard to please. From the 13. verse. unto ye 35.
Moreover the Lord answeareth with marvelous majesty unto certain questions
very profitable and necessary. From the 13. ver. unto the 18
For first he reasons of the magistrate, commanding to pay unto him, that
which we owe him. From the 18. ver. unto the 28
Then refuting the Sadduces, being the patriarchs of the Vale^tinians, and of
the Marcionites, he approves the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the
world to come. From the 28. ver. unto the 35
Afterward he disputes plainly of the end and argument of all the Scripture
or of God his law. From the 35. ver. unto the 38
Moreover he proposes a question even unto his adversaries, whereby he
proves evidently, that he is the true Messiah, being of a double nature,
namely true GOD and man. In the 38, 39 and 40. ver.
But because his adversaries, I mean the priests and scribes, would be
moved with no plainness and manifestnesse of truth, but went on continually
like themselves, both to seduce the common people with their corrupt
traditions, and to pill them with their insatiable desire of having, the Lord
admonishes the common people, and commands them to beware of their
doctrine. Besides all this he lays many and great offenses to their
charges, and among the rest covetousness and sacrileges. From the 41 ver. unto
the end of the chapter.
And yet least any should think, that riches are bestowed in vain for the
mayntenance of the affairs of the Church, he does much commend the gift of
a certain widow cast into the treasury. The 13. cha.
In the 1, and 2. verses.
Last of all, he foresheweth and paynteth forth the destruction and ruin of
the most gorgious temple of Jerusalem, of the most ancient city, and of all
the world. From the 3. ver. unto ye 33.
He adds also ye signs and calamities, which should go before, to
foreshewe such evils as can not be expressed. From the 33 ver. unto the end of
the chapter.
And because the Lord desires to save mankind and not to destroy us, he
exhorts all men to prayers and watchfulness. Whereof Mark speaks in the
14. and 15. chap.
Now Mark comes to the absolute perfection of our salvation, namely to the
description of the wholesome sacrifice, and of our redemption through Christ
his death. The 14. cha.
From the 1. verse unto the 12.
Wherein first he recites the causes of his death, so far forth as
apperteyneth to the adversaries of Christ, I mean the priests and Judas the
traitor, which being blinded with covetousness and envy sold the Lord
for a most vile price. From the 12 ver. unto the 26
Then he speaks of that last supper, wherein the Lord sharply accuses the
wickedness of Judas speaking of it at large, and instituteth the sacrament and
memorial of our redemption. In the 26. ver
After that he goes forth into the mount of olives, From the 27 ver. unto ye
32.
he reasons in the way of that grievous offense, wherein the disciples
should fall, chiefly Peter. From the 32 ver. unto the 43
He prays to his Father humblye in the mount, and awaketh his disciples
sleeping. From the 43. ver. unto the 47
The mean while Judas comes hastily with a band of murderers, and betrayeth
the Lord with a kiss, who forthwith is taken by the wicked mynisters. In the
47 ver
In that hurlye burly Peter draws his sword, and fights in vain. From the
48. ver. unto the 53
But the Lord rebukes grauelye the unjust force of his enemies. In the 53.
and 54. verses.
Notwithstanding Christ is brought bounden to the high priest. The chief
Bishop calls forthwith a counsel of elders and priests against the
Lord. From the 55 ver. unto the 60
Therein false witnesses are sought forth to destroy Christ, but in vain.
From the 60. ver. unto the 66
The high Priest rising up, desires to pick a cause of death by a question
from Christ, and asks, whether he be the son of God the true Messiah? And
when as the Lord had granted it and confirmed it, judgment of death was given
out against him by all the council. From the 66 ver. unto the end of the
chapter.
The mean while Peter denies the Lord in the high priest his palace. The
15. cha.
In the 1. ver.
And when the dawnyng was come, Jesus is leadde to Pilate the deputy. From the
2. ver. unto the 12
But he tries and practices many ways, if he might deliver him, whom he
knew to be innocent. From the 12 ver. unto the 22
But being overcome with the wicked cries of the people, he delivered Jesus
being scourged to the soldiers to be crucified. From the 22. ver. unto the 27
He is therefore lead away into the place of Caluarie, that is to say of a
skull, In the 27. and 28. verses.
where he is crucified in the midst between two thieves, From the 29. ver.
unto the 33
and having suffered both diverse torments and tauntes, From the 33. ver. unto
the 38
at the last he gives up the Ghost. From the 38. ver. unto the 42
Forthwith strange signs are showed, wherewith the Centurion being moved,
pronounces Christ to be the son of GOD. From the 42. verse unto the end of
the chap.
And in the evening of the same day he is buried most decently by Joseph an
honorable and a godly man. The 16. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 9.
But the third day he rises again from the dead, having vanquished death,
the which thing is expounded most evidently by the angel to the women coming
to the sepulcher. From the 9. ver unto the 15.
Afterward Mark, being about to finishe briefly his history begun of
Christ, collecteth and knitteth together certain sure arguments, or evident
testimonies, whereby he may prove that the Lord is risen in deed from the
dead. From the 15 ver. unto the 19
Last of all, he sets forth the 3. chiefest points of our religion, that
is to say the last deed of the Lord, wherein he ordained the Ecclesiastical
order. In the 19. verse.
Then he shows the Ascension of the Lord into heaven. In the 20. ver
After this he declares the most exact faithfulness of the Apostles of the
Lord, and the happy success thereof. For they did all things so as the Lord
had commanded, and the Lord wrought with them, so yt forthwith the most holy
Church rose up in the world.

Here ends the Sum of the Gospel by Saint Mark.
The sum of the Gospel by Saint Luke.
IN the preface placed before this Evangelical work, The 1. chap. From the 1.
ver. unto the 5
Luke shows the causes, which moved him to write, and also proposes the
sum of his whole purpose. In the 5, 6, and 7. verses.
Then he begins to pen the history, beginning it with the birth of the
forerunner of the Messiah. Therefore he describes diligently the parents of
John Baptist, From the 8. ver. unto the 18
chiefly how both the conception and the office of the son were showed to
his father by Gabriel. From the 18. ver. unto the 23
which things when as his father believed not, it came to pass, that he was
made dumb, for the punishment of his unbelief, In the 23, 24 and 25. verses.
and yt his mother notwithstanding, God performing yt which he had promised,
did conceive. In the 26. very.
Now after the description of the conceptio^ of yt forerunner, he comes down
to describe the incarnation of the very Messiah also. Therefore after the
noting of the time, In the 27. ver
he shows the kindred and condition of his mother, namely that she was a
pure virgin of the stock of David: In the 26. ver
unto whom the very same Gabriel being the messenger of the eternal GOD came
down from heaven, From the 28. ver. unto the 32
and showed her that it so pleased the eternal Godhead, that she should be
made ye mother of the Messiah: In the 32. and 33. verses.
and he declares heerewithall, who, and how great this child should be.
In the 34. ver
And whereas the Virgin did not yet fully understand so hard a matter, In ye
35. ver.
the whole reason and manner of the incarnation is expounded unto her by the
Angel, that she should conceive by the holy Ghost, and bring forth the very
son of GOD. In the 36 and 37. verses.
And she is confirmed by the example of Elizabeth. In the 38. verse.
The which words when as she believes, she conceiueth. From the 39 ver.
unto the 46
And forthwith she goes with all speed to Elizabeth, and they two have
divine talk the one with the other. From the 46. ver. unto the 57
In this communication the incarnation of the son of God is revealed, and ye
truth of God, his mercy and his power are praised, chiefly in the virgin
Mary's song of praise and thanksgiving. From the 57. ver. unto ye 59.
Moreover Elizabeth brings forth a son, From the 59. ver. unto the 64
who is named John. From the 64. ver. unto the 67
Unto his father, hitherto dumb for his unbelief, is now restored the use of
his tongue, which he uses forthwith in setting forth the praises of God.
From the 67. ver. unto the 76
For he also sings a song of praises, wherein he prayseth the truth of God
in his promises, his goodness and justice in his deeds. In the 76. and 77.
verses.
The^ he prophesies certain things of the office of his son, From the 78.
ver. unto the end of the chapter.
and of the benefits to be bestowed upon ye world through Christ. The 2. chap.
The argument of the chapter.
Which things being finished, Luke breaks of the history concerning John,
and makes have to describe the nativity of Christ. In the 1.2. and 3. verses.
Therefore he shows the time, In the 4. and 5. verses.
and describes the place of the nativity of the Lord, In the 6. and 7 verses
and the manner thereof. From the 8. ver. unto 13.
And the angel appears again, and publishes the birth of the Messiah to
the shepherds, and expounds unto them the fruit of his nativity. In the 13.
and 14. verses.
In the which place all the heavenly host flocketh together with merueylous
thankful rejoicing, singing a birth songue to their new borne King. In the
15. verse.
And the shepheardes seek the child, which was borne, with great diligence,
as they were commanded, In the 16. ver
they find him, From the 17. verse unto the 21.
they wonder, and publish to all men the great works of God. In the 21. ver
Now the child is circumcised the eight day, and is named JESUS. In the 22.23
and 24. verses.
Then he is presented also unto the Lord in the temple of Jerusalem after the
manner of the first begotten sons. From the 25. ver. unto the 34
Whereby God his ordinance Simeon the just comes in, which receives the
little child into his arms, reioyseth, and in rejoicing shows how great
things the Father has given us in his son: In ye 34, and 35 verses.
and therewithal he prophesies of his cross, and ye many should stumble at
him through unbelief. From the 36 ver. unto the 40
And there is also Anne a widow of most commendable life, which also herself
gives thanks to God, and prayseth the great benefit of the father in the
son given unto us. From the 40. ver. unto the 51
Afterward Luke touches in few words the childhood, grouth, and youth of
Christ the Lord. For he declares how he being twelve years of age, being
sought by his parents sorowfully, was found in the Temple among the Doctors,
disputing so of the chiefest points of religion, that all wondered at it. In
the 51, and 52 verses.
Whereunto he adds, that, leaving the disputation, he was obedient unto his
parents: leaving it as it were to be esteemed by these most assured tokens, of
what sort al his groweing and young age was. And thus has Luke comprehended in
a merueilous brief sum whatsoever seems to be profitable and necessary to
be known and to be believed touching the Parentage of Christ, his childhood,
his grouth, and youth. What went before.
In the two chapters before going there is an entrance made into the matter
handeled in this Gospel: What follows.
But now Luke sets forth the beginning of the Gospel, the wonderful
progress and success thereof, The 3. cha.
In the first and 2 verses.
showing at what time, In the 2. and 3 verses.
in what place, In the 2. and 3 verses.
by whom, and how, both Christ himself and his Gospel was preached openly,
namely by John Baptist, In the 3 verse also.
which baptized and taught in a great assembly of men. From the 4. verse unto
ye 10.
And he gives forth certain tastes of the preaching of S. John what he
taught al men generally, From the 10. verse unto the 15.
what certain me^ particularly, From the 15. ver. unto the 19
to be brief what he taught, and what things he witnessed of In the 19 and 20
verses
Lastly, he notes, that for the preaching of the truth, he was cast into
prison by king Herod. Whereof he speaks next.
Which things being in deed briefly knit together, (and yet in such sort as
might be sufficient for the godly Reader) he passes over to the description
of the affairs of the Savior himself our Lord Jesus Christ, whose
forerunner John was: In the 21. and 22. verses.
and forthwith in the beginning he teaches, who he was, and how great
things we have from him, he was anointed and authorized, by the father, the
King and Priest of the people of god, namely in that he was anointed with the
holy Ghost, that he is the son of of God and of man, From the 23. ver. unto
the end of the chapter.
for the which cause he draws forth along his genealogy or pedegrue even
unto Adam. The 4. cha.
From the first ver. unto the 14
Moreover our Lord being authorized in his function, and kingdom, and
Priesthood, according to his office begins now to work our salvation, and
first setting upon Satan, he overcomes him in an hard conflict, and at the
last puts him to flight. In the 14. and 15. verses.
And being a conqueror he comes forth and publishes the Gospel of the
kingdom and of deliverance throughout all Galilee. From the 16 ver. unto the
22.
He has left described an excellent taste of his preaching, namely his sermon
made in ye city Nazareth. From the 22. ver, unto the 31
But when as his wholesome doctrine was not so received of the Citizens of
Nazareth, as had becomed them, leaving them, In the 31. and 32 verses.
he went to the famous city Capernaum, where he teaches again. The use of
miracles.
And he joins certain wonderful deeds to his doctrine, whereby he approved
yt which he taught, namely yt he is the Savior of the world. From the 33 ver.
unto the 38
Therefore he delivers a man possessed with a Devil by casting out the
devil: In the 38. and 39. verses.
he restores to health Peter his wives mother, which was sick of a fever: In
the 40. and 41, verses.
and to be brief he cures all kind of diseases: In the 42.43. and 44. ver.
But the mean while he preaches the gospel diligently: The 5. cha.
From the first ver. unto the 12
the which because his will is, yt it should be preached continually in the
Church, he chooses to himself certain witnesses, who^ he draws unto him by
working of a miracle. From the 12 ver. unto the 17
He declares again by his works yt he is the Savior of the world. For he
cleanses a Leper: From the 17. verse unto the 27.
He heals a man sick of a palsy, in whom also he declares yt he forgiueth
sins to me^. From the 27 verse. unto the 33
And therefore he calls and justifies a notable Publicane, Leui, and
defends him justified, and himself also from the malicious detractions of
his enemies. In the 33.34 and 35. verses.
Where he joins aptly certain disputations of fasting and prayers, From the
36. verse unto the end of the chap.
of fit and unfit hearers of the Gospel, The 6 chap.
From the first ver. unto the 12.
of the Sabbath and of holy days, whereby he reproves errors and abuses,
and restoring the true doctrine, maintains the same. Why the Apostles were
called.
Hitherto our Lord and Redeemer Christ was made known unto his Disciples,
called for this purpose peculiarly, that they might be instructed and made the
masters and teachers of all the nations in the earth, From the 12 ver. unto ye
17.
unto them he adioyneth now certain other also, all the which he consecrating
commands to be Apostles, that is to say Legates or Ambassadors, whom at
the last he might send into the world. In the 17.18 and 19. verses.
But before he sends them forth, he instructs them more fully and more
familiarly. For he declares again to them, who he is, what he is able to
do, marking forth moreover what kind of doctrine they should follow. For
in his deeds he shows divine virtue: From the 20 verse unto the 24.
and in his words he teaches which is the true doctrine, which is the true
felicity, In the 24.25 and 26. verses.
which is infelicitie, From the 27. verse unto the 39.
which are the duties of godliness of the faithful, and that the Lord does
exact most perfect justice of his servants. For Luke sets down the whole
Sermon of the Lord made in the great assembly of men, and in the midst of
his Disciples. From the 39. verse. unto ye 46.
In the which Sermon among other things, the Lord warns us diligently, that
we beware of false teachers, of whom he reasons not vndiligently, From the
46. verse. unto the end of the chap.
adding in the end of the Sermon, that it is not enough to hear the word of
God, except we do express in godly deeds, that which we have learned in
the word. The 7. chap.
The use of miracles.
Unto this Sermon of the Lord Luke joins again deeds, whereby the Lord
shows his saving virtue. From the 1. ver. unto the 11
For he restores the Centurion his Servant. From the 11. ver. unto the 18
Then he rayseth up from the dead the son of a certain widow of Nain,
showing thereby that he is the Lord of life and death. In the 18.19 and 20.
verses.
And the Disciples of John are there, and propose a question to the Lord: In
the 21.22 and 23. verses.
by occasion whereof he declares him self to be that looked fo Messiah.
From the 24 ver. unto the 29
And then he extolleth John with most ample praises, that he might move the more
to believe his witness, which constantly witnessed that Jesus was Christ. From
the 29 verse unto the 36.
Lastly he most sharply reprooueth the want of belief of the Pharisees,
whereby he shows, that it came to pass, yt they perished through their own
vice and fault. From the 36 verse unto the end of the chapter.
Forthwith he adds an example, whereby it may evidently appear, how ye
Pharisees trusting too much in the^ selves refuse Christ, and how sinners
believing receive him, and there is brought in a sinful woman, unto who^ her
sins be freely forgiven, the Pharisees speaking much against it. The 8. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 22.
These things being in this manner set forth, Luke brings in again the
Lord teaching, and the people flocking to him in very great companies, whereby
they give him occasion to teach by a similitude, what ye nature of the word of
God is, what diversity there is of hearers, and that he does not approve all
hearers, but the^ only which bring forth fruit. From the 22 verse unto ye 26
After these things is placed the description of a tempest, and how a calm
was restored by the Lord to the disciples, which were merueilously troubled,
who here also, as well as other where often, does declare, that he has power
over tempests, From the 26. ver. unto ye 41.
and that he is the conqueror of Satan. For with no weapons, but with his word
only he casts out and puts to flight all the legion of Devils. From the
41. ver. unto the 49
Moreover he heals a certain woman being troubled with an issue of blood,
which could not be cured, From the 49. ver. unto the end of the chapter.
and rayseth from the dead Iairus his daughter. In all these things he
instructs in true faith and godliness the minds of the faithful, and chiefly
of his disciples, The 9. chap.
In the 1. and 2 verses.
whom, being now a good while instructed, he sends forth at the last to the
office of preaching, From the 3. ver. unto ye 10.
giving them certain peculier precepts, which prescribed unto them how they
should behave them selves. In the 10. ver
And the Lord very friendly receives them returning and having dispatched
their business happily, In the 11. ver
instructing them now more fully, that he might prepare the^ for greater
matters, and confirm them in the truth. From the 12 ver. unto ye 18.
He makes the people a feast. In the 18. and 19. verses.
He asks, whom the people say that he is, In the 20. verse.
and what the disciples think of him: In ye 20 ver. also, and in the 21, and
22. verses.
where the confession of a true faith is set forth. From the 23 ver. unto the
28
In the same place he teaches the denying of ones self: From the 28 ver. unto
the 37
and is transformed in the sight of the chosen disciples. From the 37 ver. unto
the 44
And he ouercometh and puts to flight again the Devil rebelling and most
fiercely raging. In the 44 and 45. verses.
He entreats of his passion and death: In the 46 47. and 48 ver.
And forthwith he teaches most diligently his disciples humility and
modesty, and he plucketh up by the root ambition and pride. In the 49. and 50
verses.
where he teaches also that no man is to be contemned or rejected, which by
any manner of means seteth forward the glory of Christ. And in this wise did
he instruct the^, whom he purposed to make the teachers of the world, and in
the^ the whole church. What follows.
Hitherto blessed Luke has declared copiously and plainly enough, what the
Lord said and did in Galilee, but henceforth he will show the Lord his
journey to the fatal city of Jerusalem, what fell out in the way, what he
taught, and what wonderful and famous things he did. In the 51.52, and 53.
ver.
And in the beginning of the journey the Samaritanes deny the Lord lodging,
In the 54.55, and 56. ver.
but the disciples, which desired that their vncourtesie might be punished,
are reproved of the Lord as inflamed with preposterous zeal. In the 57 and
58 verses.
Then the Lord repelleth a certain other man offering the Lord friendship:
From the 59. verse unto the end of the chapter.
Forthwith calling two other, he teaches how he will be received, and how
he must be followed. The 10. chapter.
In the 1. verse.
Moreover that the wholesome doctrine of the Gospel might be made known to
the more, he chooses to him self more disciples. For unto those twelve he
adioyneth moreover other seventy. These he sent before two and two into every
place whether he himself would come. From the 2 ver. unto the 17
Into them he gives certain precepts, and by that means he begins
again to entreat of teachers, and of the doctrine of the Gospel. In the 17 ver
The disciples faithfully do ye commandments, and returning declare unto the
Lord, how happily their business fell out. Here he shows, that the
kingdom of the devil is destroyed by preaching of the Gospel: In the 18, 19
and 20 ver.
he teaches his disciples humility least they should be puffed up with
pride through the happy handelyng of their affairs: In the 21. ver
and forthwith he shows who are capable of the word of the Gospel, In the
22. ver
and why all things are given unto Christ only by the preaching of the
Gospel, In the 23. and 24. verses.
also how great their happiness is, which believe the Gospel of Christ. In
the 25. ver.
And being aptly asked by a certain lawyer, what he should do, that he might
obtain everlasting life, In the 26. verse.
he teaches plainly, which is the sincere doctrine, In the 27 verse.
which is the only and certain end of the scripture, In the 28. verse.
which is the true preaching of the truth, which the teacher of the Gospel
should deliver to the Church, From the 29. ver. unto ye 38.
where he does chiefly teach us the love of our neighbor by bringing in a
parable of a man slain by thieves, In the 38.40. and 41. ver.
and by commending the duties of Martha, In the 39, and 42. verses.
before whom the mean season he prefers the faith of Marie. The 11. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 14
And because prayer in the Church is next to the preaching of the word, and
as it were adjoined thereunto, therefore does he also entreat thereof largely
and diligently. From the 14 verse unto the 27.
Forthwith by casting forth and conquering the Devil, he declares, which of
the points of the Gospel is chief, that he came into the world to overcome
the Devil, and to destroy his works: and that he does and says al things,
not furnished with art Magike, or forced by the power of Satan, but through
the power of God, seeing he is the son of God and the true Messiah. In the 27
and 28 verses.
He returns again to the commendation of the preaching of the Gospel, From
th 29. ver. unto ye 33
where he does most gravely accuse the neglecting and contemning of the word
of God, and the unbelief of the Jews. From the 33 ver. unto the 37
Moreover he shows, what the word of God is, why it is reveled to men, how
great the worthiness, profitablens, and necessity thereof is. From the 37
verse unto the end of the chap.
Over against the which is directly placed false doctrine, and the Pharisees
and false teachers are most sharply chidde of the Lord, The 12. chapter.
In in the 1.2, and 3, verses.
whose doctrine at the last he most diligently commands to beware of. From
the 4. ver unto the 13
And because that can not be done without the hatred of the world, he
exhorts his disciples also to boldness and constantnes, not to be in fear
for them selves, but to behave them selves stoutly, and to confess the truth
freely. From the 13 ver. unto ye 35.
The desire of gain, and chiefly covetousness, does hinder and trouble
sincere religion, the Lord therefore bringing many things against covetousness,
teaches every man to be content with his own estate: From the 35 ver. unto
the 41
he sets forth again watchfulness and soberness of mind, necessary for
all truly, but for the apostles chiefly, From the 41 ver. unto the 49
unto who^, by proposing a similitude, he shadoweth forth again their duty,
From the 49 verse unto the 54.
adding again what the effect of the word of God is, From the 54 ver. unto
the end of the chapter.
and admonishing us, that we do not contemn the signs of our salvation, but
that we receive it with most ready minds. What went before.
In the chapters before going the Lord entreated of many things, by the report
of Luke the historian, touching the Gospel and the preachers of the Gospel.
Now the Gospel stands of Repentance and Forgiveness of sins, as of the
parts thereof. What follows.
And therefore here follows a most wholesome doctrine of Repentance and
forgiveness of sins. The 13. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 6.
He exhorts us to repentance by examples, From the 6 ver. unto the 10
and by a certain similitude of a fig tree, teaching what lights upon the
impenite^t, From the 10 ver. unto the 14.
and what be the fruits of true repentance, From the 14 ver. unto the 18
and what the corrupt fruits of false repentance: From the 18 ver unto the 23
He shows moreover from whence the power to bring forth the fruits of
repentance and to do good works is. From the 23 verse unto the end of the
chap.
Forthwith he exhorts us all, that we would endeavor to enter through the
staight and hard way, which leads unto life. For he disputes again of that
most famous two ways, bringing in somewhat touching the punishment of the
impenitent, and concerning the equity of the judgments of God, which
destroys the incurable, who^ no faithful dealing and diligence could heal.
The 14. cha.
Then he takes from the lovers of godliness errors and certain no light
faults, and teaches them the duties of godliness. From the 1 ver. unto the
7.
For he remoueth again the error of the Sabboths religious observation. From
the 7. ver. unto the 12
He presses down the pride and loftines of ye Pharisees, and graffeth in
modest humility: In the 12, 13 and 14. ver.
and teaches us also bountifulnes. From the 15 verse unto the 24.
Herevpo^ taking occasion by ye outcrie of a certain gest, which pronounced
him blessed, yt may eat bread in the kingdom of God, he exhorts al men to
faith, least they make them selves unworthy the kingdom of god through
unbelief: where ye Lord sets forth also the counsel of God touching ye
saving of ye world, yt with he says is despised of certain through the desire
of things present, In the 24. ver
unto whom also he threatens punishment. And these things has he spoken of
those which hinder the calling of God: From the 25. verse unto the end of ye
chap.
On the contrary part he opposes the doctrine, how we ought to follow the
Lord calling us, and to obey his calling: that is to say, of what sort the
disciples of ye Lord ought to be, and what they ought to promise to themselves
by ye gospel. The 15 chap
From the beginning of the chap. to the end.
unto these things he knitteth certain most comely similitudes, whereby he
declares again the reason of true repentance, yea and the reason of the
forgiveness of sins chiefly, namely of the grace and unmeasurable mercy of
God, reproouing every where the pride and hypocrisy of They may be called
Iustitiaries, which hold that a man may be justified by his own works.
Iustitiaries. The 16. cha.
In the whole chapter.
After these things he reasons plentifully of the duties of the faithful, to
wit, of charity, and bountifulness toward our neighbors, to be brief of
the contempt of earthly things, against covetousness, in the behalf of
pitifulness, and of the use and abuse of earthly things. And all these
things does he shadow forth, and as it were propose to be vewed with our
eyes in the parables of the false steward, and of the rich glutton, and of
Lazarus the beggar. The 17. cha.
The occasion of that which follows.
There be not a few wicked men, unto whom, whatsoever is preached concerning
heaven and hell, seem fables, and they infect successively not a few with
their poisoned and blasphemous tongues. In the 1. and 2. verses.
Our Lord shows therefore consequently how great their offense is before
God. In the 3. and 4. verses.
Again he teaches thee to forgive trespasses if any be committed against
thee. In the 5. and 6. verses.
The which thing because it can not be done without the help of faith,
wholesome doctrine touching faith is forthwith adjoined. From the 7 ver. unto
the 12
After the which he places straight way doctrine touching the same, that we
ascribe nothing unto our selves, but yield all the glory to the Lord: who
only purges us, and gives us strength to work good works, for ye which
cause we ought to give him great thanks. From the 12 verse unto the 20.
And this point is set forth, as it were to be vewed with our eyes, in the
history of the ten leapers, which were cleansed. From the 20. ver. unto ye
26.
Now because there is mention made very often times of ye kingdom of God
throughout all this history, ye matter is handeled more plainly. From the 26
ver. unto ye 31.
Then is it adjoined, what they shall suffer, which will not believe that the
kingdom of God is come. From the 31 ver. unto the end of the chap.
Moreover it is showed, what troubles and calamities shall come to pass in the
world, even unto the end of the world, and how the faithful ought to bear
them selves in the same. The 18. cha.
From the first ver. unto the 6
Where he exhorts his disciples earnestly to most fervent prayers, In the
6.7. and 8 verses.
promising that God also will avenge his elect. From the 9. ver. unto the 15
And because there were many, which trusted in them selves, he proposes the
parable of the Pharisee and the Publicane, which went up into the temple, and
teaches which is true righteousness, and how men are justified. In the 15.16.
and 17. ver.
Which thing being expounded, he instructs us, what we should think of ye
salvation of infants: From the 18 verse unto the 23.
What good thing every one should do, that he may possess the kingdom of
God: From the 23 ver. unto the 28
how hardly rich men enter into the kingdom of GOD: In the 28, 29. and 30 ver.
what inward is prepared for them, that leave their worldly substance for the
Lord his sake: From the 31 ver. unto the 35
In the same place the Lord shows his disciples what he him self must
suffer. From the 35 verse unto the end of the chap.
Then follows the history of the blind man, which received his sight, The
19. cha.
From the 1. verse unto the 11.
and the calling of Zacheus that famous Publicane, and his receiving into the
favor of Christ: whereby we are taught, how all men are illuminated, received
into favor, and justified, and what they, which are justified, should work,
or how they should behave them selves toward God, and toward their
neighbors. The occasion of the parable following.
Our Lord Jesus executed the priest his office all the time of his
dispensation, but chiefly in those last days, wherein he fully finished our
salvation by dying and rising again. Therefore the nearer he comes unto the
city, the more plainly he declares him self to be the king and priest of
God his people, and thorowely does the office of the priest and king. And
first, because there were some eue^ among his own disciples, which supposed
that the kingdom of Christ should be earthly, and that it should rise up
forthwith, the Lord takes away this error, From the 11. verse unto the 28.
and teaches by a similitude what manner of kingdom the kingdom of Christ
is, and when it shall come.

From the 28 ver. unto the 41
Forthwith sitting upon an Ass, and being carried into the city, he
declares by that his glorious coming, although it were humble, that he is
that expected king of the people of God. From the 41 ver. unto the 45
And yet before he enters into the city he bewayleth with tears the
destenies and calamities of the blind city, which he foresheweth most
plainly, and declares the cause of the calamities. From the 45 ver. unto the
end of the chapter.
And because it is the duty of a king, to restore decaies, and to reform
corruptions, being entered into the Temple, he casts out the buyers and
sellers, and he him self preaches daily in the Temple. The 20 chap
From the 1. ver. unto the 9.
Being asked of the Priests by whom he was authorized a King and a Priest?
he shows that he has all his authority from God forth of heaven. From
the 9. verse unto ye 19
Moreover he rebukes most gravely the rebellions, by bringing in the parable
of the vineyarde and of the husbandemen, shadowing forth the mean while the
destruction, which hanged over them, for their rebellion. Where of he speaks
in the rest of the chap.
To be brief, for so much as it belongs to the Priest his office to teach
the people of GOD, and to confute the gayne-sayers, Luke places after these
things certain disputations and familiar speeches of the Lord had with his
adversaries. From the 19. ver. unto the 27
And first he teaches what we owe to God, and what to the Magistrate. From
the 27 verse unto the 41.
Then he reasons of the hope of the Saints, and what manner of life is in the
world to come. From the 41 ver. unto the 45
Thirdly, he shows what only is to be looked for in all the Scriptures,
namely Christ true GOD and man the savior of the world. From the 45 ver. unto
the end of the chapter.
Which things being finished the Lord paynteth forth, in discharge of his
priestly office, counterfayte priests, of whose corruption he diligently
admonishes his disciples to beware, and to avoid. The 21. cha.
From the first ver. unto the 5.
Afterward he allows the widows gift cast into the treasury in the temple.
From the 5. ver. unto the 25
Where he takes occasion to entreat most plentifully of ye destruction of the
city and nation of ye Jews. From the 25. ver. unto the 34
From that destruction he comes to the destruction also of all the world, and
to the end of the world, and to be brief defines and points forth the
signs going next before the last day. From the 34. verse unto the end of the
chapter.
Where he exhorts most diligently ye faithful to watchfulnes and sobernes,
least they be ouerthowe^ of a sudden with the unfaithful, and perish. The 22.
chap
What went before and what follows.
The Lord has hitherto fulfilled all the priestlike functions even unto the
killing and offering up of the sacrifice, therefore the expiatorie and purging
sacrifice only remained to be accomplished: wherefore Luke will describe by
those things, which follow, the passion and death of the Lord, which is the
only and wholesome oblation once offered for the sins of all the world. In
the 1. ver.
And first he notes the time, From the 2, ver. unto the 7
then he shows the causes of his death: From the 7. ver. unto the 17
hereupon he touches how he celebrated ye passover: From the 17 unto the 21.
after which he places ye worthy institution of his mystical supper. In the
21.22 and 23 ver.
He adds, what the Lord spoke of him yt betrayed him: From the 23 ver. unto
the 31
and how he quieted the contention of ye disciples, raised touching this, which
of them seemed greatest in ye kingdom of God. From the 31 ver. unto the 35
He foresheweth the earnest purpose of the devil against all the disciples,
and namely against Peter the denier. From the 35 verse unto ye 39
Forthwith he commands them to provide them swords: In the 39. and 41. ver.
and taking his disciples unto him, he goes out with his chosen unto the mount
of Olives. In the 41. and 42 verses.
Here he prays unto the father most fervently. From the 43 ver. unto ye 47
There he is tormented with an agony, which wringeth from him a bloody sweat.
He receives comfort of an angel. In the 47. and 48 verses.
After this he is taken and bounden by the priests servants: In the 49. and 50
verses.
which when Peter would have withstood, he cut off the priest his servant his
ear: In the 51. verse.
but ye Lord heals him being wounded, In the 52 and 53. verses.
and most sharply rebukes them which took him. In the 54 ver
Moreover being taken he is led into the city, and brought before ye high
priest. From the 55. ver. unto 63
Then did Peter shamefully deny ye Lord and that not once. In the 63.64. and 65
ver.
The servants of ye high priests and of wickedness mock the Lord almost all the
night long, and abuse him most unworthily. From the 66. ver. unto the end of
the chapter.
Early in the morning he is condemned by the senate of the priests and of the
chief of Jerusalem. The 23 cha.
In the 1. ver.
Being condemned he is delivered to Pilate, From the 2. ver. unto the 6.
certain points of accusation being proposed forthwith against him. In the 6.
and 7. verses.
Pilate willing to gratify Herod, sends the Lord away unto him. From the
8. ver. unto the 13
But he sends him back being notably mocked and clothed with a white garment,
to Pilate. From the 13. ver. unto the 26
He, after much reasoning had with ye Jews, and after yt he had loosed
Barrabbas, delivered Jesus to ye ministers of wickedness do be crucified. In the
26. ver
Therefore is he led away forthwith being innocent, bearing his cross, and
behind him one Simon following him, and staying up the same cross. In the 27.
verse.
Certain godly women lament his most bitter case. From the 28. ver. unto the 32
But the Lord, this occasion being offered, commands them to lament their
own calamity, which he foresheweth shall come upon the city and people. In
the 32. and 33. verses.
The mean while he comes into the place of execution, where he being
crucified is lift up in the midst between two thieves. From the 34 ver. unto
the 40
There he first prays, and then suffering many reproaches, he deareth all
things patiently. From the 40 ver. unto the 44
Among other things, he receives one of the thieves, which made supplication
unto him, into the fellowship and partaking of eternal life, declaring by yt
example, how great the force of the sacrifice once offered is. In the 44.45 and
46 verses
After this certain wonders followed testifiyng, that the Son of God
suffered. The Lord commending his spirit to God the father gave up the ghost
upon ye cross. In the 47. ver
The Centurion of ye Roman soldiers being moved with the wonders, and touched
with the patience and death of Christ, does witness that he was a just man. In the
48. and 49. verses.
The Lord his acquaintance see all these things, God his providence no doubt
so ordering the matter, that they might be seeing witnesses, appointed for so
great things. From the 50. ver. unto ye 55.
Lastly Joseph, a most famous Senator of the city, comes unto Pilate, and
beggeth the body of the Lord, that he might bury it: which when he had
obtained and taken it down from the tree, he laid it in the grave, and buried
it gloriously. In the 55. and 56. verses.
Certain women beheld and marked it, that they might come the next day
following to annoint the body. The 24. cha.
What follows.
Jesus Christ our King and Priest, having purged sin, conquered hell, and
overcome death, restored to life forth of the grave and from the dead, the
third day, rises again a conqueror and a triumphant Lord. And because the
whole matter of our hope and life stands in the lively resurrection of our
Lord Jesus, it is proved by evident signs and arguments. From the first ver.
unto 12.
And first the resurrection of our Lord is declared by the very Angels of God
to certain devout women, which came to annoint the body of our Lord Jesus. In
the 12 verse.
Forthwith the same is made known to Peter by certain signs. From the 13.
ver. unto the 36
Afterward, as two of the Disciples were going to Emaus, the Lord joins
him self unto them in the form of a stranger, and proves unto them most
plainly, as well forth of the Scriptures, as by the thing it self, that he
was risen again from the dead. From the 36. ver. unto the 44
Lastly, the Lord comes in the midst of his Disciples, and shows to the
view of eye his true and lively resurrection. In the 44.45 and 46. verses.
Moreover he confirms their minds with the Scriptures. In the 47. and 48.
verses.
And that we might all understand, that all Christ his things are ours, he
commands his disciples to preach the Gospel to all nations, In the 49. verse.
for the accomplishing whereof he promises them the holy Ghost, whom he
commands them to look for in the City of Jerusalem. In the 50. verse.
All the which things being done in deed, he leads his disciples forth to
the mount of Olives, In the 51. verse.
from thence he ascends straight into heaven. In the 52. and 53. verses.
The disciples having worshipped him, return into the City looking for the
holy Ghost.

Here ends the sum of the Gospel by Saint Luke.
The sum of the Gospel by Saint John.
THey, The 1. chap. The reason of the entrance into the Gospel by John.
which will expound any thing by certain reason and with great profit, place
before their exposition a proposition, a mark, or a Sum of the whole matter
to be expounded, unto the which the auditors bending the sharpness of wit,
and all their understanding, may know whereunto all things tend, which are
spoken, and what the use of them is. What John handeleth in his Gospel.
John the Apostle therefore about to expound ye matters of Christ the Lord,
that is to say, his words and deeds, and all the mystery of our redemption,
places before his historical narration a proposition, plentifully opened, and
containing in effect these things. In the 1. and 2. verses.
The word of God, that is to say, the son of God, Jesus Christ our Lord, of
whom I mind to speak, was with God from everlasting, and is very God, In the
3. ver.
by whom all things were made, In the 4.5.7 and 8. verses.
the same by his own nature is the life and the light. In the 9. ver.
And because we, by our humane nature, and through the fault of sin, be
darkness and the slaves of death, the word, or son of God descended from
heaven, came into the world, was incarnat and made man, that through his life
and light, the Jews chiefly, unto whom the Messiah was peculiarly promised,
might live and be illuminated. In the 10. and 11. verses.
But because they cast him off, not being willing to believe the life and
light given them, In the 12.13 and 14. verses.
therefore he gave power to all men which receive Christ with a true faith, of
what nation, sex, age, or condition they be, to become the sons of God, that
is to say, heirs of life and of all heavenly good things, and the very fellow
heirs of Christ, which is the truth, the grace, the redemption, and the
fullness, or the consummation of all believers, in whom only the faithful have
all things, which do pertain to godliness and life. The sum of the Gospel.
This is the sum of all the narration of the Gospel: Namely, that through
faith in Christ our sins be forgiven, and that everlasting life is bestowed
upon us. In the 6. ver. and from the 15 unto the 19.
Unto this head John coupleth ye very body of the Evangelical narration or
history, beginning his history at the preaching and testimony of John the
Baptist, as also the other three Evangelists did. From the 19. ver. unto the 35
And he teaches of what manner were his testimonies, private, public, and
given to the very messengers of Jerusalem, all verily of one kind, namely
such as taught, that Jesus Christ is true God and man, sent into the world
for sinners, to save them which believe in him, and that therefore we must
believe in Christ. In the 35.36. and 37. ver.
Therefore does he also send his Disciples unto him, and consecrateth them to
Christ the Lord, showing undoubtedly by the very deed it self, that all his
doctrine tends here unto, that we may believe Christ the only Savior of
all the world. Why the Evangelist briefly finisheth the history of the Baptist,
and speedily comes to the history of Christ himself.
And because the Baptist preached Christ only, and in him only shows all the
points of godliness and life, passing over the matters of ye Baptist, John the
Euangeliste makes have to describe the very matters of Christ, The 38.39 and
40 verses.
and declares first how he received them, which by the provocation of John the
Baptist followed him: In the 41. ver
also what the studies and works of the faithful be, namely to bring very
many unto Christ. From the 42. verse. unto ye 51.
There is briefly handeled the calling of certain of the disciples, in whose
examples we may learn, how men are called to the faith of the Gospel, and
what manner of men they ought to be, which must be instructed in the doctrine
of the Gospel. In the last verse.
The Lord instructs his Disciples by words and signs. By plain words,
witnessing that he is to them, which believe, the ladder and gate to a blessed
life. The 2 chap.
From the first ver. unto ye 13.
Furthermore he shows a worthy sign at a marriage, turning water into
wine, that by that deed he might declare his power, that it is he, which by
his word can do what he will, that they may boldly lean unto him, which
trust in him. And these things did he as it were privately amongst his
acquaintance and familiar friends. From the 13 ver. unto the 18.
But he came not to be made known in some one place only to a few, but in
all Jury, yea and to all the world, therefore he goes to Jerusalem the
chief city and head of the country, and makes himself known to all men by
a very great deed, and very fit for his purpose. For whereas he was come into
the world the king, and Priest, and Messiah of all the faithful in the
world, and because it appertained to the Messiah to purge religion from
corruption, and to deliver his from tyranny and superstition, he went
straight ways into the holy temple, and cast forth of it the buyers and
sellers, purging religion, and so showing himself to be the expected Messiah.
In the 18. ver*
But the rulers of religion took this thing very grievously, requiring a
sign, whereby he might prove, that he was he, whom he took upon him to
be. From the 19. ver. unto the 22
He reasons of his death and resurrection, although somewhat closely. In the
22 ver
And not a few believed the Lord, In ye 23. ver.
but some again cloked their faith, following rather ye corrupt affection of
their mind, than the motion of the holy Ghost, In the 24. and 25. verses
unto whom the Lord would not therefore commit himself, because he was not
ignorant of the counsels and cogitations of their hearts, and kept himself
for better affairs. These things are handeled in the two first Chapters. What
the Evangelist treats of.
The Apostle does diligently handle those things, which the Lord Jesus spoke
and did in the beginning of his preaching, that he might so rightly inform the
judgment of the Church, to think very well of Christian religion, and of the
principles thereof, ye which, as else where often, so here also, are wont for the
most part to be very hard. What went before.
He showed last before, what Jesus did publicly and openly in the temple of
God, and what he reasoned of among the common people, what he spoke and did,
What follows.
and now will he show a certain private thing. The 3. chap.
In the 1, 2. and 3. verses.
For the Lord uses private conference with Nicodemus a Doctor of the Law, The
sum of the Lord his talk with Nicodemus.
whom he instructs soundly, fully, and simply in the foundation, as they call
it, and in the first principles, knitting together the whole method of sincere
doctrine, and In the 3. verse.
teaching, that he, which desires to enter into the kingdom of God, must
needs first be borne anewe. Because our nature and our first nativity has in
it self no light or life. From the 4, ver. unto the 13
Moreover yt this new birth consists in the renouation of the holy Ghost, by
whose means he which is to be saved knows, that there is nothing in the
strength of man, which can deserve justification and blessed life, In the 13,
14, and 15. ver.
that those things are provided by an others deserving, namely by Jesus Christ,
In the 16. verse.
whom the grace and love of God, and no desert of ours, gave unto us, yea and
gave him to ye most shameful death of ye cross, that every one, which
believes in him, should not perish, but should have everlasting life. From the
17. ver. unto ye 22.
There he teaches that true faith in Christ works good works: and
contrarily that incredulity and want of faith is ye cause of all ungodliness,
yea of damnation it self. From the 22 verse unto ye 26
These things being finished, the Apostle handeleth forthwith the question
touching purifying, sprung up after the matters before going. From the 27 verse.
unto the end of the chap.
By occasion whereof he reports the fifth and most plain testimony of John
the Baptist, whereby he witnesses, that the faithful are fully purged
through the grace of Christ. And that he is the true Messiah, in whom the
Father has given to the world, whatsoever appertains to true salvation, and
that therefore they which believe in Christ are saved, and contrarily that they
which believe not are damned. What follows.
Unto these things he knitteth, by a marvelous and a most wise devise, an
other, and a new conference, and the same private also, between the Lord and
a woman of Samaria. What went before.
He received and instructed in the third chapter Nicodemus, a famous man, a
Jew, learned, and a man of holiness not to be despised: The matter contained
in the 4. chap.
but now he receives and instructs an obscure woman, a Gentile, unlearned,
and very greatly defiled with heinous faults, to this end, least any
should gather by the former example, that the Lord came into the world to
save the godly only. For hereby we do understand, that he was borne to save
sinners also, and that not only the Jews, but the Gentiles also, yea and the
very Samaritanes. The conference has in it much pleasa^tnesse and sweetness.
The Lord insinuates himself into the mind of the sinful woman
merueilously: notwithstanding he goes about 2. things chiefly. The 4. chap.
From the 1. ver unto the 20
First he shows, that he is the fountain of goodness, and of all graces, of
the which whosoever drink, may be most plentifully satisfied. In the 20.21,
and 22, verses.
Then having confuted the false woorshipping of GOD, In the 23. and 24, verses.
he teaches which is the true woorshipping: In the 15, 26 and 27. verses.
and therewithal he professes by a most manifest confession, that he is the
true Messiah. In the 28, 29, and 30. ver.
Forthwith the sinful woman becomes a preacher of the grace of GOD. For
she calls forth the Sycharenes or Sychimites to meet the Lord the king or
the Messiah. From the 31 ver unto the 39
The mean while the Lord disputes among his disciples of the calling of the
Gentiles and of ye Apostleship to ye Gentiles. From the 39. ver unto the 43
Verily the Samaritanes receive ye Lord. In ye 43, 44, and 45. verses.
But the Jews, especially ye citizens of ye town of Nazareth, do despise and
cast him off: From the 46 ver. unto the end of the chapter.
Wherewith the Lord is so little offended, yt he is nothing at all less
bountiful unto the evil deserving Jews. For going to Cana a city of
Galilee, he restores to health the servant of a certain ruler being at the
very point of death, proving by that worthy deed, that he can save their
life, which put their trust in him, being the author of life and of all
goodness. What went before.
The notable instructions and disputations of Christ the Lord in true Christian
religion hitherto had with Nicodemus and the woman of Samaria, were as it were
private. What follows.
In the two next chapters follow public benefits of the same Christ our
Lord, which minister occasion of public disputations, very notable, the
which disputations do handle the same, that is to say, the greatest points of
our faith. The 5. cha.
From the 1 ver. unto the 10
The one benefit he does to a man being pitifully afflicted many years with a
most grievous disease, who^ he heals most lovingly. From the 10 ver. unto the
17
But because he had done this upon the Sabbath day, the Pharisees sclaunder the
benefit, and accuse the benefactor of breaking the sabbath. In the 17. ver
The Lord defending his own cause, shows, as it were by the example of his
father the eternal God, that he brake not the Sabbath. In the 18. ver.
Forth of the which answer they pike a new matter of accusation laying unto
the Lord his charge ye crime of treason against God, and of blasphemy against
God. From the 19. ver. unto the 40
Whereupon he proves by many, and the same most lively and most evident
arguments, that God is his father, and that he is the son of God by nature,
and equal with the father in all things, being the true, the living, and
eternal God. From the 40. verse unto the 44.
Notwithstanding in the end of his demonstration he falls to chide or to
expostulate the matter with the Jews, In the 44 verse.
and he opens the causes of man's infidelity and treachery, namely the
desire of glory, of riches, and of pleasure, In the 45, 46, and 47 ver.
joining hereunto fearful threatninges, that God the revenger will once
undoubtedly most sharply punish them. The 6. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 14
The other benefit is most public. For he makes a marvelous, and a very
kinglike feast, unto certain thousands of men in the wilderness, declaring
thereby most manifestly, that he is that son to be honored of the blessed
GOD, by whose virtue and providence all living things are fed and nourished.
In the 14. verse.
Now the people not understanding the just end of so great a benefit,
according to their grossness, are willing to create the Lord the king of
Israel. In the 15. ver
But the Lord, which was not come to reign in humility, upon the earth, or
in the countreye of the Jews only, or to receive a kingdom of men, but to
be a king, crowned by GOD the Father him self, glorious, heavenly, in heaven
and in all the earth together, and of all creatures visible and invisible,
departs* and hides him self in a mountain alone. In the 16, 17 and 18. ver.
The disciples, not knowing where the Lord lay hid, or whether he was
fled, go by ship to Capernaum: In the 19. ver.
Whom the Lord following walked upon the waves of the Sea, as upon the main
land, In the 20, 21. ver.
and help them being in peril in the lake, The use of the miracle.
setting forth unto them by this proof his divine power. In the 22, 23 and
24. ver.
The next day the common people follow him also in ships, In the 25. verse.
ministering occasion unto him by their words, to reason openly in the
school of Capernaum touching the abridgement and sum of our religion, From
the 26 ver unto the 30
namely that he is the true son of GOD, sent down from heaven from the
father, to give life unto al mankind, and to conserve them in life, in that
he was incarnate for us, in that he offered his flesh and his blood unto the
death for us, that every one, which believes in him, may have life
everlasting. From the 30 ver. unto ye 34
And he proposes this chief mysterye of our faith by the continual
similitude of bread or meat, and of drink, of eating and also of drinking,
being hid in an allegory, that both spiritual things might more rightlye
be conceived by the similitude of bodily things, and also that they might the
more firmly stick in the minds of men. In the 34 verse.
But when as the Capernaites understood these things the wrong way and
grossly, From the 35. ver. unto the 66.
the Lord expounds him self most clearly, declaring plainly, what he
meant by that kind of speech. In the 66. verse.
And when as not a few forsook him, In the 67. verse.
he asks those his disciples, whom he had called to the office of
Apostleshippe, whether they also purposed to forsake him. From the 68 ver. unto
the end of the chapter.
But blessed Peter in the behalf of all the Apostles made a right confession
in all points, and comprehending all the sum of a true faith, leaving it to
the Church, that she also in all troubles and heresies may so go on to
confess Christ. A brief rehearsal of the sum of the 2. last chap.
Thou have therefore in these two last chapters, two miracles, the third and
fourth, which Jesus did, and which John has described: also two chief
points of our faith, most copiously and learnedly handeled, both that Jesus
is true GOD, of one substance with the Father, and also that the same Jesus is
true man, the food of the soul, and the conservation and life of every part
of every man which trusts in him with a true faith. What went before.
John has hitherto plainly set forth the abridgement, sum, and scope of
all the doctrine of the Gospel, What follows.
and now does he join heereunto certain peculiar points touching the
doctrine and doctors of the Gospel, The 7. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 14
What their duty is: In the 14, 15, and 16. verse.
what their doctrine ought to be: In the 17, and 18. ver.
how doctrines may be proved and known, whether they be of GOD: From the 19
ver. unto the 25
that Christ the Lord committed none offense against the doctrine of the law:
In the 25, 26 and 27. verses.
also how the doctrine of the truth being published is received of the
world, and how great troubles are raised for the Gospel, whilst the world
goes about to oppress and cut of the Gospel, by hands, by threatninges, and
by murder. From the 28. ver. unto the 33
And yet in these troubles the Lord goes on notwithstanding with a bold
courage, bearing witness with the truth, From the 33 ver. unto the 37
admonishing also what euilles are kept in store for the despisers of the
Gospel, In the 37, 38, and 39, verses.
and inculcating the same kind of doctrine continuallye, to wit, from whence
salvation comes, even from the only Son of GOD, if we believe in him,
and what the force of faith is. In the 40, and 41. verses.
As the godly do with great desire receive and embrace this doctrine, In ye
41, 42, and 43. verses.
so are the wicked more and more incensed thereby, indeuouring with tauntes to
deface it, and by all means to oppress it, From the 44 ver. unto the end of
the chapter.
but the power of God is not overcome of the weakness of men, which without
GOD always comes to nothing, and vanishes away mocked and shamefully
confounded. The 8. chap.
From the 1 ver. unto the 12
After these things John puts down a notable example of the goodness and
mercy of GOD, whereby we may understand, how Jesus is the fountain of the
water of life, watering the thirsty to everlasting life. In the 1^. ver.
Again under the cover of a certain other similitude, comprehending the sum
of sound doctrine, he teaches, that he is the light and Savior of all the
world: In the 13, 19 22, and 25. ver.
which doctrine of the truth the brawling Jews indeuouring to pollute, cavil
much. From the 14 ver. unto the 31
But the Lord does maynetayne and confirm the said doctrine gravely and
firmly, In the 21 vir
denouncing punishment to the contentious, In the 14, and 15 ver Also in the
19, and 22. ver.
opening with all the causes of contention and of error, From the 14. ver.
unto the 31
and declaring often times most clearly that he is the Savior of the world,
which can save them, that believe in him, and which can condemn them that
believe not in him: that his doctrine is certain, and infallible, the which
by repeating often times he does inculcate. For this must be retained firmly
in all contentions.

In the 31, and 32. verses.
Moreover he instructs more fully the faithful and holy, which believed him,
what they should do, how they ought to continue in the known truth, and
what the freedom of the Sons of GOD is. From the 33 ver. unto the 48
He confuteth again the wicked bragging of the Jews, boasting themselves to
be the sons of God, and the seed of Abraham. In the 39 ver
For the Lord teaches, who be the true sons of Abraham, In the 42, and 43.
ver.
what the disposition of the sons of GOD, In the 44, and 45. verse.
and of the Devil is, also what the drift and works of the devil are, In
the 46, and 47. verses.
and that the hearing of God his word is the most evident mark of the
Sons of GOD. In the 48 ve
The Jews receive this faithful and notable disputation of the Lord with
tauntes, In the 49, 50, and 51. ver.
unto whom the Lord proposes a new the sum of the true and sound
doctrine, namely that the salvation and the life of the world is not obtained,
but only by faith in Jesus Christ, From the 52 verse unto the 57.
yea and that Abraham him self lived by faith in Jesus Christ the Son of
GOD. From the 57 verse. unto the end of the chap.
At the which doctrine, as at extreme blasphemye, they being stirred up,
catch up stones, to punish forsooth ye blasphemer: but he withdrew him self
forth of the troublesome company. A necessary point of doctrine to be learned
in these 2. chap.
Now this whole disputation of these two chapters do furnishe us with a most
beautiful example of a thing most necessary, namely how we ought in all
troubles, persecutions, threatenings, disputations, bralles, reproaches, and
tauntes of this world, to have an eye only to Christ, and to the infallible
word of his Gospel, as to the only shippe-mans star in the tempestuous
Sea, and to continue faithful in him most constantly. What follows.
The Apostle describes most plentifullye and most elegantly hereafter the
fifte miracle of the Lord, or benefit bestowed upon a certain blind man.
The use of the miracle.
Whereby the Lord Jesus as by a lively deed, confirms and declares that,
which he lately proposed to all the people in the temple, namely, that he is
the light of the world, which came to lighten and quicken all believers. The
9. chap.
From the 1. ver. unto the 8.
For now by giving sight to him that was borne blind, he signifies and
proves manifestly by the thing it self, that he is the giver of light. In
the 39, 40, and 41. verse.
Yea a little before the end of the history, extending this his deed most
largely to all men, he adds: I am come unto judgment in this world, that
they which see not, might see: and that they which see, might be made
blind: which is as it were the state, where unto we may refer the whole
history. From the 8. ver. unto the 35
The mean while, as upon a certain stage, is set forth to the show, a
sharp contention of the godly and ungodly, about the matter of religion, and
the truth of the confession of the Gospel. In the 13, 15 16, 17, 18, 19, 24,
26, 28, 29 34, and 40 verse.
Here are also painted forth the manners and dispositions, not only of the
enemies of the word of GOD, In the 9, 11, 12, 15, 17.20 25, 27, 30, 31, 32,
and 33, verses.
but of simple Christians also, whose duty, francke confession, In the 36.
and 38. verses
and increase of faith are here described. The application of the history
before going.
Therefore thou shall see, as in a certain lively picture, the counsels and
endeavors of the wicked, whereby they persecute the truth, darken it, and
endeavor to oppress it. Thou shall see their marvelous slinesse, their wrath,
and envy not to be pacified, and their extreme cruelty. Thou shalt see
again ye faithfulness, simplicity, sincerity, patience, constancy, and
truth conquering in all things, which always overcomes by giving place.
The 10. cha.
From the 1. verse unto the 19.
After these things he accuses greatly the blind and unfaithful
shepheardes of the people of the Jews: and with all he shows, that he is
that true shephearde, which quickens his sheep with his death, redeemeth
them by his power and care from all euilles, and refreshes them with wholesome
food. And in these things he sets forth the example of the best
shephearde for all faithful shepheardes, instructing them what becomes them,
and what their duty is: but chiefly he inculcateth that, which he uses to
urge every where, that he is the Savior of the world, which gives life to
the faithful through his death. In the 19, 20 and 21. ver.
But there rises a new business and a new dissension about this doctrine,
some wilfully cauellyng at the proposed truth, and other no whitte the less
mayntayning and defending the same. In the 22, 23, and 24, ver.
In the feast of the dedication the adversaries propose a question to the
Lord, whereby they might take a new occasion to cavil. They demand:
whether he be Christ, that blessed son of almighty GOD, that is to say,
the Messiah? and if he be, that he would confess it openly, plainly, and
manifestly. From the 25 ver. unto the 31
Therefore the Lord Jesus professes, and not only professes, but also
proves, that he is Christ the blessed, the son of the blessed God. In the
31 ver.
By the which profession they being rather provoked, then instructed, are
willing to stone Jesus as a blasphemer. From the 32 ver. unto the 39
But he reasoning friendly with them, shows that he is the son of GOD in
deed, and that he sinned not at all against the majesty of his father. In
the 39, and 40. verse.
But because no reasons can prevail with the gross, inflexible, and blind
adversaries, leaving them again, and passing over Iordane, he returned unto
that place, where John first began to baptize. In the 41 ver
There he found not a few obedient sheep. In the last ver
For many believed on Jesus there. What went before and what follows.
Hitherto we have heard great and divine things, and yet there follow after
a sort greater and more divine things, The 11. cha.
From the 1. ver unto the 46
and before all the rest, the raising again by Christ of Lazarus, having
layne now four days in the grave and stinking. Why Christ wrought this
miracle.
The last day of Christ the Lord approached, wherein he offered him self, for
the salvation of men, to GOD the father, to be an odor of a good smelling
savor. And the nearer he drew unto his death, the more plainelye does the
force and fruit of the Lord his death show it self. What we may learn by
this miracle.
Certaynelie the Lord shows most manifestly by this his sixte last sign
or miracle, that he is the life of all the world, who although he dyed upon
the cross, yet can he save the souls of the faithful in death, and raise up
the dead. And because this thing is hard to be believed of flesh and man's
reason, this history is handeled both plentifully, and exactly, yea and
evidently, so that thou may think, that thou beholdest all things with
view of eye. In the mean season in Martha and Marye we are taught, what
manner of faith ours ought to be. And the minds of the Godly are confirmed
through all the historye against the fear of death, the offense of the Cross
is mittigated and utterly taken away, From the 46 ver. unto the end of the
chapter.
and the cause of the hatred and envy of the Priests or Senators of the
people of Israel is declared, wherewith they being blinded consulte to kill
Christ. That consultation is touched in few, but yet in evident words. The
12. cha.
In the 1, 2, 3, and 4. ver.
Now heereunto pertains the feast solemnised in Bethanie, From the 5. ver.
unto the 12
in the description whereof, the cause is showed whereby Judas being moved,
purposed to sell and betray Jesus to the Priests. The Evangelists purpose in
the rest, which follows.
In those things, which follow, John handeleth those matters, whereby the
glory and virtue of Christ appeared and shone oftentimes most clearly to the
people of Israel: From the 12. ver. unto the 19
and first, where as he entered into the city with regal pomp, he declares,
that he is the king and the deliverer of the people of God, whom the Prophets
foreshewed to come. In the 19. ver
This, grieved the Pharisees, who being overwhelmed with the greatness,
power, and euidencie of Christ his doings, are constrained to despair of their
own matters. In the 20, 21 and 22. ver.
Hereunto this also is added, yt the Greeks or Gentiles came to Jerusalem from
countries very far distant to see and salute Jesus. From the 23. ver. unto
the 27
Whereby ye Lord takes occasion to speak of his death, of the fruit thereof,
and of the great and far exceeding glory following his death immediately. In
the 27, and 28, ver.
Also he prays, that the father would set forth his glory. In the 28 and 29
ver.
An oracle is given from heaven answering to the prayers of the Lord. From the
30 ver. unto the 34.
Thereupon the Lord teaches again most clearly, what fruit shall come unto
the faithful through his death. In the 34, verse.
Now when the people here upon moved a question, touching the eternity of the
Messiah, In the 35, and 36. ver.
He exhorts them to faith. In the 37. verse.
The Jews notwithstanding continue in their unbelief, From the 38. ver. unto
ye 44.
the which thing John proves that Esaias foreshewed. From the 44. verse unto
the end of the chap.
But to confirm the weak in faith, the Lord makes a most vehement Sermon,
wherein he gathers a brief rehearsal of his doctrine, hitherto publicly
proposed. What went before.
S. John hitherto has set forth those things, which the Lord spoke and did,
privately and publicly, before his Passion, among those which were familiar
with him, and in the presence of all the common people, as well by disputing as
by preaching, both maintaining and delivering to the Church the most full and
perfect doctrine of the Gospel: What follows.
but in those things, which follow, he describes certain secret and
mystical, as well sayings as doings of the Lord, which he spoke and did, in
that his last and mystical Supper, before his Disciples. Here all things
burn and glitter with a certain divine brightness. For here all the
mysteries of our faith, and of the kingdom of God are proposed and opened, and
the most dainty banquet of the soul and spirit, is most liberally furnished
and set forth by the Son of God himself to the Church, so that the faithful
hearer diligently considering these things, may seem to hear not a humane,
but a very divine voice, and not to be at any earthly supper, but being
admitted into heaven it self, to be a guest at God his table. Notwithstanding
passing over those things, which the other three Evangelists handeled both
diligently and ple^tifully touching this last supper, John sets forth most
fully those things, which hitherto were not committed to writing, least the
Church of Christ should want any thing, but that it might have a most full
History of the affairs of her Savior. The 13. cha.
In the first verse.
Therefore in the beginning speaking somewhat in manner of a Preface, From the 2
ver. unto the 12
he brings in forthwith the Lord washing the Disciples feet, From the 12.
ver. unto the 18.
and commending by that deed, with certain words added thereunto, both
humility, and the duties of charity, expounding also the effect or fruit of
his passion. From the 18 verse unto the 30.
After these things is placed a diligent and profitable disputation of Judas
his treason. In the 30. ver
When as Judas was departed forth of the holy banquet of the holy Apostles,
that he might gather together cutters, which might take Jesus, In the 31, and
32. verses.
Jesus understood that his last hour now approached, he sees also that his
disciples, being oppressed with great sorrow, are diversely tempted and
grieved, From the 33. verse unto the end of the chap.
therefore he makes a worthy oration unto them with great deliberation, that
he might thereby comfort his Disciples, and admonish them and fully instruct
them in all his matters. For this are they wont to do, which are at the point
of death, namely to comfort theirs, to instruct the^ in diverse things, and
gravely to warn them. For in such manner the Lord makes a large and a most
profitable oration unto his Disciples here put down in writing unto the 17.
Chapter, which for the more plainness we have divided into two parts. The
former part is comprehended in the latter end of the From the 33 verse
13 Chapter, and in the 14. Chapter throughout. The latter part is contained in
the 15. and 16. Chapters. But the Oration or Sermon of the Lord is diverse,
neither is it referred to any one, and certain mark, except thou respect
consolation and instruction. For all things tend hereunto, that the Disciples
of Christ be not troubled, and that they may understand the mysteries of
Christ, and know what they should do. In the 31, 32 and 33. verses of the
13. chapter.
And first he entreats of his death, which because it seemed unto the world
to be shameful and infamous, he teaches, that both the father and the son
is glorified through his death. In the 34. and 35. ver.
Then because he must leave them, least they should be ignorant how to
behave themselves, and what laws they should keep one with another, he does
not ouercharge them with many prescriptions, but commends unto them charity
only. In the 36. and 37. ver.
Notwithstanding here the Lords talk is broken of a little, through the bold
brag of Saint Peter, In the 36.37, and 38. ver.
which the Lord cooling, goes forward in his purpose, The 14. cha.
In the 1 ver.
and professes openly that he is very God, that he may stay up the faith of
his Disciples, wherein is the surest foundation of comfort. From the 2. ver.
unto the 8.
He adds that he therefore departs hence and dies, that he may open the
way for us into heaven. From the 8, ver. unto the 15
Afterward he shows Philip and the rest more fully, that he is in all
things coequall and of one substance with the Father: yea and that the Father
cannot be known but by the Son. In the 15. ver
And now also he exhorts them to keep his commandments faithfully: In
the.16 and 17. verses.
and promises an other comforter. From the 18. ver. unto the 25
Moreover he uses many reasons, whereby he may both comfort their sorowefull
minds, and stir them up to the vehemente study of godlidesse. From the 25
ver. unto the 30
And hereupon he reasons more plentifully of the comforter, or holy Ghost,
In the 30 and 31, ver.
and says most plainly that he must shortly be delivered into the hands of
sinful men: but yet so that the world should be saved thereby. What went
before.
Having finished the former part of the Lord Jesus Oration made after the
Supper unto his beloved Disciples, What follows.
we come now to the latter part, which seems to be spoken in the journey
toward the mount of Olives, and is comprehended in the 15. and 16. Chapters.
How this which follows, agrees with that which went before.
And it agrees with those things, which went before in this manner: The Lord
had oftentimes said, that he must depart forth of this world to the
Father, the mean while least the Disciples should suppose, that they should
utterly be forsaken, he added, that he with the father and the holy Ghost
would come unto them, and abide with them, if they continue in keeping his
precepts. The 15 cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 9.
Now as it were repeating ye same thing, and after a sort enlarging the same by
bringing in the most elegant similitude of the vine and of the branches, he
reasons most plainly of his remaining, that I may so term it, or of his
presence in the Church, yea and of the true Communion of Christ and his
Saints, I mean, in that he remains wholly in us, by his spirit, by his
power, and by his evident operation, if we by faith and by love remain in
him. From the 9. verse. unto 14.
And verily for this cause he entreats more copiously of brotherly love. In
the 14, and 15. verses.
And by the way he reasons of the worthiness of the faithful, whom he
calls friends, and not servants. In the 16. ver
Again least they should be proud, he adds, that this is bestowed upon them
through the free election of God, which has chosen them, that they may go and
bring forth plentiful fruit. From the 17 ver. unto ye 26.
But the Disciples began forthwith to feel, what perilles they should be
in, and therefore were they not a little afraid of themselves. The Lord
therefore confirming their minds, reasons much and diversely of the cross
and of suffering, In the 26 and 27, ver.
and promises again the comforter, which should stir them up, encourage,
and confirm them in troubles and persecutions. The 16. cha.
From the 1. ver. unto the 16*
Moreover, he disputes with much profit many things concerning ye effects
and strength of the comforter, showing how the holy ghost being given should
recompense his corporal presence, which after his death should be no whitte
at all profitable upon earth, how by him he would prepare his Church in the
world, and reign in it. From the 16 ver. unto ye 20.
And yet does he again put them in remembrance that he must first die, In
the 20 ver.
and that hereupon his disciples should be oppressed with great sorrow: whom
forthwith raising up again by co^forting them, he assures them yt their
sorrow shall not be long: but that the joy, which shall rise of his
resurrection, and follow their sorrow, shall be everlasting. In the 21, and 22,
ver.
And this does he declare by the similitude of a woman travailing. From the 23
ver. unto ye 28.
Moreover least they should be ouermuche sorrowefull through the departing of
his body into heaven, he promises his disciples, that he will teach them all
the secrets of the kingdom of God by his spirit, and that he will give them
whatsoever they shall ask in his name, that is to say, in the name of Christ:
In the 28 verse.
and with all he gathers into a brief sum the whole matter of our
redemption, desiring to fasten this deep in their hearts. In the 29 and 30
verses.
The which things when as the disciples received with great rejoicing, and
commended, professing, that they did now believe, and plainly understand, that
he was the son of God, In the 31, and 32 ver.
he fortelleth them, that they shall forthwith forsake him, and every one
provide for him self by fliyng away. In the last ver.
And in the end, concluding his whole talk continued hitherto from the
thirtienth Chapter, and signifiyng whereunto all things must be applied, he
says: These words have I spoken unto you, that in me you might have peace,
for in the world ye have tribulation: but be of good cheer, I have overcome
the world. What went before and what follows.
After that our Lord Jesus Christ had partly comforted his disciples by these
very divine sermons, and partly informed and instructed them against the
storm of euilles imminent, because he had purposely warned them, that they
must not put their trust in any humane things, but in the help of God, he
does moreover teach by his own example, that in their afflictions the look no
whither else, but to the Father of heaven. From the 1. ver. unto the 6.
The 17. cha.
Now therefore preparing him self to suffer his passion, he begins it with
making his prayers unto the father, unto whom first he commends himself,
From the 6, ver. unto the 20
then his Apostles, From the 20 ver. unto the end of the chap.
lastly all, which believe the doctrine of the Apostles, beseeching him, that
he would glorify him, and that he would guide the Apostles, and the
Church of the faithful, through this most vnpure world, in the study of the
truth, of godliness, and of charity, and that he would join them unto him
for ever. The 18. cha.
In the 1.
Having finished his prayer, he goes unto the mount of Olives, entering into a
garden, where he might commend him self again to God by his prayers. In the
2. and 3. verses.
The mean while traiterous Judas had gathered together a band of most wicked
varlettes, and approaches the innocent. From the 4. ver. unto ye 10.
The Lord, that he might show that he suffered of his own accord and
willingly, and that he was omnipotent, although he suffered him self to be
chayned, overthrows often times the band in the graden, and afterward
commits him self voluntarily unto the wicked to be bound. In the 10, and 11
verses.
There Peter fights unhappily enough, and was rebuked of his master. In the
12.13 and 14 ver.
They bring the Lord forthwith to Annas the high priest, and from him to
Caiphas, because he was placed that year in the chief dignity of priesthood.
In the 19 ver
Inquisition is made touching the doctrine of Jesus, In the 20, and 21, ver.
and whilst he went about to answer, In the 22.23, and 24 ver.
he is most unworthily beaten of a servant of the high priests. In the 15, 16
17, and 18. verses, also in the 25, 26, and 27. verses.
Whilst these things were in doing, Peter denies and abiureth the Lord most
shamefully. In the 28, verse.
Christ is lead from the high priests court straight ways unto the deputies
common hall of judgment, because he seemed worthy of death. From the 29 ver.
unto the 38
He is accused before Pilate, and the chief points of the accusation are
discussed, In the 38. and 39 verses.
but Pilate finding no fault in him, goes about by cunning too set him at
liberty. In the last ver.
Which when it fell out vnluckely, The 19. chap
From the 1 ver. unto the 6.
he brings him torn with whips, and crowned with a crown of thorns, forth
unto the common people a beast of many heads. In the 6. ver.
They cry out together, that he may be crucified. From the 7, ver. unto the 12
But Pilate inquiring of many things, From the 12 ver. unto ye 16
yet at the last overcome with the wicked outcries of the Jews, In the 16 ver
delivers Jesus to be crucified. He is received of the soldiers, In the 17
ver.
and led forth into a place named of dead men's skulles unto execution. In the
18 ver*
There is he lifted up upon a cross in ye midst between two thieves. From
the 19 ver. unto the 23
The title or cause of his death is put upon the cross by Pilate not without
great reasoning and controversy. In the 23, and 24, ver.
Moreover the soldiers part the Lords garments, and cast lottes for his
coat, which was without seame, under the cross. In the 25, 26, and 27 ver.
The Lord from the cross commits his mother to John: In the 28 ver
He thirsts, In the 29 ver
and refuses to drink vinegar offered him in a sponge, In the 30 ver.
and witnessing holily that all things were finished, and that the sacrifice
was perfect, he gave up his ghost to God the father. In the 31, and 32 ver.
Afterward the legs of the thieves are broken, In the 33* and 34. ver.
Jesus his side is opened, blood and water guisheth out of it. In the 35, 36
and 37 ver.
John which saw it, does holily witness the truth, From the 38 ver. unto the
end of the chap.
And lastly come godly and devout men, which take down the dead body of the
Lord from the cross, and spice it most honestly, and bury it. What follows,
John, in this last part of his Gospel, rekoneth up, with great trust and
diligence, the most manifest testimonies and proofs of the glorious
resurrection from the dead of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby he shows fully
and plainly, that he rose again from the dead truly with his true and lively
body. He was not very careful touching the manner of the resurrection, and
concerning the natural order of the revelations. For he saw that the other
Evangelists had plentifully handled and plainly enough set ye forth therefore
he sets forth the most chosen proofs: The 20. cha.
In the 1 ver. and from the 11. unto the 18
And in the beginning he shows, how he showed him self alive to Marie
Magdalen. For Mark also says: Mark chap. 16 ver. 9.
When Jesus was risen early, the first day after the Sabbath, he appeared first
to Marie Magdalen, out of who^ he had cast seven devils. In the 2 and 18 verse.
Now she declares to the apostles forthwith what she had seen: From the 3
ver. unto the 11
two of the which running to the sepulcher, find by certain signs and
tokens, yt she had reported no vain matter. In the 19 and 20. verses.
Now the Lord himself, being willing to show manifestly his manifest
resurrection to the ten disciples gathered together, comes into the midst
of them, and shows them openly his hands and side marked with the prints of
ye wounds, proving so the truth of his true resurrection. In the 21, 22. and
23 ver.
Forthwith he commits and inioyneth ye apostles the ministry of preaching
salvation and redemption, putting the^ in trust with the kayes of the kingdom
of heaven. In the 24. ver
When these things were in doing, ye rest of ye disciples being assembled in
one place, Thomas only was away, In the 25 ver
unto whom returning shortly afterward, ye disciples rejoicing greatly,
report yt they had seen the Lord. He suspecting that they had bin deluded by
some phantasme, denies, yt he will believe, except he behold the body of
Jesus openly with his own eyes, yea and handeling it with his hands, touch
the truth of his body. In the 26. and and 27. verses
Therefore after eight days, when as all ye eleven disciples were come
together again into one place, the Lord Jesus is present again, and offers
himself most manifestly to Thomas, both to be beholden of his eyes, and to be
handled of his hands, From the 28. verse unto the end of the chap.
who being overcome with the euidencie and truth of the matter, cries out,
that he does now acknowledge and worship Christ for his Lord and God. Where
these things were done.
And these things were done in the very city of Jerusalem, and about the
very grave of the Lord: the which although they might suffice fully to
confirm the faith of the resurrection, The 21. chap
From the 1 ver. unto the 15
yet does John add a certain notable proof, whereby he declared in Galilee,
that he was risen from ye dead, by dyning also with his disciples. For the Lord
had promised, as well by his private promise, as by ye promises of Angels, that
it should come to pass, yt they should see him in Galilee. In the 15, 16 and
17 ver.
And unto this revelation John joins ye talk which ye Lord had with Simo^
Peter immediately after dinner, who^ he restored to his ministry, In the 18,
and 19 verses.
foretelling him his sorrowful destenie. From the 20 ver. unto the 24
Peter merueiling what should become of John, hears yt every one ought to
look unto his own calling. In the 24, and last verse of the chapter.
Lastly John, making a protestation, yt he has described ye matters of our
lord Jesus very faithfully, shuts up the history of the truth of the
Gospel.

Here ends the sum of the Gospel by Saint John.
FINIS.

