A VVONDERFVLL PROGNOSTICATION: OR, PREDICTION, for these seven years ensuing:
Showing the strange and wonderful Comets and Meatuors: beginning this present
year. 1604.

Written in French by the Lord of Billy, Secretary to the most illustrious
Princess, the Lady Celestine Olal^^pa, Duchess of Pancosme.

decorative engraving

Imprinted at London for W. Ferbrand* and are to be sold in Pope's Head Ally*
near the Exchange, 16^4.

A Prediction upon this present year. 1603.
BY the Configuration of the Heavens in this years Revolution, and the Suns
entrance (the fountain of heat and light) into the sign of Aries, we may
speak of the principal matter thereby signified: and this Revolution of the
World has almost the self same signification as that in the year. 1602. For
Mars joined to the Sun, shall force himself with all his power to oppress
the Mortals with grievous Sicknesses and other diseases, whereby (if God pity
us not) many thousands of men shall perish by Pestilence, Fa^ine, and by the
Sword: as also the Moon infortunated by Mars by a fourth aspect, shows the
same: For there shall happen great controversies among Soldiers, and many
robberies shall be done: also, diverse Cities shall be tormented and vexed with
diverse perrils and troubles, by reason of the fury of War. In brief, by
reason that Mars will force himself to vex men more and more, many tumults
shall be heald, great exp^ditiens in War shall happen, and many shall be
surprised with fear. He that can keep himself at home, let him not trau^ll,
because that most like thereby he may have some ^^^hap: many complaints of
grief and sudden losses shall be heard: he that shall ariue at home, shall
bring but little goodness with him. The fourth aspect of ^aturne and Venus.
foresheweth great vexations and differences to arise amongst Women, by reason
of adulteries and fornications. Now meetinges and assemblies shall be summoned
in diverse Provinces, to appease the differences of this time, but nothing shall
be concluded: and therefore with S^lomon I will say* Eccles. 9. I returned and
saw under the Sun, that the ra^e is not to the s^^^t, nor batta^le to the
strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor also riches unto men of understanding,
neither yet savor to men of knowledge, but time and chance comes to (...)
all.

This year the Moon shall be twice Eclipsed: to wit, the.xiiii. of May, and
at.xi. of the clock and.xxx. minutes after noone, and shall be Eclipsed.viii.
points and.lv. min. she shall continue.iii. hours and.v minutes, and will
appear black in color, mixed with palenes. The other shall be the.viii. of
November, at.vi. of the clock and.xxii. min. after noone, in greatness.iii.
de^rees and.xxxviii. min her continuance shall be two hours and viii. min. And
in color shall appear as the former: and moreover, Ash Color mixed with
White: which Eclipses are not without great signification, no more then are the
Conjunctions of the highest Planets. Saturn and Jupiter, with the others in
the first face of Sagittarius, the highest lodge of Saturn, and mansion of
Jupiter, which will be celebrated the.x of December.

Touching the effects of the Eclipse on the xiiii. of May, appearing in the.x.
and.xi. houses of the heaven, proclaymes death unto Kings, Princes and
Ecclesiastical persons, especially in their manly age: and by reason that she
has her operation in the fiery triplicitie, she signifies death of Cattle,
the exile of a great King or Prince, immprisonmentes or death, hate between
the Commons and (...) greater sort, mutual hates and differences (...)tions of
great Hoastes and horrible War(...) ^^ansl-aughters, fire, theeuery, rapines,
and depopulations: untimely birthes, Ag^es, Pestilences, hot infirmities, death
and barrenness of fruits, and notable mutations, especially in the Regions
which are subject to the signs of this Eclipse. And by reason that she is
found in the first tenth of the sign, she signifies theftes and robberies. And
for the said great Conjunction, there is no doubt but they are of great
signification, as being the first which happens under this fiery triangle.
For since the time of Charlemaine, which are 800 years ago, they have not
been seen in this manner.

As likewise in the.xiii. year of our Salvation, she was in the same face of
Sagittarius: and from that time until the time of Charlemaine, which was Anno.
809. After which, followed di^ers Eclipses, apparitions of Comets, as after
this also will ensue some grievous accidents: from which, God defend us. For
there will happen alterations as well in Housholdes as in Estates,
Commonwealths, as Religion: for these great Conjunctions in the fiery signs,
do ^raw up exhalations, which inflaming themselves in the high^^^ Region of the
air, cause this Comet or (...) Star, which although by reason of the
(...)staunce of the earth, she seems little unto our sight, yet is she of an
extreme and incredible greatness. And as after the same Conjunctions in the
time of Charlemaine, the death of some great Men or great Lights of the world
did ensue: so must ^oe be assured, that the death of great persons will follow
this (which God defend:) Also, thereby is foreshewed great motives to War,
and great alteration of Laws, Sects, and Religion, as well in the Politic
as Spiritual Estates. For this fiery Triangle has his proper signification
upon Monarkes and great Religions. As we see that the Christian faith began
under this Triangle, and likewise was greatly augmented under the same, in the
time of Charlemaine, as well in number of perso^^ as in Pompes and Ceremonies:
As for the other Triangles and great Conjunctions contained under them, their
significations are upon the sects and deuisions in the great Religion, as are
the sects of the four begging Orders, and others more rich in gifts: these
four begging Orders began. 400. years since, in which time began the greatest
Conjunctions in the ayrie Triangle, which is the signs of Gemini, Libra, and
Aquarius, and continued. 200. years. At that time, there lived a great
Astronomer, called Guido Bonatus, who says thus of these Sects. Sicut finis
quando incips s^cta sine religio Augustini, and secta Benedicti, and secta
fraetrum minorum quae incipit. Era Ara^um 609 Anno mense Rabe viti^^, Era
Christi 1211. (...) c^^us princip^^m fuit tale ascendens quod ipsa supra
decabit om^es alias sectas, and ordines sub. Romana Ecclesia de gentes* sed
cius sinem dic^re non a^di^, timore ne inci^am in remorem v^lga. Eri^ tamen
public^s valde cum ^^^^nerit as de ipso rumor mensus.

The Prediction upon the year. 1604.
BY this years Revolution which is the entrance of the Sun into the sign
of Aries. we are showed, that in many things she agrees with the former
years, and all things shall happen in self same manner as we have foretold.
For she signifies calamities and troubles in Religion, and in the estates of
Religions persons. Item, discontentions in the assemblies of great men, as the
last Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the fiery sign do show, which
threaten de^^iptes and ^ouso^ages. She is furthermore seen to threaten hates
and descentions between Kings and Princes, which shall cause Wars and
dangerous alterations. This Conjunction (because she is changed from the wa^ry
to the fiery Triplicity, according to the Arabian decrees) is mo^ evil, and
signifies great mischiefs unto mankind. Peter Ali^o Card^nall of Camerace,
says, that Gallia or France, is under the domination of Jupiter: W^erefore by
this Constellation she is subi^te unto diverse discommodities, ^^sch^efes, and
losses, as him self witnesses to have been found by sundry observations.
Wherefore I beseech Almighty God to make that Prognosticator a lya^, and to
keep her from all hurt and danger. Moreover, the applycation of Ma^s to the
body of Saturn seems to foretell the death of some noble Lady: and also moist
and hot Sicknesses, Collickes, Passions, Headaches, and the Neapolitan disease
unto the common people, and many Kings and Princes shall scarce be permitted
to be seen, so much they shall fear the fury, anger, and sedicious of the
Commons. This year in our Horizon shall be no Eclipse.

Predictions upon the year 1605.
BY the Celestial Figure of this years Revolution, which is the Suns
entrance into the Celestial weather, Saturn is in the. 12. house, who by his
myschieuous beams does unfortunate the Sun: to wit, by a fourth aspect.
Item, the Moon is found to be conioyne^ to Mars in the third house of the
heaven: which lights being infortunated, seem to foretell many evils, and
discommodities to happen in the world: wherefore with Leouice I will say, I
cannot tell how it happens, that so many great Eclipses (especially of the
Sun) do fall in so few years, whereby grievous and most wretched accidents
are presaged. Perhaps these be the latter days, when as all piety and charity
shall wax cold, truth and justice shall be oppressed: and all things else
shall be mixed, disturbed, and turned vpside down, and the forepart set
behind by torments and seditions: and finally nothing else shall be expected,
but spoil and ruin of the common society: wherefore with pure and rep^^^ant
hearts we ought to appease the Almighty God: and with incessant humble prayers
implore his Majesty, to divert his fury from us, and that he deprive us not
of the divine light of his holy Gospel (wherein our eternal salvation does
consist) nor permit the same to be rent and extinguished by the wicked.

This year the Moon shall be twice Eclipsed, and the Sun once.

The first Eclipse of the Moon shall be on the 23. day of March, at. 7 of the
clock. 35. minutes after noone, at the Dragons head, and shall be obscured. 11.
points and 40. min. and shall continue (from the beginning to the end) 3.
hours 24. min. She shall appear of color black, mixed with green and red:
and by reason that she happens in an ayrie and humane sign, she signifies
famine and grievous sicknesses and pestilences, tempestious and hurtful
winds: Her effects shall continue three months and eight days.

The second Eclipse of the Moon shall be the 17. day of September at 3 of the
clock and 14. minutes, in color black, mixed with pale and ash color: and
because she comes in the fourth house, she signifies change of Laws,
Institutions and Sects: and moreover, because she is in a fiery sign, she
signifies the self same things which are mentioned in the year. 1603. the.
14. day of May: and her being in Aries. signifies a corruption to light upon
the Fruits, on Vines and Figtrees.

The Sun likewise shall be Eclipsed on the second of October, a^ 2. of the
clock and 5 min. after noone, and shall be obscured. 11. points and 38. min*
and the first beginning shall be near 48. min. after noone, the middle at 2. of
y^ clock and 5. min. and the end shall be at. 3. and. 22. min: so that from the
beginning until the end, shall be two hours and 34. min* which (as Procl^s
Luciu* says) with the Sun passing under the eight station of the Heaven,
under the sign of Libra, is accustomed to foreshew the death of some great
King or Prince, sedi^ions* wars, famine, and P^stilence: w^ence M^ssa^ala
says, When as the Sun is Eclipsed, it can not be, (unless God appoint
otherwise) but some great accident is to be expected in the world, according to
the quantity of the Eclipse. And Virgil says, When as the S^^^ gives a sig^e,
who dares say that he foresheweth any false thing* he admonished and fore^e^^*
that the tum^lts of the blind w^rres, and secret frauds are at hand. The S^^
also pit^yed Rome when as C^^^rs death he covered his face with a black and
obscure veil: and then the great wicked^es of the world made them to fear an
everlasting darkness* therefore ^^ouice say^^, O King^^ and Princes which are
borne under the signs of the Balance and the Ram: also the Provinces and
^^^es which a^e subject unto the first quadrangle of the Zod^a^ke, and to the
sign of Scorpio, Many grievous evils are foreseen to fall upon you, extreme
mise^^s are even at hand. I could (as he says) have extended the Reuolutions
at the world until the next two years, until which, the effects of this
Eclipse shall continue: But ^lato commands me here to hold my peace, for so he
writes. It is most manifest, that of lon^ time there has not been seen any
great thing, nor the like shall not be seen in long time after* Darkness^
shall happen at high midday. The effects shall begin on the 11. day of April
1606. and shall c^ase on the 10. day of October. 1608. He shall appear of a
most deformed color, gray, sea* color, and (...) and because she ^^mes in the
sign of the ayrie and humane triangle, it signifies grievous sicknesses,
diseases, and P^stil^n^^s, with tempestious and most pernitions winds: and
being in the second fa^e of Libr^, Proclus says, that she signifies death of
Spiritual men, especially in their middle age: but the kind Venus, that
disposes of the places of the Eclipse, may somewhat moderate these Celestial
Menaces, as a second cause: for unto their first cause, who is the cause of
causes, moderatour ^f all things, the honor and praise of all must be
referred.

The Prediction upon the year. 1606.
BY this years Revolution, which is the Suns entrance into the sign of the
Martial Ram, the overthrow or spoil of some Region or City is signified
unto us, showing many other discommodities to happen to the world: of which we
have made mention in the Eclipse of the Sun: But Mars possessing the seventh
Celestial house, which is in the. 4* aspect of Mercury: and Saturn likewise
in the fourth aspect of the Sun, which holds the eight Celestial station:
these foreshew the deaths of many men: subtlety and craft shall increase: yet
he that shall have dug the pit, and pitched the snare, shall fall into it
himself. Moreover, there will be little or no constellation upon Captives, or
others put in captivity, because there will be multitudes of Prisoners, the
greater part shall live by hope, which notwithstanding shall obtain nothing:
and many men of War shall be casheer'd. Likewise there shall be great Wars,
and many hidden inventions between diverse Lords in diverse Provinces, in such
sort, that it shall be hard to discern whom amongst friends shall be true and
faithful. Mercury will cause many deceiptfull Counsayles, wherefore it is to
be feared, least many do endure evil Catastrophes, changes, and conuersions.
What restes and concerns this Profession, we leave it to be disputed of the
learned, and lovers of this Art, since with^^t danger the mysteries thereof
cannot be interpreted. This ye^re in our Horiz^^, shall be seen no Eclipse.

The Prediction of the year. 1607.
THere shall be one Ecipse of the Moon ^he 28. of August, at two a clock and
half an hour after midnight, and shall be darkoned in 4, points 28. min. in
the 13. degree of the sign Pisces, which signifies death to watery Creatures,
principally to Fishes. Corruption of Fountaynes and Rivers: and this Eclipse is
made in the second 10. of Pisces, offending and hurting Sowing universally: a^
because it is made in the house of Religion, it signifies l^sse to
Ecclesiastical persons and for that it is made in the watery Triplicitie* it
betokens death of ignoble persons, long seditions Wars, and doma^e to watery
things, and such as li^e in the Seas: notwithstanding, Jupiter Lord of the
Eclipse, the friend of Nature, says better things, that is, increase of all
things, but peculia^ly, lyberally gives to men glory, health of body* rest of
spirit, joy, peace, great help of wealth, reconciliation with great men,
augmenting Religion in Kings and Princes, principally those which he Iouials,
good renown mag^^ni^^itie, liberality, and good deeds to the people:
abundance of Annimals, profi^able for the use of men: and will kill things
in^^^ble, augmenting the Fruits of the earth preserving especially Corn and
Grai^e, and such things, making the blessing and ^^nigni^y of the heavens in
full force: the Air temp^ra^e and healthful, breathing moist bla^^es, wholesome
and my^kie shewers on terrestrtall things: the Waters to have moderate Floodes,
tempering the fl^wing and eb^ings of the Sea, gentle calmes* which will make
Nauigations prosperous and profitable garding from Pirates, and temp^s^eous
storms: and to conclude, and is Author of all happiness. Behold what the good
Jupiter signifies, being dominator of this gear^, and graciously corrects
the malice of the evil. The great God so grant it, to his everlasting glory.

Predictions in general for the year. 1608.
THe. 19. day of March at two a clock* 29. min. after noone, this year shall
reuine, the former Revolution being accomplyshed, and the Sun great conductor
of Knights ^rrant, passing through the wandering troop, will make his entry in
the house of Mars, taking for ensign the Celestial weather, the^ with us
shall rise upon our Hemispheere the 25. degree of the Lion, with the head of
the Dragon Lunaried, Saturn with Capricorn in his proper House, and Mars in
the same sign, his exhalation. Jupiter in the sign of Aries, Mercury in
Pisces, and the Moon in the height of heaven into Taurus her exaltation, there
she shall find her self the best lodged and more diguisied then all the
others: and for that she has participation in the dominion with Saturn, after
her the most worthy, the which being lodged in the house of Infirmities with
Venus in the water* powrer* does foreshew some peculiar, Sicknesses, if the
benignity of Venus (and God above all) break not her malice. Item, the Winter
following to be cold, rigorous, snowy* yc^sie, h^yly, evil and pestilent: also
thick and obscurely cloudy: clouds full of tempests, con^ea^nges* an^
rawnesse, winds, Innundations of Currents and Floodes, flowinges and
ouerflowings: in the d^ere Seas hard and perilous Nauigations. Shypwrackes, and
many times Earthquakes, corruption, scarcity, and death to Fish, and deadly
evils to wild beasts: Domageable and harmefull to fruits, pothearbes, and
especially to those which belong to the use of man, by reason of Worms,
Caterpillars, and Locustes, which shall eat them to s^a^^h their hunger: But
these evils are more upon beasts, then upon men, because she is in Capricorn,
half Goat and haste Fish. All which things, the good and Almighty great God
can change, if it please him, and make as nothing, proouing us vain liars,
even unspeakable vain. The fortunate part of this Revolution is in sufficient
good place, and promises us (being rad^ated and enlightened by Jupiter) to be a
good portion of the year, and to go well with Merchants. But the So^^ner
Figur^ of Heaven, being joined wi^^ Saturn the ma^euolent enemy of Nature, in
the sign of Capricorn, shall make the same also bountiful, for as much as
Saturn denotes intemperance of too much moisture and coldness, more then is
customable.

The first of August at three a clock 29. min. after noone, there shall be an
Eclipse, or rather the Suns labor by the Moons interposition betwixt him
and our sight, who shall cover him 3. points 44. min. One may behold this his
couerture in water (he shyning) and by a saffronlike yellowness in the
clouds, against a wall, and against the earth, and should be observed before
the said hour, and something after, that one may see him covered by the Moon,
as well in the beginning as in the end. The said Eclipse shall be made in the.
17. degree of the sign of Leo, the house of the Sun, and in the. 8. station
of the heavens, which is of death, we raising upon our Horizon the 15 degree of
Sagittarius: and amonst other things, it betokens the death of some great
Personage: from which God keep him (if he please) and us from the threatninges
and evil effects of this Eclipse. In the second face of Leo, she threatens
with troubles and detriment, the great and powerful. Venus Lady of the South
Angle, following the place of the Eclipse, has her part with the Sun in
domination of the same: and therefore the effects shall not be so evil as
some are.

The Countries and Cities subject ^o the first Quadrangle of the Zodiaque, and
those persons which in the Horoscope of their Nativity, or in their Re^olution
shall have the place of the Eclipse opposite from them, and the Planets, shall
taste more bitterly such effects (if any are) then others. From all which, the
good and mighty God keep us, if it please him. Yet furthermore, upon the
first day of May, the two evil Planets Saturn and Mars, shall be together,
conjoined in the first point of the sign of Aquarius, the house of the
sorrowful Saturn, which neither promises to us goodness, nor to Dame Flora
and her little ones, by their intemperate heat and frozen hayle, thunder, and
rain: of them it is said, Cum malus malo, sungitur angetur omne malum. Prayers
and supplications should therefore then be made to the modera^our of all
things for the conservation of them. The ancient Pagans celebrated in that
time, the Robigals and Florals: one was by the decree of Sibilla, the other by
the decree of N^ma Pompilius; and in place of the said prayers, they yet
celebate daily Rogations, and the Procession of S. Mark.

Predictions for the year. 1609.
THe tenth of the month of March at. 8. of the clock. 24. minutes. 55.
secondes after noone, the former Revolution is accomplished, and the only e^e
of this world will make his entry upon the sign of the Ram, Mars with us then
risin^ in the 25. degree of the Balance, the Sun and Moon opposite the one to
the other in the same sign of the Balance, the Moon in her full, the Lady
Venus in her Bull iayned with Jupiter; the gentle Lady of this Ascend^nt, and
of this year, being lodged in an angle of the ^ccident: and because she is
joined with Jupiter, the friend of Nature, and herself also is fortunate,
denotes her influence of this Revolution as we have said of Jupiter in the
year precedent: Besides, peculiarly she shall give to men (I mean as a second
cause) health of body, beauty, tranquillity and rest of mind, a happy year
increase of goods, respect and honor, good esteem amongst the better sort,
principally ven^rions and Musitions, shall have of the best and shall be more
enclyned to sportes, dauncings, reuellinges, banq^^tinges, voluptuousness, an^
ma^^age: then they were usually inclyned. Besides (...)sh ^ll cause sweet,
moist m^l^y shewers, at(...) from the producing earth the blessings ^^ Nature.
She shall cause fresh gentle Winds tempered of heaven(...) air, cleerenesse
and happy passage for S^^pp(...) filling the Floodes and Foun^ames, and the
Trees with Fruits. Briefly, she pron ^s^th air better then the former,
although Saturn in his Aquarius would have it as the precedent. But if Jupiter
once take him, he will thrust him from his reign: yet during the Winter,
Saturn marching by Capricorn, and the water filler his houses, shall make it
mo^^ ^old then it customably is. For Eclipses, we shall have this year two of
the Moon.

The first shall he the. 10. day of January at two a clock after midnight, and
shall be darkened to. 8. points and. 18. minutes, and shall endure about some
three hours: it shall be made in. 29. degree, 50. min. of the sign of Cancer,
to the head of the Dragon Lunaried, then shall well raise the. 14. degree of
Scorpius, and shall be made in the. 10. station of the Heavens, the house
royal, and shall continue in the ninth, which is of Religion. The good Jupiter
bearing the prize amongst the number of the works toward the end of the
Eclipse, nevertheless before the end of the Eclipse, the Moon shall enter in
the sign of Leo. Proclus says, that the Eclipse being in the last tenth
degree of Cancer, betokens to all Armenia and Affricke, and other Regions
subject to Cancer, sicknesses, seditions, and other evils: and for that she
passes also into the Lion. sh^e denotes also the death of some sovereign
Prince, and scarsity ^f all kind of Grain. He says also, that by the last
10. of Cancer. she menaseth the Feminine sex with sickness, sudden
sickness of some great Prince, or the death of some excellent man: and by
making her Eclipse first in the Palace royal and of dignity, she denotech some
disaster fortune in the dignity of the great: which God can preserve if it
please him. And her continuing in the house of Religion, denotes also some
trouble or evil, principally some evil, diminution of the Ecclesiastical
estate. From all which evils, the great GOD deliver us, if it please him.

There shall be an other Eclipse the. 6 day of July, at. 11. of the clock. 17
min. after noone, and shall be darkoned to. 15. points. 53. min. and shall
dure 3. hours: it shall be made in the 24. degree of the sign of Capricorn,
the house o^ the maleuolent Saturn. Then shall we raise in our Horizon the. 5.
degree of Taurus: now there is no doubt but the evil Saturn will bear a
share in the domination, being that it is made in his house, and therefore
betokens small good, but rather the evil which we have before spoken of him,
in the Revolution of the year 1608. from which, God of his go^^nesse keep us,
if it ^he his good pleasure. Pro^lus says, that the E^lipse being made in the
last tenth of Capricorn, signifies death, and sedition of some great Prince,
and tumultuous ^^surrections: and being made in the eleventh heau^nly Temple,
and con^inui^^ in the house of worthynesse, she denotes ill fortune to these
two Countries in their significations, to wit, that many shall be deceived of
whom they trust, and by their friends: and that many shall fall from their
dignities. The Country and Town subject to Capricorn, and to the first
Quadrangle of the Zodidique, and those persons having in the Horoscope of their
natiuities, the 24. degr^e of Capricorn, the point opposite from that of the
Suns, the Moon and the five other Planets in that degree of the Eclipse, and
3. degrees before, and 3. after, shall be more subject to the evil effects of
the same (if any come) then others. From the which things, God of his mercy
preserve us, if it please him.

Predictions for the year 1610.
THe. 21. day of Marth at two of the clock 20. minutes 40. secondes, the Sun
conductor of the wandering troop, makes his entry into the sign of the
Martial Ram, with us there ryseth upon our Hemisphere, the first degre^ of
the sign of Capricorn, the house of Saturn, the Planet Mars in the. 23.
degree of the same sign in the Horoscope, the most dignified of this hand:
there being in his exaltation, and there taking the domination of this year:
and for that naturally he has burning, intemperate, and dry effects, he
promises us no good, but rather by his influence, heat, great drought, and
scarcity of rain, drying up many Fountains and Springes of Rivers,
corrupting them, and narrowyng the currentes, bringing hot Winds, pestilent
and horrible exahalations, thunders, lightnings, and by the commixtion of
troublous and stormy Wyndes, he will cause subversion and loss of Ships: he
will cause those Cattle which are most necessary to the v(...) of man dye,
barnyng through pernicious vapors, h^getable things springing from the earth,
corrupting Fruits so as ^^ey will ^ot in the barnes. He^ denotes ruins of
edifices, embra^^in^es* rapes depopulations, cruel slaughters of men: He will
move Wars, civil seditions tu(...)s of the people, because of the eyranny
of the Rule^s, through their exactions and cruelties: and by these thin^es the
world shall endure contumelies, banishmentes, obscure and hellish prisons, and
in the end violent deaths, the virtuous despised, and the wicked esteemed,
peruertyng things unlawfully: all which evils, the great God through his
Almighty goodness, will turn to nothing, if it please him, and none shall
feel these calamities, except barbarous and strange Nations, which call not
upon his holy name. Saturn marching by the sign of Aquarius, in winter shall
ragingly give snowes and raynes, and great extraordinary frostes, especially
toward the end.

We shall have two Eclipses of the Moon this year.

The first shall be the. 27. of June at. 4. of the clock. 11. min. in the
morning, in the. 13. degree and. 31. min. of the sign Capricorn ^ then with
us shall rise in the same. 13. degree of Cancer, the Moon touching the point
of the Occident, in such sort as we can see but the beginning thereof: but the
people of the West, as the Spaniardes and Low Brittanes may better see it then
we: she shall make it in the seventh Station of the Heaven, and. 6. degrees which
is of D^seases, and therefore she makes unfortunate these two Stations in
their significations, which are of Marriage, and of infirmity. Saturn is
Dominator in this Eclipse, and therefore he threatens us with evil effects,
as we have said of him in. 1608 and by his working in the second. 10. of
C^pricorne, he shall vex (according to Proclu^ the men of Arms en^eagued
against the Emperor, and hi^ Captains and Leaders: fierce assaults of men of
war, incursions, robberies and captiuities. The Towns and Country subject
to the second Quadrangle of the Zodiaque, and especially to Capricorn, and the
persons which in their natiuities have for Ascendant the degree of the Eclipse
and her opposite: and the five other Planets shall feel most sharply these
her evil effects (if any come,) but God is above all his works.

The other Eclipse of the Moon shall be the first of December, at three of the
clock. 9. min. in the morning, and shall be darkoned 5. points 42. minutes,
and shall be made in the 8. degree of the sigae Cancer, rising in our Horizon
in the. 11. degree of the sign Scorpius, and shall begin in the second station
of the Heaven, and shall end in the first, the beueuolent Jupiter exalting in
Cancer: and in him shall join to the Eclipse, presaging no evil by the Sun,
but rather good, and therefore we will speak little of it: only that we pray
to the sovereign worker, creator, and mediator of all things, that it will
please him to turn, or moderate all sinisters euentes, and Celestial
threats, to the end we may serve to his glory.

A Description of such days as are most happy and unhappy, throughout the
year.
THese days hereafter mentioned, were by the Angel revealed (as some say) unto
good Joseph: and others say unto Job, whereby he knew what days were good or
bad, fortunate or unfortunate, throughout the year, to sell, buy, sow, plant,
and to build: to remove, to undertake vayages for trade of Merchandise, for
War, or any other matter: And such days being chosen as ar^ ^ereafter named,
are found to be most fortunate: and any thing taken in hand in these days, can
not but have good success, neither (as our French Author affirms) shall any
man have any loss by any bargain he undertakes, but shall always profit
himself. Moreover, al children which are borne in any of these happy days,
shall never be poor: and being in like sore either put to School, or to any
science, trade, or occupation upon any of these said happy days (if he do
persevere and continue in his estate and vocation) shall undoubtedly prosle
greatly, and become a rich man.

These ensuing are the happy days, in number. 27.
January has two, the 3. and 26. February has three, the 15. 19. and 26.
March has two, the 20. and 26. April has three, the 12. 19. and 24. May has
three, the 7. 24. and 29. June has one, which is the 22. July has two, the 3.
and 4. August has three, the 2. 22. and. 28. September has two, the 13. and
24. October has one, which is the 5. November has two, the 3. and 29.
December has three, the 8. 16. and 24.
These days are said to be unfortunate.
January has two, the 5. and 25. February has three, the 7. 18. and 24. March
has four, the 6. 7 8. and 28. April has two, the 5. and 27. May has three,
the 5. 7. and 27, June has none. July has two, the 5. and 8. August has two,
the 9. and 10. September has three, the 6. 8. and 26. October has none.
November has four, the 4. 6. 26. and 27. December has six, the 1, 22. 23.
25. 27. and 29.
A certain Philosophe^ says, that one ought never to undertake nor b^gin any
thing of long continuance in these ensuing days, viz. The. 1. of March, the.
2^. of July, and the. 25. of August.

And in the year are three days, whereon great heed must be taken either of
ouer-eating or ouer-drinking: the. 6. of the Ralendes of April, the. 21. of
November, and the. 22. of July: for that on these days, one might easily fall
into a great languishing Sickness, and danger of death: and (...) h^se days
ought to be shunned by all men, for else a man may unwittingly cast himself
away, and cut off his life before his time: for these day^^ are called cross
or straying days, and therefore it is written in the Gospel, Primum querite
r^gnum De^, and omnia Adijcicntur vobis.

FINIS.

