THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATING WITH PROFIT.

THE MYSTERIES OF our Lord, the Blessed Vergin and Saints.

GATHERED OVT OF Diverse good authors, And published by the very Reverend Master
John Alberto Buronzo, Chanon of the Cathedral Church of Verselles.

Revived and augmented by the same Author, and translated into English by a
Father of the Societe of Jesus.

Imprinted at Mackline, by HENRY IEAY. 1613.

HENRY IEAY TO THE Deuont Reader.
Having perused (good reader) this little book written in Italian by a father
of the Society of Jesus: though he thought to publish it under a borrowed
name; and translated into English by another of the same Society: I found it
likely, to prove as fruitful, as acceptable, to pioussoules, that are desirous
to converse with almighty God, in me^tal prayer; and for their help and
comfort determined to put it forth, with this one advise unto them, which I had
from one well experienced in spiritual affairs.

In the places from which we are here taught to draw matter of meditation, as
conditions of persons, words, and actions that occurr in any mystery. They shall
perhapes find such store and variety, as may to some seem superfluous, at
the least, if not troublesome. But they must consider, that this book is not
for one man only, nor for one sort of understandings, but intends the common
help of all that practice themselfes in this spiritual exercise. It was
therefore necessary, to make such provision for all, as out of it eueryone
might fit himself of matter for his own discourse, and take that which he
finds most agreeable with his own manner of proceeding. As he that comes to a
plentiful feast, eats not of all that is set before him, which might cloy his
appetite, and hurt his health, but rather feeds discretly and soberly on some
few dishes which his stomach lyketh, and are wholesome for him. In a good garden
are a multitude of simples, yet are not al ingredients for every medecin, the
Gardnier notwithstanding had sufficient reason to plant them al, because there
is not any one amongst them, of which some one or other may not find some use. I
wish thee good reader to choose out of these places, those that are most
behoosul for thy purpose, and let not the plenty left untouched for other men,
trouble thee. So I leave thee to make that profit of this work, which the
author wishes to all that read it: to the greater honor and glory of God.

H. I.

THE PREFACE.
AMongst the many and different exercises of men in this life, the meditation
of spiritual and divine things, without al doubt is one of the most excellent.
For by means thereof, with our understanding, together with the light of Gods
assisting grace, we do search and find out Gods holy will, which is our
sanctification; with our will we desire and love the same; with our memory we
call it to mind, we apprehend it with our imagination, and in some sort do
embrace it with our corporal senses and the faculties of our body, the better
to put it in execution.

Most iusty therefore may be said, that there remains not ^n man any one power
either internal or external, which by means of this holy exercise is not wholly
employed in the praises of almighty God, which ^s a great part of that end for
which man was created, and placed in this world. Neither does man only by
means of medita^io^ attain his proper end, and the cause of his being in this
present ^ife, but also by a certain kind of participatio^, and in some
propor^ion, does unite himself to that which is proper to the other ^ife,
(which consisting, in see^ng, loving, and enjoying the glo^ious majesty of
almighty God, according to the degree of eue^y ones merit, and that without
^nterruption or desire of ought else:) out of doubt, man giving himself wholly in
the exercise of meditation to seek the most perfect knowledge of the most
united love, and the most sweetest enjoying of God, which this wretched life
affords, he does participat proportinally of that glorious happiness in heaven,
which is the last, and accomplished portion, and that happy end for which man
was created,

True it is, that through the unhappy condition of this troublesome world, he
being di^tracted by other thoughts, and surprised by other affections cannot
continually or without some violence, enjoy this so great felicity: yet
neuerthele(...) he may with the help of God (from whom every good meditation
proceedeeh, (as his perfect gift) of whom therein he treateh, and with whom he
then conuerseth, and reasons) together with his own diligence, and industry,
attayn to such union with Gods divine Majesty, that he may, if not continually,
at least for some time, enjoy his creator with some perfection. Therefore in
this as in all other noble exercises, there must be used much diligence to
perform it well, not only for the causes set down already, but also for that
the nature of meditation it self (as it is explicated by holy Doctors) does
exact no ^esse. For meditation sometimes ^s called a studious intention of ^he
mind, which diligently at^endeth to the finding out of some matter; sometime an
especial application of our understanding seriously employed in searching out
the truth; at other times an industrious enforcing of the mind, endeavoring to
find out obscure things, and to unfold the intricat and perplexed; as also it
is described to be an earnest and vehement application of our mind to seek,
know, and taste some divine matter; finally it has other names, and
definitions, al which do plainly show that great labor and industry is
required on his part who intends to meditate. Wherefore it shall not be amiss
to set down briefly the practical manner which is to be held in this so holy an
exercise, to the intent it be not performed negligently, or without the fruit
which by it is pretended. I will therefore, for more facility, and cleerenes set
down first what is to be done before meditation, then what in the very time of
meditation, and lastly what is meet to be observed at the end thereof.

THAT WHICH IS TO BE DONE BEFORE MEDITATION. CHAPTER I.
Remote Preparations.
WHo so desires to meditate well and fruitfully the divine mysteries must
procure to have great purity of heart, that he be not guilty to himself of any
thing, which may cause great remorse of conscience.

He must have the passions and affections of his soul so composed, that neither
by excess nor want they be troublesome unto him.

3 Let him keep his powers, and senses so recollected, that he neither think,
see, nor hear willingly any thing which may cause distraction briefly let him,
as Cassian says so dispose himself before prayer, as he desires to find
himself in time of prayer.

The nearer Preparations.
WHereas, to follow the example of King David who speaking to God, said: I^
matutinis meditabor in te. I will meditate of thee in the morning: the best
time of meditation is, when he rises from his bed; therefore to make himself
more prompt and ready t^ this most holy exercise, let him the evening before
read twice or thrice with attention, that writing or book which yealds him
matter for meditation, the^ let him divide the history or general matter in to
3. or 4. ^oynts, or considerations, more or less according to the number of
the chief heads, to which we may reduce the prin ^pall parts of the mystery,
if so ^t were not before divided in his book or writting: then let him propose
the end, (as pre(...)ntly shall be declared) propor(...)nable to the matter
prepa(...)d, to the which he ought to ^ake reflection when he shall ^editate.
And this end may be like in all the mysteries of one (...)rt, (as for example
to all such ^ appertain to the life or passion of Christ) or yt may be
particular to every mystery by y self, or yet more particulerly to every point
thereof, and so consequently yt may be one only o ^ more according to the matte^
proposed. For example the ordinary end or intention of a(...) the mysteries of
the life o^ Christ, shall be the desire to penetrat, and thoroughly to understand
what he does in th(...) mystery for our good, and benefit, to love him more
fervent(...) then before, to imitate him more carefully then in tym^ past. The
particular end of the mystery of the incarnation sha^ be to know the great love
an^ humility of God, the desire ^ love him again in the best m(...)ner we
canpossibly, and to fo^low his example in giving o(...) selves wholly unto him,
and ^u^bling our selves to all other for his love.

The special end of one point alone shall be to consider troughly how almighty
God does presently put in practice his re^olutions for our good, and on ^ur
part, what desire we should have to follow him, in performing the good purposes
made (...) his glory, and to the honor of his divine majesty. After this ^e
must determine, which must ^e his preludiums, or pream^les, least he be forced
to loose (...)me in seeking of them when ^e should be at his meditation. and
lastly let him consider, what sort of persons, what ^ordes, what works are
com(...)ehended in each point, and all ^is without discourse, or at the most
passing them over lightly so to open the way for the time of meditation. Let
him know moreover that he must not only find out in every point, the persons,
words, and work which are there expressed, bu^ those also which the ordinary
circumstances of the matter do^ admit, especially the person words, and works
of God, o^ the Angels, and devils, which may be brought in almost in every
meditation, with no sma(...) fruit and spiritual profit: or e(...) taking the
history as it is related by the author, from who^ we have yt, withal notin^
breefely those persons, word^ and works only, which are expressly inserted in
the history This done when he shall be i^bed, before he falls on sleep for the
space of an Aue Mary or little more, let him think on the hour he is to rise,
and call to mind breefly the points prepared, which likewise he is to do in
the night as often as he shall awake.

Immediate preparations.
IN the morning when he shall awake, immediately expelling ^ll other thoughts,
let him ^reefly, yet heartily give God ^ue thanks for his benefits, and purpose
earnestly to esthew all ^mperfections, but especially that, which he then
seeks with ^iligence to amend, by means ^f his particular examine. After ^his
let him taste a little of his me^itation, and stir up in himself, ^ometymes
sorrow, shame and confusion; at other times a desire to know with some clearenes
the mystery of the son of God incarnate, there by to follow him more
perfectly, and love him more fervently, sometimes sense of sorrow and
compassion with Christ, who suffered so bitter pains for him sometimes again
joy and comfort to congratulate the same our Lords glory and felicity; a other
times other affections conform to the matter of each meditation. Which to
perform more easily he shall help him self much by often reuoluing in his mind
some similitude agreeable unto that mystery, or to sa^ with great affection a
verse o^ some Psalm, or other sentence of holy scripture or fathers which may
serve fitly for th(...) his purpose. But when he is to meditate oftentimes in
one day at least a quarter of an hour before meditation, let him read well the
points, and commit them to memory, and consider well whither he is to go, and
before whom to appear, or at least let him do something equivalent, to that
which he did before his morning prayer.

WHAT IS TO BEDONE IN THE TIME OF MEDITATION. CHAP. II.
The manner of presenting our selves in the presence of Almighty God.
WHEN the time of meditation is come, he may (is no better cenceit occurr)
imagine himself to be invited by his good angel or some other saint to whom he
is devoted, to appear before the presence of God. Therefore taking holy water,
and having made the sign of the cross, with intention to expel from him the
devil, who at that time does chiefly labor to trouble one, when a man does
most endeavor to stand united with God, let him go presently with a kind of
spiritual egernesse and fervor to the place where he means to make his
meditation, which fervor by how much yt is greater, so much the greater shall be
the fruit which his meditation shall produce, and so much the more recollected
and devout he shall be in the course of his meditation.

2 Standing in this manner a step or two distant from the place a Pr. Ave.
while, or little more, let him eleuate his mind to God thinking him to be there
present, as one who heedfully behouldeth what he is to do; which he may do,
either imagining himself to be conducted by his giud in to heaven before the
high throne of Gods divine majesty, or persuading himself that our most benign
Lord does show him in that very place his most amiable countenance most worthy
of al respect, and veneration.

Five ways how to frame the presence of God.
THE presence of God may be framed either by the understanding or imagination.
If by the onderstanding, yt is done by acts of faith after two manners.

First conceiving that God does so compass him about as the water the fishes
in yt contained.

Secondly believing God to be within him, or in some other thing before his
eyes (as in dee^ he is in all his creatures by hi^ essence, presence, and power
seeing perfectly what any creature does and administering needful help to
perform the same* And one of these two ways i^ is good that he do use, who
y^ either weak of imagination or is in danger to have wrong apprehensions in
doubts, or errors in matters of faith, and observe, that yt will further
devotion to speak these or the like words with the heart (and they should be
spoken heartily) God is here before me, God stands behoulding what I am to
do. God is here present to give me as gracious audience as if he had nothing
else to attend unto. If the imagination do frame this presence of God, yt is to
be done by way of apprehension, and that in diverse manners. First by imagining
Gods presence in that manner as the paynters use to paint the blessed Trinity.
Secondly apprehending a great globe of inaccessable light, which may cause in
him a certain pious horror according to that of S. John, God is light, and in
him there is no darkness at all.

Thirdly representing God unto himself, in that manner as he is described by
the Prophet (...) meditate fruitfully, must marwell, that yt greatly helps
attention to conceive the presence of God, in the most liuel^ manner he can,
and to procur with the psalmist, that his med^tation be still fixed, as much a
humane frailty will suffer, in vision, or contemplation of hi^ divine majesty,
using to th(...) purpose some especial diligence, until such time as the good
habit thereof procure facillity* Yet must not God be always conceived with the
self sam^ form, but according to the variety of the meditations, sometimes
with a benign and pleasant, other times with a seuer^ and terrible
countenance, no^ with a gentle and mild then with a hard, and stern look that
he may talk with Gods divine majesty in such sort as the matter requires which
he is to meditate, and according to the different apprehensions of his divine
presence.

Acts to be produced after this of the presence of God.
AFTER that he has conceived the majesty of God present in one of the manners
before said, he may reflect on his own baseness and indignity, and stir up in
himself a pious reverent fear, reciting to that purpose some sentence of holy
scripture, as: Loquar ad Dominum Deum meum, cum sim puluis and cinis. I will
speak unto my Lord, though I be dustad ashes, or the like. The^ let him setle
himself to do reverence to God, with an humble external gesture, together
with an external act of adoration, and with Manasses, bowing the knees of
his heart before his Lord, let him kneel down hereby acknovvledging the
presence of the most high, and divine Trinity, with these or the like words.
Blessed be the holy, and undivided Trinity. etc. Or else: Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, etc. Or else: Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God omnipotent who was, is, and ever shall be, or Benediction, clarity,
wisedoms, and thank giving, honor, virtue, and power to our God, world without
end Amen.

Being on his knees (for that the just is the first in accusing himself) let
him profess himself with much inward remorse to be a sinner; let him demand
pardon for his defects, saying the first four verses of the Psalm Miserere,
if no other more fit occur, and at the midst of the fifth verse, let him add
these words: Confige timore tuo carnes meas, a judiciis enim tuis timui.
Pearse my flesh with thy fear, for I am afraid of thy judgme^ts.

And let yt not seem from the purpose to stir up in himself this reuerentiall
child-like fear, and the sorrow for his sins; which is before described, not
with standing that he framed the presence of God after a pleasant, and gracious
manner, for even the Seraphins, although they have God always most favorable
unto them, yet were they seen, for our example, to cover their faces with
their wings in the presence of God: And besides we for our part ought always
to retayn fear and sorrow, for the many imperfections wherewith we are
replenished.

And yet for all this, we must not forbear on the contrary side to raise our
mind with confidence toward God, even at the time when we frame him present in
a severe, and dreadful manner remembering as the Prophet says: Non in
perpetuum irascetur: he will not perpetually be angry. And persuading our
selves, that God being now present to hear our prayers, we may conceue ground
hereby to move us to confidence. But hear we must note, that all this is to be
done very briefly, that yt may not take away the time allotted for meditation,
therefore yt must be done only in such manner as is necessary for our better
dispositio to treat with the majesty of God, before whom yt is not fit we
appear rashly, or unprepared.

Preparatory Prayer.
AFTER recovering a little boldness, as one who has obtained pardon for his
sins, let him take heart to lift up his countenance toward the most high
majesty of God, and acknowledging the obligation he has to employ himself
wholly in the service of God his maker, let him with great feeling, and
devotion, make his preparatory prayer, desiring grace of our Lord, That all his
forces, and actions, may be incearely directed to the honnour and glory of his
divine majesty: and this preparatory prayer as yt should be always the same in
words so yt should ever be done with the greatest affect that may be.

The first Preamble.
HE shall make his first preamble, reducing briefly to mind the history of the
mystery proposed, and that as though he should recount y^ only to some other,
without making any discourse at all, for beginning to dispose his soul to the
matter more immediately the better to rest yt self afterward in every part
thereof, by pondering yt well, and penetrating yt thoroughly in the time of his
meditation.

The second Preamble.
LET him make the second preamble imagining himself to see those places in
which all or part of the mystery was wrought, but he must endeavor to represent
them so lively, as though really he had them these present.

And here let him mark, that ^e is to frame so many several ^laces for his
meditation, as were the places, in which any art of the mystery did happon
which he is to meditate, although yt should be needful to ^ame 2. or 3. or
more in one only myditation.

As for example, in the most ^oly mystery of the incarnation ^e is to frame the
place of heaven where, as in a kingly palace that highest consistory of the
most blessed Trinity was celebrated, also the distance between heaven and
earth b^ which the Archangel Gabrie^ did pass; likewise the superfices of the
whole earth, in which diverse sorts of men did dwel^ diversely busied; then also
the house of Nazareth in which the B. Virgin remained, and in which the mystery
was accomplished.

Let him also note that wh^ he has framed a place in a^ fashion concerning
some m^stery with happy success, need not at any time chan^ that imaginary
place, or compositio^ so well made, althou(...) he should use to meditate to
same mystery oftentimes, v^ less perhaps yt shall be to add some circumstance
therein to perfect yt the more.

Two ways of making the second Preamble.
THE way of framing such places shall be, either imagining that God in heaven
does show them unto him distinctly painted in some fair image: If with his
imagination he was first transported thither. Or (if ^he presence of God be
formed on earth) imagining those pla^es to be there present before him. Or
finally that he himself with the help of God, is co^^eied to that place where
the mystery was wrought.

Which to perform more ea^ely, and without danger of wearying his head yt
will help him not a little, to have before with attention beheld some image
lively representing the mystery, or to have read, or heard, what authors have
written concerning those places, and in particular to have noted the distance
from one place to an other, the height of the hills where any mystery hapened,
where the city, castle, or village was situated in which our savior wrought
his miracles. And yt import^ much to use all these particular circumstances of
diligence, for that of the well making of the second Preamble, depends not
only the right understanding o^ the mystery, but also attention in time of
meditation, a thing of so great importance in this holy exercise.

The third Preamble.
HE shall make his third preamble de maunding instantly of God, that which he
proposes as the end, and scope of his meditation, after that manner as has
been before explicated, whether yt be common to all matters of that sort, or
particular only to that one meditation, or to any one point thereof. And this
is to be done, with the greatest affect, humility, confidence, carnestnes and
instance that is possible, co^^idering that the whole fruit he expects does
principally, co^^ist in attayning to the end which is proposed to the
me^itation, and that is chiefly to be obtained by the assistance of Gods grace.

The exercise of the Powers of the soul about the points.
THEN let him begin the meditation yt self, from the first of the points
prepared, exercising first his memory in remembering orderly the matter and
other things also, either read in holy scripture, and the^ good books, or
received by the direction of some discreet spiritual person, so that yt make
to the purpose of the thing to be meditated. Then let him exercise his
understanding, by discoursing upon the self same matter, confirming the same a
need shall require, with reasons, authorityes, similitudes examples, etc.
inferring one thing of an other, there-hence deducing true, firm, and stable
conceits.

Lastly exercising his will, by moving in himself those affections, and making
such good purposes, as the subject does require, and as the understanding
before has proposed for good. Besides these three principal powers, he shall
now and the^ according as need requires, exercise his phantasy also,
representing thereby unto the understanding the situation greatness, and
motions of the persons, the height, and difficulty of the places or renewing
^he presence of God, or framing that of the B. Virgin, of Angels, ^r of Saints,
when he is to ^peake unto them.

The manner how to dilate the meditation by the understanding.
THE manner of exercising these powers of our soul, (speaking chiefly of the
understanding, to which more properly belongs the variety and different
manner of proceeding n this her exercise) shall be of two sorts, answerable
to the two sorts of preparations before mentioned, that is to say, either to
frame the discourse of the whole story in such sor^ as yt was likely to
happen, there in determining the persons words, and works which by
probability were likely to pass in such an history: or else to take the
history only as yt is expressed in the author from whom he has yt, and to
conceive only, those persons, words, and works which are specifyed in the
same author, with out care to search, or synd out any other which either the
likelihood of the matter or decorum would seem to require.

When therefore he has used the first sort of preparations, he shall in the
time of meditation exercise his powers in this ma^^er.

First, by his memory he shall ^ecunt so much of the mystery, beginning from
the head) vn^ll he come unto some one word or action of that person from whom
is deduced the ^hiefe subject of the history. As ^or example, if one will
medi(...)te the holy mystery of the in^arnation of Christ, supposing the
history as already found out, in such sort as in deed yt might happen, he shall
then say with his memory. Many years being passed after that men were created,
made for the glory of heaven, God did look down upon them from his throne of
majesty.

This done let him cease from the exercise of his memory, and with the
understanding let him undertake the matter, at that word, or at that action,
which the memory has proposed, and let him go on considering the same
thoroughly, until he hau^ fully apprehended the matter helping himself (for the
bitter understanding thereof) with the conditions that be prope^ unto yt, (of
which we shall speak by and by) as they shalb^ suggested unto him, from tym^ to
times, according as need shall require.

And he may begin (if so he think good) with the first condition, which in
words as proceeding from an author, and in works as proceeding from a
beginning, do comprehend, and express the person, who either speaks them,
or does them, and this to the end, that by this occasion, he may enter in to
consideration of the person yt self, from whom as from a fountain do proceed
the words or actions where of he is to meditate, marking well, whether the
conditions of the persons be conformable, or not conformable to the word, or
action proposed.

As for example, (to proceed ^n the subject already set down) for that the
memory does lay before the understanding an action of God, which is took down
from heaven upon the sons of men, the understanding then shall discourse in
this manner. The beginning and efficient cause of this action is God, who
although he be always attentive to behold himself, and in so doing is
infinitely blessed, and happy, nor has the least need of man's help in any
sort, yet not with standing, ou^ of the abounda^ce of his mercy, yt pleases
him graciously to behold mankind thereby to help them.

This being done let him begin to consider attentively whether this beholding
of makynd may stand well with the nature, and substance of God o^ no, as with
the understanding the will, and the other conditions, which are known to belong
to the person of God; co^firming also this discourse, as has been said
before, with some authority reason, or example etc.

And this being done he shall then consider the other particular conditions of
the same action, as in the example proposed of Gods behoulding of men: to wit,
what is the nature, the quality, the end, the manner, and other circumstances
of ^he same behoulding.

In the like manner shall be considered the conditions of any word, which the
memory shall propose to the vnderstan^ing, pondering the same, with
^onsideration ever had to the ^onueinency, or little congruity, which yt has to
the person from whom yt proceeds, and with the conditions of the same person.

And to the end this manner of discourse may not feed curiosity, but rather be
profitable, when we find that one or two or more conditions concerning the
person be conformable, o^ not comfortable unto the word or action proposed,
there he must apply unto himself, that knowledge so gotten, and draw out of the
same some light, or practical point to be applied to his own spiritual need
and to the amendment of hi^ manners, concluding there upon, that yt is
convenient to perform that or this good work, and in this, or that manner, to
the imitation of that person of whom he does meditate and who does speak, or
work so well, and virtuously, conform to his conditions. Or else put case, the
word, or action, which the person does, be not conform to his conditions, yet
because the word, or action is good in yt self, and sit to be done, he lets
not to perform them.

And here observe, that yt yealdeth discourse, and great variety thus to
endeavor to find out these conditions of the persons whether they be, or be not
conform to the word, or action, whereof he does then meditate. As for example,
to prosecute the meditation already commenced, let the understanding say: How
does yt belong to God to stand looking upon men? he is in fallibly a divine
nature, perfect in yt self, and independent of any other, not having need of
any whosoever, as holy David confessed in the name of all makind, when he said,
speaking unto God: Deus meus estu, quoniam bonoru^ meorum non eges: Thou art my
God, for thou have no need of my goods: And nevertheless, notwithstanding this
his perfection, and natural independance, he will stand behoulding men from
heaven. Yt does not therefore seem, that this action is conform unto his
nature, which is so independent as nothing more.

And then he shall confirm this his discourse with some reason, or authority,
to the end he may apply the same more soundly to his own profit. For example
he shall say: The men of this world use not to do so, who the greater they
are, and the more indepe^dant of others, the less they will vouchsafe to
behold any man, that has need of their help. So we may see in the person of
the rich glutton in respect of poor Lazarus, for he esteeming himself to stand
in no need, and to be wholly independent of that beggar, although the poor
wretch did lie near unto his ^ouse, all covered with sores, yet did he ^ot
once vouchsafe to look upon him with a good will. And yt seems to be
grounded in humane reasen, for such ^s the nature of independa^t things, that
they are so fully contented with their ^wne estate, that they will not loose
^yme about any but themselves, or that which does belong unto them.

Then to conclude, and to prove, that God not withstanding does very well in
behoulding men, and to understand that action in God to be conformable to his
divine majesty, he shall therefore adioyn: But God uses to proceed in far
different manner from the customs of men, as he declared by the prophet Isa.
55. saying. ^ enim cogitationes meae, cogitation^ vestrae, neque viae vestrae
viae meae, femy thoughts are not your thoughts, no your ways my ways; and he
uses perform much more then humane reason does dictate, or can reach unto.
For although he by his high perfection, an^ independaunce of things created
had no need at all of men, yet notwithstanding for that his nature is not only
perfect by independance, but most perfe(...) also by charity, the which is so
essential unto him, that yt is his very self, as witnisseth S. John in his
first epistle the fourth chapter, yt is therefore conform(...) to this his
nature, that he does so behold mankind, to the end he may succo(...) them
having need of his help.

This done let him conclude this first discourse, applying unto himself, (as is
before pre^cribed) that which he has ^hus seen, and considered con^erning the
person of God, and shall say in this manner: If then ^lmighty God,
notwithstanding his nature independent of men, and most perfect in yt self,
might forbear to look ^ppon them, yt through the abundance ^f his charity
does not cease to six his merciful eyes upon them: yt is also no doubt very
needful for me often times ^o life up the eyes of my soul toward his ^iuine
majesty, as well in prayer, as in ^ctes of love although my case were such which
is impossible, that I had no need ^t all of his help, and could remain with
out dependence of him, for even so, yet were yt convenient I should use some
act of charity toward him, seeing that he does so toward men in vniuer^all,
and toward me in porticular, for whom alone he would have done as much, as he
has done for all, if so y^ had been needful. Moreover I should in
likemanner behold my neighbor with the eyes of love and care, and consider
whether he has need of my help in any thing, and this although I were
altogether independent of him, and has not need of his help in any cause
whatsoever.

Having drawn out these two lights by the help of his understanding, he shall
propose one at once unto his will, or else, both together, if so yt seem
better, and shall procure to stirt up therein that affection which shall seem
most convenient to his own estate; As for example (resting still in the matter
proposed,) thar of sorrow and confusion, considering he has not vesed to lift
up his mind to God, either so often in prayer, or with such acts of love, as
had been needful, nor yet has attented to the spiritual necessity of his
neighbor as was convenient; And this, if he that does meditate be in the state
of a beginner, but if he be in state of ^ proficient, let him seek to ^aise in
himself desire, and ^ope to do yt for the time to ^ome with greater
diligence; and if he be in the state of the ^erfect, let him stir up joy, and
^omfort, as being invited by God, both to lift up his mind to ^is merciful
goodness, and to ^ommunicate the good things which he has from his divine
^ajesty unto his brethren. And ^o do this with more facility, ^e shall serve
himself of those ^otiues, which shall be setdown ^litle after, or else, of such
other, as shall occurr to his mind.

When he has thus raised the affect in his will, which he desires, by the
means of such motives, or else paraduenture has found out his will some what
backward, and not so moved with the affect, as he desires: he may begin
again to dilate, and endeavor to awaken his will anew, by the vs^ either of
all those manner which heareafter shall be se^ down, or at least by some of the
as yt shall like him best, or as he shall feel to be requisite, for moving his
slow, and dull affection, to the good which was showed to his will, by his
understanding. But in particul(...) he may use most commonly that manner which
we wi(...) hereafter call Purpose, directe^ ^o the abhorring, and flying of
^uill, and to the chosing, and ^mbracing of good, which ma^^er of making
purposes should ^e used, although the sense see^e to repugne, especially if
reason before convinced. And this ^o the end, that the meditation ^ay be more
fruitful, and fur^hered to execution in rooting out of the soul vicces, and
im^erfections, and to plant virtues, and to proceed to all kind of perfection:
and to the end yt may likewise gather out of the meditation, three sorts of
^ruites, and commodityes which are to be sought for in that holy exercise, to
wit, Lights in the understanding, Affects in the will, Resolution in regard of
effectual execution to be afterward put in practice. And this is the first
manner of exercising the three powers, answerable to the fir(...) manne of
preparations.

The manner of more copius exercise. of the understanding.
AS for the second manne^ of preparation, and th(...) discourse with our
understanding, which may be conformable unto yt, let him take only the history
which is recounted by the author, summarily without any other obseruatio^^ but
only of the persons, word^ and actions expressed therein, and before he enter
in to the foresaid manner of exercising the 3. powers, he may beginn t^
exercise his memory, and his understanding, in making a pio(...) consideration
with a discours^ better grounded, then that which is to be made when he
^ecordeth the same history ^t the first in his preparation, before he begin
to meditate: And he shall seek out what ^ther persons might in likely^ood be
actors in that mystery, and what other words, and acti^ns might be spoken or
done by (...)em, to the end he may afterward consider of each in par(...)culer
seuerably (if he will himself) conform to the first ^anner of dilating above
men^oned.

The manner of framing this (...)ous consideration shall be this which follows.
The memo(...) shall propose unto the under(...)anding, the beginning of the
^istory, as yt is read in the au(...)our, until yt come to the first action,
or word of any person therein as has been said in the first manner, and then
the understanding shall begin to discourse there upon with the help of the
memory, grounding upon some of those conditions which shall appear, either in
the person, word, or worcester(...) proposed, and pondering th(...) same well, shall
gather by necessary consequence, or at lea(...) by some conuenience, that such
a person, word, or action, having such, or such conditions, conform to
decoru^, and probalility, there must also be fou^^ in likely hood such an other
person there, and they must say such and such things, and perform^ such and
such actions, which in decorum have connection with that person, or speech, o^
action proposed, in respect of some circumstance, either precedent, or
concomitant, or subsequent.

As for example, (not to part from the mystery already proposed of the
incarnation) if in the preparation he did only read the history of the
Annunciatio^, related by S. Luke, in the first chapter, where he says: The
Angel Gabriell was sent from God to a city of Galilee, which was called
Nazareth, to a Virgin espoused unto a man whose name was Joseph of the house of
David, and the name of the Virgin was Mary. Here without framing the whole
discourse of the history, as yt may piously be thought to have happened, and
without considering to particularly what action God might perform, or what
word he did speak, before he sent the Angel down to the earth, the memory
shall first propose unto the understanding, the beginning of the history, and
shall say in this manner. God sent Gabriell the Archangell to Mary the spouse
of Joseph in Nazareth.

Then let the understanding being assisted by the memory, take one or more
conditions of those which belong to the person of God, who sent the Angel and
let yt say in this manner, God has a most judicious and prudent knowledge in
his determinations, and from hence he shall take occasion to discourse and to
conclude in this manner. Therefore God did not rashly send the Angel to the
blessed Virgin, but with great judgment, and consideration, for so we see
prudent and wise men use to undertake, and perform their actions. He that will
judiciously send any embassage, ought to have without doubt some just motive to
send yt, and ought to take occasion of sending, from that which he shall see
therein represented unto him. Therefore some motive must needs be represented
unto God, whereby he must be moved to send the Angel. But what motive can ever
be found for such an action? The motives by which men are commonly induced to
such actions, are taken either from their own person, or from the person of
them to whom they send the embassage, therefore the motive which induced God to
send the Angel, must either be taken from himself. or from those persons to
whom the Angel was sent.

Here the memory shall suggest to the understanding other conditions of God,
and in greater number, and shall say. God has a most perfect nature and
inmortall, and blessed substannce; an understanding most clear, and able to
find out whatsoever he will; most potent forces, and able to perform
whatsoever he pleases, and this by himself, without needing any other help.
Then the understanding shall conclude. If God therefore be of such a nature,
substance, understanding, and forces, as in deed he is, yt may not be thought
that he was moved to send this embassage for any respect to himself, as having
need of the service of man, especially seeing, that he was blessed with out
this from all eternity, and had at this time a multitude of Angels which
continually did serve, and praise him; but we must conclude that he was moved
by the miseryes of men themselves.

Here the memory shall add some condition concerning the person of men, saying.
Men had their understanding darkened, and blinded in all things that belong to
God, according to that which the Apostle said of the gentills in particular.
Tenebris obscuratum habentes intellectum: they had also their will feeble and
faint towars any good work, and prompt to evil* breefly they had most bad
inclinations. and perverse habits, and that was most truly verified in them,
which David said. Omnes declinauerunt, simul invtiles facti sunt, non est qui
facit bonum, non est vsque ad vnum. All have declined, all were together made
unprofitable, there is not any that does good not so much as one. Their senses
were applied to evil, conform to the saying of the wise man: Proni sunt
sensus hominis ad mali^t: Their tougne did speak deceitfully, linguis suis
dolose ag^bant, venenum aspidum sub labiis eorum. With theyt tongues they did
deceitfully, the poison of aspes under their lips, their hands were full of
blood, their feet swift to evil works. Then he shall add here unto: And
mankind being in this estate, our Lord wouchsafed to look upon them, as the
Prophet said. Dominus de caelo prospexit superfilios hominum, vt vide at si est
intelligens aut requirens Deum. Our Lord looks forth from heaven upon the
children of men to see if there be that understands, and seeks after God,
and he found that all were corrupted, and become abominable, non erat qui
faceret bonum, non erat vsque ad vnum, there was not one that did good, no not
one. From thence the understanding shall infer. This without doubt was the
motive which moved God to send the Angel down to the earth, to wit, that he
might reform in men their understanding, their will their inclinations, their
senses, or in one word, to make the^ wholy other men then they were before,
and to reduce them to that perfectio from which they had fallen. And in that
respect, as I suppose before he sent the Angel, he did look down upon the
earth, to see in what state mankind did stand, which he had created for heaven.

Then the understanding having found out an action, which God did perform,
before he did send the Angel, if he that does meditate desire to find out any
more, let the memory propose some other condition of God, saying for example.
Although God have properly no passions, ^et nevertheless after a certain
manner he does seem to let himself be tra^s^orted (to speak after the custom
of ^en) by the passion of Love. And out of this he shall gather with his
understanding. Therefore surpri^ed as yt were by this love toward me^, when
he saw them reduced to so poor terms, and that they did run altogether
headlong toward hell, he could not endure they should continue any longer in
such miseryes, and dangers of perdition.

And this discourse he may confirm with some reason, or authority (as I said
before yt was needful to do) as in this manner. And truly yt seems he could
do no other, supposing he did love me^ with so hearty affection: for the nature
of love is such, that yt cannot endure to see the party loved in peril, or
mystery. And therefore so yt befell the father of the prodigull child, who for
that he loved his soune with great, and passionate affection, albeyt the son
had behaved himself very ill toward his father, had for saken him, and spent
his goods, had dishonored his house, and in few words had given him very ill
satisfaction: yet notwithstanding so soon as the father saw him return, and
fallen into so great misery, he could not co^tayn himself from being moved to
mercy, (Luc. 15.) and accurrens cecidit super collum eius vt oscularetur eum,
and running to him fell upon his neck that he might kiss him. What did then
almighty God the father of mercyes, when he saw the misteryes of mankind? God
(shall the memory say) is by nature so merciful, that as the prophet says,
his mercyes are above all his works; and of him yt is truly said, cui proprium
est misereri semper, and parcere, to whom yt is most proper ever to take pity,
and to pardon, and further he has a will most ready, and effectually inclined
to perform the works of mercy, and love. Therefore (shall the understanding
say) moved by his divine nature and the love he bears to mankind, he was
suddenly inclined to compassion, and took the resolution of redeeming them,
from the miseryes and perils they were in, and with his most prompt, and
effectual will resolved to do yt with out delay, and so begann to think in
what manner yt might best be effected. And because the understanding of his
divine majesty is most clear, and swift, and seeing all in an instant, that
can be in the matter, he presently found out the means of effectuating this
charitable resolution of his will, and did soon perceive, that no pure
creature could possibly remedy so great an evil, and that yt was absolutely
necessary that his divine power should therein supply the impotency of
creatures. He did therefore see, that yt was convenient to proceed in this
cause, not only as his most merciful nature required, but also as his natural
justice did exact: wherefore he considered, that although his mercy might have
been contented with the satisfaction which some Angel might have offered, or
some just man have performed, or else by a liberal and free pardon, which yt
might have pleased him to have given to mankind; yt would not his justice have
taken this for good payment: He did further see, that if he did become man, he
should by that means yeald full satisfaction both to his mercy, and justice:
for that giving himself unto man, being the God of majesty, his most merciful
nature, was fully satisfied, and then performing some act of satisfaction by
his manhood being united with the Godhead, he should fully pay all that his
divine nature could exact as just.

Having seen oll this his inclination to do good unto men, and the love which
he bare them, did effectually move him, to the resolution of taking upon him
our humane nature. Here shall the memory adioyn. But God although he be of
nature most simple, having but one most perfect essence, is notwithstanding
distinct in three persons. Yt is true (shall the understanding say,) and
therefore those three persons being one, and the self same charity, every one
would show himself most prompt to become man for the love of men, the father to
show his power where omnipotency was required, the holy ghost to show his love
in such an act of love; But the sone of God alleged that yt was most fit for
him, being the second person, and the wisdom of God: that, as man did fall
into sin by affectation of knowing to much, so the remedy might proceed from
the Divine wisdom that knew all things. And that the father, might
sufficiently exercise his power in ouershadowing his mother fo whom he was to
take his bodily substannce; and the holy ghoust might show his love in framing
that body which he was to unite to h^s divinity. Yt was therefore concluded in
that divine consistory of the most blessed Trinity that the sone of God should
become man for the love of men.

And so here is found out in respect of the persons, besides the foresaid
consideration of God, the persons also of men, and God himself is found
distinct in three persons. As for words we have found out part of that, which
the father or the sone, or the holy ghost might speak, and we have in sinuated
that which might be said also by men: As for works we have found out, besides
that of gods behoulding the earth, that he also, being moved with compassion
toward the miseryes of mankind, resolved to help them: determined in the
divine counsel, that the second person in trinity, and no other person should
be incarnat. But because in likelihood the history would seem to contain more
then this, the memory shall pass further, and shall propound other conditions
of God, and shall say. The divine nature is so perfect, and yt is naturally so
proper unto yt, to be most far from all imperfection, and defect, especially
of that kind which has any resembla^ce or shadow of sin, that yt will not by
any means admit the least iott thereof, either in yt self, or in any thing
that belongs unto yt: but rather (to speak after our manner) supposing he
could suffer himself to be ouerruled by passion of hate or colher, he should be
so ouerruled with them toward sin and sinful defects, that he would wholly
destroy them.

Here shall the understanding reply. Therefore that he might not contract any
like stayne, in making himself man; for that he well knew the castisement which
he had said upon Adam for the sin that he had committed (to wit, that all
should be borne in original sin, proceeding from him by way of generation
between man and woman) he did therefore resolve, not to begotten or brought
forth in this manner. And as he is wisdom yt self, he did presently see, that
the fittest manner would be, to be borne of a woman without ceparation of man.
Nor did his most perfect nature content yt self with this, but would unite unto
himself a body which should be in all respects most perfect. And because a
tinge is then more perfect, when yt is framed of more perfect matter, and when
yt has also other accidental dispositions more perfect in themselves, he did
therefore resolve, that the woman of whom he would be borne should be amost
pure Virgin, to the end that framing his body and flesh of her purest blood,
the same should also be most pure, and without all imperfection.

Here shall the memory suggest. God does not only permit himself (according to
our manner of understanding) to be overcome with the passion of Love, in
bearing affection to mankind, but likewise in his affection to virtue, and in
particular to humility: Yea, I do remember, I have read in S. Bernard, that
humility is so pleasing o God, that yt seems to have power over him yea to
command him; and that Virginity yt self does not please without yt.

Hereof the understanding shall infer. Therefore he would not take flesh of
any one that had been only a virgin, unless she had been also humble. And
therefore with his divine understanding, unto which all things are present, and
manifest, he did clearly see, that Mary the spouse of Joseph in Nazareth had
both these virtues joined together in great perfection, and so determined to
make her his mother, Here finally the memory shall adioyne. God has imperial
digniti, and absolute dominion over all creatutures. Then the understanding
shall say. Here upon, as supreme King and Lord of the Angels, to whom yt
belongs to serve himself of his subjects, he called unto him Gabriell the
archanhell, and delivered, and declared his divine will, and pleasure,
committing unto him the embassage, which in his name should be delivered to
the Virgin, wherefore the Evangelist says very well. Missus est Angelus
Gabriel. etc. The Angel Gabriell was sent. etc.

The discourse being ended in this manner, if peradventure he desire not to
make so long stay, as to search out the cause, why almighty God made choice
rather of the archangell Gabriell, then any other, let him (...)en begin to
apply yt unto himself, as he did in the first manner of dilating before set
down, to draw out thereof some one or two lights according to his need, and
according as his discourse does lead him. For example here he may say. If
almighty God before he sent the Angel down to the earth do ponder and think
so diligently upon the matter he had in hand: if he permit himself to be
overcome by the passion of Love toward men: if he do presently and without
delay go about to remedy their miseryes: if the three divine persons do
strive in such manner who shall be in^arnat: if God do so carefully avoid ^n
the manner of his conception, all re^emblance and shadow of sin: if he make
choice of a mother, that is both ^ure a Virgin, and humble: if he ^mploy that
dominion he has over An^el: in the service of men, yt is then doubtless most
convenient, that I do ^se to forethink prudently, what vville ^he success of
my actions, before I be^eginne them: that I also do suffer my self to be
transported with the passion of love, toward his divine majesty, to the
accomplishment of his divine will whatsoever: that I presently go in ^and
with the work, and show in effect what I have in affection: that I strive
and contend even with the best, for my greater union with God, and better
performance of his service; that I fly from all perilles, yea and from the
^hadovv of sin: that I have in most high estimation both humility and peuer^y:
and finally that I employ all h^^ I have, and can in the service of almighty
God.

Having gathered out these lights, he shall stir up in himself answerable unto
them, or unto some of them, which be more necessary for him at that present,
such affections as be most corespondent to the^, and fit for his estate, as is
above s(...); and he shall dilate them, and continue the in such manner as
shall be said heareafter, drawing the^ to practical purposes, as is before
touched, in the most effectual manner he can, to the end he may draw out of
the meditation, the 3. vtilityes before specified, to wit, Lighs, Affections,
a^^, Resolutions.

The differences betvveene the two foresaid manners of dilating.
THis ye the second manner of exercising the powers of the soul in time of
meditation, which is different from ^he first, principally in two ^heefe
points. First because that former manner does suppose for a ground that we
be^inn with seeking out the persons, the actions, and words which are contained
in the mi^tery; and these supposed does endeavor to search out, whether there
be convenience or ^n convenience from one to the ^ther, observing what
conformity there is between the conditions of the party, and the actions, or
words which procude from the same; and so on the contrary side, what condition
or coherence the actions, and words have with the person from which they
proceed, an^ this supposing one actio^, or or^ word alone: Then he goes about
to search what other words, or actions were requisite in decorum, or likely in
probability, that should be done o^ spoke by that person, to who^ belongs
that word, or action^ Yea in the mean time, while this is searching out, he
considers also, whether in lykelyhood there were not in dee^ some such spoken
or performe^ by that person: and for the be^ter fynding out there of, he does
serve himself of the known conditions of the same person observing what was fit
to be spoken or done by such a person, having such conditions, before ^he word
or action which is supposed; and again what ^ther person might be admit^ed in
to their company as par^aker in that mystery.

Secondly that first manner proceeds ordinarily, by pon^ering the conditions
of the persons (although that be not al^ogether necessary, and that
co^(...)ition may without error be ^ccepted, which first does offer ^t self,
and is represented to the ^emory,) and having served himself once of that
manner ^o^cerning one word, or action, ^e does not return to consider ^e same
concerning that word, ^r action any more.

But this second manner of dilating does serve yt self of the conditions which
belong to the person, and are conformable to that business, which he is then to
consider of, as what things any person whatsoever might do or speak, without
regarding whether he take them in order or no: and besides in the self same
discourse he does use the same diverse times, if so yt be needful, for
attayning that which is pretented, much ike as is performed in the example
before proposed, where we often resumed the conditions of the nature of
almighty God, and of his understanding.

Aduertisements concerning the exercise of the three powers.
WHEN the person that desires to meditate, has in the foresaid manner,
finished the exercise of the powers concerning that one point proposed, let him
proceed then from point to point, representing one part after an other unto the
understanding, by the help of the memory, in such manner as has been
declared, to the end, that those things being well pondered, may be proposed
afterward to the will: but those points especially, which he does judge most
conducinge to the profit of his soul, and let the will embrace, or abhor them
as need shall require.

True yt is that one ought not to be sollicitous in passing to other persons,
words, and works, whilst he finds wherein to employ himself well in any of
those which he has in hand. Neither is yt necessary to consider first the
persons apart, then the words by themselves, and lastly the works, for
although yt be well to do so, when yt may be convenient yet the meditation is
commonly performed with more facility, and ease without that restrictio^, and
predetermination; especially seeing that often these three things are so
co^nexed together, that one cannot well be understood without the other.

Moreover yt is well to be considered, that seeing the operations of the memory,
and understanding are directed to the moving of the will, they are to be used
only for so long time, and with such moderation as shall be necessary to that
end, and no more, that so the meditation may be pious, and full of good
affections, not vayn, and fraught with curiosityes. For which end yt will do
well to observe that carefully, which has been said before, to wit that we
consider some condition of the person, word, or action, applying the
consideration of the same unto our own needs in the manner aforesaid, and then
moving our will to embrace the good, and fly the evil, which is so found out
as shall be said hereafter.

Things to be considered concerning the persons, words, and works.
NOv for that one of the impediments which we find in meditation is aridity,
drynes, or want of conceit, which ofte^tymes springs from the want of matter,
and not finding out of things to be considered, concerning the persons, words,
and works; and although yt might suffice to say in general that in persons we
may consider, their thoughts, their affects, their interior virtues together
with their outward composition, and external carriage, with other conditions,
and proper circumstances; In the words, the proper sense the metaphorical, as
also the end for which they are spoken; In the works the substance, and
essence, the circumstances of time, place, manner end, and the like:
notwithstanding I will set down something more in particular, as well concerning
the persons, as the words, and works, so that he that will free himself from
spiritual drynes, may consider either all, or part, according as the time, and
matter shall afford.

True yt is, as yt will help beginners to discourse on them all one after
another, at least in one or two misteryes, thereby to invre thim-selues to find
out matter: so yt is not necessary for those who have already made progress in
this exercise, to seek for other things, then those which are proper to the
mystery they have in hand. Neither let any marveile that I set down here so
many things, and so in particular; for as according to S. Basil, no word no,
nor any syllable is to be lightly esteemed, which we find in the holy
scripture, where in the misteryes are recounted; so also we must jugd of the
considirations, which belong unto the: And although to those of better
understanding, happily yt may seem superfluous, and in beginners may breed
confusion to see before them so many heads of different matters, as also for
that some will not understand perfectly the philosophical terms of some
conditions, which are to be set down: yt is good notwithstanding to have most
part of that collected in little room (as we have done in this little book) in
which one may employ himself in time of his meditation, so that he which does
not obtain his desire in one, may at least find yt in an other, and he that
does not vndersta^ the one, may understand the other, wherein is not supposed
so much need of learning, and knowledge of terms, specially seeing, that the
holy saints have employed themselves in the same things, whilst they have
meditated of God, or of his wonderful works, as he that will read their
books shall easily find; especially of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S.
Chrysostom, S. Hierome, and others that explicate the holy gospel, either
according to the literal, or moral sense: Nor do I pretend to oblige any to
consider all the things, which have been already, or shall hereafter beset
down, neither to ponder them with that order, with which they are here written,
for that all are not for every person, nor can easily be all considered in
every mystery.

The conditions of the persons.
ABOUT the persons therefore may be considered. First their essence, or nature,
whether yt be divine, angelical, or humane, if simple or compounded, perfect
or imperfect, if dependant of any other for their being and working, or
independent.

2. Their substannce whether corporal or spiritual, mortal or immortal,
simple or compounded, passible or impassible.

3. For the understanding, whether sharp, or dull; quick or slow; judicious or
silly; and folish; if prudent in practical directions, or not; if illuminated
of God or otherwise, if blinded by the devil, or by some other passion.

4. The memory, whether ready or slow; if easyly retayning, or with difficulty;
if well employed or not.

5. The will, whether effectual or weak, good, or ill; if easy to follow good
and to be moved therewith, or the coutrary; if in tangled in earthly matters,
or busied about other things; if moved by a good, or by a bad spirit.

6. The phantasy, whether prompt to apprehend and retain, or slow; if wandering
or recollected; if employed in vanities, and fictions, or in solid, and
profitable matters.

7. The concupiscible power; whether vehement or remiss; if busied in good
objects or bad, if subject to reason or rebellious against yt.

8. The irascible part, wheter ardent or moderat; if guided by reason or by yt
self; if employed in roting out evil, or in following the same.

9. Inclinations, whether directed to good or ill; to virtue or vice; to mirth
or sadness; to proper interest or performance of duty to unite yt self with God,
and to please him, or to remayn fastened to erathly things laboring to procure
them.

10. The passions, or affections, eytheyr of love or hatred; of desire or
auersio^, of joy or grief; hope or despair; of audacity or fear; or else of
anger; if well used or ill; if subdued or no; if strong remiss, or temperate.

11. The intentions; if derect^ed to a good end or to an evil, if proper or
suggested by some other; if effectual or weak.

12. The external sense, of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching; if
duly temperat or no; if well or ill kept; if ruled by reason or by the sensual
appetite.

13. The moveable power, if slow in operation, or quick; if dextrous and active
or not; if obedient to the will or repugnant.

14. The complexion, if choleric or phlegmatic, sanguine or melancholic; if
strong, weak or of a mild temperature; if natural or accidental.

15. The health; if good, ill, or between both; if well or ill used; if
ordinary or extraordinary; if received by divine, or humane means.

16. The forces; if very strong, weak, or in the mean; if well or ill used;
if proportionat to the age, to the stature, to the complexion, or
disproportionat; if ordinary or extraordinary.

17. The countenance; if fair foul, or tolerable; if occasion of ill or no;
if natural or counterfeit; if couformable to the feature or no.

18. The sex; if a man or woman.

19. The age, if a boy, youth, or man grown; if an old man, or of decrepit,
and decayed age.

20. The name; if imposed by God or given by chance; if significant or no; if
corespondent to the actions or different from them; if choice and rare or
triniall and common.

21. The condition; if of a noble person, or unnoble; if of a great family, or
ordinary, or base; if had by inheritance or gained by some noble act.

22. The dignity; if of an Emperor, King, or Prince; of Centurion or decurion;
if obtained by just means or unjust; if answerable to the actions or not.

23. The estate; if secular or consecrated to God; if of married or unmarried; if
of a Virgin or widow; if willingly take, or by suggestio^ or violence; if loved
and esteemed of, or hated or loath some.

24. The sect; if a christian, Jew, or Gentill etc. if chosen by election or
had by inheritance; if retained with zeal or with little esteem.

25. The art; if of a husbandman, of a sheapard, merchant or soldier etc. if
painful and wearisome, or easy or delectable; if honorable or infamous; if
profitable or with loss; if necessary or superfluous.

26. The merits; if many or few; if ordinary or choice; if known or no; if of
reward or punishment; if of praise or dispraise; if equal to the reward,
greater or less.

27. The obligations; whether volutary or forced; if many or few; if proceeding
from gratitude or liberality; if little or great; if such as may easily be
fulfilled or not.

28. The gifts and talents, whether of nature or of grace; if gained or
infused; if many or few; if selected or ordinary; if well used or ill; if
employed or retained idly.

29. The virtues; if theological, or cardinal; if infufed or gained; if well
roted and solid, or superficial, and unstable; if external or internal; if
intense or remiss.

33. The fame; if good or evil, far spread, or known but in few places; if
stable or variable; if the same withal or diverse; if answerable to the facts,
or greater or lesser; if gained by virtuous, and honorabl actions, or with
fictions or deceits; if used well or ill.

31. The wealth; whether greator little; if sufficient, and answerable to the
degree of the person, or not; if had by inheritance, or gained; and whether by
lawful, or unlawful means; if well or il employed.

32. Of friends, and adherents; if many or few; if of noble persons, rich,
good, learned, or their co^traryes etc. if ancient, or newly contracted; tied
with a straight band of good will or no; if occasion of good or evil.

33. The habit; if gross or delicate; if convenient to the person or no; if
according to the use of the country or different from yt; if ordinary, or
extraordinary; if woaren for necessity, and decency, or for pomp and vanity; if
of this or that color.

34. The situation; if lying or sitting, standing, kneling, or prostate; if
comely or vndece^t, if commodious or discommodious; if determinate or
changeable etc.

35. The dominion; if of master, father, or husband etc. if lawfully obtained
or not; if well or ill used; is much or little etc.

Conditions of words.
ABOUT the words may be considered; first the author; if God or Angel, or man,
or woman, or child etc. if good or evil; if he speak by himself, or by the
mouth of an other; if sincerely or with dissimulation.

2. Of what sort they be, whether nowne or verb or other if of one self number
or mood or of an other, if Hebrew, Latyne, or Greek etc. if proper or
appellatiue; if primitive or deriuatiue.

3. The signification; whether proper or metaphorical; if simple, and
ordinary, or misterious, and extraordinary; if of one only thing or many.

4. The connection; whether natural and prudent, or casual and forced; if
continued or interrupted.

5. The efficacy; whether impetratiue and likely to obtayn or no; if much or
little, if penetrating the heart or no.

6. The quality; whether clear or obscure, if true or false, exquisite or
frivolous.

7. The mystery, whether of things past, present, or to come, if of much or
little esteem, if easy to penetrat or hard.

8. The manner where with they are spoken, whether in choler or mildly, if with
high voice or low, if in have or slowly, if arrogantly or humbly, if in good
earnest or in jest, if with compassion or in derisio^, if obstinatly or
modestly, if simply or deceitfully, if with an oath or without yt etc.

9. The end; whether good or il, if of one or many, if manifest or covert, if
profitable or no.

10. The time, whether fit or no, if long or short.

11. The place whether convenient or no; if public or secret, if sought out of
purpose or found by chance.

12. The number whether sufficient or no, if superfluous or necessary.

13. The decorum; whether convenient to the place, to the person, to the time
etc. or contrary.

The condition of the works.
ABOUT the works, the understanding may ponder. First the root from whence
they proceed, whether yt be intrinsecall, or extrinsecall, proportionate or
disproportionat, if of God, of Angels, man or woman, if one or many, if
effectual and powerful or weak and feeble, if total or partial, principal
or subordinate.

2. Their essence, and nature, whether they be supernatural or natural,
moral or artificall.

3. The quality; whether noble or vulgar, virtuous or vicious, perfect or
imperfect, begun only or ended.

4. Of what sort, whether internal or external, if durable or no.

5. The merits; whether they be worthy of praise, or dispraise, of much or
little reward.

6. The manner how they are wrought, whether in have or by leisure, whether
willingly or by force, if earnestly or negligently; with joy or sadness.

7. The helps; whether many or few, natural or supernatural, expected or
inexpected, sufficient, or insufficient, deserved or not deserved.

8. The end; whether proportionate, or disagreing, good or ill, total or
partial, the last or not, if foreseen or unthought, if one alone or many, if
natural or supernatural.

9. The means, whether effectual or not effectual, just or unjust,
convenient or no, many or fevv, if natural or supernatural.

10. The instruments, whether fit or no, superfluous or necessary, many or
fevv.

11. The place, whether convenient, or disconuenient, larg or straight,
public or private, honorable or dishonorable.

12. The time, vvheter vvinter or summer, spring or autumn, night or day, long
or short.

13. The number, whether many or fevv, if often repeated, or else continued.

From whence are to be drawn the above named conditions.
THESE be the conditions of the persons, words, and works, which I thought
good to insinuate, omitting diverse others which might be adjoined. Yt now
remains to advertise, that one shall find sometimes some of those conditions
explicated by the author himself, who recounteth the history, as that of
Simeon by S. Luke in the mystery of the purification, and sometimes one shall
nnt find them, as we see yt happen most commonly in other misteryes: wherefore
when they are not set down in the text, eyter at full or in part, a man may
conceive them as himself shall judge for the best: but when he finds them set
down, he ought to consider thee^ in that determinate manner as the author has
put them; po^dering well the force of those very words, which he finds in the
author himself. whereupon yt will come to pass, that by occasion of these
conditions the whole text of the history will offer yt self to be considered
although we do not intend to take the same for our giude in the course of our
meditation, but only some certain points gathered out of yt. And this I say,
because ordinarily one should not take the text yt self for meditation, as some
use to do, when they intend to meditate upon the mystery therein contained:
but yt is more convenient to ponder yt by occasion of examining the foresaid
conditions: because otherwise meditating the text yt self, in respect that the
same is capable of many senses either literal or moral etc. as afterward
shall be declared, yt will often happen, that the time of two or three
meditations will pass without touching the chief point of the mystery, which
the party should, and would, willingly meditate upon: And sometime he shall
light upon some word hard to be understood, which either he must leave to
discuss, or yt will hinder the time which he has taken to discourse upon the
mystery proposed.

The manner of discoursing breefly upon any mystery.
ALL that which hitherto has been said, is proposed, partly to assign many
heads, from whence the matter of one meditation, made at once upon a whole
mystery may be taken; partly, that those who will may know how to entertayne
themselves many days in the same mystery: but he that desires to content
himself with fewer heads and has a will to run over at once a whole mystery
(which may seem to be fitly done the day yt self, that any particular mystery
shall occurr, of which the holy church does solemnize the feast:) he may chose
for the heads of his discourse those seven circumstances, which ordinarily
are to be considered in our actions, by those who treat of christian manners,
and moral operations, and are comprised in this verse.

Quis, quid, vbi, quibus auxiliis, cur, quomodo, quando. Who, what, where, by
what means, why, how, and when. Pondering well what person yt is, to
whom the proposed mystery does agree, examining what actions he does, where;
by what means for what end in what manner, and in what time. For example,
upon Christmas day, considering who yt is that is borne, what yt is to be
borne into this miserabble world; where yt is that he is borne; what helps he
had in the time of his birth; for what end he would be borne; in what manner he
was borne; and in what time.

The first mannner how to meditate upon Saints days.
THE same manner he may also observe, who will fruitfully meditate any mystery
which hapened to the most B. Virgin, or Saints, whose feast the church
ordayneth to be solemnized, choosing out, of all the virtuous actions of their
life, some one most notable, and most agreeable to his own peculiar estate, to
reap from thence the pretended fruit, and let him meditate the same according
to these last related circumstances. As for example he may choose for the
subject of meditation upon the day of the conception of our Lady, the
sanctification, and abundance of grace which she had given her: upon the
days of the nativity, and presentation, let him choose to consider her inward
joy and exultation, also the great humility of her self upon the day of the
Annunti^^ion, and so also of the visitation. Upon the feasts of S. Peter, and
S. Paul, let him considar the crucifying of the one, and the beheading of the
other: the stoning of S. Sthephen upon his day: upon the feast of S.
Laurence, the cruel torment he suffered, being broyled on a gridyron: upon
the feast of S. Nicholas the Bishop of Myrrhea his tymely beginning to fast,
absteyning from the milk of his nurse two days in the week etc. And so in
this manner in the feasts of other saints he may consider other of their
actions.

The second manner of meditation for the feast of Saints.
SECONDLY let him choose in his preparation, one or two, or more virtues,
wherein the saint of whom the feast is celebrated has been most famous, and
in time of miditation, let him consider the^ after such manner, that yt be
still referred to Christ Jesus our Lord, who is the head, and ever flowing
fountayn of all the greaces communicated to mankind.

First considering him as author, and efficient cause of those virtuous
actions; for although yt be true, that the saint himself, with consent of his
free will, with his cooperation, and endeavor, did much of his part to attayn
unto that degree of sanctity, yt notwithstanding, Christ our Lord was he, who
after a particular manner like unto some most exquisite master, continued to
labor so graciously in that soul, that he wrought in yt both sanctity, and
perfection.

Secondly acknowledging him to be the meritorious cause; for that whatsoever
beauty or goodness is found in the blessed saints, although yt has his
proportion, and proper dignity, as the partial means toward grace and
glory,notwithstanding yt proceeds from the merits of Christ, as being the head
of the universal church, and all the dignity which the works of holy saints
have, is founded in the self same merits of him, who making himself man for
man's sake and continually laboring for the space of thirty three years, and
some months besides, even unto the ignominious death of the cross opened an
euerflowing fou^tayn of lively merits for his holy church, which should be
sufficient to give life to all thw works of men, be they never so many.

Thirdly considering him as a most excellent master, who whilst he lived, by
word of mouth, and after his ascending into heaven by internal instruction,
gave such precepts of all virtue to all men, and inparticular to the saints,
that from remembrance of that doctrine, has proceeded, that diligent care, to
exercise virtue, in which the saints have been so eminent.

Fourthly, behoulding him not only as a master teaching by words, but as the
pattern and example in deeds, for that he having been the true and first
parterne of all sanctity, by inspiration from his heavenly father (who cease
not to exhort all men to imitate him with these words, Behold and do
according to the Patren) the holy saints with good reason, have beheld him
after such a manner that they have copied out his lively image in their soul,
diverse after a different sort, according to the variety of their actions, yt
none with out some laudable degree of perfection.

Fifthly, behoulding him, as the final cause, the crown, and glory of his
saints after the triumphant victory obtained of the world, the flesh and the
devil, for that he was proposed unto them, for a sovereign reward most great
and high above all comparison, and as the garland of triumph which might
sustain their hopes and vphould their weakness from dangerous falls under the
troublesome burden and oppositions of their enemies, who aimed at nothing else
but to bereave them of the glorious palm prepared for the victory.

This done, to the end the meditation may be so much more fruitful, let him
endeavor to see, if our Lord Jesus do deal with him also after the five
foresaid manners, and how he does dispose himself to obtain so much favor at
his hands. After that let him stir up in himself a desire to be so favored,
and let him seek out the reasons, and causes, which may hinder him from
receiving such graces; let him reprehend and blame himself for not answering to
the gracious helps received from God, as the saints have done before him, and
let him serve himself of other ma^ners, which will come after, helping to move
the will, and more to kindle the affection.

The third manner of meditation for feasts.
AN other manner no less profitable the^ the former, may be that he take the
gospel occurring in that feast, and dividing the matter into three or more
principal parts, procure to apply, either in proper or mystical sense, all
those things which the gospel referrs, unto the virtuous actions of that
glorious saint; and lastly making reflection unto himself, as well in the first,
as in this second manner, procuring to see if in his manner of life he discover
conformity, or contrariety to the doctrine of the gospel, and to the life of
the saint; and whether Christ Jesus have not so dealt with him, in all these
five means before named for the gayning of virtue, as he has with the saints,
whose feasts he celebrats. And after this let him reprehend himself, for that
he gives not correspo^dence, unto the helps given him from our Lord, nor to
the virtuous examples of his saints.

The manner how to meditate the text of scripture.
LASTLY yt is good also to know, how to employ our selves profitably when we
meditate either one only word of the holy scripture or else some sentence of the
same, or else some particular parables which are things full of doctrine both
holy and profitable for all me^; And this altgough yt be here spoken
principally to serve for the meditation of misteryes; when by occasion of some
conditions, which concern either the persons, words, or works, we are to
meditate upon some passage of the text, as before has been declared: yt
shall serve notvvithstanding in like manner for him, that will meditate all by
himself, and cheesly for those, that will first meditate upon the Psalms,
that he may afterward say them with more devotion, either in his canonical
hours, or in the office of our B. Lady, etc.

He may therefore first examine yt in the literal sense, which is no other,
then that which is agreeable unto the signification of that word sentence, or
parable, and to the intention of him that spoke yt: or else agreeable to the
intention of the holy ghost who caused him to speak yt. The^ let him consider
yt either in the tropologicall or moral sense, which consists in
accommodating the thing signified by that word, sentence or parable, with
mystical conceits, serving to the amending of his own life, and manners or
those of others: or else let him consider yt in the sense called allegorical,
in which the things signified in that word, sentece or parable are taken as
shadows, and figures of things to come, either in respect of the Messiah, and
of the church his spouse, (if we speak of the old testament:) or else
accordingly toward others things, appertayning also to the church, or to some
other mystery, if we speak of the new: or lastly in the anagogicall sense,
whereby the signification of the words, sentences, or parables are applied to
a more high understanding of celestial, and supernatural things of the life
to come.

As for example, when there occurs one only word, as Jerusalem, you shall
interpret yt literally, according to Cassian, that so often named city of the
Jews; tropologically the soul of man; allegorically to the holy church of
Christ: Anagogically, for the blessed city of Paradise. Then meditating that
sentence of our Savior. Nisi granum frumenti cadens in terram mortuum fuerit
etc. Unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground dye etc. he shall
understand by the word seed first literally the wheat corns, or other seed,
which to bring forth young buds must first be corrupted yt self in the earth:
Then tropologically, spiritual persons, who that they may bring forth the
fruit of virtuous actions, like corn must also first be mortefied and so dye
to the world by mortification and penna^ce: Thirdly to continue the comparison
of a true allegory understanding in that manner all the martyrs, which Christ
foresaw, and by those words foretold, who by offering themselves to torments
and death, should for their own part and to their own behoefe yeald
plentiful merit; to others, worthy examples of invincible courage, and fruits
of exceeding charity toward almighty God. Fourhtly, Anagogically, all the
happy souls that in this world have been beaten by tribulation sent from God,
like corn, to be afterward translated to that celestial habitation with
multiplied gain of eternal glory.

Now if he will propose for the subject of his meditation, that parable spoken
by Christ. Simile est regunm caelorum homine negotiatori quaerenti bonas
margaritas: inuenta aute vna pretiosa murgarita, abilt and vendidit omnia quae
habuit and emit eam. The King-dome of heaven is like to a merchant seeking good
pearls, and having found one precious pearl, he went and sold all that he had
and bought yt, he shall understand in the literal, and historical sense the
words as they sound, for that which happens unto Ievvellers who with all
diligence seek after pearls, and for that they know their value, having
found one to their mynds, they sell all that they have to buy yt. In
tropologicall sense, for that which passes with spiritual persons; who
knovving where they may get grace and virtue, cease not to employ all their
thoughts, and labor until they attayn to be able to gain yt. In the
allegorical sense for that which we see verefyed in the infidells, who
illuminated by God to know the value and great vvorth of faith, and the
excellency of the holy church leave what soever they have to be admitted into
the number of true believers; finally, in the anagogicall sese, for that which
passes with one, who has knowledge of the heavenly glory prepared for the
virtuous, who adventures his goods, honor, yea and life yt self to obtain yt.

Affections to be raised in Meditation.
Now for that the discourse upon the things aforesaid, may not only be the
food of the understanding; he that will meditate fruitfully must after some
discourse made about some one thing, stir up in his soul some affect
correspondent unto the matter meditated, and dilating, and confirming yt, so
long fix himself therein, as yt shall please God to mayntayn yt; And although
the affects be many and various, and therefore yt cannot be determined always,
to which one must attend especially, they depending for the most part upon the
assistance of the holy ghost, the best master in prayer; yet notwithstanding,
those, unto which the persons who attend to the purgative way must especially
have regard, be these that follow.

First a great grief with shame and confusion for his sins committed by
negligence and coldness in Gods service, by carlesnes, and faintnes in seeking
after perfection, etc.

Secondly, a holy fear of offending almighty God, of loosing his grace, of
being faulty in his duty, in not answering to the voices, and inspirations of
God, of his being liable to great punishment for his sins past, or at least
for his present imperfections, or else for his little care to profit himself in
the way of perfection.

Thirdly, a great inward hatred of the sin of tepidity, negligence and of
earthly things which seperat a man far from God, as also of himself, and his
own interest.

Fourthly, a great desire of mortification of the body, of the senses, of the
passions, and of the desire of honor, to subject himself to all, and to
esteem himself, and to be esteemed of others the most vile of all.

For those which are in the illuminatiue way, these following will be sit.
First a fervent love to all virtues.

2. A great desire to attain the^.

Thirdly, an inflamed desire to know the person, and the most divine actions of
the son of God incarnat, and to imitate the same as much as may be.

Fourthly, a firm hope, to please God with his divine grace, to attayn to
perfection, to persevere in the good commenced, and in his vocation received
from God, to free himself from all imperfection and defect, and to obtayn at
lenght eternal blessedness.

Fifthly, a pious sorrow and compassion for those indignityes which the son of
God suffered for his sake, for the blindness of other his neighbors who offend
his divine majesty in so many things.

And for him who attends to the unitive way. First an excessive love of God.

Secondly, a spiritual joy and gladness of the insinit riches, and perfections
of his divine majesty, of the honor he receaueth from the good, and of the
knowledge, which to his faithful servants he imparteth of himself.

Thirdly, a great contentme^t for the glory and happiness of Christ risen from
death, and received in heaven with great festiuity, and majesty, for the signs
showed to men of his charity, and for so great and manifould benefits
communicated to his friends, etc.

Fourthly a vehement desire that the name of God be sanctified, that he may
raygne over all souls without contradiction, that his holy will be done in
earth as yt is in heaven, and other like, which the unction of the holy ghost
will teach him, so that he dispose himself with a great desire, and necessary
humility to the receiving of them. Yet notwithstanding he must not leave to use
his diligence to stir up some of the above named affects and others the like,
and to dilate them the most he can, as well for the greater joy and comfort of
his soul, as also for more copious fruit ordained to operation for the honor,
and glory of God almighty.

Certain motyues to be proposed to the will for the more facill embracing of
that which is good.
HE shall therefore stir up these affections, by propounding unto the will
those motives, whereby yt is apt to be moved, which motives are wont to be
various, according to the variety of the things, which do move the mind either
to embrace them, or abhor them. But speaking in general they may be reduced
to these heads following, that is to say, when the light of the understanding
does conclude that such a virtue is to be embraced, or such a point of
perfection is to be practiced, yt must withal propound unto the will.

First the beauty of the same virtue, showing that yt deserves even for yt
self to be embraced.

Secondly, the necessity he has of yt, that he may thereby be the more
answerable to his estate, or that he may attain true peace and quiet of mind,
or to put himself in perfect state toward soluation, etc.

Thirdly, the vtility he shall reap either toward his own perfection, or
that of his neighbors, or for the gayning of grace, and other heavenly gifts
in this life, or for the increase of his glory in the life to come.

Fourthly, the spiritual delight he shall feel in embracing and practicing
the same virtue, which (also sometimes does redound even to the sense,) at the
least will give content, and satisfaction unto reason in some excellent degree.

Fifthly, the honor he shall gain by the study and excellency of this virtue,
not only with God in heaven, but also with men upon earth, who cannot choose
but approve and praise the virtue wheresoever they see yt.

Sixthly, the joy yt will cause to the Angels in heaven, who as being
replenished with charity both toward God and man, do greatly rejoice to see
that men do also proceed in virtue, and do give in this respect great glory
unto his divine majesty.

Seauenthly, the displeasure yt will procure to the devil, who cannot endure
to see virtue put in practice to the glory of God, and profit of man for the
deadly hate he bears to the one, who does punish him according to his
deserts, and to the other, for that they would enter the possession of that
place from which he was justly banished.

Eighthly, the example of Christ, of the B. Virgin, and of the holy saints
either drawn out of the mystery he does then meditate, or out of others which
he has meditated before, or shall meditate after.

As for example. After one has drawn out that light which is before set down
in the first manner of discoursing, to wit, that to the imitation of God, who
being independa^t of men, yt dit look upon them with the eyes of pity, he
also in like manner yea although (which is impossible) he were independa^t of
God, ought to lift up very often the eyes of his soul to his divine majesty
with acts of love; he shall then propose unto his will these motives following,
to the end he may raise the desire of so doing, and shall say thus.

And is yt not then a decent thing. and much to be desired to lift up the mind
often to that divine Lord from whom we have received yt? yt is a fine thing to
see a child who is still looking up toward his father: yt is pleasant to see a
young bird, or other creature, that have their eyes fixed upon their breeder:
yt is comely to see a disciple who has dis aspest toward his master* or a
soldier that often looks toward his captayn. God is our father, our
mother, our master, and our captayn; yt is therefore a most fit, and convenient
thing, that we often lift up our eyes toward him for so many titles. Let us
add hereunto, how necessary yt is for us to carry our selves toward him in this
manner, although we were not dependant upon his divine majesty; for admitting
all that ca^ be said, yet he is God, that is, the most perfect nature that can
be imagined, and I a man replenished with a thousand imperfections, and all
reason would, that the things which be inferior, and of small perfection
should acknowledge their superiors, and those whose perfection is much greater.
Now how can we better acknowledge him for most perfect, then by lifting up our
minds often unto him by means of prayer, and by acts of love? and how great
will be the fruit which the practice of this action will bring when yt is done
well and often as yt ought to be?

If the devil should tempt us never so violently, and should endeavor to draw
us from our estate, and cast us to the ground, if then we cast our eyes upon
God, we shall find that he is then at hand, and by him we shall be established in
such sort that we shall not be removed on hair from the place we were in, and
so we know yt happened to the Prophet, who said: Providebam dominum in
conspectu meo semper, quoniam a dextris est mihi ne commouear. I fore saw our
Lord in my sight always, because he is at my right hand that I be not moved.
And if yt should chance that the devil should take us in his snares, before
we be aware, yet even then lifting up our eyes to God we shall be delivered;
Oculi mei semper ad dominum quoniam ipse euellet de laqueo pedes meos. My eyes
always to our Lord; for he will pull my feet out of the snare. If we be
afflicted either with coporall, or spiritual hunger, fixing our eyes upon
God, we shall be abundantly replenished. Oculi omnium in te sperant domine, and
tu das illis escam in tempore opportuno; The eyes of all hope in thee o Lord,
and thou give them meat in time convenient. If we stand in need of spiritual
light, and particular grace, lifting up our selves, and drawing near to his
divine majesty, we shall be satisfied. Accedite ad eum and illuminamini, and
facies vestrae non confundentur. Come to him and be illuminated, and your faces
shall not be confounded. Delectare in domino and dabit tibi petitiones cordis
tui, be delighted in our Lord, and he will give thee the petitions of they heart.

He which intends to travail to some strange country, shall find yt very
profitable, if he learn the language of that country, whilst yt he remains
in his own, if then we do purpose to go to heaven, why do we not learn in
the mean time, to lift up our eyes to God, whom we are to behold without
intermission, or wearines, when we are in that happy place? But put the case we
should not reap any profit thereby at all, yet what a delight and cotentment
is yt to have leave to fix our eyes upon the most beautiful and pleasant
thing that possible can be found, and to be permitted to stay behoulding the
fountain of all delights? what an honor is yt to be admitted to behold that
first and chefest pattern of all beauty, the which whosoever does continually
behold, either is God, or an Angel, or a saint? what contentment do we give
to those blessed spirits in so doing, who as they do the^ selves continually
fix their eyes upon God with all delight, and persevere in his praises: so yt
is most grateful unto them, that all creatures should do the same, especially
reasonable creatures who were made to that end? How much does yt displease and
torment the devil, who is Loath we should do the least thing in acknowledging
our duty to almighty God? and truly yt were well done of us thus to do, though
yt were for no other respect, then to show our selves to be contrary to so
cruel an enemy who would not acknowledge God as his maker, nor humble himself
unto him. Finally how reasonable a thing is yt, that we should imitate the word
incarnate, of who^ yt is read. that he did often lift up his eyes, not only
those of his soul, but of his body also toward heaven, thereby to raise
himself toward God the father, although he needed no such help? In like manner
to imitate also the saints who used often to look up, and behold the heavens,
seeking thereby to unite themselves to God, and to show the loathing they had
to earthly love.

Motives for the better flying of that which is evil
IN like manner when the light of the understanding does conclude that a sin
is to be avoided, or any other imperfection whatsoever he shall withal propose
unto the will contrary motives unto the aforesaid, that is to wit.

First, the foulnes of the vice.

Secondly, the obligation we have to fly yt.

Thirdly, the damage and loss we shall sustayn if we do not fly yt, and that
both in this world, and in the next.

Fourthly, the disgust of mind which follows after such a sin even in this
life.

Fifthly, the dishonor which ordinarily does accompany such a vice, although yt
have the appearance to be honorable.

Sixthly, the grief, after our manner of speaking, which the holy Angels take
thereat.

Seventhly, the joy that the devils do take by our so doing.

Eighthly, the example of Christ our Lord, of the blessed Virgin, and saints,
who with word did reprehe^d yt, and in practice did fly yt as a most pestilent
contagio^.

As for example. After the (...) shadows, they do always suppose some body
from which they do proceed. So also these shadows of synn, have for the most
part their beginning from some body of sin.

Again, when we seem unto others to be sinners by the means of these
shadows, we are thereby the less esteemed, and consequently as knowing the^,
to have no great conceit of us, we do the less regard, to do in their
presence things that do not beseem us.

Let us add hereunto, that with such persons, to whom we seem to be sinners,
by not flying the shadow of sin, we cannot work that fruit, which we should
be able to do, if they did esteem us as persons far from any imperfections,
and by the same means we are hindered from the metit of much grace in this
life, and much glory in the next, because we do not procure the good of our
neighbor with such diligence as we ought.

And moreover what disgust does come to our selves by this likeness of sin
(although in deed yt is but a shadow) when we see our selves by reason of them
not to be esteemed such as in deed we are, and that we are hindered in giving
that edification and help to our neighbors which otherwise we might?

Besides how dishonorable they be unto us, causing us to be esteemed for me^
imperfect, and such as are little answerable to the obligation of our estate,
and to the helps we have received from God?

Again how much we do grieve the holy Angels, and in particular our Angel
keeper, who being desirous to see us like himself in purity, and freenes from
all sin, is grieved, and lamenteth, according to our phrase of speech, that
he does not see us altogether clear from this blemish, and imperfection?

And how much contentme^t do we give to the devil, (whom notwitsta^ding we
should never please in any thing) seeing that although we have not sinned, we
are not far from sin, as yt appears in that we do not fly this
resemblance of sin, at the least we surcease to do that good which we might,
if we did avoid yt with diligence?

For this cause Christ our Lord, although he was contented to permit others to
think him born in original sin as children commonly were, by submitting
himself to the law of circumsion, yet did he fly the doing of any thing which
might give occasion or foundation, whereby to think him guilty of voluntary
sin; for which respect he did not omit to go to Jerusalem at ordinary
solemnityes, to pay tribute unto Caesar, to eat the Paschall lamb, and to
perform diverse other things (which yet he was not bound to do) thereby to
avoid the least suspicion of sin. In like manner, the B. Virgin would obey
the edict of Augustus Casar, and that in a time so dangerous, as being so near
her childbirth; she would also go to the temple to be purified, herself being
most pure; she would be present in the holy city at the solemn feasts etc.
For this cause likewise, the holy martyrs, although perhaps they might have
yealded to do some little things of those which the tyrants required at their
hands, and that lawfully, and without offense to God, yet for the most part,
they would never yeald in the least thing whatsoever, and this, not to give the
least occasion of suspect that they yealded to sin, etc.

After he has with these, and the like motives stirred up these affections in
his will which he desired, or at least has endeavored to raise them he may
then either delate them, or move them in some of the manners following, as
shall best like himself, sometimes beginning with one, and sometimes with an
other, as they have more or less connection with that light of his
onderstanding.

Certain motives conjoined with the manners of raising the affections.
IT is therefore here to be observed,, that the foresaid motives, although they
ought to be ordinarily propounded to the will, (as we have declared) before we
come to the manners of amplyfying, and continuing the affections; yet may they
notwithstanding sometimes be mingled with some of the^ according as yt shall
seem best to the person that does meditate. For example if after the second
light of the first discourse before specifyed, by which yt was gathered that
man ought with a charitable eye to behold his neighbor, and to consider if
peradventure he stand in any necessity, if then he would use the manner which
we will afterward call Admiration, he may the^ mixed therewith the foresaid
motives in this sort following.

And how is yt possible that I being looked upon by God himself with so great
chari^y beyond all merit of mine, do yet co^^inue so hard hearted toward such
an one my neighbor? And how is yt possible, that after so many and great
inspirations I should have my heart shut up from all compassion toward him? and
yet yt is true, that there is not in the world a more worthy thing then to be
like that father of goodness, qui facit oriri solemn suum super bonos and malos;
that makes his sun to rise upon the good, and the bad,

And yt is farther true, that I being man as well as he, may also fall into the
same necessity, wherein he now is, and he may come to the state wherein I am,
so that I may then stand in need of his help, as he does of mine: yt is
therefore necessary, that I do use toward him all kind of mercy.

And how comes yt to pass, that I have stayed so long before I understand
this verity, and have always showed my self so little charitable? I did perhaps
suppose there should no good have comed unto me thereby: yes great good, both
spiritual, which I should have merited in the sight of God, and corporal
also, for so I should have obtained much more easily of his divine majesty,
whatsoever I should my self have needed, and my said neigbour would thereby
have been more prompt to do me any service.

Neither can I be ignorant, that in so doing I should have been esteemed for a
good, and charitable person, and for such have been honored by them who now
hold me for one that has little charity, and so with good reason they do make
small account of me.

Besides this as I have found in other good works, which being not so great,
and good as this, are not therefore so pleasing to God as this is, yet have I
always sound great contentment, and spiritual consolation therein: so I do
persuade my self, I should have sound much greater comfort, if I had performed
this act of charity.

And how is yt possible that I am not moved either by these or any other
respects to do my duty; the very beasts themselves would have been moved to
compassion, if they had seen and known of this need, and yet I am not moved
either by this, or by whatsoever can be propounded unto me.

The blessed Angels expect no other thing at my hand but the acts of charity,
the devils are mad for fear that I should perform them; how is yt then that
to please the one, and to displease the other I do not exercise my self in so
good a work?

In the life of Christ there is nothing more frequent, and evident then his
prompines to go and seek those that stood in need of help, that he might
releive them. So he went toward Jericho where the blind men were, so he passed
by the place, where there stood the born blind man, so he went to meet the
ten leapers, so he went toward the gate of Nain to raise the widows son;
so he expected the Samaritan woman at the well of Jacob, in cenclusion he had
always special regard, and did seek occasions to help the necessity of his
neighbor, either corporal or spiritual, and why then have not I done yt
before now, being that I esteem my self a follower of Christ etc.

And in this fashion we may also proceed in the other manners, as often as we
find our selves moved thereunto, after the discourse of the understanding
concerning any of the conditions either of the persons, words, or actions, as
before I have declared.

Certain ways to stir up, continue, and dilate the affections.
NOw having setdown the motives which serve for the awakening of the
affections, which we pretend in our will the ways to continue (...) Jacob, his
hope in his Lord God; Some other times that the sinner is justly punished.
Iustus es domine, and rectum judicium tuum, omnia quae induxisti super nos, and
vniuersa quae fecisti nobis, in vero judicio fecisti, in veritate and judicio
induxisti omnia haec propter peccata nostra. Thou art just o Lord, and right is
thy judgment, all things which thou have brought upon us, and all the things
which thou have done unto us, thou have done them in true judgment, in truth
and in jugdment, thou have brought all these things upon us for our sins. In
like manner he may affirm other things, either of the perfections of God, or
of his own imperfections: of the beauty of virtue; or of the deformity of
vices, of the greatness of of the rewards to come, or of the greeuousnes of the
punishment. etc.

The second is by way of Admiration, sometimes marueling at the goodness of God,
his patience, charity, his name, his power. Domine dominus noster quam
amirabile est nomen tuum in vniuersa terra. Domine Deus virtutu^, quis similis
tibi? potens es domine and veritas tua in circuiti tu^. O Lord our Lord how
marvelous is thy name in the whole erath? O Lord the God of virtues, who is
like unto thee! thou ar mighty o Lord, and thy truth is round about thee.
Sometime admiring at they own coldness, and negligence, etc. Sometime at thy
neglect or little regard to so great favor and so many graces as thou have
received, etc. Sometime at the little esteem thou show of so frequent and so
clear inspirations, and of thy to to little care in examining them. Quamdiu
pona^ consilia in anima meat How long shall I put counsails in my soul? Some
other times at the multitude and often return of tentations which disturb the
peace; and hinder the profit, and seek to overthrow the person. Qu(...)que
irruitis in hominem? interf(...)tit vniuersiv^s tanquam parieti inclinato and
maceriae depulsae? How long set you violently upon a man? you all d^ kill,
every one of you, as if yt were upon a wall that is leaning, and a wall
shaken. Sometimes of other things, etc.

The third is Benediction, blessing almighty God, for that he does accept our
prayers, and show his mercy: Benedictus Deuteronomy qui non amouit orationem meam, and
misericordiam suam a me; Blessed be God who has not removed my prayer, and his
mercy from me, for that he does perform so marvelous things. Benedictus
dominus Deus Israel, qui facit mirabilia solus. Blessed be our Lord God of
Israel, who only does marvelous things; for that he does visit, and deliver
his servants from captivity. Benedictus dominus Deus Israel, quia visitauit,
and fecit redemptionem plebis suae. Blessed our Lord God of Israel, for that
he has visited, and wrought the redemption of his people: for that he will
help us to proceed in the way of salvation. Be^ edictus dominus die quotidie,
prosperum iter faciat nobis Deus salutarium nostrorum. Blessed our Lord day by
day, the God of our saluations will make us a prosperous journey: for that he
does teach us to fight against our spiritual enemies. Benedictus dominus Deus
meus qui docet manus meas ad praelium. Blessed be our Lord my God who teaches
my hands to battayl, and my fingers to war, for that he gives graces, and
pardons sins, etc.

The fourth is Communication, as yt weere conferring with almighty God, to know
somewhat from him, as for example, who they shall be that shall go to heaven.
Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo, aut quis requiescet in monte sancto
tuo? O Lord who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy
hill? what thing he may perform in the service of his divine majesty. Quid
faciam tibi o custos hominum? What shall I do to thee o keeper of men? What
gratitude we can render and show unto him. Quid retribuam tibi pro omnibus qua
tribuisti mihi? What shall I render to thee for all things which thou have
rendered to me? What I shall be able to answer at the day of judgment. Quid
faciam cum surrexeris ad judicandum Deus? and cum quaesieris quid respondebo
tibi? What shall I do when thou will rise to judge o God, and when thou will
ask what shall I answer to thee? What manner or course we should hold for the
moderating of our passions, for the rooting out of vicious habits, for
exercising such, or such a virtue, etc. And this may be done by way of
dialogue, as if God did answer to the demands which are asked of him, and the
persons replying a new question, God in like manner to give a new answer, etc.

The fifth is of Confession, or acknowledgme^t either of graces received from
God, as having heard his prayer. Quonia^ tu Deus meus ^xaudisti orationem meam;
For thou my God have heard my prayer; for that he has granted him light to
know, and distinguish good and evil. Quoniam tu illuminas lucernum meam
domine, because thou do illuminate my lamp o Lord. For that he has been
our guide, our hope, our strenght in the way of salvation. Dum anxiaretur cor
meum, inpetra exaltastime, deduxisti me, quiafactus es spes mea, turri^
fortitudinis a facie inimici. VVhilest my heart was in anguish thou did exalt
me in a rock thou have conducted me, because thou art made my hope, a tower of
strenght from the face of my enemy: Or else he may speak to God of his own
misterys. Non est sanitas in carne mea, quoniam iniquitates meae, supergressae
sunt super caput meum: Circunderunt me mala quorum non est numerus, quoniam
iniquitatem meam ego cognosco. There is no health in my flesh, because my
iniquityes are gone over my head. Evils have compassed me which have no
number, I do know my own iniquity. Or else he may declare how he has deserved
hell a thousand times over, that he is not worthy the least grace that he does
answer to the lights, and helps received, that he does not apprehend or
understand in what thing consists the true good, that he has all his powers
corrupted, and spoiled, etc.

The sixth is of Comfort, comforting his soul to expect our Lord, when he
seems to stay his coming. Expecta dominum and custodi viam ejus, and
exaltabit te vt haereditate capias terram, si moram fecerit expecta eum quia
veinens veniet and non tardabit. Expect our Lord, and (...) the dilights of the
flesh, and all things whatsoever that are not good, or do not belong to God.
Quid mihi est in caelo, and a te quid volui super terram? Deuteronomy cordis mei and
pars mea Deus in aeternum. What y^ to me in heaven, and besides thee what
would I upon the erath? God of my heart, God my portion for ever.

The eight of Dubitation, doubting with himself what he is to do whether to
accept of a thing, or to fly yt; what punishment he should take of himself,
which may be esteemed equivalent to his negligence used in well doing, what
assistance he should expect from God, toward whom he has carried himself so
very ill; who may be thought fit for salvation seeing matters pass with such
rigor, and so few be found that do their duty entirely. Quis est homo qui
viuet, and non videbit morte^, ^ruet animam suam de manu inferi? Who is the
man that shall live, and shall not see death, shall deliver his soul from the
hand of hell? Also from whom he is to expect necessary succor to the
resistannce of his enemies. Quis consurget mihi aduersus maligna^tes? aut quis
stabit mecum aduersus operantes iniqditatem? Who shall rise for me against the
malignant? and who shall stand for me against the^ that work iniquity? who
shall help to guide him to a place of security. Quis deducet me in ciuitatem
mnnitam, who shall conduct me into a fensed city? who or what shall help to
raise him up to heaven. Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbae, and volabo, and
requiescam? who will give me wings as of a dove, and I will fly and rest? who
shall help him to grace, that he may know and find almighty God. Quis mihi
tribvat vt cegnoscam, and in veniam illum, and veniam vsque ad solium ejus?
Who will grant me that I may know, and find him, and come even to his throne?

The ninth is Exhortation, exhorting himself to discover his needs unto
almighty God. Reuela domino viam tuam, and spera in eo, and ipse faciet.
Reveal unto our Lord thy way, and hope in him, and he will do yt. Also to
carry himself courageously in the service of God. Viriliter age, and comfortetur
cor tuum, and sustine dominum. Do manfully, and let thy heart take courage, and
expect thou our Lord: Also to delight in God. Delectare in domino and dabit
tibi petitiones cordis tui. Delight in our Lord, and he will give thee the
petitions of thy heart. Also to do well and stand steadfast in ones chosen
estate when yt is good. Spera in Deo, and fac bonitatem, and inhabita terram
and pasceris in diuitiis ejus, Hope in our Lord, and do good, and inhabit the
land and thou shall be fed in the riches thereof. Also to place all his thought
es and care upon God. Iacta super dominu^ cura^tuam, and ipse te enutriet.
Cast shy care upon our Lord, and he will noucish thee. Also to embrace
willingly what thing soever leads to perfection although yt be hard, and
troublesome. Also to contend as yt were with almighty God in striving to do
him service whilst he does continually do us benefits etc.

The tenth is called in latin Fiducia, which is faithful trust, or confidence
trusting in God that he will abate the force of our enemies. No^ timebo millia
populi circu^dantis me. I will not fear* thousands of people compassing me
about, quoniam tu percussisti omnes aduersantes mihi, because thou have stroke^
all those that are adversaries unto me. Dominus illuminatio mea and salus mea,
que^ timebo? Our Lord is my illuminatio^, and my salvation, whom shall I fear?
In te in^micos nostros ventilabimus corn^ and in nomine tuo spernemus
insurgenter nobis; In thoe we shall turn our enemies, and in thy name we shall
contemn^ them that rise up against us. Also that he will not always be
offended with us, nor always threaten us; Non in perpetu^^ irafcetur, neque in
aeternum comminabitur. He will not be angry always, no^ will he threaten for
ever. Also that he will help us to overcome all difficultyes, be they never so
great. In te eripiar a tentatione, and in Deo meo transgrediar murum. In thee I
shall be deliuerd from temptation. and in my God I shall go over a wall. That he
will give us all helps necessary to us that he will illuminat our
understanding, inflame our will, that he will give forces to our motive powers
to exercise that which is good etc. Sometimes also taking courage to have some
hope in the state of our own conscience as not feeling therein any remorse of
evil deeds. Domine Deus me^usi feci istud, si est iniquitas in manibus meis
etc. O my Lord God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands etc.
Si abscondi quasi homo peccatum meum, and celaui insinu meo iniquitatem meam.
If as man I have hyd my sin, and have concealed my iniquity in my bosom. Si
ambulaui in vanitate, and festinauit in dolo pes meus. If I have walked in
vanity, and if my foot have hastened in deceit. Si declinauio gressus meus de
via, and si secutum est oculos meot cor meum, and si in manibus meis adhaesit
macula, etc. If my step have declyned out of the way, and if my heart has
followed my eyes, and if any spot have cleaued to my hands, etc.

The eleventh is Gratitude, searching with diligence how he may render some
kind of counterohang for the benefits received from God. Quid retribuam domino
pro omnibus quae retribuit mihi? What shall I render to our Lord for all
things he has rendered to me? Sometimes recounting as yt were to others the
favors which he has received of almighty God. Venite audite, and narrabo,
omnes qui timetis dominum quanta fecit Deus animae meae. Come and hear all ye
that fear God and I will recount how great things God has done unto my soul.
Also showing to be desirous to praise him for ever. Misericordias domini in
aeternum cantabo, in generatione, and generationem, annunciabo veritatem tuam
in ore meo. I will sing the mercyes of our Lord eternally in generation and
generation, I will show forth thy truth in my mouth. Also desiring to be
assisted by other friends in the like praises of God. Magnificate dominum
mecum, and exultemus nomen eius in idipsum. Magnify ye our Lord together with
me, and let us exalt his name for ever. Esteeming yt a thing most good, and
convenient to be busyed in praising so great a benefactour. Bonum est confiteri
domino, and psallere nomini tuo altissime. Yt is a good thing to confess to
our Lord, and to sing to thy name o highest. Desyring also to have yet great
commodity to celebrat his prases. Repleatur os meum laud, vt c^tem gloriam
tuam, tota die magnit^dinem tuam. Let my mouth be fil^d with praise, that I may
sing thy glory and all the day thy greatness. Domine latis mea aperies, and os
meum annunciabit laudem tuam. O Lord thou will open my lips, and my mouth shall
show forth thy praise. In like manner confessing himself unable to give full
and due demonstration of a grateful mind, for so great and singular benefits
received from his divine majesty.

The twelfth is of Humiliation esteeming himself meaner the^ a man. Ego sum
autem vermis, and non homo, opprobrium hominum, and abiectio plebis. But I am a
worm and no man, a reproach of men, an outcast of the people. Confessing
himself for poor. Ego autem mendicus sum and pauper etc. But I am a beggar and
poor etc. Distrusting of his own forces, and habilityes. Non in arcu meo
sperabo, and gladius meus non saluabit me: I will not hope in my bow, and my
sword will not save me. Also reducing himself to his own nothing. Ego ad
nihilum redactus sum and nesciui. I was brough to nothing and knew not. Also
attributing yt to his own deserts when he suffers tribulation. Priusquam
humiliarer ego deliqui. Before I was humbled I offended. Also esteeming yt a
good, and beneficial thing to be humbled. Bonum mihi quia humiliasti me. Yt is
good for me that thou had humbled me. Confessing that God justly depressed, and
debased him. Cognout domine quia aquitas judicia tua, and in veritate tua
humiliasti me. I know o Lord, that thy judgments are equity, and in thy truth
thou have humbled me. Sometimes acknowledging himself unworthy to be admitted
to the presence of God; to be illuminated; to have the feeling of the
affections in his prayer; to be conforted, etc.

The thirtenth is of Inuitation, inuiting almighty God to be mindful of him.
Exurge domine Deus, exaltetur manus tua, me obliuiscaris pauperem. Arise Lord
God, let thy hand be exalted, forget not the poor. Also that he will come
quickly. Veni domine and noli tardare. Come o Lord and do not stay. Also that
he will visit the soul, Deus virtutum conuertere, respice de caelo, and vide,
and visita vineam istam. O God of hosts return, regard from heaven, and see,
and visit this vineard. That he will save us from dangers etc. Excita potentiam
tuam and veni, and saluos facias nos. Raise up thy might, and come to save us,
inuiting also all creatures; that they do praise, and bless almighty God.
Benedicite omnia opera domini domino, laudate, and superalte eum in saecula.
Bless ye our Lord all the works of our Lord, praise him, superexalt him for
ever. Likewise inuiting his own soul, that yt give yt self to the practice of
virtue; that yt be mindful of heaven; of God, and of yt self that yt convert
yt self to God, who is his true, and proper center. Conuertere anima mea in
requiem tuam, quia dominus benefecit tibi. Turn o my soul into thy rest,
because our Lord has been good, to thee.

Also inuiting the Angels, and men, and all creatures to come and behold how
he has defiled his soul; how many works he has done unworthy of his estate
etc. Also how much God has debased himself for him, and to what poor terms
his sins and imperfections have brought the King of glory, and how they have
treated, and used him, inuiting them that they will assist him to do his duty,
and to answer worthily to the majesty of God for the graces received in so
great abundance, etc.

The fourteenth, is of Lauds and Praises, exalting the power and wisdom of
God. Magnus dominus noster, and magna virtus ejus, and sapientiae ejus no^ est
numerus. Great is our Lord, and great is his strength and of his wisdom there
is no number. Also the greatness of his works, Magna opera domini exquisitae in
omnes voluntates ejus. The works of our Lord are great, exquisite according to
all his wills. And his infinite mercy. Misericors miserator dominus, patiens, and
multum misericors. Suauis dominus vniuorsis, and miserationes ejus super omnia
opera ejus. Our Lord is pitiful, and very merciful, patient and very
merciful. Our Lord is sweet unto all, and his commiserations, are over all his
works. In like manner his equity, and justice. Quoniam rectus dominus Deus
noster, and non est iniquitas in eo. The Lord our God is righteous, and there
is no iniquity in him. Sometime exalting the continual practice of the Angels
in praising God, and their readiness in obeying his will; also commending the
charity of the Apostles; the patience and fortitude of the martyrs; the
perseverance and stability in well doing of the Confessors; The purity of the
Virgins, the penance, and retired life of the Anchorits, in comparison of
which, himself has not hitherto done any thing worthy of his estate, and the
grace received from God.

The fifteenth is of Menaces, threatening himself some punishment on the behalf
of God, or as from himself, for that he does not perform his duty as he ought,
and will not as yet convert himself so seriously as he is bound. Nisi conuersus
fueris, gladium suum vibrabit, arcum suum retendit and parauit illum. Unless
thou will be converted, he shall shake his sword, he has bent his bow, and
prepared yt. etc. Also threatening the understanding, because yt is curious; the
will because yt affects to much terrene things, and the memory, because yt
does not remember God so often as yt should. Intellige haec qui obliuisceris
Deum ne quando rapiat and non sit qui eripiat. Understand these things thou
that forgettest God, least he take thee violently, and there be none to deliver
thee. Also the phantasy, because yt wandreth so like a vagabo^d: the eyes
because they are not modest, nor composed: the tongue because yt is talkatyue,
head long, and deceitful. Dilexisti omnia verba praecipitationis lingua
dolosa, propteria Deus destruet te in fine^ euellet te etc. Thou have loved all
words of precipitation, a deceiptfull tongue, therefore will God destroy thee
for ever, he will pluck the out for ever. etc. Breefly to all the powers and
senses in like sort, because they do not employ themselves in the service of
God, as yt were beseeching his divine majesty that he will chastise them.

The sixteenth is of Narration, recou^ting unto God, the things performed by
his sacred majesty. Annunciaui iustitiam tuam in ecclesia magna. I have
declared thy justice iu the great congregation. Iustitiam tuam non abscondi in
cord meo, veritatem tuam, and salutare tuam dixi; Thy justice I hane not hid
in my heart thy truth, and thy salvation I have spoken. Also showing our
constancy, and perseverance in diverse probations. Dedisti nos tanquam oues
escarum. Thou have given us as sheep, that are to be eaten. Posuisti nos
opprobrium vicinis nostris, etc. Thou have made us a reproach to our neighbors
etc. Haec omnia venerunt super nos nec obliti sumus te, etc. All these things
have come upon us, neither have we forgotten thee, and non recessit rotro cor
nostrum, etc. And our heart has not reuoulted back. Also he may recount
sometimes the things which almighty God has performed toward himself. Deus
docuisti me a juuentuta mea, and vsque nunc pronunciabo mirabilia tua. O God
thou have tought me from my youth, and until now I will pronounce thy
marvelous works. And that which he has done to others, who have put their
trust in his divine help. In te sperauerunt patres nostri, sperauerunt, and
liberasti eos. Ad te clamauerunt and salui facti sunt, in te sperauerunt and
non sunt confusi. In thee our fathers have hoped, they have hoped, and thou
have delivered them; They have cried to thee and were saved, they have hoped
(...) and thy truth from the great counsel Also that he does not put his trust
in his own forces or industry. Non enim in arcu meo sperabo, and gladius meus
non saluabit me. For I will not hope in my bow, and my sword will not save me.
Or if his conscience be clear, that he has not committed any error for which
he should deserve that punishment. Neque iniquitas mea, neque peccatum meum
domine, sine iniquitate cucurri and direxi. Neither is yt my iniquity nor my
s^nne^ Lord, without iniquity, I have run, and gone directly. Also not to
have any evil intention. Non proponebam ante oculos meos rem initstam, no^
adhaesit mihi cor prauum etc. I did not propose before my eyes any unjust
thing, a perverse heart has not cleaued to me. Or else that he has not been
chastised according to his deserts. Non secundum peccata mea fecit mihi, neque
secundum iniquitates meas retribuit mihi* He has not done unto me according to
my sins, nor has rendered unto me according to my iniquityes. Also that he
does not deserve either honor or glory in any sort. Non mihi domine, non mihi
sed nomini tuo da gloriam. Not to me o Lord, not to me, but to thy name give
the glory. also that he has not lifted up his heart with pride, nor to have
been puffed up with any vanity. Domine non est exalcatum cor meum, neque elati
sunt ^culi mei, neque ambulaui in magnis, neque in mirabilibus super me. Lord
my hartys not exalted, neither are my eyes lofty, nor have I walked in great
things, nor in marueils above my self. Also not to have done his duty as
others do think of him. etc.

The eighteenth is of Offering, offering himself wholly to God for a servant. O
domine quia ego seruus tuus, ego seruus tuus, and filius ancillae tuae. O Lord
because I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmayd.
Suscipe seruum tuum in bonum; Receive thy servant unto good. Suscipe me
secundum eloquium tuum, and non consundas me ab expectatatione mea. Receive me
according to thy word, and confound me not of my expectation; And even for a
horse or beast of carriage, which will all ways be ready to the service of his
divine majesty. Vt jumentum factus sum apud te, and ego semper tecum. As a
beast I am become with thee, and I always with thee. Offering up all that he
has, the understanding the will, the memory, the heart, the tongue, the
operations etc showing himself to be ready to execute so much as he has
perceived of Gods will, either in that meditation or out of yt: offering
himself prepared to imitate Jesus, as much as he can possibly, and to suffer
whatsoever, for the love of his divine majesty. Quoniam in flagella paratas
sum, Because I am ready for scourges, Domine tecum paratus sum in carccrem, and
in mortem ire. Lord I am ready to go with thee into prison, yea to death.

Also to seek all means to please almighty God, and to observe his holy
precepts. Paratus sum, and non sum turbatus vt custodiam mandata ^ua. I am
prepared and am not troubled to keep thy commandments.

The nineteenth is of Obsecration, begging instantly at the hands of God, that
he will grant him those affects, and those graces which he desires, either
for his own good, or for the good of others, and this for his infinite love,
and mercyes sake. Conuertere domine, and eripe animam meam, saluum me sac
propter misericordiam tuam. Turn thee^ Lord, and deliver my soul, save me for
thy mercyes sake; Exaudi me domine, quoniam benigna est misericordia tua. Hear
me o Lord, because thy mercys beninge. Secundum multitudinem miserationum
tuarum respice in me. According to the multitude of thy commiserations have
respect to me. Secuudum misericordiam tuam memento meitu propter bonitatem
tuam. According to thy mercy rentember thou me for thy goodness o Lord. Begging
all this for his name sake that is most holy and ineffable. Propter nomen tuum
domine propitiaberis peccato meo, multum est enim. For thy name o Lord thou will be propitious to my sin, for yt is much. Adiuua nos Deus salutaris
noster and propter gloriam nominis tui libera nos, and propitius esto peccatis
nostris propter nomen tuum etc. Help us o God our savior, and for the glory of
thy name o Lord deliver us, and be propitious to our sins for thy name sake.
etc. Also by the most grateful merits of his most beloved son. Respice in
faciem Christi tui, Look upon the face of thy Christ. By the purity and
sanctity, of the most sacred Virgin, and by other things, at the aspect whereof
he thinks God will be moved to grant him that which he demands.

The twentieth is of Petition, simple indeed but fervent, craving of almighty
God those favors which he desires for himself and others. For example,
sometimes demanding to be heard. Exaudi orationem meam domine, deprecationem
meam auribus percipe. Hear my prayer o Lord, and receive my petition with thy
ears. Sometimes to be assisted and helped by allmighty God. Illumina oculos
meos ne vnquam obdormiam in morte. Emitte lucem tuam, and veritatem tuam.
Illuminate mine eyes, that I sleep not in death at any time, send out thy light
and thy truth. Sometime that he will renew his heart and spirit. Cor mundum crea
in me Deus, and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus meis. Create a clean heart
in me o God, and renew a right spirit in my bowels. Sometimes that he will
strenghten his steeps in the way of salvation. Dirige in conspectu tuo viam
meam. Direct my way in thy sight. Dirige me in veritate tua and doce me. Direct
me in thy truth, and teach me. Legem pone mihi domine in via tua, and dirige me
in semitam rectam. Set me a law o Lord in thy way and direct me in thy right
path. Vias tuas domine demonstra mihi, and semitas tuas edore me. Lord show me
thy ways, and teach me thy paths. Sometimes that God will teach him his
divine will, and pleasure. Doce me facere voluntatem tuam quia Deus meus es tu.
Teach me to do thy will, because thou art my God. Domine quid me vis facere.
Lord what will thou have me to do? Sometimes that God will keep and guard his
tongue. Pone domine custodiam ori meo, and ostium circumstantiae labiis meis.
Set o Lord a watch to my mouth, and a door round about to my lips. Sometimes
that he will draw back our eyes from evil. Auerte oculos meos ne videant
vanitatem. Turn away mine eyes that they see not vanity. Sometimes that he will
give him understanding to conceive the things that be good. Da mihi intellectum
vt sciam testimonia tua. Give me understanding that I may know thy testimonies.
Sometimes that he will setle, and confirm him in his good purposes. Manda Deus
virtuti tuae, confirma hoc Deuteronomy quod operatus^es in me. Command thy strenght o
God, confirm this o God, which thou have wrought in me. And sometimes let him
demand other things according to his necessity, and desire etc.

The twentieth one is of Purpose, proposing, and resolving firmly in the sight
of the whole celestial court, that he will perform whatsoever he has known
or shall know to belong to the glory of God, and that he will often praise his
divine goodness, and mercy. Consitebor domino secundum justit^am eius, and
psallam nomini domini al^issimi. I will confess to our Lord, according to his
justice, and will sing to the name of our Lord most high. Laudabo nome^ Dei cum
cantico, and magnificabo eum in laud. I will praise the name of God with
canticle, and I will magnisi him in praise, and that he will for ever observe
the commandments of God. Custodiam legem tuam semper, in saeculum and in
saeculum saeculi. I will keep thy law always for ever, and ever. Iuraui and
statui custodire judicia justitiaetua. I swear and determined to keep the
jugdme^ts of thy justice. Also to do some voluntary acts which are not
commaunned. Voluntary sacrificabo tibi, and confitebor nomini tuo domine
quoniam bonum est. I will voluntarily sacrifice to thee, and will confess to
thy name o Lord because yt is good. Also to persecute vices, and to punish his
own flesh. Persequar inimicos meos, and comprehendam illos, and non conuertar
donec deficiant. I will pursue my enemies, and overtake them, and will not
return until they fayl. Also to offer my prayers in the morning. In matutinis
meditaber in te. In the morning I will meditate on thee, Mane astabo tibi
quoniam non Deus volens iniquitatem tu es. In the morning I will stand by thee,
and will see, because thou art not a God that wilt iniquity. Also to sound out
and publish the commandments of God. Narrabo omnia mirabilia tua, latabor and
exultabo in te. I will tell all thy marvelous things, I will be glad, and
rejoice in thee. Confitebor domino nimis in ore meo, in medio multorum laudabo
in eum. I will confess to our Lord exceedingly with my mouth and in the
midst of many I will praise him. Narrabo nomen tuum fratribus meis, in medio
ecclesiae laudabo te. I will declare thy name to my brethren, in the midst of
the church I will praise thee. Also to hope in God, and there upon not to
fear any thing whatsoever. Si consistant aduersusme castra non timebit cor
meum, si exurgat aduersus me praelium in hoc ego sperabo. If camps stand
together against me my heart shall not fear, if battayll rise up against me in
this I will hope.

Also never to depart from the will of God, which yt shall please him to make
known unto him. Ipse Deus meus and saluator meus, adiutor meus, no^ emigrabo.
He is my God, and my savior, my helper I shall not remove. And to persevere
firm and constant, and to make good the promises made unto his divine majesty.
Reddam tibi vota mea, quae distinxerunt labia mea. I will render thee my vows
which my lips have distinguished. Vota mea domino reddam coram omni populo
eius. etc. I will render my rows to our Lord before all his people. And so of
other things in like manner appertayning to our spiritual profit. etc.

The twentieth two is of Prosopopeia, which is sometimes to fayn as though
almighty God did lament himself, and complayn of us. Populus quem non cognoui
seruiuit mihi, in auditu auris obediuit mihi, Tu v^ro ^epulisti and despexist^,
and distulisti Christum tuum. etc. A people which I knew not has served me, in
the hearing of the ear yt has obeyed me; But thou have repelled, and
despised, thou have differeed thy Christ. Quomodo facta est meretrix ciuitas
fidelis, plena jud^cii? How is the faytfull city full of jugdment become an
harlot? Quomodo obscuratum est aurum, mutatus est color optimus? How is the
gold obscured, the best color is changed? Sometimes that he does vpbraid thee
of thy evil customs, and thy little correspo^dence to his love showed? Quare
tu enarras justitias meas, and assumis testamentum meum per os tuum? Tu vero
odisti disciplinam, projecisti sermones meos retrorsum. Why do thou declare
my justices, and take my testament by thy mouth? But thou have hated
disciplyne, and cast my words behind thee. Quid est quod vltra debui sacere
vineae meae, and non feci? An quod expectaui vt faceret vuas, and fecit
labruscas? What is there that I ought to do more to my vineard, and have not
done to yt? whether that I looked yt should yeald grapes, and yt has yielded
wild grapes? Sometimes that God does reprehe^d him for following vanities. Fili
hominis vt quid diligis vanitatem, and quieris mendacium? O son of man, why
do thou love vanity, and sollow a lie? Sometime that he does exhort thee to
praise his holy name. Immola Deo sacrificium laudis, and read altissimo
votatua. Immolate to God the sacrifice of praise, and pay thy vows to the
highest. Sometime that he does promise thee his divine help. Inuoca me in die
tribulationis, eruam te and honorificabis me; Invocat me in the day of
tribulation, I will deliver thee, and thou thalt honor me etc. Sometimes that
the devil does rejoice that he is more followed and obeyed then God himself,
and that he can handle the matter so cunningly, that he can induce men to
sin, and some others to wax cold in devotion etc. Sometimes fayning that the
virtues themselves, if they could speak would lament, that they are not prised
and esteemed according to their merits.

The twentieth three is of Quarrel, or Complaynt, taking a certain kind of
boldness, but yet with due reverence, and humility to complayn of almighty God,
for that he permits his troubles, and temptations (...) vt glutiam saliuam
meam? How long do thou not spare me, nor permit me to sir allow m^ spi^le?
And for that yt seems God is beco^e cruel unto him. Clamo ad te, and non
exaudis me, sto and non respicis me. I cry out unto thee, and thou hear me
not, I stand, and thou do not respect me. Mutatus es mihi in crudelem, and
in duritia manus tuae aduersaris mihi. Thou art changed to be cruel toward
me, and in the hardness of thy hand thou art against me. Also for that he does
not deliver him from his sins. Cur non tollis peccatum meum, and quare non
aufers iniquitatem meam? Why do thou not take away my sin, and why do
thou not take away my iniquity? At other times he may lament and complayn of
himself, for that he does not stand steadfast in his purposes, in resisting
tentations, in flying occasions of offe^ding God. Sometimes also let him
complayn of his own flesh for that yt does often move him to evil: sometimes
of the diuill, that he is to importune with his wicked suggestions. Sometimes
also of men, for that they cease not to solicit him to evil.

The four and twentieth is of Rendering thanks, yealding thanks to his divine
majesty, for so many benefits bestowed, and so many promises made and so
favorable audience granted; for the lights, and affects communicated in the
time of prayer etc. stirring up his soul, to bless, and praise almighty God,
for the pardon obtained of his synns, and the grace received. Benedic anima mea
domino, and noli obliuisci omnes retributiones ejus, Qui (...) somno tuo? How
long will thou sleep^ sluggard? when will thou rise out of thy sleep? As one
that is proud. Quid ^e eleuat cor tuum? Quid tumet coutra Deum spiritus tuus
etc. Why does thy heart eleuat thee? Why does thy spirit swell against God?

The six and twentieth is of Solliciation, soliciting almighty God, and
instantly beseeching him, that he will come spedely to help us. Inclina ad me
aurem tuam, accel^ra vt eruas me. Incline thine ear to me, make have to
deliver me. Adjutor meus, and protector meus es tu, Deus meus ne tardaueris.
Thou art my helper, and my protector, my God be not slack. Exurge quare
obdormis domine? exurge and ne repellas in sinem. Arise, why sleep thou o
Lord? arise, and repel us not to the end. Eripe me de inimicis meis Deus meus,
and ab insurgentibus in me libera me. Deliver me from my enemies o God, and
from them that rise up against me defend me. Eripe me de operantibus
iniquitatem, and de viris sanguinum salua me. Deliver me from them that work
iniquity, and from bloody men save me. Sometimes soliciting the blessed Virgin
that she will obtayn grace for us at the hands of God etc. Also the saints,
that they will releive our necessityes, and that they will assist us in giving
glory to God. Asserte domino gloriam, and honorem, asserte gloriam nomini ejus.
Bring to our Lord glory, and honor, bring to our Lord glory to his name.
Sometimes soliciting his own soul to be diligent about performing the good he
has determined to do, and to eschew with speed all occasions of evil, and of
his imperfections. (...) men. And to think virtues much more amiable, and
deserving our best love, although yt be hard then vice although yt be never so
easy etc.

The eight and twentieth is of Taxing, taxing himself with some certain pain, if
he do not his duty, if he perform not his purposes, if he be not mynfull of
God, of heaven. Si obl(...)ut fuero tui, obliuioni detur dextera me^, adhaereat
lingua mea faucibus meis, si non meminero tui, si not. propositoro Jerusalem in
principio laetitiae meae. If I shall forget thee, let my right hand be
forgotten, let my tougn^ cleave to my iures, if I do not remember thee, if I
shall not set Jerusalem in the beginning of my joy. In like manner taxing
himself with some pain annexed to a time, as for example. If to day, or within
two days I do not this, or that thing. If I do not overcome this or that
passion. If I do not fulfill this or that purpose; I will submit my self to
this or that punishment. Taxing or stinting himself also to a certayu measure
of attending to prayer, to the extirpatio^ of vices, to the exercise of virtue,
determining with himself such or such penance if he do not perform such good
works in such or such manner. etc.

The nine and twentieth is of that which in latin is called Vi^uperium, that is
to say. Rebuke or disprais, dispraising his own blindness in spiritual
matters, his to much carnal prudence in worldly business, his sloth in
executing any good purpose; his malice in abusing the mercy and grace of God
etc. His little(...) should glory in their evil. Vsquequo peccatores domine,
vsquequo peccatores gloriabuntur? How long shall the sinners o Lord, how long
shall the sinners glory? Also as being offended with himself, disdayning that
his soul and powers shall rebel against God. Nonne D^o subjecta erit anima
mea? Shall not my soul be subject to God? Desyring that all the traynes, and
deceits of his spiritual enemies may be dissolved, and come to nothing.
Decidant a cogitationibus suis, secundum multitudinem impietatum eorum expelle
eos. Let them fayl of their cogitations, according to the multitude of their
impietyes expel them. Also that malediction, and all other vices may be
banished out of the world. Disperdat dominus labia dolosa, and linguam
maguiloquam. Our Lord destroy all decei full lips, and the tongue that speaks
great things: Also that the enemies of God may be rooted out. Exurgat Deus, and
dissipentur inimici ejus. Let God arise, and let his enemies be dispersed. Also
that the evils may fall upon his enemies that they have sought to lay upon
him, if yt be to Gods honor. Veniat illi laqueus quem ignorant, and captio quam
abscondit apprehendat eum, and in laqueum cadat in ipsum. Let the snare which
he knows not come on him, and the net which he has hidden catch him, and let
him fall into the very same snare. Also that there may be no more memory leaft
of vices, of imperfections nor of wicked men. Dispereat de terra memorta eorum
etc. Let the memory of them perish out of the earth. etc.

Other manner of amplifications may be used for like ends to these as for
example, of Accusation, of Invocation of Protestation, of Representation of our
occasions, of Resignation, of Defiannce to the world, the devil, and the
flesh; which kind of manners were used sometimes as occasion served by S.
Augustine in his meditations, and soliloquiums; and S. Bernard also in his
meditations, and others. But because there is none so hard hearted, or
insensible, who having used one or more of these manners here set down, will
not be moved, yt shall be needless to enlarg our selves any further in this
matter.

I am not ignorant that the greater part of these places, and sentences of holy
scripture alleged for exaples of the ma^ners above said, may also serve for
jaculatory prayers to renew one self often in the day, as we are counsayled by
the masters of spiritual life, according as one would move himself to this or
that affect in what manner he likes best, and this with no small profit also
toward the help of our best use of meditation.

The practical use of the foresaid manners of Dilating.
BVr notwithstanding all that has been said, I will not omit to set down for
every one of these manners, a practical example over and above the aforesaid,
which are taken out of holy scripture, to the end that the person in his
meditation, may according to these use to amplify his affects, and know how to
co^nect one manner with an other; that thereby he may the more easily entertayn
himself in the exercise of his will as is convenient.

Therefore to continue in the matter which we made choice of before of the most
holy Incarnation, after he has represented unto his will the aforesaid
motives, to raise in yt the desire of lifting up the eyes of his mind often to
God, in imitating of his divine majesty, who from heaven did look down upon
men; he may the^ endeavor to awake in himself this affect; or if yt be already
raised, he may continue and amplyfy yt in the manners which follow.

First by the way of Admiration. And yet art thou stell obdurate o my heart, not
a heart of flesh, but rather as hard as the hardest stoe? And yet art thou not
moved, neither in that God, without having need of thee, does look upon thee
continually, to make thee remember thine own necessityes: nor for that yt is
one of the least things thou can do to behold, and consider often the
goodness and charity of God; nor for that thou art to reap thereby so much
profit, so much honor, and so much pleasure. Nor for that by so doing, thou
shall give so much contentment to his diuiue majesty, and to the Angels, and
saints in heaven, and shall cause so much coffeehouse to Satan thy capital
enemy; nor finally, because in doing this, thou shall become the true disciple
of JESUS CHRIST, which yet thou have so often times des^red? And how is yt
possible, that I have remained even till this time, so remiss and careless in
this act of duty? Nay rather, hou^ is yt possible, that at this instant I yet
remayn so little resolved, that I cannot move my self effectually to perform my
duty therein. Quamdiu ponam consilia in anima mea? How long shall I put
counsels in my soul? How long time will I yet take to deliberate? May yt not
be sufficient to make me to resolve, that I see any little sign of Gods will
and pleasure in this matter? O my God I see well, I am not only not moved at a
beck, as I should be, no neither commandment, nor example does suffice me.
And what shall I say? Marvel at me, o thou earth, for that thou see so much
hardness and obduration, I should say malice of the heart of man. God does
behold me without regard to his own interest, and without any merit on my
part, and I do not lift up my eyes to him, although yt would be an
unspeakable benefit to my soul, and of his part is infinitely deserved: But I
stand deliberating, and debating the matter, whether I should do yt or no.
Marvel at me o ye heavens, for that he that is author of your motions, does
in dyne himself to beho^ld the dirt, and man that is but dirt does not
vouchsafe to lift up his eyes and to raise himself that he may behold his
divine majesty, but stands prolonging the time, and disserreth to do yt
under pretense of searching out, whether he be able to contriue yt, that he may
not seem unconstant. Marvel at me o ve Angels, for that you find more
resista^ce to move a heart of earth, then you do in turning about the
celestial spears. Marvel at me, o my Lord, and God, for that at the least
sign of love which a poor unworthy creature does show me I cannot forbear to
see them, to(...) mercy, Deus meus, misericordia mea, quid retribuam tibi pro
omnibus quae retribuisti mihi? My God my mercy, what shall I render to thee
for all things that thou have rendered to me? And shall not then my heart be
melted as wax before the su^ne?

The fourth is by way of Oblation. Yes Lord, so yt is fit yt should be by any
means, behold therefore here is my heart which is become like melting wax. It
is not as yet fully melted, but yt will meelt by degres in presence of thy
burning beams, and yt will become so soft, that thou may imprint therein
any image whatsoever, or letter, or writing as shall best please thee. If thou
would imprint the image of compunction for that yt has offended thee, and
has been ungrateful to thee, behold yt here made like wax that melts; if
thou will have in yt an image of mortificatio^ or penna^nce to blot out and
satisfi for the faults committed, behold yt here like melted wax. If thou will
have an image of gratitude, and of charity toward thee, for that thou did
scarce expect to here me cry, peccaui, I have siuned, and to see some small
fruits, which might be thought worthy fruit of penna^ce, but transtulisti
peceatu^ meum a me: Thou did tra^sfer my sin from me, as to thy servant
David, behold therefore my heart beco^e as a piece of soft and tender wax. If yt
be thy pleasure to write in yt any necessary aduertiseme^ts, to the end, I may
persevere the better in thy grace and not return unto my former misrable estate,
write yt hardly. Ecie sanus factus est iam noli peccare ne deterius tibi
aliquid co^tingat: Behold thou art made whole, now sin no more, least so^e
worse thing ^appe^ unto thee; for lo my heart is now mollified, and fit to write
in. If yt be thy will to join thy self unto yt and to leave such impression,
that yt be always myndfull to do according to thy divine inspiration, and to
preseuer with more facility, behold yt here in thy hands melted, so fit and
tractable; behold yt wholly thine, behold yt prompt to do whatsoever shall
best please thee, behold, yt can say nothing else but that which yt learneth of
the apostle, Domine quid me vis facere? Lord what will thou have me to do?

The fifth is of Confession; And now o my Lord, if thou say unto me that I have
many times before this made like offers unto thee, and somtymes more full of
affect then now I do, and yet when contrary occasions were offered I went
back, and did the contrary to tha^ promised: I grant in deed, this I have
done, and that most often times, and that my faylings have been much more
frequent then my purposes to do well, and that thy divine majesty has most
just cause to object yt unto me. I confess o Lord, that I am one of those, of
whom thou did heretofore lament by the mouth of the prophet saing: filij
ephraem intendentes and mittentes arcum, conuersi sunt in die belli. The
children of Ephraem, bending and shoting with bow were turned in the day of
battle; for being once truly made by the grace thy elected son, and one that
should have been fruitful unto thee, thy manner being to work increase, and
to abetter still the hearts of those that truly love thee; yet I became like one
of those vain glorious, yet dasterdly souldiars, who before the day of battle
can do nothing but bend their bow, and shoot their arrows, but when they
come to try their valor, are the first that show their heels.

The sixth is by way of Purpose. I confess o my Lord, that all this is to to
true, but I now purpose most firmly in thy divine presence taking for witness
of this my firm resolution all the saints of thy celestial court, who always
do conssantly continue in contemplation of thy beauty, and most worthy
praises, that from this time forward, I will not omit for any cause, at the
least seven times a day, to lift up my mind toward heaven, which I see is
drawn down to the earth by the poise of my corruptible body; I know well that
I offend thy majesty not so little as seven times a day, and for that, I
purpose, by thy grace, at the least so often to honor thee. But yt seems
thou say to me, o Lord, that I will not do yt, and that this is my old
wont, to promise much and performelitle. But, o Lord, what is yt to remember
thee seven times a day? Can I be less mindful of thee then so, that should
remember thee as often as I breath? Certainly, o Lord, I will remember thee.
Reddam tibi vota mea quae distinxerunt labia mea, I will render thee, my vows
which my lips have distinguished.

The seventh is by by way of Taxing. I well fore see o Lord, that the Devil
will not fail to put into my head a thousand impertinent thoughts to make me
easily forget, what I have purposed: I know well there will sometimes fall out
so many occasions of business that either I cannot make good what I have
promised, or not remember yt. I see also, that this new suggested purpose will
appear somewhat hard unto my flesh, but certain yt is, that I am to do yt,
and I may not take yt for a new or slight suggestion, that, which is to turn
to my so great commodity. Wherefore o my Lord, I do here so freely(...) yt is
much better to suffer a little while, the trouble I shall have in the careful
practice of this purpose, then to continue in the former manner without due
memory of thy divine majesty. Better it is to deprive my self of that content,
which I had before, in the false liberty of a carlesse life, then to be
debarred of these true consolations which are to be enjoyed by treating with
thee. Meliora sunt vbera tua vino, says the spouse unto thee in the canticles:
Better are thy breasts, then wine, according to the understanding, which thy
devout Saint Bernard gives of these words, for that the affect of devotion
which is tasted by treating with thee, does truly, and that by many degrees
surpass all the pleasurs and delights which any sensual thing can bring us.
And the same o my Lord, do I now affirm at this present, although I have not
now so much taste thereof, as I should, if it were not for my own fault.
Meliora sunt vbera tua. Better are thy breasts, that is the sweetness which is
tasted in lifting up the mind often to thee: vino, thenwine, which is the
licencing our heart to go wandering where it list, without restrayning it to
return and be mindful of thee. Meliora sunt vbera tua vino. Better are thy
breasts then wine. And if thy holy prophet estteemed more one day of abode in
the courts of thy palace, rather then to stay thousands of years in the most
sumptuous, and commodious lodgings of the world, when he said, Melior est dies
vna in atrijs tuis super millia, better is one day in thy courts above
thousands, wherefore(...) to do that is thus elected by thee, and made thy
friend? Inhabitabit in atrijs tuis, he shall dwell in thy courts, certes to
treat and commune with thee. This is that I desire to make proof of.

The tenth is by way of Nogation. But what is this which I feel in my heart? Yt
seems o Lord, that thou thy self do say unto me, that thou will not admit
this my friendship, because I am as yet full of inperfections, and because I
take delight to converse with men, which be contrary unto thee, and that thou will have only those for friends, who having aba^doned all other things will
cleave to thee alone. Yt is true o my Lord, that in me are to be seen nothing
but defects: it is true that I have not my affections so purged, as were
convenient I should, when I am to treat with thy sacred majesty: but that I
should delight to converse with any that be contrary to thee, pardon me, o
Lord, I trust with thy grace, that shall never be verified in me. Any other
kind of sin might rather be objected unto me I deny it not; but certain it
is. Non sedi cum concilio vanitatis, et cum iniqua gerentibus non introiui. I
have not sit with the counsayl of vanity, and with those that work iniquity I
have not entered: I have not that perfection of life which I ought to have; I
have not that perfect health full estate of my mind, and heart; I have not that
peace of conscience that I desire; all this I grant, o my Lord is most true.
Non est sanitas in carne mea, non est pax ossibus meis; there is no health in
my flesh, my bones have no peace, but yet I must still say, cum iniqua
gerentibus ^onintroui: with those that work iniquity I have not entered. Some
have desired to treat with me, and some vain glorious people have sought my
friendship, some that cannot speak a good word, either of thee or their
neighbor, but I shall make good that which I have said. Non habitabit in medio
domus meae qui facit superbiam, qui loqutur iniqua non direxit in conspectu
oculorum meorum, he that does proudly, has not dwelt in the midst of my house,
he that speaks unjust things has not directed in the sight of my eyes, o my
God, I neither can digest, nor ever will such persons, as call evil good, and
good evil; they shall never find me to take their part, that prefer the bitter
of their own malicious, and heavy heart, before the sweet of thy holy
conversation, and esteem the sweet of Divine consolatio^s like the bitter of
worldly delights.

The eleauenth is by way of Petition, And therefore be thou pleased O my Lord,
to admit me to thy friendship, grant me so much as thou see needful, and
expedient for me, have not respect to my unworthiness, but to the desire I have
to please thee. Thou have given me this desire to treat with thee, thy grace
has moved me to make a firm, and settled purpose, be thou my good Lord, and
confirm me therein, grant me thy grace to put yt in execution.

The twelfth is by way of Obsecration. And if o my God, thou will not grant
yt, in respect of my petition, which is offered in this cold manner, yet bestow
yt upon me, in respect that thy best beloved son does ask yt most fervently
in my behalf. Respice, Respice in faciem Christi tui. Behold, behold the face
of thy Christ. I deserve yt not yt is true, but thy beloved does deserve yt,
they be his merits that I offer unto thee; by these I beseech thee, that thou will voutsafe me this(...) Comfort; And if peradventure he make some stay in
granting thee this grace, be not thou for all that anything desm aid, for such
is his manner of proceeding: so he is accustomed to do, that his favors may
be so much the more esteemed, by how much they are obtained with greater, and
more fervent desires. How long did the prophet expect, when he said, Expectaus,
expectaui Dominum. Expecting, I expectedour Lord, and he concluded the psalm
with. Deus meus ne tardaueris; my God be not slack? how much did Christ
himself expect, who was permitted to make his prayer three times, before the
Angel came to bring him comfort? Do thou therefore take courage in like
manner. Expecta Dominum, et custodi viam eius; Expect our Lord, and keep his
way. But this is one importa^ ^ point, that thou begin to work conformably
unto his holy will, and then thou may securely expect, not only that hewil
grant thee the force to raise thy self unto him, but that he will grant thee
so much favor, that he will come himself unto thee. Therefore si moram fecerit
expecta eum, quia veniens veniet et non tardabit, if he make stay, expect him,
for coming he will come, and will not stay.

The seauentinth is by way of Communication. So will I do o my gracious Lord, I
will expect thee with patience, I will hope thou will come at lenght. I will not
distrust if thou make some stay. dispose of me in the mean time as shall please
thee. But what thing is it then thou requirest I should do for my better
disposition to receive thee, or to make me fit to be raised to heaven, there to
treat with thee? Thy holy Prophet demanded of thee, who should dwell with thee
in thy palace. Domine quis habitabit in tabernaculo tuo? Lord who shall dwell in
thy tabernacle? I do not ask, who shall be worthy to dwell there, but it
suffices me to know at this present who may be admitted for some little time to
repose in the holy mount of Contemplation of thee? Quis requiescet? Quis
repuiescet in monte sancto tuo? who shall rest, who shall rest in thy holy hill?
Go to, I perceive it already, I perceive o my Lord, what thy answer will be. Qui
ingreditur sine macula, et operatur justitiam: he that works with spot, and
works justice. I know it o my Lord, I know it, Innocens manibus, et mundo
cord, the innocent of hands, and of clean heart. This is the thing thou
requirest of me, that my exterior works, which are signified by my hands be
holy, and that my interior thoughts, designed by my heart, be chaste, and pure.
Qui ingreditur sine macula, he that walks without spot* without blemish thou will have me, and without defect, thou requirest that I should be pure both
within, and without. If I will treat with thee.

The eightenth is by way of Praise, or Lauds. And in deed what other condition
could thou require of him whom thou meanest to make thy friend but purity,
thou being purity it self? What other thing coudest thou desire at my hands
thou that art a glass without stain or spot. Candor lucis aeternae, the
brightness of eternal light, a light most shining bright, without mixture of
any darkness, a spirit, and act most pure? well was it said by thy most blessed
son. Beati mundo cord, quoniam ipsi deum videbunt. Blessed are the clean of
heart for they shall see God. For the holy Prophet well knew, what they nature
was, how perfect how far from compositio^ of any matter, be it never so pure
or mixtur of any thing whatsoever. And how much more clear is it the^ the
clearest cristal, how much more shining then the sun it self? and therefore
he required, that he that would behold thee, should with the purity of his
heart, proportion himself the best he could, to that infinite purity, and
brightness he was to veiw; So that I cannot but yield due praises unto thy
majesty, for that thou do require at my hands this purity of works, and
clea^nes of thoughts, if I will raise up my heart to treat with thee.

The nintenth is by way of Benediction. Blessed be thou o my Lord a thousand,
thousand times, blessed be thou o my God, as well for that thou do so much
love purity, and sanctity of life, that thou do only grant thereunto access
unto thy self, as also for that thou do teach me, that I labor to procure
it, if I desire to become thy friend. Benedictus Dominus Deus meus, qui doces
manus meas ad praelium. Blessed my Lord God, who do teach my hands to fight
against the impurity of thoughts, against the vanity of works, against evil
intentions and against imperfect actions Benedictus Dominus Deus meus. Blessed
my Lord, my God.

The twentieth is by way of Reprehension. But thou o my soul what do thou all this while, foolish, and malicious as thou art? how often has this thy
heavenly master taught thee already the same doctrine? and thou by thy sluggish
sloth, as to say more plainly that which is true, by thy most perverse, and
crooked disposition thou would never understand it, or rather, thou would
never attend sufficiently, that thou might conceive it rightly? How
oftentimes has he said unto thee in thy heart, that thou had not so right
intention in thy works as thou should have? Ho^ often has he objected unto
thee the thy thoughts, and desires were not pure and clean? but impure, and
mixed wi^ falsehood, and doublenes? For although thou did affirm that thou
had a desire to attend to Gods service, and treating with his Divine majesty,
and banish from thee al other things the might hinder thee from so doing, the
had notwithstanding other design^ments in thy heart.

The twentieth one is by wa^ of Prosopopeia, or suppositio^ (...) a person
induced to speak. B^ this had been a less euel, if it had h(...)ned only at
such times, as thou had (...) receeued so much light, and so many there
favors from almighty God; but t(...) worst is, that his most wise, and
alse(...)ing eye, discovers plainly even to the hour, that thou art the
same that the were before. Harken, harken what says to thee, at this present
complaining of thee. Thou son of man, or rather thou son of God, for so in
deed I have loved thee like my child, and have cherished thee like my child,
and have conserved thee like a thing of mine, even like the sight of mine eye,
vt quid diligis vanitatem, and quaeris me^dacium? Why do thou love vanity,
and seek a ly? Thou say in deed thou will often treat with me that thou will
have nothing to do, with any but with me, that thou will put al thy delight in
standing in my presence, that thou desire to have me for thy father, thy
mother, thy maester, thy friend, thy beloved, thy meat thy glory, and breefely
al: but for all this I see, that deligis vanitatem, et quaeris mendatium, thou
love vanity and seek a ly. What ^s it else to live to be esteemed good and
^oly, which thou do ioyn with the desire to treat with me, but, diligere
vanitatem to love vanity? what else to have a will that others speak well of thee
and say thou art a saint, but quaerere mendacium, to seek a ly? take away
therefore, cast from thee this iniquity out of thy desires, if thou will that I
accept thee: take unto thee the pure desire of my glory for scope of thy
affections, if thou desire that I assist thee to attayn them.

The to and twentieth is by way of Menacing, or threatening, Did not I tell thee,
o perverse soul, that thou know not how to cast from thee the impurity
which thou have in thy desires, and that thou have always some other designs,
although thou say thou will have no other but according to the will of God? And
when will thou once resolve to do as thou ought? When will thou understand,
and be made thoroughly capable, that God will not admit any company in thy heart
together with himself? Thou must not think, that he is like to Dagon, who
accepted willingly the ark of God to be with him in his temple; no, he is like
to the arc, which could not suffer that Dagon should stand and rest vnmayned
in his presence. he, He alone suffices to fill thy heart, and many thousand
hearts, and to content them fully, why do thou not then as yet understand
this verity, and do not thou remember that God does possess thee only?
Intellige, intellige haee qui obliuisceris deum, nequando rapiat, et non sit
qui eripiat. Understand, understand these things, thou that forgetest God,
least sometime he take thee violently, and there be none to deliver thee.
Certain it is, that if thou do not perform thy duty, he will take thee, and
chastise thee according to thy merits, and then (...) of imperfections. This is
indeed thy manner of proceeding, and the way which thou lightest into ever and a
none, and when thou have done, thou do please thy self, and deceive thy self
therein, as if by a good desire which thou have, together with so many
imperfections, thou were already arrived to the third heaven. Haec via tua
scandalum tibi. This thy way a scandal unto thee. These are thy proofs, and
thy prouesse, and well worthy indeed of a person, that makes show as though thou
were spiritual, and postea in ore tuo complacebis, and afterward in thy mouth
thou will take pleasure, flattering, and praising thy self, as though thou
did walk uprightly, and with great fervor in the way of heaven.

The four and twentieth is by way of Zeal, Be thou therefore now at lenght
ashamed, and have thy self in disdayn, for that living as thou do, thou
dare yet ambitiously pretend the friendship of God. And why art thou silent
then o my God? how can thou endure to see so great bouldnes and arrogance?
Deus quis similis tibi? O God who is like to thee? what man in the world could
endure to see continual iniuryes done to his face, and to see a vile worm
preferred before him, and to see himself scorned, and derided by one that made
show to be his friend, and yet for all this to be patient, and not to speak a
word in his own cause? Deus quis similis tibi? ne taceas, neque compescaris
Deus. O my God, who is like to thee? hold not thy peace, nor be appeased o God.
It is fit, o my Lord, thou give me these chasticements which I deserve: let
this be instead of admitting me to treat with thee, to punish my temerity, and
ouerbouldnes. Ne taceas, neque compescaris Deus, hold not thy peace, nor be
appeased o God. (...) to demand thy aid, and attraxi spiritum, and I drew
breath, and I received forthwith, not only help to be delivered from my sins,
but withal the spirit of devotion, spiritual sweetness, and internal joy.

The seven and twentieth is by way of Solicitation. Come now therefore once
again my Lord, and show the same mercy to me as before. Come, come o my God,
and my mercy, come and make no stay, for woe unto me i^ thou differ to grant
me thy grace. The Devil stands expecting to say vnt^ me, what great matter
hopest thou for, by treating with God, perceauing we^ thou make show to
respect me. I have the flesh also, that is apt to murmr, for that I oblige it
to serve me seven time^ a day in lifting up my mind to thee, perceiving thou
make no show to regard my service, and seem to have forgotten me. There is
the world als^ which offers her present delights, and says unto me, that
from thee o Lord I shall have none, or very slowly afforded. Therefore my good
Lord make the world alyar, grant that my flesh, may not dare to speak any
more in that behalf, and put the devil to silence. Come, come, veni Domine, and
noli tardare. Come o my Lord, and do not stay. Exurge Domine, quare obdormis?
Rise o my Lord, why do thou sleep? no, no, I beseech thee o Lord, it is not
now time to sleep. Exurge and ne repellas in finem. Arise and do not repel me
for ever.

The twe^tith eaight is by way of Quarrel, or Complaint. And yet will thou stay
o my God, will thou yet make me expect thee, having showed thy self ready to
help me at other times? Give me leave I beseech thee to speak somewhat freely to
thee. Quare faciem tua^ auertis, why do thou turn (...) sired. O most
beloved veni cito: O veni cito most joyful, most joyful, and divine: O what
thanks shall I render thee, o my gracious Lord, for so great and prompt
benignity? what words may suffice to show the mind, and desire I have to yeald
thee due thanks, seeing that indeed I have no power to do it in affect? Accept
therefore o Lord for this time my iteratio^ of that thanks giving which thy best
beloved son did use, when he raised Lazarus from death to life. Pater gratias
ago tibi quoniam audisti me. Father I give thee thanks that thou have heard me.
If thou regardest the sound of these words, and him that pronounces them, they
are not sufficient to yeald thee the thanks which thou deseruest, but if thou
do acknowledge them, and accept them as the words of thy best beloved son
directed unto thee, and united now to that affection with which he then did
utter them, I know they will content thee. Accept them therefore as such o my
God, for as such with the good leave of the same thy divine son I do offerr,
and present them.

The Thirtith is by way of Invitation. And you o blessed Angills, and holy
Saints inhabitants of heaven, will you not aid me to perform worthily this duty
of thanksgiving to your God, and mine, so full of al benignity? our Savior is
well pleased, that I do offer to his ever blessed father that thanksgiving
which he himself did offer, whilst he lived here amongst us. Be you therefore
pleased to join with me, and assist me to pay this duty, which I desire to
perform unto my God. Do you also thank him for me, with that affection which
you know well how to use, for the greater honor of his divine majesty, and of
his infinite greatness. (...) ry to proceed by the order of the alphabet, as
these manners of delating were first set down, nor yet with the order observed
in this parctical use, but the person may choose, and use now this, now that,
according as it shall seem most commodious unto him: Yea and he may in the self
same manner of dilating of any one affection, use often any one of the manners
alleged. As in the use of that which is now proposed, after the foresaid
manner, concluding the exercise with the last colloquium directed to God the
father, according as shall now be set down, he may resume again the precedent
manners of dilating by way of Rendering thanks, of oblation, of Purpose, of
simple petition, and of Obsecration, speaking these, or more affectuous words.
Behold o most benign father, most merciful, and loving, and most liberal, thou
that art al charity, even charity it self, behold how al thy dear and beloved
courtiers do give thee thanks for me. Behold how thy best beloved son, it
well pleased that I offer his own words of thanksgiving for the light it has
pleased thee to give me of knowing the necessity I have to list up my mind
often unto thee, and for the desire thou have kindled in my heart, of
performming it at least seven times a day, and for the hope which thy goodness
has granted me to perform it, notwithstanding the contradiction of my flesh,
and the importune troubles, and temptations of the devil, and for the facility
which in thy mercy thou show to admit me to thy presence, as often as I will
come. Accept therefore, o Lord, al these thanks which I offer unto thee, and
together (...) Lord, my mercy, who live, and reignest for ever. Pater noster.

Lastly it is good to know that in this manner he is to proceed, when he will
meditate by way of affects (as some do use to call it, though improperly) or
when he does meditat as some others do say by way of Love, or by way of Fear,
or of Presuming, or of Hope, or of Compassion, or of Inuitatio^, or of
Compunction, or in any other manner; for in fine it is no other but to propose
unto himself for the end of his discourse (be it as long, or as short as it
will) or at least for the e^d of his apprehension (if he desire not to
discourse, but only to apprehend the matter) the raising, and dilatation of the
affect of love, or of fear etc. the which he may with great facility perform,
by these thirty ways of dilating, which I have here set down for the commodity
of him that will use them.

It is also to be noted, in this matter of moving, and dilating the affects
that it does greatly help, to introduce in any of the for said manners, the
words or sentences which in reading one shall find in holy Scripture and in the
books of Saints, such especially as are full of affects, (to which end I have
put in each one of the forsaid ma^ners, some passages of the holy Scripture for
an example, acco^modating it to the matter as I might, when I could not apply it
so properly as I would) especially if he feel devotion in any particular word,
he may then repeat the same again and again, as S. Augustine used to do,
saing. Sero te amaui pulchritudo tam antiqua et noua, sero te amaui, I have
loved thee to late, obeauty both ancient, and new, I have loved thee to late.
And as David, when he iterated those words twice over. Paratum cor meum Deus,
paratum cor meum, my heart is ready o God, my heart is ready. And at other times,
when he did solicit almighty God, or felt any extraordinary affect, as may be
seen in sundry of the examples before alleged. And this may also be done
when the person either by the instinct of the holy Ghost, or of himself shall
have spoken any thing which contains some like affect to those which he has
found in the writings of Saints.

The moderation to be used in the forsaid exercise of the powers.
IT must be here carefully observed that in exercising the affections, in
descoursing, using the memory, and imagination, finally in all the actions of
fruitful meditation, it is needful that the person have care that he hurt not
his breast, nor head by using to much violence: for besides the corporal hurt,
there follow after many spiritual damages, as a certain languor, and remisnes
in meditation for fear of hurting himself a new, acertain coldness, and
inefficacy of the affections, little disposition to receive the seeds of divine
inspirations, and influences, leaving of easily the (...) heart, and of his
spiritual necessityes by the means of examen of conscience, and by reason of
spiritual books, be hearing of sermons, and exhortations, has learned after
some sort how to talk with God almighty, how his divine majesty, is ready to
succor men's necessities, and how he himself does incite them to demand grace
of him: so that it does not seem there can be found a case in which the
person, coming to his meditation, as has been said, shall not perform it as
he ought to do.

True it is that in discoursing with some person of respect, and in public,
the sensible object there present, helps not a little, that the discourse may
prove good, which it seems cannot happen so well to us in meditation, where the
person of God, or of any other, with whom man speaks is not represented as an
object truly sensible, but only imagined or conceived by faith: yet
nevertheless, it is also true, that if some diligence be used in such
imagination or conceit, it does ordinarily remain so fixed, that sometimes it
wants lide of the presence, and vision of the sensible object, especially
seeing that this object sometimes, either by it self, or for the connection with
some other thing, yields easily occasion of distraction, which the person of
God well conceived in the imagination, ordinarily does not, but rather with a
certain reverence, and holy horror, causes also true, and respective(...)
answerable to the matter of his meditation etc.

Notwithstanding all this, toward the end of his meditation he must make a new,
either one, or more colloquiums, according as his present devotion shall move,
and direct him, and those he shall conclude with some vocal prayer which maks to
the same purpose, as the Pater noster, when he speaks to God the father, or
Anima Christi, when his speech has been to God the son, or veni creator when
he has treated with God the holy Ghost, or Aue Maria when the Colloquium has
been to the B. Virgin, or the psalm Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domin^,
when his last speech has been made to creatures; or finally the psalm
Benedic anima mea Domin^, when he has discoursed with himself. For withal
these different persons or things the Colloquium may be made, conforming the
same to the matter, and to the affection of him that does meditate.

Yet is it very true, that the last of al, which shall serve for the conclusion
of the meditation, and a respective departure from that great Lord of whom he
has had so easy audience, and so good entertainment ought to be made to the
divine majesty, and concluded with Pater noster, seeing the other Colloquiums,
which are made to Saints, or to creatures either serve to move and dilate the
affects, as has been said, or to obtain some grace by means of their
intercession, whereas the other(...) an inward, and outward reverence to God
almighty, from whose worthy conversation he then departs, yet with a mind to
renew sometimes in the day the memory of that which has passed between him,
and Gods divine majesty, vt reliquiae cogitationum diem festum agant Domino,
that the Relics of those holy thoughts may serve him to remayn as a
continual, and festiual banquet.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE AFTER MEDITATION. Chap. III.
The examination of the manner which has been used in meditation.
THE meditation being ended (either sitting or walking, or in other manner as
he will himself) let the person examine how his meditation passed, and first,
how he prepared himself, how he conceived the presence of God, how he made the
preparatiue prayer, and the Preambles, after what manner he stirred his memory,
his understanding, will, and imagination in the progress of his meditation,
and finally how he made his Colloquiums, so that finding that al has passed
well, he may learn to proceed still after the same manner, yet still indeuouring
to persitt the same more and more as he may. And if ^e find any thing has
succeeded il, let him correct that which is amiss.

Of Distractions.
LEt him examine the Distractions he has had in time of his meditation, and
let him consider, whether they did proceed from his little recollection or from
the slender custody o^ his senses, and of his heart, or from the rising of any
passion, or from the to much liberty he granted to his phantasy to discourse
where it list, either before o^ in the time of meditation i^ self, or else
whether they were caused as thoughts cast in by the Devil, to hinder the
fruits o^ his prayer, or perhaps permitted by God for the chastiseme^^ of some
fault of his, or for an^ admonition that he use to kee^ himself more
recollected, en^ more wary in the course of his life. And this done, let him
make a full purpose to use al diligence that they come not to hinder him an
other time, and let him resolve to take away, as much as he can being assisted
with the grace of God, all the occasions, which any way depend upon himself or
his endeavors.

Then let him examine the remedies he used to put from him such distractions,
which remedies for the most part should be, either to humble himself in the
presence of almighty God: or to reprehend himself for such negligence, or to
ask aid from God against the violence done unto him: or to apply the
distraction it self to his purpose: or which is better to return with renewed,
and greater attention then before unto the matter he had in hand, making use of
that distraction, as a warning sent him, that he was not before sufficiently
atte^tiue, and his thoughts not well, and duly employed about the meditation. Or
else he may renew the presence of God, with greater efficacy and vigor the^
before, or by any other way that the holy Ghost shall direct him, who is the
best master and leader in meditation. And this is understood of the remedys
which are to be used in time of meditation, for before meditation these others
may be used with greater fruit, which I will now se^ down.

The first is to endeavor to stand united with God as much and continually as
he can by means of iaculatory prayers, of which kind many may be taken out of
those places of Scripture, which I have recited before in the manners of
dilating our affects, or otherwise as his devotion shall serve him.

The second not plung himself so far into exterior business which he
undertakes, either by his own free will, and election, or by obedience that he
loose that peace, and tranquillity of mind, which should be ever conserved so
much as may be possible.

The third is, by reading sometimes in the day some spiritual book such as is
devout, and simple, and rather made to nourish the affects of the will, then to
satisfi the curiosity of the understand(...) own goodness to grant him such
recollection, and devotion as he desires.

Of Consolations.
LEt him examine the consolations he has had, seeking out the occasions of
them, and giving God thanks for them.

Now we must know that consolations do consist. First in certain inward
motions, by means whereof man is brought to love no creature, but for the
Creators sake.

Secondly in tears springing from love, or sorrow, or any other occasion
rightly ordained to the honor and glory of God.

Thirdly in the increase of hope, and charity.

Fourthly in all manner of joy which sets the soul on fire in the study of
perfection.

Fifthly in divine illumination, by which we understand, somewhat not known
before, or else we apprehend better, and more clearly, that which we
understand, and know already.

Of Desolations.
LEt him examine the desolations, if he have endured any, and let him search
out the occasions, being sorry for his fault, which happily he might have
committed about them, and let him make a full purpose of amendment.

By the name of desolatio^ are understood. First that which spreads yt self
like a veil before the eyes of our soul, so that it cannot see those things
which appertayn to the glory of God, and our own perfections.

Secondly, that which does trouble us, and move us to the seeking of earthly
and outward things.

Thirdly that which draws us to be distrustful of attayning perfection, of
making well our prayer, of knowing the will of God, of perseuering in the good we
have begun.

Fourthly, that which drives away hope and charity.

Fifthly, that which brings the soul to a certain tepidity, heaviness, and a
spiritual tediousnes etc.

Of Fertility, and Aridity in time of prayer.
LEt him mark, if he have had plenty of discourse, and of matter, or else drynes
in time of his prayer, and let him examine whether that drynes did proceed from
any indisposition of his head; or rather from the little endeavor he used to
prepare himself; or whether from the matter it self which affourded no great
varity of discouse; or whether perhaps from the chastisement of God, sent him
for some secret pride, or to much confidence in himself: or some such other his
defect: or finally from some impediment which the devil did occasion,
permetted by God for his greater (...) dinary favor, and assistannce of God,
or else received by particular gift from his divine goodness: whether they were
well grounded or not so well settled in his mind: whether they were only
speculatiue or also practical etc. And he shall resolve to procure the best he
can of that kind against his future meditatio^s, yealding humble thanks in the
mea^e time for those which it has pleased the goodness of God to bestow upon
him for the present.

By Lights, I do here understand a certain clear knowledge which we may have
of the goodness, providence, mercy, and other perfections of God, and of the
virtues, and perfecttions of the B. Virgin, and of the Saints: or else some
lively apprehensio^s, and knowledge which may be attained of the beauty,
necessity, vtility, delight etc. of virtue both in general, and in particular:
of the vglynes, enormityes, and losses which are in sins, and vices etc. or
finally certain conclusions axions of spiritual life, out of which are usually
drawn, certain points of doctrine very profitable, and helping much to the
obtaining of perfection.

Of Affections.
LEt him examine the affections he has felt, and let him see of what sort they
have been, whether vehement or moderate etc. how long they have endured, how
they have been stirred up, and how continued, (...) as may be to Gods greater
glory.

Of the points worthy to be noted.
LEt him note in a little book the things that have occurred unto him in time
of his meditation, if he judge them worthy, reducing the^ al in as brief manner
as he can, to the three kinds last specified, to wit, Light, Affects, and
Resolutions which are the three fruits that ordinarily should be pretended and
sought for in meditation, as I have before declared. True it is, that if there
should happen any consolation, or desolatio^ extraordinary, or any discourse
that were very ample, and vnwo^ted, which easily could not be reduced to the
three forsaid heads, he may then write down seperately so much thereof as he
shall judge to be extraordinary and unusual.

And it is to be noted, that the writing down of these foresaid points is very
fruitful, either to serve for a Larom to awake, and raise him to yeald due
thanks unto God for favors received: or else for a spurr to set him forward in
the amendment of his life, and in walking the ways of perfection, or else, that
he may the better hereby yeald account to his spiritual father to secure
himself the more from illusio^s: or else to serve himself in time of dearth, of
such provision: or finally for any other good end, accustomed by persons very
spiritual, and well grounded in virtue.

The Manner of nothing the fruits.
THe manner of noting these fruits may be like to these which follow, in which
I will breefly set down some fruits of the meditation which I have set down for
an example in this treatise, upon the Incarnotion of our Savior Christ, and
conform unto the first manner of dilating which I set down in the beginning.

First, I have known that God out of his meare charity, did vouchsafe to fix
his merciful eyes upon manking.

Secondly, I did well understand, that it is fit for me to lift up the eyes of
my soul to God with the acts of love and prayer, yea although I had not that
need of him that I have.

Thirdly, I did penetrate, that a man ought not to esteem any thing to be
either so nessary, profitable, delightful, or honorable unto him, as to lift
up his eyes often unto God.

Fourthly, I did feel the affect of horror, and anger against my own folly,
and malice, that in time past I have not used to lift up my mind often unto God.

Fifthly, I had a great desire, and much lively hope to do it for the time to
come, with fervor and diligence notwithstanding any contradiction to the
contrary whatsoever.

Sixthly, I did fully resolve to beginn and continue the custom of lifting up
my mind to God at least seaue^ times a day.

Seave^thly, I did set down a firm purpose to do it, when I awake in the
morning, when I begenn the first action after I am up, when I go to dinner,
and when I rise from dinner, so also before, and after supper, and when I go
to bed.

Eighthly, I have resolved to examine my self carfully about this matter every
night, and finding my self faulty to do penance for it.

Ninthly, I have found extraordinary consolation in offering my self to God as
a piece of soft wax, and entreating him, that he would be pleased to look
upon the face of his beloved son, who offered up his acts of merit for my
miserable soul etc.

The fruits being noted in this manner, he shall a new yeald thanks to the
goodness of God for all his good success, and let him procure to live in such
manner, as he has been taught by the divine wisdom, unto the which be al
praise, and glory for all eternity.

Amen.
THE PRACTICE OE APPLYING THE FIVE SENSES TO THE misteryes of Christ our Lord
and others.
THE PROME.
FOR that al persons either cannot or else know not how to attend to the
consideration of the misteryes of our Lord, and the Saints by way of
meditation: and yet besides the great, profit, which may be reaped by it, it is
a thing very delightful, and convenient to lay before the eyes of our soul, as
often as we can, the admirable things of those personages, whom we must have for
guids and masters in our spiritual affayrs: And for that also those who know
how to meditate, being sometimes wearyed out, cannot though it grieve them much,
do it with such facility as they would: It has seemed good unto me after the
practice of meditation, to adioyn unto it, the manner of fruitful application
of the five senses unto the same misteryes by the operation of the phantasy,
seeing so far distant both from the time and place wherein they were wrought,
cannot properly, and immediately apply our senses unto them. And I am more
easily induced to do this, for that this exercise is fit for all kind of
persons, who have not their imagination either wheake, or hindered, and for
that it requires not so much labor, wherefor as well these first sort of persons
as the second may easily make use of it. I add morouer, that it has been a
thing very usual to the saints to exercise themselves in the mysteries of our
Lord after this manner, as may be seen in their meditations, wherein sometimes
they seem to behold our Lord, the B. Virgin, the Angels, and other personages;
sometimes they seem to hear them speak; othertimes to fall down at their feet
embracing, and kissing them; now to smell the stench of the stable, of Judas
foul feet, of the Mount Caluary; then to taste the gaul, alloes, and vinegar
with Christ in his passion; and sometimes also the miraculous wine of Cana (...)

WHAT IS TO BE DONE BEFORE THE APPLICATION OF SENSES. CHAP. I.
Preparations.
BEsides the things set down in that first practice, which are also after their
manner proper to this second, it is good, that those persons who know how, and
can exercise themselves in the misteryes of ou^ Lord, by way of meditation, to
have first with some diligenc^ employed the three powers o^ the soul, to wit,
the memory understanding and will in the same mystery, to which he would now
apply his senses and that he have so meditated thereon, that they be suerly
possessed of all the persons Which are contained therein, in all the words they
speak or might speak, according to the decorum of the matter, and all the
works they did, or might do agreeable to the occurrance. But for those that
cannot, or else know not how to meditate, it shall be well done, either to read,
or else to hear atte^tiuely once, or oftener the relation of that mystery,
observing the number, and quality of the persons, words, and works, which are
contained therein, that so their mind may be fully possessed of them al as has
already been said.

Secondly he that would make this application of senses, must so recollect
himself at least for the space of a quarter of an hour before he begin, that
his senses be not distracted, nor busied as little as is possible in any other
objects, that so he may be more ready to employ them in the mystery which
shall be first proposed unto them.

Thirdly, in the same time also let him endeavor to stir up in the mind some
affections agreeable unto that mystery, either of desire, or love, or joy, or
grief, or others, considering also whether he intends to go, what to do, and
with whom he means to speak etc.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE IN THE TIME OF APPLYICATION OF SENSES. CHAP. II.
The Presence of God, Praeparatory prayer and Praludiums.
HE shall do al those things which have been said in the practice of
meditation, before he consider the points, as well in making his appearance
before God with humility and reverence, as also in making his preparatiue
prayer, and his three accustomed preambles: But if he make the application of
senses upon two or more misteryes at once, (...) agin the eternal father, who
with much attention, and with a countenance full of compassion beholds from
heaven, mankind going hedlong into hell, which when he has seen with his
imagination, let him frame with his understanding this discourse.

It is not usual to behold so firmly any thing, unless it be either pleasant,
or much esteemed of the behoulders, neither does any use to show compassion if
he have not a very charitable, and flexible heart; seeing therefore that God
behoulds men with such attention, and with so merciful a countenance, it is a
sign he loves them, that he takes pleasure in them, and that their miseryes
touch him near in his compassion. Which short discourse being made, let him
join to it his will by the way of Admiration. What do I therefore that I
settle not my mind to behold almighty God? that I love him not? that I take not
pleasure in his infinite goodness? Is it possible, that if he move himself to
compassion at the misery wherein I now find my self through my sins committed,
that I am not moved at the same misery of mine, and that I procure not to raise
my self out of this so great a misery by pennaunce and love of him, who takes
so great care of me most miserable creature?

Then let him enlarg his affection by way of good purposes and resolution. No
no it shall not be so hereafter, for that hence forth, I will most seriously
employ al my study in loving so benign a Lord, and in flying far from the
occasions of such misery, and not to turn the compassionate sight of God quite
away from me, but that hereafter he may behold me for some other motive.

When he shall have done thus about one thing that he has seen, let him pass
on to see or hear, smell, taste or touch an other; and let him in like manner
make thereon some brief discourse, and move his affection, according to the
manners set down in the first practice, and as he has seen in the example
here set down; and so from hand to hand, he shall pass over al those things,
which are contained under the objects of the senses, making thereon his
reflection at the end, as it has been said, that this exercise be not only a
delightful entertaynment, but withal a fruitful operation.

Neither is it needful in this sort of exercise to trouble ones self in
searching out many reasons, or to resent sundry motives to the will to awake the
affections, because for the most part the only representation of the objects,
unto which the senses shall be applied, with the only help of such a small
discourse as was now set down for an example, will be sufficient to move it,
especially when upon the same matter there has been used before some
meditation by way of discourse, for then the will is easily moved, by
remembrance of those motives, which the understanding before proposed unto it.

But if for all this the will should resist, and appear hard to be moved, then
shall it do well to propound unto it some of the motives specified in the first
practice of meditation. But yet it must so be done, that we be(...) if they be
found in one thing etc.

Fourthly about the motion; whether the tastes pastefr om one part of the
pallat to the other; or whether they remain firmly etc.

Fifthly the diversity whether in all the meats, and drinks, there be the same
taste or no; now one, now an other etc.

Of Smelling.
THe sense of Smelling does exercise it self about the odours, distinguishing
whether they be good, or bad; sweet or not; gross, subtle, or of a mild
temper; if one or many; if a far of, or near hand, natural or artificial; if
they increase, or diminish etc.

Of Touching.
THe sense of Touching does feel bodies, attending in them first their
qualityes, whether they be hot or cold; dry or moist; soft or hard, whether
clammy and easy to stick; or flue^t, and slippery; rouh or smoth, liquid or
solid, like or unlike etc.

Secondly the weight, whether heavy or light etc.

Thirdly the figure whether oual orpiramical, circular or quadrangle; if plain,
bent or hollow, straight or crooked etc.

Fourthly the quantity, whether great or little, gross or slender, larg or
straight, long or short, equal or unequal.

Fifthly the number, whether 2. 3. etc. if equal or unequal.

Sixthly the motion, whether straight or crooked; slow or quick upward or
downward.

Seauenthly the rest and quiet; whether of all the body, or of one part only; if
continued, or interrupted. etc.

Eighthly the distance; whether much or little; if it increase, or diminish.

Ninthly the position, whether standing, or sitting, or inclyning etc. if
natural, or artificial, commodious, or inconvenient.

Objects metaphorical and spiritual.
THese be the things which ordinaryly the senses do observe in their material
objects; but for that sometimes it hapens that in the mystery we have prepared
are not such like objects, answerable to all the senses, especially to the
smell, and taste, he who will use this exercise, may imagine metaphorically, by
a certain proportion, to see, hear smell, taste, and touch spiritual things in
the same manner, as corporal and sensible are seen, heard, smelt, tasted, and
touched. The example may be, applying the senses to the speech, which Christ
made to his Apostles, and the multitude, where he expounds the beatitudes. Let
him imagine to see the words of Christ coming out of his Divine mouth, like a
beam of light, which go with adirect motion, yet often dubled to the ears,
and hearts of the hearers; Let him imagine to hear that spiritual sound, which
arriving at the hearts of the audience, move them, and finding any one hardened
against it, does mollify, and break it in sunder; To smell the sweetness(...)
but young beginners. It is good also to imagine, not only to see hear, smell
touch, and taste those things, which are clearly, and expressly set down in the
mystery; but also as it was said in the practice of meditation, to imagine
other things, which might occur in those persons, words and works, whereof
there i^ made mention in the history yet still observing the needeful decorum in all things.

The last Colloquiums.
THis exercise of application of the senses being ended let him make one or
more colloquiums, according to the affect he then feels, after the manner as
is usual at the end o^ meditation. And it shall help him notably to make them
well, and with feeling, if he maintayn as it were alive some one of those
imaginations, in which he found more consolation, when he applied the senses.
As for example; having lively imagined to see that so humble, and submisse
positio^ of our Lord JESUS when he prayed in the garden to his eternal father,
to hear that voice so free, and risigned into the hands of his father, even in
the apprehensio^ of those extreme pains, when he said: Not my will, but thy
will be done, to taste the swetnes, to smell the fragrant odor, to touch the
heat of that divine blood, which fell in that sweat, from his most precious
body, or some such like thing; if he then turn to the same loving JESUS, with
the lively apprehension of some of these things yealding him most humble
thanks for that which he suffered, offering him to undergo whatsoever for
him, and asking force to perform it with constancy, and perseverance in every
occasion.

WHAT IS TO BE DONE AFTER THE APPLICATION OF SENSES. CHAP. III.
FIrst al those things which are set down to be done after meditation are also
to be done here, as much as they agree to this exercise.

Secondly in particular, h^ shall examine, how his imaginations have succeeded,
whether they have been easi, or hard whether wrong or doubtful, or just and
clear; if violent and hurtful to the head, or else sweet, or delightful;
observing how he may behave himself hereafter, to avoid the hurting of his
health, least he be forced thereby to leave of so noble an exercise: And finding
that it has proved well, let him make a purpose to continue it, to the greater
glory of God, to whom be given al praises, and benediction, now and ever.

Amen.
MATTER OF MEDITAtion for every day of the week.
SUNDAY.
HAVING set down the precepts of meditating well, and applying of the senses, I
will now add matter for seven meditations of this latter kind, answering to the
seven days of the week, that so after the example of these, the person may
from hand to hand frame the other that he will make, without any great trouble.
These shall be upon seven viages which our Lord, and savior made for our sakes
in the time of his paynful passion, and they may serve either for our ordinary
meditation, or else for an holy intertaynment of each day, supposing we make our
meditation of some other matter: or else to serve for a short view, after on
has ended his divine office, or the hours of our Lady, applying unto every
hour one voyage: or else to have matter to think on, for seven several times
in a day; or to intertayn himself fruitfully in visiting the seven Churches,
applying one voyage to each of the said Churches.

The first voyage. From the place of his last supper unto the garden.
1 Having ended supper, washed the Apostles feet, instituted the most B.
Sacrament, and distributed the same to al his Desciples, having discovered,
that one there present should betray him, and finally having given praise, and
thanks to his eternal father, our B. Savior Christ Jesus departed with his
Apostles from the place of supper.

Secondly, by the way he comforted the Apostles much afflicted at the warning
of the treason; of their scandel, and the bitter passion of their master; he
caused eight of his Apostles to remain in some one part of the garden of
Githsemani; he discovered to the other three the heaviness and fear, which so
much afflicted him; and lastly he left also those three in a nearer part of the
garden.

Thirdly he withdrew himself from those three the space of a stones cast: he
fell prostrate upon the ground; prayed thrice to his eternal father; was
comforted by an Angel; he swet blood; he returned often to his Desciples, being
then a sleep; he offered himself of his own accord to the traitor Judas, and
to those wicked ministers, who were come to apprehend him.

The form of gathering the persons, words and works, for the points of
meditation.
IN the first point, there are the persons of Jesus, of the twelve Apostles, of
the master of the house, of his servants, of the eternal father, of the holy
Angels, of the Devil.(...) sire.

The eternal father inuites the Angels to behold that which passes in the
parler; he praises the obedience of his son; he laments at the hard heart and
malice of Judas.

The Angels speak with admiration, to see their Lord come to such a point, as
to be betrayed; they desire the eternal father to hinder that foul treason,
and offer themselves ready to divert it.

The devil speaks with extreme anger against Jesus; he stirs up Judas to
betray him in any case; he urges instantly, and makes fair weather that he
be not moved, neither with admonitions nor with humiliatio^s, nor yet with
benefits. etc.

These he the works which are wrought.
Jesus enters into the dining room; he comes to the table; he eats the
Paschal Lamb; he stands on foot with his loins girt; he eats the lettice
ordained by the law, he puts of his upper garment; he takes the towel, and the
vessel of water; he washes the feet of all the Apostles, he returns to the
table; he instituts the blessed Sacrament; gives it to the Aqosteles; he is
troubled at the treason; he gives the sop to Judas; he rises from the table,
takes leave of the goodman of the house; and departs from the parlour.

The Apostles make ready supper, they eat with Jesus;(...) cheth it to the
Apostles; with exultation of spirit, and body he rises from the table; gives
thanks to his eternal father; he takes leave of the goodman of the house, and
departs.

Let him behold the Apostles, who also humbly salute the master of the house;
they modestly wash their hands, and decently com to the table; they eat hastily
the paschal; they have their countenance altered in the prediction of the
treason; they musse that Jesus girds on the towel, that he takes the water,
that he washes their feet; they are ready to make resistannce to the washing
of them; S. Peter resists; they are atte^tiue to the exhortation which our Lord
did make unto them; they lift up their eyes to heaven with him they receive
with devotion the B. Sacrament, with affections they give thanks unto our
Lord; S. John with confidence and devotion reposes his head in our Saviors
bosom; Judas distempered with rage against our Lord, as it were steals away
secretly; the other Apostles wondering at his departure; they reuere^tly take
leave of the master of the house and with fear, and heaviness depart.

He shall behold the good man of the house, who uses al curtesi possible in
entertayning our Lord, and accompaning him at his departure.

He may consider the servants ready to do what is to be done, sollicitous to
do that which they are permitted, sad in countenance that they are sent away.

He shall see the eternal father who with much attention, and satisfaction,
behoulds from heaven, that which passes in the parlor; he makes show to the
Angels of rejoicing to see his son at Judas feet.

He may see the Angles go presently whether God appoynts them; they are
astonished at that they see; they behold one an other through admiration; they
are ready to descend to do that which they see their Lord doing; they show
themselves moved at Judas proceedings, some of them also attend at the table.

He shall behold the Devil, how he drives on Judas; how he shows himself
joyful at the perturbation of the Apostles, and at Judas obstinacy; that he is
afraid least Judas should cese from his treason.

His ears shall hear the sweet words of our Savior, the courteous manner with
which he salutes the master of the house, and accepts his courtesy; the
affectuous, and pious manner he uses in blessing the meat; the compassionat
prediction of his betraying; the affectual reprehension of S. Peter, his grave
speech in recommending the example of his humility, the de^out and liberal
oblatio^ he makes of his most precious body and blood, the loving and tender
recommending the memory of his sacred passion; the affectuous thanksgiving and
courteous demeanor he uses with the master of the house

He may also hear the submissiue (...) food of the most sacred body, and blood
of Christ our Lord; the gust of our Saviors soul, whilst he gives himself for
our meat, repast and drink; his joy whilst he washes the feet of al, but in
particular the feet of Judas; the Apostles devotion, whilst they communicate,
and the grief they have at the treason.

He shall smell the sweet odurs, placed by the goodman in the dyning room, the
savor of the meat; the il sent of the feet of the Apostles fouled with dyrt,
but especially the filthy feet of Judas, the foulnes of the water where with
they were washed; the il savor, foul smell of the whole person of Judas; the
good odor of the courtesi of the goodman of the house; as also of the charity,
and humility of our Savior; of his most sacred body and blood, of the de^otion
of the Apostles; of S. pe^ers remitting himself unto the will of our Savior,
the il smell of Judas sins, in particulare of ^is coueteousnes, and obstinacy.

With the sense of touching he ^hal help to prepare the supper and shall wait at
the table; he shall ^ouch that couldnes of the A^ostles feet, who are sad, and
a^onished at the news of the reason; he shall kiss the feet of ^is beloved
Jesus, and embrace ^^hem, he shall wash them with ^ares, and dry them; he shall
help (...) wash, to dry, and kiss the feet ^f the Apostles, and of Judas al^,
he shall touch the roughnes of (...)das feet, the heat of those co(...)teous
desires inkindled in his (...) them al down backward, upon the ground; letting
Judas approach, and receiving his kiss, and having advised him of his error,
he permitted himself to be apprehended, and bound like a thief.

2 Bound and enchained, he was abandoned of al his disciples, he received many
blows, sporns, and buffets; he was with violence drawn by uneven, and
troublesome ways; he was in likelihood often thrown on the ground, and trayled
thereon: he was in a manner continually deridded of the officers, and others,
who either by chance passed those ways, or else came of purpose out of their
houses, hearing the noise made in the street* he was led to Annas house the
fatherinlaw to Caiphas, where by him he was expected, with others his equals
in malice and hatred to thy afflicted Lord.

3 Jesus being arrived at the house of Annas, wholly wearyed, and misused, was
derided by him and others there present: they rejoiced that he was fallen into
their hands; the souldiars, and ministers vaunted of their valor in
apprehending him, they vpbraided his power, miracles, and the like etc.

TVESDAY.
The third voyage from Annas to Caiphas.
1 THy Lord Jesus, being thus il, and scornfully handled, was bound a new, and
that more straight, hastily, and after a cruel manner, was with (...) rumore of
Jesus his apprehension spread far abroad, and therefore he was accompaned of
many in this his voyage, not for compassion of thy afflicted Lord, but most of
them with their opprobrious mocks increasing his affliction in this also was he
misused eue^ as in his other voiages, and peradventure worse, to the excessive
grief of his most grieved mother, who peradventure might meet her beloved
son in this his so doleful journey.

3 He was courteously received of Herod, with no small disgust of those who led
him thither, he was there with great instance demanded of many matters, and in
particular to work some miracle; but he condemning with his silence Herod's
curiosity, and being vehemently accused of the chief priests, and scribes, was
despised of the King, and his Court and esteemed for a fool, was
contemptuously clothed in a white garment.

FRIDAY.
The sixth voyage, from Herod to Pilat.
I PIlate and Herod, being become friends, who were before enemies, Jesus was
sent back again to the President in that white vesture, and was therefore with
more liberty outragiously abused by the way, both of the officers, and others,
and what through feebleness being not able to sustayn himself, as also through
the fiercnes of his enemies was often trayled on the ground, as we may piously
and with reason suppose. (...) a new, and more outragiously dealt withal then
ever before; he was led to Mount Caluary with great joy and exultation of the
wicked, and no less sorrow of the just, and good persons, especially of his
distressed mother, and of his afflicted devoted friends; he fell oftentimes
under that heavy burden, but was at last assisted by Simon Cireneus in the
carriage of his Cross,

3 Arrived at Mount Caluary he was entertained with wine mixed with Mirh; he
was stripped naked, and nailed to the Cross, with much stretching of his
arms, and legs, to fit them to the holes already made in the Cross, and so
nailed, was raised up in the midst of two thieves; whilst he lived on the
Cross he prayed to his eternal father for himself, and his Crucifiers* he
commended his B. Mother to S. John, and him also to his mother; he promised
paradise to the good thief; he showed that he endured great thirst, that the
prophecies were fulfilled; he recommended his spirit to his father, and crying
with a loud voice yielded up the ghost. After his death his blessed side was
opened with a spear; he was acknowledged for God by many, and declared for no
less of the insensible creatures in the best manner they were able.

FINIS.
Praises be to God, to the B. Virgin and to al Saints.
A TABLE OF THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS CONTAINED In this book.
CHAPTER I.
REmote Preparations. page 1. The nearer Preparations. page 2. Immediate
Preparations. page 7.
CHAPTER. II.
THe manner of presenting our selves in the presence of Almighty God. page 9.
Five ways how to frame the presence of God. page 11. Observations for the
better conceyuing the presence of God. page 14. Acts to be produced after this
of the presence of God. page 17. Preparatory prayer. page 21. The first
preamble. p. 22. (...) said exercise of the powers. p. 271. The last
Colloquiums, or speeches of meditation. page 278.
CHAPTER. III.
THe examination of the manner which has been used in meditation. page 284.
Of Distractions. page 286. Of Consolations. page 292. Of Desolations. page 293.
Of fertility, and Aridity in time of prayer. page 295. Of the lights. page 297.
Of Affections. page 299. Of Purposes, and Resolutions. p. 300. Of the points
worthy to be noted. page 302. The manner of noting the fruits p. 304.
THE PRACTICE OF Aplying the five senses.
CHAPTER. I.
Preparations. page 312.
CHAPTER. II.
THe presence of God, preparatory prayer and praeludiums. p. 315. The exercise
of the senses. p. 316. The manner of exercising these senses. page 317. The
object of the senses. And first of the sight. page 322. Of the hearing. page
325. Of the taste. page 327. Of Smelling. page 328. Of Touching. page 328.
Objects metaphorical and spiritual. page 330. Things to be observed in this
aforesaid exercise. page 332. The last Colloquiums. page 334.
CHAP. III.
WHat is to be done after the applycation of senses. page 336.
MAtter of meditation for every day of the week. page 338. The first voyage,
from the place of his last supper unto the garden. p. 339. The form of
gathering the persons, words and works, for the points of meditation. page
341. These be the works which are wrought. page 345. The form of drawing
matter for applycation of senses. page 348, The second voyage, from the garden
to the house of Anna. p. 359. The third voyage, from Annas to Caiphas. page
361. The fourth voyage, from Caiphas to Pilate. page 363. The fifth voyage from
pilate to Herod. page 365. The sixth voyage, from Herod to Pilate. page 367. The
seventh voyage, from the palace to mount Caluary. page 369.
FINIS.

