THE GLORY OF THE GODLY GRAIN: A most comfortable sermon preached before the
Honorable assembly in Paul's Church on Whitsunday 1605, on 1. Cor. 15. 42. 43,
not published before this month of August 1607. Wherein is proved the
Identitie of our bodies in the resurrection: the miseries in life, and glory
after death: By THOMAS BVRT Preacher of the word.

1. Corinthians. 15. ver. 42. The body is sown in corruption, and is raised in
incorruption. 43. It is sown in dishonor, and is raised in glory: It is sown
in weakness, and is raised in power. LONDON. Printed by N. O. for Roger
Iackson, dweling in Fleetstreet near to the Conduit. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR WILLIAM FLEETVVOOD Knight, Receiver general of
his Ma. Court of Ward and Liueries.
WHiles I was studying (right worshipful) how I should by some means express
some part of my thankfulness for your late favor and bountifulnes, J was
importuned, by such as might command me, to make this Sermon common to all,
which J am informed has been comfortable to some. J thought it my duty to
offer the dedication hereof to your Worcester: who well know, that a willing mind is
to be accepted according to that a man has, not according to that a man has
not. 2 Cor. 8. verse. 12.

And thus praying for the happiness of you and yours in all hu^blenes I take my
leave.

London this 1. of Aug. 1607 Ever at your worships command, THOMAS BVRT.

A most comfortable Sermon preached before the Honou rabble assembly in Paul's
Church, on Whitsonday 1605. on 1. Corin. 15. verse. 42. 43. not published before
this month of Aug. 1607.
1 Cor. 15. 42. The body is sown in corruption and is raised in incorruption.




WHereas the blessed Apostle in this Chapter disputes two questions: First
whether there be any resurrection of the dead: Secondly, in what manner it
shall be; I have chosen the second rather then the first: because the second
does contain the first; For being come to Qualis sit, We need not to enquire
An sit mortuoru^ resurrectio. Albeit in the former the matter is by grave and
weighty reasons taught us to be known, yet in the latter it is by visible
examples set before us to be seen. Whereas we have not only the oracles of God
to confirm our faith, but also the miracles of nature to persuade our reason,
so that whatsoever faith does apprehend in the truth of Gods promises, reason
may also acknowledge in the almightines of his power. In the second question,
S. Paul entreating only of the resurrection of the faithful, principally
touches these three things.

First, the Identitie of our bodies, that we shall rise again in them
hereafter, the same in substance as we are now.

Secondly, he declares the qualities and properties from whence and to what we
shall be changed.

Thirdly, by what power and help we do attain the same.

Touching the first, that we shall arise again the same in substance as we are
now. Though nothing can be more hardly persuaded to the wisdom of the flesh,
yet is there nothing more evidently manifested by the wisdom of Gods spirit.
For as the one article does co^taine our whole victory in Christ; and is in
very deed the only supporter of religion, the Archpiller of our faith, the
treasure of the Gospel, and the triumph of the Saints. And therefore of so
great weight and importance, that if it be vain, the whole sum of religion is
all merely vain: So is the assurance thereof so many ways pledged un to us as
there is nothing either within us or without us, either in life or indeath, in
the order of natute or of grace, that does not illustrate the same. To set
down a proof whereof, the Apostle does in this place to confirm his
assertion, fetch certain examples, as it were lively images out of the
workehouse of nature, as namely of seed or sown corn, that by such things as
are set before our eyes, he might teach us the secret and hidden mysteries of
our faith; And by exhibiting unto us the power of God in the ordinary works of
nature, that he may show forth to us the supernatural works of grace, not to
draw us from faith to ground upon reason but that as a learned father says, Ea
quae in natura sunt aliquam similitudine^ eoru^ quae supra naturam sunt
exprimunt, qua ratione effectum est, vt eorum notitia quae supra sunt, ex hijs
rebus quae natura constant, indagari possit. Such things as are in nature,
express some likeness of those things as are above nature: by which means it
comes to pass, that the knowledge of such things as are above, by those
things as are apparent in nature may be searched out.

Of those foresaid examples of the Apostle, some are elementall, and some are
celestial. The elementall are of two sorts, the one a vegetable body: the
other a sensible body. The vegetable body as of seed or sown come, the
sensible body, as namely of flesh and the variety thereof. In this text we are
to consider three things: first the phrase and manner of speech, by way of
comparison noted in these words, the body is sown: secondly the estate from
which we shall be changed, from corruption, dishonor and weakness: thirdly the
estate unto which our body shall be changed; to incorruption glory and power.
The comparison is between the bodies of the faithful, and the sown corn,
the body is sown. There their bodies are compared to the sown corn.

The example and comparison we shall best understand, if we note first the
congruence, and secondly the difference that this corn or seed has with and
from the bodies of men.

The congruence S. Paul sets down in verse the 36. O fool, that which thou
sowest is not quickened except it die. Out of which words we gather that they
agree in three things: First in sowing: Secondly in dying; and thirdly in
quickening. First the corn is cast into the ground, as into a grave reserved
unto the hope of rising again: even so we are cast into the grave as the corn
into the ground, and are covered with earth as hidden seed reserved to the
power of a new life: In respect whereof Math. 13. verse. 38. the faithful are
called wheat which at harvest shall be brought into the Lords barn. Secondly,
as the corn in the ground there dies, alters, changes and corrupteh, and
rotteth before it recover any spark of life: So our corpse likewise does rot,
change, alter and corrupt in the grave, before it receives any strength to
live again; according to that notable penalty inflicted upon the head of Adam
and his posterity, Genesis 3. ver. 19. Dust thou art and unto dust shall thou
return again. Where we may see that not only death, but the dissolution of
nature is the punishment of a wicked life.

Thirdly, as the corn after this change corrupting and rotting, does at last
become again notwithstanding, the same body as it was at first; So that as
out of the uttermost extremity of the dark night there does appear again a
little glimmering of the bright day; Even so out of rottenness peereth and
peepeth up life, and out of the midst of corruption begins a generation of
new bodies, whereby we see evidently in the lap of nature a plain proof, that
out of death there is a rising again to a new life. And so these our bodies
semblably in the last day, shall arise again the same out of the dust and
shall be drawn up out of the depth of death, unto a life immortal and
everlasting: For if Resurgere be (as Tertullian and S. Augustine do note)
nothing else but Reuiuiscere; And Resurrectio, eius quod cecidit secunda
surrectio; Seeing the bodies we now bear do fale the same bodies in substance
though not the same in quality and estate shall rise again; For the corn was
sown a bare and naked seed, hard and dried, old and withered, with an husk,
as it were an hood on his head, without either strength or beauty, life or
motion: but rises up and springs green out of death, being outwardly decked
with fairness of color, and sweetness of odor, and inwardly adorned with
rare and precious virtues; having received mighty and powerful strength, not
only to grow up great and burnish into a blade; but also to fructify and
multiply it self an hundredth fold, and enrich it self an hundredth ways:
Even so shall we be in the life of the resurrection, both outwardly decked in
body, and inwardly garnished in mind, as here the Apostle does demonstrate, It
is sown in corruption, and is raised in incorruption, It is sown in dishonor,
and is raised in glory, it is sown in weakness, and is raised in power.

But as the corn does thus agree in many points with our bodies: so does it
differ many ways from our bodies.

First, the seed corn comes not to his perfection but by little and little;
But we shall be raised in a moment, even in the twinkling of an eye: for as
the schoolmen say, Virtus infinita operatur in instants, and resurrectio diuina
virtute fiet: An infinite virtue works in an instant, and the resurrection
shall be performed by the divine and infinite power of God.

Moreover the corn does recover life upon none other condition but to die
again; whereas our bodies shall so rise out of death, as that death shall have
no more dominion over them: For this corruptible shall put on incorruption,
verse. 53. Romans 6. 1. Cor. 15 31.


Besides, the corn rises not in the same form that it was sown: for it was
sown a naked corn, but it rises up a green tender grass, and it has power
to multiply, and spread it self into diverse bodies: But our bodies shall
rise after the resurrection, the same that they are now before the
resurrection, both in number, form and order according to the worthy saying
of Ambrose, Gloria non tollit naturam, sed perficit eam: The estate of glory
does not take away nature, but perfecteth the same. Again, the corn does
recover that new life by the mean of a natural power and virtue included in
the seed; but that our bodies cannot revive through any natural power or
strength that does remain in us; but through the supernatural and divine
operation of the spirit of God, which Romans 8. verse. 11. does quicken our
natural bodies, because that his spirit dwells in us.

So that by this phrase of speech, wherein our bodies are compared unto sown
corn, we are sent to the corn of the fields, as we may be to the seeds in
our gardens, to the fruit in our orchards, that we may behold how every thing
is a president to shadow and point out the resurrection unto us. For out of
dead rotten corn comes green tender grass; out of dead rotten seeds
comes sweet smeling herbs; out of dead rotten kernels mighty grown trees;
out of dead rotten stones dainty pleasant peaches, cheries and plums: And even
so out of dead rotten corses proceed likewise ever living bodies. Omnia
pereundo seruantur: Omnia Tertul. in Apolog.
de interitu formantur. All things are preserved by perishing: All things are
formed by destroying. Therefore if vegetable bodies which are of small regard,
do by the strength of nature after death rise again to a new life; how much
more shall the body of man the Lord of all creatures, the image of the
invisible God, endewed with an immortal and eternal soul, by the strength of
the spirit of life be loosed from the bonds of death? And if we see with our
eyes in the corn the distinction, succession and variation of forms; how out
of corn comes earth, out of earth grass, out of grass a blade, out of the
blade a straw, out of the straw an ear, out of the ear blossoms, and out of
the blossoms corn: Are not these as wonderful to reason, as is this point of
faith that we so much wonder at? yet are we ready to ascribe this excellent
order of doing, either to the principles of nature, as if it were to the form
and matter of the corn that wrought it, or else unto secondarie causes, as if
it were the heavens alone that gave it. These things are nothing else but
Instruments in the hand of God to be applied unto the work. But we are to
ascend up higher even to the pleasure of God; and there to acknowledge his
divine geodnesse in the gift, his power in the act, and his wisdom in the
order; and assuredly be persuaded that he is able to draw life out of death,
and at his pleasure to make the living out of the dead, and by consequence as
able to raise them up to life as are fallen into death, and make them to live
again: God can as well make the dead to live, as make the living out of the
dead: For it is all one power and of the like strength: But God does this
every day, as we may see notably exemplified under the broad seal of the
Lady Nature; wherein we find by proof that al things which have life have
their originals out of those things which have no life, and every generation
has his beginning out of the very entrals of putrefaction. So that here we
see the reasons of this comparison in the first principles, between the sown
corn and our buried bodies, with the co^gruence and difference of the same.

But on the other side there are some (and that no small Clerks of our time)
that affirm the Apostle to compare the resurrection unto corn; that like as
the corn does rise again, so our bodies shall rise again: But the corn (say
they) does not rise again, Idem in numero, but Idem in specie: that is, that
the same particular grain that was sown, is not the same grain that is
reaped, but is another grain in number, although the same corn in kind. And
likewise (say they) the same bodies that shall be raised shall not be the same
bodies that are departed, but other bodies in particular, not the same in
number.

Their assertion they prove by natural reason, as the Philosopher does avouch
the same: But I marvel they do not conceive Arist. 2. de generatione.
the difference betwixt the order of generation and of resurrection: The
Philosopher shows how posterity is taken out of seed by the ordinary way of
nature: And the Apostle teaches how bodies are raised out of graves by the
extraordinary power of grace: Now in generation (says the Philosopher) where
corn is raised out of seed, the new corn is not the same in number with the
old: no more then the son raised of the fathers seed is the same person in
number with the father: But in the day of the resurrection, when the body shall
be raised out of the grave, the new body shall not be another but the same in
number with the old, as is manifest in Job 19. ver. 27. Isaiah 26. v. 19. Dan
12. v. 2. And God to make new bodies does not fetch new matter out of the four
Elements; but raises the old former bodies out of the grave. In vain should
S. Paul with trembling fear shake the consciences of men, making both small
and great to appear before the throne of God, if new bodies should be brought
before his tribunal seat: Neither could that persuasion of our Savior, Math.
10. 28. be so forcible to harten us against the fear of men, That can kill the
body, and to draw us to the faere of God, that can Kill both body and soul,
and cast them into hell fire, if it were not so that these present bodies were
made subject to after pains.

Would these men be wiser then the Apostles, more divine then the Phophets,
more profound then the Evangelists, better learned then Christ? Then might we
say (which is extreme blesphemie to say;) O foolish Fathers, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Confessors and Martyrs, which have yielded your bodies to all kind
of torments for the obtaining of the proposed glory, if they shall not rise
again themselves but other men for them. It might pity us that the poor
widow of Sarepta took such great pains and yet was deceived: for she
received not her son again (by these men's learning) but was beguiled with a
changeling; and so be like Christ (I rue to speak it) did but delude Mary to
make her leave her weeping: For she had not her brother Lazarus again, but
another counterfeit in his stead.

What truth (I beseech you) can there be in the whole Scripture, if this
opinion be not false? Is not this all one with the censure of the Saduceis?
They affirm that there is no rising again, and these deny that there is any
rising again of the same bodies: If the same bodies that do fall do not rise,
most undoubtedly there can be no resurrection. The Saduces do deny, and these
do pervert the truth of the resurrection; they misbeleeue it, and these do
corrupt it; they do deprave, and these do delude it. Both agree in this, to
take away the power of the new life; In this they differ, the one does it by
profaneness of infidelity, and the other does it through subtlenesse of
philosophy: and yet this philosophical reason by reason cannot stand.

The diversity of nature is between corn and our bodies, breeding a
diversity of order in the manner of rising again, as hereby is most evident to
be seen: namely in that here it is said that the bodies are raised in
incorruptio^. And it is apparent that all the creatures of God what soever,
they are by the constitution of their natures Incorruptible, either both in the
whole and in the parts (as they say) Et secundum totum, and secundum parts, as
are celestial bodies; or else in the whole only, and not in the parts, of
which sort are all the Elements which are subject to corruption in every part,
And yet no whole Element ever changed: Or else in part only, and not in the
whole, as is man whose soul is immortal, though his body be caducall; Or
else neither in the whole nor in any part as are all terrene and mixed bodies,
which are composed of the four Elements.

Now in this combination of corruption with incorruption, as the first sort,
that is, celestial creatures, have no part of mortality; so the contrary last
sort of creatures have no part of eternity: And therefore as the celestial,
because they are incorruptible both in matter and form; are in no wise subject
unto change and to die; so the terrestiall, because they perish in their
essential matter and form, are no way reducible ever to live again; And this
is the reason why that in the corn and in all those things as are of this
transitory sort, the position of the Philopher is true that they cannot,
Redire eadem in numero, Return the same things in number. But those other
creatures which are incorruptible, either in the whole only as are the
Elements, or in their parts only as are men, are not like to these: for as by
that part which is mortal in them, they are made subject to corruption; so by
that part which is not corruptible in them, they are framed to eternity.

And forasmuch as the essential forms and souls of men are of this sort,
namely eternal, and are such also as the bodies are created for the use of
them; they must either want their chiefest use, (which cannot be) or else must
at length be joined again to their former bodies; which since it must needs
be; when soever these same souls shall receive again these same bodies; there
shall be at last again, Idem numero, the same person in number as was at
first. And thus is this comparison both ways proved between the sown corn
and the bodies of men: And the Identitie of our bodies is manifest, that we
shall arise the same in substance, number and kind that we are now.

But now to the second general. Though we shall arise the same in substance,
number and kind: yet the Apostle avouches that at the resurrection we shall
differ in estate, and be changed into a far more noble and excellent
condition, viz. From corruption, dishonor and weakness; to incorruption,
glory and power. In which change of estate, the Apostle notes two things.
First, the estate from which. Secondly, the estate to which we shall be
changed, viz. From corruption, dishonor and weakness to incorruption, glory
and power. So making three degrees of misery, and three of felicity he does
match each heavenly good with his contrary evil: whereby he does not a little
illustrate the excellency of our happiness: and by laying down the
difference between the estate of our bodies in this life present, and the
estate of them in the life to come. He does glad us with a double joy: By the
one remembering the wretchedness we shall escape: By the other the happiness we
shall obtain: And so provoke us to a double thankfulness in duty.

Now in the three degrees of our unhappy estate, he notes by corruption all
those anonyes that hurl us down into the destruction of the grave, and by
dishonor the want of all those royalties which should garnish us with honor
and renown: And by weakness a fleeting estate, feeble unto goodness, and
ever fading and falling into wretchedness.

But in the three degrees of our blessed estate in the day of the resurrection,
by incorruption, he gives us to understand that we shall then want all those
evils which we now have; and by glory, that we shall then have all those good
things which we now want; and by power that we shall enjoy them in such
exceeding measure, and that they shall be of such incomparable virtue, as that
the good things shall be never diminished, nor the evil things euerrenewed, nor
our selves any way annoyed, altered, or distempered in the state of happiness.

So that to understand these three estates of incorruption, glory, and power,
we must know these two things. First the evils that man is subject unto in this
life's misery. Secondly the good he shall attain unto in that life's felicity.

The miseries that man lies wrapped in may be divided into the miserable
wretchedness of life; and 2. into the woeful cursednes of death; and 3. the
calamities both of life and death. If we will know the wretched calamities of
the body in this life, a certain ancient father shows them briefly in
discribing man's misery. Cuius concptio culpa, nasci poena, labor vita, necesse
mori: whose conception is sin, his birth a punishment, his life a labor, and
of necessity he must die.

See how it comes to pass by Gods just judgment, that as man is conceived and
borne in sin, so is he defiled with uncleanness; and as he is by nature void
of all goodness, so is he naked, feeble, and succourlesse; and as he is
corrupted with wickedness, so is he exposed to all kind of wretchedness; and
as he is falen from the true God, so does he fall in his birth most like unto
an Idol, having feet yet goes not, hands yet handles not, mouth yet tastes
not, he is dombe without speech, infatuate without wit, confused without
memory, having none use of body, nor fruition of mind to help himself
withal: and as Bernard says, he is a man sorowing that he is a man, blushing
because he is naked, grieuing because he is poor, groaning because he is
wretched, weeping and crying out because he is miserable. Neither can this
silly worm any sooner gather strength and be able to abide the battery of
correction. But presetnly he is assailed with rods, chastisments and fears, in
such sort as if he were borne to abide the severity of others, and not to have
the use and fruition of himself. So that to a natural man it may seem good
never to be borne, or as Silenus said soon to die: But when he begins to
step forth into the depth of discretion, and to look about into the world,
streight-waies how dolefullie griefs do assail him, perils besiege him,
terrors affright him, wrongs do oppress him, cares do consume him, and
troubles confound him, and that in such manner as it made the wiseman to cry
out, homo ^mbecillitatis exemplu^ fortunae lusus inconstantiae imago iniuria
and calamita ^ trutina; Man is the example of weakness the play of fortune,
the image of inconstancy and the balla^ce of wrong and calamity. And if his
lot be such as to draw out his days until the last date; yet even then also
comes old age laden with gray hairs, so withered with drines, so crooked
with stifnes, so cripled with pain, and overwhelmed with sickness, stooping
the body double to the ground that it never does respite him free from grief,
until he be tumbled viterly into the grave.

So then man does begin his life with weeping, and end his life with groaning,
his first age is weakness, his last age sickness, his young years oppressed
with fears, his best time consumed with cares: yea if we consider what great
grief and annoya^ce we suffer before our birth, and what defiling and
rottenness we endure after death, we may justly say that every calamity began
long before in the womb and also ends long time after in the grave. So that
alas beloved we were in misery before we were, and shall not cease to be in
misery when we cease to be.

If we should reckon on a row the manifold misfortunes (as some call them) by
wounding, maining, breaking and rotting of members, imprisonment, banishment,
tortures and torment, we may truly affirm with Saint Ambrose, that death
might rather seem to be the remedy of pain then the penalty of sin:
Because those evils which while we live are never finished, are at last by
death utterly extinguished.

But admit there were none of these so great and manifold miseries to fall on
us, yet without them in the midst of our best and greatest prosperity, our
strength is but weakness, our time short, our estate transitory, our life
misery, our selves vanity; Isaiah calls it grass, cap. 40. 6. Ia. 4. 14. a
vapor, Job. 25. 6. misery, David, vanity, Job again corruption. And as David
notes, Psalm. 51 the seed of sin, and brood of iniquity, who as To. 8. 8.
They that are in the flesh cannot please God, whose ways Genesis 6. are corrupted
etc.

So as if we will vouchsafe to look on the Scriptures, they will as in a
glass show us our faulty nature, sinful seed, wretched birth, that we are the
brood of iniquity, servants of finne, subjects of death, corruption for
fouleness, worms for vileness, and flesh for frailnes our thoughts wicked,
our deeds cursed, our hearts crooked, our lives wretched. And so much touching
the calamity of the body.

Now to leave the body, and to show the great infelicitie laid upon the mind,
which is by far more then any miserable body can be able to sustain; what a
bitter gall and grief of mind is this, that once the most glorious image of
God did most chiefly shine forth in it, now all these most noble lineaments are
utterly razed out of it? Is not this a most lamentable saying? though I be now
a caytiefe wretch, yet once I was a most flourishing man; now like a devil,
once like a God? For if the loss of name, riches honor, empire, government,
and authority be so grievous, and so full of sorrows and woes, that the
pleasures of every thing past, does bring into remembrance naught else but the
smart of after grief: Alas what importable thing is it, man to have lost not
only the rich treasures, plentiful pleasures, the great dignity, sovereignty
and authority of the whole earth: But the inestimable ornaments of the divine
nature; wisdom, Justice, prudence, temperance, godliness, goodness
innocence, righteousness, and perfect integrity both of soul and body,
wherewith he was made such an excellent man as he glistered in glory like agod.
And yet this pensiveness is but a small thing in comparison of that which the
mind endures: for if the loss of good things is so grievous! Oh how much
more is the burden of contrary evils? if it be so great a corasiue to forget
pleasures, what heartsore is it to endure pain? if it be a thing so lamentable
to depart from felicity, is it not a thing woeful to taste of bitter misery,
and specially after the relish of pleasant prosperity, whereas not only the
present feeling of woeful wretchedness, but the fresh remembrance of former
happiness may breed in the mind a doubling distress. But now not only by
loosing the felicity which man sometimes held, but by falling also into the
contrary calamity, is the mind overwhelmed with such an huge heap of
mischiefs, a that it had not before so much exceeding happiness, as is now
doubled on it unmeasurable wretchedness.

Again the soul of man she produces not her actions according to God his
first institution. The appetites they likewise are not obedient to the
government of reason, and the will wa^dreth after strange and straggling motions,
whereby the body is made subject to execute the wicked counsels of the mind.
And thus is the whole man distained with sin, defiled with lust, polluted
with filthiness, out-raged with affections, fretting in envy, drowned in
gluttony, bleeding in cruelty, and altogether deformed with iniquity, so that
from the glorious image of God he is become the right pattern of the devil,
Ioh. 8. 44. Ephesians. 1. ver. 2. 3. In as much as the Lord repented that he had made
man in the earth, and he was some in his heart. And does alot his whole life to
be naught else but a time of punishment and chastisment unto death, suffering
the mind (through his just judgment) sometimes to be overwhelmed with
pensiveness, sometimes to be chastised with fearfulness, sometimes to be
distracted with madness, confused with foolishnes, and swallowed up with such
incredible woefulness, that natural men had rather many times then endure it,
hang themselves like Achitophel; kill themselves like Saul, burn themselves
like Zimrie, strangle themselves like Judas, or drown themselves like the
desperate darlings of this world; such anguish, such grief, such sorrows, such
woes, such mortality, such misery has God inflicted on man and on his
posterity. And yet are we not only made subject to this misery of life, but
are abandoned further into the accursednesse of death, and the death that is
due to us by Gods Justice is twofold. One of the body only, which is
thereof a mortal destruction, Genesis 3. ver. 19. The other both of body and
soul, Math. 10. ver. 28. Now daily experience teaches, that the whole root
of Adams stock is made subject to the strok of death; and what death is may all
men know. It is the mortal enemy of life, the slaughterman of nature, the
ruin of the world, the destruction of the body, the curse of God, the woe of
man and the dart and power of hell.

If we should but speak of the temporal death of the body only, yet what
griefs are in the grave, what darkness, what solitariness, what silence,
what rottenness, where is nothing else but an extinguishment of life, a
deprivation of pleasure, a desolation of comfort, a confusion of order, and a
destruction of nature: so as it is a dungeon of dreadfulnes, a coffin of
calamities, and a cabine of corruptions.

But all this notwithstanding, if this first death be compared to the second,
this may be accounted a kind of happiness in comparison of the second
wretchedness: for in the grave albeit there be a ruin of all that is good, yet
is there no renewing of that which is evil, though there be given us, as a
just reward for our sins, our mouths full of mould, our bellies full of
worms, our bones full of carrion, our bodies full of stinch, and that this
shall be to the proudest Prince and brauest gallant (for all his glittering here
in gold) common with the poorest miserable caytiefe wretch, yet in the grave is
no griping of griefs, no soaking, consuming sorrows, no caring; no troubles,
no labor; Nay, as in Revel. 14. 13. They rest from their labors, that is to
say, are in quietness from troubles, and senseless of pains: But in the
second death, as Math. 25. 30. There shall be weeping, wailing and gnashing of
teeth; Yea, says Saint Augustine, there shall be misery no mercy, sorrow no
succor, crying no comfort, punishments no pity: Nay (says he) mischiefs
without measure, torments without ending, fire without quenching, the worm
without dying, and death without ending.

Now the first step of our happy estate, does consist herein to be made free
from all this woe and wretchedness, which how sweet it is, is best known of
them that have tasted the sharpnes of the sower: For as the Physician is best
welcome to the sick, so the immunitie of pain, and the richnes of mercy are
alwais most precious to the wretches of misery. And so much touching the evil
things we shall then want.

Now of the good things we shall then have: The learned do commonly part these
good things into three branches. First the inward decking of the soul;
secondly, the outward garnishing of the body; thirdly the common fruition of
external good things. S. Bernard (In sermonum libro) when he would set out the
ornaments of the mind, bursteth forth into an incredible exclamation (as
ravished with the meditation of these new celestial dowries) O happy region
(says he) for there shall be wisdom without vndiscreetnesse, knowledge without
ignorance, memory without forgetfulness, understanding without erroniousnes,
will without perturbation, and reason without obscuration, S. Ambrose
entreating of the great dignity and honor of the glorified bodies says
(exalting them in this sort) Habebunt integritatem in perfectione,
impatibilitatem sine corruptione, etc. They shall have integrity in
perfection, impassibilitie without corruption, they shall be as swift as thought
for agilitie, and irresistable for subtlety, as beautiful as the fairest
heavens, and in light and clearenes as the brightest stars. And to speak of
external good things: S. Augstine in lib. 22. De ciuitate Dei says: There
shall be whatsoever we can desire, neither can we desire any thing that shall
not be there; all that is there shall be good, and all shall be good that shall
be there: there is immortal blessedness, and blessed immortalnesse, certain
security, and secure tranquillity, pleasant incunditie, happy eternity, and
eternal felicity. For there says Saint Gregory (in his book of homilies)
are the joys of heaven everlasting quiers of Angels, euer-singing, blesled
spirits ever praising, holy Saints ever triumphing, Gods presence ever shining,
the fountain of life ever springing, and inaccessable light never dimming.
Whereas we shall sit and see all things, love and praise all things, praise and
have all things; Oh says Saint Augustine what a Sovereign felicity is this,
to see all things that you shall love, and what a sovereign charity to love
all that you shall see, and what a sovereign iocunditie in the end to have
all, and that without all end.

But because it would be too too tedious to speak of every branch of this
partition severally, and since that of Saint Ambrose (entreating of the bodies
of the Saints, as they are resumed again to their souls) does without labor
express the excellency of both natures, I will in this discourse only explane
his rehearsal.

First therefore as touching integrity; it shall be such (no doubt) as that no
man shall in that glorious resurrection, rise with any mayme or want of limme,
deformity or imperfection of body. But that they shall in that day every one
be whole without want, strong without weakness, pure without blemish, perfect
without defect, exact without fault. August. in Encherid says, Resurgent
sanctorum corpora sine vllo vitio, sine vlla deformitate sine vlla corruptione,
sine vlla difficultate, The bodies of the Saints shall arise without any fault,
without any deformity, without any corruption, without any difficulty; And
the reason of this so great exquisitnesse is this; because at that day, man is
to be be advanced to the highest top and summitie of all his perfection, and to
be installed as the glorious son of God in the kingdom of his Father; for if
it be so (as Isaiah says cap. 30. 26.) that against that day (as against the
coronatio^ of a most glorious and immortal King) the Sun and Moon and al
creatures shall be most royally set forth, with what divine and admirable
adorning shall the King himself be braued out?

Moreover the resurrection shall be the most admirable work of God. And the
divine work of God must needs be above all others most perfect, because that
without derogation of the work-maister there must be found none imperfection in
the work. And yet not only shall these bodies be most absolute and consummate
in every point. But also shall have a most mighty and prepotent power to
resist all manner of alteration, insomuch as their integrity shall never be
diminished, their perfectness altered, nor their exquisitnes abated: For
otherwise we know this by common sense, that whatsoever is passible is likewise
corruptible (according to that ground, Omne patibile est corruptibile, and
suffer end it must whatsoever does suffer change) but all their excellency
whatsoever as it shall then be most absolute, so shall it likewise be most
permanent, remaining always immutable without change, inviolable without hurt,
invincible without vanquish, continual without cessing, and everlasting
without ending.

Neither shall there be alone at that day an integrity of nature, a perfection
of body, a reiection of change, a perpetuity of estate; But beyond all this
pollishing of the humane creature, there shall be a further garnishing by the
divine spirit with such wonderful subtlety and agilitie, as shall by far
surpass all the adornings by nature. This subtilnes I apprehend to be
contrary to this our corpulent grossness, and this agilitie to debilitie and
slownes, so that whereas it is now gross, heavy feeble, cumbersome,
burthenous, and no small hindra^ce and let many times to the opperation of the
mind, and cannot be carried to and fro by the soul, but by great labor and in
great time, nor perform the will, but with great travel and in great trouble:
so at that day shall all these impediments be clean removed and taken from it,
and the contrary adiuments wholly invested and given to it. The glorified body
shall then not only have no slownes, no waightines, no massines, no cumbrance,
no grossenes, none unaptness, (as it has now:) But further it shall be made as
subtle as air, as light, as wind, as quick as lightning, as swift as thought,
having all celeritie, dexterity, abillite, actiuitie, placed in the same; for
the Apostle here testifies that the glorified body shall rise a spiritual
body, that is to say a body in all, actiuenes, like unto a spirit able to do
althings that a spirit can.

Now these spiritual natures and absolute forms, not being at all combred
with the weight of the body, they are able to pierce the heavens, walk on the
waters, fly in the air, accomplish their work in a moment, and to move from
place to place in an instant: And as Augustine says, In a space of time, if
not indivisible, yet at leastwise inperceptible. All which things the glorified
bodies shall be able to do: The like whereof our Savior seems to affirm, Mat.
10. that they shall be lake Angels in heaven, full of excellency, full of
purity, full of potency and powerful actiuitie; and the Apostle here says
the body shall be raised in power, that is to say, active, strong, mighty,
immortal, full of all ability, perfectly to accomplish and fulfill the desire
of the soul: For like as we see by the same we call Funambuli, how that by
great exercise, they make the body able and apt to obey the will of the mind:
Even so do we find that the greater dominion which the soul has over the
body, with so much the less labor and pains the body is moved by the soul.
Seeing then that after the resurrection the soul shall have perfect dominion
over the body, both by reason of the perfection of the soul, and of the
perfect ability of the body, there shall be no labor in the moving of the
body: But look how much the glorified soul and glorified body do excel the
virtue and power of the soul and body now: Even so much swifter shall the
soul then move the body likewise more then now; Wherefore as much as it shall
incredibly exceed in the excellency of power: even so shall it do also in the
swiftness of motion. Which assertion Augustine also maintains in his
Enchiridion; In corporibus sanctorum (says he) tanta facilitas quantafelicitas
erit, There shall be as great facility of moving, as felicity of enjoying.

Of this divine decking and adorning of the saints, the learned divines make
two sorts: The first they call Pulchritudinem: The second Lucem, beauty and
light. Pulchritudo corporis (says Augustine, In lib. 19. De ciuitate Dei) est
partium connenientia, cum suanitate quadam coloris, The beauty of the body,
is the conueniencie of the parts, with a certain sweetness of color. So may
we define this light; to be the ornament of brightness in the garment of
glory.

Lo thus (by these men's judgments) the saints shall have both favor and color
to make them amiable, light and brightness to make them admirable, color to
make them visible to be seen, light to make them impossible to be hid: the one
to make them orient with beauty, the other to make them resulgent with glory.
But our admiral decking in that day, though it cannot now be any way
expressed, yet when the Lord will have it somewhat shadowed out for our comfort,
he does compare it to the beautifullest bodies that are in the world: as are
the sun, firmament and stars, Math. 13. 43. Dan. 12. 3.

Now in that the Lord anoucheth the shining of the just to be as the glittering
of the sun: How many things of excellency under that one does he ascribe unto
our bodies. Forasmuch as that shine amongst creatures, is such a singular thing
for goodness, as nothing can be better, so pleasant and delightful, as
nothing can be sweeter; so fair and orient, as nothing can be brighter; of
such power and virtue, as nothing can be greater: A taste whereof was reueiled
to Peter, James and John by the Lord, Math. 17. 2. when his face did shine as
the sun, and his garments were as white as the lightning: and that Moses and
Elias did appear unto him in glory: for if the Lord did strengthen his mortal
face, to receive the divine ornaments of immortal beauty, and adorn an
earthen piece of clay, with such celestial and heavenly glory: What shall our
fairness and sweetness then be, when as we shall have glorified and immortal
bodies, made able to receive the garnishing of heavenly dignities? Or how shall
our selves (think you) be braued out, when as our garments shall be made so
resulgent as to shine with gleaming sparks of light? And yet does our Savior
in this place not only simply and absolutely denounce that the just shall shine
as the sun; but adds a degree of exaltation further, which is as the just
shall shine in the kingdom of their father; not as it is in this world,
whereas it is oftentimes obscured with vapors, shaddowed with clouds, dimmed
with storms: But as it shall shine in the kingdom of God: whereas his light
shall be so illustrate, as Isaiah does note, Chap. 30. 26. The light of the
moon shall be as the light of the sun: And the light of the sun shall be
seuenfold, And like the light of seven days.

Behold then (I pray you) with what a glorious vesture of incomparable beauty
shall the bodies of the saints then be decored, when the glory of the sun
shall be seuenfold, and as the light of seven days: They shall be (I say) so
divinely adorned, with such a radiant shine of heavenly light, as that they
shall not at all be exceeded of the sun, no not when the sun shall seuenfold
exceed himself. A notable experiment whereof was exhibited to S. Paul in his
journey to Damascus, Acts. 9. Whereas the excellent brightness of the son of
God did so far exceed the light of the sun-globe, that the one was cheerful
for his shine the other fearful for his glory, the one so moderate that it
served unto light, but the other so infinite that it oppressed the senses; the
one lightning with his shine the darkness of the earth, the other darkning
with his brightness the very light of heaven. Therefore if the son of God
does so far pass the glory of the sun, that when the sun may be well
endured, his brightness alone cannot be sustained with mortal eye: What
marvel if the light of all the bodies of the Saints shall seem to darken the
brightness of the sun, seeing the holy Ghost does assure us, Phil. 3. 21.
that our vile bodies shall be fashioned like unto his most glorious body. Now
how his most glorious body is decked out infinitely with the gorgeousness of
light, it is plentifully testified in Reu. 21. 23. And the city had no need of
the sun, neither of the moon to shine in it: for the glory of God did light
it: And the lamb is the light of it. Because that when as for the greatness of
the light in that kingdom, it is showed that there is no need of the light of
the sun, etc. All that wonderful illumination notwithstanding is prescribed to
proceed from the glory of the Lamb; In as much as the people that are saved
are affirmed shall walk in the light of it, verse 24.

Now way this description, and note how infinite you may deem his beauty to be;
In respect of whom, the sun and the moon are needles: and without whom, the
kingdom of light is darkness: and by whom all the saints are so garnished, as
that without him, all their brightness is quite blemished.

Wherefore let it be so that to be made in fairness as an angel, in
brightness as the firmament, in beauty as the light, in glory as the sun:
yea, to exceed his adorning with clearness, and obscure it with its
brightness, be so great and incomparable an excellency, as may by filling our
breasts with joy, and our hearts with pleasure, breed an admiration in our
minds, and an astonishment to our senses; yet to have our vile bodies which do
rise out of dust, and do fall into carrion to be fashioned like to the glorious
body of the Lord, which is of such pecrlesse perspicuitie, that like as the
sun does adorn all the stars, so does it illuminate all the saints: This does
exceed far beyond the bonds, not only of all beauty, but also far above all
the comprehension that we can have of glory. For albeit in these former
resemblances, I confess the royal decking of the saints is made comparable to
the best of all creatures, yet in this it is made fashionable to the Lord
himself: In the former, though the light is to be admired, yet is it to be
defined; but it is showed by this, not only to be infinite for goodness, but of
unmeasurable greatness.

Moreover in those former, there was a special relation to sweetness of
beauty: but in this, a general reference to all excellency of body: For S.
Paul affirms that our vile bodies shall be like to his most glorious body.
And can there be a more wonderful or incredible excellency attributed unto
any creature, then to have (I say not that body which is vile to be made
glorious,) but that body which is more vile then carrion, to be made no less
glorious then like to the son of God; And these our rotten carcasses to be
fashioned like unto Christ, not only in speciousnesse of beauty, but in
preciousnes of body.

Wherefore to speak now by way of conclusion of external good things, what a
wonderful exaltation is this for mortal flesh, to be clothed like the son of
God with immortal glory; to be assumed in honor into heaven, to be associated
in fellowship with the blessed angels, to pass all time in eternity of
pleasures, to enjoy al worlds in variety of delights, and that not only
continually without any intermitting: But also everlastingly without all
ending, to be decked out above all creatures, with the ornaments of beauty,
garnished eternally with incomparable light, and fashioned in all excellency
like the Lord Jesus himself, although not in equal degree of glory (for
therein Christ is to have the pre-eminence, and to be the head of his members)
yet the members must needs be proportionable to the head; And therefore cannot
but be stuffed full of brightness, light, fairness; sweetness, integrity,
subtlety, agilitie, power, strength, immortality, felicity, glory and majesty;
being joyous, happy, blessed, triumphant, glorious, immortal and eternal;
even as the son of God himself is.

Lo (Christians) if any be in love, here is that which is most amiable, if any
desire to be fair; no beauty is so admirable: In comparison of this all faces
are but dust, and all beauties are but shadows. Foolish Pigmalions that there
are, which gaze inamored on images of mold, and are not rather ravished with
this comelines divine. Shall the painting of earth move more then the
pollishings of heaven, the vestures of corruption, more then the ornaments of
glory? or that which is less beautiful then a flower, beyond that which is
more orient then the light? or a face drawn out of dust by the pensill of
nature, then a grace distincted in the heavens by the finger of Gods hand? Nay,
rather as S. Augustine says (in Epistola quadam) He that loves pleasures, let
him seek them there, where it never can be distracted with any pain; He that
loves honor, let him seek it there, whereas no contempt or abasement can make
him be without it; He that loves treasure, let him lay it up there, whereas no
consuming can ever wast it out; He that loves health, let him seek it there,
whereas no sickness can ever make him want it; He that would live long, let
him there obtain life, where it never can be determined by the stroke of death.

God grant therefore we may so set our affections on things above, and not on
things beneath: As that when Christ which is our life and light shall appear;
we may also appear with him in glory.

Amen.
FINIS.

