A brief ANSWER to a late Treatise OF THE SABBATH DAY.
Digested Dialogue-wise between two Divines, A. and B. A. BRother* you are
happily met?


B. And you Brother also.


A. I would I might spend an hour or two with you in private conference, in a
point wherein I have of late been not a little perplexed.


B. Why, what is the matter, Brother?


A. Have you not seen a late Treatise of the Sabbath Day, pubished by an
eminent Antistes in this Church?


B. Yes: I have both seen, and perused it.


A. I pray you what think you of it?


B. I think it is a very dangerous Book.


A. What mean you by that?


B. I (...) to the Author, if it were well examined before (...).


A. How so, I pray you?


B. Because it overthrowes the doctrine of the Church of England in the point
of the Sabbath.


A. Pardon me; that seems to me impossible.


B. Why?


A. Because he says expressly in the very title page of his book, that it
contains A Defense of the Orthodox all Doctrine of the Church of England,
against Sabbatarian novelty. And therefore I am confident, he will look to
make that good.


B. But be not too confident, you know the Proverb, Fronti rara fides. The
fowlest causes may have the fairest pretenses.


A. That is true you say. But yet I cannot be persuaded, that so great a
Personage, would so far overshoot, as to give that advantage to those, whom
he makes his adversaries. Nay you know his Book is dedicated to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; by whose direction, and that according to his sacred
Majesty's command, he was set upon this work, both for the preventing of
mischief, (as himself says in his Epistle dedicatory to the said Archbishop)
and to settle the Kings good subjects, who have long time been distracted about
Sabbatarian questions. Now if he mayntaine not, but (as you say) overthrow the
doctrine of the Church of England, he will have small thanks from his sacred
Majesty for his pains, who is the Defender of the Faith of the Church of
England, and has often solemnly protested, and that in his public
Declaration about the dissolving of the Parliament. And, Declaration before the
39 Articles.
Declarations in print, that he will never suffer therein the least
innovation. And what thanks then can he expect from the Archbishop, trow you?
And in stead of preventing, he will pull on greater mischiefs; and in stead of
settling the Kings good subjects, he will fill their minds with greater
distractions. And therefore, Brother, in so saying, you lay a heavy charge upon
him. Its dangerous so to charge a person of that dignity, and esteem in the
world. Take heed therefore what you say. You know also that he is a great
Scholar, deeply learned, a reverend Father of the Church so as his judgment is
taken almost for an Oracle. And you know also what is said in a late Book,
allowed by authority, that the holy Fathers in God the Communion Book Catech
expounded by Beve.
Bishops, are to be guides in Divinity unto the whole Clergy of inferior order,
so as all Priests are to submit unto their Godly judgments in all matters
pertaining unto Religion. And the reason is given, because the Fathers of the
Church now and always, do in the great Page 20.
mystery of Godliness comprehend many things, which the common people do not,
yea also some things, which Ministers of the inferior order do not apprehend.
So as it is expected of those holy Prelates, that we must lay our hand on our
mouth, when they speak, and be altogether regulated by their profound Dictates.


B. I remember well the book. And I cannot but wonder, that those passages
were not expunged, with many others, when the book was called in, and then the
second time published. You know we live in a learned age, and we deny the
Popes infallibility, or that it can convey it self, as from the head, and so
confine it self within the veins of the body of the Prelacy; or that a
Rotchet can confer this grace ex opere operato. And believe me, Brother,
when we see such a Papal spirit begin to perke up in this our Church, is it
not high time, trow you, to look about us? Shall we stumble at noone day, and
in this Meridian of the Gospel close up our eyes, and become the sworn
vasalls of blind obedience? No, no. In this case therefore were Goliath himself
the Champion, I would, by Gods grace try a fall with him.


A. Brother, such a resolution had need have a good ground to stand upon. And
being a matter of such moment, it requires our best zeal and strength,
especially to vindicate the doctrine of our reverend Mother the Church of
England, which we have sucked from her purer breasts. Nor only so, but to
vindicate her name from reproach. For if it be so, as you have said, that the
doctrine of our Church is by that book overthrown: then consequently (as I
conceive) she must deeply suffer, and be wounded through the sides of those,
whom he so often in his book brandeth with the odious name of Novell
Sabbatarians.


B. Brother, you conceit a right. For in truth, all those calumnious and
odious terms, which he gives to those, whose opinions (except Brabournes
only) he impugneth in his Treatise; as, venomous serpents, noisome Tares,
pestilent weeds, and unclean beasts (terms to be abhorred of all true
Christians) and in a word, Novell Sabbatarians: they all result upon our dear
Mother, the Church of England. For who are the most of those, or rather all,
whom he thus stigmatizeth? Are they not, or were they not in their time, the
true bred children of the Church of England, all unanimously professing and
maintayning her Orthodox doctrines? Can therefore the mother be free, when her
pious sons are so traduced and reproached, and that for defending those very
doctrines, which by her means they sucked from the breasts of both the
Testaments?


A. That must needs follow, I confess. Now then I pray you, satisfy my earnest
desire in this, by declaring how he overthrowes the doctrine of the Church of
England in this point of the Sabbath.


B. I will make it most clear unto you. Now the doctrine of the Church of
England concerning the Sabbath, is most clearly and fully set forth in the
Book of Homilies; which Book the 35 Article (to which all we Ministers do
subscribe) does commend, as containing a Godly and whole some doctrine, and
necessary for these times; and therefore judged to be read in Churches by the
Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understanded of the
people. Now the Homily of the time and place of prayer, part. 1. shows, that
our Lords Day is grounded upon the fourth Commandment in the Decalogue; in
these words: Whatsoever is found in the Commandment, appertaining to the Law
of nature, as a thing most Godly, most just, and needful for the setting forth
of Gods glory, it ought to be retained and kept of all good Christian people.
And therefore by this Commandment, we ought to have a time, as one day in the
week, wherein we ought to rest, yea from our lawful and needful works. For
like as it appears by this Commandment, that no man in the six days ought
to be slothful or idle, but diligently to labor in that state, wherein God
has set him: even so God has given express charge to all men, that upon the
Sabbath Day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease from all weekly and
work day labor, to the intent, that like as God himself wrought six days,
and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and consecrated it to
quietness, and rest from labor: Even so Gods obedient people should use the
Sunday holily, and rest from their common and daily business, and also give
themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and service. So
that God does not only command the observation of this holy day, but also by
his own example does stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping of the
same. Good natural children will not only become obedient to the Commandment
of their Parents, but also have a diligent eye to their doeings, and gladly
follow the same. So if we will be the children of our heavenly Father, we
must be careful to keep the Christian Sabbath Day, which is the Sunday, not
only for that it is Gods express Commandment, but also to declare our selves
to be loving children, in following the example of our gracious Lord and
Father. So the Homily. And again, as follows:

Thus it may plainly appear, that Gods will and Commandment was to have a
solemn time, and standing day in the week, wherein the people should come
together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to render him
thanks for them, as appertains to loving, kind, and obedient people. This
example and Commandment of God, the Godly Christian people began to follow
immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, etc. So the Homily, and
much more. Whence we plainly observe these conclusions: 1. That all
Christians ought and are bound in conscience of the fourth Commandment to keep
the Lords Day holily. 2. That by the force of the fourth Commandment, one day
in 7. is perpetually to be kept holy. 3. That the keeping of the Lords Day is
grounded upon, and commanded in the fourth Commandment, and so is not of
humane institution. 4. That the Lords Day is and may be called our Christian
Sabbath day, therefore it is not Jewish to call it so. 5. That this day is
wholly to be spent in holy rest, and duties of sanctification, and therefore
no part of it to be spent in vain pleasures, and profane pastimes. Now the
Author of the Treatise does overthrow all these conclusions, as is to be seen
throughout his book.


A. I pray you show some instances hereof.


B. Page 23. his words are, This position (to wit, that the fourth Commandment
is properly and perpetually moral, and is for quality and obligation, equal
to the other nine Commandments,) (which for many years has reigned in
Pamphlets, Pulpits, and Conventicles, and is entertained as an Oracle by all
such as either openly profess, or do lean toward the Disciplinarian
Faction) is destitute of truth. These are his words. Which comparing with the
words of the Homily of our Church already cited, are found quite contrary. For
the Homily says, that the fourth Commandment is a Law of nature, and ought to
be retained and kept of all good Christians; in as much as it commands one day
of the week for rest; and God has given an express charge to all men, that
the Sabbath Day, which is our Sunday, should be spent wholly in heavenly
exercises of Gods true Religion and service. So as this man does most unjustly
condemn all those Godly Preachers, that have for so many years maintained the
express doctrine of our Church in their writings and Sermons; and so he
flatly condemns our Church, and her doctrine of the Sabbath; wherein she is
more clear and sound, then any Churches in the world. And long may this
doctrine still flourish amongst us, maugre all the malicious opposers thereof,
who are so bold as to affirm, that it is destitute of truth.


A. I assure you, I begin now to suspect the man; that he has not dealt
uprightly in the cause.


B. Nay it is past all suspicion; for his words are so express, that they can
admit of no favorable interpretation, but that they condemn the clear
Doctrine of our Church, touching the perpetual morality of the fourth
Commandment, for one day in the week, and so our Lords Day, or Sunday, the
first day of the week, our Christian Sabbath day, which God has given
express charge to all men to keep holy.


A. I confess the words of the Homily are most clear, without all ambiguity,
or obscurity. But yet the Author seems to acknowledge some morality natural
to be in the fourth Commandment. For page 135. he says, Our resting from
labor in respect of the general, is grounded upon the Law of nature, or the
equity of the fourth Commandment.


B. This is nothing to the purpose, to acquit him from being an adversary to
the express doctrine of our Church. Dolosus versatur in universalibus (it was
the speech of King James.) The natural morality of the fourth Commandment, is
not in general, to imply some individuum vagum, some certain uncertain
indefinite time for Gods worship: For the Commandment is express for a
certain day in the week, for the Sabbath day; Remember the Sabbath day to
sanctify it. It says not, Remember to set apart and allow some time for the
service of God; but it determines the time, and day; least otherwise being left
undetermined, man should forget God and himself, and allow no time or day at
all for Gods service; or if he did, God should be beholden to him for it. But
it is a Law of nature, that every Lord and Master should have the power in
himself, to appoint, not only the kind of service, but the time when it should
be performed of his servants. As Alexander Alex. d'Ales P. 3. q. 32. m. ar.
d'Ales says, upon the fourth Commandment, The time of this rest it is not in
man's power to determine, but Gods. Again, the adversary acknowledges an
equity in the fourth Commandment. What equity, if as it bound the ancient
people of God to one day in the week, it do not also bind the Christian
people to keep one day in the wee^ and if it be the equity of the fourth
Commandment, to prescribe one day in seven: then they are very unjust, that
deny the keeping of the Lords day to be grounded upon the equity of the fourth
Commandment. It were well, if they would stand to equity. But this does our
adversary fly from: For he says in the next words, The particular form, and
circumstances of resting, Ibid.
are prescribed unto us by the precepts of the Church. Our spiritual actions,
according to that which is maine and substantial in them, are taught by the
Evangelical Law. Their modification and limitation, in respect of rituall and
external form; and in regard of place, duration, gesture, habit; and other
external circumstances, are prescribed by the Law of the Church. So he. Thus
you see, how he limits the prescription of circumstances, (which comprehend
time, place, persons) and namely, Duration, when, and how long God shall be
served, unto the prescription of the Law of the Church: which he expresses
more fully, page 270. saying, It was in the free election of the Church, to
appoint what day, or days, or times, she thought good, or found convenient
for Religious duties; for the Evangelical Law has not determined any
certain day, or time; and those actions or circumstances, which are not
determined by Divine precept, are permitted to the liberty and authority of the
Church, to be determined and appointed. So he. But clear it is, that the
Church of England disclameth all such power, but ascribes all authority of
prescribing a time and day of holy rest unto the Lord of the Sabbath, who has
expressed his will and pleasure herein in his Law of the fourth Commandment;
as our Homily says.


A. But the Homily seems to favor his opinion, saying, that Godly Christian
people began to choose them a standing day of the week, etc. And therefore it
seems to be at the Churches choice.


B. Our choice does not necessarily imply a power of institution. We are said
to choose life, and truth, before death and error: are we therefore the
authors of them? Again, our choice herein is according to Gods Commandment.
Thirdly, the Homily says expressly, that those Godly Christian people, did in
their choice follow the example and Commandment of God. Now what example had
they, but Christ's rising and resting on that day, after the example of Gods
resting the seventh day? And for Commandment, they had both the fourth
Commandment, and an Apostolical precept, 1. Cor. 16. and that place in the
Revelation, appropriating this day as holy to the Lord, and so ratified by God
himself. And who were they which taught those Godly Christian people, to keep
this day? viz. the Apostles. And therefore we must put a vast difference
between the unerring Apostles, and the succeeding Churches, so as the Homily
is clear against him.


A. But see, this seems to me the maine knott of the whole controversy, namely
about the designation of the particular and special time, consecrated to Gods
worship, whither it be comprehended and prescribed in the fourth Commandment,
or depends upon the determination of the Church. The Adversary confesses a
natural equity in the fourth Commandment, that some time is to be set apart
for the service of God, but indeputate, and left at large to the liberty of the
Church to determine and limit the special time, when, and how long; what
portion and proportion is to be allowed. Now although you have a little touched
upon this point already: yet considering it is the maine hindge of the whole
matter in question, and the maine ground, whereon the whole weight of the
controversy relyeth: I pray you a little more fully to elucidate this point,
and the rather (not only for the settling of my judgment) but for the
clearing of our Homily from all false interpretations, which the Adversary
might make for the eluding of those things, which you have observed out of it.


B. Your motion is very opportune, and no less important. For the Adversary
does the more easily play fast and loose in the mist of his generalities,
while, though he cannot, or dare not for shame utterly deny the morality of
the fourth Commandment, (which all Divines do hold) yet he denies any
particular, special, determinate time to be commanded or limited therein; but
will have that wholly put and placed in the power of the Church. It will be
requisite therefore to stop this hole, that he may not have the least
evasion, but by the cords of strong reasons, be bound and forced to confess,
that either the fourth Commandment does prescribe and determine a set,
certain, fixed proportion of time. consecrated by God himself unto his solemn
and sacred worship: or else, that it commands to us Christians no certain time
or day at all, and so the morality of it (if ever it had any) is quite
abolished, and no other Law or Commandment now binds us, but the precept or
practice of the Church. This is the very sum and upshot of the matter.


A. Sir, I conceive and apprehend it to be so.


B. Now I shall prove, and make it evident, that the fourth Commandment
either prescribes a certain proportion of time, and a fixed day consecrate to
God, and in that very respect is perpetually moral, binding us Christians to
the same proportion: or else, if it determine no set proportion of time, but
leaves it at large to the Church to proportionate, whither longer, or shorter;
then there remains no such obligatory equity in the fourth Commandment, as to
bind the Church to appoint and allow such or such a proportion of time; but
that if this time, which the Church appoints, be either one day in 20, or 40,
or 100, or one day in the year, or so, or but one piece of a day in such a
revolution of time, and not one whole or intyre day, much less one whole day
in every seven; the Church in this sins not, as being not guilty of the
breach of the fourth Commandment, which binds us Christians to no certain
proportion of time, as the Adversary himself would have it, but in this respect
is now abrogated. His words are: Page 90.
The fourth Commandment, in respect of any one definite and special day of
every week, was not simply and perpetually moral, but positive and
temporary only. Which assertion of his, as it is directly, and in terminis,
contrary to the doctrine of our Homily fore-alledged, which says: By this
Commandment (the fourth) we ought to have a time, as one day in the week,
etc. and this appartaineth to the Law of nature, as a thing most Godly, most
just and needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, and therefore ought to
be retained and kept of all good Christian people. So the Homily. No, says D.
Whi^ one day in the week was but positive and temporary only; and therefore
not appartaining to the Law of nature, as a thing most Godly, most just, and
needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, and so ought not in that respect
to be retained and kept of all good Christian people. But we will not press
him down with the bare authority of our Church, without showing the grounds
and reasons, whereupon it is grounded.

Now first observe we the words of the Commandment, Remember the Sabbath day,
to keep it holy: which words (says the learnest Zanchie) are the very moral
substance of the fourth Commandment. The Lord says not, Remember to sanctify
some convenient, and sufficient time, as the Church shall think fit. The
Commandment prescribes a certain and set time, yea a day, the Sabbath day,
one day in the week, which is the Sabbath day. Again it teaches us what day
in the week the Sabbath day is, to wit, the Sabbath day of the Lord thy God:
that day in the week, wherein the Lord our God rests, must be our Sabbath
day. So that as the Commandment prescribes unto us a weekly Sabbath day to be
sanctified: so Gods Precedent and example points out unto us, what or which day
in the week we must rest on, to sanctify it. And this is not only the
natural equity (which the adversary in general confesses) but the very
natural Law and substance of the fourth Commandment, to prescribe a set
solemn day in the week to be sanctified, and not to leave it in the power of
man, or of the Church to appoint what time they please. The reasons are these:
1. because the Commandment expressly limiteth one set day in the week, being
the Sabbath day of the Lord our God, as has been said. Now the Commandment
prescribing a set and fixed day in the week: what humain power shall dare to
alter it into an indefinite time (call it what you will, convenient, or
sufficient) to be appointed at the pleasure of man? This is with the Papists to
commit high sacrilege, in altering the property of Gods Commandments. For
upon this ground, of a general equity, they have been bold to suppress the
second Commandment, saying, it is comprised in the first. As they have robbed
the people of the cup in the Sacrament, saying, the blood is contained in the
body, under the forms of bread. So our adversary, imagining a general (I wot
not what) equity in the fourth Commandment, of some certain uncertain time for
Gods public worship, does thereby destroy the very property of the
Commandment, which expressly prescribes the Sabbath day in every week.

A second reason, why it is not left in the power of the Church to prescribe
what time men please, is, because as it is Gods prerogative, as a Master, to
appoint his own worship and service, so the time, wherein he will be served.
This God himself commands in the fourth Commandment. Now as the King will
not take it well, that any meddle with his prerogative, and arrogate that to
himself, which is the Kings right: so God is justly offended, when men presume
to assume to themselves that power, which is proper and peculiar to God alone.
If any will take upon him to coin money, by counterfeting the Kings stamp and
name: his act is treason: how then shall they escape, if presume to coin what
time they please for Gods solemn worship, though they set the counterfeit
stamp of God upon it. Now the Sabbath day is of the Lords own making and
stamping, and therefore called the Lords day.

A third reason, why it is not left in man's power to institute the solemn day
of Gods worship, his Sabbath day, or to appoint him what proportion of time
they please, is, because an indefinite time must either bind to all moments of
time, as a debt, when the day of payment is not expressly dated, is liable to
payment every moment; or else it binds to no time at all. For if the Law of God
bind us not to an express determinate time, or day, consecrate to his service:
then the not allowing of him a set time, or day, is no sin at all. For what
Gods Law commands not, therein man is not bound. And where no Law is of a set
time or day, there is no transgression, if a set time, or day be not observed.
So as, by this reason, if the Law of the fourth Commandment prescribe no set
sacred time, or day for Rest and sanctification, it is a mere nullity. For, to
say there is a natural equity in it for some sufficient and convenient time,
and yet no man can define what this sufficient and convenient time is, nay all
the wits and heads in the world put together, are not able to determine it: is,
as to say, there is a world in the moon, consisting of Land and Sea, and
inhabitants, because there are some black spots in it; which yet is not a more
lunaticke opinion, then that is presumptuous and absurd. Has not the profane
world found by woeful experience, and that of late days, within these two
years last past, wherein men have taken a liberty to profane and pollute, but
a part of the Lords day: that this is a most horrible sin? And a sin it
cannot be, but as a breach of one of Gods holy Commandments. For where there
is no Law, there is no transgression. The profanation (I say) of the Lords day
is clearly showed to be an horrible presumptuous sin, and in special a bold
breach of the fourth Commandment, by those many markable judgments of God,
which have fearfully fallen upon fearelesse Sabbath breakers, and that (I say)
within these two years last past, the like whereof cannot be paralleld in all
the Histories of all the Centuries since the Apostles times. Which alone (if
men were not altogether possessed with the spirit of stupidity, and of a croced
conscience) were sufficient to teach their dull wits, that the fourth
Commandment is still in force, commanding the Sabbath day to be sanctified,
the profanation whereof we see so terribly punished by divine revenge. A point
also, which our Homily has noted, which were sufficient to admonish the
adversary of his presumptuous oppositions thereunto.


A. Sir, you have abundantly satisfied me in this point, and I suppose every
rational man, and true bred-sonne of the Church of England. And surely I
wonder so learned a man should commit so foul an error, as not to search
better into the Doctrine of our Church, so clearly expressed in the Homily.


B. You need not wonder at it; we have all known him to do as great a matter
as that. For was not his hand to the Approbation of a Book in print (though
afterward called in by Sovereign Authority) which contaynes and maintayns
many sundry Tenants, both Pelagian and Popish, flatt against the clear
Doctrines of our Church; and whereby he has as yet made no public
recantation, to remoove the scandal from the Church of England, and to satisfy
so high an offense given? Yea in stead of Recantation, I my self have heard him
in open Court speak against both Justification; that a man might be justified
to day, and damned to morrow; and against Election of some to eternal life;
and against the In the High Commission, at the Censure of Th. Brabourne.
sanctification of the Sabbath, saying, I say, there is no sanctification of
the Sabbath, but Rest, Rest only. And therefore cease to wonder, that this man
should be so feareles, either privily to undermine, or apertly to oppugn the
express doctrines of our Church.


A. Yet I cannot but wonder, how he dare be so bold, and upon what grounds he
should thus impune bear himself.


B. The grounds I examine not, as pertaining to those that are more judicious,
and in highest place over the Church, but the fact cannot be dissembled.


A. But perhaps he will say, this is your private interpretation of the
Homily; and of a sort of factions Sabbatarian Novellists. But what instances
can you bring of any, that were eminent in this Church for learning and parts,
and not any way inclined to the Disciplinarian Faction, that concur with you
in the same judgment and understanding of the doctrine of our Church, laid
down in the Homily?


B. First, the words of the Homily (as you have heard, and as every one may
plainly see) are so express, clear, and full, that they cannot possibly
admit of the least ambiguity. And for instances, I could give many. I will
content my self with two witnesses, enough to establish the matter. What say
you to the learned Hooker, and to the learned Dr. Andrews? were these any way
inclined unto the Disciplinarian Faction? or were they novell Sabbatarians?


A. No surely; I think D. Wh. himself will not say so of them, but will admit
them for very competent witnesses in this cause, as without all exception.


B. First then for Mr. Hooker: He in his fifth book of Ecclesiastical Policy,
Sect. 70. has these words: If it be demanded, whether we observe these times
(to wit, holy days) as being thereunto bound by force of Divine Law, or else by
the only positive Ordinances of the Church: I answer to this, that the very
Law of nature it self, which all men confess to be Gods Law, requires in
general no less the sanctification of times, then of places, persons, and
things unto Gods honor. For which cause it has pleased him heretofore as of
the rest, so of time likewise to exact some parts by way of perpetual homage,
never to be dispensed withal, nor remitted; again, to require some other
parts of time, with as strict exaction, but for less continuance, and of the
rest which were left arbitrary, to accept what the Church shall in due
consideration consecrate voluntarily unto like Religious uses. Of the first
kind amongst the Jews, was the Sabbath day: Of the second, those Feasts which
are appointed to the Law of Moses; the Feast of Dedication invented by the
Church, stands in the number of the last kind. The Moral Law requiring
therefore a seventh part throughout the age of the whole world to be that way
employed, although with us the day be changed, in regard of a new revolution
begun by our Savior Christ, yet the same proportion of time continues, which
was before, because in reference to the benefit of Creation, and now much more,
of Renovation thereunto added by him, which was Prince of the world to come,
we are bound to account the sanctification of one day in seven, a duty which
Gods immutable Law does exact for ever. So he there. Where you see, how in
terminis he agrees and jumpeth with the express doctrine of our Church in
the Homily, touching the perpetual morality of the fourth Commandment, We
are bound (says he) to account the sanctification of one day in seven (which
before he says is now the Lords day) a duty which Gods immutable Law does
exact for ever. The second instance is the late Reverend and learned B. of
VVinkc. who in his speech in the Star Chamber, (which with B. Andrews speech
in Startechamber against Mr. Traske.
other of his works has been by the great diligence and care of the now
Archbishop of Cant. published in print) confuting Trasks opinion about the
Jews Sabbath, has these words: It has ever been the Churches doctrine, that
Christ made an end of all Sabbaths, by his Sabbath in the grave. That Sabbath,
was the last of them. And that the Lords day presently came in place of it:
Dominicus, etc. The Lords day was, by the Resurrection of Christ, declared to
be the Dominicus dies, Christi resurrectione declaratus est Christianis, and ex
illo coepit habere festivitatem suam. Aug. p. 119. c. 13
Christians day; and from that very time (of Christ's Resurrection) it began to
be celebrated, as the Christian man's Festival. For the Sabbath had reference
to the old Creation; but in Christ, we are a new creature, a new creation by
him, and to have a new Sabbath. And a little after: The Apostles, they kept
their meetings on that day. On that day they were (...) (that is) held their
synaxes, their solemn assemblies: to preach, to pray, to break bread, or
celebrate the Lords Supper, (...), the Lords Supper on the Lords day: For,
these two only (the Day and the Supper) have the Epithet of (...), Dominicum,
in the Scriptures; to show Dominicum is alike to be taken in both. This, for
the practice then: If you will have it in Precept; The Thus D. Andr. is point
blanck against
Apostle gives it (and in the same word still) that against (...) (the first
day of the week) the day of their assembly, every one should lay apart, what
God should moove him to offer to the Collection for the Saints, and D. Wh. who
page 270. (quoted before) says, that the Evangelical Law has not determined
any certain day or time. Yet lo here a certain day determined by the
Evangelical Law, delivered by the Apostle.
then offer it; which was soever in use. That, the day of oblations. So have
you it in practice and in precept, both, etc. And after: A thing so notorious,
so well known, even to the heathen themselves, as it was (in the Acts of the
Martyrs) ever an usual question of theirs (even of Course) in their examining,
What? Dominicum Servasti? Hold you the Sunday? and their answer known; they
all aver it, Christianus sum, intermittere non possum. I am a Christian, I
cannot intermit it. And besides others he cites Athanasius, who shows the
abolishing of the Jews day, and the succeeding of the Lords day, in place of
it, and that so full, as no man can wish more. Last of all, he both quotes,
and commends the Council of Laodicea, for that Canon 29. That Christen men may
not Iudaize, or grow Jews; that is, not make the Sabbath or Saturday, their
day of rest; but that they are to work on that day, giving their honor of
celebration to the Lords day. So he. I will add only a brief note of the
same Author in one of his Sermons; on those Sermon. 1. of the gunpowder treason,
on Psa. 118 23. 24.
words: This is the day, which the Lord has made: The day of Christ's
Resurrection, made by God, Dies Dominicus; and to it, do all the Fathers apply
this verse. So he. I might here also add what is said in that Book, which is
entitled, A Pattern of catecheticall Doctrine, and printed at London 1630.
which though it A Pattern of Catecheticall Doctrine. And, the whole Decalogue
succinctly and judiciously expounded.
have not Dr. Andrews name prefixed unto it; yet it is well known, it was his
work, (even ex ungne Leonem) being his Catecheticall exercise in Cambridge, as
I have been credibly informed, and whereof I have the Manuscript by me, which
I keep as an Antiquity. I know the book will not very well relish with our
adversaries palate. For there (page 233.) are these passages. Quest. But is not
the Sabbath a ceremony, and so abrogated by Christ? Answ. Do as Christ did in
the cause of divorce; look whither it were so from the beginning; Now the
beginning of the Sabbath was in Paradise before there was any sin, and so
before there needed any Savior, and so before there was any Ceremony, or
figure of a Savior. Object. And if they say it prefigured the rest that we
shall have from our sins in Christ. Answ. We grant it (as coming in
afterward Deuter. 5. 15. as it is in my Manuscript) and therefore the day is
changed, but yet no Ceremony prooved. 1. From the Law. 1. By the distinction
between the Law and a Ceremony, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. 14. the Law came immediately from
God: the Ceremonies were instituted by Moses. 2. It were not wise to set a
Ceremony in the midst of moral Precepts So there should be confusion. Manuscr.
. 3. This is a principle, that the Decalogue is the Law of Nature revived, and
the Law of Nature is the image of God; now in God there can be no Ceremony, but
all must be eternal: and so in this Image, which is the Law of Nature, and so
in the Decalogue. Secondly from the Gospel, Ephesians. 2. 4. all Ceremonies were
ended in Christ; but so was not the Sabbath; for Mat. 24. 20. Christ bids
them pray, that their visitation be not on the Sabbath day: so that there must
needs be a Sabbath after Christ's death. 3. Those which were Ceremonies were
abrogated, and not changed: but those which were not Ceremonies were changed:
as the Ministry from the Levites, to be chosen throughout the world: the seats
changed: so here the day changed from the day of Jews, to the Lords day. Rev.
1. 10. So there. And my Manuscript adds, And yet a Sabbath, Act. 1. 12. So
that this lasts as long, as the Church militant. So there. Now from the
premises in this instance, we observe, what was the judgment of that learned
Prelate, and how consonant to the doctrine of our Church in the Homily,
touching the Sabbath. He shows plainly, that the Lords day coming in place
of the old Sabbath day, and so becoming our Sabbath day, is by necessary
consequence grounded upon the fourth Commandment, the Law whereof is
perpetually, because naturally moral. So as hence I might frame this argument:
That day, which comes in place of the old Sabbath day, is commanded in the
fourth Commandment: But the Lords day is come in place of the old Sabbath:
Therefore it is commanded in the fourth Commandment. The Minor is clear in D.
Andr. and so from all the Fathers universally. The Major is no less true; for
if the fourth Commandment command the Sabbath day to be kept perpetually in
all ages (as says our Homily) and that Sabbath day of the Jews is now
abolished, and an other day, the Lords day is now come in place of the old, and
is the Christians Sabbath day: then of necessity, does the fourth Commandment
command us Christians to keep the Lords day, as our new Sabbath day. For
instance: One is made a present heir, yea and Lord of such an inheritance: he
enjoys it for his life; but when he dies, his next heir succeeds him in the
full title. So here. If they object, But Quo jure, by what right does the Lords
day take the place of the Sabbath day? I answer with D. Andrews, and all the
Fathers, out of the Psalm, God made it so: And Christ's Resurrection declared
it to be so: and the Apostles observed it so; yea and commanded it so too.


A. I remember the Treatiser confesses, that the Apostles Page 211. and 189.
themselves at sometimes observed this day; as Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2.


B. At sometimes only? what? no oftener, then he finds expressly mentioned?
This is like him in Oxford, who in his Sermon said, that the Jews kept the
Sabbath, but once in 40 years, during their abode in the wilderness. This he
gathered, because he found it but once mentioned. But he might have found it
twice, if he had looked well. So as this is a most beggarly kind of reasoning.
And how injurious an imputation is it to the Apostles, to say, that they kept
the Lords day sometimes, when as they taught and commanded others to observe it
weekly; as has been noted; did Christian people immediately after Christ's
Ascension observe this weekly day: and did not the Apostles themselves? This
is too grossly repugnant both to good reason, to our Homily, and to the
witnesses produced.


A. These two witnesses and instances I perceive come full home to the Homily.
Only one thing I observe, that D. Andrews calls the Lords day our new
Sabbath. This is a very rare thing, and that which the adversary in his book
does much except against, not
enduring that the Lords day should be called the Sabbath day. And I remember
one passage in it, wherein he quarrels H. B. for saying, that the ancient
Fathers did ever usually call it the Sabbath day. Wherein he says he has
wronged and wrested S. Augustine in those places by him alleged.


B. Concerning that, I have spoken with H. B. and he says, he will answer,
and make good what he has said against his adversary. And he told me, that
howsoever indeed those words, ever usually, might give advantage to the
adversary to carpe, yet being rightly understood, they may pass current
enough. For by, ever usually, he meant, that all the ancient Fathers, although
they always distinguish between the Lords day, and the Jews Sabbath day, yet
they ever took and observed the Lords day in stead of the old Sabbath day; and
ever used it for the rest-day or Sabbath day of Christians; Rest-day, and
Sabbath Day being all one. And H. B. told me, that if D. Wh. took advantage of
that, he could as easily Page 207.
take advantage of that speech of his, where he says, This name (Sabbath) is
not given it (the Lords day) in holy Scripture, or by any of the Godly Fathers
of the Church. Now (says H. B.) was not S. Augustine a Godly Father? And he,
not only in those places, quarrelled by D. W. and which H. B. will more fully
clear from his cavills, but more plainly, and without all ambiguity, in his
251. Sermon de Tempore, speaking of the Lords day, he has these very words:
Ac ideo etc. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 251. De eo quod scriptum est vacate, and videte
quoniam ego sum Deus. Ac ideo sancti Doctores Ecclesiae decreverunt omnem
gloriam Iudaici Sabbatismi in illam (Dominicam) transfer, ut quod ipsi in
figura, nos celebraremus in veritate and observemus ergo diem Dominicam
fratres, and sanctificemus illam, sicut antiquis praeceptum est de Sabbato,
dicente Legislatore, A vespere usque ad vesperam celebrabitis Sabbata vestra.
Videamus ^e otium nostrum vanum sit, sed a vespera diei Sabbati, usque ad
vesperam diei Dominici sequestrati a rurali opere, and ab omni negotio, soli
Divino cultui vacemus. Sic quoque sanctificamus rite Sabbatum Domini, dicente
Domino, Omne opus non facietis in eo.
And therefore the holy Doctors of the Church have decreed to transfer all
the glory of the Judicial Sabbath, or Sabbatisme, unto the Lords day, that
what they observed in a figure, we might celebrate in truth. Let us therefore
Brethren observe the Lords day, and sanctify it, like as it was commanded them
of old, concerning the Sabbath, the Lawgiver saying, From evening to evening
ye shall celebrate your Sabbaths. Let us take heed that our Rest be not vain,
but from the evening of the Saturday unto the evening of the Lords day, being
sequestered from rural work, and from all business, we may be vacant only
for the worship of God. Thus also we duly sanctify the Sabbath of the Lord, as
the Lord says, Ye shall do no work therein. So he. And a little before in
the same Sermon: Dominicum ergo diem, etc. Therefore the Apostles, and
Apostolical men, established the Lords day to be therefore observed with a
Religious solemnity, because in it our Redeemer arose from the dead. And which
is therefore called the Lords day, that in it we abstaining from terrene
works, or the allurements of the world, might only attend to Gods worship,
etc. So Augustine. And you see he speaks this, not as his own particular
opinion, but as it was the Tenet of the whole Catholic Church. So as the whole
ancient Catholic Church did not only observe, but call the Lords day the
Sabbath of the Lord, which they kept in place of the old Sabbath day. Thus did
H. B. inform me. And I remember Hilary calls it so, saying; Though in the
seventh day of the week, both the name and observance [Hilar in Psalm.
explanato Prologus] Cum in septimo die Sabbati sit and nomen, and observantia
constituta: tamen nos in octava die, quae and ipsa prima est, perfecti Sabbatum
festivitate laetamur.
of the Sabbath be established: yet we on the eigth day, which also is the
first, do enjoy the festivity of the perfect Sabbath. Lo here this Father also
calls the Lords day the day of our perfect Sabbath. But this suffice.


A. It is a very pregnant place for his purpose, and sufficient to answer fully
all the cavills, which are brought to the contrary; so as if H. B. do but
allege this one place, it will clear all the other. But Sir, here is a huge
clamor, especially of late days, raised against the name of Sabbath applied
to the Lords day. I pray you, may it not be called the Sabbath day? And what
does our Church hold concerning this?


B. That the Lords day may be called the Sabbath day, I make no question. And
that for many reasons: 1. Because it is our Restday: 2. The Apostle calls our
rest a Sabbatisme. 3. The very name of Lords day imports so much, as being the
Lords holy day, as Heb. 4 see Zanchy de hominis creatione. lib. 1. cap. 1.
Sect. 36.
Esa. 58. 13. and that day whereon the Lord rested from his work of
Redemption; and so sanctified by him, and to him.


A. D. Wh. denies, that Christ upon the day of his Resurrection rested from the
work of Redemption.


B. I conferred with H. B. about this, because it much concerns him to quitt
this question, seeing on Christ's resting on that day, he grounds the
Sabbatisme of it, as agreeable to the fourth Commandment. And in my judgment,
if he can evince and clear it, it will prove unanswerable. And he tells me,
that he has in two several Treatises in Latin against Theo. Brab. fully
cleared it, and remooved all objections and cavillations, that either Th. Br.
or F. Wh. have or can bring to the contrary. And he purposes to do the like
to D. Wh. And he made it very clear to me, that Christ's Rest from the work
of Redemption from sin on the Cross, and from death in the grave (which was
a branch of that work) began not, till his Resurrection. As for his Ascension,
that was into the place of rest; but his Resurrection was into the state of
rest. As for D. Wh. his objection, with Th. Brab. that Christ labored on that
day: H. B. shows it to be absurd and ridiculous, seeing Christ arose with a
body glorified and impassible, so as his actions that day could not be called a
labor, that thereby the new Sabbath should be broken. But you ask me, what
our Church holds concerning this, that the Lords day is called the Sabbath
day. In brief, I have observed, that in the Homilies it is no less then ten
several times called expressly the Sabbath day;
8. times in the Homily forecited, and twice in the third Homily of Rebellion.
Also Canon 70. in the Articles of the two last Trienniall visitations of
London. In K. James his Proclamation May 7. 1603 twice. In an exhortation at a
general Fast set forth by him in the first year of his Reign. In Archbishop
Bancrofts visitation Articles for Canterbury, Art. 75. 76. I might compile a
whole volume of instances in this kind. Yea there seldom comes forth a Brief,
but it calls it the Sabbath day. But least neither the Church of England in her
public doctrine, nor the pious works of her grave and learned sons, may
perhaps satisfy the Adversaries importunity: yet I hope the writings of his
more pious, and no less learned brother D. John White, (and those also both
republished, and vindicated by Fr. White, from the Jesuits calumnies, white
dyed black etc.) will a little qualify him. How D. John White does not only
call the Lords day the Sabbath day, as once Sect. 38. 1. The way to the true
Church.
and twice Sect. 43. digress. 46. 6. but he also condemns all profane sports
and recreations on that day, and among the rest dancing for one. And for this
he alleges the example of the Papists, as the most notorious
Sabbath Breakers in this kind.


A. Does he so, Sir; This seems strange to me, that so great a Clerk, as Fr.
White, should so far forget himself, as not to remember what his brother
has write. Surely if it be so, it will be a cooling card, and no small
disgrace to his Lo; when so worthy and reverend a Brother shall be brought as a
witness against him. But I pray you for my better satisfaction, relate to me
the very passages and words of D. John White.


B. I will. In Digress. 46. the title whereofis, Naming certain Ibid. Sect 43.
Digress. 46. n. 6.
points of the Popish Religion, which directly tend to the maintenance of open
sin, and liberty of life. Now among many foul and profane practices (as he
calls them) this he notes for one, namely the profanation of the Sabbath, in
these words: That they hold it lawful on the Sabbath day, to follow suits,
travel, hunt, DANCE, keep faires, and such like. This is it that has made
Papists the most notorious Sabbath Breakers that live. So he. And Ibid Sect.
38. n. 1.
Sect. 38. n. 1. he says: Let it be observed, if all disorders be not most in
those parts among us, where the people is most Pope-holy, etc. And for mine
own part, having spent much of my time among them, this I have found, that in
all excess of sin, Papists have been the ringleaders, in riotous companies,
in drunken meetings, in seditious assemblies and practices, in profaning the
Sabbath in quarrels and brawles, in stage plays, Greenes, Ales, and all
heathenish customs, etc. Thus this reverend Divine, Candore notabilis ipso,
whom all the Jesuitical smoke out of the bottomless pit cannot besweere or
besumdge, or dye black with all their black-mouthed obloquies.


A. Surely these are very pregnant passages. And it makes me tremble to think,
and amazeth me, how one White is so contrary to another; as also, how the
Libertinisme dispensed now a days on the Sabbath, tends to bring us
Protestants to be like to the Papists in their profane times, in taking up
their heathenish savage, and barbarous manners and customs.


B. We have all of us cause to lament what we see, and to fear yet more
sinful mischiefs to follow, if they be not prevented.


A. I begin to blame my own negligence, I did not think that our Church, and
the Archbishops and Bishops themselves, and K. James and others had so
familiarly used to call the Lords day the Sabbath day. And it seems, that D.
Wh. has not well read over out own Church Records, how skillfull soever he
profess himself to be in Antiquity, tanquam in aliena republica, (...); or as
the Lamiae, who abroad carried their eyes in their heads, but at home closed
them up in a box. Otherwise, I suppose he would not so frequently brand all
those for novell Sabbatarians, who call the Lords day the Sabbath day.


B. What is his reason, I know not. Let him look to it. Me thinks the very
reading of the fourth Commandment every Lords day, might stop his mouth;
saving that he has found out many inventions to elude the nature and property
of this Commandment, as page 158. 159. etc. which I hope H. B. will meet
withal.


A. I shall be glad to see it. And yet I somewhat correct my former conceit of
D. Wh. For I find, he has read the Homily and Injunction, as page 224.


B. Indeed I thank you for minding me of it. I remember he Page 224.
quotes the Homily in one place of his Book (and that is all as far as I
have observed) where he has picked out one little piece, to maintain his
Christian Libertinisme in point of labor on the Lords day. But it is
altogether perverted by him for works of great necessity, as scathfire,
invasion of enemies, etc. God allows on the Sabbath. And the Injunction of
Queen Eliz. 20. he there also no less perverteth, while he confounds the
Lords day with other holy days, which the Injunction does clearly distinguish
for that liberty, which it dispenses with, touching work in harvest time is
not spoken of the Lords day, or Holy day, as it is there called, and set alone
by it self, but of holy and festival days only, of humain institution.


A. And I thank you for this observation. And falling here upon work on the
Lords day, I am occasiotied to ask your judgment of those passages of his,
touching Recreations on that day, in which argument he has spent many leaves.


B. But without any good fruit. And as his discourses hereupon are large, so
they require a large confutation, which I hope H. B. will perform. For the
present, a little to satisfy your request, thus much: He distinguishes
Recreations into two sorts: 1. Honest and lawful. 2. Vicious and unlawful.
For his definitions, or descriptions of them, I pass them by, as requiring a
larger answer. In sum, I note his pitiful enterfeerings by equivocations,
contradictions, and the artifice of his purest natural wit, in spinning a
curious web of so fine a thread, as wherewith though he may think to cover
himself, yet it is pervious and penetrable to every eye. He says, All kinds
of Recreation, which are of evil quality, Page 229.
in respect of their object; or which are attended with evil and vicious
circumstances, are unlawful, and to be refrayned upon all days, and at all
seasons. But if they be used upon the Lords day, or on other Festival days,
they are sacrilegious, because they rob God of his honor, to whose worship and
service the holy day is devoted: and they defile the souls of men, for the
cleansing and edifying whereof the holy day is deputed. And page 259. he
relates out of ancient Imperial Edicts, that all obscene, lascivious, and
voluptuous pastime* are prohibited, etc. And yet page 266. he has these
words: This seems to me to have been a prime motive to our Religious
Governors, of allowing the people of the Land some Recreations (not prohibited
by our Laws) upon the holy days. For if they should (upon Puritan principles)
restrain them wholly from all repast* the Holyday would be more unwelcome to
them, then the plough-day: and besides, it might engender in peoples minds a
distaste of their present Religion, and manner of serving God. So he. Where I
note sundry poor and pitiful shifts and shu^^lings. For first, page 258. he
says, Also our most gracious and Religious Sovereign is the Lords Vicegerent,
to restrain the abuse, and scandalous profanation of the Lords day: And he is
a noble Successor of those glorious Princes, which in ancient times, by their
Royal and Imperial Edicts and Constitutions, prohibited on this day, All
obscene, lascivious, and voluptuous pastimes, etc. If then I might be so bold,
I would ask him, what he thinks of promiscuous meetings of wanton youth in
their May-games, setting up of May-poles, dancing about them, dancing the
Morice, and leading the ringdance, and the like: unto which D. Wh. in the
former passage, 266. does not obscurely point as it were with the finger. Are
not these obscene, or lascivious and voluptuous pastimes? And if so, are they
not prohibited by Royal and Imperial Edicts and Constitutions of those
glorious ancient Princes, whereof our most Gracious and Religious Sovereign,
the Lords Vicegerent, for restraining the abuse and scandalous profanation of
the Lords day, is a noble Successor? Lo then, what a monstrous Contradiction is
here.


A. But do ancient Emperors in their Imperial Edicts prohibit such
Recreations on the Lords day?


B. I will give you one instance, in stead of many. Carolus M. Caroli M. Leges
Ecclesiast. lib. 6. cap. 202.
Placuit, It is our pleasure, that all the faithful do reverently observe the
Lords day, in which the Lord rose again. For if Pagans, for the memory and
reverence of their gods, do celebrate certain days, and the Jews do
carnally observe the Sabbath: how much more ought this day to be honorably
celebrated of Christians, that on this Holyday they attend not upon vain
fables, or idle chat, or songs, or dances, or scoffings, standing in the
Crosse-wayes, or streets, as they usually do; but that they have recourse to
the Priests, or some wise, and good man, that they may profit by their
preaching and good discourses, such as concern the soul. In like sort also
les shepherds, or keepers of cattle, by going and returning into the feilds,
and home again, do so, that all may know such to be true, and devout
Christians. So he. And his Son, Ludovicus Pius, in his Additionalls,
repeating the selfsame Constitution of his Father verbatim, does add these
words: Ludovic. Pius ibid. Additio c. 9.
Proinde, etc. Therefore it is necessary, that first Priests, Kings and
Princes, and all the faithful, do most devoutly give all due observance, and
reverence to this day. So he.


A. A most noble instance, and home. For I perceive this Imperial Decree
condemns all dancing, especially on the Lords day. But let me not interrupt
you.


B. To proceed then upon the former passages: Secondly, I note how poorly he
plays the Divine, or Doctor, by giving indulgence of more liberty to such as
have queasy stomaks, and cannot digest those wholesome meats, which Gods word,
and all sound Divines and Doctors do prescribe. This is just, as if a sick
Patient should refuse some bitter pills or potions, which are for his health,
complaining he cannot endure the bitterness of them: and then forsooth his
palate must be pleased with some delicious thing, which corrupts the stomach,
and feeds the disease. Or as if a wanton boy must be permitted so many hours
play every day, because he has learned one lesson, and complaynes the task
is too hard to learn more. Or as if a Servant, being set about his Masters
business, though it be otherwise easy and tolerable, yet complaynes it is too
hard a task, and therefore he must have liberty to take his pleasure one part
of the day. And surely this follows by good reason, from the greater to the
less, from Gods day to man's day, and from Gods service to man's service. Give
man a power thus to dispense with a part of the Lords day, which is an
incrochment upon the fourth Commandment, according to the doctrine of our
Church: and why may not man assume to himself a power (as the Pope does) to
dispense with servants, or children, by allowing them sometime, wherein they
shall be free from the control of their Masters and Parents?

Thirdly, I note what a great blemish he fastens upon our Religion, as if it
were either too rigorous, or too licentious. Too rigorous, by laying no other
burden upon them, but that of Christ, which though in its own nature it be
light and easy, yet to the sons of Belial it seems insupportable, and
intolerable. As if sanctity, and purity of life were an over rigid
preciseness, and a Puritan principle. Or too licentious, by giving indulgence,
and dispensation to loose Libertines, and teaching men to become more filthy
still, and to be as the unclean Beasts, that chew not the Cudde, or as the sow
that is washed, to return to their wallowing in their profuse and profane
sports and pastimes, when no sooner they are out of the Church, but they run
to their excess of riot. And here I cannot but record an excellent passage in
Nazianzen, to shame the impudency of these times. This Godly Father, reprooving
the loose carriage of Christians in his time, especially on the days of
solemn and sacred assemblyes, as on the Lords days, says: Postquam, etc.
After they are gone out of the Church, casting Clem. Alex. Poedag. lib. 3 c.
11. nere the end. He lived about the year of Christ 200.
aside all that instruction, they had there learned, they fashion themselves to
the vulgar, with whom they converse; or rather laying aside the false and
counterfeit vizard of gravity, they are discovered to be such, as they were not
known to be before: and having seemed to give some reverence to Gods word,
while it was preached, they leave it: and out of the Church, they fall to
delight and sport themselves in an impious manner, and with love songs, with the
noise of Minstrells, as piping, clapping the hands, being full of strong
drink, and defiled with all kind of muddy and dorty pleasures. And whilst they
chant it over and over, they who celebrated the honor of immortality, by and
by fall to a most wicked recantation; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall dye. And these are not dead to morrow, but indeed are now dead unto God;
burying the dead, that is, themselves, in the grave of death. So he. Which
liberty even the Papists themselves, and Bellarmine abundantly, do with open
voice declame against, and are ashamed of, so far will they be from being
willing to be drawn to such a Religion, by the motives of such liberty. And
herein does our Treatiser miserably abuse the Scripture, and so turn the Grace
of God into wantonness. For page 257. he says, The Law of Christ is sweet and
easy, Mat. 11. 30. and, his Commandments are not grievous, 1. Ioh. 5. 3. And
what then? Is Christ's Law so sweet and easy, as that it gives indulgence to
profane Libertinisme? This is to make the Gospel a sweet fable, as that
Atheistical Pontifician said. Or as an other in his Sermon, upon those words
of Christ, The son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day: thence inferred,
that Christ had given us liberty to play on the Sabbath. And this the Treatiser
calls Page 268.
Christian liberty, and on the contrary, the holy and Religious keeping of the
Lords day, a superstitious Judicial fancy, and Page 249.
rigid Ordinances of our Sunday-Sabbatarians. Whereas the ancient Godly See
Aug. de Consensu Evangelist. l. 2* c* ^7.
Fathers called the loose profaning of the Lords day by dancing and revelling,
a Jewish Sabbatising. A point well to be observed.

Fourthly I observe a very improper, and so untrue speech; where
he says* If they should (upon Paritan Principles) restrain them wholly from
all repast. Who (I pray you) do restrain the people from all repast on the
Lords day? Or is profane sport a repast, to feed the humor of the rude vulgar?
It seems so. And liberty to youth is as their meat and drink.

Fifthly page 266. he says: Some Recreations (not prohibited by our laws) our
Religious Governors allow upon Holy Days. And page 232. Civil recreation, not
prohibited in terms, neither yet by any necessary consequence from the law,
cannot be simply unlawful. And page 231. No just law, divine, Ecclesiastical,
or Civil, does totally prohibit the same. To this I reply, that those sports
forespecified, are prohibited by law, both divine, Ecclesiastical, and Civil.
1. by divine law: as Gloss Interlin. Haec sunt opera tenebrarum.
Romans 13. 13. Opera carnis ibi. M. Bucer* de Regno Christi. lib. 2. ca. 10.
Scripta Anglicana.
Gal. 5. 21. 1. Pet. 4. 3. In the fourth commandment for as Bucer says:
writing to K. Edw. 6. His diebus. On these, to wit, Holy Days, the works of
the flesh are not to be allowed, nor profane businesses, nor licentious sports,
nor unseemly drinkings, and other vicious pleasures. Indeed the people are to
be allowed honest recreations at fit seasons: but seeing God has so severely
forbidden works profitable for the body, to be done on days sanctified to his
Name: how much more greivously is he offended, when th^se days are profaned
with wanton, and for the most part wicked works? Six days (says he) thou
shall do all thy work; to wit, such as concerns the sustentation, or else
the recreation of this present life: but the seventh day is the Lords Sabbath,
on it thou shall not do any work: not any, which the Lord himself has not
commanded to be done on that day: but those which he has commanded, they are
all most religiously to be observed on the Holy Days. And of so weak and
slippery faith are we all, as the daily renewing and confirming of the same is
very necessary for us. Whereas most men more greivously offend and provoke Gods
Majesty on these days, then on other days. By all means therefore it is the
office of your sacred Majesty against this so great dishonor of God, and
lawles profanation of his Holy Days, to revive the authority, of Gods law, and
therein also to follow the examples of pious Princes, etc. So he.

Secondly: Those foresaid sports are prohibited by Ecclesiastical laws, for
all Councels do universally condemn them. To instance Council. Mediolan. 4.
one or two. The Council of Millan. Nefasesse, etc. It is impious, that sacred
days instituted for the commemoration of the greatest benefits of God, and to
render our best praises unto him, should be transferred to those things, which
most of all abhor from that service: as leapings, sports, daunces, enterludes
or shows, which being inticements to filthy pleasures, do much delight the
Devil, the enemy of man's salvation. And another of Millan: That no sports, or
vain sights, Council. Mediolan. 1.
dancings, leaping, be used at all in Cities, suburbs, town, or any where eis
on the Holy Days. And yet another Council at Millan: Quoniam, Council.
Mediolan. 3.
etc. Because it is found by too much experience in this Province, that in
these corrupted times and manners, that people for the most part never meet at
dancing, merriments, leapings, and the like, without many, and those most
grievous offenses of God, and that both by reason of filthy thoughts and
obscene speeches, dishonest actions, corruption of manners, and most pernicious
bates to all the lusts of the flesh, perpetually coupled with them, and also of
murders, brawles, dissentions, whoredoms, adulteries, and many other evils,
the most frequent consequences thereof, wherefore on Holy Days we prohibit
leapings, sports, dancings, etc. Now these Councels were kept in Italy. Yea a
Council Conc. Romans anno 826. Conc. pars 3. Bin.
at Rome, but more ancient: Of Feastings not to be made upon Holy Days; and,
On Holy Days dancing not to be used: There be some, and specially women, which
on Holy Days by their balling, singing filthy songs, holding and leading
dances, so imitating the guise of Pagans, do bring it among Christians, such,
if they come to the Church, with lesser sins, they return from it with
greater. And if upon admonition they desisted not, Leo 4. denounces
excommunication against them. Lo here, this Council at Rome says, that dancing
on Holy Days is a heathen guise, brought in among Christians. Can. Conc.
Colon. anno 1563. explic in Deoalogum.
Shall I add one more. The Council of Colen: deinde impingunt. Again, they
offend against this Precept, who on Holy Days are intent upon sports,
pastimes, dice, leaping, dancing the ring, who are vacant for revellings,
drinkings, superfluous pomp, who defile the Holy Days with wicked talk, and
filthy songs: such does the Council of Carthage, and of Toledo, decree to be
excommunicate. For holy solemnities and feasts are not therefore instituted, to
serve our filthy lusts, or that we should collect together our sins, but that
we should altogether abandon them, and not to celebrate them with corporal
refection or recreation, but spiritual rejoicing. And how is it possible, that
in dances the sanctification of the Sabbath should be kept, where modesty it
self is not secure from snares. So the Council. But what need we go further,
then our own Homily forecited, which says, that in pride, in excess, like
rats in brawling, fighting, quarrelling, wantonness, toy^sh talking, and filthy
fleshlines, God is more dishonored, and the devil better served on the
Sunday, or Sabbath day, then upon all the days of the week besides. Now
though moris dances and maygames, and the like, be not here condemned in
terminis, yet by consequence they be: since they are the inseparable companions,
and most pernicious occasions of inflaming the lusts, and of manifold
mischeifs; as has been noted. Therefore by just Ecclesiastical laws such
sports are prohibited.

Thirdly, They are prohibited by just Civil laws. Besides those instances
fore-alleged of the Edicts of Charolus Mag. and Ludovicus Pius his Son: we
may to the honor of our nation, and the eternal fame of our religious King
Charles, produce the first Act of Parliament in I. Caroli, the prime gemme in
his Royal diadem; and which deserves to be written in golden Characters.
Forasmuch as there is nothing more acceptable to God, then the true and sincere
worship and service of Him, according to his holy will, and that the holy
keeping of the Lords day is a principal part of the true service of God, which
in very many places of this Realm has been, and now is profaned and neglected
by a disorderly sort of people, in exercising and frequenting Beare-baiting,
Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common plays, and other unlawful exercises and
pastimes upon the Lords day, etc. That from henceforth, etc. there shall be no
Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, common plays, or other unlawful
exercises or pastimes within their own Parishes, Hence it is plain, that all
manner of sports and pastimes are unlawful on the Lords day; for Beare-baiting
and Bull-baiting are prohibited, as unlawful on this day, which else are made
lawful on other days. And therefore dancing, Maygames, Morrices, and the
like, how ever men may account them lawful on other days, yet for the very
reasons afore-sayd, forasmuch as they are prohibited as unlawful by Imperial
Edicts of ancient Kings and Emperors, of whom our most gracious and religious
sovereign is by the Treatiser acknowledged to be the noble, successor, in
restraining the abuse, and scandalous profanation of the Lords day: on this day
at least, they are unlawful. I will add but one instance more, and that is out
of Justinian, where he seth down this Imperial Constitution. Die Dominico,
etc. On the Lords day, which of the whole week is the first, Justinian. Cod.
15. tit. 5.
all pleasures of sports and pastimes being denied to the people through all
Cities, let the whole minds of Christians be occupied in the service of God:
and if any shall on this day be taken up with the madness of Jewish impiety, or
with the error and franticknes of brutish Paganism, let him know, that there
is a difference to be put between the time of prayers, and the time of
pleasures. Yea so religiously was this day observed, as if the Emperors
birthday fell upon it, it must be put of to another day of the week; and
says the Constitution, If the people shall show less reverence toward us
then, than they were wont, let no man be offended with it, because men do give
greatest honor to our clemency, when the worlds obedience is entirely yielded
to the virtues and merits of Almighty God. So there. In fine, in a A necessary
Doctrine for a Christen man.
book set forth by King Hen. 8. and inscribted to his loving and faithful
subjects, which before had been set forth by the Printed 1537. The Institution
of a Christen man.
whole Clergy of the Realm, with the names of 21. Prelates, besides many
Doctors, prefixed unto it, and approoved by both the houses of Parliament: are
these passages, Upon the fourth Commandment.
Against this Commandment generally do offend all they, which will not cease
from their own carnal wills and pleasures, that do not give themselves
Entirely and wholly, without any impediment unto all holy works, and that not
only in the house of God, but also in their own houses; but (as commonly is
used) pass the time either in idleness, in gluttony, in riot, or other vain,
or idle pastime; which is not according to the intent and meaning of this
Commandment, but after the usage and custom of the Jews, and does much offend
God, and provoke his indignation and wrath toward us. And it is added in the
Clergies Institution fol. 77. 2.
book, for as S. Austen says of the Jews, they should be better occupied,
laboring in their feilds, and to be at the plough, then to be idle at home.
And women should better bestow their time in spinning of woll, then upon the
Sabbath day to lose their time in leaping, and dancing, and other idle wanton,
lose time* So there. Now tell me Brother, what think you of this, that those
Prelates and Clergy of England in the very first duskish dawning of the
morning, should be so clear, orthodox, and zealous in the point of the
Sabbath, and now in the Meridian of the Gospel so many, with their eyes closed
up, do with both hands fight against this truth?


A. I confess it is to me no small matter of wonder. But Sir now that you have
so fully cleared the point about Recreation from all the subterfuges of him,
that has so moyled himself to make some thing of nothing, and therein also
have vindicated the Laws both Divine, Ecclesiastical and Civil, from giving
any countenance or connivence to such Recreations: there remaynes yet one thing
to be cleared, and that is, about the judgment of the reformed Churches beyond
the Seas, which the opposite author pleads to be all for him.


B. Its true. And I cannot but smile, when I think of it. That they, which
make no bones even in open Court to vilify the prime pillars of those
Churches, yea and to nullify the Churches themselves, as if they were no true
Churches, as having no lawful Ministers, because no Prelates to put them in
orders: should notwithstanding daigne to grace them so much, as to call them
in, and to account them competent witnesses in the cause. But a bad cause is
glad of any Patron, or Advocate to plead for it, though the Client have openly
stigmatized him for a (...). But what stead will the Reformed Divines stand him
in? Certainly in the point of Sports and Recreations they will utterly fail
him, yea and disclame him too. In the point of the Institution of the Lords
day, indeed, and the obligation of it to Christians, a great part is for him,
though the better part is for us. This is confessed of us.


A. But I pray you, are they against him in the point of Sports and
Recreations? I have been credibly informed, that the contrary report has made
a strong impression of persuasion in some gentle and generous breasts, whose
credulity subtle insinuations can prevail so with, as to make them believe
the Moon is made of green cheese. I pray you therefore clear this one point,
and I will weary you no longer at this time, the night now drawing on apace.


B. In a word then. True it is, that many and most of those Churches, for the
vulgar generality, come far short of the due esteem of the Lords day in
point of practice. But yet, for the Ministers of the 17. Provinces Reformed,
and of the neighboring Churches in Germany, even all those; that were of the
Council of Dort, did unanimously make some Canons and Decrees, jointly to
petition the States General of the United Provinces, for the reformation of
the manifold profanations of the Lords day. For in the 14. Session are these
words: Ne autem, etc. And least the people on the Lords days in the
afternoon, being taken up with other affairs or exercises, be withdrawn from
the afternoon-sermons, the Magistrates are to be supplicated, that they by more
severe Edicts prohibit all servile, or daily works, and especially sports,
drinkings, and other profanations of the Sabbath, whereby the afternoon time
on the Lords days, and specially in villages, is usually spent, that so by
this means also they may be brought to those afternoon Sermons, and so may
learn to sanctify the whole Sabbath day. And D. VVallaeus in his Preface
before his Treatise of the Sabbath, has set down so much of the Synods
Petition to the States, as was drawn into form for this purpose, in these
words: Vt gravissimae illae, etc. That these most grievous and manifold
profanations of the Sess. 177.
Sabbath, which are daily committed by Faires, wakes, banquets of societies,
Watchmen, Neighbourhoods, Marriages; by the exercise of Arms, by hunting,
fishing, fowling, playing at ball, by Histrionicall acting of Comedies, by
dauncings, Port-hale of goods, drinkings; and that many other like things,
which in these Countries do every where abound, to the great scandal and
reproach of the Reformed Religion, and to the great hindera^ce of Gods worship,
may be most strictly prohibited etc. So the Synod. Thus in one brief view you
see the unanimous judgment of the Divines of that Synod, for the due
sanctification of the Lords day, or Sabbath day, as they often call it:
although the stream of a wicked custom in point of practice has made an
universal inundation in those Provinces, which (I fear) will (in time) drown
them up in their profaneness. And the Synods judgment in the point of
Institution by Divine authority and that from the fourth Commandment, seems
to be no less sound and consentient, since they so often call the Lords day the
Sabbath day, and so zealously plead for the due sanctification thereof. (...)
enough of this.


A. Sir, I heartily thank you for this your sweet conference, which I could be
content might last yet a whole summers day, but that (as I said) the day now
bidding us* farewell, leaves us to bid one another good night.


B. And so good night to you Brother.


A. And to you also, good Brother.


Deo gratias. October. 2. 1635.

