THE SCEPTER OF IVDAH: Or, what manner of Government it was, that unto the
Commonwealth or Church of Israel was by the Law of God appointed.

By Edm. Bunny.

Deuteronomy. 4: verse. 8. What nation is so great, that has ordinances and laws so
righteous, as is all this Law, which I set before you this day?

Imprinted at London by N. Newton, and A. Hatfield, for John Wight.

1584.

Gryphus Graiensis.

INTEGRA LEX AEQVI CVSTOS RECTIQVE MAGISTRA NON HABET AFFETVA SED CAVSAS IVRE
CVEERNAT
frontispiece, griffyn rampant

Quo truci es vultu, Gryphe, parce rectis:
In malos totus rapiare saevus:
Sic tuis semper genuina fies
Iuris imago.
Unto the Right Honorable, Worshipful, and deerly beloved in the Lord, the
Gentlemen and Students of Graies In, Edm. BVNNY wishes grace, mercy, and
peace from God the Father, through Jesus Christ his Son our Lord.
HAving gathered out this Treatise of the Israelites government, more than six
years since, as a part or member of a greater work that before that time I had
in hand, and shall not be able as yet to finish: I had in the mean time no other
purpose, but to stay it with the rest, til I should be able to finish the
whole, and then to publish al together. But since espieng, that the whole work
is like to grow so large, and of such importance withal, that it is not like to
be finished, any thing near within the time that before I conceived (nor
convenient it should, but as it may be orderly done) I have now thought good to
publish this before, not only to the common use of others, but for mine own
furtherance also. For mine opinion is, that whereas the matter is such as
craveth good industry, truly to gather; and judgment likewise, orderly and
aptly to dispose: howsoever I have yet but drawn as it were the first lines
thereof, yet, when I com to place it in the work it self, then by the help and
judgment of others (by communicating it before unto them, which otherwise I
could not have so well) I may be able the better to do it. Which help or
advantage I have thought good rather to use in this part only of all the Bible,
for that it is of all the old Testament, the principal part; and not fully
enough (me think) as yet digested by others. Which that now I praesent unto
you, the only reason is not, for that sometime I have been of your company
(which notwithstanding I so esteem of, as that I acknowledge it my bounden
duty, ever with reverence to be thankful for it) but much rather because it
does very well accord, that such as are occupied in the laws of the Realm, and
now in the way to be in place of government hereafter, have some recourse withal
unto the righteous laws of God, and to the government that he of old to his
people ordained. Wherein although I have not attanied to that, which were
needful to such a purpose, nor may so much as hope to com any thing near it, in
the best that I am able to do: yet may it suffice to commend unto you this
consideration, that it shall be good for you to ioin the one with the other.
Whereunto whereas you have alredie an open way in the text it self, and in those
that have written thereon: if this little travel of mine, by the shortness or
plainnes of it may any thing further, it is the thing that I have desired,
howsoever I have praevailed therein. In which respect you are much beholding to
the goodness of God, that has opened your eyes so far, as that now you see it
to be your duties, and a special point of wisdom withal, to have ordinary
teachers of your own: and that he has, both framed your hearts to do
accordingly; and given you so rich a blessing therein. By means whereof, the
less that such weak labors of mine may be to any use unto you, though I am,
and so ought to be the gladder of it; and so much the less do need, to busy
my self to make supply: yet, neither might I of duty shrink from that, which
I am (howsoever) enabled to do; neither is it amiss for you, to be admonished
of others besides. Whatsoever can be done is little enough: but God I trust will
give supply; and make you able, not only to understand his will, but in some
good measure also to do it. Unto whose grace I humbly commend your selves, and
your studies, to be in such sort directed by him, as may be most to his glory,
and to the benefit of those his people where your calling shall be.

From Bolton-Percie in the ancientie of York,
the fifth of September, 1584.
To the Reader.
IT may be, thou will look for (gentle Reader) that in this Treatise following
I should have set down not only the ordinances themselves that unto the
Israelites were praescribed: but also the interpretation and meaning of them:
both for the better understanding thereof; and because that most of them are
altogether abolished to us, but so far as in sense and spirit, we are to take
instruction of them. I have therefore to give thee to understand, that it was of
purpose by me omitted, partly because that many others have written of it, and
the book would so have grown to be very great: but chiefly for that it agrees
not with the course that I have taken, meaning first to set down the story of
the church by it self: and then, under the doctrine of it, to show the sense
of those constitutions that were given unto it. As for the Table of the
scriptures that follows at the end of the book, I have to this end gathered
the same, that so it may more easily be seen, what texts of the law are
already gathered hither, and unto what place they are sorted: that so it might
more easily appeer, what they are that are omitted; and how aptly those are
applied that already are taken. Which I trust shall be a ready way for others,
both to judge better of this which is done: and to amend the same to their own
private use as need shall require. Of other things I trust I shall not need to
admonish thee: neither yet, if thou find any use of this, to take it unto thee.
So fare thou well, and give glory to God: and, to thy power, employ thy self
to the use of thy neighbor.

Errata.
Page. 55. Line. 27.

Fault. any heerin, or

for

Correction. any Herem, or.

The effect and method of the Treatise ensuing.
The government of Israel (so far as is discoursed of in this Treatise ensuing)
consists of two principal sorts or kinds: viz. One, that they have common
with others: which is the instinct of nature, or that common sense and feeling
of aequitie, which God has imprinted in the nature of al, not only in men, but
(after a sort) in diverse other creatures besides. Section. 1-5. The other, that
which they had proper to themselves, or such as at that time (and many years
after) was not bestowed on any other people in all the world. Which was the same
that was praescribed unto them by the written law of God, under the ministry
and regiment of Moses. Of which there be two principal parts. One concerning
their inhabiting of the land that God did give them. Concerning which, First,
there is a description of the land it self. Sect. 6-10. Then it is declared
how it was allotted unto them: that is, First, how they should make it theirs,
or take it into their hands: to which appertains Both their entry at the
first. Sect. 11, 12. And in the division or distribution thereof that afterward
they made among them. Sect. 13-16.
Then, in what manner they should possess it or hold it. Sect. 17-19.

The other concerning their behavior therein: whereunto belong two principal
parts: First what was the direction they had, for to frame their lives thereby:
First as touching their private life at home, toward God and man: which is set
down by the order of the ten commandments. Se. 20-30. Then as touching the
publik exercise of their religion: where unto appertain these two: First their
sacraments. Sect. 31. Then their sacrifices. Concerning which, First there is
set down matter before (for the better understanding of them:) viz. First,
somewhat of the Place, wherein they should be offered. Se. 32-33. Persons, to
whom this sacrificing belonged. Section. 35-38. Creatures, that were to be
offered Sect. 39.
Then somewhat also of their solemn feasts. Sect. 40, 41.
Then the sacrifices themselves ^^^^^clar^ First those that were ordinary.
Sect. 42. Then extra ordinary: and therein, First such as were for the whole
congregation. Section. 43-45. Then such as were for several persons. Se. 46-49.




Then in what sort their falts were to be punished. Whereunto belong: What
authority was erected among them on this behalf. ^^, 51 What rules of judgment
were unto them praescribed. Which concern Partly magistr themselves. Section.
52. But chiefly others: and then, Either the manner of trial. Sect. 53. Or the
punishment it self du to offenders: Either whole multitudes Sect. 54, 55. Or
several persons, according as they have offended against any of the
commandments of God. Sect. 56-62.







THE SCEPTER OF IVDAH: or, what manner of government it was, that unto the
Commonwealth or church of Israel was appointed.
BEing purposed to inquire of the policy of the Jews, Not to be considered
what government they used: but what was praescribed unto them.
or the manner of government that among the Israelites was established, it shall
not be good for any of us, to cast our eyes to the estate of the people on that
behalf, as at any time it was among them, either before the law was given; or
after, when they dwelt in their land: because that til the giving of the law,
it was very unperfect; and after that once they came to their land, neither is
it sufficiently set forth what it was then; neither was the pattern
praescribed, so observed by them, but that, for the most part, it was very
much corrupted one way or other. Again, to cast our eyes on the whole, from the
first time that they were a people, unto the latter end of them, would with the
manifold variety that it carries with it, confound our memory and judgment
in such sort, that we should be hardly able to epsy, what we had to think
thereof. On the other side, what manner of government was appointed of God unto
the^, is so plainly expressed in the law, that taking some pains to digest the
same to some plainer method, we may quikly see what it was, and much more
certainly in that rule given them from God, than in their own practice, which
was often times very much corrupted by them. For the quaestion that I speak of,
and that most of al appertains to this matter, is not, under what kind of
regiment they lived, or at any time was in ure and force among them: but, what
kind of government it was, which it pleased God to appoint unto them, and under
which they ought to have lived for the time that it was to them commended.

2 Having so found out the compass of our matter, That which was praescribed
consisted of two parts: the instinct of nature; and the law written.
and set out the bounds thereof, we have now to search, what kind of government
it was, that it pleased God, then in the wilderness to appoint unto them: which
was nothing else, but only that rule of aequitie which God has printed in the
heart of mankind generally, though in some more, in some less; by his written
word, amended and bettered, as his wisdom thought most meet. For though we have
not (since the fall) any perfection in any thing at al; yet have we a reasonable
light in such matters, as do appertain to this civil or outward life of ours:
and though we have a kind of knowledge in them, notwithstanding the decay that
came in by the fall; yet is the same so unperfect, that it was needful some way
to be helped. Hence is it, that when God would give unto them the rule and
direction of their life (that, as he had chosen them to be a peculiar people to
him, so they might walk somewhat worthy of so holy a calling) he would
neither altogether leave them to that instinct of nature as he did the rest;
because that in many things it came very short: neither would he give them al
particulars in writing; because that it was not so very needful, and otherwise
might be somewhat chargeable unto them, overlaieng their weakness therewith. The
form therefore of government which by God among them was established, does
consist of these two parts: the instinct of nature, for the one; and the supply
which was given by the written law, for the other. In the former of which two,
they were but aequal to others, for that others had that, as much as they: but
in the latter they were praeferred to al, for that no people in all the world,
had in those dais the like judgments among the^. But to the end we may better
perceive, what this government of theirs was, that so consisted of these two
parts, we have need to enter into the consideration of each of these apart by it
self: and so consequently, to begin with this same instinct of nature, that
teaches al some sense of aequitie, less or more.

3 Therefore as touching this former part of the Israelitish or Jewish policy,
What instinct of nature it is, that he has given us.
which they have not proper to themselves, but common to al, although we need
not any large or absolute discourse thereof: yet somthings there are thereunto
belonging, that we had need to set before our eyes, and a little to enter
therinto. For first on behalf of this work of God toward us, it shall be good
to consider, both what it is that he has given us; and to what end: then also
on our parts, how far we are able by it to have any sound direction. That there
is such an instinct of nature, it is a thing so commonly known, that it were
but lost labor to tarry long about the proof thereof. In men.
For first of al among men, if we go to particulars, we have many notable
examples of aequitie and upright dealing among the heathen: and diverse of them
such, as even at this day (without al quaestion) they may be as excellent
lights in the church of God, among us that are christians. Besides these
examples, diverse of themselves and others have given so notable rules of
aequitie in their writings, that although their deeds were never so contrary
thereunto: yet might we be bold to conclude upon their writings only, that they
had a certain light of upright dealing that shone in their hearts, though
themselves walked not agreeable thereunto. Again, besides those tokens of
aequitie in particular duties one with another, we see that diverse of them that
were utterly destitute of the word of God, had notwithstanding excellent gifts
in the way of government, and notably governed much people and mighty
kingdoms. And not only certain particular persons have given such tokens of the
excellencies in them: but all the rest also, more or less; and the whole
multitude in obeieng, and inclining themselves to be in order, as well as those
others in commending the same unto them. As also it is well enough known, that
unless there were in the whole multitude an inclination thereunto: it were too
much for any others (were their wisdom and policy never so great) to keep them
in order. In other creatures.
But what speak I of men? May we not see that God would have this so common a
thing throughout the whole world among al his creatures, that he has put some
sparks thereof, even in beasts and birds, and such other like brutish creatures?
For though it do less appeer in them, than (for the most part) in men: yet
even in those also may we evidently see, both that they have some misliking of
violence, disorder, and wrong: and that some kinds especially have a set policy
or form of government in ordering themselves, and com therein (though they want
very much, yet) altogether as near unto man, as Pope-holie persons are like in
devotion to the children of God. Seeing therefore that we see such infallible
tokens of this instinct of nature, not only in certain choice men of the world,
but also in the very multitude, in all ages; yea and almost in all living
creatures besides: there is no dowt, but that we may be bold to conclude, that
in man there are certain sparks of this kind of light. Such as the fruit is,
such also needs must the tree be accounted.

4 What God should mean to leave this knowledge or sense of aequitie (so far as
it is) imprinted in all, He has given it to his glory: and our benefit.
it is no hard matter to find. First of al, if we go to a general ground, that
the end of all the works of God is to show forth himself, or to set forth his
own glory: then may we of this also conclude, that he would thereby make known,
that aequitie in him is marvelous rife, and very absolute, when as he has left
such tokens thereof in all his creatures, that he made of such a nature, as by
any means might be capable thereof: and though more in some, than in others; yet
so much in every one, as for the capacity thereof was meet. For that must needs
be very sweet it self, that leaves a redolent favor to whatsoever it passes
by; and that workman must needs be very cunning, that so workman-like handles
whatsoever he takes in hand. But we will go to another reason, that is more
proper to the nature of this quaestion. This we know, that his purpose was,
that such things as he made; should both continu for the time that they were
appointed: and that, in some reasonable order. Of which two, whether soever we
do respect, what could be more aptly devised, than that there should be such a
sense of aequitie in living creatures? For, if there be no authority to
restrain iniquity (as sometimes there is not) no laws, no punishment to
restrain malefactors, what other bridle then can there be in any, but only this
inward restraint of nature? When the outward is wanting, if there were no
inward help, soon would al be tumbled on heaps. And though there be an order
taken, and some put in trust to see the same observed: yet are they also found
sometimes so negligent, and sometimes so unable to do as they ought, one way or
other, that in that case also, were not men inwardly stayed by that aforesaid
sense of aequitie, it would soon be seen how weak the outward restraint were
without the inward. Blessed be God, that has put in our mouths this secret
bridle without the which neither should we be in order, nor be at al. Thus
therefore we have to conclude, that as God has given the desire and appetite of
generation, for the continual propagation of such kinds, as he has ordained
from time to time to furnish the world; so has he in like sort given into the
hearts of al, this sense of right and wrong (not only to be evident tokens of
the great righteousness that is in him; but also) to the end that al things may
better continu their time appointed, and continu in better order.

5 On our parts now it is to be seen how far forth this knowledge or sense of
upright dealing is able to lead us toward the performance of the same: This
instinct of nature is not able to work in us any great matters in this kind.
a point that much appertains to the cause that we have in hand. For, if it
self be sufficient to guide us in the way of aequitie, then whatsoever shall
come in besides, is, for that matter, more than needs; if it be not, then the
supply, that is given in the written word, is much more welcome. Therefore to
find out, what help heerunto we have in this natural sense of aequitie, we have
to consider, that there are two principal powers thereof; and to search out,
what is the force of either of those. Our understanding darkened.
The one is the understanding of the mind: the other, the inclination of the
will. For common experience teaches us al, that both sometimes we know what is
right; but yet are not disposed to do it: and sometimes are disposed to do as we
should; but yet do not sufficiently perceive what that should be. Therefore as
touching the former of these, we have to know, that a kind of light it gives
unto us; but yet notwithstanding no sound direction. For, first as touching
that part of righteousness which comprehends our duty toward our first
founder, neither does it teach us who it is, nor what kind of service we should
do unto him: but leaves us to our own blind rashness in both. As we may very
plainly see, both for that, not only the common people, but even the wisest,
and the most sober of all the heathen men that ever were, did ever vary (and
that very much) in both those points, as well among themselves one from another,
as from the people of al other countries, or sects: and also, for that neither
the ancient church of God under the law, nor yet Christendom under the Gospel
(notwithstanding the express word given unto them, and this most clear and
absolute manifestation of the will of God in that point made unto us) could ever
soundly be brought from our native corruption on that behalf. For where we are
so far to seek notwithstanding those helps, there are we of our selves
marvelous weak. In that part of aequitie which respects our duty to others,
we have some reasonable light remaining, in comparison of the other, as it may
sufficiently appeer by the monuments of many, that in writing they have left
unto us: and by the experience and practice which was in ure in all ages, and is
at this praesent among our selves. Howbeit, it cannot be denied, but that in
the aestimation of wrong or disorder, they have been in many things very much
deceived: and in the aestimation of right and order, have been further short by
many degrees. An example may make the matter more plain. To take away any part
of another man's goods, or a magistrate to bear with such offenders, is in most
cases quikly espied to be very il: but, that a man should have such a special
care, to praeserve to every one that which is his, that though by bargain, or
wagers he might have it with his neighbors good will, yet he will not; or that a
prince should by laws require such a care to be had: that is very far, not only
from the dim sight of the heathen people, but also from our much better
lightened eyes. The inclination of our will but weak.
Our understanding therefore is weak: but what shall we say of the inclination of
our will? Even the selfsame. For though we have an indifferent ready will to
diverse points of this aequitie: yet first of al, unto many others (and those,
for the most part, of the greatest importance, as namely, in matters of sound
devotion) we have no readiness at al; but are bent directly against them. Then
also, though unto some of them, as I said, we have some inclination: yet cannot
it be soundly approoved of God, partly for that oftentimes we corrupt our
inclination by directing the same to some wrong end (as to avoid either the
danger of laws; or else the displeasure, or reproach of men) til that our will by
the written word be better framed; and partly for that though it have no such
meaning, with all, yet is it not grounded upon knowledge, til it has the word
written, and therefore is not the service of GOD, but of our selves. So, though
we have this instinct of nature, and though it gives us in many points a
goodly light: yet therwithal may we plainly see, whether we cast our eyes to
our understanding, or to our will, that it is not able to serve our turn. In the
eye or judgment of man (I grant) we may by the virtue of it, and the ordinary
working of God therwithal, not only live in seemly order: but also, now and
then give forth very rare and excellent virtues. But before the judgment seat
of God, whatsoever such things are found in us, be they never so fair, yet
could they not there be able to stand.

6 The case being so with us al, This want in the Israelits helped by the
written law.
it pleased God to cast a special favor to one people, whom we call the
Israelites, and a principal part of them, the Jews: and unto this people, by
his written law, to give a sufficient supply, for whatsoever wanted in them by
defect of that natural instinct or sense of aequitie. This I say he gave unto
them: but not unto others. He gave unto them a more certain light: but still
left others unto their thik, and duskish mists. And now does it appertain unto
us, to endevor our selves, that as we have seen what they had common with
others, wherein others had as much as they: so now to find out what it was,
wherein they had that their special help, and in respect whereof others came so
short of them. Which (as I said) was, by the written law: whereby they had
special order set down, so far as the wisdom of God thought meet, to supply the
defect that was in themselves. As touching which, although the laws that to
this purpose do appertain, are many and diverse, and so little digested to any
plain method, that some have omitted to treat of them, and those that write of
them, do not handle them al alike: yet me think there may be very well such a
method conceived of them, as that we may thereby sufficiently perceive what was
the form or manner of government that was in those commended unto them.

7. For whatsoever laws they had heerunto appertaining, they did concern,
either their inhabiting of the land that God did give them: or else their
behavior therein. Unto the former of which it does appertain, first to consider
somewhat of the land it self: then to see in what sort it was allotted to them.
A brief description of the land of Canaan.
Concerning the land it self it is no more but to consider what it was: and
yet not at large, for that many others have written thereof; but only in some
brief manner, so far as to this preasent purpose is needful. The land therefore
that was appointed for their possession, was at this time in the possession of
others, and those not under any one prince, but under many. This Genesis 15,
18-31. Exo. 3: 8. 17.23: 23, 31, Number. 34: 1-15 Ios. 1: 3, 4.
land does the scripture bound or describe two manner of wais: sometimes by the
bounds and coasts thereof: and sometimes by the inhabitants whom they should find
dwelling therein. As touching the bounds, it is found to be that land that has
Egypt, Idumaea, and the wilderness of Zin, on the south: the middle-earth sea
from Gaza, to Sidon, on the west: Mount Libanus, and Phoenicia a part of Syria,
on the north: and the mountains of Galaad with the kingdoms of the Ammonites
and Moabites, on the east. The uttermost length whereof in straight line, is
aesteemed to be, about 150. of our English miles, accounting eight furlongs
unto a mile: and the breadth scant 30. miles, accounting one place with another.
Howbeit, the land is not so directly coasted, but that it does not a little
decline: the north end of it, so much into the east, and the south end so much
into the west, that it lies very near to the north-east, and southwest points
of the compass. Through which land Jordan a great river comes from the
mountains of Libanon in the north, and ends in a dead sea in the south: and
in such sort, that it leaves about three parts of this land on the west, and
but about a fourth part of it on the east. Which also has about the midst of
the land, that famous lake, which is called the sea or lake of Genasereth.

8 The name of this land is diverse: Of the diverse names thereof.
but Herod Thalia. lib. 3. and Polymnia. li. 7. Ptol. Geograph. lib. 5. cap.
15, and 16. Plin. li. 5.c.12.
among the ancient heathen people, for the most part either it goes in account
as a part of Syria; or else is it properly called by the name of Palaestine,
because of the Philistines that dwelt in a principal corner of it, toward the
south-west, near unto Egypt. In scripture it is commonly called Genesis 11: 31.
45: 25. Exodus 6: 4. 16: 35.
the land of Canaan, for that the posterity of Canaan, the son of Cham did
principally inhabit the same. Afterward, when the children of Israel were there
placed, and Ios. 13-19.
the whole land divided among the 12. tribes, every shire or part Ios. 13: 7,
8. and 14: 2, 3.
had the name of the tribe that dwelt therein. But so soon as the kingdom was
divided, 1. King. 12: 16, 17. and 14: 7, 22.
then was the south part termed the kingdom of Judah, or Jury: and the
north-part, which was the greater, the kingdom of Israel, Isai. 7: 9. Ier. 32:
4, 5. Eze. 16: 46, 51 Mich. 1: 1.
or (of the principal city therein) Samaria. After the return from the
captivity, it came to pass, that it fell to have Carol. Ste. ex historicis, in
Galilaea.
four principal parts of name: Jury, in the south; Samaria, north from it;
then Galilie the lower; and last of al Galilie the higher and furthest north.
So, since the time of Christ, after that the Saracens and Turks began to get
possession of it, it was termed of us (or at least a principal part thereof) the
Hiero. in epitaphio Paulae. Et alii fere omnes qui sequuti sunt.
Holie-land: that name making very much for the clergy of Rome, who, when
people began to inquire of their abuses, were wont often times to devise a quarrel
for the recoverie of the same, so to set them occupied about other matters.

9 What kind of land it was for the fertility thereof, Of the fruitfulnes of it.
and for the abundance of things needful for the use of such as should dwell
therein, the scripture it self does in like sort very plainly declare in many
places: but especially under these terms, that it flowed with milk and honey.
When God did first set in hand with the deliverance of his people out of
Egypt, and told Moses that now he would no longer suffer his people to be
under the greevous yoke of that extreme bondage to the tyrants of Egypt, but
would bring to pass, that themselves should have a land of their own to dwell
in, he also told him, that Exo. 3: 17.
the same land should be a very good, and a large land, and that it should
flow with milk and honey. Deuteronomy. 1: 20-22.
When (after that once they were delivered) they came so far in the wilderness,
that now they were at the borders of the land, and being encouraged by Moses,
then to make their entry, desired to have searchers sent before (very
reprochful, and therefore injurious to the word of God, that could not now be
believed of them, without the approbation of man; and therefore immediately
afterward woorthily punished in it self) although of those searchers, being
but twelve in all, no fewer than ten of them discouraged the people so much as
to hope ever to get it, for that their enemies were so mighty, and had so
marvelously fortified themselves: yet Number. 13: 27
could they not deny, but that the land it self was marvelous fruitful, as
also they brought of the fruits thereof in witness of it. So likewise toward the
end of their pilgrimage, when Moses would take (as we say) his leave of the
people, or bid them farewell, as he put them in mind of the law of God, and
called upon them to walk thereafter, so, to the end they might better perceive
that they should not leese their labor, but were well hired thereunto, Deu. 8:
7-9.
he does in like manner put them in mind how notable a land the Lord had
provided for them: Deuteronomy. 11: 10-12.
another manner of thing than was Egypt, which some of them did so much condemn.
For that the inhabitants of Egypt were fain sometimes to water their land
themselves, with their own bodily labor: whereas this was watered without the
labor of man, with the sweet and seasonable showers of heaven from above, and
with plenty of springs and rivers beneath. Again, that the Lord had a special
care of that land, and that his eyes were thereupon from the one end of the year
to the other. And therefore, that they should there have plenty of wheat, and
barley; wine, and olives; pomgranats, and figs: with iron, and brass in great
abundance. And to the better testification thereof, and to keep up a perpetual
memory thereof, he also taught them, Deu. 26: 9.
so often as they should come with their first fruits unto the Lord, ever in
plain words to confess unto the Lord, that indeed they had received of him a
notable good land. To be short, when afterward the people had diversely offended
the Lord, and therefore well deserved to have their land barren, and houses
desolate, nevertheles, even after the enemies, whom they called in with their
sin, had fowly defaced it, Eze. 20: 6.
yet then does God term it to be, a land that flows with milk and honey, and
that is a pleasant land among al others.

10 But notwithstanding the excellency of this land, Deu. 15: 11. Though there
should be poor therein, yet might that be no discredit to the land it self.
they were by Moses given to understand, that they should ever have poor among
them. Which might be in the judgment of some, a sore blemish to the land it
self: as though it could not be of that fertility, when as diverse of the
inhabitants thereof should be so needy. Howbeit experience it self does teach
us, that though any country do never so much abound with all things needful:
yet may diverse particular persons that live therein, be very needy. Causes of
poverty.
And me think there are three principal fountains, out of which the want or
straightnes that the poor are in, does otherwise spring. First of al, if
themselves be unthriftie, and wastfully spend those good blessings that God
has given them. For then it is no marvel, nor any strange matter, if God that
cannot abide to see his goods so wastfully spent take the occupation thereof
from such, and bestow them on others. He would have his household therwithal
releeved: he would not have his goods bestowed to the contentation of sin, or
vanity. Again, some there are, that cannot be content to have the use of such
things themselves, and then to let them pass on, in that same course that the
wisdom of God has provided: but must also be meddling in turning them to go,
after their time, as the^ selves think good. So comes it to pass often times,
that while they are so busy in displacing others (though yet unborn) from the
interest that otherwise they had, themselves also by the judgments of God
worthily leese that, which otherwise they might still have enjoied. For he that
cannot quietly suffer, such as God appoints, to have the reversion, give just
occasion to God; to take from him his abused possession. Himself therefore, in
both these cases, may be the fountain of al his poverty. The second fountain
is in others. As namely, when there is no sufficient order taken, either for
the distribution of these earthly things; or for the sober and moderate
spending of them; or for all to settle themselves to some godly labor. For if
there be no order taken for the distribution of these things, then, when as the
mightier will have what they can, the weaker must needs have little to live on.
So likewise, seeing that God is not overseen in the making of his provision,
and therefore has not provided things needful, but so far as our need requires
(and yet in such sort, as that his allowance is very liberal) how can it
otherwise be, but that if some do wastfully spend much more than their allowance
comes unto, others must needs want it in theirs? Even so also may we conclude
of the third member of this, that whereas these earthly things cannot be applied
to our use, but by the industry and labor of man; and God does so little allow
of idleness in any, that he may not be thought so to have ordained man, that as
the labor of the stronger may well be a supply to the want that is in the
weaker, so the labor of one may releeve himself and others, I wot not how
many: how can it be, if but some be laborers, and yet al allowed to be feeders,
and the idle person to have his share in all things needful as well as the
laborer, but that, because the labor of few is not able to maintain themselves
and many others idle, many must needs be very sore streightened by this? The
third fountain of poverty is neither in our selves nor others: but only in the
good will and pleasure of God. Who not only by these, but also by his own hand
diverse wais besides, does often times clasp about our neks this yoke of poverty.
And that sometimes, to put us in mind of some offense of ours, whereunto such a
kind of fatherly discipline does fitly appertain; as the injuring of others,
prodigality, idleness, or such like: sometimes, that rich men may have on whom
to bestow those blessings of God, that they have in such abundance: sometimes,
to make us more weary of this earthly tabernacle, and more glad to come to the
heavenly: and sometimes for diverse other causes that he keeps unto himself
unknown unto us. So that we may be bold to conclude, that notwithstanding this
poverty that should be among them, yet may it well stand therwithal, that the
land it self did abundantly yield whatsoever was needful for every one: and
that, not after a sparing manner, but after that most liberal allowance that God
approoveth, and most becomes his gracious goodness.

11 So having seen what the land was; How they had to make their entry into
this land.
by what means it is commonly called; and of what valor it was to the
sustenance of those that should dwell therein: we may well proceed to search out,
in what sort it was allotted unto them. Which me think may then sufficiently
appeer, if we shall find out these two things. How they should at the first make
it theirs; and in what manner they should possess or hold it. Unto the former
of these does appertain both their entry at the first, and the division thereof
that after insued. The manner of their entry and getting the land into their
hands, was not to challenge it by descent, or any such title; but by a kind of
purchase: and yet not with money, or money worth; but only by the dint of the
sword, I mean, by conquest. Howbeit, this same was done in such sort, as that
nevertheles they had no just cause to imagine, either that they got it by their
own prowess, but only by the power and might of God: or that he gave it them
for their own righteousness sake, and not only of his mere goodness toward them.
For this cause does Moses first Deu. 8: 17, 18. and 9: 4-6.
will them to take heed of both those errors, before that ever they come
thereunto. But to make the matter more plain, in what sort they had to make
their entry by conquest, first let us see what direct or particular charge
they had concerning the same; then how they did put it in execution. Their
charge was Ex. 23: 32, 33. and 34: 12-17. Number. 33: 50-56. Deu. 7: 1-6, 16, 25,
26.
that they should in no wise have any frindship or amity; nor make any
marriages; nor so much as be in leag, or make any peace, not only, not with the
idols of that country (or to have any reverence of them) but also with none of
the people thereof: but that they should be at utter enmity with them al, til
they had put out their remembrance from the face of the earth, that they should
break down their images, cut down their groves, overthrow their altars, and not
so much as covet the gold, or any such thing as thereunto belonged; and as
touching the people, that they should have no pity on them, but destroy them
al, man, woman, and child. And to the end they might the more faithfully
execute this judgment of God, as they are also given to understand Deu. 9: 5.
that the sins of the people deserved this sharp vengeance, that they may
perceive themselves to be executioners of the righteous judgments of God: so
they have their eyes chiefly turned to another cause that might kindle their
hearts more earnestly against them, seeing that it touched (so near as it did)
their own estate and welfare. As namely, that if they did join in marriage or
amity with them, or but suffered them to dwell in the land, they would entice
them to their idols, and so pluk upon them the vengeance of God: and
nevertheles themselves ever seek to disquiet them to the uttermost of their
power; and be, as it were thorns in their eyes, and spears in their sides, to
keep them in continual and bitter vexation, as in those places before set down,
sufficiently appears.

12 The execution of this their charge, This charge of theirs was not so truly
executed by them.
was not in all points very well performed: belike for that they thought it was
very streit or rigorous; and dowted therwithal, it would be so odious to al
those countries that joined thereunto, that thereby they might pluk them al upon
them, and occasion them to lay their powers together, in like sort to destroy
them from the face of the earth, that without mercy had destroyed so ancient a
people. For worldly policy does in such cases praevail very much with flesh
and blood. Nevertheles, that we may see in what sort they did order this
matter, so far as they meddled therewith, first of al they began to take
possession of their land, when on the east side of Jordan they had Number. 21:
21-35. Deu. 2: 26-37. and 3: 1-11.
subdued Sehon king of the Ammorites, and Og the king of Basan, and took those
countries unto themselves. At which time we find very good likelihood, that
they did fully execute the charge committed unto them. For seeing we read Deuteronomy.
2: 34. and 3: 6.
that they did utterly destroy them, men, women, and children; and that God so
far approoveth their dealing with Sehon, that he Number. 21: 34
makes it a pattern for them to follow in their dealing with Og, and misliketh
nothing (that we read of) in either of both: it must needs be a very good
conjecture (if not a sufficient proof) that they destroyed their idols also,
and did whatsoever else was to be done, after a faithful, and zealous manner. But
immediately after this, before that ever they passed Jordan to the other side
of the land, by the reason that Ios. 2: 1-21. and 6: 22, 23.
a certain woman that kept victualing, Rahab by name, and dwelling in Jericho,
did keep secret a couple of men that Iosuah had sent to search the land, both
those men did swear unto her, that they would save her, and her household
harmles, and the whole army after they came in, performed the same. After this
they entered the land, and being victorious; did very well (for ought we see to
the contrary) perform their charge: themselves entering unto the possession of
the land ever as they got it; and rooting out the old inhabitants, and their
idols with them. And although Ios. 7: 1-26.
one man Acham by name, did through covetousnes grevously transgress; and
though the wrath of God was thereby so sharply provoked, that he did punish the
whole multitude by making them fly before their enemies: yet neither was it
but one man's trespass, neither did the whole congregation leave it unpunished.
How beit, not long after Ios. 9: 3-15.
both Iosuah himself and the rest of the princes, did commit a foul oversight,
contrary to the charge that the Lord had given them. For when as the
ambassadors of the Gibeonites (who were of that people, that the Lord had
appointed them to destroy) came with a subtle practice, to get a leag of peace
at the hands of the Israelites, praetending themselves to be of another nation,
far distant from the land of Canaan, and that they came to be in leag with
them, for the great things that they heard to be done by them: then the
Israelites were so fully persuaded by that homly policy of the Gibeonites,
that they were indeed as they praetended, that, forgetting to ask counsel of
the mouth of the Lord, or else counting the same but needles in so plain a
matter as they supposed it to have been, they unadvisedly entered into the leag
with them. They were as wise men, as others are: and yet in this did they very
foully overshoote themselves. But such is the wisdom of flesh and blood, when it
regards not the word of the Lord, but will venture to go by it self. But this
was but a small slip, to speak of, in comparison of that which followed: and
besides that, it was immediately after something amended by themselves. For
afterward they did indeed conquer the whole land, and Ios. 12: 24.
slu in all, one and thirty kings. But, having once gotten the feeld of al
their enemies; and having driven them that remained, to their holds; Judge. 2:
10.
Iosuah also and the good elders being fallen asleep, Iud. 1: 20-35
then began they generally to spare their enemies: and, either to let them
quietly enjoy many of their cities without molestation, or at the least, only
to make them tributaries unto them. Insomuch that Iud. 2: 1-5.
the Lord did both sharply rebuke them for it: and besides that, did plainly
give them to understand, that seeing they had so done, he also would now have
peace with them, and have them to live in the land, to the great and perpetual
molestation of the Israelites that would not destroy them when they might. At
which sorrowful news though the Israelites wept so bitterly, that thereby they
gave the name of the place: yet was it too late, then to reverse that sentence
of the Lord, which they should have foreseen before. And so by their
sluggishnes it was fulfilled, which the Lord before had spoken, that Exo. 23:
28-30. Deu. 7: 22.
he would not destroy them at once, least the land should grow to a wilderness,
and the beasts of the feeld rise up against them: as afterward also he gives
them to understand, Iud. 2: 22. and 3: 2, 4.
that they should be to some use unto them, that is, to prove them whether they
would obey the Lord, and keep fast to his wais; and to teach them feats of arms.

13 Concerning the division or distribution of this land, How the people were
sorted among themselves.
which the Lord has in this sort given them, and which by conquest they have
now taken unto themselves, here we have need first to consider how the people
themselves were sorted, for that the distribution of the land does hang
thereupon. Iaacob, whom it pleased God to term Genesis 32: 28 and 35: 10.
Israel, that is, praevailing with God, being the son of Isaac, which was the
son of Abraham, had, as it is well enough known unto al, twelve Genesis 29, and 30,
and 35: 22-26.
sons: Ruben, Simeon, Levy, Judah, Dan, Nepthalie, Gad, Aser, Isachar,
Zabulon, Joseph and Benjamin. Out of which his twelve sons it pleased GOD to
raise a mighty people, which are called (of Israel himself, the father of
these twelve) the children of Israel, as who should say, that people that has
found favor with God, as indeed they had specially done. So likewise that race
of people that came of every one of these sons of Iaacob, were termed the Number.
1. Apoc. 7: 5-8.
tribe of him, of whom they descended. As the race or stok of Ruben, was called
the tribe of Ruben: the family or kindred of Judah, was termed the tribe of
Judah: and so the rest. Now it pleased GOD, after that he praescribed unto them
a set form of religion, which was immediately after their deliverance out of
Egypt, what time they had now been the people of God 430. years, and were
grown to about Exo. 12: 37.
600000. men, besides women and children: then (I say) it pleased God to Nu. 1:
49, 50
separate unto himself, or to take out, one whole tribe or stok from among the
rest unto the preests office, and to the ministration of that service, which
himself had now appointed. So, whereas Genesis 48: 5.
Iaacob, as he lay on his deathbed in Egypt, had taken unto him the two sons
of Joseph (which were Manasses and Ephraim) as his own, and so making two
tribes of Joseph, had made thirteen in all: the Lord thus taking the Levites
out, did leave them to keep still the number of twelve. By this distribution we
are led (as it were by the hand) to follow this order. First to search out what
was given or allotted to those twelve tribes, Ruben, Simeon, Judah, Dan,
Nephtalie, Gad, Aser, Isachar, Zabulon, Ephraim, Manasses, and Benjamin: and
then, what was given to the tribe of Levy, whom the Lord had exempted from the
rest.

14 Unto the twelve tribes, What was the portion of the twelve tribes.
the whole land was by God himself appointed to be given: and that by lot, for
the avoiding of contention, that otherwise might have risen about that matter.
Howbeit, this distribution was not so praecisely observed, but that two tribes
and a half, that is, the tribes of Ruben, and Gad, and half the tribe of
Manasses, praeventing their lot in that distribution, got a portion to be
assigned to them. For so soon as the children of Israel had conquered those
two kings aforesaid on the east side of Jordan, before that ever as yet they
had entered the land of Canaan, Nu. 32: 1-42
these two tribes, and half the other, liking that country well, desired Moses
that the same might stand for their lot, and so would they be content without
any more on the other side. Moses therefore, taking them bound, that they should
nevertheles go over with their brethren, and help them to fight their battles,
and not forsake them til their brethren also had gotten the victory of al
their enemies, granted their request, and gave unto them that land of the
Ammorites, which immediately before they had gotten of Sheon, and Og, before
mentioned. Unto the Nu. 26: 53-56. Ios. 11: 23.
other nine tribes and the half that remained, was the rest of the land, that
which lies on the west side of Jordan, and is called the land of Canaan
divided: but in such sort, that as every tribe had their portion by lot
assigned unto them; so should it be divided among themselves in such sort, that
those which were many might have more, and those that were fewer should have
less. Again, they divided among themselves the whole country that the Lord
had bounded forth unto them: not only those cities which they had already
conquered; but those also that were yet in their enemies hands. And so
dismissed all the tribes to repair to their own private inheritance, and to
conquer their hom-enimies, such as remained within the lot or possession of
every one.

15 Of the Levites there were three families, What was the portion of the
Levites.
and every of those assigned to a special function or charge: but that
discourse we must reserve til we come to speak of their office, or in what sort
they had to live in this land which God does give them. So far as appertains
to this praesent purpose, being but about to search out what portion they have
among their brethren, it shall be best to make our distribution otherwise,
dividing the whole, into these two sorts: the common sort of Levites; and those
that ministered about the ordinary service. For either of these two sorts, had
as it were a several portion. The common sort of Levites, or generally the
whole multitude of them were appointed to have for their maintenance Number. 18:
20, 23. Deu. 10: 8, 9. and 18: 1-5.
no part at al among their brethren: but only, Lev. 27: 30. Nu. 18: 21, 24 Deu.
14: 22, 27 and 12: 19.
the tenth part of all the increase or profits that the land did yield any manner
of way; and, out of every tribe, a certain number of Nu. 35: 1-15
cities with their suburbs to dwell in, to the number of eight and forty in all.
Their cities were so taken out from among the rest, that those which had many
gave mo, and those which had fewer gave accordingly: and the Levites were so
scattered throughout the land, that the people might everie-where be better
taught. The suburbs that their cities were allowed to have, to find their
cattle withal, were appointed to be two thousand cubits, or half a mile
foorth-right from the walls of the city round about: so that although God gave
them no such portion as he gave to the other: yet considering that each of them
had but a twelfe part, and these a tenth part, besides their cities, with their
suburbs, it is evident, that by Gods ordinance they had a much better part; at
least, so long, as the number of them did not much exceed themselves as they
were now, for that they were the fewest in number of all the other tribes. Also
the manner of paieng this tith was such, that Lev. 27: 32, 33.
it was not lawful for them to put by a better, and to put in a worse in steed
thereof: but to pay the same that fell out to be the tenth, whether it were
better or worse. And Lev. 27: 31.
though the place were far, so that they would rather covet to give the valu of
it in money, than the thing it self in kind: yet might they not so do, but by
putting a fifth part more thereunto; so to put by such collusion, as thereupon
might otherwise arise.

16 Unto the preests that were occupied in the ministration, What was the
portion of the preests.
a more liberal portion was du: which arose unto them two manner of wais. Whereof
the former is the same that respects their ordinary commodities: the other,
that which respects certain other extraordinary fees or avails. Their
ordinary commodity (besides Deu. 18: 8.
that which otherwise any of them might have of his own) consisted principally
in three things: whereof the first is the tenth or tith that they had of that
tenth or tith which the Levites received of the Israelits. For as the Levites
were allowed to take tith of their brethren the Israelites: so Number. 18: 25, 26.
were they charged to pay over the tith of the same to the preests. The second
sort of such commodities as were ordinary Number. 18: 8, 9, 11, 19, 30, 31 Number.
5: 8-10.
were those measures, and parts of al such things as were brought unto the Lord
for oblations and sacrifices, which was according to the nature of the
sacrifice (of which afterward we have to speak) either a certain quantity of
corn, flower, wine, or oil; or else Nu. 18: 18. Deuteronomy. 18: 3.
certain portions of the beast sacrificed. The third consisted in that the
people were bound to bring unto the Lord, which the preests by his appointment
were to have, the first of all that it pleased God to bless them withal. Whereof
there were two sorts: one of Number. 18: 15-18. Le. 27.
living creatures as they fell, both man, and beast: yet in such sort, that both
men-children, and the increase of unclean beasts should by a certain price be
redeemed the other, of the Number. 18: 12, 13. Deu. 18: 4.
fruits that the land every year does yield: which at a certain time, and
before they took thereof to their own use, they should bring to the preests, as
after follows. Their extraordinary avails I term those fees, that were du
unto them, out of the vows that the people would often times extraordinarily
make of their own accord. Which were sometimes of some kind of oblation; Lev. 27:
11-22. Nu. 18: 14.
and sometimes of some other blessings that God had given them: Le. 27: 1-8.
sometimes likewise, of themselves, or their children. Out of which lightly Nu.
18: 8. Lev. 27: 1-25.
some commodity came unto them, according to the nature of the vow. So
likewise, Number. 5: 8.
if one man had trespassed against another, and then purposed with himself to
restore it again with a fifth part more added thereunto, as the law required, and
could not find neither the party himself alive, nor any of his kin to receive
it, that also should he bring to the priest, besides his sacrifice for that
trespass.

17 In what manner they should possess this good land, Of the te^^^e of their
lands.
which in this sort they had divided among them, cannot be here very fully
declared: for that the discourse thereof has so great affinity with those
others that follow. So that until we see, in what sort they have to live
therein, and how their trespasses are by the sentence of God to be punished, we
are not able fully to find out what is to be said of this matter. Nevertheles,
some laws there are (but those very few) that may be taken apart from the
others, and properly concern this praesent matter. Possession rests in these
two things: in lands, and goods. Concerning lands, some of the laws that I speak
of concern the holding of lands: and some, the redeeming of the^. Concerning the
former, first we have to note in what sort they are appointed to descend: then
how afterward they are to hold the same both toward God, and toward their
neighbor. How they should descend, is chiefly declared upon occasion that Nu.
27: 1-11
Zalphaad one of the tribe of Manasses, had no sons but only five daughters,
that at his departure he left behind him. For by that occasion it came in
quaestion, and was decided by the mouth of God, that in all such cases, if a man
had any son, the same should be accounted his heir: if he had no son, then his
daughter: if he had no daughter, then his brother: if no brother, his fathers
brother: if no such uncle, then the next of his kin whosoever. So likewise does
he els-where determine, that, if upon some il persuasion of a second wife, Deu.
21: 15-17.
a man would dishaerit his eldest son by a former wife, to make the son of the
second his heir: yet may he not so do, but leave the birthright unto the
eldest. Nevertheles, we read that Ruben, for Genesis 35: 22. 49: 3, 4. and 1. Par.
5: 1.
defiling his fathers bed, Genesis 49: 4. 1. Par. 5: 1.
was put from his birthright, being the eldest; and Joseph and Judah taken
into his room. That which concerns the manner of their hold toward God, is
only that law, that was of a certain De. 26: 1-10
homage, that every year they were commanded to do unto the Lord, for such
lands as they held of him. Which was nothing else, but to bring of their first
fruits unto the Lord, and there to confess that God had praeserved their
fathers and them from time to time, and been marvelous gracious unto them: that
he had given them that good land as before he promised, that they did now enjoy
the same, and therefore brought of the fruits thereof unto him. A notable tenure:
and such as disgraceth many of ours, that were notwithstanding devised and
appointed by notable men, as then they were taken. Whereunto may be added, that
Ex. 23: 10, 11 Lev. 25: 1-11.
every seventh year, and in the Iubile, they should suffer their land to rest:
so to teach them, to moderate their affections on that behalf; to depend on
the providence of God; and not utterly to wear out the soil that was given
them. That which concerns the manner of their hold toward men, was that they
might have it several: and yet not so; but that the poor, and generally al,
might sometimes have some use thereof. That they might have it several, it
appears both by the partition that before is spoken of: and in this also,
that Exodus 22: 6.
if any should with his cattle eat up, or otherwise hurt his neighbors feelds,
he should make good the same again, with the best of his own. That the poor,
and others generally might notwithstanding have some use thereof, it appears in
this, that so often as the land should rest without any husbandry bestowed on it
Exo. 23: 11. Lev. 25: 4-7.
such things as it yielded of it self, should be common: and Deuteronomy. 23: 24, 25.
that when it was several, any passing by the way, might take and eat of the
fruits of the ground to serve his need, so that he carried none away.

18 As for redeeming of land that once was gone from the ancient owners, Of
redeming their lands.
two laws there are, that belong thereunto. The one restores lands hom again
generally to al: the other restores them but unto some. The law which restores
lands hom unto al, is double, whereof one is the law of Iubile. Which was, that
if any through poverty or unthriftines had sold his lands or any part thereof
Lev. 25: 10, 13, 28.
yet in the year of Iubile, which was every fiftith year, those lands should
return again, either to him, if he were alive, or else to his heirs if he were
dead. The other, that which is set down in express words, Lev. 25: 24.
that no lands shall be bought, but with clause of redemption. That is, that he
that sells must ever have liberty to bie his lands again, so that it be
within the time appointed. That law which is more particular, issues out of
the latter of these, and it self also is double: first as it respects al
other Israelites; then as it respects the Levites only. That which respects
al other Israelites has two principal members. For first as touching land
generally, Lev. 25: 25-27.
if a man sell it to his neighbor, either himself, or the next of his kin may
redeem it again: and, for so much less than the other gave, as the commodity
(that since he bought it, he did receive) amounts unto. So likewise Lev. 27:
16-21.
if he vow to the Lord any part of his inhaeritance, he may redeem it again,
adding the fifth part (as the priest shall valu it) thereunto: but if he shrink
from his vow, and sell it to some other, then, after the next Iubile, it comes
to the preests for ever. If the land that he voweth were purchased of another,
then though he shronk, yet was not the land to be forfeited, but Lev. 27: 22-24.
the valu only to be du to the Lord: and the land it self was to return after
the Iubile, to the ancient owner. Then also, as touching the sale of an house,
the law was, that Lev. 25: 29, 30.
if the house were in a walled city, the seller should not have liberty to
redeem it, but the space of one whole year, and that it should never again
return to the ancient owner, if in one year, he, or some for him, did not redeem
it. But Lev. 25: 31
if it were out of a walled city, then it should follow the nature of the
common lands. That which respects only the Levites does not a little vary
from the other. For first Lev. 25: 34
as touching the little land that they had to the suburbs of their 48. cities,
that might in no wise be sold. Then also as touching Lev. 25: 32, 33.
their houses whether they were in walled cities, or not, both they might be at
al times redeemed; and otherwise in the year of Iubile they should return.

19 Concerning the possessing of their goods, I see little set down, Of their
manner of villeinage.
but that may be better referred to one of those parts that follow. One thing
only there is, that does more properly appertain unto this. Which is, that they
were allowed to have (that which seems somewhat hard among us) villans or
bondmen, as their proper goods. As touching which matter, a few laws there are:
both concerning their estate in bondage; and concerning their manumission, or
the infranchising, or freeing of them. First as touching Ex. 21: 2-6. De. 15:
12-17.
an Hebrew, though they bought him of others, yet could they not compel him to
serve but six years, and must needs let him go free the seventh, both himself
and his, if he came with wife or children. Howbeit, that if the servant would
not then part with his master, his master might then keep him for ever. So
likewise, if any man should bie a bondwoman, she should have the same law. This
also besides, that Ex. 21: 8, 10 Deuteronomy. 21: 14.
if he should promise her marriage, though afterward he misliked her before he
married her, yet should he give her meat, drink, and cloth, and such dowry as
the duty of marriage required: and might not sell her to any other. So
likewise, that Exo. 2^ 10, 11.
if he should promise her to his son, and afterward repented: yet should he do
unto her, as to one of his daughters. Else for default of such duties, that she
should be thereby infranchised. Over their villans or bondmen that were not of
their own nation, they had such liberty allowed them, as then was in ure in
those countries. Insomuch that they might keep them ever: and Exo. 21: 20, 21.
though they beat them so sore, that within few dais after they died, in diverse
cases they were not to be charged therewith. Other laws also there be of such
matters: but such as, I think, will better agree to that which follows.

20 Concerning the other, Of their duty generally.
that is, their behavior in the land that God had given them, we have to
consider two principal things: what was the direction that they had to frame
their lives by; and in what sort their faults and transgressions were to be
punished. In the former of which, that is, in what sort they should lead their
lives, there are two principal things to be considered: first, what direction
they had as touching their private life at hom; then, what direction they and
as touching the publik exercise of their religion. The direction that was given
them for the more orderly framing of their private life at hom before God and
men, sometimes is given in plain speech: and sometimes commended unto them by
figures, and under the exercise of outward observations. Both which kinds may
best be sorted according to the order of the ten commandments, for that they
do compraehend the effect of al, which effect or sum of al, is in few words no
more but this, Exodus 20: 3.
wholly to give over themselves to God alone: and from thence to derive unto
them these two principal parts of that their duty; to love God above al
things, and their neighbor as themselves. Unto which love of God they were
taught, two special points to appertain. First, that Ibid. 4, 5.
they should worship him, not as themselves, or others thought good: but only
as himself in his word had required. Then, that they should do it in
convenient manner: whereunto appertain two principal points. First, that they
should do the same Ibid. 7.
truly, without hypocrisy or dissimulation: then, that they should be Ibid.
8-11.
zealous therein, or earnestly bent thereunto. So likewise, that unto the love of
their neighbor did appertain other two points: one concerning their doings
toward him: the other concerning the moderating of their own affections
within. That which respects their doings toward him, has two special
points. First, that they should Ibid. 12.
reverence each other, every one in his degree; and thereby knit together in
one, in godly unity. Secondly, that they should have such an hearty care to
praeserve each other, that not only they regard each others Ibid. 13.
life or good estate generally, to uphold the same: but also, that they have a
special care of these three points, to praeserve or leave unto every one his
Ibid. 14.
wedlok undefiled; his Ibid. 15.
substance undiminished; and his good name Ibid. 16.
unblemished. That which respects the moderating of their affections within,
is that they should not Ibid. 17.
covet, or that they should so content themselves with their estate, that they
sought not to praevent any others in theirs. Howbeit, although this be the
effect of al, yet it shall be good to see, how the same is expressed by certain
particulars.

21 First of al therefore concerning their life toward God, They must have none
other, but him alone.
they are commanded to put by all others in heaven and earth, and to have Ex.
20: 3. and 23: 25. De. 5: 7
none other God but him alone: nor so much as to have in their mouths the Exo.
23: 13. Iosuah. 23: 7. Psalm. 16: 5.
names of any others, or to let them be heard out of their lips. And because
the greatest danger was either in those that were worshipped in Egypt, where
the children of Israel had sojourned so long; or in those that were worshipped
of the Canaanites, and other nations among whom now they should dwell (the one
for education sake; the other for policy:) therefore Lev. 18: 2, 3. De. 12: 30,
31.
had they a special warning given to take heed of the gods of those countries:
and therwithal were straightly charged Exo. 23: 24. Deu. 7: 5, 25. and 12: 2, 3.
to break down the idols or pictures of them; to overthrow their altars; to cut
down their groves; and to let no monument of them to remain. To this end
especially it did appertain, that the Lord did ordain certain servises among
them, that should properly serve to confirm them in that point: that is, that
he only is the Lord; that they were his tenants, and held of them whatsoever
they had. Of this sort there were especially three: that yielding to him of
their first born; or of their first fruits; and of their tithes. For although
there was another end of these ordinances, that is, that the ministry, and
such as served at the altar, should live thereby: yet to this end also were they
ordained, to witness the soveraigntie, that the Lord had over them. The law of
the firstborn was this. Exodus 13: 2, 11-16. and 22: 28.34: 19. Number. 18: 15.
Whatsoever male did first open the womb, whether it was of man, or beast, or
(as we say) was first of al born or bred, that same did the Lord challenge to
be his, and ordained the same to be an ordinance among them: but not al after
one manner. For Exo. 13: 13. and 34: 20. Nu. 18: 15, 16.
if it were the first born of man, it was to be redeemed: and the price was
five sicles of the sanctuary, or five score Gerahs (which is al one) amounting
to (as it is said) about sixteen shillings and eight pence of our coin: though
by the weight of the Gerah, which Joan. Brentius in Exodus 30: 13. And Annot. on
the B. Bible upon Number. 3: 47. 18: 16.
is said to be the weight of sixteen barley corns, I cannot find that 20. Gerahs
(which is the sicle of the sanctuary, double to the other sicle that is
common) do weigh any more than two shillings and four pence of our coin, after
the rate of five shillings the ounce. And then is the sicle of the sanctuary
but two shillings and four pence: and five sicles but eleven shillings eight
pence. Exo. 13: 12. 22: 29. and 34: 19. Number. 18: 17. De. 15: 19, 20.
If it were a beast that was clean, it might not be redeemed, nor kept bak, nor
put to use, nor any commodity taken of it; but without deceit brought as it
was unto the preests, as the portion of the Lord after that it had been seven
dais with the dam. Exo. 13: 13. 34: 20. Number. 18: 15.
If it were of an unclean beast, as of an ass, that also was the Lords: but it
was to be redeemed with a lamb. Nevertheles, the party was not bound to redeem
it, as he was to redeem his firstborn son: but, if he would not be at the cost
to redeem it, then must he cut off the head thereof; and was so discharged. So
likewise the firstborn of a clean beast, if it had any deformity or blemish,
then, although in that case also it was the Lords: yet Deu. 15: 21-23.
were they discharged for bringing it unto the sanctuary or temple of the
Lord, there to make merry or feast therwithal before him (as Deu. 15: 19, 20.
they were bound to do with such as were without blemish) and were willed to
eat it at hom, and to hold feast therwithal unto the Lord in their own houses.
This challenge that the Lord did make to the firstborn, exempting them to his
own proper use, had also a special sense, that was proper to it self, besides
those two before recited that are common to both the others. For this was
ordained to this use also, Exo. 13: 14-16.
that it might keep in fresh remembrance that notable benefit which the
children of Israel received of the Lord a little before their departure out of
Egypt: that is, that when the Lord destroyed the firstborn of Egypt,
nevertheles he spared the firstborn of al his people. As also the Lord did
Number. 3: 6, 12, 13, 40-51. and 8: 16-19.
afterward use it, to quiet the people in deducting the whole tribe of Levy
out from among them to the use of the ministry: taking them, and a certain
fine by pole of the overplus, for all the firstborn that then were. Of which to
discourse more fully, there is afterward offered better occasion. Unto our
selves, out of this law this lesson may we take, that seeing God is as gracious
to us, we also ought to praesent him with the best that we have: and for to
abandon those miserly practices that commonly we use, to shift him off with the
very woorst that we are able to pik out of the rest. The offering of the first
of their fruits that out of the increase of the earth did arise unto them, was
Exo. 22: 28. 23: 19. and 34: 26. Deu. 26: 2. Lev. 19: 24.
to the selfsame end ordained: that is, to witness, that whatsoever they had,
they held only of him. For the first of their fruits, they had to offer, both
the first of corn, and Lev. 23: 10.
such things as first ripened unto them: and also a part of their Number. 15:
18-21.
first batch of bread. To the end, that they might ever observe this ordinance,
they were Lev. 23: 14.
charged that they should take nothing that their ground did yield to their own
use, until that they had first brought some such praesent unto the Lord. And to
the end that they might do it more effectually, De. 26: 1-11.
he teaches them also, when they com to bring him that prsent, to acknowledge
in plain words that it was the Lord, and he alone, that gave unto them that
good land: and that by his goodness they now had the same in quiet and peaceable
possession. As indeed the goodness of God is such, that it deserves to be
acknowledged: and, of such things as he gives, to have such portion as he
requires (especially being so small as it is) even at the first, and not to
tarry til we our selves (after the proportion of our greedy appetite) shall be
glutted to our own desire. What the law of tithes was, is before declared. Now
I do but admonish, that it is one of the ordinances, whereby God would
continually witness unto them, that he was the Lord, and they his tenants. Which
that they might more effectually do, Deuteronomy. 26, 12-15.
he taught them, that every third year they should make a solemn protestation
unto the Lord, that they had truly paid al their tithes, that to their
knowledge they had not withheld any part thereof, either to supply their own
necessity; or to do any good work which was otherwise to be done of their own
charges, as to bury the dead, or such like: and that wittingly they had not
suffered any part of it to perish by their negligence. And because this was
ordained to be every third year after the seventh years rest to the land, it
was a time of al most fit to amend such things, as a man had omitted before:
for that this year was farthest of al on both sides remooved from the seventh
year, wherein the land was to lie common. So that as this law was ordained to
teach them sincerity in paieng of their tithes: so was this protestation
appointed then to be made, when they might most easily do it. What things we
omit by the reason of some urgent necessity that at some special time does much
annoy us, if we have any grace, we make up again so soon as God does send us
plenty. Other things besides those there are, that preached the soveraigntie
that God had over his people. But these are the cheifest in my judgment: and
these might well suffice to teach them, that he was The Lord their God, that
they must abandon al others, and wholly betake themselves unto him, to live and
die at his pleasure.

22 Next heerunto it is of them required that having already in such sort
betaken themselves to him alone, They must do unto God nothing else but as he
appoints.
as to their only true and living Lord, they should do unto him, not as
themselves, or others think good; but only as himself praescribeth unto them.
Unto which place especially does appertain the whole form of religion that was
given unto them. But because it is a thing of special importance in diverse
respects, therefore I thought good to speak of it apart by it self: and in this
place to speak but of such other duties of this kind, as did not concern the
form of their publik religion, but were to be observed of them al at hom, at al
times, and in all places, as occasion served. Of this sort were these. First of
al, Lev. 18: 1-5. 20: 23. De. 12: 29-31. Deuteronomy. 18: 9.
that they should in no wise behave them selves before him, either after the
doings of the land of Egypt, wherein they dwelt; or after the doings of the
land of Canaan, whither now he was about to bring them: but ever frame
themselves to do Lev. 20: 22 Deu. 4: 2. 5: 32, 33. and 12: 32.
after his ordinances, judgments, and statutes, in whatsoever they took in
hand, turning aside from them neither to the right hand, nor to the left.
Insomuch that although he allow them to make vows, that is, even of their
accord to do some work unto him, that otherwise he does not urge them unto
(which is the thing that of al others is left most free unto them:) yet even in
that also does he not leave them to their own wills, but directs them how to
proceed, and how to behave themselves therein. And first as touching the persons
that may vow, Nu. 30: 1-17
he allows but such as are at their own liberty, to make any vow. As for
young women that are in their fathers house, and married wives, he allows
none of their vows to stand, unles the father of the one, and husband of the
other do hear the same, and either give his consent unto it, or at least do not
gainsay it. Then concerning the things vowed, if afterward they were not
disposed to give the very thing that they vowed, or could not conveniently
bring it thither where it should be delivered, or if it were such as was not to
be offered, he teaches them how to redeem whatsoever they vowed, being of that
nature, that it could not bein the very kind it self performed. For otherwise,
if a man did vow Le. 27: 9, 10.
any such thing, that was not to be redeemed by money, but to be paid as we say
in kind: insomuch, that if any should put to by a better to give a worse, he
should then give both. As also on the other side, some things were so
detestable, as the price of whoordom, or advantage

gotten by bauderie; and some things so vile and of so small account, as the
price or valu of a dog; and some things so fully the Lords already, as the
firstborn, that Deu. 23: 18. Lev. 27: 26.
no vow to the Lord might be made of them. But the things, that once being
vowed, might be by the parties again redeemed, were such as might not be
offered in sacrifice, and yet might be given unto the Lord to some other good
purpose. As namely, mankind; the common sort of unclean beasts; houses; and
land. Of which only mankind had the price set: the rest were to be taxed by the
priest. The price or rate of the redemption of man, was according to his sex,
and years: and that after this manner. Le. 27: 3-7.
A man-child vowed, being betwixt a month and five years old, was priced at
five shekels: from five, to twenty, at twenty shekels: from twenty years old
to three score, to fifty: from three score upward to fifteen. A woman-child of
the first compass of age, to three shekels: of the second, to ten: of the third,
to thirty; and of the fourth, to ten. Lev. 27: 8.
Saving only that a proviso is had for such as were not able to pay after this
rate, that the priest might at his discretion take it down to their ability.
As for the Lev. 27: 11-25.
other three, the priest had to set the rate according to his discretion. But
in these things this was to be observed, that although any others might bie
them at the price that the priest did set, Lev. 27: 13, 15, 19, 27.
yet might not the owner himself so redeem them, but by adding a fifth part
more. And this is the effect of the law of vows, so much as appertains to
this praesent purpose. Whereby we may see, that although God would take at their
hands a work of their own: yet, that it might not be any other, but such as was
subject to the direction that God appointed. So far is it from him, to accept
any thing in good part, that is not his. And to the end that they might not
fear to be driven to any lak, being so absolutely put by all others, and so
praecisely kept only to the bek of God, it is farther to their comfort
declared, first, that those Deuteronomy. 4: 6-8. 6: 23.
statutes and ordinances are of marvelous aequitie and wisdom: then, that a
sufficient prophet shall be sent unto them, both Exodus 23: 20-23.
to guide them in the wilderness until they com to their promised rest, and to
Deuteronomy. 18: 15-19.
make known unto them the way of health: last of al, both what Le. 26: 3-13
Deu. 28: 1-14.
blessedness appertains to those that observe them; and what Lev. 26: 14-41.
Deuteronomy. 28: 15-68.
misery hangs over the graceless heads of those that care not for them.
Then, besides that kind of general prohibition of al other wais, he touches
certain of those by name, of which he would have them especially to beware. Of
which sort, although the most of them may better be digested to other places as
more proper to them: yet some of them are such, as do not only challenge this
place as meetest for them; but also may give sufficient light, how careful it
stood them in hand to be, to take heed of that country infection, and to
follow the direction that God did give them. As namely, first that they should
in no wise bow down to the Exo. 23: 24. Deuteronomy. 12: 1-4.
images of those nations, nor Exo. 20: 23. Lev. 19: 3. Deu. 4: 15-19.
have any of their own, of what manner or likeness soever, nor so much as Lev.
16: 1.
a pillar to look upon. So likewise that they should not Lev. 17: 7.
offer unto devils: Deu. 18: 10. Lev. 18: 21. and 20: 2.
nor make their sons and their daughters go thorough the fire: nor offer of
their seed unto Molok. Thirdly, Lev, 19: 29, 36, 31. and 20: 6 De. 18: 10, 11.
that they should not use any sorcerie, witchcraft, southsaieng, charming; or
regard either times, or the flieng of fouls, or such like. Fourthly, as
touching the property of earthly things, that no man should account to have
such property in his possessions, but that it should be lawful Deu. 23: 24, 25.
for any man passing by, to eat of his neighbors vines, or corn (so that he put
up none to carry away with him:) Lev. 25: 23-28.
and that himself might not for ever alien his lands from him and his, by the
privilege of the Iubile, nor sell at al but with clause of redemption; Lev. 25:
29-34.
nor any way alien the Levites possessions. That in all their doings to him,
sincerity is needful.


23 Concerning the manner of doing this duty in such sort as is required, the
first point of it was to walk before God in all sincerity and singlenes of
mind, and in no thing to behave themselves otherwise than became their holy
calling. And there were two sorts of praecepts that did appertain heerunto.
Those I account of the first sort, Generally of al.
that generally appertain unto al: and such of the second, as do specially
appertain unto some, by the virtue of some special profession, that they are in.
Concerning the former sort, first of al it is plainly forbidden, to Lev. 19: 12.
use the name of God in matters of untruth; or, any way to pollute his holy
name: and required, that they Leu. 20: 7, 8.
sanctify themselves, and be holy in all their doings. Then also, the same
care that they ought to have of sanctifieng the Lord, is commended unto them by
diverse figures. As namely, De. 23: 1-8.
that a maimed person, or a bastard of a common harlot, or an Ammonite, or a
Moabite (for that they did not releeve the children of Israel as they passed
by, toward their land of promise) might not enter into the congregation of the
Lord; nor the Idumaean, nor the Egyptian neither, til the third generation. So
likewise among the people themselves, and the whole multitude of the same one
with another, diverse cases there were, wherein they had to acknowledge
themselves unclean, and to withdraw themselves for a time, both from diverse
exercises of religion, and from the assembly of the people: as Le. 11, and 15
Number. 5: 1-4. and 19: 11-16. Deu. 23: 9-11.
if themselves had the leprosy or any issu; if the man had his seed parting
from him; or if the woman were in her flowers: if at any time they did eat of
that which died, or was torn with wild beasts; or of any such creature as was
forbidden, whether beast, bird, or fish: or if they did but only touch them, or
a dead body, or any such thing as was by law unclean. To the self same end it
is, that if Deuteronomy. 15: 21, 22.
the beast that they meant to offer had any blemish, though it might be eaten at
hom, yet might it not be brought unto the Lord, Lev. 22: 21, 23.
nor stand for any that before was vowed unto the Lord: that at the death of
their frinds they might not De. 14: 1^, Lev. 19: 27.
moorn (as the heathen did) immoderately, but so take up themselves betimes,
that after they had yielded a little to nature, they might forthwith declare
themselves, very well to like of Gods doings: that if Deuteronomy. 21: 10-13.
an Israelite would marry with an heathen woman taken in war, she must first
pass through certain ceremonies that should witness such uncleannes in her, as
that otherwise an Israelite might not marry with her: that Deuteronomy. 23: 12-14.
when any man was disposed to ease himself, he should make a little pit, and
after that he had done his easement therein, he would cover it again, that no
body might take noiance thereby: and Lev. 6: 28. and 11: 33. and 15: 12.
that even their pots and such other vessels as they had in use, should in
diverse cases be unclean unto them; and then, either broken, if they were of
stone, or rensed if they were of wood, or scowred if they were of metal. So
likewise in the law of vows many things there are that do plainly declare,
that although it be by nature a voluntary act, and therefore may seem that
needs it must be very welcome to God, yet is it not so easily excused, but
altogether put by, unless it bring sincerity with it besides. For this cause
first of al it is required, that Deu. 23: 18.
neither the filthy lucre that is gotten by fornication or such like, nor so
mean a thing as the price of a dog, be at time vowed unto the Lord. So
likewise, Deuteronomy. 23: 21-23.
that when they had vowed such things as might be performed, they should not
then delay the performing of them: although that otherwise it had been no fault
in them at al, not to have vowed. As also on the other side it was forbidden
Lev. 27: 10.
to put a worse in the place of that which was vowed (which if they did, they
had to give both: or Lev. 22: 18, 19.
to bring a blemished beast for a vow before made: or Lev. 27: 28, 29.
to redeem or praeserve any heerin, or that which was utterly abandoned from
any use unto the Lord, as afterward Ios. 6: 17, 18 More specially of some.
Jericho was after this manner by Iosuah abandoned. Those that do appertain more
specially to some, by reason of their special profession, are especially but of
two sorts: such as appertained to the preests; and such as appertained to the
Nazarites. The preests were such as God had chosen from among the rest of the
people nearer unto him, and to have much dealing with him on the peoples
behalf. Unto them therefore he praescribeth certain rules of special
sanctification somewhat more straightly than unto others. As namely, first
generally to al, that they should Le. 10: 8-11
not drink wine or any strong drink, when it was their course to be about the
office of their administration: to the end, that they might the better be able
to judge betwixt the holy and unholie; between the clean and unclean; and
better teach the children of Israel as they ought. And that Lev. 21: 16-24.
none of them, of the seed of Aaron, having a blemish in any part of their
body, might execute the preests office; and yet might live with them, and take
their part of the holy offerings as much as others. Two other laws there were
appointed to the preests, but not unto every of them alike: the one of
marrieng, the other of moorning, and other duties to frinds departed.
Concerning marrieng, the law that was given, was to restrain the abuse of
unseemly marrieng of themselves. The Lev. 21: 13-15.
high priest mght not marry any that had played the harlot, or been divorced,
or was a widow: but only, a maid. The Lev. 21: 7, 8.
inferior preests might marry widows: but not such as had been polluted or
defamed; or before divorced from any other. Concerning moorning, and such other
funeral duties, the high priest might Lev. 21: 10-12.
not moorn for any, or do such things at funerals as others commonly were
wont, and might. The inferior preests had some more liberty, but Lev. 21: 1-6.
yet restrained to certain persons that were near unto them; as father, mother,
son, daughter, brother, and unmarried sister: otherwise they might not have
ought to do with the funerals of any; no not of the magistrate. As also, not
only Aaron the high priest, Lev. 10: 6, 7.
but Eleazar, and Ithamar likewise being under preests, though here they have
liberty to moorn for their brethren, yet there they were forbid to moorn for
those two of their brethren, that were then sudde^ly destroyed with fire for
their sin: belike, because they were taken away in Gods displeasure, and they
could not well moorn for them, but that they must seem somewhat to repine against
the severitie of Gods judgments. The Nazarites were such as took upon them a
special vow of holiness, not constrained, but (as it were) of their own accord.
Seeing thereof that needs they would be Nazarites, that is, separate from the
common sort, and drawing nearer (for the time) unto the Lord, he gave unto them
also certain outward observations of special holiness: that so in that
voluntary separation of theirs, they might not so easily take in vain the name
of God; but do indeed as they did praetend, and took upon them to observe. And
the law that was given to the Nu. 6: 1-21.
Nazarite, was no more but to teach how, or in what manner to Verse. 1-5.
consecrate himself; how in the time of his separation he might Verse. 6-9.
be defiled; how that pollution was to be Verse. 9-12.
cleansed again; and how he had to Verse. 13-21.
finish his vow of separation. But the soldier also has a special charge, De.
23: 9-11.
if he know himself to be unclean, to avoid himself out of the camp for the
time.

24 The other point of this their duty, And that they must be zealous withal.
that was to be directed to the person of God, is, that they should be zealous
toward God, or earnestly bent to the way of godliness and religion: so to call
them from the common corruption of the world, in being so careless of
religion, or so faint in the worship of God, or any good work; and yet
marvelous earnestly bent on the vain, and corruptible things of this praesent
world. The things that do appertain heerunto are three. First, the requiring of
the seventh dais rest: then the commending of the scriptures unto them: last of
all the allowing of vows. Concerning the seventh dais rest, it was ordained,
First in the sabbath.
that Ex. 20: 8-11. and 23: 12.31: 13-17. and 34: 21.35: 1-3. Lev. 19: 3,
30.26: 2. Deu. 5: 12-15.
every seventh day should be a sabbath, that is, a day of rest: the meaning
whereof was, that the people themselves withal their families and their cattle
also; and that al such strangers as dwelt among them with their families and
cattle, should that day cease from al manner of their usual labors, and keep it
an holy rest unto the Lord. To the end they might the better observe it, he
does both give them to understand, that as he does thereby Lev. 19: 2, 3.
require holiness of them, so does he himself Exo. 20: 11. and 31: 13.
sanctify those that truly observe it, and so performs in them his own
request: and, although he do so praecisely require it, that he allows not so
much as the Exo. 35: 3.
kindeling of a fire on that day, no not Exo. 34: 21.
in seed time, nor in harvest; yet makes he the Exo. 31: 14, 15. and 35: 2.
breach thereof to be death. As also he shows them another commodity that
hangs thereon, which himself to their own use requires, that is, that he will
have that a rest-day Exo. 20: 10. 23: 12.
that themselves, their servants, and cattle may rest thereon from their woonted
labors: which must needs make them a great deal more fresh to continu their
labor. Then in the study of the scriptures.
The scriptures were commended unto them that they should have a special regard
of them, and be very studious both to know, and to do the law of the Lord. To
this they were lead three manner of wais. The first was, that they should have
the words of the law written, and that very plainly, Deuteronomy. 27: 2, 3, 4, 8.
first upon certain great stones, set up, and plastered for the same purpose at
the entrance of the land, so soon as they shall com thither: then Deu. 6: 5-9.
in their own houses upon the gates and posts thereof: yea, and to have the same
Deuteronomy. 11: 18-21.
bound to their hands, and as a frontlet between their eyes to put them in
better remembrance thereof. The next was, that they were commanded to have Number.
15: 37-41. Deu. 22: 12.
fringes, and ribbands of blew silk upon their garments, to put them in
remembrance of the law of the Lord, to do after it, and not to follow their own
inventions, little regarding the law of the Lord. The last was, that they were
willed both for their own better instruction, and for the spreading forth of
religion continually to Deuteronomy. 6: 7. and 11: 19.
teach the law to their children, and to talk thereof in their own houses, or as
they walked by the way, when they laid them down to sleep, and when they rose
up again to their work. By all which things we may perceive that he would have
them very studious and careful how to be godly. In which respect he does also
warn the^ Deuteronomy. 6: 10-12. and 8: 10-15.
then specially to take heed to themselves that they do not forget the Lord,
when they shall wax wealthy, and have abundance of al good things: for because
that worldly felicity, ingendring in man a love of the same, does very much
abate the zeal that erst before we had unto godliness, and makes us worldly,
insomuch that after that once we com unto wealth, then do we for the most part
Mat. 6: 24. Luc. 16: 13 1. Tim. 6: 9, 10
either utterly despise the way of godliness, and wholly give over our selves to
the world: or else do we lean so much to the latter, that we do very much
despise the former. Lastly in vows, or voluntary worship.
The allowance of vows that before I spoke of is this. Seeing that it pleased
God to allow of vows, as it may sufficiently appeer by that which is said of
them already; and whereas a vow is nothing else in effect, but a voluntary work
of thanksgiving to God for his goodness toward us, by proceeding out of a more
fervent zeal, than is for the most part to be found, either in the common
multitude, or otherwise in himself that voweth: heerby it appears, that GOD
does not only allow of a singular zeal; but seeing that himself does vouchsafe
to praepare the way wherein it may orderly proceed, and whereby it may be able to
com unto him, and to his gracious acceptance, he does himself also invite us
thereunto, or rather seeks to breed in us a special and a singular care to do
our service unto the Lord: the thing that now we have in hand.

25 Concerning their life one toward another, Of their duty to superiors.
that which first we have to fall in hand withal, which is, that every one
honor their parents, and so consequently reverence each other in his degree, so
far as he is any father or mother unto him, is in the law very breefly set
down: belike because it is so imprinted in the hearts of al generally, that the
contrary vice is odious withal; and sharply restreined of the higher sort. But
although the law in this point be very brief, yet is it effectual. For first
of al, as touching Exo. 20: 12. Deuteronomy. 5: 16. Lev, 19: 3.
their natural parents they were required to give them du honor; and forbidden
Deu. 22: 30
to marry their fathers wife. As touching Exo. 22: 28.
superiors, not to rail or speak evil of them: as touching the Lev. 19: 32.
aged, to reverence them. And to the end that they may better perceive how much
they ought to aesteem of al men, especially of those that were to good use unto
them, they are commanded both in such sort to do Deu. 23: 12-14.
their easement, that it be no noiance to any, and so to aesteem of their Deuteronomy.
25: 4.
laboring ox, as that while he treads out their corn, they moosel him not. As
indeed if we consider that al such creatures are made to our use, and that by
them we reap a notable commodity one way or other, as Solomon Pro. 12: 10.
says, that a just man regards the life of his beast, when as even the
mercies of the wicked are cruel: so whosoever enters into this consideration,
if therwithal he be of a thankful nature, he more aesteemeth of the meanest
creatures of all that are to any use unto us, than the common sort of worldly
people do soundly aesteem of their own natural parents.

26 The next is, What care they should have of their neighbors life or good
estate generally.
that they were bound to have a care to praeserve and uphold their neighbor in
his good estate: and first as touching his life, and whatsoever does appertain
thereunto. Unto this do belong not only the Ex. 20: 13. Deu. 5: 17.
commandment it self that does forbid murder generally: but also many other
things that concern other matters of that nature. Al which may be digested into
two sorts. Whereof the former is of those that directly and in plain speech do
treat thereof: the other of those that by outward ceremonies do mean the
selfsame thing. Those that do it directly or in plain terms do first of al
forbid al manner of violence and hard dealing toward al. As namely, to seek the
blood of any; or to Lev. 19: 16, 17, 18.
bear any malice or hatred in heart: to take Exo. 22: 25. Le. 25: 35-37 Deu. 23:
19.
usurie of their brethren; to Exo. 22: 26, 27. Deu. 24: 6, 12, 13, 17.
take or keep such a pledge as might not well be forborne; or to Deu. 24: 10, 11.
take it inordinately. Concerning certain special persons they had charge
given, not to deal hardly with Ex. 22: 21-24 Lev. 19: 33, 14 Deuteronomy. 24: 14.
strangers, widows, fatherles, or their poor neighbors that com to borrow: as
also Lev. 19: 14.
not to curse the deaf; nor to put Deu. 27: 18.
a stumbling blok before the blind; nor Lev. 25: 39-46. Ex^d. 21: 2. and Deu.
15: 12.
to have any bondmen of their own nation decayed by poverty; nor to Deuteronomy. 23:
15, 16.
betray the bondmen of the heathen to their masters again, nor to vex him, but
quietly to suffer such to live among them. So likewise they were willed to have
so special a care of their neighbor, that they should Deuteronomy. 22: 8.
batlement their house; Ex. 21: 33.
shut up again the pit that they opened; Dev. 22: 4.
help up their neighbors ox or ass that falls by the way; Lev. 25: 47-55.
redeem their brethren that were bonds to the heathen; and themselves deal Ex.
21: 2-11. De. 15: 12-18. Lev. 25: 53.
kindly with those that serve them. Those that do teach them the same in effect
by outward shadows, are such as will them to eat no Lev. 17: 10-14. 19: 26.
blood; Ex. 23: 19. and 34: 26.
nor to sees a kid in the milk of his dam, nor Lev. 22: 28.
to kill the dam and her young both on a day; nor Deu. 22: 6, 7.
to take the dam with her young.

27 The next thing that they had to praeserve of their neighbors, How careful
they should be of their neighbors wedlok.
was his wedlok or marriage: which they had to keep undefiled, by the virtue of
that commandment, Exo. 20: 14. Deuteronomy. 5: 18. Lev. 18: 20.
which forbids them to commit adultery. And to the end they might do it the
better, he does in some cases allow them Deu. 24: 1.
divorce, or to put away their wives upon misliking: and does Deu. 24: 5.
exempt them from wars, and such other affairs as might take them away from
their wives, for the first year of their marriage. And that they might better
know how to keep this commandment, and to perform their duty on that behalf,
he further gives them to understand, that not only Deu. 23: 17.
whoordom is forbidden unto them: but likewise al carnal Lev. 18: 23. and 20:
15.
copulation with beasts; or Lev. 18: 22.
man, with man: or man with a woman Lev. 18: 19. and 20: 18.
in her flowers: Deu. 22: 5.
the man also to go in woman's apparel, or the woman in man's apparel, because
that it would make an easier way unto sin, and therwithal be a cloak for the
same: and that they do not suffer their unbrideled and wanton affections to
wander, Lev. 18.
either to such degrees as were over-neer, and so forbidden; Deu. 20: 1-4
or to her, whom he has divorced, after that once she is married to another;
or, in case when his near kinsman is dead withoutissu, to marry where he list,
but De. 25: 5-10.
only with her that is left, so to raise up seed to his brother, or else say
nay, and take reproach.

28 As touching his substance, How careful they should be of their neighbors
substance.
they were commanded to have of it also a special care. And first they were
forbidden Lev. 19: 11, 13.
to do him any wrong, to steal from him, or to deal falsely with him: as for
example, to remoove Deu. 19: 14.
his land marks, or to use deceit Lev. 19: 35-37. De. 25: 13-16.
in weight or measure. And two cases there are more specially touched, the
withholding of work folks hire, and servants wages: and tithes from the
Levites: the Lev. 19: 13. De. 24: 14, 15.
wages or hire of those that wrought for them, might not be unpaid the same day
that they earned it. And if any man Lev. 27: 30, 32, 33.
paid not tith of al, as it came to hand, but put by a better to pay a worse,
he was then bound for to give both. If Lev. 6: 1-7. Number. 5: 5-8.
at any time a man had done a wrong, either by robbery, or by violence; or by
withholding or denieng the thing that was committed to him of trust; or by
denieng and keeping any thing that another has lost, and he has found, then
the party that had done this injury had to restore the damage with his
principal, and to put a fifth part more thereunto: besides a sacrifice to the
Lord. If the party were dead to whom it should be restored, and had no
executor nor heir to whom the right thereof were du: yet must they not enjoy it
themselves, nor bestow it as they thought good; but bring it to the Lord, and
deliver it unto the preests. Besides that, they might do wrong unto none, but
themselves make it up again. If there were a fault, they were also charged Lev.
25: 35-38. Deu. 15: 1-10.
to help up the poor that stood in need; to lend them according to their
necessity; and the seventh year to pardon them their debt, if they were not
able to pay: and not to deny them when they came for help, though the seventh
year were at hand. So likewise Ex. 22: 4, 5. Deu. 22: 1-3.
they were willed to bring hom to the owners such things as were lost, and such
cattle as they found straieng: or, if they knew not the owners, to keep them
safe til they heard who owed them: as also, in Lev. 19: 9, 10 and 23: 22. De.
24: 19-22.
gathering the fruits of the earth, not to gather over near, that the poor
might get some relief to themselves, after that the others have done.

29 Concerning the good name of their neighbor, Not to hurt his name.
which also was their charge, they Exo. 20: 16. 23: 1. and Deu. 5: 20.
were not only forbidden false witness: but, to make the matter more sure Lev.
19: 11, 16.
they were also forbidden al manner of lieng, and to be a carrier of tales.

30 The last of those duties that they did ow to their neighbor, How they
should content themselves with their own estate.
was Exo. 20: 17. Deuteronomy. 5: 21.
that they should not covet. Which does call them to such a moderation
concerning the things of this world, as that they ought fully to content
themselves with the portion that God had given them, that so they might never
go about to praevent any other in theirs. And to the end that they might the
better learn this moderation, and learn to keep in their inordinate affections,
certain disciplines were given unto them, that might very well teach the same.
As namely, that Lev. 11: 1-4. Deu. 14: 3-21.
certain beasts, birds, and fishes (which otherwise were good, and delicate
meats, for many of them, and very commonly eaten of others) were forbid them:
the Lev. 3: 17.7: 22-27.17: 13.
blood, and fat of those that were allowed: and Exo. 22: 30. Lev. 17: 15, 16
so many besides, as died alone, or were torn with wild beasts. So likewise
that Lev. 25: 1-7 Deu. 15: 1, 2, 9
every seventh year they should forgive debts, and yet take no increase of the
earth; and every Lev. 25: 10, 18, 31, 32, 41, 54.
fiftith suffer their bondmen to be free, and lands to return from many of
them, to their ancient possessors again: that Lev. 19: 23-25.
for the four of the first years, they might not eat any fruit of their trees:
and that they might not Lev. 19: 19. Deu. 22: 9-11.
mingle together diverse kinds, in cattle, seed, or apparel.

31 The direction that they had as touching the publik exercise of their
religion is now to be seen. Of their publik exercise in religion: and first of
their sa^raments.
Unto which most properly appertain three principal things: their sacraments;
and sacrifices. Their sacraments (that were of this kind) were only two:
Circumcision, and the Pascal lamb. Both which, although they were ordained
somewhat Genesis 17: 1-14. Exo. 12: 1-20.
before the law was given in mount Sinai; yet were they Lev. 12: 3. Ios. 7: 22.
Lev. 23: 5. Number. 9: 2. Circumcision
confirmed by the same, and under it in common use, and great force.
Circumcision was ordained to Abraham at the first, Genesis 17: 7, 10, 24.
what time he sojourned in the land of Canaan, himself being 99. years old:
which was 406. years before the giving of the law in Sinai. The matter of the
sacrament was the Genesis 17: 11, 12.
cutting away of the foreskin of the privy members of all the male children in
the land: and Lev. 12: 3.
when the child was eight dais old, then was this sacrament to be ministered
unto him. The Genesis 17: 7.
meaning of the sacrament was, that God made with Abraham and with his seed, an
everlasting covenant of special favor: that him and his seed God took to
himself, to be his own peculiar people: and for that cause it seems to have
a special consideration, that the seal of the covenant was printed on that part
of the body: that therein they might more plainly behold, both that there was a
Deu. 30: 6.
mortification of the flesh wrought by the spirit of God, in all that were under
the covenant in spirit and truth; and that their Ge. 17: 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 30: 6.
children appertained to the covenant, as well as themselves. And it is to be
noted, that they were taken to be his people before; and this pledge, or the
seal of the covenant afterward given. As for the day, the reason seems to be
this, that both children should be of some strength to bear it; and that they
should not long delay to minister that comfortable sacrament unto them. Last of
al Genesis 17: 12-14.
it was ordained, that al should take that sacrament on them: and that such as
would not, should be cut off from among the people. The Pascal lamb, The pascal
lamb.
their other sacrament, was instituted or ordained to the whole people Ex. 12:
3, 51.
a little before their deliverance out of Egypt. The matter of the sacrament
was this. The Ex. 12: 1-11.
tenth day of their first month (named Nisan) they should take from among
their sheep or goats, a young sheep or a goat of a year old, of the male kind,
and the same without blemish: him should they keep until the fourteenth day of
the month, and then kill him at even. Ver. 7: 22.
Then they should take the blood of him in a basen, and with a bunch of hysop
sprinkle of the same on the upper posts of their doors, and on both the side
posts. They should Ver. 8, 9, 46.
roast the carcass whole, and not break a bone of it: they should Verse. 8.
eat it with unleavened bread; with sower herbs; and like Verse. 11.
passengers ready to go their journie, with their loins girt, their shoes on
their feet, their staves in their hands, and make a quik dispatch thereof: Verse.
43, 44, 45, 48. Verse. 4, 46. Verse. 10.
none but Israelites, or such strangers as were circumcised should eat thereof;
they should be so many, as might conveniently eat it; and whatsoever remained
thereof to the next morning, that should they burn, or consume with fire. This
sacrament was ordained to be received Exo. 12: 14.
every year once, at the time by the law appointed; and had Verse. 14-20.
one of the three principal feasts thereunto annexed. By the reason Number. 9: 6-9.
of uncleanes, or being in journey, it might be deferred to the same day of the
next month. But Number. 9: 13.
otherwise might not be deferred of those that were clean, and were at hom.
Howbeit, the unclean might not eat thereof. The meaning of this sacrament was,
both to assure the people that then lived, of two notable benefits that
immediately after the institution of it were to insu: and to Exo. 12: 14,
24-27, 42.
keep up those benefits in fresh remembrance, both to themselves and to al
their children, that should afterward follow. The benefits, of which they were
heerby assured at the first institution heerof, and which afterward were kept
in memory by the same, were, Exodus 12: 13, 23, 29.
that the Lord spared them at the sprinkling of the blood of that lamb, when as
he destroyed the first born of all the land besides; and Exodus 12: 17, 41, 42.
immediately after delivered them out of the hands of Pharao, and from their
long and miserable bondage. Nevertheles, because these benefits could not be
grounded but in their promised savior, therefore did this sacrament to so many
as had that consideration nourish (besides) a comfortable, and a faithful
expectation of Christ, and of the force of his death and passion: as afterward
he was more plainly known, to be both our 1. Cor. 5: 7.
pasover, and the John. 1: 36.
lamb that takes away the sins of the world.

32 The sacrifices that I speak of are very diverse, and therefore harder to be
conceived. Of their manner of sacrificing: and first of the place.
Neither is the diversnes of them the only cause that they are somewhat hard to
be conceived: but also, because they cannot well be understood without the
knowledge of certain other things first had; and of their solemn feasts withal.
Those other things are especially three: what was the place were they might
sacrifice unto the Lord; what the persons were that ought to do it; and what
were those creatures out of which they had to choose their sacrifice. So it
shall be needful, to say somewhat of these things first: and after to come to the
sacrifices themselves. And concerning the place it is first to be considered
that a restraint was made: then, what the place was whereunto they were
restrained. The restraint that was made, was that they should offer their
sacrifice no where else, but only before the Lord. And that was, for the time of
their pilgrimage, and until another place was chosen, only where the sanctuary
was: afterward in Jerusalem, at the temple there. Concerning the former of
these, Lev. 17: 3-5, 8, 9.
it was death to offer any where else when they were in the wilderness, either in
the host, or without, but only before the sanctuary or tabernacle. As touching
the other, they were warned beforehand De. 12: 4-14
that when they came to their land they should not offer their sacrifices where
they thought good, but only in that place, which the Lord should choose or name
unto them. Nevertheles, because we are now to inquire, but only of that manner
of government that in the wilderness was praescribed unto them; and because the
manner and use of the former does sufficiently show the use and manner of the
latter: therefore it shall be sufficient for us, for this compass that now we
have taken, to cast our eyes on the sanctuary only, as it was at the first
ordained unto them. But because that it was mooveable, therefore it is expedient
to consider, both what the thing it self was, and what was the manner of
remooving the same. Of the tabernacle.
The place it self consisted of two principal parts: the tabernacle, and court
wherein it stood. The tabernacle it self was as it were a church or chapel,
ordained for divine service; but of set purpose so made, as that it might be
taken down, carried with them, and set up again, so often as they would: as it
was expedient and needful for them, who at that time that it was ordained, were
in a long and cumbersom journie toward the land of Canaan. It was therefore
Exodus 26: 15-30.
made of diverse parcels, redily framed to be joined together, so to stand by it
self upright. In steed of a roof Ex. 26: 1-14. Exo. 25: 37.
it had coverings cast over the top of it: and lights within, in steed of
windows. Which frame being so set together, was of that quantity, that (if
their cubit were al one with ours) then Exodus 26: 16-^5.
was it in length fifteen yards; in breadth six; in height five; and the manner
of it was to be reared up toward the west. Thus have we a general view thereof.
But to the end that we may more perfectly see it, let us now more specially
consider, whereof it was made; how it was parted; and wherwithal each part was
furnished. Concerning the stuff, the text declares that the sides thereof were
made of Exo. 26: 15.
boords: which notwithstanding were such, as we more properly call planks. As
indeed the use whereunto they were ordained does necessarily import that they
must needs be of good thiknes. And Ant. Iud. li. 3. cap. 5.
Josephus writes that they were a handful thik. They were of a kind of wood
which they called Setim, somewhat like to white thorn, and so durable that it is
said of some, never to rot. They were Exo. 26: 16, 18, 20, 22-25.
in length, five yards; in breadth, one cubit and an half; in number, for each
side twenty, and for the west end eight: which truly answer the aforesaid
measure of the tabernacle. Verse. 17.
Every of these boords had at the nether end a couple of tenons: for the
which there were provided as many Verse. 19.
sockets with mortases in them, wherinto the boords were to be let, when the
tabernacle was to be reared. And Verse. 26-30.
to compact the whole frame better together, there were ordained certain bars
of the same kind of wood for every side five: of which one should pass through
the midst of the boords throughout the whole side of the tabernacle, and the
other four should by certain rings be coupled to the boords, and so join them
fast together. Exo. 26: 29.
Al these boords, with their bars and rings were overlaid with beaten gold: and
Verse. 19.
their sockets were of silver. The coverings or hangings that were cast aloft
on the tabernacle, were diverse: those that were in-most, very fair, and costly;
those that were out-most, of courser work, and such as were meetest to bear off
the weather. The Exo. 26: 1-6
in-most of al was fine twined linen, blew silk, and purple, and scarlet, and
imbrodered fair. Ver. 7-13.
The next unto it of goats hair: Verse. 14.
the third of rams skins colored red: the fourth, and out-most of al of badgers
skins; with the hair on (as it seems) for that so it might better keep off
the weather. Which hangings Verse. 2, 3, 8, 9, 12, 13.
were of that largenes that they did cover the whole frame round about half
way to the ground, but only at that end which was left open for the way to com
in. At which Verse. 36, 37.
there was hung a rich hanging of needle work, made of fine twined linen, of
blew silk, of purple, and scarlet. Which was hung on five pillars, for that
purpose provided, whose heads or tops were of gold, their sockets of brass,
and the rest of Setim wood, overlaid with beaten gold. So have we the outward
face or show of the tabernacle. Within, it was divided into two parts: the
division being made Verse. 31, 32, 33.
by a rich hanging of the same work that the in-most covering of the tabernacle
was of, which was hung on four pillars like to the others, saving that their
sockets were of silver. Whereas therefore before it was one, now, by this
partition, it is become two: whereof Verse. 33.
the out-most and east part, was termed the holy place, or the tabernacle of
the congregation: the in-most or west part, the most holy place. In the
out-most of these two Ver. 35, and 30: 6.
there were three principal things: a table, a frame for lights, and an altar;
in the in-most, Verse. 33, 34.
but one, which was the ark of testimony. The table was Exo. 25: 23-25.
of Setim wood, but overlaid with beaten gold, and the work thereof was fair.
The frame that was ordained for lights, was Verse. 31-37.
as it were a great standing candlestik of beaten gold, branching forth in
such sort on each side, that it yielded in all seven branches, on the tops of
which were seven lamps. The Ex. 30: 1, 3.
altar that I speak of, was of timberwork within, as the table was: but
overlaid with beaten gold. The use Exo. 25: 30.
of the table was that thereon should be bread continually, which was called the
shewbread Verse. 37.
of the standing candlestik, to give light: and Ex. 30: 7-10.
of the altar that incense or sweet perfume shall every day be burned, and
once a year the reconciliation made thereon. Of which afterward somewhat more
largely. These were Exo. 26: 35. and 30: 6. Number. 8: 2.
placed, the table on the north side of the tabernacle; the standing candlestik
on the south; and the altar in the midst toward the hanging that parted both
these places. In the in-most place which was called the most-holie, there was
nothing else Exo. 25: 10, 11, and 26: 33.
but an ark or chest, of timberwork, but overlaid within, and without, with
beaten gold. The lid whereof being of the same stuff, had Exo. 25: 17-19.
at each end a cherub, with their faces, and wings stretched forth one toward
another: and the place where their wings met (about the midst of the chest lid)
was a place of special account. This chest was called Exo. 25: 16, 21.
the ark of testimony, for that it had the tables of testimony, or ten
commandments therein: and the middle place of the lid between the wings of the
cherubins, was called the Verse. 17, 22.
mercie-seat. And it is to be noted Exodus 25: 12-15, 26-28, and 30: 4, 5.
that both this ark, and altar, and table in the other; had rings and bars of
the same stuff that themselves were of, for the more convenient carriage of
them. We read also of certain other implements, that did appertain to certain
of these: as of Exo. 25: 29.
certain dishes, goblets, or bouls, and incense cups; that did appertain unto
the table, that so the shewbread might more decently be set thereon, and
incense on the top of the same: and Verse. 38.
snuffers, and snuffing dishes that did belong to the standing candlestik: al
which were of pure gold.

33 Concerning the court, we have in like manner to consider, Of the court of
the tabernacle.
not only the court it self: but diverse other things likewise that were placed
therein. The court that I speak of, was a plot of ground taken into the use of
the tabernacle: wherein the tabernacle it self was placed, and diverse other
things done, that did appertain to the worship and service of God. The Ex. 27:
9-18.
form of it was square: the quantity of it fifty yards in length, and five
and twenty in breadth: Verse. 9.
compassed about with hangings of fine twined linen Ver. 18, and 38: 18.
two yards and an half high, hoong upon pillars for the same purpose provided.
Which Verse. 10, 11.
pillars were on either side twenty, and at each end ten: al Verse. 17.
having their sockets of brass; and their heads or tops of silver. But Verse.
14, 15.
at the east end (where was the coming in) the linen hangings did reach from
each corner toward the midst of that end, but fifteen cubits only, and so
fifteen yards in all: and left the other ten yards in the mids, Verse. 16.
to be hoong with a richer hanging, which was of blew silk, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with needle. To the hangings also, and
curtains of the sanctuary did Exo. 27: 19. and 38: 20. Number. 3: 37. and 4: 20.
appertain a convenient number of cords, and brazen pins to rear up these
things, and to fasten them unto the ground. In which court, the tabernacle or
sanctuary was reared toward the upper end thereof, that so the other part of
the court might yield more convenient room for such service as was there to be
done. The other things that were placed therein and belong to this discourse,
were especially two: the brazen altar, and the great laver. The Exo. 27: 1, 2.
brazen altar, which was for burnt sacrifices, and such like, was of timberwork
within, but overlaid with brass round about: and Verse. 4, 5.
had within, in the hollow thereof, a grate of brass, whereon the sacrifice
should lie with the fire, and wood thereunto belonging. And this altar Verse. 1.
was in length five cubits, in breadth as much, and in height three: and had
Verse. 2.
horns at the corners thereof, of the same stuff, that it self was of, whereby
they might more conveniently bind their sacrifices unto the altar. Unto which
altar Verse. 3.
belonged certain other implements, as namely, ash-pans, beesoms, basins,
flesh-hooks, fire-pans, and such like: al which were of brass, suitable unto
the altar it self. This altar was to be placed in the nether part of the
court, as it were about the midst of the whole, before the door of the
tabernacle, and a reasonable distance from it. The Exodus 30: 17-21.
laver was a mighty great vessel of brass, whereat the preests should wash,
when they went into the sanctuary, and when they came forth again to offer
any sacrifice: and therefore was it placed in convenient room meet for that
purpose; even Exo. 30: 18.
between the sanctuary, and the great brazen altar.

34 But this tabernacle (as I said) together with the court and all the
furniture thereunto belonging, How they had to pitch about the tabernacle: and
in what sort they had to remoove.
was to be carried from place to place: and to be placed among the people, not
at aventure, but after a set praescribed order. Here therefore we have more
specially to consider, both how they camped about the tabernacle, and how they
removed. Of those that camped about the tabernacle, there were two sorts: some
that had some special charge about it; and the residu of the people. Those that
had some special charge were especially, Moses, and Aaron: then also all the
Levites besides. Moses and Aaron camped Number. 3: 38.
at the east end of the tabernacle, before the entrance thereunto; the Levites
about, by the other sides: the Koathites on the Number. 3: 29.
south side, whose number then Number. 4: 36.
was 2750; the Gersonites on the Number. 3: 23.
west end, whose number Number. 4: 40.
was 2630; and the Merarites on the Number. 3: 35.
north side, whose number Number. 4: 44.
was 3200. The residu of the people camped a convenient space without these:
but round about the tabernacle also. At the Number. 2: 3-9
east end camped the tribe of Judah with two other tribes, Isachar, and Zabulon
associate unto him; but it self bearing the standard: who were in all 186400.
On the Nu. 2: 10-16
south side Ruben bearing the standard, with Simeon, and Gad associate unto
him: who were in all, 151450. at the Nu. 2: 18-24
west end, Ephraim bearing the standard, Manasses and Benjamin being under the
same: whose number was 108100. On the Nu. 2: 25-31
north side the tribe of Dan, with Asser, and Nephthalie his accomplices: whose
host was 157600. When they were to remoove, the Number. 9: 17-23.
cloud ascending from the tabernacle, and going forward, did both give them
warning of remooving, and it self led them the way. Then the preests were to
com and lap up the ark, and the other holy things: and themselves, with the
ark on their sholders, first of al to follow after. At which time Number. 10: 35
Moses was wont to say; Arise, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and
let them that hate thee fly before thee. Concerning the people, Nu. 10: 5, 6.
at the sound of the trumpet they were to set forward in those four main
armies, every one under their standard: Number. 2: 2, 17.10: 5, 6.
first Judah; then Ruben; thirdly Ephraim; and last of al Dan, which also was
called Number. 10: 25
the gathering host, because it shut up al, and took al with it, that dragged
or fainted by the way. Concerning the Levites it is not so plainly set down how
they should march on: but by the nature of their charge, and by a journie that
afterward they took, it appears, that the Number. 10: 17
Gersonites and Merarites went betwixt the first two armies, the one carrieng
the timber-work of the tabernacle, the other the curtains and hangings: and so
made al ready against the others came. Then that Number. 2: 17. 10: 21.
the Koathites followed in the midst, betwixt the second and the third army,
with the sanctuary, and the holy things. The third space between the battles,
that is, the space betwixt the third and the fourth main armies seems to be
left for those that were sik, feeble, and weary, because that so the host of
Dan (that Number. 10: 25.
came last and shut up al) might best see unto them. And thus going on in roial
manner, they were Number. 9: 18.
not to rest, til the cloud, that comfortable testimony of Gods praesence, did
stay. But where it stayed, there did the priest set down the ark: and then was
Moses wont to Number. 10: 36
say; Return, O Lord, to the many thousands of Israel; so (as it were)
welcoming hom the Lord again. The Levites also and preests, Number. 10: 21
set al such things as belonged to them in their place again: and the Number. 2:
34.
rest of the people pitched round about in their order as before is described.
So it appears that the Lord would both dwell in the midst of his people; and
whenever they had to travel, then would himself lead the^ the way. But
because this manner of remooving and camping was but for a time, only so long as
they were in the wilderness, therefore for this matter this short discourse may
well enough suffice.

35 The persons to whom the sacrificing of these things belonged, were two: Of
the ministry of the tribe of Levy about the tabernacle.
the people that did bring their sacrifice; and the preests and Levites which
were the ordinary ministers of those affairs. The party that brought the
sacrifice, had no more to do but Lev. 1: 3.
to bring it willingly of his own accord, and to present it before the Lord at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation: but it did appertain to them
al, to see they were Nu. 9: 6-10.
clean, for that such as were unclean, might not praesume to any such matter:
insomuch that Lev. 8: 6, 23, 24, 30.
the preests themselves were to be cleansed before they entered into that
office; although they were specially chosen thereunto. Of the Levites.
The other parties that had to deal in the offering of sacrifices, and whom
that action did properly concern, were (as I said) the preests and Levites.
These were one whole tribe or family of that people, and were Number. 3: 11-13,
45. and 8: 14
diducted from the rest to the ministry of the tabernacle. Out of which
tribe, Exo. 28: 1. and 29: 44.
some were exempted from the rest, and appointed to be preests: the Number. 3: 5-9
rest were left to the ordinary service of the tabernacle, at the direction of
the preests, and by the proper name of their kindred were called Levites. Of
the preests.
Concerning the preesthood it is first to be noted, that the succession and
dignity thereof Exo. 28: 1. and 29: 9, 29: 30. Number. 25: 13.
was appointed to one only family of the Levites ever to remain therein, and to
go by descent, from the father to the son. So that they were not ordained to be
chosen out of the woorthiest: but from time to time were such, as that same one
line did yield. And yet was it their office to be mediators betwixt God, and
man, so far as the nature of figures may bear: and, in the mean while, to
repraesent in themselves, and in the office to them committed, the notable
mediation that afterward by another was to be made. Whereby it may sufficiently
appeer that the force or merit of reconciliation, or of the atonement betwixt
God and man, hangs not on the woorthines or merit of man, but only on the
favorable acceptance or goodness of God. But as the whole tribe of Levy was
taken Number. 3: 11, 12, 13. and 18: 6
nearer to the sanctuary of the Lord, than the rest of the people; and the
preests advanced Exo. 28: 1. and Nu. 18: 7.
to an higher degree than they: so among the preests also there was such a
distinction, that Exodus 28: 3. Lev. 21: 10. Number. 35: 25.
one was appointed to be the high priest; and the rest inferior preests under
him. Concerning al which, we have to see these two things; how they were
praepared unto their function; and what was the proper function of every one.
The apparel of the high priest.
Their praeparation consisted in two things; in their appareling, and
consecration. The apparel that was appointed for the high priest, was very
Exodus 28: 2.
honorable and fair, and for the most part such, as the great men in those
countries did commonly wear, excepting the proper form that it had peculiarly
in it self. His in-most garment besides his ordinary and Lev. 16: 23, 24.
usual clothing, Ex. 28: 4, 39.
was of fine linen, and the same imbrodered. The Exodus 28: 4, 31-35.
next unto was somewhat shorter, but of blew silk, and having bells of gold, and
pomgranates of silk hanging round about on the skirts thereof. The Ex. 28: 4, 6-8
uppermost garment of al was called an Ephod, which in shape and form was a
short coat, close before: but in substance, and workmanship it was very costly
and rich. For it was made of gold, blew silk; purple, scarlet, and fine linen,
and the same imbrodered. Al which were Ex. 28: 4, 39
girded together with a girdle of needle work. Moreover he had hanging down
before his breast, Exodus 28: 15-21.
a kind of tablet called a breast plate of brodered work like unto the Ephod it
self, an hand breadth square, set with twelve precious stones of diverse kinds,
every one of them having the name of one of the tribes of Israel engraven
therein. Which Exodus 28: 14, 22-29.
breast plate or tablet was by certain chains and rings fastened beneath to the
Ephod it self, and above on the top of the sholders, to a couple of imbosments
of gold that for that purpose were set on the Ephod, on each sholder one: wherein
Ex. 28: 9-13.
were set two Onix stones, having the names of the children of Israel ingraved
in them also, in each of them six. Into which breast plate Moses was willed to
put Exo. 28: 30.
Vrim, and Thumin: that is, light, and perfection: or that tablet should so be
wrought, that both the stones and gold thereof should be very clear, beutiful
and fair; and that the workmanship of it should in no point fail so near as
might be, but should be as perfectly wrought as could be devised: that so it
might the better lead the party that should were it, to the consideration of
greater matters. The Exo. 28: 39, 36-38.
attire of his head was of fine linen: and on the forefront thereof had a fair
plate of beaten gold, by certain laces fastened thereunto, wherein was written;
Holiness unto the Lord. The Exo. 28: 40, 42, 33. The apparel of the other
preests.
apparel that was for the inferior preests, was also ordained to be such, as
might be both comely, and fair: the particulars whereof were these, coats,
girdels, bonets, and breeches. Which breeches were to this end ordained, that
whereas it was the manner of that people to go in long clothing, the preests
might sometimes have their nakedness discovered, their clothes flaring open, and
themselves being occupied about their business, but only by the help of these:
and for that cause they were ordained not only for the inferior priest, but
also for the Exo. 28: 43.
high priest likewise.

36 Their consecration was a solemn investing of them into the office that they
had to perform, The consecration of the preests.
and had two principal parts: the fact of Moses on their behalf; and then what
was left unto them to do for their selves. The fact of Moses was this. First of
al he must have in a readiness Ex. 29: 1, 2, 3 Lev. 8: 2.
one bullok or calfe of a year old, and two rams without blemish: and one
basket of unlevened bread, of cakes unlevened tempered with oil, and of wafers
unlevened anointed with oil. Then Ex. 29: 4.
bringing Aaron and his sons toward the door of the tabernacle, there Exo 29:
4-9. Lev. 8: 6-9, 13
did he wash them. Which being done, then did he put on their apparel; and
anointed the high priest with the holy, and praecious oil. Having so far done
with their persons, Exo. 29: 10. Lev. 8: 14.
he sets in hand with the sacrifices that on their behalf were to be
offered; which were three. A sin offering; a burnt offering; and the sacrifice
of consecration. The Exodus 29: 10-14. Lev. 8: 14-17.
sin offering was a young bullok, or a calfe of a year old, without blemish,
whereon Aaron and his sons that were to be consecrated must lay their hand.
Which being done, then had Moses to kill the bullok, to put of the blood on the
horns of the altar: to burn the fat, the kal, and the kidneies upon the altar;
and to send away all the rest, the flesh, the hide, and the doong to be burnt
without the host, after the manner of the sin offerings. The Exodus 29: 15-18.
Lev. 8: 18-21.
burnt offering was a ram, whereon Aaron and his sons must in like sort lay
their hands, and then did Moses slay the same: sprinkling the blood round about
the altar, cutting the ram into certain pieces, washing the inwards and feet
thereof, and then laieng al together on the altar, to be consumed together with
fire. The Exodus 29: 19-21. Lev. 8: 22-24, 30.
other ram was for the sacrifice of consecration: on which Aaron and his sons
did first lay their hands, and then did Moses kill it as before. With the blood
of the sacrifice first of al was to be touched the lap, or nether part of the
right ear, both of Aaron, and of his sons, the right thumb likewise, and the
right toe of every of them: then should the altar be sprinkled therewith round
about: lastly with it; and the anointing oil mingled together, both Aaron and
his sons and al their garments were to be sprinkled. The carcass of this
sacrifice was thus divided. Only Exodus 29: 22-28. Lev: 8: 25-29.
the fat, the rump, the kal and the kidneies, and the right sholder were
consumed with fire on the altar: the rest was given to Aaron and his sons to be
their portion, saving only the breast, which was (for the time) the portion of
Moses. That part which was burnt had put thereunto out of the basket before
mentioned one lofe, one cake, and one wafer: and were al together first given
into the hands of Aaron and his sons. The residu of the flesh that Exodus 29:
31-34. Lev. 8: 31, 32.
was given to Aaron and his sons, had all the rest of the bread to go
therwithal. Of which none might eat but Aaron and his sons, and that sodden,
and before the door of the tabernacle: none other might eat thereof; and so
much as remained til the next day, was to be burned. Al Exodus 29: 35-37. Lev.
8: 33-36.
these sacrifices on the behalf of Aaron and his sons for their consecration,
were to be offered seven dais together, after one and the selfsame manner: so
to cleanse and sanctify the altar for the ministration, which by Aaron and his
sons was afterward to be done on the same. Concerning that which was left to
Aaron and his sons to do for themselves, it was no more, but, after that once
in manner aforesaid they were consecrated by Moses, themselves to enter into
their office. So Lev. 9: 1, 2.
when the seven dais of their consecration were finished, the eight day
themselves did enter into their office. At which time (beside Lev. 9: 17.
the daily sacrifice of that praesent morning) first they Lev. 9: 2, 8-14.
offered for themselves a bullok for a sin offering; and a ram for a burnt
offering: then Lev. 9: 3, 4, 7, 15.
for the whole people, an he-goat for a sin offering, a young calfe an a lamb
for a burnt offering; a bullok and a ram for a peace offering, and a meat
offering mingled with oil. These they did offer Lev. 9: 8-23
after the several rites or customs of every one. At what time Lev. 9: 24.
the Lord on the other side, to win a credit to their ministration, and to show
that he had appointed them unto that office, sent forth a fire from his
praesence that consumed the sacrifice on the altar.

37 As touching the Levites, The consecration of the Levites.
they were in this sort praepared to their office. First Number. 8: 6, 7
they were sprinkled over with water, and were charged to shave their heads,
and to wash their clothes. Number. 8: 9-14, and 16-19
After this they were prsented to Aaron, to offer unto the Lord as an
heave offering of the children of Israel, diducted from the rest in steed of
the first born of all the people, which by good title did before belong unto the
Lord. On whose behalf Nu. 8: 8, 12.
Aaron was to offer unto the Lord the day of this their separation to the
service of the tabernacle, two young bulloks, the one for a sin offering, the
other for a burnt offering. Which being done, Nu. 8: 15, 22
then were they admitted unto their charge.

38 Concerning the proper function of these, Of the proper function of every of
these: and first of the preests.
it was the office of the preests Le. 9: 1-4, 7. Number. 18: 7.
to offer sacrifices both for themselves, and for the people; as well the
ordinary, as extraordinary, as occasion served: to keep the Lev. 24: 3, 4.
lamps burning, and therefore to dress them both morning and evening; and
therwithal, at that praesent, to Exo. 30: 7, 8
burn sweet perfume unto the Lord on the altar of incense; and Exo. 25: 30.
Lev. 24: 8.
every week to shift the shewbread, taking away the old, and setting on new:
to Lev. 9: 7, 22. and 16: 34. Number. 8: 19: and 6: 22-27.
make atonement for the people, and to bless them: to Lev. 10: 11.
instruct the people in all such things as concern their duty: therefore Le. 10:
9, 10.
to have a special care of themselves, still to keep and increase their
knowledge and zeal, that so they might ever be able to teach the people, and
soundly to judge between good and evil: and specially Le. 13, and 14 Deuteronomy. 24:
8.
to judge of the leprosy, who it is that has it, and who is clean. Of the
high priest.
Unto the high priest was committed Nu. 18: 1-8.
the chief oversight of such things as appertained to the sanctuary and
service of the Lord: and yet not so, but that the other preests also stood
charged therewith. And De. 17: 8-12
if any matter of controversy were found in any part of the land so hard, that
the magistrates, and Levites there, could not tell what to say unto it, then
should it be brought before the high priest, and before the chief magistrate in
those dais, there to be decided by them. Again, the high priest Lev. 16: 1-34
might only enter into the most-holie place: and that but once every year, on
the day of reconciliation, there to make an atonement for himself, for his
household, and for all the congregation of Israel. Carriage of the ark.
The inferior preests had (as it seems) the charge of bearing the ark. For
though it be left to the charge of the Nu. 4: 4, 15.
Koathithes generally among other of the holiest things of the sanctuary: yet
because the preests must needs be of that kindred, and because that Ios. 3: 8.
God himself commanded Iosuah to bid the preests to bear the ark (as also they
did Ios. 3: 14.
both in passing over Jordan, and in Ios. 6: 12.
compassing of Jericho and such like) it seems to be a peculiar charge to
them especially belonging. This is certain that Nu. 4: 5-15, and 17-20.
Aaron and his sons (and so consequently those that after them succeeded in
lineal descent) were charged to cover both the ark, and all the other furniture
of the holy place, before that others should com to take it up, or so much as
be in praesence while it was don. As also Eleazar was specially Number. 4: 16.
charged with the oil for the lights, with the sweet perfume, with the daily
sacrifice, with the anointing oil, and with the oversight of the sanctuary it
self, and such things as thereunto appertained. Concerning the Levites, The
charge of the Levites.
whereas Levy their great and common ancestor Genesis 46: 11.
had three sons, Gershon, Kohath, and Merari, and every one of these Ex. 6:
16-25. Number. 3: 22, 28, 34.
grew to a several family, hence comes it to pass, that as they were three
sundry families, so was there allotted to every one a several charge about
the tabernacle, beside that same which they had common to them al. That which
was common to them al, was Number. 3: 6-8. 8: 19. and 18: 2, 3, 4, 6, 21, 23.
to help and assist the preests about the service of the tabernacle, that is,
about the dressing and praeparing of sacrifices and such like: as also to teach
and maintain the knowledge of the law among the people, Lev. 10: 11
that being some part of the work of those that served in the tabernacle; and
themselves being Genesis 49: 7. Number. 35: 1-8. Ios. 21: 1-40.
afterward so placed throughout the land, as might be most commodious to give
forth and maintain a light unto al. That which was allotted unto the several
families, was but temporal; that is, so long as the tabernacle was to be
remooved. During which time they were assigned to carry the same so often as
needed: the Number. 4: 4, 15
Kohathites the most holy things that were appertaining to the tabernacle; the
Nu. 4: 24-28.
Gershonites, all the hangings, and coverings; and the Nu. 4: 29-33
Merarites all the timberwork, the boords of the tabernacle and the pillars, the
cords also and the pins. But it is to be noted, first, that Number. 4: 3, 23, 30.
none of any of these families was appointed to the bearing of these burdens,
but that were of the age of thirty years, and under fifty: Number. 7: 3-9.
then also that for the easier carriage of these (for God was never wont to
overlay his people) the Merarites had four chariots allowed them; and the
Gershonites two. And when that this temporal charge did cease, we find that
David 1. Chro. 23: 25-27.
took occasion thereby to allot them from twenty years old upward to other
labors: both 1. Chro. 23: 2-6.
about the building of the temple, as 24000. to build, 6000. to oversee, 4000.
to be porters, and 4000. to praise the Lord with instruments ordained thereunto;
and 1. Chro. 23: 28-32.
when that work also should be finished, to al such labors and charges as did
appertain to the service of the temple.

39 As for the creatures which they had to offer in their sacrifices, What kind
of creatures might be offered.
it may soon be seen what they were. For generally they were such, as were
their common and usual sustinance. As Lev. 1: 2, 10, 14.
beeves, muttons, goats: and some kind of birds, as turtle doves, and pigeons:
and of the increase of the ground, Lev. 2: 1, 4, 5, 7. Lev. 7: 12, 13. Lev. 2:
13. Lev. 2: 2.
fine flower, corn unground, bread, oil, and wine: salt also and frankincense
in diverse cases. Concerning the beasts that were allowed for sacrifice, they
Lev. 22: 8. and 1: 3, 10.
might not be first dead, nor maimed, nor have any blemish, nor be il liking,
nor under Lev. 22: 26, 27.
eight dais old at the least. Which in most cases, must be only the males: in
some the females; and in some, either of both. As for all the rest, there was no
special choice in them praescribed: save only, that Lev. 2: 11.
the bread that was offered in the meat offerings, must ever be unlevened;
saving that Lev. 7: 13.
in peace offerings they might bring some levened bread withal: and the bread
that they should bring, might be either Le. 2: 4, 5, 7.
baked in the oven, or fried in the pan, or made in the caldron: the Lev. 7: 12.
form of which was either cakes, or wafers.

40 Concerning the times of their solemnities, Of their solemn feasts and times.
of them there were two sorts: one of dais; another of years. Of dais there
were diverse: first the sabbath every week; then the first day of every
month; and certain others that came every year. Sabbaths.
Concerning the sabbath, the word by nature does signify rest: and the
ordinance of God for it was, that whereas he had most liberally allowed his
people to bestow six dais in the week about their usual labors, the seventh
day he would have them ever to rest, and to keep it holy unto the Lord. Which
being first Genesis 2: 2, 3.
commended to man by the example of God himself, was afterward Exo. 20: 8-11.
and 23: 12 Lev. 23: 3. Deu. 5: 12-15.
commanded very expressly by the written word. So that they had both to intermit
their ordinary business for that day: and to give them selves to holiness
besides. The first day of every month.
As for the first day of every month (which also is called the new moon) it
was in this something severed from other dais, for that Number. 28: 11-15.
there was a special sacrifice appointed for it: of which there is somewhat
already said in the treatise of sacrifices. And although otherwise we read not
of any special solemnity appointed for that day in the first institution
thereof: yet afterward in the practice of the church 1. Sam. 20: 5 2. King. 4:
23.
we find it often rekoned among their festival dais; and sometimes to be so
specially named, that it seems with them to have bin of some special account.
As that David Psalm: 81: 3.
assigneththerunto the blowing of trumpets, and a joiful solemnizing thereof:
and Solomon 2. Par. 2: 4.
does rekon it among others of the solemn feasts: and Isai. 1: 14. Hos. 2: 11.
Col. 2: 15.
so likewise, both Isai, and Hoseah among the prophets, and long after that;
Saint Paul the Apostle. Of these there was one, of more special account, The
first day of the seventh month.
and of greater solemnity than the rest; which was the first of the Lev. 23:
23-25. Number. 29: 1.
seventh month: which they were appointed to keep very holy; and to
solemnize not only with the sound of the trumpet, but also Number. 29: 2-6
with another sacrifice proper to it self, over and besides that which was
appointed for the first dais of other months. Easter.
Of those that came every year once, Exo. 12: 1.
the first was that which is called Easter: the solemnities whereof were diverse.
First, that which was Exodus 23: 14-17. and 34: 23, 24.
common both unto Pentecost, and to the feast of tabernacles following, that
is, that Deu. 16: 5, 6, 11, 16, 17.
all the people should make their repair to the place that the Lord had chosen
(so many as were of the woorthier sex, and able to travel) there to keep holy
the feast to the Lord: then, the eating of the pascal lamb, according to the
manner before described; and namely, with none other Exo. 12: 15, 17-20. and 34:
18. and 13: 3, 6, 7 Lev. 23: 6. Deuteronomy. 16: 8.
than unlevened bread all the whole feast: thirdly, that therein they had to
offer a Lev. 23: 10, 11.
sheaf of new corn unto the Lord: last of all that their feast was to last Exodus
12: 15, 16. Lev. 23: 7, 8.
seven dais together, whereof the first and the last were of special solemnity
above the rest. But as touching the second point, that is, the eating of the
pascal lamb, Exodus 12: 6.13: 10. Lev. 25: 5, 6. Nu. 9: 2, 3, 13.
although the law did generally require, both that every one should eat
thereof, and appointed both one time and place for all: yet did it allow of
certain Nu. 9: 10, 11
exceptions, if any should be either unclean, or in his journey else where, that
such might have respit til the same day of the next month. Pentecost.
The feast of Exodus 23: 16.34: 22. Lev. 23; 15-17 Deu. 16: 9-12.
Pentecost which followed next in order, was the fiftith day after Easter:
which also was to be holden a very holy feast unto the Lord, in remembrance
of their deliverance out of the bondage of Egypt. For which their deliverance
they were willed, themselves and their families to rejoice together before the
Lord: and to bring with them two loaves of levened bread to praesent the Lord
withal. And the better to advance the solemnity of this feast (besides the
praesence of the people, and those loaves that they had to bring for themselves
and there families) there was Lev. 23: 18-21.
a special sacrifice appointed on behalf of the whole people for that prsent
day. After this feast of Pentecost which fell in the third month of the year,
they had no more til they came to the seventh: saving only the first of every
month, that before was spoken of. But when the seventh month came in, which
was about the end of summer, it did bring with it two notable feasts besides
the first day spoken of before. The former of which was no more but one only
day: The day of reconciliation.
which was Ley. 16: 29.23: 27. Number. 29: 7.
on the tenth day of that month, and was called the day Lev. 23: 27.
of reconciliation. On it was it, that the high priest had to enter into Lev.
16: 34. Exodus 30: 10.
the most-holie place, there to make a general atonement for all. On it had the
Lev. 16: 31. 23: 27-32. Number. 29: 7.
people to cease from their labors, and to afflict and humble themselves before
the Lord. On it also (every nine and fortith year) Lev. 25: 9.
was proclaimed the Iubile following, by the sound of the trumpet. Five dais
after, that is, the Lev. 23: 33-43. Nu. 29: 12-39. The feast of tabernacles.
fifteenth of the same month began the feast of tabernacles, the last of the
principal feasts in the year, and of a very special solemnity: ordained to
call to their remembrance, how they dwelt in tents in the wilderness forty
years. It continued eight dais, and had a proper sacrifice for every one: but
the greatest and most special dais were the first and the last.

41 The years that were of special account with them, Their solemnities in
years. The third year.
were especially three: the third; the seventh; and the fiftith. The solemnity
of the third year was, Deu. 14: 28, 29. and 26: 12-15.
that so soon as they had that year set out a just tith of al such things as
God had given them, they should make a solemn protestation thereof before the
Lord, that they had truly paid al such duties; that they had withheld, or taken
to their own use no part of them, whatsoever need or occasion there was; nor
suffered any part of them through negligence to decay in their hands: and
therwithal, that they should make their prayers unto the Lord to bless the
people, and the land which he had given them. It was also ordained, that that
year they al should have a more special care of those that stood in need, as
namely of the Levite, stranger, fatherles and widow; and to that end be of
extraordinary liberality toward them, or keep (as we say) open house for
them. But as touching this point, it cannot be denied, but that the writers do
something vary. For some think that this was another tenth besides the ordinary
tenth of the year: others, that it was no other tenth that here is spoken of,
but the ordinary tenth of the year, but that it should be this year bestowed
not only on the Levites, but also on all the poor generally. Howbeit I take it,
that neither of those senses can well stand with other parts of the scripture
heerunto belonging: and that they are not charged, but with protestation of
sincere and righteous dealing in those matters; and not to lay out any other
tenth, nor to bestow that tenth on others, than otherwise by law they ought,
but only to have more special care of the poor, and of their own to be more
liberal to them. Whence this third year is to be rekoned.
And it is to be noted, that this third year was not every third year: but the
third from the

seventh years rest; and so fell no oftener indeed, but only every seventh,
year. And therein may we see the wisdom and goodness of God, that appointed them
to make that protestation, and to have a special care of the poor, at such a
time as was the easiest for them, being even in the midst of their plenty:
when they might most easily amend what defaults they had before made, in
payment of their duties, if any such were; and with less hurt to themselves be
liberal to others. And seeing that Deuteronomy. 15: 9.
God does in any wise forbid to have the less care on the poor, when at any
time the seventh year approaches, much more are they charged to be careful of
them, when as it is furthest of from them. The seventh year.
The solemnity of the seventh year, rested in three special points. Whereof the
first was, that Exodus 23: 10, 11. Lev. 25: 1-7, 20-22.
they should that year let their ground rest, and neither sow nor plant thereon;
neither yet reap or take to themselves that which it yielded forth of it self:
but that it should that year be common, and serve to the use of the poorer
sort, and to releeve the beasts and cattle of the feeld. The second was, Deu.
15: 1-6
that no man might trouble or su his brother for debt: but that for that year,
he had to surcease from al such actions; that so, poor creditors might
together have rest with the land, and so, more easily pay it after. But yet was
it lawful to exact the same of strangers, that observed not the law of God, and
so had their sabbaths in derision. And to the end that they might be in this
case more favorable to their poor brethren, the Lord does promise that his
blessing shall besuch toward them, that so doing they shall find no want. The
third and last was, that Dent. 31: 10-13.
every seventh year all the people, men, women, and children, and those
strangers that dwelt among them, should at the feast of tabernacles resort to
the place that the Lord had appointed: and thereshould have the law read unto
them, to the end that they al might know it, and keep it. And so it seems to
be meant of this seventh year, that in another place Deu. 16: 14.
there is mention of bringing their daughters and maidens to the feast of
tabernacles: whereas Exo. 23: 17.
otherwise but only the males were required. The fiftith year.
The solemnity of the fiftith year was much greater. For first of al, that
none should be deceived in their rekoning, it Lev. 25: 8, 9.
was to be proclaimed openly in all quarters of the land, and on the day of
reconciliation, in the 49. year going before. So that, whereas Lev. 23.27.
they had that day to afflict themselves every year: yet in the 49. year, on
the selfsame day came there to al, this special news of joy and gladness. In it
Lev. 25: 11, 12.
the land should rest, as in the seventh year. And because it might be dowted,
how they should live, when the seventh and the fiftith concur together, Le. 25:
20-22
he answers, that God wilso bless the sixth year with increase, that they
shall live thereof til new com again. But besides this, which it had common with
the seventh year, there were two other special praerogatives to it belonging.
One Lev. 25: 10
was that freedom must be proclaimed and granted to al: the other, that Lev.
25: 13.
every one had free access unto his ancient inhaeritance again. Which
benefits were to be enjoied, not only for that year; but for the time that
should afterward follow: unles themselves by some new act or deed of theirs
should com in bondage, or make away the possessions they had.

42 Concerning the sacrifices themselves (further to help the hardness thereof)
it shall be good first to say somewhat generally: Of the sacrifices themselves.
and then to enter into the several nature of every one. Which in my judgment
may best be done, if we shall sort them al to be one of these two, either
ordinary, or extraordinary. The ordinary sacrifice principally is that,
which is called the daily sacrifice: which being once set before our eyes, will
give unto us such a general knowledge of the nature and form of a sacrifice,
that when we com to the rest, we shall not need, but to discourse of their
several natures, wherein they vary from the other. Those also may we account
ordinary, The ordinary sacrifice.
which by the law of God the preests were bound ordinarily to offer at their
times appointed, without any other occasion given, as request of others, or
whatsoever else. Of this sort were diverse: but the first and principal was that
which was called the daily sacrifice. Which was Exodus 29: 38-42. Number. 28: 1-8.
that every morning and every evening the priest should take a lamb of a year
old, without spot, and praesent it before the Lord, then should he kill and
dress it, and lay it on the altar, and there burn it unto the Lord. Whereunto
they must also ad Exo. 29: 40.
a certain quantity of flower, oil, and wine: of flower a tenth part, which
was an Omer, which of our measure was about a pottle: of oil and wine, a like
quantity, which was of either of them the fourth part of an Hin, which of our
measure was about a pint. Last of al to the latter part of this sacrifice (that
is, to the flower, oil, and wine, which also is called Lev. 2: 1. Number. 28: 5.
a meat offering) they should Lev. 2: 13. The sabbaoths sacrifice
ever put some salt, which in no meat offering might at any time want. Next
heerunto is the sacrifice Nu. 28: 9, 10.
of the sabbath, which was no more but the daily sacrifice doubled: that is,
every morning of the sabbath two lambs, and twice so much flower, Other
sacrifices for proper feasts.
oil, and wine, as before; and so again in the evening. Last of al, there was
Number. 28: 11-31.
another kind of sacrifice of some greater cattle withal, properly ordained for
their other solemn feasts. As namely, for their three greatest feast dais,
Easter, Penticost, and Tabernacles; for the first day of every month; and of
the seventh month, for the first and the tenth besides. For the Number. 28: 11
first day of every month, for Number. 28: 19, 24.
all the eight dais of the feast of Easter, and for the Number. 28: 27.
feast of Penticost, or weeks there was one kind of sacrifice provided: for the
Number. 29.: 2.
first day of the seventh month besides, for that it was Lev. 23: 24. Number. 29:
1.
the day of blowing the trumpets; and for Number. 29: 8.
the tenth day of the same month, which Lev. 23: 27.
was the day of reconciliation; Number. 29: 36
and for the last day of the feast of the tabernacles, another kind of
sacrifice something varieng from the other: and for every day besides of the
feast of tabernacles, which began the fifteenth day of the same month, a
several sacrifice. But as these do in some respects vary; so do they in some
other agree. They varied in the number of beasts that were offered: they agree
in this, that according to the number of the beasts that were offered, the like
proportion of flower mingled with oil, and the like proportion of wine was
commanded. The sacrifice that ( Number. 20: 15, 24, 31.
besides the daily sacrifice in the morning and evening, with the meat offering
thereunto belonging) was proper to the first day of every month, to every day
of the feast of Easter, and to the feast of Penticost, or Whitsuntide, Number. 28:
11, 15; 19, 22, 24; 27, 30.
was, two young bulloks, one ram, seven lambs of a year old without spot for a
burnt offering; and an he-goat, for a sin offering: Number. 29: 2, 4; 8, 10; 36,
38.
for the first, and tenth of the seventh month, and for the last day of the
feast of tabernacles, but one young bullok; otherwise al one with the other
(but that Number. 29: 6.
the ordinary sacrifice for the first day of the month stood on the first day
of this month also, besides this that now I speak of) for the feast of
tabernacles Number. 29: 13-34.
the first day of the feast: thirty young bulloks; the second twelve, the
third eleven, the fourth ten, the fifth nine, the sixth eight, the seventh seven,
and with these every day besides, two rams, fourteen lambs of one year old
without blemish, for a burnt offering, and one hegoat for a sin offering; for
the eight day as before for the first and tenth of the seventh month. The meat
offering, or the oblation of flower, oil, and wine that should go with the
burnt offering in every one was like, or kept but one, and the selfsame
proportion. Which was this, Number. 28: 12 13, 14; 20, 21; 28, 29. Number. 29: 3, 4,
6; 9, 10; 14, 15, etc.
that to every bullok should go three tenth deals (that is, about three
pottles) of fine flower mingled with oil; and of wine about one quart: to
every ram, of flower, mingled with oil, two pottles; and of wine a third part
of an Hin, which was almost a pint and an half: and to every lamb, of the
flower aforesaid one pottle; and of wine one pint. As for the oil which was to
be mingled with the flower, although the just quantity of it be not here set
down: yet seems it to follow the former rate, and to be al one with the wine,
as we saw in the daily sacrifice.

43 These other sacrifices, Of those sacrifices that are extraordinary.
such as I termed extraordinary, are those which the preests were occasioned
for some special purpose to offer: either on the behalf of the whole people; or
on the behalf of several persons, themselves, For the whole congregation.
or others. On the behalf of the whole congregation we read of three principal
sacrifices which were grounded upon some special purpose. For otherwise those
also of which I have spoken before, were on the behalf of the whole people:
and the first of these that now I have to speak of, had a special day in the
year appointed for it, and so was ordinarily offered every year once; but yet
(in my judgment) comes nearer to the nature of these that follow, than to to
the nature of those that are gone before. The first therefore, On the day of
reconciliation.
and the chief of those three sacrifices that now I speak of, was that same
which was made by the high priest and the people together, in the aforesaid day
of reconciliation, the tenth of Tisri, their seventh month. The form or manner
of which was this. First there were (as before is said) certain other
sacrifices that day to be offered: as the daily sacrifice; and the other that
was proper unto it as it was a festival day. And these might others of the
preests offer: but this other sacrifice which was for the peoples
reconciliation might none offer Lev. 16: 3, 32
but the high priest only, and that in this manner. First Verse. 4.
he had to wash, and to put on the holy garments that were ordained for the
high priest to wear in his ministration. Then as touching the very action of
the solemnity, there were three principal parts thereof. For Verse. 3, 6, 11
first he had to offer the sin offerings to reconcile himself, his house, and
the people; and to purge the sanctuary, and altars from the sins, that in the
one, and on the others were committed: Verse. 20, 21, 22.
then he had to send away the scapegoat: and Verse. 24.
last of al to offer his burnt offerings. To accomplish this business withal,
Verse. 3.
first himself should bring a bullok, for a sin offering, and a ram for a
burnt offering: then Verse. 5.
on behalf of the people should be prsented two he-goats for a sin offering,
and a ram for a burnt offering. Of these should he Ver. 6, 11.
first take the bullok, praesent him, and slay him before the Lord, and take
unto him no more of that sacrifice but the blood, and the fat. Of which two,
the Verse. 25.
sat should he burn on the altar for his facrifice: but with the Verse. 12, 13,
14.
blood, and with a censer of hot burning coals taken from the altar, and an
handful of incense cast thereon, himself Verse. 17.
without any company by, should enter into the in-most part of the sanctuary
or into the holiest place of al, and there seven several times with his finger
sprinkle of the blood of the bullok, toward the mercie-seat, and on the same.
This being done, then had he to Verse. 7, 8.
com forth to the door of the tabernacle, and there in the sight of the
people to cast lots over those two goats, whether of them should be the
sacrifice, and whether should be let go again. When by lot it was found whether
of them should be the sacrifice, Verse. 9.
then should the high priest take him, praesent him, and kill him before the
Lord, but (as before of the bullok) take nothingels, but the fat, and the blood.
Of which two, the Ver. 25.
fat was burnt for sacrifice on the altar of burnt offerings: but with the
Verse. 15, 16.
blood he should enter in (as before) into the most holy place, and with his
finger sprinkle of it also toward the mercie-seat, and upon it seven times.
Then Verse. 16, 18, 19.
coming forth into the tabernacle of the congregation, he had to do likewise
with the altar of incense: and not only to sprinkle toward it, as in the
in-most place before, but also to anoint the horns of the altar therwithal, and
so to cleanse and halow it from the uncleanes of the children of Israel. And
although it be not very clearly set down in the text, that he had to do so to
the altar of incense with the blood of the bullok at his former coming out:
yet because it is appointed that Verse. 18.
he should do so with the blood of both, and because it seems by diverse good
likelihoods that he should Verse: 14, 15.
first dispatch with the one, before that he should meddle with the other,
therefore it is most likely, that at his first coming forth from the most
holy place he began this reconciliation at the altar of incense for the
tabernacle of the congregation with the blood of the bullok, and now at his
second return thence again, made an end thereof with the blood of the goat.
During which time that the high priest was so occupied within to make this
reconciliation, not only for himself and his family, but also for the whole
people of Israel, it was in like sort injoined to the people, that on their
parts the better to help forward this reconciliation, they should Verse. 29, 31
Lev. 23: 27, 29 Number. 29: 7.
afflict and humble themselves before the Lord, with sorrowful hearts bewailing
their sins, and earnestly praieng to have them forgiven. The reconciliation
thus being made, then had the high priest Verse. 20, 21.
to com to the living goat, and laieng his hands on his head, there had he to
confess and acknowledge all the transgressions and sins of the people; and to
lay them al upon him, so to disburden the people of them: and Verse. 21, 22.
therwithal to send him away forthwith from among the people into some wast, by
some that beforehand should be thereunto appointed, who also should Verse. 26.
not return to the congregation again, til first he had washed himself and his
clothes, that so no conscience of sin remaining or returning again, should with
his return enter into the hearts of any. The third and last part of the action
was, that the high priest had then Verse. 23, 24.
to put off his holy ornaments in the tabernacle of the congregation, and
after he had washed, then to put on his other garments, and to offer his two
rams for burnt offerings, for himself, and for the people. And as touching the
carcases of the bullok and he goat, whereof before he might take (as already I
showed) but the fat, and the blood, it was ordained, that Verse. 27.
they should afterward be had out of the host, and there be wholly consumed with
fire: and Verse. 28.
that he that should have that charge given him, should not return into the
host again, Of the sacrifice that was to be offered, when the congregation had
done any thing ignorantly.
until that he also had washed himself and his clothes.

44 Another sacrifice there was which was to be offered on the behalf of the
whole congregation (and it may be, on the behalf of any great multitude,
though the same were but a part of the whole:) but neither had it any set day,
neither did it carry that solemnity or majesty with it, that this other had
which is gone before; and yet was it of great and special importance. It was to
pacify the wrath of God, when of ignorance the congregation had any way
offended. Whereas therefore it enters soon into the opinion and persuasion of
man, both that the whole church cannot at any time er; and that, if the offense
or error com but of ignorance, then is that but a small matter: it is as we may
see to very good purpose, that for it there was such a sacrifice provided, as
might plainly teach, not only that the whole church might er; but also, that it
was a dangerous matter in the judgments of God, though it were done ignorantly.
The manner of this sacrifice was this. Whenever it was found that such a
transgression was committed, then Le. 4: 13-15. Number. 15: 24-26.
should the congregation bring a young bullok for a sin offering, and present
the same before the Lord at the door of the tabernacle, the elders laieng
their hands on the head of the bullok so to testify the confession or
acknowledging of their sin committed. Which being done, Le. 4: 15-18.
then had the priest to take him and kill him; to take of the blood also, and to
go into the tabernacle of the congregation, and there to sprinkle it seven
times toward the vail, and to put thereof on the horns of the altar of incense,
and so departing to power forth that which was left, at the foot of the altar
of burn offerings. Then had he to take Verse. 19.
the fat from him, and to burn the same for the sacrifice, on the altar of
burnt offerings: but Verse. 20, 21.
to send away the carcass as we heard of the other before.

45 The third and last of this sort, The sacrifice of the red cow: whereby was
made their sprinkling water.
was that sacrifice, out of which was made Number. 19.
that sprinkling water, that was common to the use of the whole congregation,
and to be used of particular persons whenever any of them was unclean. The
sacrifice was this. The Verse. 2.
whole congregation should bring a red cow without blemish, and upon whom never
came yoke: Verse. 3.
her should one of the inferior preests slay without the host in a clean place:
Verse. 4, 5.
then should another take of her blood and sprinkle it before the tabernacle of
the congregation seven times, and cause the cow to be burned in his sight:
Verse. 6.
whilst she was in burning the priest should cast in cedar wood, and hyssop,
and scarlet lace: Verse. 9.
the ashes whereof were to be laid up in a clean place. And when any was to be
cleansed, Verse. 17-19.
some of the ashes were to be mingled with spring water, and with a bunch of
hyssop to be sprinkled on the unclean, but by such an one (a point that none of
our holy water-clerks could ever reach, though they also would needs be
meddling) as himself was clean: and this being done both on the third day, and
on the seventh, then on the seventh he might be clean.

46 Concerning those sacrifices, Of sacrifices offered on the behalf of
several persons.
which were offered but on the behalf of several persons, now that we are com
unto them, it shall be good to sort them by their several natures: which was,
either to take away sin; or else to give thanks for benefits received.
Nevertheles, these two several purposes or intents were not so distinct the one
from the other; nor ever so praecisely respecting either, but that a middle
intention often times did arise, and carried the sacrifice away with it: which
was, to have no other meaning, but to worship the Lord, and to exercise their
religion or faith toward him. And though certain kinds of these sacrifices
were such, as that by the very nature of them, they did praecisely respect one
of those two purposes; and no mo; as the sin offering did only respect the
doing away of the sin, and diverse of the peace offerings nothing else, but
thanksgiving: yet the burnt offerings did not so specially respect the purging
of sin, but that they were done as much in the way of worship; and so likewise
many of the peace offerings besides. So we have to consider what were those
sacrifices, that being done on the behalf of several persons, did specially
respect the doing away of sin: and then what they were that did concern giving
of thanks. So shall we have those among them, that did not so praecisely respect
either of these, but that sometimes rather they were done in the way of
worshipping. Sin offerings.
Those that are specially directed to put away sin, were of three sorts: some
for offenses wittingly done; others for offenses done of ignorance; the third
for the very original corruption of our nature. For sin wittingly contmitted.
Concerning the former of these we find two sacrifices that do properly
appertain thereunto. The first is, when as a man should at any time of
infirmity, or want of sufficient advisement or care, offend against the law of
God in such sort, that although thereby he had hurt no body else: yet thereby he
had polluted himself. As for example, Lev. 5: 1-6.
if he do not utter the truth (though undemanded) when he hears others swear
falsely: or if he negligently but touch such things as pollute, or if he rashly
vow or promise in such sort that afterward he perceive himself thereby to have
done amiss. In all these cases, the offender had to confess and acknowledge
that he had therein offended: and to bring for his sacrifice, a female of his
sheep or goats. Nevertheles, if the party were so poor that he was not able
so to do, then Lev. 5: 7.
it was permitted that in stead thereof he should bring two turtle dooves, or
two young pigeons: as also Verse. 11.
if he were not able to bring those neither, that then he should bring an
Ephah, that is, about a pottle of fine flower; but without either oil or
incense, for that it was a sin offering. If he brought his sacrifice of sheep
or goats, she was to be sacrificed as other sin offerings, of which we have
seen the manner already. If he brought Ver. 8, 9, 10.
turtles, or pigeons, the one was to be made a sin offering (wringing the nek
asunder, but not clean off; sprinkling part of the blood on the side of the
altar; and pouring the rest down besides:) and the other a burnt offering. If
it were Verse. 12, 13.
flower, the priest had to take out and burn for the sacrifice an handful of
it; and to take the rest to himself. The other sacrifice for sin wittingly
committed, is when a man has so offended, that thereby he has done some wrong
to his neighbor in his possessions. As for example, Lev. 6: 1-3.
if a man deny to his neighbor that which was taken to him to keep: or
otherwise employ that which was committed to him of trust, than the trust to
him committed does bear: or by unlawful means, as by fraud, robbery, or
violence oppress his neighbors: or has found that which was lost, and denies
it, and swears falsely. In all which cases Lev. 6: 4, 5. Mat. 5: 24.
the duty of the offender was first to make a true and just restitution of that
whole thing which he had unlawfully gotten (to whom it should appertain to
restore it) the selfsame day on which he would be reconciled to the Lord: and
not only that, but also to ad or put to of his own, the valu of a fifth part of
that which he took. Which when he had done, then had he to com and bring his
sacrifice: which Lev. 6: 6, 7.
was ordained to be a ram without blemish, and such as the priest himself
should aesteem to be worth two shekles of the sanctuary, which is rekoned to
about six shillings and eight pence of our coin. But whereas it is here
required, to make restitution to whom it appertains, it is in another place
made more plain, that is, Number. 5: 5-8.
that if the party be dead, it should be to the next kinsman of him to whom it
should otherwise be restored: if there be none such, then that it should be
given to the priest.

47 Concerning offenses done of ignorance, Sacrifices for sins done of
ignorance. Sim respecting persons.
those that do properly appertain thereunto, do somewhat for the most part
respect the persons also: putting some difference in the offenses of a priest,
of a magistrate, and of a common private person, when they com to offer their
sacrifice for such trespasses as are of this kind. For Lev. 4: 1-12, 22-26,
27-35.
if it were the priest that offended, he had to offer a bullok: if it were a
ruler, an he-goat, or an ew-lamb. Again in the sacrifice of the priest, the
blood of his sacrifice was brought into the holy place there to be sprinkled as
we heard of other before; the fat was to be burnt on the altar of burnt
offerings; and Lev. 6: 30.
the carcass with all the rest was to be burned without the host: but the blood
of the other sacrifices was not to be had in, but only to be sprinkled on the
altar without; and therefore the Le. 6: 26, 30.
fat being burned, these were not to be carried forth out of the host to be
burned, but they fell to be the preests fees, to be eaten in the holy place
Lev. 6: 29. Lev. 7: 6, 7. One other respecting only the fault.
of so many as were males among them. But one sacrifice for offenses committed
of ignorance there is, that does nothing at al respect the person, but only the
fault. Which was, Le. 5: 14-16.
when a man had taken away any consecrate thing, as first fruits, tithes, or
such like. In which cases their sacrifice was a ram of the worth of two
shekles: and they had not only to make restitution of the thing taken away, but
in this case also to put to of their own a fifth part more.

48 That which was to do away the guiltines of original corruption, A sacrifice
for original sin.
was the same Lev. 12.
which was ordained for women that had traveled with child, and had been
delivered. In the which God minding to show, that by the fall of Adam the whole
race of mankind is so corrupt, that even the child that is born is by nature
laden with sin, he ordained that the mother, by bearing and bringing into the
world a child of corruption, should account her self unclean until that she
were by a special sacrifice cleansed again. But before she might com to offer
her sacrifice, she was excluded, and shut up a certain time, that so she might
after com abroad without danger; and that at hom she might better enter into
the consideration of the great uncleannes, that we are in by original sin: and
then after that time expired, to better purpose offer her sacrifice. The Verse.
2, 4.
time that she was in this sort shut up, was for a man child to be in her
uncleanes seven dais, and so continued thirty and three dais more, before she
might come and offer her sacrifice, so to make up forty dais in all: for a
Verse. 5.
woman child double in both, that is, to be fourteen dais in her uncleanes, and
threescore and six dais more, before that she might offer her sacrifice. That
the ceremony was easier for the bearing of a man child, than for a maid
child, the reason may be, for that the woman in paradise did first offend; and
for that every man child was afterward to be circumcised, which also tended
to the abolishing of original sin. After that she had finished this time at
hom, Verse. 6, 7, 8.
then had she to com and offer her sacrifice. Which was either a lamb of a year
old, and one turtle doove or young pigeon, the one for a burnt offering, the
other for a sin offering: or, if she were not able to bring a lamb, then a pair
of turtle doves or young pigeons, to be employed in sacrifice as before.

49. Of peace offerings.
Of peace offerings there were two sorts: yet in effect, and substance, but
one. For they varied but in this, that sometimes they did offer them as occasion
praesently served: and sometimes they were vowed or promised before. These peace
offerings were appointed to be unto them a way or manner of thanksgiving for
the goodness of God generally; or particularly for some special benefit received:
and otherwise to be therwithal a kind of worshipping the Lord; and of
exercising the religion and faith that they professed. Le. 3: 1, 6, 13
These kind of sacrifices might be of the herd, or of the flok: that is, of
great cattle, sheep, or goats, either male or female. Again, though the blood
of these also Lev. 3: 2-5, 7-11, 13-17.
was to be sprinkled about the altar, and the fat to be burned with fire: yet
the rest went partly to the use of those that brought it, to feast together
withal before the Lord; and Le. 7: 31-38.
partly to the preests for their fees. But the Le. 7: 14-18
flesh must be eaten the same day; saving, that if it were a vow, the next day
also was then permitted unto them. And it may be, that God did thus require,
the meat of their sacrifice to be forthwith spent, that profane people should
neither bring the sacrifice it self to some dishonor, by keeping their meat til
it was naught: nor have any way left unto them to profess a devotion, and yet
to be greedily bent withal; as they might easily have been, if after they had
offered their sacrifice, they might have carried hom and powdered the flesh that
was left, and have spent it at their leisure. For no kind of niggardlines, but
liberality, and franknes of nature becomes devotion. As also on the other
side it was a good way to cut off licentious and inordinate feasting, which
otherwise might easily have crept in among them, and have lurked under the
praetence of devotion. Again, as burnt offerings had their meat offerings to go
therwithal; so Lev. 7: 12.
peace offerings likewise: saving that in the other no leven was admitted; in
these, besides the unlevened cakes, and wafers, they should also have Lev. 7:
13.
some levened bread. But because Lev. 2: 11.
no leven might be burned (as Verse. 9.
was the manner of al meat offerings) therefore it seems to be for the use of
those that were there to feast.

50 Unto the punishment of their transgressions, How their transgressions were
to he punished.
there do appertain two principal things to be considered: what authority was
erected among them on this behalf; and what rules were unto it praescribed. To
find out what authority was erected among them, What authority was erected
among them.
we have to consider these two things: first what it was that in the beginning
was practiced among them; then what it was, that afterward by the authority of
the word succeeded. What authority it was that was first in practice with them.
That which was practiced among them, has three principal considerations. For
first of al, while they were in the land of Canaan, they were but few; and
strangers themselves in another country: and therefore could have no other
government among them, than such as masters have in their own households. And
immediately thereupon descending into Egypt, as they grew to be mo in number;
so they grew more and more in bondage to the princes there: and so could have
no freedom of any higher government; nor that which they had, but much
encumbered. But when the time was come that they were to be delivered out of
Egypt, and to go to the land of promise, then did they fully attain to their
freedom, and had of their own a sovereign authority established among them.
Unto which third consideration it is, whereunto especially we have at this
praesent to cast our eyes. How the authority of Moses was erected.
The form of which government was, that unto one man was committed the whole
charge: who governing al first by himself; afterward, by occasion, had help of
others. This one man, to whom the whole was committed, was Exodus 6: 20 and 3: 1.
Moses the son of Amram and Iochabed, of the tribe of Levy. Who at the first
being left of his mother in desperate case, hid in a basket among a sort of
flags in the water side, when yet he was but a quarter old, so to avoid the
hands of tyrants that most cruelly without compassion imbrued themselves with
the blood of the Hebrews infants: was nevertheles, both at that time notably
praeserved, by king Pharaohs daughter that there did find him; and afterward
was so brought up, and advanced to honor in the kings court, that he became an
excellent man. Him it pleased God to appoint to be the governor of his people
Israel. Who long before that he was appointed to set in hand with the charge,
had (as it seems) some understanding, one way or other, that God had ordained
him thereunto: and the same so plain, that Ex. 2: 11-13 Acts. 7: 24, 26.
both himself began to take upon him, as one that was called to the place of
authority, both against an Egyptian on behalf of an Israelite, and betwixt
two Israelites that were contending; Act. 7: 25.
and thought that his brethren also had certainly known of the purpose of God
for that matter. Howbeit, although he were thus beforehand ordained of God,
that once he should com to that place of authority: yet may it be, that as yet
he was not called thereunto; and so consequently, that that meddling of his was
somewhat inordinate, although notwithstanding his zeal was excellent. This is
certain, that at that time he Ex. 2: 14, 15. Acts. 7: 27.
was interrupted by the displeasure of the king co^ceived against him upon that
occasion: that thereupon he made no resistance, nor put on armor, that so by
force he might win to the place, that he perceived that God had provided for
him; but that he Exo. 2: 15. Acts. 7: 29.
gave place, and fled his country: and that it Acts. 7: 30.
was forty years after, before that he was called of God to set in hand with
the charge that we speak of. Ex. 2: 15, 21. and 3: 1. Acts. 7: 29.
Al which time he was fain to live in a very low and mean estate, but such, as
(indeed) was very meet for those (whether Moses were free from that fault, or
not) that finding themselves to be ordained to the place of government, do at
aventure step to the room, before that God do call them unto it. But when those
forty years were expired, Ex. 3: 10. Acts. 7: 34, 35.
then it pleased God to give him a lawful and a manifest calling by virtue
whereof, he both entered into his office, and afterward attended the same so
long as he lived: first leading the people out of Egypt, Inferior magistrates
under Moses.
and then ruling them in the wilderness. And this he did at the first by
himself Ex. 4: 18, 20. and 5: 1. and 18: 13-16. Acts. 7: 36.
alone for a little season. Afterward, when Iethro his father in law came unto
him, and found, that so doing the labor of Moses was very great, or rather
intolerable, and yet that he could in no wise dispatch any sufficient number
of the peoples causes, he Exodus 18: 17-23.
gave him counsel both for his own sake, and for the better dispatch of the
peoples causes; to choose out from among the people such men as were meet for
government, and to make them inferior magistrates under him, allotting al to
their proper charge: some to be over thousands; some over hundreds; some over
fifties; and some over tens. Which counsel of Iethro, though he were but an
heathen man: yet Moses the prophet of God did Exodus 18: 24-26. Deu. 1: 9-15.
follow: and so did better the form of government, both for himself, and fot
the people. This being done a few weeks after that they came out of Egypt, A
bench of elders with Moses.
before the selfsame year was spent, or therabout, by another occasion, the
form of government that was already grown unto this, was afterward brought to
greater perfection: by the putting to of an honorable bench of elders to assist
Moses in the government of the people. The occasion was this. The people were
very il to govern, especially to be lead by so barren a wilderness, toward a
land they wist not whither: and so misliking their praesent estate in diverse
things, did often Exo. 16: 2, 3 and 17: 2, 3. and Nu. 11: 1, 4-6.
murmur against Moses, that lately had brought them out of the land of Egypt.
Heerupon Moses in his impatiencie Number. 11: 11-15.
did make a greevous complaint unto the Lord, that he was not able to bear the
burden of the peoples government: desiring the Lord, rather to kill him, than
that still he should stand charged therewith. By occasion whereof Number. 11: 16, 17,
25.
the Lord caused him to bring in threescore and ten persons, such as were of
the chief of the people: and bestowing on them a certain measure of the spirit
or gifts of Moses, and ordaining them to sustain the burden with him, did so
erect a very honorable bench of elders to be assistant in the government of
the people. Which bench of assistance, though it had no direct commandment to
be continued: yet notwithstanding it was afterward diverse times revived, and
reached unto the age of Christ. And this was the authority that was in ure and
practice among them. As 1. Chron. 27: 1-34.
For as touching those others, that afterward grew to be in ure among them,
such as their kings from time to time thought good to ordain, they do not
appertain to our purpose: for that we seek not what was done among them; but
whereunto by the law of God they were directed.

51 What authority it was, What authority was after by the word appointed.
that afterward by the word of God succeeded, is now to beseen. Which
consists in two principal points: first as touching under-magistrates; then
as touching the chief of al. As touching under-magistrates, What under
magistrates.
there is Deu. 16: 18.
a law very plainly set down, that when the people should com to the land,
which God promised to bring them unto, and in his good time to give them, then
should they choose from among themselves judges and officers in all their
cities, to minister just judgment unto the people. So that Exo. 18: 17.
as before, by the counsel of Iethro, under-magistrates were appointed
according to their persons, as was most meet while they were in the wilderness,
and had not there any cities to dwell in, nor place of continuance: so now by
the Lord himself it is appointed, that what time they shall com to enjoy the
land of promise, they shall in like sort have magistrates chosen, but not
according to the number of their persons now, but according to the number of
their cities wherein they shall dwell. What sovereign magigistrate.
As touching the chief, or sovereign of al, there was no direct order taken
for the establishing of any such: belike, because that God would thereby
signify unto them, that he would himself rule so praesently among them, as
that he need not set down any law for that matter. Nevertheles, these two
things are very clear, both that God would not leave them destitute of a ruler
among them: and that he left it in their own liberty, afterward to choose them
a king, if themselves should think good so to do. That they should never be
destitute of a governor.
That he would not leave them destitute, it appears Genesis 12: 2, 3
by those comfortable promises that were made to Abraham when first he was
called, which should be performed both to himself, and to his seed that should
afterward follow. Which comfortable promises Genesis 13: 14-16. 15: 1. 17: 9. 22:
16-18. 25: 11. 26: 2-4, 24. 27: 28, 29.28: 13-15. 32: 28. 46: 2-4.
were after that very often renewed: both to himself; and to Isaac, and Jacob
besides. Al which promises being thoroughly considered, although some of them
be, but of multitudes of people to descend of them; others, of particular
benefits sometimes: yet do those also evidently witness such a special favor of
God to that people, and that their estate should in such sort be blessed, as
that when they should grow to be such a people, needs must they have an
ordinary magistrate to be their governor, or else must the Lord himself some
other way supply the same. Iaacob therefore in spirit foreseeing this continual
providence of God, toward that peculiar people of his, Ge. 49: 9, 10
did plainly assure them a little before his death, that a convenient and
needful government should never be wanting to the tribe of Judah: but that it
should be continually maintained there til the Lord and Savior himself should
com, and take to himself the government of them. Moses likewise upon the same
ground Deu. 31: 3-6
assures the people, that the Lord himself will go over with them into the
land that he promised to give them; that he would destroy their enemies before
them; and that he would never fail them there: Deu. 33: 26-29.
and therwithal utters so great good things of the blessed estate that the
people should have, being under the protection and government of God, as that
they might assure themselves, that a sovereign magistrate could never be
wanting unto them, so far as was expedient for them. So it appears, that, as
concerning their spiritual direction, he Deu. 18: 15, 18.
only told them that he would so order the matter, that they should not want a
prophet; and yet set down no certain order how to continu a perpetual
succession of prophets, but reserved the same to himself, to dispose of that
matter from time to time, as himself should think good: so concerning this
chief or highest place of authority, he contented himself not to set down
any certain order for it, but would himself at al times dispose thereof as he
should think most convenient for them: and yet assures them in the mean
season, that his providence over them should be such, as that they need not
trouble themselves about that matter. Of which he gave them a plain experience,
and a sufficient pattern of that platform that he meant to follow, both in
calling Exodus 3: 10.
Moses to that place at the first; and after his death, appointing Number. 27: 18
Ios. 1: 2.
Iosuah to succeed in his room: which course likewise he afterward followed,
in raising up whom himself thought good, so often as any occasion was offered.
The liberty of choosing a king permitted unto the^.
The liberty of choosing a king to set over them, was as I said permitted unto
them: and themselves did afterward take the advantage thereof, though little or
nothing they did advantage themselves thereby. The permission was Deuteronomy. 17: 14,
15.
such, as that although it did not forbid them to choose a king, if they were
disposed: yet did it praescribe some rules unto them to be observed, and what
kind of one he should be that should be chosen: which were, that they should in
no wise set up a stranger, but one of their brethren; and such as the Lord
himself should choose. Seeing then that in this sort it was by law permitted
unto them, it does necessarily follow, that if at any time afterward they
should use this their liberty under the limitation praescribed unto them, the
authority of their king were sufficiently warranted by the word of God.
Afterward therefore 1. Sam. 8: 5.
they craved a king, and the Lord appointed whom they should have: and so, in
process of time they brought their commonwealth to the form of a kingdom. Two
kingdoms.
After which time, ten of the tribes 1. King. 12: 16, 20.
misliking to remain together with their brethren under one, and the selfsame
king, did set up another of their own: which doing of theirs also was in such
sort of the Lord approoved (although on their parts it were very disorderly
done) that it also did afterward stand by sufficient warrant from God. So have
we now found out, unto what persons the chief authority of governing the
people was by the law of God committed: first unto such as himself only should
choose; then unto kings of their own desire. And although this their appointing
of kings over them, was of substancial warrant enough, for that the Lord
allowed them so to do, if needs they would: yet had it becomd them a great deal
better, so to have moderated themselves in this their liberty as that still
they had left the ruling and ordering of themselves wholly and only in the hands
of the Lord. Seeing that Number. 23: 22.24: 7.
Balaam could a far of so plainly behold the praesent power of God among them,
and the very majesty of a mighty and glorious kingdom, when as
notwithstanding it was but Moses that was their chief magistrate: needs must
it be reproach unto them, that being so near, yet notwithstanding did so little
epsy it, that for because they thought that same to be wanting, even therefore
especially did they so much desire to have a king.

52 The rules of government that unto this authority in this sort erected,
What rules of government were ordained.
were by the laws of God praescribed, are of two special sorts: whereof some few
concern themselves; and all the residu concern others. The rules that concerned
the magistrates themselves, are of two sorts: Of those that concern magistrates
themselves. Generally al.
such as are generally praescribed to al; and such as are specially directed to
those forms of magistrates that were ordained. Unto al generally it was
praescribed Lev. 19: 17.
to execute justice, and not to suffer any sin to tarry upon an offender for
want of rebuke when need required: in matters Exodus 23: 3. Lev. 19: 15.
of judgment never to respect the person of any; neither of the rich, nor of
the poor: in no wise Exo. 23: 6, 9. De. 24: 17, 18.
to pervert or hinder the right, or judgment of the stranger, widow,
fatherles, or poor: Deu. 25: 1.
to determine such controversies as came before them, justifieng the righteous,
and condemning the offender: to receive no accusation, Deu. 19: 15. Deu. 17: 6.
Number. 35: 30.
but under two witnesses at the least: Deu. 24: 16.
not to put the father to death for the fault of his children: nor the child
for the fault of his father: in such faults as are to be punished with stripes,
Deu. 25: 2, 3
to punish according to the quality of the offense, and never to give above
forty at once, that the offender think not himself despised. More specially
certain of them.
Those forms of magistrates to whom there were some rules more specially
directed are three: first of al kings that afterward might be appointed; then
those under Moses, that were over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens; and
last of al those threescore and ten, that were on the bench associate with
Moses: Kings.
unto their kings whom afterward it might be they would choose, it was
ordained, that they should Deu. 17: 16-20.
not lean inordinately to earthly strength, seeking to increase the number of
their horses, or getting themselves abundance of treasure: that they should
moderate themselves in their pleasures, not taking unto them many wives: and
that they should retain that humility of mind, as that notwithstanding their
high degree, yet should they not advance themselves above their brethren. To
the end they might do these things the better, and whatsoever else was required
of them, they had in commandment to get them a copy of the law so soon as
ever they were com to their kingdom, and diligently to study the same all the
dais of their life: that, doing according thereunto, and declining on neither
side, neither on the right hand, nor on the left, from the praescript and tenor
thereof, he and his children by that means might have a long, and a prosperous
reign on the earth. Besides these generals, one special commandment was given
unto them, that they should never bring the people again to the land of Egypt.
Concerning that diligent study of the law, Ios. 1: 8.
it was in like sort injoined to Iosuah, when he was appointed to govern the
people: and that in respect of the office whereunto he was called; and by the
mouth of God himself. Captains under Moses.
Unto those that were over thousands, over hundreds, fifties, and tens, it was
injoined that they should perform the parts of good judges: that De. 1: 16, 17
they should diligently hear, and uprightly determine every cause, both for
their brethren, and for such strangers as were among them: that they should in
no wise have any respect of persons, neither of the small, nor of the great: and
that such causes as were too hard for them, they should refer to Moses
himself. Judges in cities.
Unto those inferior magistrates that were to be ordained in their cities, it
Deuteronomy. 16: 18-20,
was commanded that they should judge uprightly, regarding no person, nor
wresting the law: that so they might prosper upon the earth. And to the end
that they might the better do it, he charge them in no wise to take rewards:
for that those are wont, Exodus 23: 8.
both to blind the eyes of the wise; and to pervert the words of the righteous.
More specially to them De. 17: 8-13
it was praescribed, that if at any time they should have a matter that was too
hard for them to decide at hom, then should they repair unto the place that the
Lord should choose, and refer the deciding of the court unto the Deuteronomy. 21: 5.
Levitical preests that ministered there before the Lord, and to him that should
be the judge or sovereign magistrate in those dais: and that according to their
sentence, so should the matter stand determined. And that whosoever would not
stand to their judgment, but should do any thing contrary thereunto, should be
put to death, to teach all the people to fear, and to deal so praesumptuously no
more.

53 Those which concern others, What manner of trial was appointed unto them.
do partly respect the manner of trial that should be among them: but especially
the punishment that should be du unto those that should be found faulty.
Concerning the manner of trial that should be among them, we find that the
magistrates were straightly charged to search out such matters: and that they
had diverse wais or means allowed unto them to find out the truth. They were
willed to make diligent inquiry, sometimes about Deu. 13: 14.
whole cities that should at any time revolt from the Lord their God to any
other: sometimes about Deuteronomy. 17: 4.19: 18.
particular men that should be supposed to have offended. The wais that were
allowed unto them, were, some more ordinary: and others more special, or
chiefly appertaining to certain cases. Ordinary it was to have witnesses: and
those sworn sometimes it Lev. 5: 1.
appears. But for that matter it was ordained, Deu. 17: 6.
that one witness should not be of force, to condemn any to be guilty of death;
Deu. 19: 15.
nor so much as be received against any, in any other trespass, or fault
whatsoever: but that al such matters should be tried Deuteronomy. 17: 6.19: 15.
by the witness of two or three at the least. Those that were more special, are
two: oaths; and purging of themselves by a kind of solemn protestation.
Concerning oaths, first it is plain, Ex. 22: 7, 8, 10, 11. Lev. 5: 1.
that they were allowed to be used in matters of judgment, by the appointment
of God himself. Then also in what cases, that is, Exo. 22: 7, 8.
when a man had given to his neighbor any thing to keep which after was stolen,
and the thief could not be found; in which case the party to whom it was
given to be kept, had to purge himself by oath: or Exodus 22: 10, 11.
in things lent, that came to hurt in the hands of him that borrowed them; in
which case the party that borrowed, had to purge himself by oath likewise. And
although the same that should swear, was but the party himself: yet Deu. 17:
6, 19: 15. Heb. 6: 16.
was it ordained, that the controversy thereby should be decided. Of purging
themselves by a solemn protestation, we read of two special cases. One Deu. 21:
1-7.
that if a man were found slain in the feeld, and the party unknown that did
it, then should the inhabitants of the next city adjoining to the place, stand
charged with a ceremony to that use ordained, to protest their innocence in
that matter. The ceremony was, that they should com forth and bring a young
heifer with them never put to the yoke: with it they should com unto some vallie
therabout, such as was not plowed or sowed, but rough, and wast (such as a
murderer would think a meet place to commit his wickedness in) wherein they
should slay their heifer, and wash their hands over the same. Their
protestation was, that neither did they it themselves; neither knew they who it
was that did it: and then had they to desire the Lord to be merciful unto them,
and not to lay innocent blood to their charge. The other case was, Number. 5:
12-31.
when a man was persuaded, that his wife had played the harlot in wedlok. In
which case the wife denieng the same was brought to her purgation, in manner
following. She should be brought to the priest with a certain quantity of
barlie flower (about our pottle) for her offering, but without oil, or incense:
then should the priest uncover her head and praesent her before the Lord. He
should also praepare a drink for her, of bitter, and cursed waters, which
should be given her in an earthen pot to be drunk of: which drink should be
thus praepared. He should write in a paper the heavy judgments and curses of
God against that sin, and taking a quantity of the hallowed water, he should
with the same wash out that writing: wherinto he should also put of the dust of
the tabernacle. Which being ready, he should praesent her with her sacrifice
before the Lord, and having burnt an handful thereof, recite unto her in earnest
manner the great and fearful judgments of God against her if she had offended,
as that her belly should swel, her thigh should rot, and she should be made a
fearful example of the wrath of God to al her neighbors. Whereunto the woman was
to answer, Amen, Amen: and withal to drink of the drink praepared for her.
Which being done, the woman was discharged, and the man was to quiet himself
for that matter.

54 Those that concern the punishment du to offenders, Of publik revenge
against foreign enemies.
do sometimes respect some whole multitude; sometimes other particular persons.
Those do respect whole multitudes, which carry with them the direction of
publik revenge. Which publik revenge was to be executed two manner of wais:
either abroad upon others; or at hom on their own country people. What rules
thereof were praescribed.
In what manner they had to execute publik revenge upon others, is set down two
manet of wais: both by certain general rules; and by some particular examples.
Those general rules that are, do first of al Deu. 20: 1, 5-8.
charge them in no wise to fear though their enemies be mo than they: yea, and
to dismiss out of the feeld al such as have any manner of occasion at al (to
speak of) to be at hom. As, if any have lately builded a new house, planted a
vineyard, or married a wife: and generally, as many as were afraid. Which being
done, then Deu. 20: 9.
had they to set captains, and officers over the rest. Now when they came
against any foreign city, first Deuteronomy. 20: 10, 11.
they had to offer peace unto them: which being accepted, they had but to make
them tributaries unto them. If any city would not accept of their peace being
offered, Deu. 20: 16.
or if it were any of the cities of that country, which the Lord gave unto
them, then had they to address their battle against it. De. 20: 2-3.
When they were com nigh to the battle, then was it the part of the priest to
step forth and to encourage the people to pluk up their hearts, assuring them
that God would take their parts against their enemies. In their seege Deuteronomy. 20:
19, 20.
they might not cut down any fruit trees to further them in their enterprise:
how beit al others they might. When they had won it, if it were one of the
cities of that land, Deu. 20: 16-18.
they had to put all that had breath, man, woman, and child, beasts, and cattle
to the edge of the sword: if it were some foreign country Deu. 20: 12-15.
they had to put but men only to the edge of the sword, and should save alive
both women, and children, and to take the whole pray to themselves. Certain
examples thereof.
The particular examples that were under the government of Moses, by whose
ministry the law was given, were especially four: three against foreign
nations; the fourth against some of the people of that land which themselves had
to inhabit. Amalekites.
The foreign people were the Amalekites, Madianites, and Canaanites. The Exodus
17: 8.
Amalekites came out against the people of Israel, shortly after that they were
com into the wilderness, and fought against them: Deu. 25: 17, 18.
especially against the hindmost, and against those that being feeble and
weary, could not keep with the rest, but followed after. Therefore Exodus 17:
9-13.
Moses caused Iosuah to choose him out a power of men, and to go against them:
whilst that himself in the mean season got up into a mountain there by to
pray. At which time the Lord so harkened unto the prayer of Moses, and so
strengthened the hand of Iosuah, that they vanquished the Amalekites, and put
them to flight. But Exo. 17: 14.
to show that this was not execution sharp enough for so many as should so
wickedly molest the people of God traveling to their promised rest, the Lord
commanded the same to be written, for a remembrance: promising that the day
should com, when he would for the same utterly destroy that whole generation
from the face of the earth. Moses also gives the people to understand, Exo.
17: 16.
that for that matter the Lord would have war with Amalek for ever: and Deu.
25: 19.
does give them a plain charge, that when they shall be settled in their land,
and shall have gotten themselves peace in all their borders, then should they go
and utterly destroy that naughty people. Which also 1. Sam. 15: 1-23.
was reasonably well performed (in the judgment of flesh and blood) by the
hands of Saul, sent forth to that end by the Lord himself, about 405. years
after: and because it was not so thoroughly executed as the Lord by his prophet
commanded, therefore the Lord took away the scepter and crown from his line,
and bestowed the same on another. Madianites.
The Madianites a good while after, Number. 31: 2.
almost at the end of the peoples pilgrimage, Number. 25: 1-3, 18.
provoked certain of the people by women, they and the Moabites together (and
Deuteronomy. 23: 4. Mich. 6: 5.
as it seems, by the wicked counsel of Balaam) to commit idolatry to
Baal-Peor. Whereupon Nu. 31: 1-18
the Lords wrath was so kindled, that he sent forth 12000. of the people
against them under the government of Phinehas the priest, and gave them a very
great overthrow: putting all the males and married women to the edge of the
sword, and among them five kings of the Madianites, and Balaam their prophet;
and taking unto them for a pray their goods and cattle, and all the
women-children, that as yet had not lain with man. Canaanites.
The Canaanites were as yet a foreign people unto them, so long as the
Israelites were in the wilderness. And Nu. 21: 1-3.
because that they, and Arad their king, came forth to battle against them,
therefore was there some execution by the Israelites done among them. But the
effect of that which is written thereof is no more but this, that the people of
Israel made a vow unto the Lord, that if he would deliver those enemies of
theirs into their hands, they would make an utter destruction of them; that the
Lord delivered them into their hands; and that the people did accordingly as
before they promised. The other special example of publik execution which was
against certain of those people that did enjoy some part of the land, which the
people of Israel had now to inhabit, was in order of time Number. 22: 2.
before that same of the Madianites and it was against the Ammorites that dwelt
on the east side of Jordan as they had to go into the residu of the land of
promise. Which yields unto us these principal points: that Number. 21: 21-25,
31-35. Deu. 2: 24-37 3: 1-7.
the people of Israel did first send unto the^ in peaceable manner, to have but
passage through their land: that the Ammorites denied them that courtesy, and
therwithal came forth with all their power against them: that thereupon the
Israelites setting upon them by the commandment, and encouragement of the
Lord, did utterly destroy them, and took to themselves all that they had, even
both the kingdoms of the Ammorites.

55 That which was to be executed on their own country people at hom, Of publik
vengeance on their own people. What law they had for it.
is in like sort delivered unto us, both by a plain general law, and by certain
special examples. The law that I speak of was for the avoiding of apostacy, or
falling away from the living Lord. And the effect of it was this: that Deuteronomy.
13: 12-17.
if the inahbitants of any of their cities, had turned aside to the service and
worship of strange gods, that the residu of the people should make diligent
inquiry thereof; and, if they found it to be so indeed, then should they war
against it, and utterly destroy it with fire and sword, the people, and all that
was therein. What examples of it.
The examples that I speak of, do aim at the selfsame severitie of justice,
and in the action or cause of religion. One was shortly after the giving of the
law in the first year of their pilgrimage, For the golden calfe.
the other in the last year of al, a little before the death of Moses, and
immediately before that they entered into the land of promise. The former was,
Ex. 32: 1-6.
that when the people in the absence of Moses had set up the golden calfe, and
had worshipped the same, Moses coming down from the mountain, and espieng
their detestable and gross idolatry, Exo. 32: 20.
brake down their idol, brent it in the fire, stamped it to powder, strawed it
in the water, and made the people to drink thereof: and after that, Exodus 32:
26-29.
calling unto him those that were jelous on the behalf of the glory of God,
did so sharp execution on the chief offenders therein, that there fell of the
people that day about the number of three thousand persons. The other example
was much like unto this, For Baal-Peor.
about the idolatry of Baal-Peor before rehearsed: about the which in the Lords
displeasure by the commandment of the Lord, there were Number. 25: 4, 5, 9.
executed of the heads of the people, and of other offenders, with those that
the Lord otherwise destroyed for the selfsame matter, the number of four and
twenty thousand.

56 What those are, Of those that respect particular persons.
that do respect particular persons, is now to be seen. Which I think may best
be distributed into two special sorts, according to the common division of the
commandments themselves; into the first, and second table. First therefore to
begin with those that are against the first table, we find the sentence of
death appointed for diverse offenses of that sort. As, Against the first table.
Idolatry.
if against the first commandment, any body should transgress, Exo. 22: 19.
Lev. 20: 1-5.
either by committing some act of idolatry, by giving worship to other gods;
De. 13: 1-11
or but enticing others thereto, both these transgressions were to be punished
with bodily death: although the party that should so entice, were a prophet
himself, or otherwise never so deer unto them. So likewise, Stubbornes against
the truth.
if against the second commandment, any body should so far transgress, as
for to do what himself thought good, howsoever the same were more easily put
up, if it were found to be don of ignorance, as before in the treatise of
sacrifices is described: yet Number. 15: 30, 31.
if it were stubbornly done, with an outstretched arm, with an obstinate heart,
then was it also condemned to death. Which severitie the Lord did not openly
command to be executed by others: but himself also would witness the same by
his own example, when as Lev. 10: 1-3.
he destroyed a couple of preests with violent fire as they were burning
incense to him, only for that they venturously took (as a matter of great
importance) such fire as themselves thought good: and at such time as they were
not yet well inured to the manner of worship, the tabernacle being then but newly
reared. In like manner we find certain transgressions against the third
commandment to be condemned to death. Blasphemy.
First Lev. 24: 15, 16.
if any man should speak any blasphemy against the Lord: of which also there
is a notable example, of Lev. 24: 10-14. Seducing of the people.
one that was for the same condemned by the Lord himself. Then, if any prophet
should praesume to speak Deu. 18: 20-22.
in the name of the Lord, that which the Lord did never command him: or if any
should speak to the people of God, in the name of other gods. Lastly, Exo. 22:
17. Lev. 20: 27.
if any were a witch, or southsaier, or used to deal with familiars, spirits,
or devils. Breach of the sabbath.
As for the breach of the sabbath day, he did not only make it Exodus 31: 14,
15. Death.
death by law: but also by his own example declared, with what severitie al his
deputies should punish the same: when as Number. 15: 32-36.
himself condemned to death, one that had gathered a few stiks on the sabbath
day. And whereas to be ungodly or worldly minded, Stripes.
is the root and fountain of the breach and abuse of the sabbath day, Deu. 25:
2, 3.
the law of beating ungodly persons according to the quality of the offense,
may seem to appertain (and that very fitly) to the lesser trespasses of this
kind also.

57 Such as go against the second table, Against the second table: the fifth
commandment.
are diversely punished: and first of al, those offenses that go against the
fifth commandment, that is, against our superiors: as, our natural parents,
magistrates, spiritual pastors, and masters: something is set down directly
against them in law; and something we may very well gather in the example of God
himself. In the plain words of the law it self we find three sorts of this
kind, which are al punishable by death. The first is, Exo. 21: 15.
if any should strike his father or mother: the next, Exo. 21: 17. Lev. 20: 9.
if he should but curse either of them: the third, Deu. 21: 18-21.
if he lived in droonkennes, or other kind of riot, and being admonished and
chastised by his parents, nevertheles remained disobedient, and would not be
ruled. In all these cases the offender was to be put to death: and in the last,
the parents were charged to be the accusers of their own disobedient child.
Which accusation of theirs was allowed that favor, that immediately upon the
same, execution was to be done: for the men of the city had forthwith to
stone him to death. The examples that I speak of, wherein we may see what
severitie God himself has showed (within the compass of that time that now I
have in hand) against such offenders, are especially two: one against Miriam
the sister of Moses; the other against Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, with their
accomplices. For Nu. 12: 1, 10
on Miriam, that grudged against the authority and dignity of Moses, he cast
a foul and sudden leprosy: and on the others that despised his authority, and
were disobedient unto him, refusing to com when he sent for them, Nu. 16: 1-50
a very strange and an horrible judgment. For, those three captain-rebels,
with their wives, their children, and all that they had, were swallowed up of
the earth, the ground suddenly opening upon them, and devouring them al: two
hundred and fifty mo besides, of the same conspiracy, and men of name among
the people were consumed suddenly with fire: and of the people that murmured
against Moses and Aaron for the loss of these (and so belike were infected
with the said rebellion likewise) by a sudden plaeg, the next day after,
fourteen thousand and seven hundred persons.

58 Those offenses that commonly passed from one to another of the common sort,
Against the sixth commandment.
were often times more gently dealt withal; and yet notwithstanding diverse of
them punishable by death likewise: especially the chief of those two sorts
that go against the two next commandments; the sixth, and the seventh. Of those
that go against the sixth commandment and have their proper punishments
appointed for them, there be especially two kinds: one, the destroieng of man's
life; the other, Of those that concern the punishment of those that destroy
men's lives.
some other hurt to his body. The life of man is destroyed sometimes by man
himself: sometimes by some perilous beast unto man belonging. When it is
destroyed by man himself, the offender is either known; or not known. When the
offender is known, sometimes it falls out that he did it wittingly: sometimes
that he did it unwares, against his will. If it were wittingly, or of set
purpose, it was either against a free man, or against his own bond. If done to
a free man, Murder.
then was it at al times murder (whether it were done with an ordinary weapon,
or but with a stone, or a cudgel) and the offender Exodus 21: 12, 14. Le. 24:
17, 21. Number. 35: 16-21, 30. De. 19: 11-13
was to be put to death: neither might his life be Number. 35: 31, 33, 34.
redeemed by putting him to fine for his offense; for that so they should very
sore defile their land with blood, which could in no wise be done away but by
the blood of him that wittingly had shed the blood of the other. If it were but
casualtie, Cities of refuge.
against the will of him, that did it, then Exo. 21: 13. Nu. 35: 6, 9-15 Deu.
19: 2-4, 7-10. Joshua. 20: 1-6.
were there six cities of refuge appointed (three on the one side of the water,
and three on the other) unto which, al such offenders had liberty to fly, so
to escape the inordinat rage and revenging hand of al such as were frinds to
the party destroyed, until the matter might be brought to indifferent trial. At
which time, if it were found to be murder, then was he to be executed as before:
Chance-medley.
if it were found to be casual, altogether against the mind of him that did it,
then Number. 35: 22-28.
was he to be restored to the city of refuge which he had taken, and there to
abide until the death of the high priest. At whose death, he had liberty to
return hom again: but was otherwise left open to the danger of death, if at any
time he should be found without the bounds and liberties of that city of
refuge which he had taken. Striking at one, and hitting another
Yet one case there is, wherein it is appointed that a man shall die for slaieng
of one, to whom it may be he never meant any hurt at al: as Exodus 21: 22, 23.
when two men are striving together, if either of them, meaning to strike his
adversary, should unadvisedly hit a woman with child, so that hirselfe or her
child died thereof, in such case should the party that did it, be put to
death. As indeed it is evident, that although he meant no hurt unto her; yet
that he meant it unto his adversary: which consideration, does not only
convince it, not to be altogether and merely casual; but also imports, that
being done in the passion of anger, though not to her, but to the other, it well
deserves the sentence of death. If at any time De. 21: 1-9. Of one found slain
in the feelds.
there should be any body found slain in the feeld, and not known who did it,
then the city that were next unto him should com forth with a kind of
sacrifice, and by a ceremony of washing their hands over it, should protest
their own innocence from the blood of that man, and desire the Lord to be
favorable unto them, and not to lay innocent blood unto their charge. If it
were his own Exodus 21: 20, 21. Of a man's own bondservant.
bondservant, and he being his master had beat him, so that he died under his
hands, then was he to be accordingly punished: but, if he died shortly after,
then, though he were beaten by his master a little before, yet if he lived but
a day or two, and if there could no hurt appeer of any strokes that his master
gave him, that might seem to be the cause of his death, then the master was
clearly acquitted, for that it is to be supposed, that having bought him with
his money, he would himself be loath to have lost him. The goring ox.
If any were slain by some perilous beast to man belonging, as for example by a
goring ox, in such case it was provided, that Exodus 21: 28-32.
if any man had such an ox, not known before to have gored any, if at any time
the ox beginning to gore, should slay either man, woman, or child, he should
for the first time leese his ox, which ox should be stoned to death, and his
flesh might not be eaten. And if the ox before time were known to have that
fault, and the owner being told thereof, yet notwithstanding did not so
diligently see unto him, but that after he knew his property, he gored any to
death, then, if the party destroyed were free, not only the ox must be
destroyed as before, but the owner also must die for the same, or at least fine
for the redemption of his life: Fine.
if the party destroyed were a bond unto any, then (besides the loss of the
ox) the owner had to give but thirty sicles unto the master of the bond, Of
those that concerned punishment of less hurt.
and was then discharged. The laws that were provided against some less hurt of
the body, were of that nature, that some of the^ concerned those that were
free: and one other, none but such as were bond. Those that concerned the free,
were to make good the hurt, that they had done to another, so^times by their
own bodies: sometimes by their purse. The recompense that they had to make on
their own bodies, Ex. 21: 24, 25 Lev. 24: 19, 20
was to have the like bodily hurt by the sentence of justice to be done unto
them, that themselves in their rage had done to the other: as eye, Eye, for
eye: tooth, for tooth, etc.
for eye; tooth, for tooth; hand, for hand; foot, for foot; burning for
burning; wound, for wound; stripe, for stripe; breach, for breach: and
generally, that howsoever any man had blemished another, so should himself be
blemished again. Costs and damage.
By the purse recompense was to be made, when as two men striving together,
either the Exo. 21: 18, 19.
one of themselves was so hurt, that he kept his bed for a season though
afterward he recovered again; in which case he that hurt him, was to pay for
his charges in leesing his time, and for his healing: or Exo. 21: 22, 23. A
woman with child.
else when either of them did so hurt a woman with child, as that thereby she
were forthwith driven to travel before her time; in which case the offender
was to be taxed to the woman's husband as by their dais-men should be appointed.
The bond made free.
The law that did concern the bond, was no more but this, that if any man so
struck his Exo. 21: 26, 27.
bond servant, whether man or woman, that thereby he smote out either eye or
tooth, that for that hurt the bond should go free.

59 Those that appertain to the seventh commandment do (in a manner) al concern
some fact that is known to be committed: Against the seventh commandment.
but a couple there are, that do concern a fact supposed. Of those that concern
a fact committed.
Those that concern some fact committed, are of two sorts: some that ordain the
judgment of death unto the offender; others that ordain some other punishment.
Of those that appoint the judgment of death.
The judgment of death is appointed for those that are the chief offenders in
this kind. Whereof some notwithstanding to cleave to the sex that is ordained:
others do leave the sex appointed, and are carried to others with their
unbrideled and monsterous lusts. Those that keep to the sex that is ordained,
and yet sin so very greevously, that they are adjudged to die for the same,
have the same judgment allotted unto them, most commonly for the odiousnes
only of the fact it self: but in one case the same aggrevated by the
consideration of the person that does it. Of those copulations that are
themselves so wicked, that the sentence of death is appointed unto them, there
be some that concern both parties together: others, but one party alone. Of the
former there are especially three. Adultery.
Whereof the first is adultery: when any man lies with such a woman, as either
is already Lev. 20: 10. Deuteronomy. 22: 22.
married to another man; or else is already Deuteronomy. 22: 23-24.
betrothed. In which case, both the parties were to suffer death, even the
betrothed, as well as the married, if it were in the town or city, where by her
crieng she might have been helped: whereas otherwise Deuteronomy. 22: 25-27.
if it were in the feeld, where she could not call for help, then was the woman
acquitted, if so be that the man did force her thereunto. Incest.
The next is incest, carnal knowledge of near kinsfolk. As, if any man Lev. 20:
11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21.
do carnally know, his own mother; his daughter in law; his wives mother; his
own sister; his ant by father, or mother; his uncles wife; or his brothers
wife. In which cases both parties were to be put to death: for though the
phrase of the text does somewhat vary in some of them; yet the best learned do so
take it, and the circumstances of the text do so import. Where also it is to be
noted, that he that lies with his wives mother, was to be brent, and the other
with him: even his wife also, if she were consenting thereunto. The third and
last is, to have to do with a woman Lev. 20: 18. Rape.
in her flowers: In flowers.
which was death likewise to both. Of the other there be two special
provisions. The one Deuteronomy. 22: 25, 26. Maidenhood lost before marriage.
if a man should force a betrothed woman against her will: the other Deuteronomy. 22:
20, 21.
if a woman being taken of any man in marriage for a virgin, be afterward found
to have played the harlot before. In both which cases the offenders were to be
put to death: and the woman before her fathers door. The daughter of a priest.
The aggravation which before I spoke of, which arises out of the
consideration of the person, is, if the daughter Lev. 21: 9.
of a priest should play the whore: which if she should do, then were she to
be brent to death. Buggerie.
As for those that by their unnatural and monsterous lusts are carried beyond
the sex that is ordained, after that once they have committed any such fact,
both parties Exo. 22: 18. Lev. 18: 22, 23. and 20: 13, 15, 16. Of those that
appoint less punishment than death.
are appointed to die: whether it were man, with man: or man, or woman with any
beast. Those laws that ordain some other punishment are first concerning the act
of unlawful copulation: then concerning a special point of dishonestie which a
shameless woman might sometime commit. The unlawful copulation which was not
punished by death, but in other more gentle manner, was in two special cases:
the one, with a free woman; the other, with a bond woman. Fornication with a
free woman.
If a man had enticed a young woman that was free, and unbetrothed, and had
lien with her, if her father was content he should have hit to wife, Exo. 22:
15, 16. Deuteronomy. 22: 28, 29. With a bond woman.
he was bound to indu her, and to marry her, and to give her father fifty
sicles of silver: if her father would not give her in marriage unto him, then
was he to pay his money only according to the dowry of virgins. If it were a
Lev. 19: 20-22.
bond maid, though she were betrothed: yet so long as she was not given in
marriage, nor made free, it mas but beating or scourging to both the parties,
and a ram for a trespass offering. That point of dishonestie that a shameful
woman might sometime commit, was, Deuteronomy. 25: 11, 12.
if her husband and another man striving together, she being desirous to help
her husband, should lay hold on the others privy members: in which case she
was to leese her hand. Of those that concern a fact supposed.
Those two laws that do concern a fact supposed, are these: the one of jelousie
in marriage, when the man suspected his wife to have broken marriage on her
part; the other of the suspicion of virginity lost before marriage. Suspicion
of adultery.
Concerning the former, Nu. 5: 11-31
it was ordained, that the wife should make her purgation, by a ceremony for
the same purpose ordained, in very solemn manner before the Lord: protesting
that she has not known any other carnally besides her husband, and accursing
hirselfe in fearful and horrible manner, if ever she did it. Concerning the
other, Suspicion of maidenhood lost before.
it Deuteronomy. 22: 13-19.
was ordained, that if any man after marriage hating his wife, should lay to
her charge that she was defiled before, that then the father of that woman
should bring forth the tokens of his daughters maidenhead before, and after
that he had sufficiently prooved that she was a maid when he delivered her
forth in marriage, then was the husband to pay to the father of his wife an
hundred sicles of silver, and never might put away his wife.

60 Such as appertain to the eight commandment, Against the eight commandment.
do first of al restrain such of that kind, as com to knowledge: then also al
such as injurious persons having secretly done, suppress with themselves, til
their own conscience force them to acknowledge the same. Of those that com to
knowledge, they first provide for theft it self: then for other damages and
wrongs, that often pass betwixt man and man. Of theft are restrained two
kinds: the stealing of goods; and the stealing of men. Of goods likewise two
kinds: leading away such as are in the feelds; and breaking into the house for
such as are there. As for such goods as are in the feeld, Stealing goods out of
the feeld.
it was ordained, that Ex. 22: 1-4.
whosoever should steal either ox, or sheep, if he did either kill it, or sell
it, he should be compelled to restore five oxen, for an ox; and four sheep for
a sheep: if he had them remaining with him, then, whether it was ox, ass, or
sheep, he had but to restore double. Burglarie.
As for Exo. 21: 2, 3.
such goods as were in the house, if the thief were breaking in betwixt sun
and sun in the night, then might they of the house lawfully kill him: but not,
if he were breaking in, in the day time, for that he had the law against him to
compel him to make restitution. A bond, that could make restitution.
And what felon soever it was not Ex. 21: 3.
able to make restitution as was appointed, the same was to be sold for his
theft. Concerning the Ex. 21: 16. Deuteronomy. 24: 7.
stealing of men (as diverse used to sell them for bonds) the punishment of it
was death: Stealing of men.
as it well deserved, when the insatiable desire of a little money, or money
worth, was such, as that they could find in their heart to addict another to so
miserable bondage al his life, that themselves might gain some trifle by it: a
very detestable and wicked covetousnes, that altogether drowned in them, not
only compassion and mercy, but humanity to. Damage and wrong that is
sustained, is sometimes in such parcels of substance as they did retain in their
own possession: sometimes in such as themselves delivered forth unto others. In
those things that they retained in their own possession, others did them hurt
and wrong sometimes wittingly, and of set purpose: sometimes for want of
sufficient carefulnes and heed on that behalf. Trespass.
When any man did a wrong to his neighbor wittingly, as by Exo. 22: 5.
hurting his neighbors feeld or vineyard, or putting in his beast to feed
there; or by Lev. 24: 21.
destroieng any of his cattle, he had to make restitution for the same: even
the best of his own for that which he spoiled of his neighbors; and in steed of
the other, as good as they. When the hurt that a man had done, Hurt by want of
heed taking.
was for lak of sufficient heed taking, he was to make good the loss he had
put his neighbor unto. As, Exo. 21: 33, 34.
if he had opened a pit, and not shut it again, By a pit left uncovered.
if his neighbors beast had fallen into it, the owner of the well or pit had to
take the dead beast into his hands, and to give the worth of the same in money
unto the former owner thereof. By his ox.
If Exo. 21: 35, 36.
an ox that any man had, had slain an ox of his neighbors, then they had to
part betwixt them, both the dead, and the living ox: but if the ox were known
to his master to push before, and yet kept him not in so diligently, but that
he did this hurt, then should he take the dead ox wholly in his own hands, and
give to his neighbor another as good. If a man had so unwarily Exo. 22: 6.
kindeled a fire, By fire.
that it had done any hurt to his neighbors corn, either in the stak, or
standing in the feeld, he was to make good the whole loss unto his neighbor.
The things they delivered forth unto others, was sometimes of trust, for
custodies sake: sometimes of lone, or hire. Of things delivered of trust.
If any thing were delivered of Ex. 22: 7-12.
trust for custodies sake, and afterward wanting, if it were found to be stolen
by any, it was to be restored double: if otherwise it miscarried they could not
tell how, then the party that took it to his custody, had to clear himself
by his oath: if it were stolen from him, then he had to make it good. Of things
borrowed.
If a man Exodus 22: 13, 14.
borrowed ought of his neighbor, and it miscarried or died, the owner thereof not
being by, he had to make it good; otherwise not: if it were hired, and did
miscarie, A secret hurt.
then was there no more, but to pay the hire. If any man had done Lev. 6: 1-7.
a secret wrong, such as his neighbor could not charge him with, as such as
before it might be he had on his oath denied, (whether it were in such a thing
as was of trust committed unto him; or which he had done by violent robbery;
or which he found and denied) in all such cases he had to restore the whole
thing or the valu thereof, and to ad a fifth part more thereunto, besides his
trespass offering unto the Lord.

61 Of such things as do appertain to the ninth commandment, Against the ninth
commandment.
we find no more directly restrained by civil coertion, but only the false
witness generally; and, in one case, a false accuser that brings the good name
of others into great suspicion and peril. False witness.
The general law is this, that Deuteronomy. 19: 16-21.
every false witness should be punished himself with the selfsame punishment
that the other by his false witness bearing, if it had taken place, should have
fallen into: even life, for life; eye, for eye; tooth, for tooth; hand, for
hand; and foot, for foot. The other special case that I speak of, is of the
Deuteronomy. 22: 13-19.
husband that upon hatred to his wife after marriage conceived, should lay to
her charge, The husband falsely accusing his wife of whoordom before marriage.
that contrary to that which was born him in hand, she had lost her maidenhead
before she was given in marriage to him: which being in judgment overthrown,
by such proof as her father was to bring forth, both for his own, and his
daughters honesty, the other had to pay unto the father an hundred sicles of
silver, for bringing up so vile a slander upon an honest maiden of Israel.

62 The tenth commandment does (by the very nature thereof) deal in such
matters, as that the transgressions thereof are beyond the reach of civil
punishment: so that in the whole policy of Moses, there is no law of civil
coertion that punishes any of those vices, that issu only out of such
fountains, as by this commandment are condemned, but that more properly they
may be referred unto some of the other commandments; and so have taken up their
place already.

S. D. G.

FINIS.
A Table of the Scriptures, that in this Treatise are alleged: whereby the
Reader may readily find any sentence that here is cited, whereunto, and how
many wais it is applied. The first two colums do show the Chapter and verse:
the other, the section and letter. The little long line likewise, that sometimes
goes between two numbers, signifies that all that are betwixt, are included
together with them: as in the fourth line, 14-16. is as much, as if 14, 15, 16,
had been written at large; and after, 22-26. for 22, 23, 24, 25, and 26.
Genesis. Verse. Section. Letter. 2 2, 3. 4 0 a 1 1 31. 8 b 1 2 2, 3. 5 1 c 1 3
14-16. 5 1 d 1 5 1. 5 1 d 18-31. 7 a 1 7 1-14. 3 1 a 7. 3 1 s 7, 8. 3 1 h 7,
10, 24. 3 1 c 9. 5 1 d 11, 12. 3 1 d 12-14. 3 1 i 2 2 16-18. 5 1 d 2 5 11. 5 1
d 2 6 2-4, 24. 5 1 d 2 7 28, 29. 5 1 d 2 8 13-15. 5 1 d 2 9 1 3 b 3 0 1 3 b 3 2
28. 1 3 a 3 2 28. 5 1 d 3 5 10. 1 3 a 22-26. 1 3 b 22. 1 7 c 4 5 25. 8 b 4 6
2-4. 5 1 d 11. 3 8 s 4 8 5. 1 3 f 4 9 3, 4. 1 7 c 4. 1 7 d 7. 3 8 y 9, 10. 5 1
e Exodus. 2 11-13. 5 0 b 14, 15. 5 0 d 15, 21. 5 0 g 15. 5 0 e 3 1. 5 0 a, g 8,
17. 7 a 10. 5 0 h 10. 5 1 i 17. 9 a 4 18, 20. 5 0 i 5 1. 5 0 i 6 4. 8 b 16-25.
3 8 t 20. 5 0 a 1 2 1-20. 3 1 a 1. 4 0 k 1-11. 3 1 l 1 2 3, 51. 3 1 k 4, 46. 3
1 q 6. 4 0 q 7, 22. 3 1 m 8. 3 1 o 8, 9, 46. 3 1 n 9, 6-9. 3 1 t 9, 13. 3 1 u
10. 3 1 q 11. 3 1 p 13, 23, 29. 3 1 y 14. 3 1 r 14-20. 3 1 s 14, 24-27, 42. 3 1
x 15, 17-20 4 0 n 15, 16. 4 0 p 17, 41, 42. 3 1 z 37. 1 3 d 43, 44, 45, 48. 3 1
q 1 3 2-11, 16. 2 1 e 3, 6, 7. 4 0 n 10. 4 0 q 12. 2 1 h 13. 2 1 f 13. 2 1 i
14-16. 2 1 m 1 6 2, 3. 5 0 m 35. 8 b 1 7 2, 3. 5 0 m 8. 5 4 i 9-13. 5 4 l 14. 5
4 m 16. 5 4 n 1 8 13-16. 5 0 i 17. 5 1 b 17-23. 5 0 k 2 0 3. 2 1 a 3. 2 0 a 4,
5. 2 0 b 7. 2 0 c 8-11. 2 4 a 8-11. 4 0 b 8-11. 2 0 d 10. 2 4 h 11. 2 4 c 12. 2
5 a 12. 2 0 e 13. 2 6 a 13. 2 0 f 14. 2 7 a 14. 2 0 g 15. 2 0 h 16. 2 9 a 16. 2
0 i 17. 3 0 a 17. 2 0 k 23. 2 2 q 2 1 2, 3. 6 0 b 2-6. 1 9 a 2. 2 6 i 2-11. 2 6
p 3. 6 0 c 2 1 8, 10. 1 9 b 9, 10, 11. 1 9 c 12, 14. 5 8 a 13. 5 8 c 15. 5 7 a
16. 6 0 d 17. 5 7 b 18, 19. 5 8 k 20, 21. 1 9 d 20, 21. 5 8 q 22, 23. 5 8 e 22,
23. 5 8 l 24, 25. 5 8 i 26, 27. 5 8 m 28-31. 5 8 h 33. 2 6 m 33, 34. 6 0 g 35,
36. 6 0 h 2 2 1-4. 6 0 a 4, 5. 2 8 h 5. 6 0 e 6. 1 7 g 6. 6 0 i 7, 8. 5 3 h 7,
8, 10, 11. 5 3 g 7-12. 6 0 k 10, 11. 5 3 i 13, 14. 6 0 l 15, 16. 5 9 k 17. 5 6
h 18. 5 9 i 2 2 19. 5 6 a 21-24. 2 6 f 25. 2 6 c 26, 27. 2 6 d 28. 2 5 c 28. 2
1 e 28. 2 1 o 29. 2 1 h 30. 3 0 d 2 3 1. 2 9 a 3. 5 2 b 6-9. 5 2 c 8. 5 2 m 10,
11. 4 1 c 10, 11. 1 7 f 11. 1 7 h 12. 2 4 a, h 12. 4 0 b 13. 2 1 b 14-17. 4 0 l
16. 4 0 s 17. 4 1 g 19. 2 1 o 19. 2 6 r 20-23. 2 2 l 23, 31. 7 a 24. 2 1 d 24.
2 2 p 25. 2 1 a 28-30. 1 2 l 32, 33. 1 1 b 2 5 10, 11 3 2 g.2 16, 21 3 2 i.2
17-19 3 2 h.2 12-15, 26-28 3 2 l.2 17, 22 3 2 k.2 23-25 3 2 z 29 3 2 m.2 30 3 2
c.2 30 3 8 d 31-37 3 2 a.2 37 3 2 d.2 38 3 2 n.2 2 6 1-14 3 2 d 1-6 3 2 o 2, 3,
8, 9, 12, 13 3 2 r 7-13 3 2 p 14 3 2 q 15-30 3 2 c 15 3 2 f 16-25 3 2 e 16, 18,
20, 22-25 3 2 h 17 3 2 i 19 3 2 k, n 26-30 3 2 l 29 3 2 m 31, 32, 33 3 2 t 33 3
2 g.2 33, 34 3 2 y 35 3 2 f.2 36, 37 3 2 s 2 7 1, 2 3 3 i 2 7 1 3 3 l 2 3 3 m 3
3 3 n 4, 5 3 3 k 9-18 3 3 a 9 3 3 b 10, 11 3 3 d 14, 15 3 3 f 16 3 3 g 17 3 3 e
18 3 3 c 19 3 3 h 2 8 1 3 5 i, e, g 2 3 5 l 3 3 5 k 4, 39 3 5 n 4, 31-35 3 5 o
4, 6-8 3 5 p 4, 39 3 5 q 9-13 3 5 t 14, 22-29 3 5 s 15-21 3 5 r 30 3 5 u 39,
36-38 3 5 x 40, 42, 43 3 5 y 43 3 5 z 2 9 1, 2, 3 3 6 a 4-9 3 6 b 9, 29, 30 3 5
g 10 3 6 d 10-14 3 6 e 2 9 15-18 3 6 f 19-21 3 6 q 22-26 3 6 h 31-34 3 6 i
35-37 3 6 k 38-42 4 2 a 40 4 2 b 44 3 5 e 3 0 1, 3 3 2 b.2 4, 5 3 2 k.2 6 3 1 g
6 3 2 f.2.y 7, 8 3 8 c 7-10 3 2 e.2 9 2 1 h 10 4 0 y 17-21 3 3 o 18 3 3 p 3 1
13-17 2 4 a 13 2 4 c 14 2 4 g 14, 15 2 4 h.2 20 3 3 h 3 2 1-6 5 5 b 20 5 5 c
26-29 5 5 d 3 4 12-17 1 1 b 18 4 0 n 19 2 1 e, h 20 2 1 f, i 21 2 4 a, f 3 4 22
4 0 s 23, 24 4 0 l 26 2 1 o 26 2 6 r 3 5 1-3 2 4 a 2 2 4 g 3 2 4 d 3 8 20 3 3 h
Leviticus 1 2, 10, 14 3 4 a 3, 10 3 9 c 3 3 5 a 2 1, 4, 5, 7 3 9 b 1 4 2 c 2 3
9 b 4, 5, 7 3 9 g 9 4 9 g 11 3 9 e 11 4 9 g 13 3 9 b 13 4 2 d 3 1, 6, 12 4 9 a
2-5, 7-11, 13-17 4 9 b 17 3 0 c 4 1-12, 22-26, 27-33 4 7 a 13-15 4 4 a 15-18 4
4 b 19 4 4 c 20, 21 4 4 d 5 1-6 4 6 a 1 5 3 c.g. 5 7 4 6 b 8, 9, 10 4 6 d 11 4
6 c 12, 13 4 6 e 14-16 4 7 e 6 1-7 2 8 f 1-3 4 6 f 1-7 6 0 m 4, 5 4 6 g 6, 7 4
6 h 26, 30 4 7 c 28 2 3 k 29 4 1 d 30 4 7 b 7 6, 7 4 7 d 12, 13 3 9 b 12 4 9 e
12 3 9 h 13 3 9 f 13 4 9 f 14-18 4 9 d 22-27 3 0 c 31-38 4 9 c 8 2 3 6 a 6-9,
13 3 6 c 6, 23, 24, 30 3 5 c 14 3 6 d 14-17 3 6 e 18-21 3 6 f 22-24, 30 3 6 g
25-29 3 6 h 8 31, 32 3 6 i 33-36 3 6 k 9 1-4, 7 3 8 a 1, 2 3 6 l 2, 8-14 3 6 n
3, 4, 7, 15 3 6 o 7, 22 3 8 e 8-23 3 6 p 17 3 6 m 24 3 6 q 1 0 1-3 5 6 d 6, 7 2
3 z 8-11 2 3 r 9, 10 3 8 g 11 3 8 f, x 1 1 1-4 3 0 b 11-15 2 3 d 33 2 3 k 1 2
2, 4 4 8 b 3 3 1 b, e 5 4 8 c 6, 7, 8 4 8 d 1 2 at large in 4 8 a 1 3 at large
in 3 8 h 1 4 at large in 3 8 h 1 5 at large in 2 3 d 1 5 12 2 5 k 1 6 1-34 3 8
l 2, 24 4 0 y 3, 32 4 3 a 3, 6, 11 4 3 c 1 6 3 4 3 f 4 4 3 b 5 4 3 g 6, 11 4 3
h 7, 8 4 3 m 8 4 0 n 9 4 3 n 12, 13, 14 4 3 k 14, 15 4 3 s 15, 16 4 3 p 16, 18,
19 4 3 q 17 4 3 l 18 4 3 r 20, 21, 22 4 3 d 23, 24 3 5 m 24 4 3 e 25 4 3 i, o
29, 31 4 3 t 29 4 0 u 31 4 0 z 34 3 8 e 1 7 3-5, 8, 9 3 2 a 7 3 2 s 10-14 2 6 q
15, 16 3 0 d 13 3 0 c 1 8 1-5 2 2 a 2, 3 2 1 c 19 2 7 e 20 2 7 a 21 2 2 t 1 8
22 2 7 d 22, 23 5 9 i 23 2 7 c 1 8 2 7 g 1 9 2, 3 2 4 b 3 2 5 a 3, 30 2 4 a 3 2
2 q 9, 10 2 8 i 11, 13 2 8 a 11, 16 2 9 b 12 2 3 a 13 2 8 d 14 2 6 g, h 15 5 2
b 16, 18 2 6 b 17 5 2 a 19 3 0 h 20-22 5 9 l 23, 25 3 0 g 24 2 1 o 26 2 6 q 27
2 3 g 29, 36, 31 2 2 u 32 2 5 d 33, 34 2 6 f 35, 37 2 8 c 2 0 1-5 5 6 a 2 2 2 t
6 2 2 u 7, 8 2 3 b 2 0 9 5 7 b 10 5 9 a 11, 12, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21 5 9 d 13,
15, 16 5 9 i 15 2 7 c 18 2 7 e 18 5 9 e 22 2 2 b 23 2 2 a 27 5 6 h 2 1 1-6 2 3
y 7, 8 2 3 u 9 5 9 h 10 3 5 k 10-12 2 3 x 13-15 2 3 t 16-24 2 3 s 2 2 8 3 9 c
18, 19 2 3 o 21, 23 2 3 f 26, 27 3 9 d 28 2 6 s 2 3 3 4 0 b 5 3 1 b 5, 6 4 0 q
6 4 0 n 7, 8 4 0 p 10, 11 4 0 o 10 2 1 p 14 2 1 r 15-17 4 0 s 2 3 18-21 4 0 t
22 2 8 i 23-25 4 0 h 24 4 2 l 27, 29 4 3 t 27 4 2 n 27 4 0 x 27 4 1 i 27 4 0 u
27-32 4 0 z 33-43 4 0 a. 2 2 4 3, 4 3 8 b 8 3 8 d 10-14 5 6 f 15, 16 5 6 e 17,
21 5 8 a 19, 20 5 8 i 21 6 0 f 2 5 1-7, 20-22 4 1 c 1-7 3 0 e 9 4 0 g. 2 1-11 1
7 f 4-7 1 7 h 8, 9 4 1 h 10, 13, 28 1 8 a 10, 18, 31, 32, 41, 54 4 0 f 10 4 1 m
11, 12 4 1 k 13 4 1 u 20-22 4 1 l 23-28 2 2 y 2 5 24 1 8 b 25-27 1 8 c 29, 30 1
8 f 29-34 2 2 z 31 1 8 g 32, 33 1 8 i 34 1 8 h 35-37 2 6 e 35-38 2 8 g 39-46 2
6 i 47-55 2 6 o 53 2 6 p 2 6 1 2 2 r 2 2 4 a 3-13 2 2 n 14-41 2 2 o 2 7 1-8 1 6
h 1-25 1 6 i 3-7 2 2 f 8 2 2 g 9, 10 2 2 d 10 2 3 n 11-22 1 6 g 11-25 2 2 h 13,
15, 19, 27 2 2 i 16-21 1 8 d 2 7 1 6 e 22-24 1 8 e 26 2 2 e 28, 29 2 3 p 30 1 5
b 2 7 30, 31, 33 2 8 e 31 1 5 e 32, 33 1 5 d Numeri. 1 1 3 c 49, 50 1 3 e 2 2,
17 3 4 p 3-9 3 4 h 10-16 3 4 i 17 3 4 s 18-24 3 4 k 25-31 3 4 l 34 3 4 z 3 5-9
3 5 f 6, 12, 13, 40-51 2 2 n 6-8 3 8 u 11-13, 45 3 5 d 11, 12, 13 3 5 h 23 3 4
d 29 3 4 b 35 3 4 f 37 3 3 h 38 3 4 a 22, 28, 34 3 8 t 4 3, 23, 30 3 8 c.2 4,
15 3 8 m 4, 15 3 8 z 4-15 3 8 q 16 3 8 t 17-20 3 8 q 20 3 8 h 4 24-28 3 8 a.2
29-33 3 8 b.2 36 3 4 c 40 3 4 e 44 3 4 g 5 1-4 2 3 d 5-8 2 8 f 5-8 4 6 i 8-10 1
6 c 8 1 6 k 11-31 5 9 n 12-31 5 3 m 15, 17-20 3 8 q 6 1-5 2 3 b.2 1-21 2 3 a, 2
6-9 2 3 c.2 9-12 2 3 d.2 13-21 2 3 c.2 22-27 3 8 e 7 3-9 3 8 d.2 6, 7 3 7 a 8 2
3 2 f.2 8, 12 3 7 c 9-14 3 7 b 14 3 5 d 15, 22 3 7 d 16-19 3 7 b 16-19 2 1 n 19
3 8 e, u 9 2 3 1 b 2, 3, 13 4 0 q 9 6-10 3 5 b 6-9 4 0 t 10, 11 4 0 r 17-23 3 4
m 18 3 4 u 1 0 5-6 3 4 o 5-6 3 4 p 17 3 4 r 21 3 4 s 21 3 4 y 25 3 4 q 25 3 4 t
35 3 4 n 36 3 4 x 1 1 1, 4-6 5 0 m 11-15 5 0 n 16, 17, 25 5 0 o 1 2 1-10 5 7 d
1 3 27 9 c 1 5 18-21 2 1 q 24-26 4 4 a 30, 31 5 6 c 32-36 5 6 i 37-41 2 4 m 1 6
1-50 5 7 e 1 8 1-8 3 8 i 2, 3, 4, 6, 21, 23 3 8 u 6 3 5 h 7 3 8 a 7 3 5 i 18 1
6 d 1 8 8, 9, 11, 19, 30, 31 1 6 c 8 1 6 i 12, 13 1 6 f 14 1 6 g 15-18 1 6 e
15, 16 2 1 f 15 2 1 e 17 2 1 h 20, 23 1 5 a 21, 24 1 5 b 25, 26 1 6 b 1 9 2 4 5
b 3 4 5 c 4, 5 4 5 d 6 4 5 e 9 4 5 f 11-16 2 3 d 17-19 4 5 g 1 9 4 5 a 2 1 1-3
5 4 u 21-35 1 2 a 21-25, 31-35 5 4 y 34 1 2 c 2 2 2 5 4 x 2 3 21 5 1 o 2 4 7 5
1 o 2 5 1-3, 8 5 4 r 4, 5, 9 5 5 e 13 3 5 g 2 6 53-56 1 4 b 2 7 1-11 1 7 a 2 7
18 5 1 k 2 8 1-8 4 2 a 5 4 2 c 9, 10 4 2 e 11-15 4 0 c 11 4 2 g 11, 15, 19, 22,
24, 27, 30 4 2 g 11-31 4 2 f 12, 13, 14, 20, 21, 28, 29 4 2 u 15, 24, 31 4 2 p
19, 24 4 2 h 27 4 2 i 2 9 1 4 0 h 1 4 2 l 2 4 2 k 2-6 4 0 i 2, 4, 8, 10, 36, 38
4 2 r 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 14, 15 4 2 u 6 4 2 s 7 4 3 t 7 4 0 u, z 8 4 2 m 12-39 4 0
b.2 13-34 4 2 t 20, 21 4 3 u 21, 22 4 3 x 23, 24 4 3 z 26 4 3 y 27 4 3 a.2 28 4
3 b.2 36 4 2 o 3 0 1-7 2 2 c 3 1 1-18 5 4 t 2 5 4 q 3 2 1-42 1 4 a 3 3 50-56 1
1 b 3 4 1-15 7 a 3 5 1-15 1 5 c 1-8 3 8 y 6, 9-15 5 8 c 16-21, 30 5 8 a 22-28 5
8 d 25 3 5 k 30 5 2 e 31, 33, 34 5 8 b Deuteron 1 9-15 5 0 l 16, 17 5 2 k 20-22
9 b 2 24-37 5 4 y 26-37 1 2 a 34 1 2 b 3 1-11 1 2 a 1-7 5 4 y 6 1 2 b 4 2 2 2 b
6-8 2 2 k 15-19 2 2 q 5 7 2 1 a 12-15 2 4 a 12-15 4 0 b 16 2 5 a 5 17 2 6 a 18
2 7 a 20 2 9 a 21 3 0 a 6 32, 33 2 2 b 5-9 2 4 k 7 2 4 n 10-12 2 4 o 23 2 2 k 7
1-6, 16, 25, 26 1 1 b 5 2 1 d 22 1 2 l 8 7-9 9 d 10-15 2 4 o 17, 18 1 1 a 9 4-6
1 1 a 5 1 1 c 1 0 8, 9 1 5 a 1 1 10-12 9 e 18-21 2 4 l 19 2 4 n 1 2 1-14 2 2 p
2, 3 2 1 d 4-14 3 2 b 19 1 5 b 29-31 2 2 a 30, 31 2 1 c 32 2 2 b 1 3 1-11 5 6 b
12-17. 5 5 a 14 5 3 a 1 4 1-3 2 2 g 3-21 3 0 b 22, 27 1 5 b 28, 29 4 1 a 1 5
1-6 4 1 d 1, 2, 9 3 0 e 1-10 2 8 g 9 4 1 b 11 1 0 a 12-17 1 9 a 12 2 6 i 12-18
2 6 p 19, 20 2 1 h, l 21, 22 2 3 e 21-23 2 1 k 1 6 5, 6, 11, 16, 17 4 6 m 8 4 0
u 9-12 4 0 s 14 4 1 f 18 5 1 a 18-20 5 2 c 1 7 4 5 3 b 6 5 3 d, f, k 6 5 2 e
8-12 3 8 k 8-13 5 2 n 14, 15 5 1 l 16-20 5 2 h 1 8 1-5 1 5 a 3 1 6 d 4 1 6 f 1
8 8 1 6 a 9 2 2 a 10 2 2 t 10, 11 2 2 u 15, 18 5 1 h 15-19 2 2 m 20-22 5 6 g 1
9 2-4, 7-10 5 8 c 18 5 3 b 11-13 5 8 a 14 2 8 b 15 5 3 e 15 5 2 e 15 5 3 f, k
16-21 6 1 a 2 0 1, 5-8 5 4 a 1-4 2 7 h 2, 3 5 4 e 9 5 4 b 10, 11 5 4 c 12-15 5
4 h 16 5 4 d 16-18 5 4 g 19, 20 5 4 f 2 1 1-7 5 3 l 1-9 5 8 f 5 5 2 o 10-13 2 3
h 14 1 9 b 15-17 1 7 b 18-21 1 7 c 2 2 1-3 2 8 h 4 2 6 u 5 2 7 f 6, 7 2 6 t 8 2
6 l 9-11 3 0 h 12 2 4 m 13-19 6 1 b 13-19 5 9 o 20, 21 5 9 g 22 5 9 a 23, 24 5
9 b 25, 26 5 9 f 25-27 5 9 c 28, 29 5 9 k 30 2 5 b 2 3 1-8 2 3 c 4 5 4 s 9-11 2
3 d, f.2 12-14 2 5 e 12-14 2 3 i 15, 16 2 6 k 17 2 7 b 18 2 2 e 18 2 3 l 19 2 6
c 21-32 2 3 m 24, 25 1 7 i 24, 25 2 2 x 2 4 1 2 7 a.2 2-4 2 7 h 5 2 7 a.3 2 4
6, 12, 13, 17 2 6 d 7 6 0 d 10, 11 2 6 e 14 2 6 f 14, 15 2 8 d 16 5 2 f 17, 18
5 2 c 19-22 2 8 i 8 3 8 h 2 5 1 5 2 d 2, 3 5 2 g 4 2 5 f 5-10 2 7 i 11-12 5 9 m
13-16 2 8 c 17-18 5 4 k 19 5 4 o 2 6 1-10 1 7 e 1-11 2 1 s 2 2 1 o 9 9 f 12-15
3 1 a 12-15 2 1 t 2 7 2, 3, 4, 8 2 4 i 18 2 6 g, h 2 8 1-14 2 2 m 15-68 2 2 o 3
0 6 3 1 g, h 3 1 3-6 4 1 f 10-13 5 1 e 3 3 26-29 5 1 g Iosuah. 1 2 5 1 k 3, 4 7
a 8 5 2 i 2 1-21 1 2 d 3 8 3 8 n 14 3 8 o 6 12 3 8 p 17, 18 2 3 q 22, 23 1 2 d
7 1-26 1 2 e 9 3-15 1 2 f 1 1 23 1 4 b 1 2 24 1 2 g 1 3 7, 8 8 d 19 8 c 1 4 2,
3 8 d 2 0 1-6 5 8 c 2 1 1-40 3 8 y 2 3 7 2 1 b Judges. 1 20-35 1 2 i 2 1-5 1 2
k 10 1 2 h 22 1 2 m 3 2, 4 1 2 m 1. Sam. 8 1 5 1 m 1 5 1-23 5 4 p 2 0 5 4 0 d
1. Kin. 12 16, 17 8 e 16, 20 5 1 u 1 4 7, 22 8 e 2. King. 4 23 4 0 d 1. Chro. 5
1 1 7 c, d 2 3 2-6 3 8 f.2 1. Chr. 23 25-27 3 8 e.2 28-32 3 8 g.2 2 7 1-34 5 0
p 2. Chron. 2 4 4 0 f Psalm. 16 5 2 1 b 8 1 3 4 0 e Prove. 12 10 2 5 g Isaie. 1
14 4 0 g 7 9 8 f Ierem. 31 4, 5 8 f Ezech. 16 46, 51 8 f 2 0 6 9 g Hosea. 2 11
4 0 g Mica. 1 1 8 f 6 5 5 4 s Matt. 5 24 4 6 g 6 24 2 4 p Luke. 16 13 2 4 p
John. 1 36 3 1 b.2 7 22 3 1 b Acts. 7 24, 26 5 0 b 25 5 0 c 27 5 0 d 29 5 0 e,
g 30 5 0 f 34, 35 5 0 h 36 5 0 i 1 Corint. 5 7 3 1 a.2 Coloss. 2 15 4 6 g 1.
Tim. 6 9, 10 2 4 p Hebru. 6 16 5 3 k Apoc. 7 5-8 1 3 c

An Alphabet Table of the principal things in this book contained: showing
both the Section, and letter, where the things specified are to be found.
AAron, and his sons consecrated, 36.6. Aaron, and his sons charged with
covering the ark, 38.q. Want of Ability considered, 22.g.
Abiram: see disobedience, e. Abusing: see trust. Achams covetousnes punished,
12.e. Accusation: see witnesses, e. The Levites Admitted to their charge, 37.d.
Administration: see wine. Adultery, death to both the parties, 59.a.b.
Adultery, not only in the married, but also in the betrothed, 59.a.b.
Adultery: see purging, l. Egypt: see king, h. For the love and care of
Aequitie that by instinct of nature is given: see government.
Afflicting of our selves inioined, 43.t. Afflicting: see reconciliation, t.
The Aged to be reverenced, 25.d. The Altar of timber work, 32.b.2. The brazen
Altar for sacrifice, 33.i. With the implements thereof, n. An Altar in the holy
place, 32.x. The Altar placed, 32.f.2. The use of the Altar, 32.e.2. The
Amalekites troubled the children of Israel and had the woorst, 54, i-l The
Israelites were willed to avenge themselves of the Amalekites, 54.o. The
Amalekites destroyed by Saul, 54.p. The Lord has war with the Amalekites for
ever, 54.n.
Amalekites: see prayer, l. Ammorites deny Israel to pass thorough their
country in peaceable manner, 54.y. Ammorites destroyed, 54.x, y. Apostacy
provided for, 55. Man forbidden to go in woman's Apparel, 27.f. The Apparel for
the high priest, 35.l.
Apparel of the inferior preests, 35.y. Apparel proper to one sex, in no wise
to be worn of the other. 27.f. Arad a king of the Canaanites, 54.u. The Ark of
timber work, 32.g.2. The Ark overlaid within and without with beaten gold,
32.g.2. The Ark was placed in the inmost or most holy place, 32.g.2. The Ark
was to be covered by Aaron and his sons, 38.q. The preests commanded to bear
the Ark, 38.n.
Ark of testimony why so called, 32.i.2. In what manner the Ark remooved, 34.m.
When it was to be set down again: and Moses prayer withal. 34.x. The people of
Israel divided into four several Armies, 34.o.
Ashpans: see implements for the brazen altar. The Attire of the high preests
head, 35.x.
Atonement made once in the year in the most holy place, and in what manner,
43. When the general Atonement was done, 40.y. To make Atonement and bless
the people, 38.e. The children of Israel are willed to be Avenged on the
Amalekites, 54, o.
Authority: see government, magistrates, and Moses.
B.
HOw their bread might be Baked, 39.g. Balaam an il counseler to the
Madianites, and Moabites against Israel, 54.s. Balaam destroyed, 54.t. Bars for
the altar, table, and ark, 32.l.2. Bars for the boords of the tabernacle, 32.l.
Bars overlaid with beaten gold, 32.m. In what sort to go to Battle, 54.a, b.
When they were to ioin Battle the priest had to encourage the army, 54. e.
Beasts, birds, and fishes forbidden and made unclean, 30.b. What Beasts they
might offer in their sacrifice, 39.b. A just man regards the life of his
Beast.25.g.
Beast: see one. Beating a man, so that for a time he lay by reason of it, how
it was punished. 58.k. Bench of elders: see elders. Betrothing accounted in
some case as marriage, 59.b. Betrothed: see ravish. Betrothed: see fornication,
k. Blasphemy punished with death, 56.e.f. A beast with a Blemish not to be
offered, 23.e. nor to stand for a vow, f.o. None of the seed of Aaron having a
Blemish might be priest, 23.s. To Bless the people: see atonement, e.
Blessedness to those that keep the law, 22.n. The Blood and fat forbidden, 30.c.
Blood not purged, but by blood again, 58.b. Blowing of trumpets assigned to
the first day of every month, 40.e. Blowing trumpets: see seventh, l. Bondmen
allowed, 19. Great liberty over Bond servants, 19.d. Stealing of men, and
seling them for Bondmen, death, 60.d. A Bondsman, 16.b.c. Fornication with a
Bondmaid though she were betrothed, punished but with beating, 59.l. An Hebru
might be a Bond to them but six years, 19.a.
Bondsman: see maiming, m. Bondmaid: see fornication. Bondmen: see 50. year.
Bondservant: see slaieng, g. Bondslave: see thief, c. The Boords of the
tabernacle an handful thik overlaid with gold, 32.f.g.m. and how broad and long
they were, h.
Borrowed: see goods, l. Borrowed: see oath, h. Brazen altar: see altar. What
Bread was given to the consecrated offering: see flesh. The Bread of the meat
offering: see unlevened. The Breadth of the tabernacle, 32.e.
Breeches ordained both for the high priest and inferior, 35.z. The Brestplate
or tablet of the high priest, 35.r-u.
Brethren and strangers: see seventh, d. Buggerie, death to both the parties,
whether man or beast, 59.i. Buggerie: see man. The Levites appointed to the
building of the temple, 38.f.2. The age of the Levites appointed for Burdens,
38.c.2 The Burnt offering at the consecration of the priest, 26.f.
Burnt offering for the Levites: see separation. The Burnt offering for the
people: see whole people.

C.
CAkes: see form of bread. How the Levites Camped about the tabernacle, 34 a-g.
How the tribe of Israel Camped about the tabernacle, 34.i-l.
Candlestik, 32.n.2. The Candlestik of beaten gold, 32.a.2. The place of the
Candlestik, 32.f.2. The use of the Candlestik, 32 d.2. The Canaanites came
forth against Israel in the wilderness, and are overthrown, 54.u. Nothing to do
with the Canaanites, 11.b. The Canaanites spared, 12.i.k.l.
Canaanites to be utterly destroyed, 54.g. Chance-medley, death in one case,
58.e. Chance-medley: see manslaughter. Chariots allowed the Gershonites, and
Merorites for bearing, 38.d.2. Cherubs on the lid of the ark, 32.h.2. Child:
see father. Children appertain to the covenant, 31.h. To make their Children go
thorough the fire, forbidden, 22.t. A comfortable expectation of Christ, 31.
before, a.2. The whole Church may er, 44. The matter of Circumcision, 31.d. The
meaning of Circumcision, 31.f.
Circumcision, to whom and when it was given, 31.c. When Circumcision was to be
ministered, 31.e. The eight day appointed for Circumcision, 31. after, h. That
al should be Circumcised, 31.i. The Levites Cities, 15.c.
Cities of refuge, 58.c.d. City: see slaughter, f. None but the Clean might
sacrifice, 35.b.
Clean: see sprinkle. The preests to be Cleansed before they offer, 35. The
usual Clothing of the high priest, 35.m. The use of the Cloud, 34.m.
Cloud: see rested. A brief exposition of the ten Commandments, 20. A larger
exposition of the ten Commandments, 21-30.
Conceal: see truth, a. The Confirmation of the preests ministration, 36.q. Who
were repelled from the Congregation. 23.c
Congregation: see sacrifice, 44. Taking away of Consecrate or holy things, as
first fruits, tithes, and such like to be purged by sacrifice, though it were
but ignorantly or unwittingly done, 47.e. The manner of Consecrating the
Levites, 37.a. At the Consecration of the preests what Moses should have in a
readiness, 36.a. To be Content with the estate that God does give: see covet.
How long the sacrifice of consecration for Aaron and his sons was to Continu,
36.k. Matters of Controversy brought to the high priest and chief magistrate,
38.k. Carnal Copulation with beasts forbidden. 27. c.
Corah: see disobedience. e. Cords of the sanctuary, 33.h. The Covering that
was inmost of al, 32.o. The second Covering, 32.p. The third Covering, 32.i.
Not to Covet. 30.a. The Court of the tabernacle square, 33.a.
Cursing father or mother death, 57.b. Curtain of the tabernacle: see covering.
D.
DAily sacrifice again: see sacrifice, a. The daily sacrifice of the morning,
36.m. A Damage or wrong wittingly done to be made up with the best of his own,
60.e.f.
Damage or wrong diversely done, 60. after. d. Damage done for want of heed
taking, how to be punished, 60.g. A secret Damage or hurt how to be answered,
60.m.
Dan the gathering host, 34.q. Dan where he camped: see Camped. Dathan: see
disobedience, e. Not to curse the Deaf, 26.g. False Dealing: see stealing.
Debts and debtors: see seventh. Defraud: see oppress. Delay: see vow, m. To
Deny a thing committed to his trust, purged by sacrifice, 46.f.
Denieng or forswearing a thing found, purged by sacrifice, 46.f. Destroy by
war: see Canaanites and foreign cities. Dishes pertaining to the table, 32.m.2.
Disobedience to authority punished with death, 52, o. For Disobedience to
authority a strange and great execution done, on Corah, Dathan, Abiram and
others, 57.e.
Disobedience: see authority. Disobedience: see father. c The Distribution of
the land among the tribes, 14. Devils: see offering, s. Divorse in some cases
permitted, 27.b.2. Divorse: see marriage, h. Dog: see vile thing. Drunkards or
riotous persons that will not be ruiled by their parent calling from it, to be
put to death, 57.c.
E.
EAsement so to be done as should annoy none, 23.i. Easement done to the
noiance of others offends God also, 23.i Easement so to be done, as that
therein also it may appeer that we reverence others, 25.e. Easter the first of
their yearly feasts, 40.k. The solemnity of Easter, 40.k.l. A sheafe of new
corn to be offered at Easter, 40.o. Certain things forbid to be Eaten, 30.b.
also blood, fat, and such as died alone, c.d. No beast to be offered under
Eight dais old, 39, d. A bench of Elders appointed upon the complaint of Moses,
50.m.n.o. Enemies to good use, 12.m. Aaron and his sons Entered into their
office the eight day, 36.l. Of their Entry into the land, 11.
Entry into the court at the west end, 33.f. Ephod: see upmost garment. The
Exercise of the sabbath: see sabbath. Eye for eye; tooth for tooth, etc. 58.i.
Eye for eye: see witness, a.
F.
FAt forbid: see blood. Faise swearing punished by a sacrifice, 46.f.
Familiars: see witches. The Families of Levy, 38.t.
Father and mother to be honored, 20. and 25. Refusing to be ruled by Father or
mother to be punished with death, 57.c. Not to marry the Fathers wife, 25.b.
The Father not to die for the offense of the child, nor the child for the
father, 25.f.
Fatherles: see hard-dealing. Not to Fear though their enemies be many, 54.a.
When they go to war to send away such as are Fearful, 54.a. Of their solemn
Feasts and times, 40. Their Feast lasted seven dais together, 40.p. Every
Feast had his proper sacrifice, 42.f, u.
Fire was first sent down to consume the sacrifice. 36.q Fighting: see beating.
Fighting: see hurting. Fighting: see maiming. A Fifth part more to be added for
an injury done, 60.m. A Fifth part more to be added for taking away of holy
things, 47.e.
Fifth part: see owner. The solemnity of the Fiftith year, 41. In the Fiftith
year the land should rest, as in the seventh, 41.k, l. In the Fiftith year
freedom was granted to al: and every one might return to their ancient
inheritance, 41.m.n. The freedom of the Fiftith year, 30.f. The Fiftith year
how it should be proclaimed, 41.h
First born exempted to keep in memory how the Lord spared them when he
destroyed the first born of Egypt, 21.m.n. First born of man, 21.f. First born
of such things as were clean, 21.h.k. First born of such things as were
unclean, 21.i. or had deformity, k. First born: see Levites, n. The First day
of every month rekoned among other solemn feasts, 40.f. The First day of the
month: see new moon.
First fruits ordained and why, 21.o. and of what things they should be
offered, p, q. At the offering of their First fruits, how they should
acknowledge the goodness of the Lord withal, 21.s. How careful they should be
truly to bring their First fruits to the Lord, 21.r.
First fruits: see consecrate. Certain portions of the Flesh of the sacrifice
given to the preests, 36.i. How the preests should use the Flesh of the
sacrifice.
Flesh: see sacrifice, d. Flowers: see fluers. Fluers token of maidenhead,
59.o. To lie with a woman in her Fluers forbidden. 27.g. and punished by death
to both the parties, 59.e.
Flieng of birds: see prognosticate. Fornication with a single woman
unbetrothed how it is punished, 59.k. Fornication with a bondmaid, how
punished, 59.l. Fornication: see whoordom. Foreign cities not to be so clean
destroyed, as the cities of Canaan, 54.h. Forswearing: see denieng. Things
Found ought to be restored again, 28.f. Found: see denieng. A Frame for lights
in the holy place: see candlestik.
Freedom: see fiftith, n. and maiming. Frindges: see law, m. That there should
be poor in the land it hinders not the Fruitfulnes of it, for that poverty
may arise of other causes than of the hardness of the land, 10.
Fruits of their trees forbidden the first four years, 30.g. Fruits not to be
gathered over near, 28.i. Fruit trees not to be cut down in a seege, 54.f. Hurt
by Fire negligently. kindled, how to be answered, 60.i.
Fire: see hurt. i.
G.
GAin of whoordom not to be offered unto the Lord, 23.l. The holy Garments of
the high priest put on when he began the reconciliation, and put off again when
he had done, 43.b, z. The lake or sea Genasareth, 7. The Gerah, 21.f.g. Peace
made with the Gibeonites, 12.f. To speak to the people in the name of other
Gods, death, 59.g. To have no Gods but the Lord alone, 21.a.
Goods delivered of trust afterward wanting how to be answered, 60.k. Goods
hired and miscarieng not to be answered, 60.l. Goods borrowed and miscarieng,
how to be answered, 60.l. What Government there is in men by instinct of nature,
only appears by certain special examples that have been, and by the rules of
aequitie that they have set down, 3. What Government is in other creatures by
instinct of nature appears by that they detest violence, and for that many of
the^ have a kind of government among them, 3. By such natural instinct neither
have we sufficient understanding to right Government, neither inclination unto
it, s. Such natural instinct of Government is left to the glory of God, and
for the preservation of the kinds that God has ordained, 4. A sufficient
Government promised to Judah, 51.e, f. What rules of Government were to their
governors appointed, 52. What Governors were erected among the Israelites, 50.

H.
AN Hanging for the entry of the tabernacle, 32.s. Hang long: see suits.
Hangings of the court, 33, b Hangings of the entry to the court, 33.q.
Hangings allotted to the Gershonites to carry, 38.a.2 Hard causes in judgment
to be referred to the priest together with the civil magistrate, 52.n.o. Hard
dealing forbidden with strangers, widows, fatherles, and poor, 26.f. Harlot:
see maid, g. An Heathenish woman not to be married to an Israelite, but upon
diverse ceremonies of purging first, 23.h.
Hebru: see bondsman. a. An Herem what it is, 23.p.
Herem: see Jericho. An Herem might not be redeemed nor kept bak, 23.p. Of the
High priest, 35.k-x. and 38. The High priest how he should marry, 23.t. The
High priest might not mourn for any, 23.x.. The High precst only might offer
the proper sacrifice that did belong to the day of reconciliation, 43.a. The
High priest must offer for himself before he offered for others, 43.c. The
High priest enters into the holy place alone, 43.l. Apparel of the High
priest, 35.l-x. Of the Holy and most holy place, 32.u. Taking away of Holy
things how to be purged, 47.e.
Holiness unto the Lord, 35.x. What kind of Homage they were taught to do, 17.e.
Horses: see king, i.2. Gathering Host: see Dan.
Houses: see redeem. Hurting of a woman with child by two that are fighting
together, how it is punished, 58.l. The like Hurt that one does to another, to
be inflicted upon themselves, 58.i.
Hurt: see damage, m. and wrong, f, g. Husband hating and slandering his wife:
see whore, o Husband: see slandering, b. Hire: see goods, l.
I.
IDolatie commanded to be destroyed, 11.b. Of what idols and Idolatry we
should take special heed, 21.c. How zealously they were bound to destroy
Idolatry, 21.c, d.
Idolatry angreth the Lord, 54.t. Any city that should set up Idolatry to be
destroyed, 55.a.
Idolatry to the golden calfe in the wilderness punished by the death of 3000.
persons, 55.b-d. Idolatry to Baal-Peor punished by the death of 24000.
persons, 55.e. To commit Idolatry, death, 56.b. To entice to Idolatry, death,
56.b. To have no names of Idols in our mouths, 20.b. The Idols of Canaan
specially forbidden, 22.p. Al other Idols likewise generally, 22.q. When the
husband is Ielous how the wife is to purge hirselfe, 59.n.
Jealousy how to be taken away, 53.l. Jericho made an Herem, or utterly
abandoned, 23.q. Ignorance dangerous in the judgment of God, 44. Ignorance:
see sacrifice, 47. In things committed to custody and lost, borrowed, and
hurt, a man had to purge himself by his oath, 53.g, h. Incense: see perfume. O.
3. Incense cups, 32.m.2. Incest what it is, 54.d. Incest death to both the
offenders, 59.d. One kind of Incest such as the parties offending therinshuld
be brent, 69.d
Inferior preests, 35.k. Inferior preests apparel, 35.y Inferior preests duty
or charge. 38.m-s. Inhaeritance how to descend 17.a. Inhritance not to be put
away absolutely, 22.y. Inhaeritance: see fiftith, m. Injury: see fifth part, m.
Diligent Inquiry to be made, 53.a, b. To Instruct the people in their duty,
38.f. The river Jordan, 7. Of the Iubile or fiftith year, 41.h, n. At the
Iubile lands return again, 18.a.41.n.
Iubile: see fiftith. Iubile: see lands. Judah promised a special government,
52.e. Judges and officers in all their cities to minister just judgment unto
them, 51.a. Judgment of the leprosy, 38.h. In hard causes of Judgment the
priest was put in authority with the sovereign magistrate, 52.n, o.
Justice to be executed: see magistrates, a.
K.
KEep long: see sacrifice, d. Killing: see slaieng. Kindling of fire
negligently, 60.i. Kindling of a fire not allowed on the sabbath day, 24, d
Kindred: see married, i. It was permitted unto the^ to choose a King if needs
they would, 51.l. A King set up among the people, 51.m. A King might never
bring the people bak to Egypt again, 52.h. A King may not inordinately lean to
his earthly power providing many horses or much treasure: he must moderate
himself in his pleasures, and not exalt himself above his brethren, 52.i.2.
King: see government, o. King: see sovereign. The government of Israel without
a King yet never theles had the majesty of a glorious kingdom. 51.o.
Kings, 31. destroyed, 12.g. The Kingdom afterward divided, and so two kings
at once ruling among them, 51.n. The preests ought to have a special care to
increase in Knowledge and zeal, 38.g To maintain the Knowledge of the law: see
law. Where the Koathites camped, 34.b. How the Koathites marched, 34.s. The
bearing of the ark, and the most holy things the special charge of the
Koathites 38.z.

L.
THe pascal Lamb received every year once, 31.r. The blood of the Lamb taken in
a basin sprinkled, 31.m, y. The carcass of the Lamb was roasted whole, 31.n. Our
pascal Lamb Jesus Christ, 31.a.2. The description of the Land of Canaan, 7-10.
The names of the Land 8. Palaestine a; the land of Canaa^, b. the holy land,
a.2 The bounds of the Land, 7.a. The Land divided, 8. By the tribes, c. Into
two kingdoms, e. Into four principal parts, g. It was a very fruitful Land, 9.
Land to be several, 17.g. Land to lie common and to rest every seventh year,
17.f. Forbidden to remoove Land marks, 28.b. In what manner Lands should
descend, 17.b, c.
Lands might not be sold for ever, 22.y. Returning of Land, 50.y. The Land
defiled by blood til the offender be punished 58.b. How to redeem Lands sold or
vowed to the Lord, 18.c, d, e. The Laver of brass, and the use of it, 33.o.
The place of the brazen Laver, 33.o. The excellency of the Law, 22.k. Defects
of nature helped by the Law among the Israelites, 6. Acursing to those that do
not observe the Law, 22.o The Law to be bound to their hands, 24.l. Frindges
and ribands appointed to put the^ in mind to observe the Law, 24.m The Law to
be written on stones, and in their houses, 24.i, k. A king must be a diligent
reader of the Law and do accordingly, 52.h. Al were to hear the Law every
seventh year, at the feast of tabernacles, 41.e. They should teach the Law to
their children, 24.n.
Law: see magistrate. Leven might not be brent in sacrifice, 49.g. Levened
bread in peace offerings: and to what use, 49.f, g, h. and 39.f. The Length of
the hanging of the court, 33.c. The Length of the tabernacle, 32.e. The Length
of the brazen altar, 33.l. Of whom Leprosy is to be judged: see judgment.
Levi the great ancestor of the Levites had three sons, Gershon, Kohath, and
Merari, of whom came the families of the Levites 38.f. Levi taken out from the
rest to the ministry, 13.e. The Levites taken out for the firstborn of the
people 21.n. The Levites an heave offering of the firstborn, 37.s
Levites tithed to the preests, 16.b. The Levites had the ordinary service of
the tabernacle, 35.f. What portion was allowed to the Levites, 15.
Levites possessions not to be aliened, 23.z. Marching of the Levites, 4.r. How
David did appoint the Levites, 38.e.2. The work of the Levites after the
building of the temple: see service, g.2. The Levites consecrated: see
consecrating, a.
Levites: see placed. That the Lord was their chief Lord, how it was taught
them, by ceremonies, and services, 21. after, d. Al manner of Lieng forbidden,
29.b.

M.
MAgistrates had to execute justice, and to rebuke offenders, 52.a. Magistrates
must diligently hear and rightly determine, 52.k, l. Nor take rewards, m.
Iosuah being made a Magistrate was straightly charged to study the law, 52.l.
Inferior Magistrates in hard cases to resort to their superior, 52.k, n. The
proper sacrifice of a Magistrate for sin done of ignorance, 47. a.
Magistrates: see superiors, c. Chief Magistrate: see controversy, k. A woman
taken in marriage for a Maid, and afterward found an harlot, to be put to death
at her fathers door, 59.g. The high priest might marry none but a Maid, 23.t.
The father was to keep, and bring forth (if need required) the tokens of his
daughters Maidenhead, 59.o.
Maidenhead: see fluers, o. Maiming how it was punished, 58.i. Maiming the
bo^dman made him free, 58.m. Males: see tabernacles.g. Secret Malice forbidden,
26, b. Copulation of Man with man forbidden, 27.d.
Man may not go in woman's apparel, 27.f. Manslaughter or chancemedley, how it
was provided for, 58.c, d, e. How the Israelites Marched in the wilderness, 34.o.
Marie: see Miriam. Degrees in Marriage forbidden, 27.g. New Married folk
spared from the wars for one year, 27.c. To Marry with his next kinswoman,
27.i. Not to Marry her that he had divorced. 27.h.
Marry: see fathers wife. Marry: see heathenish. Marry: see high priest, and
preests. Meat offering what it is, 42.c. What was to be offered in the Meat
offering, 39.b.
Meat offering: see salt, d. The Merarites bare the timber work of the
tabernacle, 38.b.2.
Merarites camped on the north side of the tabernacle, 34.f. The number of the
Merarites, 34.g.
Madianites trouble Israel, 54.q, r. Madianites destroyed, 54.t. To Mingle
diverse kinds, forbidden. 30.h. The Ministration of the preests: see confirmed.
To what tribe the Ministry of the tabernacle did belong, 35.d.
Miriam or Marie punished with leprosy, for making quaestion of the authority
of Moses, 57.d. How sharply they are to be punished, that Molest the people of
God, 54.m-p.
Moloch: see seed. The preests in one case forbidden to Moorn for their
brethren, which was otherwise permitted unto them, 23.z. Nature preferred
before civil duty in Moorning, 23.y.
Moorning as the heathen, forbidden, 23.g. Moorn: see high priest. Morning
sacrifice: see daily. Mother in law: see fathers wife, b. Mortasses: see
sockets. Mortification of the flesh, 31.g. Moses the Israelites chief
governor, 50.a. How Moses began to take the government on him, 50.b, c. In what
sort Moses came to the place of government 50.a-h.
Moses did al himself alone at the first, 50.i. but. Moses government for a
time interrupted, 50.d. Moses and Aaron camped at the east end of the
tabernacle, 34.a. The Most holy things allotted to the Koathites: see
Koathites.
Mourn: see moorn. Murder forbidden, 26.a. What is Murder, 58.a.
Murder punished with death, 58, a. A Murderer might not be pardoned, 58.b.
Murder: see purging, k. Murder: see slaughter, f.
N.
NOt to pollute the Name of God, 23.a. Names: see Idols. Nature or natural
instinct to aequitie: see government. Nature: see moorning. Of the Nazarite,
and the ceremonies that to him belonged, 23. The tribe of Levy Nearer to the
sanctuary than the rest of the people, 38.h
Nephthalies camping: see camping. The New moon (being the first day of the
month received among their festival dais, 40.d. The New moon had a special
sacrifice, 40.c. The Number of every tribe as they ca^ped about the tabernacle
and marched in their array, 34.

O.
OBservation oftentimes forbidden, 22.u. Offer: see sacrifice. Offering unto
devils forbidden, 22.s. Offered: see blemish, and vile thing. One: see witness,
5.d. One man's beast slaieng another, 60.h. Those that Oppress others by fraud,
robbery, or violence, how they had to amend it, 46.f, g.
Original sin: see sacrifice, 48. Trial by Oaths allowed in matters of
judgment, 33.g A man might be purged by his own Oath, 53.i.
Oath: see goods, k. The Owner might not have his vowed things, but by adding a
fifth part more, 22.i. A goring Ox, 58.h. The laboring Ox to be regarded, 25.f.

P.
PArdon: see murder, b. Parents to be honored, 25, a. The institution and
ceremonies of the pasouer or Pascal lamb 31.a, b, k-a.2 The solemnity or manner
of the feast of Easter or the Pascal lamb, 40.k-r.
Pas-over: see pascal. Passengers might eat of other men's fruits, but carry
none away, 17.i.and 22.x. Eating the pasover, we must be like Passengers 31.p.
Peace to be offered, first before they gave battle, 54.c Upon refusal of Peace
they had to give battle, 54.d. Of Peace offerings, the variety, and nature of
them, 49. The Peace offering for the people: see whole. Of the feast of
Pentecost 40.s. A special sacrifice for the feast of Pentecost on the behalf
of the whole people, 40.t. The burning of Perfume, or incense unto the Lord,
32.e.2. and 38.c. No respect of Persons, 2.b. To erect a Pillar to look upon,
forbidden, 22.r.
Pillars of the court, 33.d. Brazen Pins for the sanctuary, 33.h. A Pit
opened, and not shut again, 60.g. The Pitching of the people, 34.z. The Levites
Placed in the land so that they might teach, 38.y.
Pleasures: see king, h. Not to take a Pledge that may not well be spared, 26.d.
Not to take a Pledge inordinately or greedily, 26.e.
Polluted: see unclean. To help the Poor, 28.g. A more special care for the
Poor the third year, 41.a.
Poor: see hard dealing. The Portion of the preests 16.
Poverty whence it may arise, 10. The Poverty of a man provided for in
bringing his sacrifice, 46.b. The Amalekites overthrown by Moses Prayer, 54.l,
m. The Price or redemption of man, 22.f, g.
Pride: see king, h. Of Priest and Preesthood 35-38. Of their apparel: and
first of the High Priest 35.l-x. Then for the inferior Preests, y.z. Of their
consecration, 36. And of their proper function, 38. Succession of the
Preesthood appointed to one family, 35.g. First fruits the portion of the
Preests. 16.e, f. Blemished persons of the seed of Aaron excluded the office of
Preesthood, but not their maintenance, 23,s. How both the High and inferior
Preests should marie, 23.t, u. The High Priest might not moorn, 23.x. For whom
the inferior Preests might moorn, 23.y. The Priest in some cases appointed to
civil causes, together with the civil magistrate, 52.n, o. The proper sacrifice
of a Priest for a sin of ignorance, 47.a. Of things to be redeemed, the Priest
must set the price, 22.h. The daughter of a Priest plaieng the whore to be
brent, 59.h.
Priest: see battle, l. Priest: see wine. The proper sacrifice of a Private
person, for sin of ignorance, 47.a.
Privy members: see shameless. Great Promises made to Israel, 51.c, d. To
Prognosticate or to guess beforehand of the success of any matter, by
luckines of dais, or seasons, or by the flieng of birds, or such like,
forbidden, 22.u. The people should never want a Prophet, 22.l, m.51.h. A false
Prophet to be put to death, 56.b. In time of Prosperity to take heed
especially that then we forget not God, 24.o. How hard it is in Prosperity to
stand in the fear of God, 24.p. A notable Protestation for the true payment of
tithes: see tithes.
Purging of suspicion of murder, 53.k. Purging of suspicion of adultery, 53.l.
Purge: see ielous, n. Purged: see oath, i. Of Purification, and the meaning of
it, 48. The ceremony of Purifieng easier for a man child than for a woman
child, 48.c.

R.
RAhab spared, 12.d. Rape or ravishing, death to the party that forces, 59,
c.f. Rash: see vow, a. Of the feast of Reconciliation, 40.x. While the priest
does make the Reconciliation, the people are to sorrow for their sins, 43.t.
The day of Reconciliation, a day of affliction, but sometimes joy withal, 41.i.
The peoples exercise on the day of Reconciliation, 40.z. That the force of
Reconciliation is not in the merit of man. 35. after, g.
Reconciliation: see sacrifice. Reconciliation day: see seventh, i, m, n. Of
the Red cow, 45.
Redeeming of the firstborn, 21.f, i. No lands to be sold without clause of
Redemption, 18.b. How to Redeem houses, 18.f-i.
Redeemed: see Herem. Refuge: see cities, c. What is the effect or sum of al
Religion, 20.a-k. Religion: see venturous. Moses prayer at the Removing of the
ark, 34.n.
Remooving: see marched, o To Repair to the place that the Lord had chosen.
40.m.
Respect: see persons. Sabbath day a Rest day, 24.a, f. The Rest of the sabbath
should be an holy rest, 24.a, b. The armies Rested not til the cloud did stay,
34.u.
Restitution to be made for injuries done, 46.f, g. Restitution to be made for
taking away holy things ignorantly, 47.e. To whom Restitution is du, 28.
after, f. and 46.i.
Return: see setting down of the ark. We ought to Reverence each other as his
place requires, 25. before, a.
Rewards do blind the eyes of the magistrate, 52.m. Right of any not to be
hindered, 52.c. Rings for the table, 32.l.2. Rings for the altar, 32.l.2. Rings
for the ark, 32, l.2. Rings overlaid with beaten gold, 32.m. Riotous persons.
see drunkards. The several Rites of the offerings for the people, 36.p.
Robbery: see wrong, and oppress. The Roof of the tabernacle, 32.d.
Ruben put from his birthright, and why, 17.c, d.

S.
THe Sabbath ordained, 24.a. Sabbath day to be observed in seed time and
harvest, 24.f. The Sabbath commanded by the example of God 40.a. By writing,
40.b. The Sabbath ordained that we and our cattle may rest, 24.h. In the
Sabbath the Lord requires holiness, 24.b. The Sabbath teaches that God does
sanctify us, 24.c. The breach of the Sabbath to be punished with death, 24.g.
and 56.i.2. Lesser breaches of the Sabbath punishable with stripes, 56.k.
Gathering of stiks on the Sabbath death, 56.i.
Sabbaths sacrifice: see sacrifice. Sacraments ordained before the law was
given, 31.a. Sacraments confirmed by the law, 31.b. Their Sacraments were two,
circumcision, and the pascal lamb, 31.a. Of Sacrifices generally: ordinary and
extraordinary, 42. Of their manner of Sacrifice, 32. Of the daily Sacrifice,
42.a. Who might Sacrifice: see clean. Not to Sacrifice where they list, but
only in the place that the Lord appointed, 32.b.
Sacrifice proper to certain of their feasts, 42.f-u. The Sacrifice of the
sabbath, 42.e. The Sacrifice on the day of reconciliation made by the high
priest only, 43. a. Extraordinary Sacrifice, 43.
Sacrifice for original sin, 48. A Sacrifice for sin, how to be handled, 46.c,
d, e. Sacrifice for a sin wittingly done, but without hurt to our neighbor,
46.a. Sacrifice for sin when our neighbor was hurt by us, 46.f, h. Sacrifice
for offenses done of ignorance, 47.r, a-e. Sacrifice for the whole congregation
having offended ignorantly, 44. Sacrifice for several persons: the nature and
diversity of them, 46. Sacrifice must be brought willingly, 35.a. Why the
flesh of the Sacrifice might not be long kept, 49.d. The Sacrifice of the red
cow, 45.
Salt never to be wanting in any meat offering, 42.d. Sanctifieng of our selves
required, 23.b. The manner and form of the Sanctuary, 32.c-n.2. The oversight of
the Sanctuary committed to the preests, 38.i.
Scriptures: see Law. Secret: see damage, m. Offering of their Seed to Moloch,
forbidden, 22.t.
Selling of lands should ever be with clause of redemption, 22.y. The offerings
for the Levites in their Separation 37.c. The Service of the tabernacle given
to all the Levites, 38.u. The Service of the temple was the work of the Levits
after the building of it, 38.g.2.
Setim wood, 32.g. The Setting down of the ark, 34.a.2. The Seventh day of the
sabbath, 24.a. The Seventh month brought two notable feasts 40. before, u. The
tenth day of the Seventh month, the day of reconciliation, 42.m, n. The tenth
day of the Seventh month, was also the day of blowing the tru^pets, 41.k, l.
Five dais after the feast of Tabernacles, 40.b.2. The Seventh years solemnity
in what points it rested, 41. The Seventh year their ground should rest, and be
common, 41.c. The Seventh year to surcease from suits for debts concerning
their brethren, but not so for strangers, 41.d.
Seven times seven years being ended, the Iubile was the next year: of which,
41.h-n. Seventh: see law, e. The Escape goat, 43.d. How the Escape goat should be
sent away, 43.u, x, y. A Shameless woman how in one case she were to be
punished, 59.m.
Sheafe: see Easter. o. The remooving or shifting the Shewbread, 38.d.
Sicle, what it is, 21.g. In their Siege they might not cut down fruit trees,
54.f.
Sin offering: see sacrifice. When Slaughter or murder is found, and not known
who did it, the next city how to be dealt with, 58.f.
Slander: see whore, o. An husband Slandering his wife with whoordom
punishable by fine, 62.b.
Slaieng or killing of a bondservant by beating him, in what manner to be
punished, 58.g. Sockets for the mortasses or tenons, 32.k. Sockets of silver,
32.n. Sockets of brass, 33.e. Sorcerie and witchcraft forbidden, 22.u. A
Soldier unclean had to get him out of the camp, 23.f.2. No want in Israel of a
king or Sovereign magistrate, 51.g, h, i, k, o. But permitted unto them to
choose one if they would, 51.l. Who would not stand to the sentence or
determination of the Sovereign magistrate, and of the priest, he should be put
to death, 52.o.
Sower herbs to be eaten with the Pascal lamb, 31.o. Southsaiers: see witches.
Spirits: see witches. Sprinkling water, 45. None but the clean should Sprinkle
the unclean, 45.g.
Stealing, how it was punished, 60.a-d. Stiks: see sabbath. Strange gods: see
Gods. g. Strangers: see hard dealing. Strangers and brethren: see seventh. d.
Striking father or mother, death, 57.d. In faults punishable by Stripes, not to
give above forty at once, 52.g. Not to lay a Stumbling blok before the blind,
26.h
Suburbs how large, 15.c. Not to suffer Suits to hang long before them, but
determine them according to justice, 52.d.
Superior not to be spoken il of, or to be railed on, 25.c. Suspicion: see
purging, k, l. The commandment that forbids Swearing by the name of God in
vain, condemns hypocrisy also, and requires sincerity, 20.c. and 23. in all. For Swearing falsely a trespass offering appointed 46.f.g.

T.
OF the manner and form of the Tabernacle: see sanctuary. The feast of
Tabernacle, 40.a.2. When al had to com to the feast of Tabernacles generally:
and when but the males only, 41.f, g. The Table of setim wood but overlaid with
gold, 32.a.2. The use of the Table, 32.c.2. The place of the Table, 32.f.2.
Tablet: see brestplate. Taking away: see consecrate. Carieng of Tales
forbidden, 29.b. To Teach the people, part of the work of these, that served in
the tabernacle, 38.x.. The Temple built by the Levites: see building.
Tenth: see seventh, u. Testimony: see ark. A Thief not able to make
restitution should be a bondslave, 60.c. A Thief breaking into the house by
night might be killed: not in the day, 60.b. The Third years solemnity, 41.a.
The Third year how to be rekoned, 41. after, a.
Third year: see poor, a. Threescore and ten elders appointed, 50.o. Vrim and
Thumin into the brestplate, 35.r.
Tithe ordained for the maintenance of the ministry, 15.b. Tithe ordained as
a rent service du to the Lord. 21.d. Tithe how truly it should be paid: not
putting by a better to give a worse, 15.d.e We may not suffer Tithes decay in
our hands, 41.a. We may not withhold our Tithes though our own need be great,
41.a. How notably they should protest for their Tithing every third year,
21.t.41.a.
Tithes: see consecrate, e. Their principal Times, 40,41.
Times: see prognosticate. Torn with beasts: see died alone. To Touch unclean
things to be purged by sacrifice, 46.a.
Treasure: see king, h. Trespass offering: see swearing, f, g. Trespass offering,
and a fifth part more, 60.m. The twelve Tribes, 13. At the sound of the Trump
the people remooved, 34.o. Abusing of Trust committed to any to be purged by
sacrifice, 46.f. and civily to be cleared by oath: and so likewise of things
borrowed and hurt, 53.f-i.
Trust: see deny. Trust: see goods, k. NOt to witness or say the Truth when we
hear others swear falsely to be purged by a sacrifice, 46.a.

V.
TWo preests destroyed of the Lord for being Venturous in matters of religion,
56.d. No Vile thing to be offered to the Lord: as for example the price of a
dog, 23.l.
Villains: see bondmen. Violence: see oppress. Who were Unclean, 33, d
Unclean vessels how to be dealt withal, 33.k. By Uncleanness or iourneieng, the
pasover might be deferred, 31.t.
Unclean: see beast. Unclean: see soldier. Vndermagistrates appointed by
Moses, by Iethros counsel, 50.k, l.51.b. Ungodly persons to be beaten with
stripes, 56.k. Vnlevened bread eaten with the pascal lamb, 31.o Vnlevened bread
ever offered in the meat offering, 39.e. Of Vow, 23.l-q. The law of Vows
declares that God inviteth us to a singular zeal, 24. after, p. Who might Vow,
12.c. A Vow made, not to be delaied, 23, m. No fault not to Vow, 23, m. A Vow
not to be of such things as had blemish, 23.o. A better thing Vowed not to be
changed for a worse, 23.n. A rash Vow to be purged by sacrifice, 46.a. What
things might not be Vowed, 22.e. Somthings Vowed might not be redeemed, 22.d.
Vows: see owner. Vrim and thumin in the high preests tablet, 35.u. Usury
forbidden toward their brethren, 26.c.
W.
WAges or hire might not be unpaid, 28.d. Want: see ability. Who might be
spared from the Wars, 54.a.
War: see fearful. War: see battle, a. The preests did Wash before they
ministered, 36.c.
Wealth: see prosperity. Deceit in Weight and measure, 28.c. We must have care
of our neighbors Wedlok, 27.a.
Wedlok: see marriage. Women not to go in men's apparel, 27.f. The offering of
the Whole people. 38.g.
Whore: see priest. If the husband slander his wife upon hatred to have been
an Whore before he married her to be fined, 59.o.
Whoordome forbidden, 27.b. Widow: see hard dealing. Preests might not drink
Wine in time of their administration, 23.r.
Witches, southsaiers, and al others of that kind should be put to death, 56.
h. Witchcraft: see sorcerie. Witnesses must be two at the least, 53.e. One only
Witness not to be received against the life of any man, 53.c. Nor to be of force
in any other matter, d. To receive no accusation but under two Witnesses at the
least, 52.e. False Witness forbidden, 29.a. A false Witness how to be punished,
61.a.
Witnesses sworn sometimes, 53.c.2. Witness: see truth. Woman: see shameless. They
may not serve or Worship the Lord after the manner of other peoples: but as the
Lord himself appointed, 22.a, b. To put a Worse in stead of a better, makes
the partic chargeable to give both, 23.n.
Wrong doing forbidden, 28.f. Wrong or hurt, how to be amended, 46.f.g. Wrong:
see damage. Willingly: see sacrifice, a.
Y.
Years of special account, the third, seventh, and fiftith, 41.
Z.
ZEal in the preests: see knowledge, g. Zeal: see vows after, p. We must be
Zealous toward God, 24.

FINIS.

