THE LAW AND the Gospel reconciled. OR The Evangelical Faith, and the Moral
Law how they stand together in the state of grace.

A treatise showing the perpetual use of the Moral Law under the Gospel to
believers; in answer to a letter written by an Antinomi^^ (...) a faithful
Christian. Also how the mora^^^^ of the 4th Commandment is continued in the
Lords day, proved the Christian Sabbath by divine institution.

^^fe Catalogue of the Antinomian doctrinoc. By HENRY BVRTON.

1 TIMOTHY 1.5. The end of the Commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of
a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned.

Vt Rota intra rotam currit: sic lex intra Gratiam, et obseruantia legis intra
diuin^ curriculum misericordiae est. Ambros. de Jacob, etc, li. 2. cap: 11.

LONDON, Printed by J. N. for Thomas Slatter, and are to be sold at his
shop in Blackfryars. 1631.

TO THE HIGH and Mighty Prince, Charles, by the grace of God, King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Gracious Sovereign, this small treatise humbly pleades your Royal Patronage
by a double title: the one, from the Author of it, your old servant, who owes
all he is to your Majesty; the other, from the work it self, being a defense
of the Moral Law of God against the Antinomian Libertines in these days, who
deny to believers any more use thereof. And what one subject can more justly
clame your Majesty's protection, then this of the Moral Law, since you are not
only by a proper title, Defender of the faith: but by a common trust committed
to Kings, keeper of both Tables? The discharge of which trust as it tends much
to the honor of the great Lawgiuer, who has made you his Vicegerent to see
his Laws well executed: So it is the maine propp and pillar to support and
secure your royal Throne. The consideration whereof, (when I saw these sons
of Belial thus undermining the Kings Throne) has provoked my zeal both to
God, and to your Majesty, to write this simple Treatise. For to deny the Moral
Law to be of any more use to belieuers, or to be so much as a rule of
conversation, or that they owe obedience unto it in point of duty and
conscience: this strikes at the very root, and cutts in sunder the k^^ot, not
only of christian charity, but even of all civil society, and happy union and
communion between King and Subjects, Head and Members. For first, the rule of
Gods true and unmixed worship, commanded in the first Table, is taken away:
Secondly, the rule of all christian and civil duties between man and man, in
whatsoever relation they stand, of equality or inequality, Commanded in the
second Table; and all this with one stroke of cutting off the Moral Law from
belieuers. And particularly, these Antinomians cut off all dutiful and
conscionable obedience to Princes, grounded on the fifth Commandment, wherein
they being principal Parents, namely of our Country, all due honor and
obedience in the Lord is commanded to be given them in the first place, as of
children to their Father. Again, on the other side, they break down the
banks, that God himself has pitched to confine the course of Kings, whose
hearts in the Lords hand, like the rivers of waters, keeping within their
banks, refresh the Land on every side with their sweet streams: but being
without the banks of Gods sacred laws, how soon might they ouerflow and
drown all? Therefore it was the care of the wise and good God (to the end he
might provide for the hapy welfare both of the King and People) to leave it in
charge to the King of Israel that he should have a copy of the Law always by
him, to read therein day and night, Deuteronomy 17.18, 19, 20.
to learn thereby to fear the Lord his God, to walk humbly among his
brethren, to do justice and judgment, to the end he may prolong his days in
his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst thereof. But these Lawless
Antinomians, enemies to God, to Kings and States, would robb Christian Kings of
this blessed Book of Gods Law, that so; if they could strippe them of the
grace and fear of God in their hearts, letting loosse the reins of all
honesty and conscience, they might usurp a government after the lust of man,
not after the law of God, and so precipitate inevitable ruin to Princes and
Commonweales. For take away Gods Law, and what law of man can bind the
conscience, either in point of obeying, or of commanding? For though it has
ever been a Maxim among the very heathen, that human Laws, and such as
were ratified by solemn oaths and covenants between Prince and people, they
held sacred and inviolable, as that Law of the Medes and Persians, the Kings
writing and seal, etc. Dan. 6.16: Yet the maine ground that bore up all the
rest, was the conscience they had, by natural instinct, of Gods eternal Law
written in their hearts, accusing or excusing; knowing that God was an auenger
of the breach of laws, oaths, covenants, such as were agreeable to his Law.
This then being the strongest ligature to combine the Head and Body politic
in a firm society, whereby it becomes invincible, perpetual, and glorious:
these sons of Belial would dismember all. Wherein they plainly show who is
their sire, (...) that lawless one, whose Motto is, Volumus et iubemus, we
will and command; which style Platina notes to be first taken up by Boniface
the third, who first usurped the Papal Headship over the Church; So as casting
off all laws of God and man, he became that great Beast described in the
Revelation, whom no law or reason can bound or limit; accounting it a
disparagement to his tyrannical greatness, to be confined within the lists
of any laws, oaths, vows, covenants, though never so just and sacred. Now
the Lord Jesus so bless your Majesty, that trampling this Antinomian Anomian
heresy, both sire and sons, under your sacred feet, you may long and
happily reign over your people, as a tender father over his children, while
your chief care is first for the mayntenance of Gods pure worship without
mixture, and for the execution of justice and judgment; these two being the
sum of both the Tables, and the supporters of the Kings Throne, which the
Lord ever defend from all Antinomian Anomian spirits.

In this Treatise also J have occasionally proved the divine institution of the
Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, denied by some. And as your reign has been
honored with a pious law, for the due observation of this great Holyday of
Christ: So, I trust, that this my vindicating of it to its own right of divine
institution will not a little help to the better execution of that your
Christian law. Which that it may be more reverently and religiously observed
both in Court, City, and Country, to the purging out of profanesse, and to the
increase of all christian graces in your Majesty, and us your people; it is,
and shall be the daily and dutyfull prayer of

Your Majesty's loyal subject and old servant. Henry Burton.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, if this Treatise may seem to any to be superfluous, as
defending that, which noe good Christians deny: yet considering how fruitful
these last times are in bringing forth the spurious spawnes, and monstrous
birthes of all kinds of heresies, among which this of the Antinomians, a most
pestilent and pernicious sest, is not the least, which denies any further use
of the Moral Law to belieuers, no not as a rule of conversation, as of duty to
be conformed unto: and seeing also how many counterfeit Christians are ready,
and do daily intertaine this Libertine doctrine, which lets loosse the raines
to all licentiousness, as both the Doctors and Disciples of this Antinomian
heresy, the Sons of Belial, do evidently prove in the practice of their
lawless and graceless life: and lastly waighing, how this Antinomian frye is,
as an enemy to true faith, and the power of religion, so a friend to all other
heresies now on foot, specially to Popery, serving as a way maker for it, by
breaking down the walls of the City of God, that so Romes Trojan Horse, full of
traitorous Engines and armed Engineers, may find the easier reentry for the
erecting of their Dagon, instead of God's Ark: I hope thou will not esteem
either my pains lost in writing, or thine in reading this small tract. And
howsoever there is small hope, that those, who have already deeply drunk in
this sweet deadly poison, will easily admit of any Antidote or Preservative,
or suffer it kindly to work upon them, so intoxicated they are with the spirit
of giddynesse, and (I fear) many of them justly given over of God to a
reprobate sense, having fallen from the truth of the Gospel once acknowledged
of them: Yet I doubt not, but (by Gods grace) this Treatise will be a means to
preserve all sound and simple-hearted christians in the true faith of Jesus
Christ, never to be seduced by such spirits of error, and perhaps to reduce
into the way of the truth all such honest-hearted poor souls, as have been
beguiled by them.

Only this let me premonish thee of: that whereas in the fourth page I
promise to affix the Copy of that letter at large, which gave occasion of this
Treatise: I have since altered my mind for these reasons: 1. Because (...)
copy is very large: 2. Because I have set down the substance of it in all the
particulars throughout this Tract: 3. Instead thereof, I have added (upon
occasion offered, when I had ended this treatise) as a branch thereof, a short
discourse toucbing the Sabbath day, the Morality whereof some have of late
impugned, as not binding Christians in the observation of the Lords day; the
divine Institution whereof they also deny. So as if I have not made good my
promise in a matter of no necessity, nor of much moment: thou will pardon me,
if J have made thee amends, in adding that, which is of far greater
importance and benefit. And if herein also I have not in all points satisfied
thy judgment to the full, concerning the Law of the Sabbath, and of the divine
institution of the Lords day instead of the Jews Sabbath: I shall (by Gods
grace) shortly give thee further satisfaction in a fuller and ampler Treatise,
purposely penned in answer to a book lately come forth, which would utterly
euacuate the Lords day for the Christian Sabbath, and reduce us to the Jews
Sabbath Day again. Which will be a work so much the more necessary, by how
much this Jewish Sabbatarian finds already many Maleferiatos homi^es, idle and
giddy-brained Christians to embrace his book, which is written with Amighty,
confident, and Gyantlike spirit, as if the Arguments thereof were invincible.
Jn the mean time enjoy this, and pray for me, that God would assist me in
that greater work, and in all things that may most concern his glory, and the
benefit of his Church. Farewell.

Thine in Christ Jesus Henry Burton.

Faults in the Printing, to be corrected with the pen.
Page 10. live 10: read, Calumniations. So also, l. 15: blot out, the p: 26: l.
17: r. close. p. 27. l. 6. r to the ground. p. 30. l. 8. r. preaching. p. 33.
l. 1. r. syllogisticall. p. 43. l 5. r. morality of the Cmmandement. p. 51. l.
24. r: initiation. p. 52. l. 36. r. first fruits. p. 55. l. 6. r. Titulus l. 9.
r. sign. p. 56. l. 1. r, placuent. p. 57. l. 11. r. Arians, and Aerians. l.
25. r. christian: l. 29. blot out, his. p. 58. l. 17: r: slip: p. 59. l: 6. r:
lie under. p. 60. l. 19. r. pretty reasons. l: 30. r. impose. p. 61. l. 8. blot
out, and communing. p. 62. l. 313 r, detrect, p. 6.. l. r. commandal. 28. r.
sacred, ordinances. p. 69. in the margent. l. ^^. r. pawber. and l. 26. r. 515.
to 15. lighter escapes the eye well correct.

THE LAW AND the Gospel reconciled. The Evangelical faith, and the Moral
Law how they stand together in the State of Grace. Upon occasion of a letter
written by an Antinomian to a faithful Christian.
THat which holy Jude deemed so needful to write, Jude: 3:
and to exhort unto; all true Christians should be ready to intertaine; that
is, earnestly to contend for that faith, which was once delivered to the
Saints. This was that, which the Apostle gave chiefly in charge to the
Philippians, Phil. i. 27.
Only let your conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, that
whither I come and see you, or else be absent, I may hear of your affairs,
that ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel. This is indeed that only thing, worthy to be contended
for, and that with earnestness. And if those two mothers before King Solomon,
did so plead about the living child, which yet was mortal, and a sinful
brood: how should the true Church of God plead her titles to that which brings
immortality, the blessed fruit, and issue of the living faith. But how shall we
know who has best right to this living faith? One says, Mine is the living
faith, and thine the dead faith; another says, No, but thine is the dead, and
mine the living. As therefore Solomon's sword deciding the quarrel, gave the
living child to the true mother: So the sword of the spirit, Christ's word, a
greater then Solomon, only can determine who is the true mother, the true
Church, to which the living faith of right belongs, since it is delivered to
none, but to the Saints.

Nor were it a matter of wonder to hear the whore of Babylon, the old Romish
beldame, to make claim to the living faith, as her natural child, which now
long ago by ouerlaying it in the night of black ignorance, and supine
security, with her vnwealdy body (become so gross and monstrous with the
infinite additions of human Traditions, standing in stead of her many
subtractions and purloynings from the divine truth) is strangled, and become
stone-dead; and on the other side, to charge the reformed Church of having the
dead faith, because she teaches justification by faith only, with outworkes:
but behold a wonder, that any sons of this our dear mother Church should
prove so unnatural and unreasonable, as (and that most impudently, though
withal cunningly, even pretending the doctrine of the Church of England to be
for them, and they for it; a thing too usual) to impute unto her the dead
faith, as whereof she is the teacher, while unto the doctrine of justification
by faith only she adds and presses the doctrine and practice of
sanctification, not only as a fruit, but as a duty springing from the same.
From which impious and senseless reproach while we shall purge our mother, we
shall with one bush stop two gapps: both the wide mouth of Mother Babell,
crying out against us, that by teaching Justification by faith only, we
destroy sanctification, and the impudent mouths of the misbegotten homebred
bratts, that exclaim, we destroy the justification of the true living faith.
And this done, we shall by Gods grace either so convince these men, as to pull
them from their dead faith; or make it so evident to all men, as they shall
confess the dead faith of Belial, or of Baal to be with these men, and the
living faith to be only on our side.

Now the occasion of our taking this task upon us, is this: there is a new
sprung-vp opinion, which not only in this City, but in some parts of the
Country spreading like a Cancer, or gangrene, has infected many, poisoning
them with a schismatic spirit, and not only alienating their minds from, but
opening their mouths against our Congregations and Ministers, so as they
scoff, and scandalize even the soundest and sincearest preaching of the word
of God. They deny any use at all of the moral law, so far as to be a rule of
life and christian conversation, after that a man is once brought to be a
believer in Christ. They allow the law no further use, then as to be a
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, and then farewell law. And if Ministers
Preach and press the duties of sanctification, these Antinomians ieare at
them, yea and rail on them to their very faces, calling them Anabaptists, and
telling them, that they preach the dead faith, and that such goodly doctrines
are good for nothing, but to carry men to Hell.

And for my part, I should not have believed there had been such mouths of
blasphemy in the world, had not mine cares been witnesses of them. And for a
further proof hereof, to make it evident to others also (besides other
writings, which the ringleaders of this Antinomian or lawless sect of Belial
convey and scatter among their Disciples) a letter, written with the chief
ringleaders own hand (for ex vngue leonem) but consigned or subscribed with the
name of one of his prime she-Disciples, and sent to one Mr. T. may suffice to
manifest their virulent spirits to all the world. The copy whereof is here
affixed verbatim; only I have forborne to set down the parties name at large,
but only the first letters of her name; concealing the Masters name, who is
the inditer and writer, altogether. And I follow therein the example of holy
Ierom, who writing to Ctesiphon against the Pelagians, Hieroinmus ad
Ctesiphontem aduersus Pelagianos:
says, No man's name is particularly touched in this small work: we have
spoken against the Master of a perverse opinion, who if he shall be angry, and
shall write again, he shall like the mouse be bewrayed by his own
discovery, and expose himself to receive yet greater wounds in a set pitched
field. And let me also advertise the reader concerning this letter (as also of
others of the like kind, which I have seen) that howsoever it has poison
enough in it, yet it is so ministered in a goulden cup so covered over with
clowdy and obscure words, and so tempered with sugared phrases of scripture, as
that both his Disciples may with the less suspicion and more delight drink it
down, and his just adversaries may have less cause to cast it in his dish, or
to quarrel him, and bring him in Quorum for it.

And that this was the ancient guise of Heretics, the same Hierom tells us in
the same place where speaking to the Pelagian, he says: Nosti etc. Thou know
what thou teach thy Disciples privately, expressing one thing with thy
mouth, and concealing another in thy conscience: and to us who are strangers,
and none of thy Disciples, thou speak by Parables, but to thine own
scholars thou vnfoldest thy mysteries: and this thou boastest thou do,
according to the scriptures, because it is said, Jesus spoke to the people
abroad in parables, and to the Disciples within doors he says, To you it is
given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not
given. And again, Sola haec haeresis, etc. This only is heresy, which
blusheth to speak in public, what it fears not to teach in private. The rage
of the scholars utters the silence of the Masters. That which they have
heard in the chambers, they preach on the house tops; that if they shall please
their hearers, it may be attributed to the praise of their Masters: if it
displease, the fault may be the scholars, not the masters. Ideo creuit etc.
Thus has your heresy increased, and you have deceived many, because you
always teach and always deny. Sententias vestras prodidisse superass est etc:
Hieron.
It is the Churches victory, when you speak plainly, what your opinion is. To
show your opinions, is to subdue them. So Hierome. Now let me appeal to the
consciences of the Disciples of such Masters as we speak of, whither they do
not deliver their documents and lessons in plainer terms, and more perspicuous
amplification in their private schole or chamber by word of mouth, then they
do, or dare do publikly in their loose papers and pamphlets? Let them tell me
wherein they differ or come short of the Pelagians, in the guise of broaching
and venting their opinions, noted by Jerome. And this is the nature and
practice of all heresy, which serpent-like walks with a doubled gate, and
like the snaile puts forth her horns slowly to prove her way, but upon the
least resistance quickly pulls them in again, or iugler-like, playing fast and
loose with his spectators, or like lying Fame, which for fear is sparing at
first, till spreading it self, it find credit and intertainement in the world.

Yet the quick sighted Reader shall find this letter to be not altogether so
even spun, but that it has many knobbs and knots of gross error, which is
ever uneven, and never but unlike it self, sufficiently bewraying a poisonous
mind, and virulent spirit in the author, 2 Timothy 3.5. etc.
being of the number of those, who having a form of godliness, deny the power
thereof; from such turn away. Of which sort are they which creep into houses,
and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And as Iannes
and Iambres withstood Moses; so do these also resist the truth, men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no farther: for
their folly shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also was. All which, how
fully it is verefied and exemplified in the Author we have to deal withal,
this little discourse seconded with the subscription of his own handy work,
will abundantly testifye.

Now because the letter is teadious, so as to answer to every circumstance
would clogge our discourse with many unnecessary and unprofitable matters:
therefore I will epitomize or contract the whole into one brief view, and
pitch upon such points, as the Author stands most upon, and wherein he places
the maine strength of his battalion, And first I will muster up his scattered
skirmishes and brauadoes, And those I find to be divided into two special
companies. The first is a brauado, setting forth his cause with many specious
and glorious titles; as his ascribing it to Gods gracious calling; that it is
the true lively justifying faith which he maintains; (which words he often
repeateth) that it is of the household of true faith; the most holy and
heavenly calling into the true lively justifying faith; that it is the gracious
leauening of the Gospel; that it is the effectual calling to true
christianity, and assured free salvation; that this leaven is the wedding
garment of Christ's perfect holiness and that this is the good and old way
which Abraham walked in; that it is the established protestant doctrine of our
Church of England, grounded upon the word of God, which every one ought to
embrace, if he will be a loyal subject to his Protestant King; again, This
is the Protestant faith, this is the established doctrine of our Church; that
he is as one true Prophet to a great number of false Prophets; that he with a
few more go with a right foot to the truth of the Gospel; such as call the
people to a cheerful, zealous, godly life, only for and by the joy and
excellency of free justification (but mark how) deeply considered; only
those few do apply the law purely and truly; that these are the few foresaid
true ministers of Christ, and (such as follow them) the true believers; that
they only bring in the true means of true sanctification, and of doing all
good works; that these are the true teachers, who do truly establish the
law; that these are the only true ministers, and their followers the only
true people of God; that this doctrine is and may be proved in every point
with two or three plain scriptures, and two or three plain testimonies of
Orthodox Protestant writers. These and the like be the glorious guildings,
wherewith he does so fairly inammile his leaden cause, which anon will come
to the Test.

The second company, wherewith he skirmisheth all along, is of such reproaches,
as he casts upon all those that are adversaries to his opinion. I take them in
order as they lie. That to avouch the contrary is a sinful prejudice of Gods
truth; that it is a blaspheming of the true lively justifying faith; such are
too much leauened with the sour leaven of the deuouter sort of Pharisees,
which with the false brethren among the Galatians leauened and corrupted the
faith of the Galatians; Thus the pentificians, where they find certainety of
Salvation, they call it presumption, etc.
and that with a conceited holiness of doing and keeping the moral law; this
is a dangerous leaven of the Pharisees, which under the visour, and conceit and
opinion of sincerity and obedience to God, and zeal of God, is but hypocrisy;
Christ's marriage garment is now a days eagerly opposed, and subtly betrayed
with a Iudasses kiss; in this regard these are the perilous times, wherein men
and women are ever learning, and never able to come to the truth of the
assurance of their free salvation, and that there is in a manner now no faith
on the earth, because the dead faith, before God, is no faith; although it be
varnished and gilded over with a blind prepostrous zeal, and opinion of
obedience, and walking in all gods commandments, as Paul before his conversion
was in this blind zealous dead faith (which phrase is very frequent with him)
that it is another Gospel; that the blind zealous dead faith thinks it
knows something, when it knows nothing as it ought to know, that they are not
some few teachers among us that trouble the people of God by Preaching another
Gospel: but (especially when God means to punish an ungrateful Church and
Nation) many false teachers; This great prophet, Iwis.
as of old, there are many hundred false Prophets to one true Prophet; hanging,
relying, and depending, yea bragging of their obedience, works, and weldoings,
and keeping of the law; these bad ministers and teachers that trouble the
people of God are, and for the iuster judgment and scourge of the great
unthankful multitude ever have been the greatest multitude; and these are
divided into two sorts: the first sort are such, as are evil beasts, slow
bellies, that use to preach a little for their living sake, and for their
belly, but care not for the saving of souls, but for their ease, their pomp,
and worldly esteem; and those ministers make only Hoggschristians; that
trampling free justification and the Pearls of the Gospel under the feet of
their durty affections, do care for nothing, but rooting in the earth, and
filling the belly: but the other sort of bad teachers, although their right eye
also of true faith be out, and do more deeply delude themselves and others
in the dead faith, yet they have the light of nature more strongly stirring in
them, described Romans 2.14.15. where it is said, that the Gentiles which have
not the law do by nature the things contained in the law, which show the
effect or work of the law written in their hearts, their consciences also
bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing them, that is, with fear of
punishment, when they do ill, and will preach it, as the true Gospel I
warrant you: and excusing them, that is, hoping to speed well, when they do
well; and this light of nature they varnish over with titles of the Gospel,
whereby especially young Ministers being carried with a preposterous zeal of
Gods glory, Romans 10.2.3. in works and conceited weldoings, they slight over
faith, and free justification with a wet finger, thinking with the Papists by a
carnal understanding of them, that they are quickly, or rather learned too
fast, and so do preach neither true law, nor true Gospel, but a corrupting,
blending and marring of both law and Gospel; whereby they put out the right
eye of the greatest multitude of zealous professors, they drown them with
themselves in the dead faith, and instead of a true faith in Christ's
righteousness, do make them to rely and hang upon their own holiness,
works, and well-doings, whereby people are ever troubled in conscience; or
else glory with the Pharisees Luke. 8.11. in a prepostrous, false, bastard
sanctification, and Anabaptisticall mortification, and obedience, in doing the
law of God, flowing from no true love or charity; and so, as the former
profaine Ministers do make dogg-christians; so greedily feeding upon the
fifthy pleasing carrion of the secret lurking vain glory of their own
holiness, obedience, works, and well-doings; that these most Iudas-like and
traitorously trample the pearl of free justification, and free grace under the
feet of their Pharisaicall affections, and do not only fall a barking like
dogs at the few Meaning those of his Antinomian and lawless sect.
foresaid true Ministers of Christ, and so trouble the true believers with all
manner of caluminations, raylings, and slanderings, as that they are against
sanctification, and good works, whereas they only bring in the true means of
true sanctification, and of doing all good works; and that those true teachers
destroy the law, when they truly stablish the law; and with suchlike
innumerable caluminations; but also stick even violently like dogs to fly in
the true Ministers and people of Gods faces, and are ready (if they can) to
tear out their very throats, with bitter hatred, and cruel persecution; are
not these truly Christ's dogg-christians? the Disciples of such false masters
plainly declaring, that whilst they contend for the law, they are both in
words and deeds the greatest destroyers of the law, and that their bragging
obedience is most grievous disobedience, all their holy sanctification is
dubble sin and iniquity, and that their whole worship of high esteem with men
is idolatrous and abomination before God, traitorous to their King, and
dangerous to the betraying and destruction of their whole Country and Kingdom,
wherein such live. Therefore in my hearty love, and in the sincerity of my
bettered affections, I pray you take heed of this blind, zealous, dead faith,
and content not your selves in the carnal knowledge of free justification, etc.

Thus far of his skirmish. Wherein thou may (good reader) observe how he
magnifieth himself as the only true Prophet opposed by many hundred of false
Prophets; those he ranks together with their hearers, and several
congregations, into two companies: the one a heard of hoggs, the other a
kennell of dogs: and of these two he makes up the universal body of the
Church of England, as which God has given up to be plagued with such
ministers of the blind dead faith, as his usual manner of language is to call
it. So as in sum he makes the Church and nation of England to be an accursed
Isle of hoggs, and dogs. Again, for all this, note how sliely, like the
subtle serpent, he seeks by insinuation to patronize his doctrine under the
authority of the Church of Englands established doctrine, as grounded thereon,
and consonant thereunto, and so consequently under the Kings protection: (a
pestilent piece of policy and practice) though by necessary consequence, he
makes the Defender of the faith no better, (that which my very thought
abhors) then one of his hogg, or dogg-christians: and on the other side
labors to make all his adversaries odious, as being in their doctrines enemies
to the King and State; (a notable practice of heretics in all ages) and such
are all Ministers in Court, City, Country, all Courtiers, Citizens,
Countrymen, that follow not this man in his conceited true lively faith.

Come we in the next place to his maine battalion, which he rangeth into 3
squadrons. Namely he sets down the state of the doctrine in 3 Propositions,
which he calls his 3 Protestant positions. The first is: that the horrible
filthiness of sin is such to Gods infinite, pure, and righteous nature, that
God cannot but abhor, curse, and detest the creature, that has any sin in
his sight: as these, and such like scriptures teach: Deuteronomy. 27.26. 2. Pet. 2.4.
Romans 5.12.15. Esa. 59 2. Job. 15.16.

The second is: I believe, that for remedy of this my misery by sin, God by the
power of his imputation does, though mystically, yet so truly cloth me with
the wedding garment of his sons perfect holiness, and righteousness, Esa.
61.10. that all my sins, both of my person and works being truly abolished,
not out of me, 1 Ioh. 1.8. that there may be place for faith, Heb. 11.1. Romans
4.18.19. to 21. but yet utterly abolished out of Gods sight Col. 1.22. I and
all my works are of unjust made just before God, that is perfectly holy and
righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of God freely by faith only without
works. And I say, By faith only without works, because only true faith sees
this, and only true faith inioyeth this. And thus by Christ's stripes am I
healed, Esa. 53.5. And so God is well pleased and at peace with me. For being
justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. And am truly blessed,
Romans 4.6. For as many as are of this faith of free justification, are blessed
with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.8.9. and shall be certainly glorified: for whom
God justifies them he also glorifieth, Rem. 8.30. All which Protestant
position of free justification is abundantly and clearly taught by these and
such like scriptures: Esa. 43.25. Esa. 44.22.23. Ioh. 1.29. Heb. 1.3. Heb.
9.26. 1. Ioh. 1.7. Reu. 1.5.6. Dan. 9.24. Romans 3.21.22. Romans 5.17.18.19.21.
Ephesians. 5.26.27. Reu. 3.18. Col. 1.22.23. Romans 8.4. Col. 2.10. Romans 9.30. Heb.
10.14. Esa. 62. Phil. 3.8.9. Tit. 1.15. Heb. 11.4.

The 3 is: my third position is, that this true faith of free justification
does infallibly inflame the heart with true love, Gal. 5.6. which makes the
true believer to break off from; and mortify his former corrupt and profane
conversation, and brings forth a declaratiue obedience, and readiness to every
good work, and a free and cherefull walking in all Gods will and commandments
declaratiuely to manward, which is true sanctification: as these, and such like
scriptures teach, Tim. 2.11. to 15. 1. Ioh. 3.5.6.9. Ephesians: 2.10. Romans 6. Ephesians.
4.22.23.24. Math. 5.16. This is the Protestant faith; this is the established
doctrine of our Church: these are the 3 positions, that (here he makes the
woman-Disciple to speak) I have too lately received, and which have so changed
me out of the blind zealous dead faith, into the true lively justifying faith.

Thus you have his 3 Protestant positions (as he calls them) set down word
for word. which an indifferent reader, yea a sound Protestant perusing, and
knowing no more of the authors mind, then what is here expressed: he would at
the first sight perhapps take all for harmless and sound doctrine. But when
he shall consider how all these positions (as Protestant as they be) stand in
opposition to all that doctrine, which is generally taught by the most sound,
learned, and orthodox Divines in England, and so (I may safely say) in all the
world: then he may well suspect a Pad in the straw, and a serpent to lurk
under the green leaves, and some thing more in it, then at the first appears.

For touching the first position: What one Protestant Divine does not hold and
teach, that sin is most detestable to God, which his pure eyes cannot behold,
and that it makes a man odious in Gods sight? Witness the bitter and cursed
death of the son of God himself, which he suffered for sin; otherwise we had
all remained under the curse, left to eternal perdition, the just punishment
and reward of sin, if it had not bin removed by Christ. So as herein the author
has no color of accusation against his hoggs and dogs, his adversaries: but
this first Position serves only as an usher to lead in the rest, or as a
harbinger to take up the best rome in men's conceit for the rest of the train
by prepossessing the readers mind with an expectation of suitable doctrine in
that which follows. Number, 23.8.
Wherein we shall find, that he plays but the cheater, who showing one piece
of good gold out of his purse would persuade his gull, that his purse is full
of such, when all the rest is but counters, or counterfeit gold double guilt.

For the second position: what Protestant Minister of the Church of England, of
what rank soever, be he reckoned among his hoggs, or among his dogs, that
holds not, and teaches not, that the only remedy to remove man's misery by
sin is Jesus Christ, his death and passion, his obedience active and passive,
his whole righteousness freely imputed of God to every true believer? What
Protestant, Divine, or other, but holds justification to be by faith, freely
without works? And that those whom God iustifyeth, he so acquiteth them in
abolishing their sin, that he remembers it no more, but casts it behind his
back, sees it not any more, in as much as he does graciously for his sons
sake not impute it to them. So as what needs all that heaping up of places of
scripture? as if none but the Author took notice of them: or as if his
doctrine were so unknown or doubted of, as it needed such a cloud of proofs.

Yet some particulars in this position would be a little talked with all. As
1. where he says, That all sins in the believers are utterly abolished out of
Gods sight, by being not imputed. This is most true. Yet it puts me in mind
of that which I heard long ago scattered abroad by this very Author, that God
sees no sin in his children. Which Aphorism taken up of the vulgar, may
breed in them, that believe not, presumptuous thoughts, and resolutions void
of the conscience of sin. Therefore this point would be a little opened. True
it is, God sees no sin in his believing children, for which he inflicteth the
curse, or any satisfactory penalty upon them. Thus when Balack would have had
Balaam to curse Gods people, he answered, How shall I curse, where God has
not cursed? And v. 19. God is not as man, that he should lie, or repent; has
he said, and shall he not do it? Behold I have received commandment to
bless; and he has blessed, and I cannot reuerse it. And he renders the
reason: He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen
preuersenesse in Israel; the Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King
is among them. Surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor divination
against Israel. For Christ has borne Isreal's sin, in him has God, the Judge,
fully punished it, his justice is fully satisfed for all Isreal's debts. So that
all being satisfied and discharged in our surety, Christ's righteousness and
satisfaction made ours, now God sees not sin in his believing children, as a
judge to punish them: yet he may be said to see as a father, to chastise them.
Or when he chastises his child, he seems to see his sin, though done away
in Christ, and pardoned in Gods Court, to the end his child may come to see
it, and so have the evidence of pardon sealed unto him in the Court of his own
conscience, And this is that, which all sound Protestant Ministers teach and
believe.

A second thing I note in his second position, is, if not an absurdity, yet an
obscure speech: his words are, All my sins both of my person and works are
truly abolished, not out of me: that there may be place for faith. Why? Are
sins abolished actually by imputation, before faith be wrought, that the
abolishing of sin makes way to faith? True it is, Christ has taken away our
sins, and by death abolished death, before we have faith to apply it; for our
faith is from the merit and virtue of his death. Otherwise, I know not what
sense to make of his words; unless he mean that faith alone takes place in
the believer, working and doing all infallibly and freely, (as else where he
expresses himself) without the Law of the ten Commandments:

3 I note a falsehood in it: for he says, All my works are of unjust made just
before God. What these works are, I find in other of his scatered pamphlets:
to wit all natural, civil, religious, sanctified actions, which being in
themselves (as he says) foul and filthy, are made perfectly holy and
righteous by free justification. Now this is a thing both imposible, and were
also unjust, for God to do it. It is impossible for God to make a work, that
is unjust to be just. Indeed Antichrist arrogateth this omnipotent, or rather
impotent power, as derived from God, to make ex iniustitia iustitiam,
righteousness of unrighteousness: but Gods omnipotency stretches not to make
an unjust work to be just. For then he might seem to be both improuident, and
unjust, in appointing his son to take away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
in case God could have made of sin no sin by his mere omnipotency. Indeed God
can make a thing to cease to be, or he can make a thing to be, which had not
a being, as he did all the world: but he cannot so abolish a thing, as to
cause the former being of it not to have been a being after it has once
actually been. So of a wicked work; God is so powerful, so good, so just, as
that he cannot make the wickedness to be good: for that implies a
contradiction; but he can and does so abolish the wickedness of our works by
Christ, by not imputing of them; as if it had never bin. But to say, our works
are of unjust made just, this as it is a phrase not used in scripture, so in
the Antinomians sense it tends to the bringing in of a heavenly state of
perfection in this life. For he would infer hereupon that a man once in
Christ, justified, is altogether without sin in Gods sight; abusing that place
of John, 1, Ioh. 3.6, 9. Where he concludes, that the justified man not only
cannot sin, but also abstaineth from all appearance of evil. These are his
very words. And hence is that cursed heresy of the Pelagians, and Pontificians
revived by the Antinomians, that there is such a prefection in this life, as a
man may live altogether without all sin: for all his sins of unjust are made
just, says he. The nomination whereof is a sufficient confutation. For in many
things we sin all, Iam. 3.2. And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves and the truth is not in us. 1 Ioh. 1.8.

4d I note another falsehood, where he says, By faith only with out works,
freely, I am perfectly holy and righteous from all spot of sin in the sight of
God: (and why? (because only true faith sees this, and only true faith inioyes
this. How? are we justified by faith freely, because only true faith sees
this? What if true faith, while during the time of some temptation the exercise
of it is suspended, do not see, nor enjoy the fruit of justification? must we
therefore pass sentence upon our selves, that we are not justified? nay
certainly we are therefore justified from all sin, because God not imputing sin
sees no sin in us: and not because we see and enjoy our reconciliation and
peace with God. For though God be continually pacified toward his faithful
children in Christ, yet do not they always by the act of faith see and enjoy
Gods favor toward them. This was David's case; and is, and may be the case of
every child of God. Yet whenever we do see and enjoy our justification, by
having peace with God through Christ, we do by the eye and apprehension of
faith see and enjoy it. But our seeing and enjoying is not the cause that we
are justified, but the consequent effect and fruit of it, being apprehended by
faith.

3ly For his 3d Position, therein stand his Triarian forces; here his files are
so doubled, and the ranks are so closse, that it seems to be impregnable,
impenetrable. But howsoever they stand thick without, yet they are thin and
hollow within, so that being but once by a wedge divided, they are able no
longer to abide the field. Therefore observing it well, I find sundry
advantages to be taken. First, from his commending of faith in the efficacy of
it, that it infallibly inflames the heart with true love, making the true
believer to break off his former corrupt conversation, etc. Secondly, that he
uses one word twice, to wit, Declaratiue, obedience Declaratiue, and a free
and cherefull walking in all Gods will, and Commandments declaratiuely to
manward. Which may seem to some to be either idle, or a riddle; but we shall
declare the mystery of it by and by. In the mean time, all this hitherto in
his 3d position has no other appearance, but of sound and orthodox doctrine;
agreeable to the Scriptures, and so to the doctrine of our Church, if there be
no more in it, then what the outer rind makes show of. For what Protestant
Church, or what one sound Protestant of our Church does not teach, or believe,
that that most noble and divine Lady grace of true saving and living faith,
does infallibly (to use his own word) inflame the heart with love, which makes
the true believer to break off from, and mortify his former corrupt, and
profane conversation, and brings forth a declaratiue obedience, and readiness
to every good work, and a free and cheerful walking in all Gods will and
Commandments declaratiu^ to manward, which is true sanctification. Herein we
all agree. Whereis the difference then? Yea but the author comes afterward in
the same position, and (although he protest these his positions to be the
Protestant faith, and the established doctrine of our Church) he proclaims a
defyance against the blind zealous, dead faith, as merely opposite to this his
true lively justifying faith, And this dead faith, whose is it? by whom is it
taught? by whom entertained? Even by the universal bulk and body of our
Church, which he deuides into two sides, the left side consisting of profane
sensual hoggs, and the right side of zealous Anabaptisticall Dogs, as he
styles them. Now if the case stand so, that all those protestants generally,
whom he calls dogs, and hoggs do hold the selfsame doctrine in truth, as
the author setts down in words, and yet theirs is the blind zealous dead
faith, and his the truly lively justifying faith: it concerns us a little
more narrowly to examine his words, to see whither some mystical sense be not
couched in them; or whither he has dealt not so heartily, nor so ingeniously
(as by his roauing and rauing language may justly be suspected) but has kept
up some reseruations as precious pearls; which if he should vent among so
many hoggs and dogs, as he lives amongst, he might justly fear, lest the one
sort should, and that worthily, trample them under their feet, and the other
turn upon him, and all to tear him. But now it being brought to the vpshot,
whither he, or we have, the true living justifying faith: he must permit us
perforce (we bringing our warrant from God) to mak^ a privy search, and to
rifle his Cabbinet, to see whither he have this Pearl of the Kingdom, yea,
or no. Nor are we engaged to do this in regard only of our faith toward
God, as we are Christans, but also of our fidelity and loyalty to our King the
Lords Anointed, as we are subjects, for as much as he challenges all men,
that he that will be a loyal subject to his Protestant King, ought to
embrace this doctrine of faith, which he only, the A per se Doctor, does teach.

Wherein then is the maine difference between us, that makes his the only
true lively justifying faith, and ours the blind, zealous, dead faith? Surely
in this; that his faith is so lively, active, vigorous, and potent, perfect,
and complete, that of it self it produces all the fruits of sanctification,
without having any thing to do with the word of God, especially the moral
law, as a rule of our actions, or as a glass of our imperfections: when as we
on the other side acknowledge, that our faith at the best estate during this
life, is not so perfect, and every way complete, but as a lamp it needs the
continual supply of the holy oil of Gods spirit of grace, to cause it to
flame forth the more in the works of sanctification, which grace of the spirit
is ministered and supplied unto us by the Ministry of the word of God, as the
Oyle-pipe through which it runs: and for as much as in the state of grace
and faith, we know but in part, and prophecy in part, and consequently our
faith is imperfect, being mingled with much ignorance; therefore we have need of
the Moral law, whereof both the old and new Testament are a large commentary,
both as a rule whereby to frame our thoughts, words, and works, and also as a
glass, wherein looking the face of our souls, and beholding our speckes and
imperfections, we may get them washed in the fountain of Christ blood, and may
make straight paths unto our feet, Heb. 12, i3:
least that which is lame be turned out of the way, but rather that it be
healed. This is that perfect law of liberty, wherein who so looks, and
continues therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work
this man shall be blessed in his deed: Iam. 1.25. This is that glass, 2 Cor.
3.18.
wherein we beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same Image
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. So far are we from
holding a state of perfection of faith in this life, as though our faith could
do all things of it self, and did not need a daily supply of grace, which
must be procured by the word of God, either preached, or read, or meditated
and conferred upon, and that also by the means of prayer, Lord increase our
faith. But this our Adversary shutts out the law quite, as out of date to a
true believer, and of no use at all, not so much as to be a rule of life and
conversation; his lively faith does all, and has noe need of the word of God
to direct or assist it.

Now that this is the sum of his doctrine concerning his lively faith, ye
may gather from his own words, saying, faith infallibly inflames the heart
with true love, making the true believer to break off his former corrupt
conversation etc. This word Infallibly, implies, that faith does by a continued
and uninterrupted act inflame the heart with love to do all works of
sanctification, and so it has no need of Gods word as a rule to be guided
by, but the spirit, is instead of the word. But you will say, So much is not
expressed in the letter. True. But you must know that this is the doctrine,
which he privately instilleth into his Disciples. As in one of his scattered
writings I find these words, that this faith of free justification does cause
us to walk infallibly in the steps of the works of our father Abraham,
whereby like Abraham, freely without the law of the ten Commandments, we
walk holily, righteously, and soberly in all Gods Commandments declaratiuely
to manward. Yea coming sometimes to contest with me, and to charge me for
preaching the dead faith, himself did utter so much to me by word of mouth,
that after a man is once enlightened by faith, the spirit guides him, so as he
has no need of the word, or of the Moral law for a rule to direct him. This
Doctrine is so familiar among his Disciples, as they profess it, and are proud
of it, so far are they from making scruple or dainety of it, as once to deny
it. So that this is one of the marks and properties of his lively faith, that
it has no need of the Moral Law to be a rule unto it in point of
conversation, or in the works of sanctification; otherwise neither is it the
true lively faith, nor this the true sanctification.

A second property and prerogative of this his lively faith is this, that it
owes no obedience to the Moral Law in point of duty. He denies the works of
sanctification to be duties. What are they then? Fruits, says he. So say we
too; fruits they be, yet duties too. Here is the difference then. Because we
say the fruits of faith are duties, therefore he says ours is the dead faith.
All this he has avouched, and that most vehemently (as his manner is) to my
face. And howsoever he has not in plain words expressed so much in this his
letter, as being more shy and cautelous what he publishes abroad, having been
hampered by me and others, and puzzled with some arguments which he could not
answer, but said he would answer them when they were written: Yet ye may
easily gather so much out of his writing. For he calls the obedience of a
believer only declaratiue, and to be done declaratiuely to manward. Note it
well. This declaratiuely to manward excludes all duty to Godward. For else what
use is there in this place either of Declaratiue, or much less, To manward?
For all obedience in conversation is declaratiue: and all declaratiue is to
manward. So as all this man's obedience is to manward, in point of declaration,
but none to Godward in point of duty. For if it be of duty in obedience to
Gods law, then his faith also should be the dead faith. But herein stands the
prerogative of his true lively faith, that as it does not so much as reflect
the eye upon the moral Law, as to learn obedience from the rule thereof: so
much less does it acknowledge it owes any obedience thereunto as a duty to
God.

On the contrary we for holding and teaching, that the Moral Law, and so Gods
word stands not only for a rule of direction for sanctified obedience, but
also requires of the faithful a cheerful yet dutyfull conformity thereunto:
we (I say) for this very cause must hear, Hoggs, or Dogs, Hogg-christians, or
Dogg-christians, as holding the blind, zealous, dead faith. So thus stands the
state of the question between us about the living and the dead faith, and
herein we come now to join issue.

First then we are all agreed on both sides, that the true lively faith is no
other, but that whith the scriptures teach and allow for the true lively faith,
which promised, and granted, I argue thus.

That faith, Proposition.
which the Scriptures teach and allow for the true lively justifying faith,
that, and no other, is the true, lively, justifying faith.

But the Scriptures teach and allow that, and no other, Assumption,
for the true, lively, justifying faith, which resting only on Christ for
justification by the only imputation of his righteousness, does
notwithstanding look upon the Moral Law of God as a rule of Christian
conversation, and sanctification, acknowledging the conformity thereunto as a
duty which God requires of every true believer: according to that, Luke
1.74.75. That we being delivered from the hands of our enemies, should serve
him, etc.

Therefore this faith and none other is that, which the Scriptures teach and
allow for the true lively justifying faith.

The Proposition is undeniable. The Assumption I prove. And first from the very
giving of the Moral law in mount Sinai. For it was given in, and by, and under
Christ the Redeemer. Deuteronomy. 18.18.
As the Apostle says, It was given in the hand of a Mediator: which Mediator
was personally Moses: but typically Christ, of whom Moses was a type and
figure. And Christ was that heavenly Exo. 25.40. Heb. 8.5,
Pattern or Antitype, according to which were all those things delivered to
Moses in the Mount; yea not only the Ceremonial Law, but also the Moral Law
given by Christ himself, where he says, I am the Lord thy God, which has
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage? whereupon
follows, Thou shall have none other Gods before me. Thou shall not make etc.
For these words (I am the Lord thy God, whicb brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage,) are a preface to the whole Decalogue or
ten Commandments, setting forth the Author of them unto us, not only by his
name Jehovah, but by that near relation of Confederacy, or Covenant of grace
made to us in Christ, saying, Thy God. And that this is the very Covenant of
grace made to us in Christ, under which the Law is given, appears by this,
that the words of the Preface contain not only a history of that peoples
temporal deliverance from the Egyptian bondage: but also, and especialy the
mystery of the Redemption of all the true Israel of God by Christ, or their
spiritual deliverance from the bondage of sin and Satan. This is a thing most
clear, though few observe it. For was not the Paschall Lamb slain, and the
blood sprinkled upon all Isreal's door posts, and the Angel passed over them,
and Egypts firstborn were slain, and Gods firstborn delivered? And was not
Christ prefigured thereby, as the Lamb slain from before the foundation of
the world? Yea all those passages of Gods people from Egypt to Canaan came to
them in Types, as the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 10:
Besides other types, observe here two notable ones, which jointly are pregnant
to our purpose: first of Christ's ascension: secondly, of sending the Holy
Ghost. 1. the history in Exodus well observed makes it plain, that upon the
40th day after their coming out of Egypt, Moses, Aron, and Hur, went up into
the Mount, where Moses hands are by Aron and Hur supported, while Ioshuah with
Gods people fight against Amaleck. Now Moses the Prophet, Aron the Priest and
Hur signifies a Prince, and he was of the family and tribe of Judah.
Hur the Prince (for so was his name by interpretation) all put together, were
a type of Christ, who on the fortith day after his resurrection, ascended into
the Mount of Heaven, where, as our Prophet, Priest, and Prince, he holds up
the hands of his intercession for his Church militant, while she fights with
spiritual Amaleck, Sin, Satan, Antichrist, the World, the Flesh, etc. The
other Type I note, was just 10. days after, which from Egypt makes 50. days,
and that was the giving of the Law in Mount Sina, Acts. 2,
and therefore called the Jews Pentecost, and we know, that on the day of
Pentecost just 50 days after Christ's Resurrection, and 10 days after his
Ascension, did the Father and Christ send down the Holy Ghost in his manifold
gifts and graces, to lead his people into all truth, and to reveal fully the
Law of Christ unto them. Now therefore the as the type, and thing typed are
(for their use to the faithful people of God) one and the same thing: So as
the ancient Isralites did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all
drink the same spiritual drink, 1. Cor. 10.3.4.
for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them; and that Rock was
Christ: So that giving of the Law in Mount Sina, being a type of the coming
down of the holy Ghost bringing and revealing the Law of Christ to his Church
both of them in sum and use are to the faithful one and the same law; for
though they differ in the manner of administration, and in the measure of
manifestation, yet not in the matter it self, Christ being the sum and
matter of both. And thus we clearly see, that the Moral Law given in Mount
Sina, being given by Jehovah our God in Christ the Redeemer, and that under the
covenant of grace, being given to the Israel of God in the old Testament, to
which the coming down of the Holy Ghost in the new Testament fully answers;
that it remains as a perpetual rule of a holy life to all Gods people to the
end of the world. So that here, by the way an invincible argument is hence
drawn, to prove the perpetual morality of the sabbath to the end of the
world, against all Antisabbatarians, because it was given under the covenant of
grace to be kept. But we will reserve the further discussing of this point to
the choice of all, least the intermingling of it here should interrupt the
maine matters in hand.

Objection. But the Apostle says, The law is not of faith, How then comes the
Law to be given under faith?

Answer. The Law, in that place, is to be taken for the first Covenant, to
wit, of works, given to Adam in Paradise in the state of innocence; which has
no communion with faith belonging to the second covenant, namely, of grace. But
the Law, as it was given in Mount Sina, the literal veil being removed, was
not delivered as the first Covenant, but as a rule of conversation to the
faithful under the second Covenant.

Objection. But the Apostle calls the giving of the Law in Mount Sina the first
Covenant in opposition to the second. as Agar to Sara, the bondwoman to the
free, Sina to Sion and Jerusalem.

Answer. The Apostle compares it so only in regard of the literal killing
sense, to which the Carnal Jew was captiuated, and thereby slain, while not
looking unto Christ the Redeemer, that brought his people out of the spiritual
Egypt and bondage, they sought to be justified by the works of the Law, which
Saint Paul beats down the to ground in that Epistle to the Galatians. But to
the believing Jews the Moral Law was none other, but the sweet yoke and
light burden of Christ, while they behold him as it were on the top of Jacobs
ladder a Redeemer of his people by his own innocent blood, whereby he
expiated all their breaches of the Law, fulfilling the Law for them. And in no
other regard does the Law in Mount Sina, and that in Mount Sion stand opposite,
but as the letter to the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6. while the carnal Jews could not
diserne the pith of the spirit under the bark of the letter: or by way of
comparison, the one excelling the other in the manner and measure of
mynifestation, as 2 Cor. 3.10. Whereupon the learned and judicious Calvin upon
those words, Gal. 4.24 faith, that the Jews liberty was hidden under the veil
of ceremonies, and of the whole economy, or dispensation of the Law, by which
they were then governed: So that in external show nothing but servitude
appeared. Yet the servile generation of the Law hindered not, but that the godly
fathers, who lived under the old Testament, had for their mother the spiritual
Jerusalem, which is free. ^o that it was partly the Jews blindness, and
partly the veil covering those Mosaicall mysteries, which made that Law in
Sina seem to be no other, but the Covenant of works made with Adam in his
Innocence.

Question. But here by the way it may be asked, wherein does the first
Covenant, and the second chiefly differ?

Answer. There are sundry opposite differences between the two Covenants.

1 The first Covenant was of man's works: the second of Gods grace, and these
two in the point of justification are opposite one to the other. Romans 11.6.

2ly The first covenant was made with Adam, and all his posterity universally:
the second only with Abraham's seed, called the woman's seed. Genesis 3.15. to
wit, Christ, and all the Elect. so Romans 4.1.

3ly The first covenant stood upon man's own righteousness, the second stands
upon another righteousness, to wit, Christ's rigteousnesse, made ours by
imputation.

4ly The first covenant stood upon the mutability of man's will, so as it was
quickly broken: but the second stands firm upon the sure foundation of Gods
immutable will, good pleasure, and eternal purpose in himself, so as it can
never be broken, being an everlasting Covenant.

5ly The first was a covenant of justice without mercy: the second a covenant
of justice and mercy together, justice fulfilled by Christ, and mercy extended
in and for Christ to all the Elect.

6 The first Covenant had no other reward revealed to the first Adam (from the
Earth earthy) but what was confined to the earthly Paradise: but the second
has the Kingdom of Heaven set open in Christ (the second Adam, the Lord from
Heaven) unto all the Elect.

These and the like differences between the first Covenant and the second well
considered, and conferred together, will plainly show, that the Law given
under Christ the Redeemer in Mount Sina, was not that first Covenant of works.
For besides the fore alleged reasons, there is mention made of Gods mercy in
the second Commandment; and of the promise of the land of the living, the
Kingdom of Heaven tiped in Canaan, in the fifth Commandment. Which mercy and
kingdom were not comprehended in that first Covenant of works. But so much of
the first proof of our Assumption, which was, that true justifying faith
though it rests upon Christ's righteousness only for justification, yet it
looks upon the Moral law as a rule of Christian conversation, and
acknowledges the obedience thereunto as a duty, which God requires of every
true belieuer.

The second proof is in Math. 5. Read for this from the 16. verse to the end
of the chapter.
Where our Master Christ in his divine sermon upon the Mount, expounddeth to
his disciples, and all faithful hearers, and does as it were give them a
Commentary upon the Moral law, which the same Christ delivered to Moses in the
Mount; which he sets before his scholars as a rule of the duties of
sanctification, and christian conversation, Math. 5.20.
in which their righteousness they must exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, otherwise they could not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. But how shall Christ escape the censure, as one that preaches the dead
faith? surely I know not, while his faithful Ministers preaching the same
doctrine, are censured as preaching the blind, zealous, dead faith, and are
called dogs for their labor.

But because Christ preached and pressed the Moral Law as a rule of Christian
obedience, and called that also their righteousness: therefore did he teach,
or mean, that this was their righteousness in the sight of God? Nothing
less. For he that said, Math. 5.20.
Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: said also, When ye
have done all these things that are commanded you, say we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do. Mark, he calls our
obedience to the Law of God our duty: yet so, as we are not thereby justified.
And yet we preach the same doctrine of our Master Christ, must be rated as
Dogs, as preaching the dead faith.

The 3d proof is from that exquisite form of Prayer prescribed by Christ, in
the fifth petition, Math. 6, 12. Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors. All sins are debts to God. All sins are breaches of the Moral Law:
therefore the keeping of the Moral Law is a debt that we owe to God. The
Proposition is Christ's. The Assumption is the Apostles. So as nothing remains
for the Adversary to deny, but the Conclusion.

The fourth proof is from the Apostles words, Gal. 5.6. (that which the
adversary also alleges for the proof of his third position) In Jesus Christ,
neither circumcision avails anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith which
works by love. Love to God, and to our neighbor is a duty we owe to God, and
to our neighbor. But the Moral Law is the rule of this love. Therefore faith
working by love looks upon the Moral law as a rule of those duties of love we
owe to God and our neighbor. That love is a debt, the Apostle proves, To.
13.8. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another; so that is a debt, that we
owe one to another. And if love be a debt to man, then much more to God.
Again, that the Moral Law is a rule of this love, the same Apostle proves
in the same chapter, v. 9. For this, Thou shall not commit adultery: Thou shall
not kill: Thou shall not steal: Thou shall not bear false witness: Thou
shall not covet: and if there be any other Commandment: it is briefly
comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. Love works no ill to his neighbor: therefore love is the fulfilling
of the Law So that the conclusion remains firm, that faith working by love
looks upon the Moral Law as a rule of those duties of love we owe to God, and
our neighbor.

The fifth proof is from the Apostles words Romans 12.1. etc. I beseech you
therefore brethren, by the mercies of God, Proposition,
that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy acceptable to God, which
is your reasonable service: And be not conformed to this world, Assumption,
but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, and acceptable, Conclusion,
and perfect will of God, etc. Now from this general exhortation he
descends to particular duties, as so many branches springing from our
reasonable service of God. From thence to the very end of the Epistle. Whence I
argue thus.

All Christian duties of love to God, and to man are branches of our reasonable
service of God.

But the Moral Law contains all christian duties of our love to God, and to
our neighbors.

Therefore the keeping of the Moral Law is our reasonable service of God.

The Proposition is evident by the whole context of the Apostle in the foresaid
part of his Epistle The Assumption is undeniable, proved before.

The sixth proof is from 1. These. 4, 1. etc. Further more then we beseech you
brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, that as ye have received of us,
how ye ought to walk, and to please God: so ye would abound more and more.
For ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus. For this is the
will of God even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication. The exhortation is very forcible, and full of weight. He presses
it by the authority of the Lord Jesus: he minds them of it, as one of those
lessons he had delivered formerly by word of mouth, and they had received: he
calls it a duty, How ye ought to walk: yea a duty to God, How ye ought to
walk, and please God: he calls it a special commandment which he gave them
by the Lord Jesus as which the Lord Jesus gave him in charge to deliver to
them: he calls it the will of God: he calls it their sanctification.

Now what is all this which the Apostle here aymeth at? What, but this: That
ye abstain from fornication? Whence I argue thus:

Proposition,
Abstinence from fornication is a part of keeping of the Moral Law.

Assumption:
But this abstinence from fornication is a duty acceptable to God, is a doctrine
to be taught by the Ministers of Christ, to be received by the people of God,
is a commandment of the Lord Jesus, it is the will of God, it is our
sanctification, or a fruit and effect of it.

Conclusion.
Therefore the keeping of the Moral Law is commanded of God, of Christ, as a
duty to all true believers.

To what part of this Argument will the adversary answer? To the Proposition?
That he dare not: for the Law says. Thou shall not commit adultery. To the
Assumption? That he cannot; for that is the Apostles, in the fore alleged
place. Therefore I will conclude with this conclusion, That the keeping of the
Moral law is commanded of God and of Christ, as a duty to all true believers.
When I urged this argument, or the as rhis. What soever is Gods will we should
do, is our duty to do: But the doing of Gods Law is Gods will we Should do,
therefore it is our duty to do Gods law, so far as we are able. Now all
this is plainly concluded by the Apostle. This is the will of God even your
sanctification, that ye should abstain from fornication. To abstain from
fornication is a part of keeping the Moral Law, and what is true of a part, is
true of the whole, as Iam. 2.10, 11.
like in form syelogisticall, out of this very place of the Apostle, to this
our adversary occasionally face to face, and had, to satisfy his demand
repeated it over twice or thrice: he could not give a present answer, but
desired to have it written down. But I expect not an answer, because none can
be given to this which is here written.

No, can he not in all his budget find an answer? does he not (as I hear
he was wont to do at least) carry his trunk-hose full farsed and stuffed with
Protestant Authors, as Luther, Zanchee, Paraeus, with sundry others of good
note, that with their grave authority and reverend names he may the more easily
impose upon his credulous and ignorant Disciples, who admire that most, which
they understand least: cannot he out of all these beat out an answer to these
things; For of these he braggs much in the conclusion of his letter. But till
he can bring some, I will content my self to bring his belweather Author,
even Luther, whose no less puissant, then elegant, and heavenly speech
(wherewith I will for this time conclude this short discourse) shall run full
butt upon, and push down all that he has said for his pretended, counterfeit,
false, heretical, scandalous, Anabaptisticall, libertine faith: Luthers words
are: Admittimus quidem Mosen legendum, and audiendum a nobis, vt predictorem
and testem Christi. Deinde vt petamus ab eo exempla optimarum logum and morum
Cetaerum dominium in conscientiam nullo modo concedimus ei; ibi mortuus et
sepultus esto; nemoque sciat vbi sepulchrum eius sit: we indeed admit of Moses
to be read and heard of us as a Prophet and witness of Christ: Again, that
we may fetch from him examples of good laws and manners. But dominion over
the conscience (to a man in the state of grace, as Romans 6.10.) we by no means
yealde him; there, let him be dead and buried; and let no man know where his
sepulcher is. So Luther. And in his argument upon the Galatians: Sum quidem
peccator, etc. I am indeed a sinner according to this present life, and the
righteousness of it, as the son of Adam where the Law accuses me, death
reigns and will devour me: but above this life I have another
righteousness, another life, which is the Son of God, who knows not sin
and death, but is righteousness and life eternal: for which also this dead
body of mine shall be raised up again, and freed from the bondage of the Law
and of sin, and together with the spirit it shall be sanctified. So both these
remain while we live here, the flesh is accused, exercised, made sad and
contrite with the active righteousness of the Law: but the spirit reigns,
rejoices, and is saved by passive righteousness; because it knows it has
the Lord sitting in heaven at the fathers right hand, who has abolished the
Law, Sin, Death, and has t^ampled under feet all evil things, has led them
captive, and tryumphed over them all. So he.

Now God forbid, that I should glory, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, Gal. 6.14.
and I unto the world.

For in Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but
a new creature.

15
And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

I thought here should have bin an end. But as the Proverb is, 16
One absurdity begets a thousand; as one of Lerna his 7 heads being cut off, 3
grew in the place thereof. Parua m^tu primo, mox sese attollit in auras, Ingred
turque solo, et caput inter nubila condit. Monstrum horrendum ingens, etc.
Virgil. Aenead.
Such is the nature of heresy, which of a small seed grows to be an hiddeous
monster, if it be not strangled in the first conception. Like Fame, which for
fear at first is small: but finding entertainment with Dame Credulity and
loquacity, grows bold and big upon it. Or like a small leprous spot in the
beginnig, which quickly runs over the whole body. Or like a drop of sweet
poison, which at first goes pleasantly down, but in a short time insinuates
it self to the infecting of the vital spirits, and ceasseth not, till it has
wrought its mortal effect. Or like a Gangreene, or like a Canker, as the
Apostle compares it. This Antinomian leprosy does spread, and get strength,
and boldness every day, even unto impudency and madness.

And the reason it finds so many disciples to embrace it, because cutting off
sanctification, denying it to be a duty, (as one of their Disciples said, Away
with this scuruy sanctification.) and putting all upon an imaginary faith, and
perfection in Christ: it becomes so much the more plausible to flesh and
blood, which is so prone and ready to listen after any doctrine, that gives
liberty to their untamed lusts. So that when such Disciples hear their
teachers say, Believe only, and so be merry in Christ, sing care away to the
duty of sanctification, away with mortification, Repent no more, for ye are
perfectly justified, God sees no sin in you, ye are perfectly saved, and the
like: no marvel if being carnal, and they hypocritical persons, they catch
at such doctrines, as may nuzzle them in their carnal lusts, as is too
apparent by the fruit which grows necessarily from such a root of
bitterness, whereby many are defiled.

For persuade a man once, that being in Christ, and so justified from all his
sins, Montanistae omnem panitentiae virtutem e medio sustulerunt. Hieronead
Marcellinam. Et lib. 2. adu^rsus Iouinianum. se Centuria: 2. c. 5.
he has no more need of repentance: and what a flood-gate is opened to all
impiety, when there is noe more conscience of sin? Thus they revive the heresy
of the Montanistes, who denied repentance to be needful. This they ground
upon Heb. 6.11. Not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works.
Whence they conclude, that believers have no more to do with repentances,
where as the Apostle there speaks of the Doctrine, not of the practice of
repentance, reproving those Hebrews, that they were no better proficients i^
Christ's school, when instead of being able to teach others, they were still A
B C darians, having need to be catichized in the very common rudiments and
known Principles of Religion, as Heb. 5.12. Again they say, that they are as
pure from all sin in Christ, and as perfect in righteousness and holiness, as
Christ himself is: alleging that in John. 1 John. 4.17. Herein is our love
made perfect, that we have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he
is, so are we in this world. Hence they conclude such absolute perfection to
be in the believer, as in Christ now glorified in heaven. And therefore when
they say, that a believer is perfectly saved in this life, they express
themselves in plain words to mean, that a believer is perfectly glorified in
this life, and that there is noe difference between our state here and in
heaven, but only in our sense and apprehension. I should not (I confess) have
believed, that ever any man, endued with common sense and reason, would have so
much as once conceived, much less uttered such a senseless and monstrous
Paradox, had I not my self heard one of their Antinomian Ministers affirm so
much to me and others together. For I asking him what difference there was
between the state of grace here, and that of glory here after: he answered,
none at all, but in our sense and apprehension. And thereupon another Minister
asking him, whither we were perfectly glorified in this life: he answered, we
were; whereupon I, abhorring such an insolent and Luciferian speech, presently
avoided his company and further speech. To this height of pride are they come,
who teach the empty and windy faith of Justification against Sanctification,
the fruit of a true lively faith. But are we perfectly glorified in this life,
so as it differs not from that in heaven, but in our sense and apprehension?
Then when a justified man sins, it is but in his sense and apprehension, if
that; or rather, they are in this point without sense and apprehension of sin.
Then when we are afflicted, diseased, and the like, it is not so indeed, but
only in our sense and apprehension; because a man perfectly glorified can
neither sin, nor suffer any sorrow, diseases, or death. Yea our faith is no
more the foundation of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen,
we have no longer hope of eternal life, but in our sense and apprehension; For
we are already possessed of the thing hoped for, we are already perfectly
glorified. O senseless stupidity! But they urge, As he is, so are we in this
world; he is pure, perfect, undefiled, therefore are we so to. Therefore, say
they, we are so perfect, as we cannot be more. But St Paul shows plainly
the meaning of St John, saying: 2 Cor. 3, 8.
But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord. Now though from hence they would infer, that we have the same image of
Christ's glory in full perfection: yet the next words (From glory to glory)
plainly show, that though the state of grace be a glorious estate, as being
an initiation of glory, being begun here in the soul: yet we go from one
degree of glory and grace unto another, and never attain to full perfection,
till this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on
incorruption. 1 Cor, 15. Romans 8.29.
So that the image of Christ which we bear upon us here, is a conformity unto
Christ our Head in the participation of his glorious graces, but in such a
proportion, as here we are capable of, and as God has distributed to every man
the measure of faith. And the state of grace is in a perpetual growth here, as
2. Pet. 3.18. Ephe. 4.12.13. Psalm. 84.7 The path of the righteous being a
perpetual progress, like to the morning light, shining more and more unto the
perfect day: Prou: 4..18. But why do I spend arguments against such as deny
undeniable Principles?

But thus we see, how a false and imaginary faith, whereof these men do
dream, begets in them such damnable imaginations, and high presumptions, even
to the destruction of grace, while they would stretch it beyond the line. No
marvel therefore if they abolish quite any further use of the moral law,
sith they deny Sanctification it self, as a duty prescribed and commanded in
the law. Exo. 19.5.6. So that if the Doctrines of these men might prevail,
what could be expected, but a deluge of Atheism and profanesse, and all
lawless licentiousnes and dissoluteness to ouerflow and drown the world? For
they cry down and abolish all duties contained and commanded in the Moral
Law, both toward God, and toward men. Do we think these men can be good
subjects to their Prince, who deny they owe him any honor in the way of duty
enjoined by the commandment, 1 Pet, 2, 17,
Honor thy Father and Mother; whereof one maine branch is, Honor the King?
And if they do not of duty honor their King on earth, how shall they honor
their King in heaven? To instance in the fourth commandment: they quite
abrogate the Moral Law to believers, and consequently the fourth commandment,
which is the sanctification of the sabbath day.

But they reply, that the Jewish Sabbath Day is abolished, and therefore
Christians have nothing to do with the commandment, no more then the rest of
the Decalogue. I answer: It follows not: for though the Jews sabbath day be
abolished, yet there remains a sabbath to be kept of Christians, seeing that
the commandment of the sabbath is Moral, and so no less perpetual, then all
the rest. For if none of the rest of the commandments be abolished: then
neither the fourth And so though the ceremonial part of the Jews sabbath be
abrogated, yet not the morality of it.

Ob. But how, or wherein was the Jews Sabbath day ceremonial?

Answ. In two regards; first, because it was appointed them to be a memorial
of their deliverance out of Egypt, as Deuteronomy. 5.15. where the Lord says. And
remember that thou wast a servant in the Land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy
God brought thee out thence through a mighty hand, and by a stretched out arm:
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day. So that the
Jews were commanded to keep the sabbath day in a thankful remembrance of
their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage; therefore the Lord thy God
commanded thee to keep the Sabbath day.

Ob. But in Exo. 20.11. the Sabbath day has relation to the Creation.

Answ. True, yet herein Deuteronomy Moses tells them, that even then, when this
commandment was given the Lord had a special respect to the deliverance from
Egypt; and therefore he says, the Lord commanded thee, as referring to the
time past, when the Law was given. And in that respect the Sabbath day was to
them ceremonial. Secondly in regard of some ceremonies proper (as some say) to
that Nation, being inhabitants of the Land of Canaan, a hot climate; as the not
kindling of a fire on the Sabbath, as also the not dressing of their meat in
that day, which was in remembrance of the Manna in the desert: whereof they
gathered enough for the sabbath on the day before, God miraculously and
plentifully providing it for them. But in very truth, and (so far as I can
yet conceive, till I be convinced otherwise by better reasons, then I have yet
seen) that observance of not kindling a fire, nor dressing of meat on the
sabbath (which was lawful and allowed upon all other festival days) was not
so much proper to that people in regard of their hot Country and climate, as in
regard of that Mosaicall Pedagogie and dispensation, under which that only
people and Church was subiugated and subjected, so as this not kindling a fire,
and not dressing of meat, was a mere Ceremony Mosaicall, a type of the
eternal sabbath, brought in by Christ in his resurrection, which puts an end
to all sabbaticall ceremonies, as these are, which typed the estate of the
everlasting sabbath, wherein is no need of bodily provision. For in heaven,
there shall be neither kindling of fire, nor dressing of meat, nor the like.
Whereupon Isychius in leuit. lib. 6. cap. 19. speaking of the Omer of Manna,
which every one was to gather every day, and two before the sabbath, An Omer
(says he) was so much, as could feed one man. Hereby he would teach and
instruct them of the intelligible rest, and end of the world, because then it
was impossible to boil, or work, or gather. Some again limit the not
dressing of meat to the time of their travel in the Desert 40 years, during
the Manna, and not to extend to the Land of Canaan, where the Manna ceased.
And this lis not improbable, since their journey in the wilderness was to type
out the time of out heavenly Country, where all the provision for the body
should cease. Some also restrain the not kindling of a fire to the work of
the Tabernacle only (as Vatablus in Exodus 35.3.) but I see no probabillity
hereof, seeing the Priests about the Tabernacle had liberty on the sabbath to
perform their rites, as sacrificing, and the like. Yet (by the way) the
abrogation of these ceremonies ought not Christians to turn into surquedry and
excess of feasting, (as too many do) so abusing their christian liberty: but
to be used with all sobriety, such as may not hinder, but help the holy
spiritual duties of this day by a due refreshing of the body, for necessity,
not for superfluity.

Now these Ceremonies dying together with the whole Mosaicall economy, which
stood in types and Ceremonies, yet the Morality remains a perpetual suruiuer
in, and with, and under the Gospel. For else, if the Morality of the Sabbath
were antiquated and abolished, then also the whole Decalogue. But the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments remain still in force, not only in their
curse and full rigor to all transgressing Infidels, such as are out of Christ,
but also as a rule of holy conversation to all true believers. And that the
Moral Law still remains as a rule of Christian obedience to every true
Israelite, appears by the very manner of giving of it in Mount Sinai. For it
was given by the Lawgiuer Christ the Redeemer of his people, who says, I am
the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the
house of bondage: and thereupon infers, Thou shall have no other Gods before
me, etc. Now the deliverance out of the Egyptian bondage what was it, but a
type of our spiritual deliverance from sin and satan by Christ? And therefore
by his own argument it follows, that the same Moral Law given by and under
Christ to the Jews in the old Testament, is propagated and perpetuated to all
christians in the new Testament, and so consequently the Sabbath, as touching
the morality of it.

Thus the Moral Law is no less a rule to believing christians then it was
once to the believing Jews, all one joint spiritual seed of Abraham, to whose
posterity this Law was given. And thus also by the self same reason, the
fourth Commandment for the sanctification of the sabbath is still in force
with the Christian Church, as well as the other 9. unless (as the Papists have
by their sacrilegious practice nimmed away the second Commandment out of their
vulgar Catechism, and by their corrupt glosses guelded the masculine sense of
it in their Doway Bibles) we will take their part in the polluting and
profaining the Sabbath, by denying the perpetual morality of it, and so leave
but two Commandments for God (according to the Popish acompt) in the first
Table; or rather none at all, when by this means there is noe day allowed for
his service, no nor means to teach us the true worship of the only true God,
and the honor due unto his name, which means is the public Ministry of his
word, together with public and private inuocasion.

So that the whole worship and service of God, and his saving knowledge for
man's salvation (to speak nothing of bodily refreshing, and works of Charity,
for the relief of the poor) having a necessary dependence, as touching the
external means, upon the due observation of the fourth Commandment in the
Morality o^ it: who can deny the keeping of the Sabbath to be Moral, but he
must withal procliame open enmity to Gods worship, and man's salvation;

Ob. But the Sabbath day of the Jews being wholly ceased, as being buried in
Christ's grave, wherein he rested all that day, and so fully kept it: of what
force is it with christians any longer? or what morality remains of it to be
observed by us?

Answ. As the Jews Sabbath day was a precise seventh day, which no doubt was
by successiue revolution observed by Adams generations from the seventh day of
the Creation, sanctified by Gods own rest, (for we read of it, in Exo. 16.
which was before the giving of the Law in Sinai,) but with all had an addition
of a new relation to the typical Redemption from Egypt, as we noted before, in
which regard it was ceremonial: So (as ceremonial) it was subject to be
abrogated, and changed from a Legal, into an Evangelical Sabbath, which the
Scripture calls the Lords day. Although some are bold to deny, that the
Sabbath was at all observed by the Old Church, until Moses time, and so till
the Law was given in Sinai. But this seems to be a groundless opinion, if
not also Godless. For though the Scripture makes no mention of the keeping of
the Sabbath, until Exodus 16.5. etc. yet both that mention goes before the
solemn bidding of it in Mount Sinai, and does also sufficiently infer, that
the Sabbath was in use before that time, as being fiist instituted in Paradise.
For elfs, as a learned Divine of our Church has noted upon this very occasion:
It is absurd for any man to prepare a thing 2000 years, before the use
thereof. And Exodus, 20.11. the very reason and ground of man's observation of the
Sabbath is there given to be Gods own institution of it, which was his
actual sanctifying and blessing of it by his own resting on that day from the
works of Creation. Though otherwise the fourth Commandment, being a part of
the Law written in Adams heart, needed not any express Commandment, more then
the rest did; saving that this has a Memento set upon it, as being most
subject to neglect and profanation: and that the Lord himself was pleased to
assign his own seventh day for rest and sanctification to those former ages.
But to proceed: Here it may be demanded, what is that morality of the fourth
Commandment, which yet is in force with christians? For answer: None will
question (but the Antinomian, who altogether denies the whole Moral Law to be
in force, so much as a rule to believers under the Gospel, the morality of the
Sabbath to be yet of force and use with Christians. Only some differ both
about the manner of it, how it is imposed, and how exacted of christians, and
about the matter of it. For first, they deny that the fourth Commandment has
any thing to do with the Lords day, which is the christian Sabbath. Again
they deny that the fourth Commandment reaches further, then to masters of
families, exempting servants from imputation of sin, in case they work at
their masters command. Thirdly they deny the Lords day is by any divine
institution, humane only, and therefore not of the same force with the fourth
Commandment. Fourthly, (for the matter) they deny that the vacation and
abstinence from servile labor, or the ordinary works of a man's worldly
calling, is any part of the morality of the fourth Commandment, but a mere
ceremony, and so abrogated. Yea they go further, and say, that howsoever the
generality of that Commandment to keep a Sabbath, wherein God might be
honored, was Moral: Yet the speciality of it, namely to keep, First, one day
of seven: Secondly, the seventh: Thirdly, one whole day: Fourthly, with
precise vacancy from all work, was merely ceremonial, and so the
specialities of the Commandment are vanished, though for the generality of it,
it is a law of nature and remains. So they. Here then be sundry things, which
offer themselves to be scanned. And to make way, First where they call the
bodily rest, observed once by the Jews, a point of exact and extreme vacation
from every kind of work, and which christians have nothing to do with all:
This is but a buggbeare, or scarcrow to fright Childish christians from so much
as looking back to the fourth Commandment, in the keeping of the Lords day.
For first an extreme vacation was not exacted of the Church of the Jews; as
in case of extremity, or urgent necessity, they might work, yea for the
saving of a poor Asses life, by pulling him out of the pit on the Sabbath day;
as our Savior conuinceth the carping Jews.

How much more in extremities of more importance, as the quenching of a scath
fire, or defending of their City, or Country, by repelling the inuading, or
beleaguring enemy? yea in such cases not to bestirre themselves, and to use
their utmost labor and skill, not only turned into superstition, but many
times proved their bane and ruin. Among sundry instances in this kind,
Josephus Antiq. of the Ieases, lib. 12. c. 8 soli. 14. 8.
this is one: that the Jews on the Sabbath being assailed by their enemies,
would neither make resistance, nor yet so much as close up their caves mouth to
defend themselves, and so their lives became a spoil to their enemies cruelty.
So superstitiously obseruant were they of the Sabbath, as if God had made it to
be a snare for them, whenever the crafty enemy should take that oppertunity
to invade them so as in case of extreme necessity, as to save life, yea a
beasts life, the Commandment was not strictly obligatory; much more in
spiritual observance, touching Gods worship, as the Priests slaying of beasts
for sacrifice, and the like. Extreme vacation then was not exacted of the
Jews in their keeping of their Sabbath.

Again, we showed before, how the prohibition to the Jews of kindling a fire,
and dressing of meat on the Sabbath was peculiar to that Nation, or rather
Church, and was a type and ceremony. Nor was it extreme, because they lived in
an hot climate, wherein their was no extreme necessity of fire for one day,
which they were to supply: by their spiritual fire of holy zeal in a due
observation of the Sabbath. Though some are of opinion, that this prohibition
of kindling a fire reached only to such fires, as were used about servile
works, and not about their necessary food. But I will not blow the coals of
this controversy in this point at this time, having showed sufficient reason
already of this restraint. Only this I add, if it were a burden, laid upon
the shoulders of that Pedagogy of Moses: it was to teach them and us, to put a
difference between that hard yoke of the Ceremonial Law. Acts. 15.10, and
that sweet yoke, and light burden of Christ, Matthew, 11.30.

In the next place, where they say, that one whole day for the Sabbath, or one
seventh day, or one day of seven, was merely Ceremonial: I would ask them
how the memorial of the Commandment could be kept, without a special time
or day? unless they will say, that the morality, being perpetual, is not tied
to any one day. But seeing the Moral Law cannot be kept by the Church in this
world, without time (for as the Preacher says, Eccle 3.1.
There is a time for every purpose under the Sun) and this time of keeping
the fourth Commandment is limited by God to the 7th day: how can this day be
separated from the Sabbath, as being an inseparable circumstance of the
substance of that Commandment? Yea, so inseparable by divine appointment, as
Gods wisdom did best know the Sabbath cannot be solemnly kept, unless it be
one of the seven, I say not, one fixed day of seven to last for ever from the
Creation to the end of the world without alteration; for so it was ceremonial
in the old Testament: but the proportion of a seventh part of our time decreed
by Gods own institution and perpetually annexed to the morality. And the Lord
who limited a seventh day for rest, and to be kept holy, has nowhere left
it arbitrary to man, to allow what day or proportion of time likes him for
that purpose beyond the number of seven. For as God has reserved a tenth of
our goods (though we owe him all that we have) as sacred to himself, and by
means whereof he sanctifies all the 9 parts to our use: so also a seventh of
our time (though- the whole time of our life is to be spent to his honor) for
the sanctification of our whole life. And both these serve jointly for the more
commodious, complete, and solemn administration of his worship and service,
which also redounledeth not only to our temporal, but spiritual and eternal
good. Nor is it now in man's power to alter the Lords day into any other
seventh day of the week, since it is Christ's own Ordinance, and therefore
vndispensable.

Inuij Praelect: in Gene 2.2
The learned Iunius on Genesis 2.2. concerning the Sabbath thus speaks: Haec
lex, etc. This Law (of the Sabbath) is natural, having a ceremonial
designation of one day affixed unto it. This seventh day, added of God, is not
natural, but positive. A seventh day is natural, and remains, but the
seventh from the creation appointed of God, is positive, instead whereof the
Lords day succeeds in the christian Church, called the first day of the
week, and the Lords day, Reu. 1.10. celebrated, Acts. 20.7. and. 1, Cor, 16.2.
Causa mutationis, etc. The cause of this mutation is Christ's resurrection, and
the benefit of restoring the Church in Christ: the commemoration of which
benefit succeeded the memory of the creation, not by humane tradition, but by
Christ's own observation and institution; who both on the day of his
Resurrection, Et octauo quoque die, and on every eight day, until his
ascension into Heaven, appeared to his Disciples, and came into their assembly.
And the same was done by the constant observation of the Apostles and
Disciples, and of the Church of Christ, to which by the institution and example
of Christ the Apostles delivered the observation of the Lords day which is well
set forth by Cyril. lib. 12. in Johan. cap. 58. by Augustine ad Casulanum, Ep.
86. et ad Ianuarium Ep. 119. cap. 13. And therefore Chrysostom in his fifth
sermon of the Resurrection writteth, that of old in the Primitive Church this
day was called by three names, The Lords day, The day of bread, and the day of
light. The Lords day, because in it, being a solemn memorial of Christ's
resurrection, they attended to his word and worship: the day of bread, because
in it the Sacrament of the Lords supper was administered: and the day of light,
because on it was observed the administration of Baptism, For the ancients
called Baptism (...), illumination and the day of Baptism diem (...), the
day, of lights; and the Baptized were called (...), New illuminates. Wherefore
since the Lords day by Christ's Act, example, and institution, by the most
constant observation of the Apostles and the ancient Church, and by the
testimony of Scripture, has been observed, and put in the place of the Jews
Sabbath: inepte faciunt, etc. They do absurdly, who affirm that the
observation of the Lords day continues in the Church by Tradition, and not by
authority of the holy Scripture, that by these helps they may (si Deo placet)
support the Traditions of men. So he.

Thirdly, where they say, that the generality only of keeping a Sabbath, was
Moral: this generality or morality must either now be quite lost: or else
does necessarily import some special day for christians, wherein solemly to
keep this morality (unless we be bound every moment or day of our life to
keep it) as well as for the Jews of old, by Gods own limitation.

But fourthly they say that the vacation and abstinence from servile labor, or
the ordinary works of a manes worldly calling, is not any part of the morality
of the fourth Commandment, but a mere ceremony, and so abrogated. This is a
strange Paradox. For then the whole observation of the sabbath as touching the
reast of it, was a Ceremony: and where is then the morality of it? stands not
the morality of it in corporal rest, and spiritual exercise? Or else tell us
wherein? Nay certainly that cannot be a mere ceremony, which lasts for
ever. But vacation and rest from bodily labor lasts for ever, even in
Heaven, in the keeping of the eternal Sabbath; as the. Apostle says, Heb:
4.9.10. And Revel: 14.13. And in heaven there is noe pleace for mere
ceremonies. Therefore vacation from labor on the Sabbath is no mere ceremony,
but one special part of the morality commanded in the Sabbath. So that to
rest from labor is of the very essence of the Sabbath, which is therefore
called Sabbath or rest, because one chief part of the observation of it stands
in rest.

Ob. But they object: That the Commandment of the Sabbath is not moral
because it binds not to all times and to every day, as well as one in the
week.

Answ. Though the external solemn rest of it binds but for one day in the
week, yet the due Sanctification of it is such, as it reatheth to the
Sanctification of the whole time of our life, yea to the Sanctifying of our
persons, acsions, affections, etc. by the right use of the means, as the Word
and Prayer. For (as we said before) as God by reserving and consecrating the
tenth of our goods, thereby sanctifies all the 9 parts unto us: So by setting
apart and hallowing the seventh of our time to his service, he extends
sanctification to every day of our life, that therein we might be holy.
Again, affirmative precepts cease not to be moral, because they bind not, ad
semper, to all times: it suffices they bind semqer, all ways, in their due
time and place.

Fifthly, they deny, that the Lords day, the christians Sabbath, has any
relation to the fourth Commandment, of the Sabbath day, as succeeding in the
place of it. And their reason is, because (say they) the Lords day is not by
any Divine institution, but humane only, and therefore not of the same force
with the fourth Commandment. This assertion, and reason is noe less
unreasonable and peremptory, then the former. How? The Lords day not of Divine
instiutio^, but humane only? Ecclesiastical they grant, though Apostolical
they name not; but in no case divine; that they expressly and stiffely deny.
First therefore we will prove, that the Lords day is of divine institution:
Secondly, that it succeeds in the place of the Sabbath, and so beitng of divine
instituiton, has the force of a Commandment. First, that it is of divine
institution, thouigh we have no express Word of Christ, yet we have his Act,
and work for it, Which is ever as good as his word. We showed before, how Gods
Act in his resting in blessing and sanctfying the Sabbath or seventh day, was
his institution. For to what end did he bless and sanctify it? For, himself?
what needed he? No surely for man, for whom the Sabbath day was made to rest
in, as well as the sixth to labor in. For the Sabbath was made for man, says
the Lord of the Sabbath.

This institution was in Paradise. It stands indeed, Genesis 2.2. before the fall
of Adam. But if Adam fell the same day of his Creation, being the sixth day, as
the best Divines think: then it is set by way of anticipation, or Hysteron
Proteron; and so this seventh day began next after the Fall. when the son of
God incarnate was clearly promised, in which respect the Son of man Christ,
was Lord of the sabbath day being the Institutor of it, under whom Adam began
his spiritual life in the observation or sanctification of the Sabbath. And
then (I doubt not) he began to Sacrifice, as he taught his sons afterward,
as we see Genesis 4. it being not improbable, that those skins, wherewith God
clothed Adams shameful nakedness, were of the Sacrifices, which God taught him
now under Christ to offer, as a type of Christ clothing us with the robe of
his righteousness imputed to us, and merited for us by the sacrifice of his
death, which sacrificing shall we deny to be of divine institution, because
we find it not there expressly commanded? Otherwise it had been
will worship, and so abominable, whereas God had respect to Abel and to his
offering. And that he respected not Cain, it was on Cains part for want of
faith. Heb 11, 4 And why should not man then in the state of inocency have a
Sabbath to rest solemnly in, and to be vacant for Gods worship, as he had a
task (though not toylesome) laid upon him to dress the garden, and so much
the more, being now cast out, having a hard and sore toil imposed on him to
till the ground, whence he must eat his bread with sour or brackish sauce,
to wit, the sweat of his face? Other wise, if he had had no Sabbath to rest
in, his state had been most miserable, as attended with incessant toil and
travel. And when (in most likelihood) did Cain and Abell bring their
sacrifices? Most likely on the Sabbath. For the text says Mikets iamim in the
end of the days, which some refer to the end of the year, Gene. 4.3.
as Ex. 22.16. and why not also may it be meant of the end of the week days?
But I will not contend. Thus Adam no doubt, had the Sabbath, not only before
his fall, written in his heart, but after his fall a special day even the
seventh assigned him under Christ the Redeemer, the Lord of the Sabbath And
Gods own act in resting from the work of Creation, and in blessing and
sanctifying the Sabbath day for man's use and comfort, was warrant enough to
make it of divine institution, without any other express Commandment. The
like we say of the Lords day. That which gave it a stamp of divine
institution, was the Lords own Act in blessing and sanctifying this Lords day
with his blessed and glorious Resurrection, when now he ceased from the work
of Redemption, a greater and more glorious work then that of Creation; now
beginning also, and consecrating the eternal Sabbath. So that this very act of
Christ was a sufficient consecration of this day, as the Sabbath of our
Redemption; and therefore justly styled by the Holy Ghost, the Lords day,
because consecrated not only to him, but by him as the author of it. Therefore
also is he rightly entitled Lord of the Sabbath day of the Jews, as alone
having a power to abrogate that, and to initiate this day. For in like manner
the Sabbath is called Gods own Holyday, (Isay. 58.) and the Sabbath of the
Lord our God, (Exodus 20.) which has relation to Christ the Redeemer. Exodus
20.2. to show, that he is the Lord, and institutor of it. So that it belonged
to him alone to cancel the old, and to consecrate a new Sabbath to Christians,
in memorial of a better Creation, and as the entrance and iniatition to the
eternal Sabbath. Again, observe how he honors this day. For the very day of
his Resurrection, his Disciples being assembled, he presents himself
personally unto them, comforting and confirming them with the sensible evidence
of his Resurrection, and breathing on them the gifts of the Holy Ghost. And,
because they should take special notice further of this day, just eight days
after, when this day came about again, he appeared to them the second time
where they were assembled, and standing in the midst of them, as Lord of his
Church, salutes them with his peace, and shows them many signs for the fuller
confirmation of his Resurrection. And yet for the more abundant confirmation of
the consecration of this day, after his Ascension he sends the Holy Ghost on
this very day 50 days after his Resurrection, whose powerful presence was an
evident sanctification of this day by his manifold gifts and graces to his
Church unto the end of the world. And, it is specially to be noted, that on
those days, wherein Christ appeared to his Disciples, and the Holy Ghost
descended, they were all assembled solemnly together in a holy communion in
prayer, and other sacred duties: So that Christ's twice appearing unto, and the
Holy Ghost descending visibly upon his Disciples when they were assembled, and
all upon this day, was warrant sufficient for the Apostles, and so for the
succeeding Churches, to continue the sanctification of this first day of the
week by their holy assemblies, and exercises, as Prayer, Preaching,
administering the Sacraments, Alms etc. They saw, that this was the special
day selected and sealed by Christ, and the Holy Ghost ( For in the mouth of 2.
or 3. witnesses shall every word be established) for public sacred
assemblies, wherein they might expect Christ's presence, by his spirits
influence, in sanctifying his people in their holy exercises on that day.
Hereupon it grew a perpetual Ordinance, not first constituted by Apostolic
authority, but seconded and followed by them in their practice, as Acts. 20.7.
and 1 Cor. 16.2 upon which place Master Perkins iudiciously observes, that
Paul commanded nothing as an ordinance to be observed by the Church, but what
he had from Christ. But to make collection for the poor every Lords day, or
first day of the week, as a consequent or concomitant fruit of other
Sabbath-duties, as Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments, was (says he) a constitution
Apostolic, and so of divine authority; and therefore no mere humane
institution. And we say, that the ground and cause hereof was Christ's
Resurrection. So as it is a gross Solecime in Divinity to admit an Institution
to be Apostolic, and yet to deny it to be of divine authority. Thus the
first day of the week, the Lords day grew to be the day of holy assemblies for
Christians, from that first day of the week, wherein Christ rose again, and
appeared to his Disciples, as we have touched. And from this spring did the
ancient Fathers derive the sanctification of this day, as by so many continued
streams of succession. Saint Augustine says, Dies Dominicus, etc. The Lords
day was not to the Jews, Aug: Ianuario Epis. 119. c 13.
but to Christians declared by Christ's Resurrection, and from that began to be
kept holy. And elsewhere Proepenitur dies Dominicus Sabbato, etc. The Lords day
is preferred before the Sabbath, by the faith of the Resurrection, Aug. Ca
sulano Presbytero Ep. 86.
not by the fashion of refection, or licentiousnes of drunken mirth. And
again, Domini Resurrectio, etc. The Lords resurrection has promised us an
eternal day, and consecrated to us the Lords day; And Ambros, Dominica nobis
etc. De verbis Apost ser: 15-
To us the Lords day is so honorable and sacred, because in it the Savior, as
the sun arising, dispelling infernal darkness, has shined forth in the light
of his resurrection. And for this cause, Ambros: ser: 61:
this day of the men of the world is called Sunday, because Christ the Sun of
righteousness arising, did enlighten it. But what need we seek a cloud of
witnesses, of men, when we have divine Sarrs in Scriptures (though shining in a
dark place, till the day did dawne) which may give us sufficient light to
direct us to this day? For first it is apparent that the seventh day which was
commanded the Israelites of the old Testament to celebrate for the Sabbath, was
given them in memorial of their deliverance from the Egyptian bondage, as we
noted before out of Deu. 5, 15, And thus it was ceremonial and subject to be
changed into another day, to wit, the Lords day, which should succeed in
memorial of our Redemption and deliverance from our spiritual bondage,
whereof that corporal was a type, which Redemption and deliverance was
finished in Christ's Resurrection; and therefore who should have power, but
Christ, the Lord of the Sabbath, to change the Sabbath into the Lords day?

Again, another remarkable place we find in Leu. 23.10, etc. where the
sheafe of the first fruits was to be waued by the Priest before the Lord the
day after the Sabbath. This sheafe of the fruits was a pregnant type of Christ's
rising again, 2 Cor: 15, 20. Leui: 23.11.
the first fruits from the dead. This sheafe was to be waued the next day
after the Sabbath, and not else. This was fulfilled in Christ's resurrection,
which was the day after the Sabbath, and because this Sabbath was chiefly meant
of the Passover, which was a high Sabbath, to be sure, it was a double
Sabbath, (the Sabbath of the Passover concurring together) wherein Christ
rested in the grave. The very next morning was Christ, the first fruits, waued
before the Lord, when in the Earthquake he rose from the dead the first
fruits of them that sleep. This was the sheafe of the first fruits, which
was accepted for us, Rom: 4, 25 Rom: 11.19.
for he rose again for our justification? And if the first fruits be holy,
the lump is also holy. And the meat offering of this day was twice as much, as
upon any other day, even two tenth deals; whereas the rest had but one, which
is a matter worthy of heedefull observation. This typed and signified some
thing extraordinary as touching this days oblation. And the offering was made
by fire unto the Lord for a savor of Rest, as the Hebrew has it. This
prefigured the Rest of this day of the sheafe of first fruits, of Christ's
resurrection. And this rest had relation not only to Christ, who now had
finished the work of Redemption: but also to all the Redeemed. For from this
very day of the sheafe of first fruits, they were (Leuit. 23.15.16.) to reckon
7 Sabbaths or weeks complete, which inclusiuely contains 50 days, and so
the seventh first day of the week next after the Sabbath, they must offer a
new meat offering unto the Lord. This was the feast of Pentecost, which being
fully come ( Act. 2.) the Holy Ghost came down visibly upon the Church, so
fulfilling that typical prophecy, Leuit. 23.17:
or Prophetical type. And this meat offering of loaves, and the like, being
called also a first fruits unto the Lord, signified and prefigured that First
fruits of the Church of the new Testament, offered, consecrated, and sanctified
unto God that very day, wherein the Holy Ghost descended. For behold two wave
loaves, molded up of so many grains, the one of the Jews, the other of the
Gentiles, both one offering, being a collection of all the Nations under
Heaven, even the Catholic Church representative, were the first fruits unto
God, and unto the Lamb, sanctified in Christ the first fruits. These are
those waue-loaues, Isychius Praesbyt, Hirrosol. in Leuit 23, Planius ergo
Legislator suam demonstran volens mentem ab altero die Sabbati numerari
praecipit 50 dies, Dominicum Diem proculdubio volens intelligi. Hic enim est
altera Dies Sabbati.
that are holy to the Lord, for Christ eur High Priest: Leuit. 23.20. and this
offering became a savor of rest, v. 18. as we showed v. 13. noting still the
rest of this day. So as this self same day is solemnly proclaimed to be an
holy Convocation; Therein no servile work is to be done: and this to stand as
a statute vnrepealable. Hereupon Isychius says: Therefore the Lawgiuer willing
more plainly to express his mind, commanded them to reckon from the next day
of the Sabbath 50 days, thereby willing without doubt the Lords day to be
understood. For this is that next day after the Sabbath. For which cause (says
he) the Holy Ghost came not down in any other day of the week, but in that
day of the Resurrection, wherein the sheafe of first fruits was waued before
the Lord. Thus we see how the day of Christ's Resurrection, is made solemn and
sacred not only by Christ himself, but by the Holy Ghost sent down from
heaven, sanctifying this day for holy Conuocations, or public assemblies of
Gods people for his public service, and this to stand as a perpetual statute
to the end of the world; having also evident and ample testimony from the
Mosaicall Law, and those Evangelical types. whence we conclude with M. Perkins
his argument, in his Cases of conscience, page 113. That which is prefigured,
is prescribed. But the Lords day was prefigured, Leuit. 23.10. therefore it is
prescribed and instituted of God.

A third place we have Psalm, 118.24: where the Prophet speaking ( v. 22.23) of
Christ's Resurrection, he adds, This is the day, which the Lord has made, we
will rejoice, and be glad in it. This is a plane Prophetical institution of
this day to be solemnized under the new Testament. For first, the Lord has
made it, that is, appointed, and set it a part, by marking it out with a
glorious work. And secondly, it is so taken of the Church of God, who says,
We will rejoice and be glad in it, which shows the festiuity, and grateful
solemnity of the Lords day. And although many take this day for the whole time
under the Gospel (as 2. Cor. 6.2:) yet none do exclude or deny the particular
acception of it for the Lords day. St. Ambrose understands this to be the Lords
day, the day of the Lords Resurrection; which day (says he on Psalm: 47,
Titneus) has its holiness from the Lords Resurrection. What shall I say of
Circumcision, which was limited to the eighth day; loking upon Christ's
Resurrection, which was the eighth day; Circumcision, being a singe of that
hollines Christ brought unto us in the day of his Resurrection, who rose again
for our Justification. But let this suffice. Thus has the Lords day not only
real institution by Christ himself, but also testimony from the Law and the
Prophets. And thus, as Hugo says, The fathers of the old Testament observed
the septenary number, or the seventh of Days, Wekes Months: Years we of the
New, the octonary number, or the eight day, to wit the Lords day, for the
reverence of the Lords resurrection, and of the sending of the Holy Ghost, Hugo
in Psalm. 1^9.

Ob. But here it is objected, that the Lords day has noe divine institution,
but merely an hamane and Ecclesiastical. For else how came it to be
instituted by Constantine the Great, who made a Law, and prescribed limits for
the keeping of it? The like also did other Emperors, Princes, and States,
Councels, and Synods in several ages.

Answ. This is no good argument, that because pious Princes make Laws for the
keeping of the Lords day, therefore it is not of divine institution. For so good
Princes make Laws against Adultery, etc. Therefore the forbidding of these
sins is it not of divine institution? King Darius makes a decree, that in
every Nation of his Kingdom men tremble before the God of Daniell, etc.
therefore is not this Law of divine institution: Thou shall worsbip the Lord
thy God, and him only shall thou serve? And because Tyberius Caesar would have
the Roman Senate pass a Decree for the deifying of Christ, or ranking him
among their Gods, therefore Christ was not God? whereupon says Tertullian, Ergo
nisi homini placucurit, Deus non erit Deus: therefore if it do not please man,
God shall not be God.

But it became Christian Princes, when they saw how subject the Lords day was
to be profaned with all licenciousnesse, and how prone carnal men were to
leap over all the banks and bounds, which God had set to keep them in: for
to help to make up the breaches again, and to strengthen the divine ordinance
by their humane and penal constitutions, as we see our noble Kings of England
have done, by name, our pious King Charles, whose reign has been honored
with a religious Law for the better keeping of the Lords day, if laws were as
well kept, as they have been wisely, piously, and justly enacted by our
Progenitors.

Yet because, notwithstanding all Laws, divine and humane, this holy day of
the Lord is for the generality of men little regarded, as not requiring the
like sanctification of us, which the Sabbath did of the Jews: let us further
show what a reverend esteem the ancient holy men in former ages had, and what
pious rules they gave, concerning the religious keeping of this day. We have
noted some of their excellent sayings a little before: we will add a few
more. And first we observe, that they ever did use to call the Lords day, by
the name of the Sabbath, Obseruamus sabbatum, Aug, Contra Adamantum. c. 15
hoc est Dominicam, in signum nempe aeterni sabbati: We observe the Sabbath,
that is the Lords day, for a sign of the eternal Sabbath. The same Augustine
in his 95 sermon de Tempore, says, They which in the observation of the
Sabbath, do not apply themselves to good works and prayer, which is to
sanctify the Sabbath, (and sanctification is where the Holy Ghost is) are like
to the small flies bred of the mud, which disquieted the Egyptians. And
elsewhere (upon those words, Aug de Conseusu Euang. lib: 1. c. 77.
Math. 24.20) Pray that your slight be not in the winter, nor on the Sabbath
day, he says, by winter is signified the cares of this life, and by the
Sabbath gluttony and drunkenness; which evil is therefore signified by the
name of Sabbath, because this was, as now it is, the wicked custom of the
Jews on that day to swim in delicacies, while they are ignorant of the
spiritual Sabbath, For the Jews do seruilely observe the Sabbath day unto
ryotousnesse. and drunkenness. How much better were it for their women to
spin, then on that day to dance. And thus while they carnally kept the
Sabbath, they knew it not, says he. And Melius tota die foderent, etc. The
men were better to digg all that day, then to tread is out in daunces and
measures, Again, the Sabbath (to wit, the Lords day) is more commanded us,
then the Jews. They celebrate the Sabbath seruilely, but we spiritually? And
how spiritualy not in chambering and wantonness, not in gluttony and
dru^kennesse. For these are forbidden Christians any day, much more on the
Lords day, For it were better to plough and harrow, to spin and card wool,
which in themselves are lawful, then to do those things on the Sabbath or
Lords day, which christians should blush at, and be ashamed of to do at any
time, as to dance, to revel, to hear plays, to go to masking and mumning,
and the like, which are exercises fitter for heathen, then christians, for
Bacchanalls, then such as celebrate the Lords Festival. How then is this day
of the Lords to be kept? Neither as the Eneratites, Aeriancs, and Aerians, who
fasted all the Lords day but madly reueld on other festiuals. These are
extremes and therefore to be avoided. How then? As the christians did in
Justin Martyrs days of old, who says, Die solis, etc. On the Sunday, or Lords
day, Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
are the christians assemblies of Citizens and Countrmen, where the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets are first read; then when the Reader has done, the
Master of the assembly the chief Minister uses words of exortation, his
inuiting them to the imitation of things honest. The richer sort, who are
willing, do contribute to the relief of the poorer, every man according to his
mind and means, and the Collecta, or collections are deposited with the chief
Minister; he therewith succoureth the Orphans and poor etc. This is that day,
wherein God created the world, and Christ rose again from the dead. So he.
And Saint Chrisostom upon the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 16.1, Behold (says he)
How fitly the Apostle rayseth his exhortation from the consideration of this
day of the week, as being the fittest day, wherein to exhort unto alms; as if
the Apostle had said, Remember what things ye have obtained this day,
unutterable good things, yea the very root and spring of our life stands in
it. Not that it is a fit day only for giving of alms, but that it has a
rest, and is free from worldly affairs, and the mind being vacant from
molestations is the apter and more inclinable to mercy, and it brings with it a
great efficacy in the use of the celestial Ordinances. And Saint Augustine:
Omni Die Dominico, etc. Every Lords day come to the Church, and spend not the
day in pleading, and brabbles, and idle chat, but with silence hearken to the
word of God, and pray for the peace of the Church, and for the pardon of your
sins, etc. And Bernard says. out of Esaias. 58.13. He calls the Sabbath
(says he) not only a delight, but he adds, holy and glorious to the Lord.
Nor let the Sabbath slipped away with sloth, but in thy Sabbath work the works
of God. And in the Synodal Epistle of the second synod of Matiscon, we have
these words: Custodite Diem Dominicum, etc. Keep the Lords day, which has a
new brought you forth, and has freed you from all sins; as being that day
wherein Christ rose for our justification. Let none of you be vacant to
minister fuel for suites in Law, let none plead causes, let none draw upon
himself such a necessity, as to compel the cattle to bear the yoke.. Be
all of you taken up with hymmes in praising of God, being content in mind and
body. Let every one hasten to the next Church, and their humble himself on the
Lords day with prayers and tears. Let your eyes and hands be all that day open
to God. For that is a perpetual day of rest, that is made known in the law and
the Prophets, being insinuated unto us by the shadow of the seventh day. Just
it is therefore that we do unanimously celebrate this day, by which we are
made that which before we were not. Let us perform to the Lord a free
service, etc. Not that the Lord requires of us, that we should celebrate the
Lords day with bodily abstinence; but he requires our obedience, by which,
trampling all terrene actions under our feet, he may mercifully lift us up
even unto Heaven. If therefore any of you shall slight or contemn this our
wholesome exhortation, let him know that for the quality of his demerit he
shall be punished of the Lord, and henceforth implacably under the sacerdotall
indignation. If he be a Lawyer, he shall be dismissed of his pleading
without recovery; if a Countryman or servant, he shall be sore beaten with
clubs: if a Clearke, or so, he shall be suspended six months from his
Fraternity, etc. And in the Council of Dingelfing On the Lords day let men be
vacant for divine rest, and abstain from worldly and profane business. He
that this day shall do any work about the Cart, or otherwise, let his oxen
be confiscate. If he shall proceed on obstinately, let him be made a
bondslaue. And Charles the great in his constitutions forbids markets to be
kept any where on the Lords day; nor any servile works to be done therein. We
might be infinite in such like instances of pious constitutions for the
solemn and sacred keeping of the Lords day; but let these suffice by the way.

Only one thing remains to be resolved, whether the fourth Commandment
reach unto servants, as well as unto Masters of Families, some would restrain
the Commandment only to Masters excluding servants thus far, that in case a
Master command his servant any servill work on the Sabbath, or Lords day, the
servant therein obeying his Master, is not answerable to God, as a trangressour
of Gods Commandment, but his Master only is in the transgression for so
commanding. This is a strange piece of Logic: A Master in commanding his
servant transgresses Gods Commandment: and yet the servant obeying his Master
therein, transgresses not. Does not the case hold a like in other relations,
as between Prince and subject, spiritual Pastors and People? yes say they.
But how? Thus: God (say they) has commanded all men to honor their Parents,
and the Parents of their Country stands in the first, ranke-True who denies it?
But what follows there upon? This, say they: The Son of God has commanded
all Christians to hear the Church, and under forfeiture of communion of
Saints; but they that deny the Canons of the Church, or Edict of the Prince,
hear not the one, honor not the other: therefore they that transgress either
of these Constitutions, transgress also consequently, though not immediately,
the commandments of God, yet neither of both are transgressed by servants, if
they work by their Masters commission, and not of their own electon; for
neither does the one Law, or the other, neither the Canons of the Church, nor
Edicts of Princes give liberty and warrant to servants to be rebellious to
their Masters touching point of service that day, more then others. To this
purpose they argue, that deny the keeping of the Lords day to have any
dependence upon the morality of the fourth Commandment. Here be prege reasons,
which would not lightly be passed over. Therefore a little to examine the
mettle of these men's reasons: first we must remember, that not only on the
Lords day; servants obying their Masters, in deoing servile work therein, are
guiltles (for so they have euation for it, by denying the Lords day to be of
divine institution, and rest therein to be any moral duty) but they deny also,
that the fourth Commandment did bind any Jews, but only Masters of
familyes, and not those under them. For (say they) the Commandment was given
only to masters, and not to servants standing in relation to their masters, in
case they should impusote any servile labor upon them. It is true the
Commandment was given principally and immediately to masters, that not only
themselves should keep it, but they should look their whole family kept it.
Yet in case the Master should neglect his duty herein, and instead of
commanding his family to keep the Sabbath, should inioyne them servile work:
does not the Commandment take hold of the servant? What? Is the servant an
Ass, or sott, to yeald blind obedience to his master commanding against God?
Or is he such a slave, as he has not a soul to answer for to God, as well
as his master? Or being his Masters servant, is he thereby, exempted from
being Gods servant? says not the Apostle, He that is called in the Lord being
a servant, is the Lords freeman? Likewise also he that it called being free,
is Christ's servant? Indeed the Masters sin is double, not only in permitting,
and communing but compelling, or commanding his servant to work, when God
commands to rest: but yet the servant obeying his master herein unjustly
commanding, committes a single sin at least against God, if not also double,
while he prefers his earthly, masters Commandment, before his heavenly
masters. But this (say they) is Petitio Principij, if Gods Commandment reach
not to servants. But we show it does, if servants be not unreasonable beasts,
or blind Asses. Nor ought the Masters Commandment to be of force, yea it
has a mere nullity, if it be contrary to Gods express Commandment. So that
in such a case for a servant to obey his Master, is against and above God to
set up an Idol, which is nothing in the world, and such servants slauishly
observing Sabbatum Asinorum the Sabbath of Asses, do justly deserve the whip
for the Asses back: or that censure forementioned in the second synod of
Matiscon, If a servant or rusticke do break the Sabbath, let him be soundly
dry basted with clubs. But (say they) the son of God has commanded all
christians to hear the Church, not to despise her Canons, or Princes Edicts.

True. But is Christ's command absolute, and without limitation, namely to obey
Superiors actiuely, whatsoever they command right or wrong, for or against
God? what if the Canons of the Church do by man's Traditions disanull the
Commandment of God, as of old the Jewish Synagogue, and of latter times the
Romish? Are such Canons to be obeyed against Gods express Commandment? If the
Pharisees and chief Priests make a Canon to punish with Excommunication, or
Suspention, those that shall confess Christ, or profess or preach his truth
and faith freely and faithfully: is it not disobedience to God herein to obey
them, and through slavish fear rather to renounce Christ, then not submit to
such wicked Canons.

The Jews Corban freed Children fom honoring their Parents: and do not they
as well make void Gods Commandment, who in binding servants to obey their
masters commanding against Gods Commandment, do thereby free them from Gods
Commandment? And for Princes Edicts we all reverence, and willingly embrace
and obey them. But without limitation? what if they command against God? what
if they shall forbid by public Edict the free preaching of the word of God in
any part of it, as such and such points of faith and salvation not to be
handled, such and such heresies not to be meddled with by way of confutation?
Are we not to answer in such a case, as the Apostle did, Whether it be meet
in the sight of God to obey you, rather than God, judge you; for we cannot but
speak the things wbich we have seen and heard? And Peter tells the Rulers
boldly and plainly, We ought rather to obey God, then men. What? because
Nebuchadnezzer erected his Image, and commanded all to worship it, and forbad
to pray to any God, but to the King only, for thirty days: must this Edict
therefore be obeyed? Noe surely. And why? Because it was against God; and
therefore it ought to have been of no force to exact obedience of any. But
what (will you say?) Must we be rebels, in disobeying our superiors? No, it is
one thing not obey, and another to be rebellious; superiors ought not to be
obeyed, if they command against God; Yet this is no rebellion, where men are
ready to yeald passive obedience to their unjust cruelty, by not resisting it,
though they derect and deny active obedience to their unjust commands. Thus
Daniel, thus the three Children did; the one desires rather to be cast into
the Lions den, the other into the hott fiery furnace, then to dishonor God,
by bowing to the Kings Image. Thus all Gods true bred children have, and will
do; they neither dare obey unjust command contrary to Gods word, and a good
conscience; nor yet rebelliously resist unjust punnishments; in both which they
obey God.

But enough of this point, at least in this place, where we have as it were by
the way occasionally met with it, not purposely minded thoroughly to handle it,
but only as a branch of that morality of the Law of God, the whole bulk and
body whereof is hewed at by the Antinomians, to cut it down by the very roots.

Only let us add here a few reasons and motives, Reasons why the Lords day is
to be sanctfied.
the more to strengthen, and provoke us to the more diligent observation of
this great holy day of the Lord. One reason may be taken from the comparison
between christians under the new Testament, and the Jews under the Old.

How exactly were the Jews bound to keep the Sabbath, as a memorial of their
deliverance from Egypt, in token of their perpetual thankfulness? How much
more then are we thus bound to sanctify the Lords day, in a perpetual
thankful remembrance of our spiritual deliverance from the bondage of sin,
satan, and hell, over which Christ triumphed manifestly in the day of his
Resurrection? Secondly, Exodus: 31.16.17.
as the Sabbath day was given to the Jews as a sign and means of their
sanctification. So the Lords day in the due sanctifying of it in the use of the
means is a pregnant occasion of our sanctification, and that not only in
regard of the same Ordinances attending upon it, but as it is a perpetual
memorial of Christ's Resurrection and in the faith and fact whereof is begun
here not only our sanctification, but also our glorification and eternal
Sabbath.

Ob. But if the Eternal Sabbath began in Christ's Resurrection, then what
further use is there of a seventh day weekly to keep Sabbath in? Every day
now, yea our whole life time is a Sabbath unto us; therefore to keep a
seventh day still, is against the nature of the eternal Sabbath has begun in
Christ's Resurrection. And thus to keep a seventh still is to go back to the
Jewish ceremony again, which is abolished in Christ's Resurrection.

Answ. Though the Eternal Sabbath began in Christ's Resurrection, and is now
eternally kept of Christ and of the Church triumphant: yet during the time of
this life, which is measured by times and days, and in regard of the many
corporal necessitys of it must be maintained by the labors of every man's
particular calling in which regard the external condition of christians
differs not from that of Gods people in the former Testament: our solemn
keeping of the Sabbath is no less limited to certain circumstances of time,
as one day of seven, then theirs was. Nor is this a complying with Jewish
ceremonies again. For their Sabbath was in part typical: but ours is now the
true eternal Sabbath, kept of christians according to Christ's own Ordinance,
attempering it to the condition of our present necessity, who must as well
work for the good of our bodies, Exodus: 31.13.7.
as solemnly rest for our souls good. And therefore Christ's wisdom, being
the same with his Fathers and his own in the first institution of a seventh
day keeps still the same proportion, not altering the Commandment which says,
Six days shall thou labor, Only he has altered the day because the typical
Sabbath must give place to the true and eternal Sabbath which we now solemnly
keep on the first day, of the week, as it were the first fruits of our
eternal Sabbatisme, in heaven with Christ, though our whole life otherwise is
the true Sabbatisme begun.

Again it is the market day of our souls, wherein we come to Gods house the
market place, Esaias 55.2:
to buy the Wine and Milk of the word without money, or money worth.

How is that? By hearing and harekning to Gods word, that truth whereby we are
sanctified, John. 17.17. and to pray unto him; thus by the Word and Prayer
wear sanctified. Esaias. 55.32:
Harken diligently to me, and eat that which is good, and let your soul
delight it self in fatnes; Incline your ears, and come unto me, and hear,
and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting covenant with you,
even the sure mercies of David. Lo, the sanctifying of the Sabbath, or Lords
day in a diligent use of Gods Ordinances, is the means whereby the mercies of
David are made sure unto us. And it is remarkable, how the Holy Ghost does
point out Christ's Resurrection, by alleging and applying this place of the
Prophet, Act. 13.34. as thereby not obscurely insinuating the sanctification of
the day of the Lords resurrection by a diligent harkning to the word of God,
and reverend vvsing of other divine Ordinances and duties of that day. And were
it not, that the Lords day did succeed in place of the Sabbath, the Sabbath
day of the Jews being abolished: what time for the means of our
sanctification and salvation were left unto us? were it not for the Lords day,
we should be in a far worse case, then the Jews of old, as being left without
opportunity and means of sanctification, all which the Lords day ministers
unto us; without this, we should have no market day for our spiritual
provision, and merchandise of our souls, wherein to buy the pearl of the
kingdom, and to supply all our spiritual wants. And therefore the not well
employing and improuing our providence and diligence upon this market day, does
expose us to that censure, Why stand ye idle in the market place all the day
long? Such are they, that either idle or trifle out the Lords day
impertinently, or such as profane it with carnal pleasures, as feasting and
banketing (a too common abuse especially among our greater Citizens) also
reuelling and ryoting, plays and enterludes, idle chat and communication,
dicing, carding, and many such unchristianlike profane pastimes, which
Christians should beware of and avoid all the days of the week, yea all the
days of their life, much more on the Lords day, wherein the foot of our
carnal affections should be turned away from doing our pleasure on the Lords
holy day, calling the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord honorably,
honoring him, not doing our own ways, nor finding of our own pleasure, nor
speaking our own words. This is to delight our selves in the Lord, and so shall
he cause us to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed us with the
heritage of Jacob; for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

Otherwise, if the due sanctification of this day be neglected, farewell all
true christianity. If the spiritual provision of this day be not carefully
looked after, and brought in, and locked up, and fitly disposed and distributed
for all the week, we shall with the Prodigal bring our souls to feed one
empty husks. And for men to hear the word that day, and when they have done,
to go home, and not ruminate and confer of it, but to spend the rest of this
day in idle, or godless exercises: what is this, but as if a man should buy
provision at the market to serve himself and his family, all the week, and
go presently the same day, and calling idle companions together, spend and
squander all upon them at one sitting, and so come empty home? What shall we
say then of the Papists, that allow of their profaine markets this day, and for
spiritual commodities they have none, but such as are painted, or give an
empty sound, as their long Latin Matiens and Masses, whereby they have quite
shouldered out the preaching of the word of God; a fair pretense by long
prayers to keep out preaching, that scarce Sermons may take place in the
forenoone, muchlesse any at all in the afternoon, least there should not be
time enough to make up a Sabbath for Satan, which they consecrate to him in
all kind of exorbitances and profuse carnality; that so they may be vacant for
theaters, and dancing as Aug, speaks; or for Cards, Tables and reuelings, as
Leo speaks, which is to keep the Sabbath of the golden Ass, as Aug. calls it,
yea Sabbatum Satana, Satan's Sabbath, for if it be not lawful to do the works
of our calling, which on the six days are lawful: With what warrant can we
do those things, which are sinful, and therefore on noe day lawful, as not
coming within the compass of any Calling at all? And if we do any thing, to
which we have not a lawful calling, we are out of Gods Protection, according
to that Ps. 91.11. who commands his Angels to keep his Saints in all their
lawful ways: but if men go astray in the by paths of carnal and unchristian
courses, then Gods Angel is as ready with his sword drawn to cut them off; as
Ex. 4.24. Number. 22.23.

A third reason and motive to stir us up to the more careful and diligent
sanctification of the Lords day, may be taken from the evil fruits and
consequents, which we see do grow from the neglect thereof. For it is easy to
observe, and it is an observation infallible, that where the greatest
profanation of the Lords day reigns, there all kind of iniquity and impiety
does most abound among such a people. Now where is this profanation greater,
then when Prayer, together with the powerful Ministry and preaching of the
word, and administration of the Sacraments are most neglected, and scanted?
what marvel then, if in such places, where the banks of the public
Ordinances, together with the fruit thereof, to wit private familie-duties are
wanting an universal deluge of all licentiousnes do not ouerflow al? whereas
on the contrary, where the Lords day is most duly and dutifully observed and
sanctified in a conscionable frequenting the holy assemblies in public prayer,
hearing the word faithfully preached, the Sacraments duly administered, and the
like: there is not only a- beautiful face, but a sound body of religion to
be seen. Especially where a good Ministry and Magistracy are the joint
pillars of the Corporation. So as from the right sanctification of the Lords
day does spring all holiness, and power of religion, where by God is honored,
the commonwealth it self is made glorious, as being established and combined
with the most firm bonds of pure religion, the Crown and security of Kings
and Kingdoms.

I might hereunto add many more motives, which though they be necessary for
these licentious times (if as well the remedies could be endured, as the
maladies cannot) yet I forbear at this time, as not so suitable to this short
discourse, wherein I fear already I have been too tedious; though occasioned,
if not rather enforced by the inportunate Antinomians, the enemies of all true
piety.

But to shut up all in a word, let me here give the Reader one summary view of
their absurd and impious Tenets.

Positions, that the Antinomians and such like Libertines and sectaries hold
with their usual euasions and distinctions.
THese Antinomians teach, that God sees no sin in his justified Children, and
though he know sin to be in them, yet he sees it not; thus making God like to a
blind man, who sees not those things, which he knows. And where we
object, God sees sin in his justified Children, for he reproues, and corrects
them for it: they answer, that particular congregations consist of a mixed
multitude, some belieuers, some not, and upon the unbelievers only are the
corrections and reproves, and not on the other. And when it is objected, God saw
sin, reproved and corrected it in David a belieuer in Christ, who says Psa.
69.5. Thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee: they
answer with mayntaining that the justification of the Saints before Christ's
death, and since, is not alike, but because there is great difference in the
manifestation, to them before, and us now: therefore there is a difference in
their justifying. God did see sin thorough the righteousness of Christ imputed
unto David, but not through that which was imputed to Paul. so they.

Object. But Paul himself proves, that the justification of all the Saints,
both before and since Christ's death, is alike. But this they will not allow of,
but still will have euasions. Ob. But he sees their Sins daily, because daily
he commands them to pray for pardon. To this they answer that that Petition
is to be said either only for modesty, or else for the further manifestation
of their justification, Ob. But does justification abolish Sin clean out of a
belieuer? No, for then we should lie, 1 Ioh. 1.8, 10. Ob. But do you see sin in
you, and does not God see it? No God sees it not, for he looks upon us only
in the righteousness of Christ; in that green glass all he looks on in it,
is green. And to this purpose they misapplie many speeches out of Luther on
(...) and others. Ob. But we are indeed perfectly justified, but not perfectly
sanctified in this life: because the righteousness whereby we are justified is
Perfect, inherent in Christ, and only imputed unto us; but our sanctification
is from Christ, and inherent in us, not perfect in this life, but still
imperfect. For that they answer, first, that the Scripture speaking of
sanctification, means it in a large sense, comprehending justification under
it; and so they will not admit, or very hardly, of that distinction betwixt
justification, and sanctification, but iumble them together. And secondly they
say, that a belieuer, is as perfect here, as ever he shall be hereafter, but
only in regard of manifestation, and to that purpose they allege this text,
Because as he is, so are we in this world. Ioh. 4.17.

Ob. But the Scripture every where excites us to grow in sanctification, and
the more we grow therein, the more assurance we have of our justification.
But this they deny, for they will not have our sanctification to prove our
justification, but that must be manifest unto us only by faith.

Ob. But ought not a belieuer to walk in an holy course of life? That word,
One of the^ writ in a lett^ to an orthodo^ Minister, It is vain babbling when
men are cast down to raise them by duties, and fl^daubing, to bu^^ men on
doeings though duties dyed in the blood of Christ Then Paul was a babbler in
deed a^ the Athenians called him, who thus raised by duties: as Heb.
12.12.13.14 Then Peter was a daw who built by duties, 2 Pet. 15: to 15 we
accordingly teach duties but disclame merits, as Christ teaches us Luc: 17.10
he there commends duties but condemns merits; So we.
ought, they cannot brook, but they say that he cannot but walk in an holy
life.

Ob. But what then is the rule of that holy life?

Answ The matter of the Law, say they, but not the Law, as it is a Law; for
they are not under the Law; but under grace, and the Law is not given to a
righteous man 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law of love only now sets them a work to
walk in an holy life, for they are free now, not only from the curse of the
Law but also from it, as it is a command, or rule of life.

And therefore they say, They must be far from any thought of displeasing
God at all by any thing they fail in; So as they must take heed of being cast
down for any failings. Flat contrary both to the Apostles precept, and to the
Corinthians practice, 1 Cor. 5.1, 2.3.4.5. and 2 Cor. 7.9, 10, 11.

Again: Neither (say they) must we think of ^^a^si^^ God at all in whole, or
in part, by any thing at (...) set up a calfe of our own works to dance about
(...) like is their Rhetoric, whereby they pe^^ (...) pose upon their Simple
Disciples, who are like Reeds easily shaken with every wind of novel
doctrines, such as tend to carnal liberty, and to possess the soul with
spiritual pride. But the Scriptures do not so teach us Christ. Read 1. These.
4.1. Col. 1.10. 1 Cor. 7.22. Heb. 12.5. o^ ha^ (...) which our pleasing of God
(there commended) by weldoing, the fruit of a lively faith is not meant of
pleasing by way of satisfaction, for so Christ only pleased God: but of
acceptance in and through Christ. But if we shall once be possessed with this
conceit, that neither our Sins displease God, no^ our best sanctified actions
do please him; what shall (...) and false flesh to become either as senseless,
stocks and stones, or as sensual beasts: putting no difference, not (...)
conscience of good and evil, when (I say) we (...) per^^aded, that neither
our best actions please God (...) worst displease him? This is right Stoicall
doctrine, to be (...) with nothing at all, to repent of nothing, and (...)
^^^^rence between the ^^^ling of a coc^^ and of (...) ^^ctrine which nature it
self abhor (...) ^o Orat^^^ condemns. The second such lik^ (...) that they
hold. And who (...) same, they ^^^^me and (...) the dead faith.

FINIS.

