FOR GOD, and the KING.

THE SVMME OF TWO SERMONS Preached on the fifth of November last in St.
MATTHEWES FRIDAY-STREETE. 1636.

By HENRY BVRTON, Minister of GODS Word there and then.

1. PET. 2. 17. Fear GOD. Honor the KING.

2. TIM. 4. 1, 2, 3. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach
the Word, be instant, in season, out of season, reproove, rebuke, exhort with
all long suffering and doctrine. For the time will come, when they will not
endure sound doctrine, etc.

Bernard. in Dedic. Ecclae. Ser. 3. Non miremini, fratres, si durius loqui
videor:
Quia veritas neminem palpat.
Printed, Anno Dom. 1636.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, King of
Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
SIR,
What the title in the front professes, FOR GOD, AND THE KING, the substance
thereof was by me preached in two Sermons on the last fifth of November, 1636.
to teach my people obedience to both. And for this, I was by the divine
providence directed to this Text (Prove. 24. 21. 22.) My Son, fear thou the
Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their
calamity shall arise suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them both? The
Doctrines of which text, as I thought the more necessary to be preached and
pressed in these times of Apostasy, and defection from the due obedience both
of God and the King: So I deemed that day (the memorial whereof should cause
all loyal subjects for ever to detest all Innovations tending to reduce us to
that Religion of Rome, which plotted that matchless treason) the most
seasonable for this text, as wherein our Solemn acknowledgement of our sacred
thanks to God for our great deliverance (the fruits whereof we enjoy at this
day under your Royal and happy government) being a strong engagement and
inducement to every good duty both to God and the King, might work the more
kindly effect in the hearers; a word in season, being (as the Wiseman says)
like Apples of gold in pictures of silver.

Now although the general good acceptance of the word then preached, whereby
the peoples hearts were much affected, being instructed and exhorted to stick
closse to God and the King in all manner of duties to each, that none of those,
of whom my text admonishes, might work a disunion, might have been a
sufficient motive of publishing those Sermons in print, for the general good
of all your Majesty's loving Subjects throughout this your Kingdom; yet Lo a
necessity it now laid upon me. For on December 3. after my house had been
searched by a Pursuivant, Constables, and Wardens of the Company of Stationers
for a book which I had not, then and there, the Pursuivant served me with
Letters Missive from the High Commission to appear on Twesday then next
ensuing, before Doctor Ducke at Chesewicke, there to answer to Articles against
me. The Articles were all of them against my preaching, and in special, and by
name, against my Sermons on November 5. on Prove. 34. 21. 22. Therein was
objected to me, that I preached against sundry Innovations (which indeed was
one special point in my text) as alterations in the book for the fifth of
November; alterations in the new Fast-booke, contrary to your Majestes
Proclamation, which Orders the old Fast book set forth by your Majesty's
authority to be reprinted and published; alterations in the Book of Common
Prayer, set forth by Act of Parliament; a turning out of the Collect for the
Queen and Royal Progeny, these words, Father of thine Elect, and of their
seed, as if they would blot out your Majesty, Qeene, and Royal Progeny out of
the number of Gods Elect: and in the Epistle on Sunday before Faster, for, IN
the name of Jesus, is now put, AT the name of Jesus, etc. alterations in
setting up of Altars, Images, Crucifixes, in bowing to the Altar: in putting
down afternoon Sermons on the Lords days in sundry Diocese: in allowing no
other Catechizing, but by bare Question and Answer out of the Book, without
expounding of the maine Principles of Religion to the ignorant youth and people
in reading of a second Service at the Altar, in the upper end of the Chancell,
where in many great Churches the people cannot possibly hear, and not even in
lesser Churches, or indifferent, without a stentorious voice of the Minister:
together with sundry other things of the like nature: some truly alleged,
which I am ready to maintain against the Innovators, and some falsely and
maliciously perverted, whereof I am ready to give your Majesty a true
account. And in the end of all the Articles, I was charged to bring in a true
copy of my Sermon. The conclusion was, a book tendered to me to swear to
answer to those Articles.

Here at I startled, admiring that these things should be charged upon me as
crimes, which both were truths, and pertinent to my text, and necessary to
admonish my people of, as leading them from the fear of God, and of the King.
I also (upon the sudden) apprehended, that I could expect small justice of
those, that were not only the countenancers, but practisers, yea and (which is
the highest degree of all iniquity) open maintainers of such innovations, and
that in that very Court where they ought rather to be severely Censured and
Suppressed: but that on the contrary I should be there censured as a
Delinquent, for executing my Ministry, in speaking the truth, and reprooving
of Sin. And again considering with my self that this cause was of a higher
nature, then to be so much as hazzarded upon the judgment of these, who were
professed parties; I presently reflected my thoughts upon your Sacred Majesty,
as not only worthy to take the cognizance of so weighty a cause, and the best
able both in respect of your Princely wisdom, and unpartiall judgment to
weigh it in a just balance: but also as the prime and principal person, next
unto God, whose honor and welfarre it most neerelie concerns; and who next
after God, are engaged in my text to inquire into. So as my reply to Dr. Duke
was, Sir, I humbly appeal to the Kings Majesty my Sovereign and Patron, as
my judge in this cause, and before whom I shall be both a Defendant, and
Complainant. For I hold it not fit, that they who are my adversaries, should be
my Judges. These were the very words of my Appeal to Your Majesty as I
remember.

Now thou my Gracious Sovereign, that which my professed adversaries in so just
a cause did unjustlie and against the Law require of me, namely to bring them
a copy of my Sermon, that so they might at their pleasure take advantages by
perverting of my words. I do here most freely and faithfully in all
humbleness present to Your Majesty, yea and that with many additions and
inlargements (like to Ieremies roll) that in the chief place Your Majesty
may take a full account of the whole matter whereof nothing is concealed; and
so also, as all Your loving and loyal Subjects may make good use of it. Herein
(besides many other things, the reading whereof will not (I hope) be loss of
time to Your Majesty) I have observed sundry perilous innovations set on
foot in this Your Kingdom, worthy Your Majesty's saddest consideration. And
to whom (next unto God) should I address my complaint herein, but to Your
Majesty whose honor I cannot but be most tenderly sensible of, so deeply
suffering in those Innovations herein mentioned? For how frequentlie and
Solemnly has your Majesty made most Sacred Protestations to all Your loving
Subjects, that you would never suffer the least innovation to creep into Your
Kingdom? And here, both for the comfort to us Your faithful people, and for
the conviction and condemnation of our Innovators, and for the refreshing of
the memory of Your Majesty's Golden Sayings, never to be forgotten, as most
honorable to Your Majesty let me set down a few of them. Your Majesty in
Your Declaration to all Your loving Subjects, of the causes that moved You to
dissolve the last Parliament, published by Your Majesty's Special command,
1628. page 21. has these words: We Golden sentence.
call God to record, before whom we stand, that it is, and always has been
our hearts desire to be found worthy of that title, which we account the most
glorious in all our Crown, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, neither shall we ever give
way to the authorizing of any thing, whereby ante innovation may steal or
creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of Doctrine and Discipline
established in the time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby the Church of England has
stood and flourished ever since. And in your Declaration prefixed to the
Articles of Religion, speaking of Ordinances and Constitutions in Convocation
by Your Majesty's leave, and under Your Seal, is added this Proviso, Providing
that none be made contrary to the Laws and Customs of the Land. More might
be added. All which well considered, how audacious, yea how impious are our
Innovatours, how fearelesse of Your Majesty, how regardlesse of Your Royal
Honor, that in their Innovations made such havocke, commit such outrages, and
that upon the open theater? New Rites and Ceremonies do now, not steal and
creep into the Church, but nudo capite are violently and furiously obtruded
upon Ministers and people, and that with suspension, excommunication, ejection
out of house and home, threatenings and thundrings to the refusers, who dare not
yield conformity unto them, as being against both Law and Conscience, and these
your solemn declarations So as it seems these Innovators will put it to the
trial, whether their practices will more prevayle against your Majesty's
Solemn and Sacred Protestations to the contrary, which stand upon Record, in
aeternam rei memoriam. that so they may as much as in them lies, blast the
beauty and glory of Your Royal Name delivered in Annals to posterity, as
if it should be said, This King had no regard to sacred Vows, and solemn
Protestations (which God forbid it should ever enter into the thought of any of
Your loving Subjects to suspect) or whether your Majesty will look moore
narrowly into their desperate practices, and (not suffering your self to be
abused through credulity of their blandishing flatteries, and bainfull
suggestions, and Your people most intollerably oppressed under their lawless
power) will be pleased upon others true reports (true reports, I say; for who
dare report falsely of them, whom so few dare speak the truth against them,
they be so potent and vindicative) to make a full Scrutiny, and inquiry into
their exorbitant and extravagant courses, and thereupon to acquit Your honor
in executing of Justice upon the Delinquents. I do not charge any one
particular person. That honor is reserved to Your Majesty. For as Solomon
says, it is the honor of Kings to search out a matter. And for me Your
Majesty's old and faithful Servant, while as Christ Minister, and a watchman
of Israel, yea a Sentinel perdu, I discover both present, and thereupon (in my
apprehension) consequent dangers to my Sovereign and his State, and while, as
the poor sheep, I appeal and complain to my Shepherd: oh never let my
Shepherd either leave me in, or deliver me into the power of the wolf! And
while all along I plead for God and the King, for Fear and Obedience, and
against Innovators, the enemies of both; oh let my God and my King protect
their poor Servant against his adversaries; the Innovators in my text! Who if
they quarrel these my charges, I beseech Your Majesty lay Your charge upon
them to make a full and clear answer unto them.

What shall, or can I say more? Your Majesty's wisdom can pierce deeper into
this cause, then my shallowness is able to give intimation, wherein you will
easily discern how deeply You are engaged to close with God and Your good
Subjects against all those Innovators, the disturbers of the peace, and
distractors of the unity of Your Kingdom, so as thereby You shall become the
most glorious Prince in Christendom, formidable to Your enemies, and amiable
to all Your good Subjects, whose hearts and affections being indecred hereby,
will become a richer Mine to Your Majesty, then all the Western Indies to the
King of Spain.

And if my style seem sharper then usual, be pleased to impute it to my Zeal
and Fidelity for God and for Your Majesty, when I am to encounter with those
that he adversaries to both. And if any word have dropped from my pen, which
malice may pervert and wrest to my prejudice, I beseech Your Majesty to be my
Judge Your self, and to consider, as on the one side a weak man, so on the
other a Minister of Christ, whose message he durst not but faithfully
discharge to his uttermost power, and at his uttermost peril. Nor must I look
to fare better then the Prophets of old, who complained of those, who made a
man an offender for a word, and laid a snare for him that reproved in the
gate; Yea then Christ himself, whom the Pharisees thought to entangle in his
words: Yet my comfort is, that a Prince so gracious, so righteous, so religious
shall be my Judge. And if my simplicity shall be by my captious Adversaries
found worthy of censure for a word misplaced, or so: I shall the more
willingly undergo their censure, so as they may have their condign
punishment according to the Law, for their most perrillous Innovations. In
fine, my last comfort is, and will be, that in case they shall for the present
bear me down, together with so Noble a cause as this is (which yet I know
will in time, beat all us Adversaries down, since it is Christ's own Cause) I
have been a true witness of Christ, and a faithful subject of Your Majesty,
in thus freeing mine own soul by discharging of my duty: What ever become of
my body, which is every day threatened by Pursuivants to be haled to Prison, if
Your Majesty's Justice, and good Laws do not all the better safeguard me.
But prison or not prison, I heartily thank my Lord Jesus Christ, who has
accounted me faithful, and called me forth to stand for his cause, and to
witness it before all the World, by publishing my said Sermons in Print, that
thereby also I might clear both the cause, and my credit, which they have
publicly, before hearing, branded with sedition. All which I humbly commit to
Your Majesty's Royal Patronage, as Who next under God, are most interessed in
the Cause. Now the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so
unite and combine your heart unto Himself, that You being guided by His Spirit
of Wisdom and Understanding, of Council and strength, and of the fear of
the Lord, You may do Valiantly, and prosper, in stopping the course of all
Innovators and Backe-sliders into Popery, that so with and under Christ's
Kingdom, Yours may be established in Righteousness to You and your Royal
Posterity, until time shall be no more, Which is the daily Prayer of,

Your Majesty's dutiful Servant and Subject HENRY BVRTON.

FOR GOD, AND THE KING.
PROVERBES 24. 21. 22. My son, fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly;
and who knows the ruin of them both?


THis time is a time of sorrow and humiliation: but this day a day of joy and
festivity, to be celebrated in this our anniversary thankful remembrance of a
great and memorable deliverance, as on this day, 31. years ago. So as this
day falling in so sad a season, is like a starie peeping and shining forth
through the clouds of a dolesome duskie night, and by and by ready to be
overclouded again. Such is our joy, such is our Invicem cedunt dolor and
voluptas, brevior voluptas. Senec.
sorrow, this long, that short, this, a summer and a winter plague, that a
widows joy, a blaze, and away. Yet since God is pleased in the midst of
judgment to remember Mercy, there is no reason that this calamitous time
should so far dampe us, as to deprive both us of our comfort, and God of his
glory this day. Therefore we may say with David, Why art thou cast down, o my
soul? I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, Psalm. 42. 11
and my God. Or as Psalm. 101. I will sing of Mercy and Judgment. And surely
that joy is soundest, which is seasoned with some sorrow. Psalm. 2. 11.
As says the Psalmist, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
It Is good to be merry and wise, as says the Proverb. Sadness is as salt that
seasoneth our mirth, and preserues it from corruption. Well, blessed be God,
who in the midst of many sad days, has sent us this joyful day to sing
praise unto him for that mercy, which has made it a day of joy unto all good
Christians, and all good Subjects in this land.

Suitable therefore to the occasion of this day, and season, I have made choice
of this Text: It comprehends one of those wise Sentences, Counsels or
Proverbs, which King Solomon, a Preacher also, inspired with the spirit of
Wisdom from God, has left recorded for instruction of the Church of God in
all ages. If we seek to find the coherence, or dependence of these words, we
may quickly loose our selves, and our labor. For this Book, of the Proverbs
is fitly compared to a bagg full of sweet and fragrant spices, which shuff led
and shaken together, or taken single, do yield forth a most pleasant and
comfortable odor. Or to the Stars in the firmament, each in itself
glorious, and independent of another, yet all receive their light from the
Sun. Like as Eccles. 12. 11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as
nails fastened by the Masters of assemblies, which are given from one
Shepherd. This one Shepherd is Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, who
inlightens all the Prophets. Or here are studds of silver in borders of gold:
Cant. 1. 11. Or apples of gold in pictures of silver. Prove. 25. 11. And these
things belong to the wise. v. 23.

The words recited contain three things in general. 1. an Exhortation. 2. an
Admonition. 3. a reason of the admonition. The Exhortation in these words, My
son, fear thou the Lord and the King. The admonition in these words, And
meddle not with them that are given to change: the reason of the admonition in
these words, For their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who knows the ruin
of them both?

In the Exhortation, these particulars are considerable. 1. The Person
Exhorting, and that is King Solomon instructing the people as from Gods own
mouth. 2. The persons exhorted, to wit, all Gods people, represented here in
the singular number, under the name of one son: and this by a near bond of
relation, by a strong cord of affection, distinguishing him from others, and
appropriating him as Gods own peculiar, My Son. The duty exhorted unto, is
fear: the object of this fear is twofold. 1. The Lord. 2. The King. In all
which we are to observe three things, 1. The order of this fear, first the
Lord, and secondly the King. 2. the connection of these two, as things
inseparable in this duty of Fear, Fear the LORD, and the KING. 3. The
special property of this duty, as peculiar to the child of God, above all
other, Mysonne, fear THOU the Lord and the King, as if Solomon should have
said, My son, how ever the sons of Belial, the men of the world cast off all
fear, both of God and man, yet fear THOU the Lord and the King. This is the
resolution of the Exhortation.

2. In the Admonition, we are to note three things. 1. The admonition it
self, meddle not. 2. Who they be of whom Gods children are admonished, namely
such as are said here to be given to change. 3. The antithesis or opposition,
between these changlings, and them that truly fear God and the King.

3. In the reason of the admonition annexed, which is taken from the dangerous
condition, that these, who are given to change, are obnoxious unto: we
observe, 1. The matter of their danger, in these words, Calamity and ruin:
then the manner of their calamity and ruin, set down, 1. In it is suddenness,
and 2. in its certainty. It shall rise suddenly: and lastly the unexpected
means of their ruin, contrary to all outward appearance, And who knows the
ruin of them both: That is, though there be no outward appearance of ruin to
these men, but that all things prosper with them, and seem to be on their
side, yet their ruin shall be from both these, as we shall further open by
and by.

Now having distributed the words into their several parts, and that without
curiosity, taking them as they lie naturally in the text: come we briefly to
give you the sense of the words. First, My son, a compellation frequent and
familiar in this book of the Proverbs, as ye may see throughout. It is a voice
beseeming a father to his child, or an ancient to a young man, or a Pastor and
Preacher to his hearer, or God Himself to his people; by his Minister; as in
this place. So Prove. 23. 26. My son give me thine heart, etc. which cannot
be understood, but as spoken by Solomon both from and for God, as who may
justly challenge our heart, and none but he. So here.

Secondly, for fear here: what kind of fear is here meant? There are in
Scripture sundry kinds of fear: as 1. a natural fear, which was in Christ
himself, as man, and is in every man: 2. a filial fear, as in genuine
children to their Parents: 3. a Servill fear, as in all wicked men, and in the
devils themselves, who tremble at God: 4. a civil fear, as of Subjects to
their Prince. 5. a religious fear, as in true Christians toward God. Now this
fear in this place is to be distinguished, though not in name, yet in nature
and kind, according to the difference of the several objects of it. So as
when it is ascribed to God, as the object of it, it is a religious fear: but
as it is applied to man, as its object, as here, it is a civil fear. The
fear of the Lord then, Jehovah, that is, God the Father, and Christ, as the
ordinary Gloss, is a religious fear: the fear of the King is a civil fear.
And though these two fears differ in their kind, yet in resemblance and
similitude they are not unlike. As, the fear of the Lord is a filial fear:
so is the fear of the King: the fear of God comprehends in it all duties
required of his children: the fear of the King all duties required in Subjects
toward their Prince: there is a fear of universal obedience due to God: and
there is a fear of universal obedience next under and after God, due to the
King: there is a fear of adherence to God: and a fear of adherence to the
King. So much in brief for the opening of this word fear: Fear thou the Lord
and the King.

Now for the admonition: Meddle not. It is not meant here, that we may not
meddle at all, by way of reproof, detection, conviction, impeding or
impeaching their wicked courses and practices: but not to meddle, that is, have
no fellowship, side not, countenance not, approve not, applawd not such men in
their evil ways. As (Genesis 49. 5.) Jacob said of Simeon and Leui, instruments
of cruelty, O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly
mine honor be thou not united. Or as Psalm. 1. 1. not to walk, stand, sit with
them in their Counsels, ways, chair. Or as Pro. 1. 10. 15. My son, if
sinners entice thee, consent thou not, walk not thou, in the way with them,
etc. But who are these men we are admonished of? Such as are given to change.
The best interpreters expound it of innouations either of Religion, or of the
Republic: So Mercer, and Lauater Pagnin renders gnim shonim -- cum iterantibus
iniquitatis. Vulg. cum detractoribus. Tremellius and Iunius, cum Id est, cum
variantibus ac perfringentibus Dei, suorumque Principum mandata denique
deficientibus vita sua immorigera a reverentia Dei and Regis.
varijs, Such as change and break the Commandment of God, and of their
Princes, and fall away from the fear of God, and the King in their rebellious
life. But we need go no further then our own translation, which is very full,
meaning it of all such as are factious, seditious, given to change the Laws of
God, and the King.

Lastly, for the reason annexed, one term seems somewhat difficult, as being
subject to different interpretations: the ruin of them both: wat's meant by
them both? Some (as the Ordinary Gloss, and Lyra) refer it to detractors,
and those that intertaine and hearken unto them: to Arch-hereticks, and those
that are seduced by them: to such as derogate from Christ, and others that
join with them. Others again, as Mercerus and Lauater, understand ruin of
them both in an active sense, referring the ruin of those that are given to
change, to God and the King, who shall bring ruin upon them: as if it were
expressed thus, who knows the ruin, that God and the King, whose laws they
violated and innouated, shall cause suddenly to arise and fall upon them. So as
though these be different interpretations, yet they may well be reconciled
together, and may serve for the mutual amplification and illustration of each
other. For innouators are always notorious detractors and sycophants,
derogating from those things, which they go about to innouate or abrogate,
that so they may establish their own novelties, whither in Church, or State,
or both. And ever such ringleaders have their disciples and followers, ready to
be instruments of their wicked designs. These ringleaders with their adherents
and accomplices shall both fall and perish together: and both God and the King,
that is, the justice of Gods Law, and man's Law shall conspire together to root
them out.

Lastly, to show the manner of their unexpected ruin or calamity, it is said,
It shall rise: that is, although they seem to be so high, as to surmount all
fear of dangers, as trampling all under their feet: yet calamity shall rise
above them, and bring them to ruin. As the Lord says, Ier. 37. 10. Also,
Their calamity, notes that God has laid up judgments in store, proper and
peculiar to the wicked. This for the sense of the words; wherein if I have
been a little the longer, yet it is not fruitless, both because we may take a
view of the sense of the whole text together and also lay the better grounds
for those sundry instructions, which will naturally issue from the same.

Come we then to points of instruction arising from this text.

The first is this, from this compellation, My son: Point. (...).
That every one ought so to address himself to the hearing of the Word of
God, as a Son of God. Here we see God speaks unto us, as unto sons, My son,
fear etc. My son, hear the instruction of a Father: as chap. 4. 1. and 2. 1.
etc. So Heb. 12. 6. And ye have forgotten the Exhortation, which speaks unto
you, as unto children, My son, despise not thou the chastning of the Lord,
etc. This is that exhortation, Prove. 3. 11.

But how can poor men, as we are, be said to be the Question.
Sons of God?

In brief: not by nature, for so Christ only is the Son Answer.
of God: but by adoption and grace we are made the Sons of God through faith,
as Gal. 4. 5. and Gal. 3. 26.

Now this addressement, as of sons, to hear Gods Word, is very effectual and
profitable in sundry respects: As 1. It is a strong motive, and sweet
preparative to a reverend attention. I will hearken (says David) Psalm. 85. 8.
1 Thessalonians. 2. 13.
what the Lord God will speak: for he will speak peace unto his people, and
to his Saints. And the Thessalonians are commended, and Taul thanketh God, that
they received the Word, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the Word of
God. When a son hears the counsel of his Father, that is wise, loving,
kind, true, and powerful to make good what he says, it draws on, and
commands attention. Such a Father is God, infinite inall his Attributes.

Secondly, to hear as a son, makes for fervent affection, in loving,
embracing, and highly esteeming the Word of God. The reason that many men do
not receive the Word of truth in the love of it, is because they are none of
his sons. They are as 1. King. 22
Ahab, they hear the truth at the Prophets mouth, but they hate him and the
truth. As Christ said to the Jews, when they boasted that God was their
Father, and they were Abraham's children: If God were your Father, you would
love John 8. 39. 41. v. 42. 39.
me: And if Abraham were your father, you would do his works, for he
rejoiced to see my day. It is therefore a sonlike affection, that intertaines
Gods Word with love, whither he check, or whither he cherish, whither he
threaten, or comfort.

3. To hear as a son, is an inducement to frequent meditation of the Word
heard. As Prove. 7. 1. 2. 3. My son, keep my words, and lay up my
Commandments with thee. Keep my Commandments and live; and my Law, as the
apple of thine eye. Bind them upon thy Nec quenquam senem audivi obl^tum quo
lovo thes^urum abruisset. Omnia quae curant, menunerunt. Cre. de Senectute.
singer, write them upon the table of thine heart. For the instructions of such
a Father, are so many Jewels. As Prove. 1. 1. 9. an ornament of grace to thy
head, and chains about thy neck: yea a crown of glory. Prove. 4. 9. Now a man
will always be minding his treasure, where his Jewels be. Where the treasure
is, the heart will be, says Christ.

4. To hear Gods Word as his son, makes for diligent observation and
obedience. This is the true try, all of Sons, if they observe their Fathers
commandments. If I be a Father, says God, where is mine honor. Our Mal. 1. 6.
Fathers honor is our following of his counsels, and obeying his
Commandments.

Use. 1. For trial of our Sonship, by these former signs and marks: by our
reverend attention in hearing, as to gods own Word, by our fervent love in
intertaining his Word; by our frequent meditation of it; and by our diligent
observation. As Zach. 6. 15.

2. For instruction: this is the maine duty of a Christian to be most careful
of his behavior and frame of spirit, about the hearing of Gods Word. And
therefore Christ often admonishes his disciples, Take heed how ye hear, and
Take heed what ye hear. For according to our hearing is our soul indueth with
faith, and seasoned with grace, and illuminated with sound and saving knowledge
of Christ, and the whole course of our life regulated and framed.

3. And lastly, for reproof and conviction those, as no Sons of God, but
enemies, and rebels, that hate and despise Gods Word in the powerful Ministry
of it, and do with might and maine labor to oppose and oppress it. Such
plainly show themselves whence they come, namely as those mysts and foggs from
the bottomless pit, which darken the clear light of the Sun and Stars: so
do these overclowd the beams of the Gospel, that they cannot shine forth to
the Church of God. Or they are those froggs, unclean spirits out of the mouth
of the Dragon, and Beast, and false Prophet, whose croking cries down the
voice of Gods Ministers, and which do corrupt the pure streams of the waters
of life by their filthiness. In a word, these are the limbs of the Beast, even
of Antichrist, taking his very courses to bear and beat down the hearing of
the Word of God, whereby men might be saved; like to the Jews, of whom the
Ap^stle says, who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own Prophets, and have
persecuted us, and they please not God, and are contrary to all men, Forbidding
us to speak to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fill up their sins
a^ way; for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. And surely the wrath
hangs over the heads of these men, which must needs sease upon them ere long,
if they speedily repent not, whereof there is little hope. But leave we them
and come we to the matter of the exhortation.

Fear thou the Lord etc. Whence the point is: 1. Poi^. 2.
That it is the duty of every true Christian to fear the Lord, and this, with
a filial fear, as is, employed in this word, My son, fear thou the Lord.
This filial fear is, used in Scripture for the whole worship and service of
God, and comprehends in it all virtues and graces of Gods spirit. As Eccles.
12. 13. Let us hear the end of all, Fear God and keep his Commandments:
for this is the whole man: that is, the whole duty which God requires of his
children. So Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and
shall swear by his name. And Esa. 29. 13. Their fear toward me is taught by
the prec^pt of men; that is, the worship and service they perform unto me, is
taught by man's precepts. Which is that ^aine worship, whereof Christ convinces
Math. 15. 9
the Pharisees, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, the
Comman^ements of men. And Acts 10. 35. In every nation he that fears God,
and works righteousness, is accepted of him. Thus by these places we see,
how the true fear of the Lord, is taken for the whole worship and service of
God, both internal, and external, and so for every grace of Gods Spirit in
us, as faith, hope, love, and the like.

Reasons of this point. 1. Because the true fear of God is a fundamental
grace, and respects all the Commandments of God, as the object of it. As
Psalm. 112. 1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, he delights greatly
in ^is Commandments.

2. Because where God is not truly worshipped, there is no fear of God. As in
Esaias 29. 13. This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips
do honor me, but they have remooved their heart far from me. And the
reasonis added: Their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men.

3. Because where other virtues be not, the reason is, because true fear is
not. Which argues, that true fear of God is inseparably combined with other
graces. As Romans 3. 10. 18. the Apostle reckoning up a bead-row of iniquities,
concludes with this reason, There is no fear of God before their eyes. So Mal.
3. 5. I will come near to you to judgment, and will be a swift witness
against the Sorcerers, and against the adulte^ers, and against false swearers,
and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the
fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right. Well, what is the
ground of all this wickedness, It is there added, And fear not me, says the
Lord of Hoasts.

4. Because holy fear is the seasoning and salt of every virtue, and of the
whole worship of God. As Psalm. 5. 7. In thy f^are will I worship toward thy
holy Temple. So Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord in fear. Which I say, is such a
fear, as has in it faith, love, affiance and other graces.

5. Lastly, we are bound to perform all obedience to God in a holy fear, by
virtue of the Word of God as the rule, and of the Covenant God has made with
us in his Word, and we with him. Gods Law is so the rule of our fear, and
obedience to God, as it is death to fear or obey him otherwise, then he has
commanded us in his Law. Else it is rebellion, not obedience, will worship, not
service to God. And this we are bound to, by mutual Covenant. 1. God binds
himself to be our God and King by Covenant in his word: as Exodus 20. Secondly,
we bind our selves by a reciprocal Covenant, as in our Baptism to be his
Servants, and to serve him as he has commanded in his Law.

Use of this point is first for reproof and conviction of the whole Roman
Synagogue, as being altogether devoyd of the true fear of God; and
consequently, is no true Church of Christ, ^one of the Kings Daughter, none of
his spowse. Why? For all her fear toward God is taught by the precept of men;
her service of God is a Mass of Idolatry and Superstition, Will Worship of
man's invention; and therefore though they draw near to God with their lips,
yet their hearts are far from him. And so in vain they worship him, nay they
worship the Devil, and not God, as the Apostle shows, 1. Cor. 10. 20. For
all Idolatry, as that of the breaden god in the Mass, is the worship of the
Devil. They will say, they worship God in the Host: So did the Pagans plead
for themselves, that they worshipped God in their Idols. Yet, says the
Apostle, I say, that the things, which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice
to Devils, and not to God. And God disclaimes all worship of Him, that is not
according to His Word, and He abhorres such presumptuous worshippers, as those
that do not fear him. So as secondly here are justly reprooved those men, as
wanting the true fear of God, who in these days show themselves Antichrists
Factors, both in teaching, practicing, and pressing new Forms of worship,
Secundum usum Sarum, and setting them up again in Churches, as Altar-worship,
Iesuworship, Image Worship, Crosse-worship, and the like. A plain evidence,
that these men (what ever they most hypocritically pretend, and would be
accounted as a new kind of Saints dropped down out of the clouds, as most
holy and devoute persons) have no true fear of God in them. Yea their hearts
are far from God. Their fear is more toward an Altar of their own invention,
toward an Image and Crucifix, toward the sound and sillables of Jesus, then
toward the Lord Christ. For did they truly fear Christ, they would not (as
they do) so desperately and furiously persecute him in his faithful Ministers
and members, and make havocke, and turn upside-down the very glory of Christ's
Kingdom in the Ministry of His Word, and power of Religion, and purity of his
worship, which they altogether trample under, and defile with their Wolvish
feet. Therefore, forasmuch as they set up and teach a false fear, and worship
of God in the Churches, I (says the Lord) will proceed to do a mavelous
work among the people, even a mavelous work, and a wonder: for the wisdom
of their wise men shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent men
shall be hid. And v. 16. Surely your turning of things upside-downe, shall be
esteemed at the Potters clay. But of these more in their proper place.

A 2. (...) ^s for instruction, to teach us wherein the true filial fear of
God consists; namely in the true worship and service of God internal and
external, according to the exact form and prescript of his Word. Not to
swerve one hairs breadth from it. Again, that true fear of God stnads in an
universal obedience to all and every of his Commandments, not only those of
the first Table, but those of the second; nor only those of the second, but
those of the first.

So as Thirdly, this may condemn two sorts of gross Hypocrites. 1. Those that
seem exact and punctual in observing the Commandments of the second Table:
they are no Adulterers, no Drunkards, no inordinate livers; they are not
notorious offenders; and what then? Hereupon they applaud themselves, and would
be esteemed of the World good Christians, and with the Pharisee thank God,
that in these things they are not as other men, Extortioners, Unjust, etc. They
live peacably with their Neighbors, they pay every man his own, and the like.
But what is all this without the fear of God? Where is their Piety, and Love to
God, expressed in the duties of the first Table? Are they willingly and grossly
ignorant of the knowledge of God? Do they hate, contemn, neglect his words?
Do they despise his faithful Ministers? Do they speak evil of the Way and
Profession of Godliness? Do they profane the Lords Sabbaths? Yea, do they
comply with Idolaters in their Altar-worship, and Iesu-worship, and the like?
and yet would they be accounted good honest men? Can they be honest and good
men, that are enemies of God, and of the Profession, yea and name of holiness,
and of the power of Religion, and of the true Saints and servants of Jesus
Christ? Can they be good Christians, which are enemies to the Cross of Christ,
whose Phil. 3. 18. 19.
end is damnation, whose God is their belly, and which mind earthly things? On
the other side, there is another sort of Hypocrites, who place all their
Religion in the outward performances and duties of the first Table, profess a
great deal of Religion, would seem very devout, but yet are like the
Pharisees, who under a color of long prayers, devour Widows houses. Of these
Hypocrites, there are two sorts. 1. Of them, that are all for outward
formality, but their hypocrisy bewrays it self two ways: First, in that
though they seem very devoute, in frequenting the Church, yet it is in a false
way, mingling men's devices of will worship with Gods Ordinance; and in dividing
the Lords day between God and the Devil, allowing to God only two hours of
the day for his public worship, and the rest of the day to the lusts of men.
Secondly, in that they place all the service of God in reading of long Prayers,
and thereby exclude Preaching as unnecessary. And yet they make no bones of
oppressing Gods people, and the Kings good Subjects with burdens intolerable
to be borne. The second sort is of them, that will seem Religious, and to
give God his due, but make no conscience of giving to all men their due: they
will make no scruple of Lying, of overreaching in bargaining, of living in
some secret reigning lust, of oppressing, of defrawding, and the like. These
are so much the more to be abhorred, because by their means, Religion, and the
name of God is evil spoken of. And such have been, and will be in all ages.
Yet woe be to them, that hereupon take occasion to cast an aspersion of
reproach upon religion, and all the sincere Professors thereof, because of a
few hypocritical and false hearted Christians, so called, who have a form of
godliness, but deny the power thereof. There was among the twelve Apostles one
Judas, a traitor, a thief, a notorious hypocrite: were therefore all the rest
so? God forbid. And yet is not this one of those subtle practices, which
Jesuits and their accomplices, the Popes Factors here in England do familiarly
use, taking all occasions, by laying forth the examples of some faylings or
perhaps some gross sin in one that is a Professor, to brand the whole
profession of Religion? In so much as they take the pains, and spend their
time and wits, in setting forth pamphlets, yea some larger volumes, as of that
poor distracted man Ap-Evans, who (as they write) should kill his Mother and
Brother, and all (forsooth) because they kneeled in receiving the holy
Communion. Now it is most evident to every sober and rational man, that this
poor wretch was out of his wits, else he had never done such an outrageous
act. And yet what a hubbub is made hereof, how must the Press sweat with
printing this tale of a mad man? how must the Court, and City, and Country,
ring of it? And to what end? Namely, to beware of these Puritans, and to hate
all Puritans for Evans his sake. Alas poor Puritans, must they all fare the
worse, for one mad man? Yet this is the charity of those, that are professed
enemies to true sanctity and sincerity. And it matters not whither it be true
or false: it must be believed for truth; though this of Evans was in another
written copy (offered to be licensed, but rejected) showed to be quite contrary
to the first relation. And thus the accuser of the brethren wants not his
agents, to make advantage of the falls, or faylings of some Professors, not
only to the branding of their persons, but even of Religion it self, and the
whole profession of it. As when some, possessed and overcome with that
malevolent humor of black melancholy, through Satan's prevailing over the
weaker part, do make themselves away: oh how is this exagitated, and occasion
taken thereby to exclame against Religion, or some Puritan Preachers, that by
the doctrine of Predestination drive men to despair? and therefore some strict
order must be taken for the suppressing of this Doctrine, as dangerous and
desperate; which notwithstanding the 17. article of our Religion commends,
Saying, The godly consideration of Predestination, and our Article 17.
Election in Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to
godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the What m^r^ jeared by a
generation of upstarts in these days.
working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh, and their
earthly members, and drawing up their minds to high and heavenly things, as
well because it does greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal
salvation, to be inioyed through Christ, as because it does fervently kindle
their love toward God. So the article, which I note by the way. But the
conclusion is, the men of the world will have Gods children, or Professors of
Religion, either as the pure and perfect Angels, without the least spot of
sinful infirmity: or if they be at any time overtaken with humane frailty,
then they must be taken for black devils, and their religion to come from
hell. But all good Christians, and wise men of upright judgment, will beware
of this rock, not to be Scandalized, and fall foul upon the Religion of
Christ, either for the hypocrisy of some false Professors, or for the
infirmity of those that be sincere, and upright in their way, but are attended
with faylings, and humane frailty. Concerning which the Apostle gives this good
lesson: Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, Galath. 6. 1.
Considering thine own self, least thou also be tempted. And again, we that
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please our
selves. So much of this point, That it is the duty of every true Romans 15. 1.
Christian thus to fear the Lord, as has been said.

Again, as there is in Scripture a fear of obedience, which fear comprehends
the whole service of God, and is the whole of a Christian man. So there is also
a fear of adherence, whereby the soul cleaves inseparably to God. This fear
is laid down in Ier. 32. 40. v. I will make an everlasting covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them to do them good: but I will put my fear
in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This is the fear of
adherency. And this further shows, how this fear is not without faith, hope,
and charity, as without which it cannot adhere unto God. Now from this fear of
adherency, we learn:

That the true fear of God in his children, preserves them from falling from
God, and his worship. This is Point. 3.
confirmed by the forenamed place in Jeremy. And this is notably set forth,
Psalm. 1^2. Blessed is the man, that fears the Lord, etc. Surely he shall not
be moved for ever, v. 6. he shall not be afraid of evil tidings, for his
heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, v. 7. This is a special property and
character of the true child of God. So 1. John 2, 19. speaking of Apostates,
They went out from us, for they were not of us, for had they been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be
made manifest, that they were not all of us. Where we note these particulars:

1. All they that are of us, to wit, true believers, do no doubt continue in
the Communion of Saints.

2. Aug. De correptili and gratia, Cap. 9. quia non habuerunt persevere antiam,
sicut non vere discipuli Christi, ita nec vere filij De fuerimt, etiam quando
esse videbantur at it^ vocabantur.
They that for a time seem to be of the number of Gods children, and
afterward fall away, it is a certain sign, that they were not indeed, what
they once seemed to be. So 2. John 9. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not
in the doctrine of Christ, has not God: he that abides in the Doctrine of
Christ, has both the Father and the Son. And it is worth the nothing, by the
way, what is added in the very next words, V. 10.
If there come any unto you, and bring you not this Doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed: for he that bids him God speed,
is partaker of his evil deeds. So that this is the doctrine of Christ, namely
the doctrine of adherency and perseverance of the Saints in grace, as here in
the grace of fear.

This doctrine might further be illustrated and confirmed by many reasons: as
1. from the covenant of Reasons.
God, I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, that I will not turn away
from you to do you good: Ier. 32. 40. This is that foundation of God that
stands sure, and has this Seal, The Lord knows who are his. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
And because this covenant is founded on God himself, and his free and gracious
love depending on himself alone, and not on weak, and impotent man, therefore
what should be able to undo or revoke this everlasting Covenant? Not man, nor
devil. For I am persuaded (says the Apostle) that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor powers, etc. shall be able Romans 8. 38. ^9.
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Secondly, from the nature of true fear, which is a gift of grace from God. 1.
a grace of a saving nature, and 2. of free gift of grace. Therefore it is here
added to Gods Covenant, that as Gods Covenant is, that He will never turn
away from us to do us good: So he puts his fear into our hearts, that we
shall never depart from Him. Thus God is tied to us, and we to him by sure
bonds. And where God gives this fear, he never takes it away. For the gifts
and calling of God are without repentance. And God gives it to that end, that
we shall Romans 11.
never depart from him.

Thirdly from regeneration: He that has this fear has the new birth, he is
borne of God; and being borne of God, sins not, that is, not to death, and
the reason is there rendered, because the seed of God remains in him, and he
cannot sin, because he is borne of God. The reason is most forcible. And
Examen.
Arminius is so puzzled with it, as he cannot tell what to say to it,
confessing it is the strongest place that is brought for perseverance. Yet that
he may not say nothing, though to no purpose, he says, The seed of God
remains so long as it does remain. A poor and pitiful shift. So he may
clude all Scripture. So he may say, Gods Covenant not to turn away from his
people to do them good, is everlasting so long as it is everlasting. Were not
this ridiculous? So Christ says, Ioh. 6. 39.
This is the Fathers will, that of all, which he has given me, I should loose
nothing. Now were it not absurd to say, It is the fathers will, so long as it
is his will? Even so it is here, the constant and perpetual remaining of the
Seed of God in us, whereby we are begotten and borne of God, is rendered by
the holy Ghost, as a grond and reason, why such cannot sin unto death, or
fall away from grace, either totally or finally; and Arminius would make it
nonsense, saying, So long as the Seed of God remains in him that is borne of
God. For he says, This Seed may be lost. If it may be lost, then God has
lost His credit: Who says, He that is borne of God cannot commit sin, for
the Seed of God remains in him. But if the Seed of God remain not, then he
that is borne of God, may commit sin, and so perish for ever, which is
contrary to Gods Truth. And let God be true, and every man a liar. Yea, this
is backed also with another reason: Neither can he sin, because he is borne
of God. He that is once borne of God, cannot sin, that is unto death: For
God cannot die, of whom he is borne again. All the Arminians in the world,
with their father Arminius, are here either at a nonplus, or of necessity they
must speak nonsense.

Hereunto might be added many other reasons of the Saints perseverance in the
grace of fear; as because it is the godly man's treasure, Esa. 33. 6. The fear
of the Lord is his treasure. Now there is nothing, which a man keeps more
carefully and safely, then his treasure. And to be sure, Gods child lays up
his treasure in heaven, unaccessible to the rust, or moth, or thief: because
this fear is combined inseparably with other graces, as faith, hope, charity,
which never fail: for faith is the foundation of things hoped for, Heb. 11. 1.
and Hope, as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, enters within
the veil, Heb. 6. 9. and hope also makes not ashamed, because the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. So as
the holy Ghost also is that power of God, whereby through faith we are kept
unto Salvation. 1. Pet. 1. 5. And whereby we are sealed, even with the holy
Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance unto the redemption
of the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory.

But this suffice for the proof and Illustration of the point.

Use 1. For terror of all the enemies of grace, Whither Papists, Pelagians, or
Arminians, who hold and teach the Apostasy of the Saints, that they may fall
away from grace totally and finally: Surely these men are none of Gods
Children, they have none of this filial fear of adherencie, they never had
this fear put into their hearts, that they shall not depart away from God. And
forasmuch as many in these days are fallen away from this doctrine of Christ,
so clearly laid down in the Scriptures, so as they oppugn it with might and
maine, and with an inveterate hatred: certain it is, that they are gone out
from us, because they were not of us; for had they been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us. And by the way, we must not meddle
with, show no countenance to, make no friendship, have no familiarity with such
Apostates, such changers of the Doctrine of Christ. For if there come any unto
you, and bring you not this Doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither
bid him God speed: for he that 2. Ioh. 10. 11.
bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds.

Secondly, Let this be for admonition to us all in these days of Apostasy; by
a godly and filial fear to stick close unto God, and his Doctrine, and
worship in purity; that nothing may be able to separate us from Christ. You
see, or hear at the least of old heaving and shooving to erect Altar-worship,
and Iesu-worship, and other inventions of men, and all (as it is too plain) to
set up Popery again: and for not yielding to these things, Ministers are
Excommunicated, suspended, yea threatened with Dr. Corbet Chancellor to the Bp.
of Norwi^h (Mr. Greenhill an eminent Minister coming to him with another
Minister in humble manner to desire absolution from excommunication for the
refusal of conformity to their new rites) said unto him in a great head of
passion, that if he had the power as he desired, he would Pistol him.
Pistolling, and with bloodshedding, and hanging As Master Buck in his Sermon
at Norwich, inveighing against the Puritans, said, If a cup of cold water had a
reward, much more a cup of blood.
as Rebels. And so hot is the persecution against Gods faithful Ministers and
people in those Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, as now to stick close to
Christ, is an eminent character of a true Son and servant of God, as to whom
it is said here, My son, fear THOU the Lord: though thou see many other
give out, and flinch for fear of men, Yet Fear thou the Lord, my Son. Which
leads us to another point, which is this.

Point 4. A man that truly fears the Lord, is a man of a thousand, is an
eminent person, a goodly object, or Spectacle to be looked upon. Fear THOU the
Lord, is a property peculiar to him. So Psalm. 25. 12. What man is HE that
fears the Lord? Find me such a man: give we such a man. Why what of him? He
is in special favor with God. Him shall he teach in the way which he shall
choose. Yea, God will acquaint him with his Secrets, as accounting him his most
intimate friend. For v. 14. The Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him.
And these are so rare (like to rich and rare jewels) that Solomon himself
could find but one man of a thousand. But especially does the eminency of that
man, that truly fears God, appear, when other fears stand in opposition
against it, as fear of cruel As Dr. Corbet said to Mr. Powell a Minister, who
refused to read the book for sports, That were it not for a point in the
common law, he deserved to be hanged, drawn and quartered.
men, loss of liberty, livelihood, and the like. As Moses his rod was not so
famous, for being (though miraculously) turned into a Serpent (for even the
Magitians of Egypt by their enchantments could (in show) turn their rods also
into Serpents) but herein it was admirable in the eyes of all the Beholders,
that thus being a Serpent, it devoured all the Magitians Serpents. And such is
true fear, in Gods Child, when it stands in emulation, or opposition with
other fears though they seem never so terrible, as the Magitians Serpents,
yet it overcomes and devoures them all. Such was Daniels fear, devouring the
terror of the hungry Lions, which could not devour him: such the fear of
those 3. Iustum and tenacem Propositi virum, non civium ardor Prav^ Iubentium,
non vultus instantis Tyranni, mente qua^it solida. Horat.
Children, who feared neither the Kings big and furious threats, nor his
seven fold heated fiery furnace. Such was Nehemiahs, who being threatened, and
moved to fly, answered, 1. King. 18. 18.
should such a man as I fly? So as indeed the true fear of God, is true
fortitude and magnanimity. For this, who will not admire Elias, when he
retorted K. Ahabs words upon him, I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy
Fathers house etc? And Elisha, who being brought before the King of Israel,
said to him, Were it not, that I regard the presence of Iehoshaphat the King of
Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see 2. King. 3. 14.
thee? Such a spirit of holy fear was in the Martyrs, and Confessors. Maris
Zozo^. Hist. l. 5. Cap. 4.
Bishop of Chalcedon being blind, and coming before the Emperor Julian the
Apostata, called him Atheist, Apostata, and a desertor of the faith. And when
Julian objected to him his blindness, and asked him upbraidingly, If his God,
the Galilean (meaning Christ) could not cure his blindness, he replied, But I
thank my God, that I am blind, that I may not behold such a wretched and
Impious Apostata, as thou art. It were endless to recite, examples in this
kind, except to convince the cowardice of our times.

But yet this Parrhesia, this liberty, and freedom of speech in such cases, is
not without the fear of God, but is a branch and fruit, that springs of it.
And this fear shows it self in sundry manners, according either to the
present occasion, or the natural disposition of a child of God, being seasoned
and sanctified and guided by Gods Spirit. Sometimes it shows it self in
meekness and mildness, sometimes in a greater measure of zeal, and
roughness, and yet all from the selfsame spirit of godly fear. Of this
latter kind are those former examples. Of the former, that of It was in old
time, when some Bishops, were content to be poorevita S. Wilfredi. See Caml.
Remains. Wisespeeches. p. 183.
a poor English Bishop: whom when Theodor the Grecian, Archbishop of
Canterbury, without any just cause deprived of his Bishopric, saying,
Although we can charge you with nothing, yet that we will, we will. Sic volo,
sic jubeo: the poor Bishop humbly replied: Paul appealed from the Jews to
Caesar, and I from you, to Christ. And how many godly Ministers in these our
days (being most unjustly and illegally, yea and in canonically also, and that
in a most barbarous and furious insolent manner suspended, excommunicated,
outed of their livings, and so deprived of all livelihood and means to
maintain themselves, their wives and children, and withal rayled upon, and
reviled, and most outragiously used, as if they were dogs, and not men) have
cause and occasion so to answer those that thus use them, Paul appealed from
the Jews to Caesar, and we from you to Christ. But what care these miscreants
for Christ, who thus persecute him in his members and Ministers? Yet this is a
comfort to all such Ministers, as stand for Christ; that as they appeal, and
commit their cause to him whose cause it is, so he will certainly vindicate
both his righteous cause, and his faithful servants in due time. When Stephen
was stoned, he saw Christ standing at the Act. 7.
right hand of God, as ready to revenge his cause, which not long after he did,
upon all the obstinate and rebellious Jews in Jerusalem.

Use 1. Now for use of this point: it first gives occasion to Christians, in
these days of lukewarmenesse and apostasy, to make proof of their graces, and
especially of the fear of the Lord in them, whither it be such, as devoures
and swalloweth down all worldly fears.

Secondly, since this fear is so excellent and rare, we should be the more
earnest in getting it, as he in the Gospel was to buy the goodly pearl. He
gave all he had for it. And surely it was richly worth it. For as Christ says,
What shall it profit a man, if he shall win the whole world, and loose his own
soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? A man may by his
discretion, or Christian Prudence (as they call it) so carry the matter, as to
secure himself from fear of the world; for he can give way, and conform
himself quietly to all human impositions, and can command his conscience to
bear with them, notwithstanding it do secretly whisper in his ear, that this
ought not to be done, as being an intolerable dishonor to Christ, a disgrace
to his Ministry, a forfeiture of his Christian liberty, a Scandal to Religion,
and a base betraying of the cause of Christ, and of the salvation of his own
soul. But yet he wants not reasons for it. Thereby he shall preserve his
Ministry, and his credit too, in not being accounted refractory, he shall thus
purchase his peace, and retain his means for him and his, without which he
and they must beg, and the like. Alas poor soul! what is thy Ministry worth,
when thou have abased it, and inthralled it to be impious inventions and
impositions of men? or when thou injoyest it, with the loss of its vigor,
power, dignity, authority? or when thou retainest it together with thy outward
liberty, livelihood, peace, credit, with the misjudging world, and loosest thy
Christ, thy peace of conscience, thy Bono probari malo, quam multis malis.
Ausonius.
credit with all good and wise men, yea heaven and all; what will all thy
discretion and Christian prudence advantage thee? O let us rather learn to be
fools for Christ's cause, let us fear the Lord, and not men, not the world.
It Is Christ's counsel to all his, that are his friends, saying, I say unto you
my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that can do
no Lu. 12. 4. 5.
more: but I will forewarne you whom ye shall fear, fear him, which after he
has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you; him fear.
Where Christ exhorts us to this fear of God, by a threefold motive 1. that he
calls us friends. And surely such as truly fear God, are the friends of
Christ, from whom no fear of men can divide them; as we said before. 2. he
forewarnes us, that we may not be unarmed with this fear of God, least
otherwise we be on a sudden surprised, and overthrown, before we be aware,
when the great red Dragon with all his terror presents himself Revel. 12. 4
before the woman, ready to bring forth a masculine birth, which with the
mother, he threatens to devour. And so much the more, when the Dragon is (...)
powerful, as with his tail to draw the third part of the Stars of heaven,
and to cast them to the earth: that is, when the greatest part of those, who in
their heavenly Orbs and Motions are as Starry lights, shining in their
doctrine and life, are either by the Dragons threats, or the trains and wiles
of his dog-like flattering tail, cast from their heavenly station, to the
earth, when the love or fear of earthly things swayes more with them to draw
them downwards, then of heavenly, to fix them on Christ. Thirdly, Christ in
the forenamed place redoubles his premonition, Yea I say unto you fear HIM: by
which he would intimate unto us of what force the fear of man is to draw us
away from our station with God, if we be not well rooted in the fear of God.

Thirdly here is an use of caution to those, that are apt to be censorious of
those, to whom God has given a greater and more extraordinary measure of
Christian zeal and courage for Christ. For such a virtue, as it is more
eminent, so it draws upon it a great deal of envy, especially from those,
which as they idolize their counterfeit discretion and Christian prudence (as
they term it) and all because they love to sleep in a whole, skin, and are
loath to hazard a hair of their head for Christ: so on the other side they
clevate and slight the noble zeal and courage of those whom they see so far
to out strip them in this heroic grace, and invincible love to Christ: yea
they are ready to term it rashness and indiscretion; especially if the
success prove an imprisonment, or other vexation from those, who with their
might bearedowne the right; and then they applawde and hug their own
prudence and discretion, when in the mean time they enjoy their peace and
cease at home. For as an Prosper^ ac f^lix scelus virtus vocatur. Senec si mal^
res cessit. licet optima male tamen audit.
evil attempt, if it hit well, is called a virtue: so the best actions, being
attended with an issue not answerable, are deemed, by unjust judges, vicious
and erroneous.

Fourthly and lastly, is the true fear of God such a rare and excellent
virtue, and so invincible, overco^ming all other fears? Then this makes for
exceeding consolation to the Church of God, especially in declining times of
Apostasy, and when the truth is openly persecuted and oppressed, and Idolatry
and Superstition obtruded instead thereof: when notwithstanding we see, many
Ministers of Jesus Christ (though but few comparatively, in respect of the
whole multitude) to stand stoutly to their tacklings, and rather then they will
betray any part of Gods truth, and of a good conscience, they will part with
their Ministry, liberty, livelihood, and life too, if need were. This is that
which keeps Christ's cause in life. This gives Gods people cause of rejoicing,
that they see their Captains to keep their ground, and not to fly the field,
or forsake their colors, or basely yield themselves to the enemy. Here is
hope, that the cause will prevail at length. But if all should yield or fly,
then the field were lost without recovery. Yet how many do like Demosthenes,
who seeing his party begin to be put to the worst, takes his heels, and
being asked why he fled so fast: Oh, says he, that I may preserve my self to
fight another time? Then sure he would do great feats. But in the mean time
the enemy is master of the field, and now there is no more place of fighting.
So, prudent Soldiers, and captains among us, seeing Christ's side (in man's
judgment) to be distressed by the enemies prevailing power, think it good
discretion rather to yield to the present extremity; and so to reserve
themselves for better times; when in the mean time the cause is by them
betrayed, and themselves soled captive, that their captain Christ will never
trust to such captains again, as to commit the leading of his people under
the false colors of their empty pretenses. Yea and the people too are willing
and persuade their Ministers to yield in those smaller matters, as they
conceive, rather then to forgo their Ministry; not waighing either the
dangerous conseque^ces of such beginnings, or the worthlessenesse of such
Ministers, as shall do such certain evil, that a supposed (and but supposed
only) good may come thereof. Whose damnation is just, as the Apostle speaks.
For Rome was not build in one day. And Rome being about Romans
to be rebuilt in this land, cannot be done all at once, but it must be by
degrees; although the builders do every day get ground, and their building
goes on a maine, with an incredible celerity. But I trust they make more have,
then good speed. And me thinks I see the issue of their building in that of
the Tower of Babell: of which the Lord said, Behold the people is one, Genesis 11.
6.
and they have all one language, and this they begin to do, and now nothing
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. Even so our new
Babel-builders upon a strong combination and faction against Christ and his
Kingdom, have begun to build a Tower reaching to heaven in their high
imagination, as if they would (as the Giants of old) pull Christ out of his
Throne: and all outward likelyhoods conspire unto their more than hoped for
success, which no external means can prevent: but as then, so now, the Lord
is able by an uncouth way, which they never dreamed of to confound them, and
their work, to their eternal infamy. Even so, o Lord.

Yet (as we said before) Gods children must take heed for their parts, that
they bring not so much as a Turpiu^, (...) gr^ ^^icitur, quam non admitt^tur
^espes.
stick, or a stone, to this building, but that they hinder and stop the
beginning and creeping in of Idolatry and Superstition, which else is as a
breaking in of the Sea, that so overflowes the land, and so gains more ground
every tide, till it grow incurable. This we have seen in these Innovations.
First Pewes at Chancel-ends must be remooved, that so none may sit above God
Almighty. Though this at first dash, brings the Real Presence, Well, what is
next? It Is fit to remoove the Table Altarwise. This was with much hard tugge
effected in Saint Gregory's by Paul's, at least for the near Virgil. Eglog Sic
cantb^^ carulos similes, sio matribus hoedos Noram sic parvu componere magna
solebam.
neighborhood it has to Paul's, and that the daughter may be somewhat like the
mother (Ezech. 16. 44. As is the mother, so is the daughter) though the table
do not stand end-wayes an as Altat, but with the end to the wall. Well, yet a
rail must be made about it, to infinuate into the peoples minds an opinion of
some extraordinary sanctity in the Table, more then in other places of the
Church, as the Pew, Pulpit, or Font. Yet all this may seem tolerable, and
without danger. Well, the like is done in other places. But this grows further
on; in many places adorations practiced to this new Altar-God: yea pleaded for
in pulpits, and in See Shelforts Sermons, and Dr. Pockl. Sunday no Sabbath. And
others.
printed books; yea and that in sundry Colleges in the Universities (the
seminaries and seed plotts of learning and Religion) so far pressed, as the
exemplary practices of those that be the Heads or Superiors there, may any way
draw and induce the inferior Students to their imitation, either through fear
of displeasure, or for hope of preferrement. Which how perilous it is, tending
to corrupt the whole land with superstition and Idolatry every one may see.
Well now, what is the next? Thus far we now see Popery, like a thief,
stolen in upon us step by step, when we, as men Matt. 13. 25.
asleep in our beds, suspected no danger. And perhaps, the next degree will be
the placing of their God-Almighty in the Host or Pix visibly and conspicuously
upon the Altar, and a Mass with the piping of the Organs, chanted unto it, as
the Israelites did about their See the Homily of the place and time of Prayer
part. 2. Where these words are: Finally Gods vengeance has been, and is daily
provoked, because much wicked people pass nothing to resort to the Church,
either for that they are so sore blinded that they understand nothing of God
and godliness, and care not with divellish example to offend their neighbors,
or ^ls for that they see the church altogether scoured of such gay gazing
sights, as their gross fantasy was greatly*delighted with, because they see
the false religion abandoned, and the true restored, which seems an unsavory
thing to their unsavorly taste: as may appear by this, that a woman said to her
neighbor: Alas Gossip, what shall we do at Church, since all the Saints are
taken away, since all the goodly sights we were wons to have, are gone, since
we cannot hear the like piping, singing, chanting and playing upon the Organs,
that we could before. But (dearly beloved) we ought greatly to rejoice and
give God thanks, that our Churches are delivered out of ALL those things, which
displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy house, and his place of
prayer, for the which he has justly destroyed many nations according to the
saying of Saint Paul. If any man defile the Temple of God, God will him
destroy, And this ought we greatly to praise God for, that such Superstitious
and Idolatrous manners, as were utterly naught, and defaced Gods glory, are
utterly abolished as they most justly deserved. So the Homily.
Calfe, Exodus 32. Therefore does it not concern Gods Ministers and people
too, even from the highest to the lowest, as one man, to stand out against this
creeping gangrene, that having begun but in the least member, never cease
creping, till at length it has prevailed over the principal parts and so
brought death to the whole body, and this such a death, as kills the soul, and
bring us all back again under the most intolerable yoke and bondage of
Satan and Antichrist, from the which the Lord had so mightily and mercifully
delivered us?

Thus much of the fear of the Lord. Come we now to the next point, which is
the fear of the King. In which we are to observe. 1. The kind of this fear:
2. The order of it, next to the fear of the Lord: 3. The Connection of it with
the fear of the Lord: being so combined, that the one cannot stand without the
other.

First then for the kind of this fear, I told you in the opening of the text,
that it is a Civil fear, differing from the fear of the Lord, which is a
religious fear, and so a part of his worship, and consequently incommunicable
to any creature. Yet so (as I told you) there is a similitude between this
Civil fear to the King, and that religious fear of the Lord. As, 1. as the
true fear of the Lord comprehends in it all duties and services due from us to
God: so the fear of the King contaynes all duties due from Subject, to their
King. 2. as the fear of the Lord is a filial fear: so the fear of the King.
3. As the fear of the Lord is a fear of adherency: so the fear of the King.

Of these in order: and of the points of instruction thence arising.

Every true Subject, and every true servant of God, Point. 1.
ought to fear his King, that is, perform all duties and offices whatsoever
due from a subject to his Prince. For the opening hereof, we must know, that
the fear of the King contains all duties of a Christian Subject to his King.
For that which is said here, Fear the Lord, and fear the King, is expressed
by Peter thus: Fear God, Honor the King. As in the fifth Commandment, Pet.
2. 17
Honor thy Father and thy Mother. Here, as by Father and Mother all Superiors,
that stand in a bond of relation to inferiors, as Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, Ministers, and above all the chief Magistrate, the Prince, is
meant: so under this word honor, all kinds of duty and service due from all
inferiors to their Superiors respectively, are comprised. This is expressed
also by 1. Pet. 1. 3.
Peter, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake,
whither it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that
are sent by him, for the punishment of evil do^rs, and for the praise of them
that do well. This is yet more fully and amply set down by the Apostle Paul,
Romans 13. Where this doctrine is not only prooved, but pressed and confirmed by
many strong reasons. First, the doctrine is propounded, in the duty enjoined,
verse. 1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers. The Precept is
universal to every creature; not Popes of old were subject to Emperors, when
they withdrew their necks, and trampled on their Masters necks, and they held
the stirrops, the^ he became Antichrist mounted on Horseback, fullfilling that
of the Apostle. 2 Thessalonians. 2* 3. 4.
Pope nor Cardinal, nor Prelate excepted. All living under the Kings Dominion,
must be subject to the King.

And the reasons are there rendered. 1. Because those higher Powers are of God.
So as he that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. Secondly,
the penalty upon rebels: They that resist, shall receive to themselves
damnation. Rebels shall not escape either the just hand of man, or of God,
whose ordinance is resisted, in resisting of the power. Thirdly, from the
excellent office that the Powers do bear, which is to execute justice and
judgment between Subjects. For Rulers are not a terror to good works, but to
the evil. And as he rewards the evil with punishment: so the good with
praise. For, will thou not be affrayd of the power? Do that which is good, and
thou shall have praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God to thee for
good: but if thou do that which is evil, be affrayd: for he bears not the
sword in vain: for he is the Minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath
upon him that does evil. Fourthly, there is a necessity of this subjection,
verse. 3. Wherefore ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. So as, if fear of wrath be not a bond strong enough: yet
conscience is, which will dispense with no man. For Gods ordinance binds the
Conscience. Fifthly, from the end of paying tribute. verse. 6. For, for this
cause pay ye tribute also. For what cause? That is, for they are Gods
Ministers attending continually upon this very thing. That is, for the
execution of justice, in punishing the evil, in praising and countenancing the
good. And hereupon the Apostle reinforceth his exhortation, as an use of the
point; Render therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor.

Again, to the former reasons expressed by the Apostle, we may add one more,
answerable and correspondent to that fore-alledged, of our obedience unto God:
(for as I said, in all things the fear of the King holds a resemblance with
the fear of the Lord, as being the most exact and perfect pattern of it, even
as God is the best pattern for a King, and the rule whereby God does govern,
the best pattern of a Kings government) and the reason is this: We are to be
subject to our King, in the performance of all due services by that bond or
tie, which not only Gods Law and Ordinance, but also the Kings Law does put
upon us. You may remember I showed you before, how Gods Law is the rule of our
fear and service, which we perform unto his Majesty, and to go beside, or
transgress this rule, brings us under the guilt and penalty of rebellion. I
showed you also, how we are bound to serve God as our King, by virtue of
mutual stipulation which God makes with us, and we with him. Semblably, our
subjection unto the King, is to be regulated, as by Gods Law, the rule of
universal obedience to God and man: so by the good Laws of the King. And note
the completenesse of this correspondence. It stays not here, but holds also in
that mutual stipulation or Covenant which the King and his Subjects make at
his Coronation: Where the King taking an explicit solemn oath to maintain the
ancient Laws and Liberties of the Kingdom, and so to rule and govern all his
people according to those Laws established: So consequently, and implicitly,
all the people of the Land do swear fealty, allegiance, subjection and
obedience to their King, and that according to his just Laws. To this purpose
it is, that his excellent Majesty in the Petition of Right, which he subscribed
with his own royal hand, has these words, worthy to be written in golden
characters. The King wills, that right be done, according to the Laws and
Customs of the Realm: and that the Statutes be put in due execution, and His
Subjects may have no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppressions, contrary
to their just Rights and Liberties: To the preservation whereof he holds
himself in Conscience as well obliged, as of his Prerogative. And after that,
in full Parliament he concluded with these words, Soit droit fait come est
desire: Let right be done King James (...) Speech at Whithall to the Lords and
Commons of the Parliament there assembled. 1609. Which Speech is printed with
his Royal Works, in aeternam reimemoriam.
as is desired. And then in his Majesty's speech following; And I assure you my
Maxim is, that the Peoples Liberty strengthens the Kings Prerogative, that
the Kings Prerogative, is to defend the Peoples Liberties. O blessed King, ever
may Thou live crowned with all blessings in Thy Royal self and Posterity,
being knit unto Thy people in this indissoluble bond! And herein His Sacred
Majesty showed himself a Peereles Son to His Peerless Father, who in his
speech to the Parliament, 1609. besides sundry other rare passages to the same
purpose, has these words: The King binds himself, by a double oath to the
observation of the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: Tacitly, as being a
King, and so bound as well to protect the People, as the Laws of his Kingdom:
and expressly, by his Oath at His Coronation: So as every Just King in a settled
Kingdom is bound to observe that paction made to his people by his Laws, in
framing his government agreeable thereunto, according to that paction which God
made with Noah after the deluge, etc. And therefore a King governing in a
settled Kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerates into a Tyrant, as soon
as he leaves off to rule according to his laws. And a little after: Therefore
all Kings that are not Tyrants, or perjured, will be glad to bound themselves
within the limits of their Laws: and they that persuade them the contrary, are
Vipers and Pests, both against them, and the Common Wealth. Which words
beseeming a just King, I have here set down as an honorable testimony of
such a Father, of such a Son: and all to be for the stronger reason to all
subjects to perform all due obedience to their Sovereign. For if your
Gracious King do so solemnly by Sacred oath, ratified again in Parliament
under His Royal hand, bind himself to maintain the Laws of his Kingdom,
and therein the Rights and Liberties of His Subjects: then how much are the
people bound to yield all subjection and obedience to the King according to his
just Laws? So much of the proof of the point.

Now to the Uses. Here, 1. Not only Papists, but the religion of Popery it
self, come under the guilt and condemnation of Rebellion; forasmuch as the
maine Principle of Popery, is to exalt and acknowledge the Pope as supreme over
all Powers, as Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, etc. And therefore not
unworthily is their In the first Collect in the public Prayerbooke of
thankesgiving for our deliverance from the Powder Treason, on the 5. of No.
1605. set forth by Act of Par. Though this be altered and turned another way in
a new impression, 1635. Tertull. adversus Marcionem, lib. 1. Rex c^s^ summus
est in suo folio usque Deum tamen infra Deum.
Religion branded for Rebellion, and their faith for Faction, and their
practice murdering of souls and bodies. And though some Papists will take the
Oath of Allegiance, as subjects to their King, yet they refuse the Oath of
Supremacy, as acknowledging their subjection to the King upon no other terms,
but as subordinate to the Pope, as Supreme. And so the Pope, and not the King,
is the Papists King and Sovereign. And yet how is their rebellious religion,
nay which is rebellion it self, fostered and fomented in our Land; to the
infinite dishonor, not only of God, but of the King, and His Supremacy, and
danger of the Kingdom, if God in mercy do not prevent it. The ancient Church,
before Antichrist the great usurper mounted aloft, acknowledged no Supreme
above the And Ad Scapulam. lib. Sic omnibus major est, dum solo vero Deo minor
est.
Emperor, or every absolute Prince in his Kingdom, but only God.

2. For Exhortation. Here let all good Christians, and royal subjects learn
to yield all fear, honor, obedience to their Sovereign, following the
direction and exhortation of the Apostle; Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers. And render to all their dues, Tribute to whom Tribute is due,
Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom fear, Honor to whom honor. And for
the better stirring up of all those duties, which subjects owe to their
Sovereign, Let us often meditate of these reasons, and motives forementioned
by the Apostle; and especially considering, That the King is Gods Minister, to
do Justice, to punish the evil, and to countenance and reward the good: as
also because he attends continually upon this great office. And lastly
considering in special, how our Gracious Sovereign has entered into Solemn
and sacred Covenant with all his people, to be their King and Protector, and
to govern them according to his good and just laws, and to maintain all
their just Rights and Liberties, and according to the Pattern of God himself,
whose vicegerent he is, to demand of them no other obedience, but what the
good laws of the Kingdom prescribe, and require. With what alacrity then and
readiness, ought all Subjects to express their loyalty to their Prince, and
with all add their daily and fervent prayers and supplications for the life of
our gracious King, that under the shadow of his righteous and religious 1. Tim.
2. 2.
government, we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty.

It follows: Fear the King, that is, with a filial fear, as the fear of
the Lord is, only keeping the difference, that the one is a religious filial
fear, the other a Civil filial fear. The point in brief is: True Subjects
bear to their King such a fear, as children to Point.
their parents. Not a fear with terror; as the Apostle says to Parents, Ephesians.
6. 4. Col. 3. 21.
Provoke not your children to wrath. The name of a Father, is a name of love,
and has in it the bowels of a natural affection, which is above all other
kinds of human affections. Now a King is the Father of his Country, and all
his loving and loyal Pater Patr^^.
Subjects are as so many Children into him. He is the Father of the great
family of his Kingdom. He is the great Lord Steward, whom God has set over
his family to provide for them, and to protect them. He is the Shepherd of the
people, to feed them, and rule them as David, Psalm. 78. 71. 72. Now the sheep
are affrayd of the wolf, not of the Shepherd. Therefore says the Apostle, If
thou do evil, be affrayd. So as a good Subject so fears, as he is not
affrayd, because he lives in obedience to God and his King.

Again this filial fear in a Subject toward his Prince, does necessarily
imply an excellent and eminent love toward the King: yea greater love, then
natural Children bear unto their Parents, namely as they are members of the
great politic body, united to the King as the Head. There being a nearer tie
of affection between the Head and the members; then between a Father and his
child. And therefore it is worthily said by that faithful servant of God M.
Perkins, A good Subject Mr. Perkin^ in his Commentary on the Galat. chap. 5. v.
14. Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self.
is more to love the life of his Prince, then his own life. And great reason;
for the King is the breath of our nostrills, Lam. 4. 20. He is more worth,
than ten thousand of us, 2. Sam. 18. 3.

Use 1. Let this be for exhortation to all good Subjects to fear their King as
Sons their Father; as their careful Shepherd to provide for them under God,
and to preserve them from wolves.

2. This may condemn those that would persuade Kings to rule in a terrible and
formidable manner, as over a sort of slaves. Contrary to the Apostle, Rulers
are not a terror to the good: Romans 13. 3. Such are dangerous persons, that
would turn filial fear in Subjects to servile. For according to the old
saying, Oderunt dum metuunt.

Again, hereunto we may fitly join the next Point; which is,

That the true fear of a King, as it is a filial fear, so Poi^
it is a fear of adherency, a fear full of loyalty and fidelity, which makes
a true Subject to stick so close to his Prince at all times, and in all
conditions, as nothing can make a separation.

The King and his Subjects are united with strong ligaments, as the head and
body. And this fear of adherency, is a special gift of God: as we read, 1.
Sam. 10. 26. There went with Saul a band of men, whose hearts God had touched.
But such as cleave not unto the King are branded for children of Belial, who
despis^d their King. verse. 27. So we read also of David, when he was in great
distress and straits, by reason of his unnatural and traitorous Son
Absalom, and those many tribes of Israel that had revolted to him from their
King, yet some cleave unto him; as 2. Sam. 15. 15. The Kings servants said unto
the King: Behold thy servants are ready to do whatsoever my Lord the King
shall appoint. And verse. 21. Ittai said to the King, (when he went about to
persuade him to go back, and to take care for his safety, as verse 19. 2^.) As
the Lord lives, and as my Lord the King lives, Surely in what place my Lord
the King shall be, whether in death or life, even there also will thy servant
be. Here was a faithful servant, and loyal subject indeed.

And great reason, every good subject should stick close to his King in all
difficulties. First we are bound hereunto by a strong bond of conscience, as
before, Romans 13. 5. And this Conscience is grounded upon the true Religion, and
fear of God, which is the surest bond of all obedience. This was that bond,
which tied the Christians of old to perform such faithful military service
unto the heathen Emperors, and those also, who where otherwise cruel
persecuters of the Church, and Apostates from Christ. As we see in the Example
of Milites Christiani serv^ fuerunt Imperatori infid^, A^ Idolatrae. 1.
Iuliano. Vbi venic^ant a^ causam Christi non agnosc^bant nisi illum, qu^ in
caelo erat: quando volebat, ut idolacolerent, and thurific rent: pr^ponebant
illi Deum: quando antem diccbat, Producite aciem, (...) contra ill^ gentem:
statim obtemperabant: and distinguebant Dominum aeternum a Domino temporali.
Gratian. Causa. 11. Q. 3. Imperatores. Divide and impera. Foe^icester, and am^
quos irrupta tenet copula, nec (...), Div^ quorimo^, supr^ ^ius solvet amor
die. Horat.
Julian, who when he commanded his band of Christians to march against his
enemies, those of the heathen, they straight obeyed, and put their lives in
hazard. But if he commanded them to fight against the Christians, their
brethren, then they laid down their Arms, and cast themselves down at the
Emperors feet, and offered their naked bodies rather to suffer whatsoever
torments.

A second reason why a good subject ought to stick close to his King in all
difficulties, because this is the means to make a Kingdom invincible, and
terrible to the enemies. Therefore it was an old saying; Divide and Rule.
Divisions in a state, expose it to foreign enemies. But unity of heart and
affections between the subjects and their Sovereign, makes a Commonwealth
happy and perpetual. When my self was once at the High Commission falsely
charged by a great Prelate of Sedition, in that (said he) I had dedicated a
That, intitu^ed, Babel no Bethel.
Book to the Lower house of Parliament, thereby to incense the Commons against
the King: I presently answered, No, my Lord, I dedicated my Book to the whole
Parliament, to wit, to the King, and both the Howses; I do not divide the head
from the body (my Lord) but I pray God unite them together. Hereat he was mute,
and all his raylings, and false charges were at an nonplus. So it seemed some
there were not far off, who went about This was presently after the
^issolution of the last Parliament.
at that time to divide the King from his people. And yet another of them said
Amen to my prayer, being convinced of this truth, that divisions or
heart-burnings between the King and his subjects, are most perilous.

Use 1. Here then those are justly and severely censurable, even as traitors to
the King and State, who play the make-baites between the Prince and people:
And these are the Jesuits and Seminary Priests, or else those of their
faction, who herein combine with them, as Samsons foxes tied tail to tail,
with a firebrand, to set the whole State in a combustion, by stirring up and
fomenting the fire of dissension between our gracious Sovereign, and his
loving and loyal Subjects. And this they labor to do two ways: either by
incensing the King with a hard opinion of his best Subjects, those especially
that are most religious and pious, humble and peaceable in his Kingdom: or
else on the other side by incensing the people with a sinister opinion of their
Sovereign, thus playing lack of both sides, being Ambidexters, and know to
make advantage every way.

The first of these ways: it has been an old practice of Satan, the Accuser
of the brethren, Blandissi^ni adulatores, and mordacissims detractores. Bren.
De consid. ad Eugenium, lib. 4. c. 2. Hester 3. 8.
to suggest and whisper into Kings ears evil and false reports, especially of
Gods people, who, where ever they be, are the Kings best subjects. What a fair
tale could Haman tell the King, concerning the Jews, that they were a people
scattered over his Provinces, and had their Laws diverse from other people, so
as they might hereby trouble the peace of his Kingdom, and that they were
factious, for they observed not the Kings Laws, and therefore that it was not
for the Kings profit to suffer them. Hereupon, seducing the King by his
sycophants tongue, he procures a Decree for their utter extirpation. It is
observed by the Centurists in their Preface before the 5. and 6. Centurie, that
this art of satan^ was much practiced in those times against those that were
most religious and pious, and that it prevayled much to the corrupting and
overthrowing of Religion. And herein were the Arrians the chief sticklers in
Princes Courts. I will set down one passage for many. Et hoc quoque, etc. This
also is remarkable in this present Century, Est hoc quoque in praesenti
Centuria insigne, quod arts nobis ob oculos ponit, quibus falsi Doctores in
altum surgant: and postea voti compotes facti, pro libitu dominantur, and
faciunt omnia. Nam in Aulas irrepunt, ac Potentum ac Magistratuum animos
occupant, hypocrysi, delationibus and obtrectationibus Sincerorum Doctorum, and
collusione quadam cum Politicis. Nihil enim officij non pollicentur. Nam
plerumque sunt in odio Aularum atque Potentum, graves, constantes, fidi
Ministri, ac Professores verbi Dei: quia rigidius, quam Aulis ac Politicis
commodum videatur, veritatem tutentur, and liberius peccata taxent, quibus
Aulae ac Potentes sunt obnoxij. Parasiti and Gnathones Aulici interpretantur,
ista redundare in contumeliam and diminutionem Authoritatis Magistratuum,
Spectare ad turbas and Seditiones. Et sunt mollia and placentia loquentes,
vigiles c^ci, canes muti, pestes animarum, Pseudoprophet^, lupi rapaces, fures
ac latrones animarum, etc. Itaque levi momento Potentiores, recte, serio,
graviter, and cum salute plurimorum in Ecclesia Dei docentes profligunt, and
suae fartnae homines in Cathedras collocant, etc.
that it presents before our eyes those arts, whereby false teachers do mount
on high: and afterward obtaining their desire, they domineere as they list.
For they creep into Courts, and by their hypocrisy, false tales, and
detractions of sincere teachers, and by a kind of collusion with Courtiers,
they do surprise the minds of the great ones, and Magistrates. For there is
no office, or service that they promise not unto them. For commonly grave,
constant, faithful Ministers, Professors of the Word of God are hated in
Courts and great men's houses: because they defend the truth more stisfely, and
tax sins more freely to which Courts and great ones are more obnoxious, than
to them seems fit, Parasites and Court Gnathoes interpret these things to
redound to the reproach and diminution of the Magistrates authority, and to
tend to tumults and seditions. And they speak pleasing and plausible things,
being blind watchmen, dumb dogs, plagues of souls, false Prophets, ravening
wolves, the eves and robbers of souls, etc. Therefore with no great ado, they
make havocke of the most able Ministers, such as teach truly, seriously,
gravely and savingly, in the Church of God, and such as are of their own Sect
they prefer and place them in the Chaires. So there, and much more to this
purpose. But what need we turn over antiquity? Have we not examples enough
nearer home. What then is more common in Vides omnem Ecclesiasticum Zelum
fervere sola pro dignitate tuenda. Hono^ ^um d^tur: Sanctuati ni^il, ^^t parum.
Absit, in^ tempor^ non (...). Bern. De ons^d lib. 4. ^p. 2.
Amasiahses mouths, then declamations against the good Ministers of the Land,
the Kings most loyal, loving, dutiful, faithful, obedient peaceable
subjects? How do they hear of such Declamers, Factious, Seditious, Turbulent,
Disafected to the Indeed, if to Prelates practices in this present age, no mar
voile.
present government, enemies of the Kings Prerogative, and what not? By this
means, often inculcated, they seek to ingratiate themselves, and to bring
into disgrace the true servants of Jesus Christ. Nor are they content, to abuse
our pious Princes ears in the Pulpit, but also on the Stage. O pyous, holy,
reverend, grave, gracious Prelates, whose Academicall Entertainment of pious
and religious Kings and Princes (in stead of learned and Scholasticall
disputations, or exercises intable to the condition of a learned Academy) is a
scurrilous Interlude, and this in disgrace of that, which is the greatest
beauty of our religion, to wit, true piety and virtue! O blush at this ye
Prelates, and in your shrift confess how unseemly this was for YOU, that
pretend to succeed the Apoles! Either for shame mend your manners, or never
more imprison any man, for denying that title of succession, which you so belly
by your vnapostolicall practice. And may not that be applied to you, which
Bernard, Bernard. De Considerat. ad Eugenium. lib. 4. cap. 2.
taxed Pope Eugenius with: where telling him of his pomp, Oves quid capiunt?
Si auderem dicere, Demonum magis, quam ovium passcua haec. What good do the
sheep receive? If I durst speak, these are the pastures rather of Devils, then
of the sheep. Scilicet sic factitabat Petrus? Sic Paulus ludebat? Did Peter
thus, I pray you? Did Paul play, such play? Surely for my part, I am ashamed of
you, that ever it should be said, I have lived a Minister under such a Prelacy.
Nay, as if this had not been sufficient, this is done in the very heat and
height of Gods Tragedy, still in Acting in the Imperial City, when we were all
mourning, yea, and every moment as dying men. Was this a time then of
Entertaining the Court, and poisoning their ears with Enterludes, and thereby
provoking the Lord further to plague the Kings good people, when you should
rather have moved his Majesty (who^ you and we al know to be forward enough
to hearken to such a motion) to have called a true Fast, with Prayer and
Preaching over the Land? And was that a time of Enterludes? Why did you not
fear some Plague to grow in such a mighty assembly? When notwithstanding
Preaching is made dangerous by you, for fear of the plague; which should be a
means (as it has been formerly) to drive away the plague, by bringing the
people to true humiliation and reformation. Whereas your guelded Fast-book
(contrary to the Proclamation) I am sure brought us for a hansell, a double
increase of the Plague that week, to any week since the Plague began: and
most terrible weather withal, to the Kings great loss, and the Mercheants,
the angry countenance of heaven ever since pouring Gods wrath upon this your
hypocritical Mockfast. But by the way take this with you: As, when the Lord
calls to Fasting, you fall a Feasting: So there is a hand writing over you on
the wall, the Prophet Esaias will tell you, from the Lord, Surely this iniquity
shall never be Esaias 22. 12 13. 14.
purged away from you, till ye dye says the Lord. But now do not exclame, as
if I spoke against such intertainment of our Gracious Sovereign, and his noble
Court, as is indeed honorable, grave, and suitable to such a Majesty and Train,
for whom I am ready to Sacrifice my dearest blood, if need were. Let not malice
suck poison out of the sweet flower of candid sincerity. But this by the way.

Secondly, as Jesuits and their Faction, the Popes Factors do, labor to
divide the King from his good Subjects, by poisoning his gentle ears with
their Serpentine breath, in their malicious detractions: So on the other side,
they so carry the matter with the Subjects, as to cause disunion of affection
between them and their Sovereign. As first the Jesuits and Priests, by
seducing the people to their Superstition and Idolatry, which of it self is a
drawing of their hearts away, as from their God, so from their King. Secondly
the Prelates, who do so interpret and press the Kings Acts (which his Majesty
intendend for good) as if he prohibited the Ministers to preach of the saying
Doctrines of grace and Salvation, without which the very Gospel is destroyed.
For example: I my self was convented by a Pursivant to London house, and there
by his Lordship charged, for preaching of the Goulden Chain of Salvation, Romans
8. 29. 30. as it lay in my course, preaching upon the whole Chapter. It was
objected to me, that therein I did A dang^rous and false charge laid upon the
King.
contrary to the Kings Declaration. To which I answered, that I never take the
Kings Declaration to be intended by him for the suppressing of any part of Gods
truth, neither durst I ever conceive a thought so dishonorable to the King, at
to think him to be an instrument of suppressing Gods truth. And have I not
good ground for it? For in his Majesty's Declaration to All Page 11. 12.
his loving Subjects, of the cause which moved him to dissolve, the last
Parliament, Published by his Majesty's special Command, his Majesty mentioning
Richard Mountagues Appeal, which did open the way to those Schisms and
divisions, which have since insued in the Church, expresses himself in these
words: we did for remedy and redress thereof, and for satisfaction of the
consciences of our good people, not only by our public Proclamation call in
that Book, which ministered matter of offense, but, to prevent the like danger
for hereafter, reprinted the Articles of Religion, established in the time of
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory: and, by a Declaration before those Articles,
we did tie and restrain all opinions to the sense of those Articles, that
nothing might be left for private fancies, and innovation. For we call God to
record, before whom we stand, that it is, and always has been, our hearts
desire to be found worthy of that title, which we account the most glorious in
all our Crown, Defender of the faith: neither shall we ever give way, to the
authorizing of any thing, where by any innovation may steal, or creep into the
Church, but preserve that unity of Doctrine and Discipline established in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, whereby the Church of England has stood and
flourished ever since. These be his Majesty's express words. Well for all this,
I was suspended from my Mystery. Thus when they would ensnare or oppress us,
they lay all the burden upon the King, which how * A most pernicious practice.
injurious, and dishonorable it is to his Majesty, I refer to them, that are
best able to judge of matters of such moment. Take another instance Another
time, namely then, when I was brought to the High Commission board at
London-house, about that Book of mine formerly mentioned, though they had
nothing at all against me, but railing and reviling, and charging me with
sedition, which I retorted upon themselves, whereby I put them to silence for
the time: yet they recovering breath, one of them said, I must to prison. If I
must (said I) I desire to put in bail, in regard of my Ministerial charge,
being within three days of Easter. No, quoth my Lord of London, that then was,
A most impious and disgraceful speech, to bring the people into a hard conceit
of his Majesty, who but a little before had signed the Petition of Right.
the King has given express charge for YOU, that no ^ale shall be taken for
YOU. No, my Lord? Then I desire to know by what Law or Statute of the Land you
do imprison (...): if it be according to Law, I humbly submit my self:
Otherwise I do here claim the right and privilege of a Subject, according to
the Petition of Right. Well, for all this, to prison I must, and if I found my
self agrieved, I might bring a writ of false imprisonment. To the Fleet I
went, where I was a prisonner twelve days. And when they sent for me forth, to
make me amends, they put me into the High Commission; out of the frying pan
into the fire. But blessed be God, and my King, by the benefit of whose good
Laws I obtained a Prohibition against their illegal proceedings, which fetched
me off those shelves, where else with the threatened storm of their Censure I
must have suffered shipwreck. But now I refer it to the sad consideration of
the sagest, whither that which he fathered upon the King, was not a most
dangerous, and seditious speech, N. B.
tending to possess both me, and the many bystanders, and consequently all
the people in the Land, with a sinister opinion of the Kings justice and
constancy in keeping his solemn Covenant with his people, as in that Petition
of Right. Though (I bless God) I could never intertaine such a thought of my
King, that he should utter such a word, as to deny his old Servant the
hanfell-benefit of his gracious hand, wherewith but a little before he had
signed the Petition of Right, for the maintenance, not only of mine, but of
every good Subjects just and honest cause.

Take yet another instance, and that also at the high Commission Court, where I
was attending as a poor Client, or rather an Innocent at the bar, waiting
for my Censure. There a Rule for a Prohibition for Master Prinne being cendered
in Court according to the course of the Kings Laws in that behalf, presently
my Lord of London, then President of the Court, stands up and flies in the face
of Master Prinne and his Prohibition with great heat of passion, even almost
unto fury, and after many threatenings to him, he uttered these words, that A
most audacious and presumtuous speech of a Prelate, setting his proud foot
upon the Kings Laws, as the Pope did once on the Emperors neck an Emblem of
perpetual servitude. p.
whosoever should dare to bring the next Prohibition, he would set him fast by
the heels. This was spoken alowd in open Court. Now, as I conceive, this did
not a little reflect and trench upon the Kings honor, the Laws of the Land,
and the Liberty of the subject. What? for any man to dare with open mouth, and
that in open Court, to out-dare the Kings just government of his Subjects
according to his good Laws? Or upon what ground did he thus boldly bear
himself? Upon the King? His Majesty had not long before signed ^he Petition of
Right. Also his Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects of the causes
which moved him to dissolve the last Parliament, Published by his Majesty's
special command, 1628. Speaking in his name, that for the Parliaments full
satisfaction and security; He did by an answer, framed in the form by
themselves desired, to their Parliamentary Petition, confirm their ancient and
just Liberties and Rights, which (says his Majesty) We resolve with all
constancy and justice to maintain. Whereupon then did this man dare to utter
such an insolent speech? Not from the King, I am sure. We have his Royal
Word, and Hand to the contrary. And yet some perhaps might surmise, that he
durst not speak thus in open Court, had he not some better ground for it,
than his own desperate boldness. Or the best Apology he can make, is, that
his tongue did run before his wit, and that in the flames of his passion he
sacrificed his best reason, and loyalty.

To these Instances, we will add two or three more, very remarkable, and
whereof we all at this very time are eyewitnesses; for they are still in
acting. The first is, That most outrageous practice of the Prelates in making
havocke of the Church, and of Religion, by suspending, excommunicating, outing
of Ministers from their freehold, and the like, because they cannot, dare not
read the book for sports on the Lords day. Now the Prelates and their
officers, herein most insolently, and with a high hand proceeding, neither
according to Law, nor Canon, upon what authority do they go? Surely they lay
all the load upon the King. Why upon the King? Does the King command that
Ministers shall read it in their Congregations? No such thing. The Book Orders
that it be published in Churches: but expresses not that it be read by the
Ministers. Indeed it says, We further will, that publication of this our
Command be made by order from the Bishops, etc. Now the publication of the
Command differs from the reading of the Book. The commandment may be
published, and yet not the Book read. Well: but it pleases their Lordships so
to extend their order. Ministers must read it. But they dare not do it, as
being against their Consciences. If not, what then? They must be suspended,
and are. By what Law, or Canon? That matters not, their will is so. But if they
allege the Kings authority, as they do, where show they the King has given
them this authority to proceed so illegally and incanonically? The Book orders
no such severe and wicked Censures to be inflicted upon any in that behalf.
No, nor yet gives the Bishops any express order, or power at all to punish any
Minister in this case. And will no less Censure then serve the turn, then
suspension, excommunication, deprivation, and the like? but they are rebels
against the King. If so, then there is a Law to punish them. But how are they
rebels? They resist not, they do no violence to authority. All disobedience
is not rebellion. For then Daniel, and the three children had been rebels,
Dan. 3, 6.
for not obeying the Kings Commandment. But the Ministers (I say) that refuse
to read the Book, do not therein directly disobey the King. For first, the
Book expresses no such Commandment, that Ministers shall read the Book; as
before. Secondly, no wife and honest man, can ever imagine, that the King
should ever intend to command that, which mainly tends to the public
dishonor of God, and his Word, to the violation and annihilation of the holy
commandment touching the Sabbath, to the alteration of the Doctrine of the
Church of England, which in the Homily of the Place and time of Prayer. Part. 1.
Homily clearly and fully grounds the sanctification of the Lords day (which it
calls our Christian Sabbath Day upon the fourth commandment; and conseqnently
to the destruction of the peoples souls. For this were against all those
solemn royal Protestations of the King, as where he says: See before the
Declaration for d^ssolution of the last Parliament.
Neither shall we give way for the authorizing of any thing, whereby any
innovation may steal or creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of
Doctrine, etc. But the reading of this Book by the Ministers is to bring in
(and that not creepingly and by stealth, but by the head and shoulders, as it
were by a flood gate set open) a mighty innovation of the unity or Doctrine
concerning the Sabbath, which has been ever since the Reformation, and so
from the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, constantly, universally
and unanimously maintained in the Church of England, until this late faction
of Anti-Sabbatarians started up, to cry down all Sanctification, all power and
purity of Religion. And indeed the innovation of the Doctrine of the Sabbath
bring in with it an universal innovation of all Religion, as experience is an
eyewitness. Therefore for certain, the King never gave authority to the
republishing of this Book in case it should any way tend to any innovation, or
violation of the unity of Doctrine professed and maintained in our Church.
Again, the profanation of the Sabbath, or Lord's Day, which the Book seems to
give allowance unto, as in sundry sports there specified, is directly against
the very first Act of Parliament in the first of King Charles (an auspicious
beginning, promising a religious and gracious Reign) where it is expressly
said, For as much as there is nothing more acceptable to God, then the true and
sincere service and worship of Him, according to his holy will, and that the
holy keeping of the Lords day is a principal part of the true service of God,
and therefore all unlawful exercises and pastimes are prohibited upon that
day. Now what are unlawful exercises and pastimes prohibited on that day?
Namely, not only those there specified, but all other unlawful pastimes, as
there it is said. What are those? By name, all dancing, leaping, rebelling, and
such like, in terms condemned, by Imperial Edicts, Decrees of Counsels,
writings of ancient Fathers, of all learned Divines both Protestants and
Papists, in all Basilicon Doron. Book 2 in his Works: page 164. Printed, 1616.
ages. And King James of famous memory in his Basilicon Doron to his Son,
has these words: Certain days in the year would be appointed for delighting
the people with public Spectacles of all honest games and exercises of arms:
as also for conveening of neighbors, for intertaining friendship and
heartlinesse, by honest feasting and merrinesse: as in making plays, and
lawful games in May, etc. So that always the Sabbaths be kept holy, and no
unlawful pastimes be used. By which words it is evident, that all Sports on the
Sabbaths, or Lords days, are condemned as unlawful, which yet are by King
James allowed on other days: Now will any say, that our gracious Sovereign,
the Peerless Son of so Peerless a Father, does herein disobey his Royal
Fathers instruction, as to allow May-games, and the like, as lawful on the
Sabbath, which He expressly and by name forbids to be used on that day?

Object. But the Book for Sports was first published in Print in K. James his
name, and therein May-games, and other Sports are allowed on the Sabbath days.

Answ. Its too true. But if we consider the manner of putting forth of that
book at first, we shall find how light it is, to hold weight, or to
preponderate that learned and judicious Book, honorably, Styled Basilicon
Doron. First it was procured, compiled, and published in time of his Majesty's
Progress into Scotland, when he was more then ordinarily merrily disposed. They
that were the compilers of it (for we must not think the Kings leisure served
him to do it) for their officiousness (Populo ut placerent) God rewarded
them, the one not long after enjoying his life, the other surviving and
out-living both his favor and place in Court. Again it was never read, nor
yet pressed upon any Minister to be read, during King James his reign, which
lasted six years after the publishing of the said Book in Print. Thirdly, it
was not ratified under the Kings broad Seal, as public royal Acts use to be,
to make them authentical. Fourthly, this book was not inserted in his royal
works sent to Oxford, as not suitable to be ranked among so many learned and
pious works. Lastly, it was never in his reign used as a snare, and engine,
to outt good Ministers out of their Ministry and living, as it is now used by
the Prelates.

Quest. But how came it to be revived, and republished, K. James being dead,
and this book also, having no place in his royal Works to preserve the memory
of it?

Answer. By whose means it was raked out of the Ashes, I know not, but this I
am sure of, that the republishing of it with some addition, was the first
remarkable work, which was done presently after the Lord of Canterbury took
possession of his Grace-ship. Which done, his Grace was very zealous for the
pressing of it to be read in all the Churches of his Province, so as the unwary
and hasty reading of it has caused the dignity of some to kiss the dust, and
the not reading of it has cast some out of their livings by suspension, yea,
and out of the Church too by Excommunication: though (blessed be God) their
dignity shines the more gloriously. So as the violent and furious pressing of
it by the Prelates and their instruments, has proved a most pernicious snare
to all the Ministers in England. And though the Prelates, with their Learned
Doctors, and heirs apparent, have pulled their wits, broken their brains and
sleep, spent many precious hours, and days, and months in compiling and
setting forth Treatises, Histories, Sermons, and such like, and all to
ouerturne the fourth Commanndement, with the Sanctification of the Sabbath day,
and so bring in Libertinisme and all profanesse into the Church, thereby
exposing our Religion to the reproach and scorn of the Papists themselves, the
Bellarmine in his Sermons, in many plates, copiously declameth against such
profanations^as we have elsewhere expressed at large.
learned of them confessing, that their profanation of Holy Days caused
their Catholic Religion to be Scorned of the very Turks, and hindered their
Conversion; so far are we from all hope of converting Papist to our Religion,
by using the Liberty of our vain and mad fooleries on the Lords Holy day,
which they detest on their Festival days: Yet all their sophistry,
decurtations of authorities, wrestings, wrangling, windings, contradictions,
vain distinctions, and bold asseverations, will never be able to abide the
test, or yet the light, when their dross, and false visard shall come to be
pulled off.

Again, besides the dishonor of God, and of his word, the violation of his
holy Commandment, the precipice and downfall of the peoples souls into
perdition, A p^ p^nt well to be wa^ghed by the wisest.
and the reproach of our Religion and Ministry, all which the public reading of
the Book draws after it; the least whereof were cause sufficient to deter
and stay Ministers from reading of it: besides many other reasons, there is one
more, and that of no small consequence, and which makes me tremble with the
very thought of it, namely that Ministers in reading this book to the
congregation, should declare, how the Justices of A^s in their several
Circuits are commanded, that no man to trouble or molest any, in or for their
lawful recreation, such as are there specified, Alas, then, what shall
Parents, and Masters do, when their Sons or daughters, and servants will
abroad, and take their liberty of Sports, at least wise after evening prayer
every Lords day, and will stay out as long as they please, when in the mean
time their Parents or Masters, being godly disposed, would have them to spend
the time at home in the private duties of the day, for the good of their
souls? Gladly would they restrain them, but they may not, dare not, for fear
of being brought before the Assizes, there to be punished for their Sons or
Servants offenses. And what is the issue of this? Does it not engender in
youths minds (too prone to run riot, without a spur) contempt of their
Parents, or Masters, being freed by the book to follow their pastimes on the
Lords-dayes after evening prayer, so as they will attend upon no private family
duty, either requisite for their souls, or necessary about the house? And
though this liberty be dispensed only upon the Lords-dayes, and their holy
days: yet it is sufficient to breed in them, and train them up to such a
habit of contempt and so of a rebellious humor toward their Parents and
Masters, as they will be ready to fly out upon all occasions, and they will be
contained within no bounds of their obedience. Of this how many Masters do
complain, but the Justice that should bright them, must for sooth punish those
Masters if their servants complain of restraint. And among many other examples
of youth^ Contempt and rebellion against their Masters, and that upon the
occasion of the Ministers reading of the said book in the Congregation, I will
allege one related to me in a letter, by a reverend Minister of good credit,
so as no doubt is to be made of the truth of it: In October last, 1636. the
said book for Sports being publicly read by the minister (one Master Hubberd
of S. Stephens Parish) upon the Lords day, three Apprentises being present at
the reading of it, were so overjoyed at the Liberty dispensed in it, as that
they spent six shillings that same day at the Tavern, concluded to run from
their Masters, hired horses on the Lords day 3. weeks ensuing, executed their
plot, rode away toward London, were pursued, overtaken, and two of them
brought home, made this Confession. O consider this al ye my brethren, that
have read the book, how many souls you have endangered, if not destroyed
hereby! So as this is a trenching, or rather a violent inroade upon the fifth
Commandment, which says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother etc. Thus the
reading of this book to the Congregation, teaches them at once to break two
great Commandments in the Decalogue; the last of the first Table, and the
first of the Second, and so cutting in sunder the very sinews, not only of
Religion, but of all Civil Society at one blow. And by this occasion, what
Ministers instructions, Exhortations, reprofes of youth in this kind will be of
any authority with them, when they teach them, how to sanctify the Lords day
according to his word, how to fear God, and to honor and obey their own
Parents, and masters in the Lord, as well upon the Lords days, as upon other
days? Who then sees not here a most dangerous overthrow of those two great
Commandments in the Law, which are the very pillars both of Religion, and of
Civil Society, and which be ing pulled down, the whole house must needs
become a ruinous heap of all confusion? And does not this tend to the inuring
and training up of all unbridled, untaught, and unseasoned youth, by degrees to
such a height of insolency, as that, upon some discontents, or other occasions,
as Jesuits baits and seducements, they are easily drawn to advance their
rebellious lusts against those that be higher in authority, then their
Masters, and Parents, which the Lord prevent? Yet N. B.
such like Soldiers, trained up in such a licentiated disorderly camp, as
that of Venus, or the Lady May, in their sportfull intertainments, are those
like to prove: who when they should fight for their King and Country, will be
ready either to take their heels, as not knowing how to keep rank, or
because effeminate Sports and warlike encounters will not suite together. Our
Homily against wilful Rebellion notes, how Rebels and Sabbath Breakers go
hand in hand together. For there it is said; Rebels do not only leave the
Sabbathday H^ly 3. against wilful Rebellion.
of the Lord unsanctified, the Temple and Church of the Lord unresorted unto,
but also do by their works of wickedness most horribly profane and pollute
the Sabbath day, Serving Satan and by doing of his work, making it the Devils
day instead of the Lords day. And surely if this liberty of youth be not all
the sooner restrained, the whole Land may rue it one day. And therefore if the
Prelates had any regard either to the honor of God, and of his Word, or to the
settled peace of the Kingdom, as they have but little, as appears too
palpably by their practices, in disturbing and disordering of all they would
have been so fair from procuring the republishing, and from pressing and
oppressing Ministers about the said book, as they would rather have become
humble suitors to his Majesty to have set forth some severe Edict for the
better Sanctification of the Lords day, that so the people might be kept in
better obedience both to God, and to his Majestey. Forasmuch also as the giving
liberty of such sports, whereby it is manifestly profained, is without all
example in any age of the world: and their so pressing of it, with that cursed
and tyranicall tigor, both without and against all Law, and all example, and
that also in the Kings name, R^x est (...) stos u^vs ^ue Tabulae.
is very dangerous to breed in peoples minds (such as are not so well
acquainted with His Majesty's either noble and Christian disposition, or His
many solemn Protestations to keep Religion safe and sound) I know not what
strange Scruples on fears, causing them to stagger in their good opinion of
His Majesty, when indeed, the whole burden of the blame is to be laid upon Qui
non ve^at mori cum potest, ^ubet* Seneca.
the Prelates, as either the chief procures of these things, or the not
hindere^ of them.

The last instance, whe^^in the Prelates do endanger a division between the
King and his good Subjects (whom the Lord preserve in a perpetual bond of
unity) is their most impetuous and violent obtruding of new ^ites and
Ceremonies, which they have begun through some whole Diocese, and exacting a
new conformity in all Ministers there unto. This is another snare, wherewith
they may catch more Ministers, either to outt them of their Ministry, and
living, or else to captivate them for ever, as vassalls for whatsoever base
uses their good Masters will put them unto. And herein they have made a fair
progress already, as (for example) in two whole Counties, Norfolk and
Suffolk, where in a very short space they have made the fowlest havocke of
good Ministers, and their flocks, now left desolate, and exposed to the Wolves,
as sheep without their shepherd, as our eyes have never seen: For there are
already Threescore Ministers in that one Diocese suspended, and between three
and Fowrescore more, have time given them now till Christ-tide, by which time
either they must bid their good Conscience farewell, or else their precious
Ministry, and necessary means. Neither I think can it be showed, that in all
Queen Mary's time there was so great havocke made in so short a time of the
faithful Ministers of God, in any part of, yea, or in the whole Land. And now
do those Counties and Countries groan under this intolerable burden,
remediless, if God and the King do not relieve them. And our neigbours house
being thus on fire, does it not concern us all to look to it? For they say
that this shall be a precedent for all England.

But upon what ground is all this? What authority do they show for these
outrages? The King? That is answered before by his solemn Protestations to the
contrary. But they plead the Act of Parliament for Uniformity before the
Communion Book, wherein is reserved a power to the Queen with advise of her
Commissioners, or of the Metropolitan to ordain and publish such further
Ceremonies or Rites, as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the
edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and
Sacraments. Hereupon they ground all their Innovations. But for this: First
observe, that this clause of the Act is limmited to Queen Elizabeth, and not
extended to her Successors of the Crown, they are still expressed. Secondly,
admit it was intended to the Successors: yet it is with that qualification, as
may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edefying of his Church, and
the due reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments. Well. To bring our
new Rites to this Rule. First, do they make to the Advancement of Gods glory?
What? Superstitious, Idolatrous worship, of wooden Aultars? What? a
complementall Crouch to Jesus, when they Crucify Christ? What? to bow before a
Crucifix? Again, for the edifying of his Church. What? by the Preaching and
not praying in the Pulpit before and after his Sermon? What? by the expounding
of the Catechism? What? by reading a second Service at the Altar, where the
people cannot hear it? And for due reverence to Christ's Sacraments. What? by
possessing the people with an opinion of a Popish real presence? What? by
offering Christ in sacrifice upon a Wooden Altar; By a Priest of man's making?
What? by drawing the people to a new adoration, by bringing them up close to
the new Altar?

But they will say, all makes for them. And who shall be judges, but
themselves who are the Church? Therefore, Lastly I answer for all that no
humane rational creature can bring the least shadow of color, that this Act
did give the Queen or her succssors any power to set up Popery again. This is
out of all question. But now our New Reformers are tooth and nail for setting
up Popery again: witness their hoysing up Altars in most places, as also of
Images, Crucifixes with adorations, putting down of the means of knowledge,
as Preaching, and bringing in of Ignorance, also preaching for sundry points of
Popery, as Auricular Confession, praying to Saints, yea printing of such
Sermons, prayer for the dead, and many other. All which while they set up with
a high hand, and so as if the King gave them authority so to do (of which all
his Solemn protestations (I say) do sufficiently resolve us the contrary)
they must needs mightily shake and unsettle the peace of the State by these
their dangerous and desperate attempts, and sill the peoples minds with musings
what the issue will be, and how the King will digest these things at the
Prealates hands, which tend to the most dangerous dividing and renting of the
Kingdom asunder.

The next instance, is their arrogating of their Episcopal title and office of
Superiority from Christ and his Apostles. This they did lately in the High
Commission Court, and that upon occasion of Doctor Bastwicks cause then before
them. Where he was accused and severely censured, for writting a Book
entitled Flagellum Potificis, and Episcoporum Latialium: in which book be
whipped that usurped authority of the Roman Hierarchy; through whose sides, by
reason of their near affinity or rather consanguinity, they being sensible of
the smart of his whip, took it all upon themselves, and so, as Judges in their
own cause, passed their Episcopal censure upon him; yea although he not only
in his book, but openly before the whole Court professed and protested, that
he meddled not with those Prelates, who received and acknowledged their
Episcopal Jurisdiction from Kings and Princes; and withal he alleged and
read in the audience of the Courts sundry Statutes, as in King Henry the eight,
Edward the sixth, and 1. Eliz 1.
Queen Elizabeth, which do annex all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction unto the
Crown of England; So as no Prelate, or other Person, has any power to visit
Ecclesiastical persons, etc. But he must have it immediately from the King;
and confirmed by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England. This
Jurisdiction annexed to the Crown of England Doctor Bastwicke alleged in
Court against that usurped Jurisdiction of the Hierarchy of Rome, which they
challenge from Christ. Notwithstanding they alleged for themselves, that they
had their Episcopal authority from Christ, and if they could not prove it,
they would cast away their Rochets. So they may cast their caps too, for any
such proof they can bring for it. But stopping the Doctors mouth, that he
might not plead his cause, they proceeded to a most grievous censure of him, in
1000. pound fine to the King (for maintaining the Royalty of His Crown against
the Prelates usurpation, who would pluck away that gemme from, it)
Imprisonment, Excommunication, suspension from his practice in Prison, and the
many miseries depending thereupon, and devolving upon his Wife and children. So
as it is plain, they usurp, profess and practice such a jurisdiction, as is
not annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, but which with the Pope, and
Prelates of Italy, they claim from Christ. And this is clear by a threefold
practice of theirs. 1. Their censuring of Doctor Bastwick for this very cause,
that he impugned all Episcopal Jurisdiction over Gods Ministers, claimed from
Christ, or the Scripture. So as they make it their own cause with the Pope,
and his Prelates, as all holding by that title, and not from the authority of
Kings and Princes: And this is according to that in Dr. Pock^^ngtons Sunday, no
Sabbath, where he says, page 48. Hereby we may by Gods mercy, make good the
truth of our Church. For we are able lineally to set down the succession of
our Bishops from St. Peter to St. Gregory, and from him to our first
Archbishops St. Austin, our English Apostle, downward to his Grace, that now
fits in his Chair, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan. So he. Thus we
see how our Prelates have no other claim for their Hierchie, then the Popes of
Rome have and do make, which all our Divines fince the Reformation, till but
yesterday, have disclaimed, and our Prelates cannot otherwise assume, but by
making themselves the very limbs of the Pope, and so our Church a member of
that Synagogue of Rome. Secondly, the constant practice of our Prelates proves
this: for they neither have at any time, nor have sought to have any the Kings
Letters Parents, under the great Seal of England for their keeping Courts and
Visitations, etc. But do all in their own names, and under their own Seals,
contrary to the Law in that behalf. Thirdly, in that they labor by all means
possible to maintain this their absolute and independed Jurisdiction, as no
way depending on the King; and namely, by stopping the ordinary course of Law,
that the Kings people may be cut off from all benefit of the Kings good Laws,
and of their native ancient Liberties; so as it is become very geason, and a
rare matter to obtain a Prohibition against their illegal practices, invexing
and oppressing the Kings good Subjects; nay they are grown so formidable of
late (as if they were some new generation of Giants) that the very motion of a
Prohibition against a Prelate, or their Proceedings in the High Commission,
makes the Courts of Instice startle; So as good causes are lost, and Innocents
condemned because none dare plead, and judge their cause according to the
Kings Laws, whereby we ought all to be governed. For example: the Ministers
of Surry, who are suspended from their Ministry, and outed of their means and
freeholds against all Law, or Conscience: yet are so disheartened and overawed,
that they dare not contend in Law against the Prelate, for fear of further
vexations: and they are out of hope of any fair hearing in an ordinary Legal
way. Nay when Doctor Bastwicke had procured a Hab^as corpus to remove him out
of the Bishope stinking prison in the Gate House unto the Kings Bench. and
thereupon was removed thither-yet notwithstanding they procured the reversing
of this Legal Order, and brought the Prisonner back again with avengeance
and triumph to his old lodging. Thus we see they have gotten such a power into
their hands, as does overtop and countermaund the Kings Laws, and the peoples
Liberties, Now this power they have not from the Imperial Crown, according to
the Laws of the Land, but it is a mere usurpation. So as being a power not
derived from the King, as the immediate fountain of it, it proves to be at
least a branch of that foreign power altogether excluded in the Statute of 1.
Elis. cap. 1. And it is flatly against the Oath of Supremacy in the same
Statute, which all Prelates take, wherein they profess and promise faith and
true allegiance to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and lawful Successors,
and to their power to defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, etc. granted or
belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs etc. Now all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, which the Prelates have authority to exercise, being annexed to
the Crown (as is clear by the foresaid statute) either they must not claim
it by another title, or if they do, they are all in a Tramunire, and under the
guilt of perjury. And whither they be not also in a Praemunire for practicing
their Jurisdiction, as keeping of Courts, visitations, etc. in their own
names, not having the Kings Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, I
leave to the learned in the Law to judge.

But some will say, that they defend and maintain all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to be from the King, For in the visitation Articles for Norwich,
by Matthew Anno 1636. Chap. 1. a 2.
their Lord Bishop, this is one, Be there any in your Parish, that have denied,
or persuaded any other to deny, withstand, or impugn the Kings Majesty's
Authority, and Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical within this Realm? First, I
answer, this is a fair color and pretense, as if it were against Papists.
Secondly it is against their ordinary practice, as in the former examples. And
thirdly admit they do sincerely profess, that they have or hold no
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction but from the King; yet the question is, whither
they will say, that all those outrageous courses they how hold, and the pranks
that they play in many places of the Kingdom, are by special warrant from the
King: or whither the King by some general warrant dormant has given them this
unlimited power, which they at their pleasure do exercise? For instance: Will
Matthew Lord Bishop of Norwich say, that he has any warrant from the King,
special or general, for making such havocks and hurliburlies in those two
great Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, to the intolerable dishonor of God,
injury to his Ministers, and people, and tending to most dangerous
consequences? If he have not any warrant, but does it of his own head, or by
the instigation of any other Arch-Prelate, then let him look to it, least he
come to suffer as an usurper, a bringer in of a foreign power, an Innovator,
Oppressor, Persecutor and troubler of the peace of the Church and Kingdom. If
he say he has warrant for (...) let him (...) it. But I hope he will not
father his desperate courses upon the King. What? will he say, that the King
gives him a power to exercise such unheard of tyranny and injustice upon the
Kings peaceable Subjects, and Christ's faithful Ministers, and that against the
Kings Laws, and peoples Rights, all which the King has sworn again and
again, and solemnly protested to maintain inviolable, as his own Crown?
Never therefore let any man dare to pretend any such thing, so dishonorable to
his Majesty. Again suppose which yet is not to be supposed) that the Prelates
should so far prevail, as to procure a grant from the King to do all those
things, which of late they have done, tending to the utter overthrow of the
Religion by Law established. Yet, whatsoever color, pretext, or ^ow could they
make for this, the King (to speak with all humble reverence) cannot give that
power to others, which he has not himself. For the Power that is in the King
is given unto him by God, and confirmed by the Laws of the Kingdom. Now
neither God in his Law, nor the Laws of the Land, do allow the King a power
to alter the State of Religion, or to oppress and Suppress the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, against both Law and Conscience. For Kings are the
Ministers of God for the good of his people, as we showed before. But what do
I speak of this? If all the Prelates in England did never so boldly affirm,
that what they do in these extravagant courses of theirs, it is by warrant
from the King I would be so fat from giving any credit unto them herein that I
should be the first that should address my humble complaint to his Majesty of
such dishonor done unto him, and humbly petition his Majesty to vindicate his
honor from the least suspicion of his giving way to, or countenancing the
Prelates in such their practices, as cry up to heaven for vengeance upon their
heads.

This I have urged the more, both in reverence to his Sacred Majesty whose
honor I cannot endure should receive the least blemish; and also in reference
to the point in hand, because such usurpation of the Prelates cendeth directly
to make a division between the King and his subjects, cantrary to that which
we teach here, that good Subjects must cleave to their God and King without
separation and defection, which is by the ligaments of good Laws, which being
broken, they are as the resolution of the nerves in the natural body, or the
cutting in sunder of the sinews, whereby the head and members are united and
compacted in one entire body. And therefore this claim, which the Prelates
make, of their Prelation and Jurisdiction over Christ's Ministers jure divino,
being repugnant not only to the clear Scripture, forbidding all such
domination as they practice (as Math. 20. 25. etc. Mark 10. 42. etc. 1. Pet.
5. i. etc.) for which they have neither the example of Christ, nor of his
Apostles, nor of any ancient Bishops, but principally of Diotrephes 3 John. 10.
whom they imitate in affecting of preeminence, in opposing John the Apostle, in
exommunicating the Preachers, in prating against them with malicious words and
the like; but also to the Kings Crown, to the Laws of the Land, and
consequently to the Liberties of the Subjects: I know not with what warrant or
Conscience any Minister of Christ can submit to the Practices of these men,
tending to the ruin of the Kingdom of Christ in this Land, and consequently
of the whole Kingdom and State.

Now all these instances alleged are so notorious, (some of them fresh in
memory, and many witnesses of them yet living, being done but the other day,
and others yet present before our eyes) that they cannot be denied, and their
notoriousnesse makes them the more pernicious, as te^ding to corrupt the Kings
good peoples hearts, by casting into them fears, and jealousies, with sinister
affections toward their King, as if he were the prime cause of all those
grievances, which the Prelates in his name do oppress the Kings good Subjects
withal. But Trust in the Lord (as it is my daily prayer) that he will
preserve the hearts and affections of his people closse and entire to their
King, and that he will discover both to the King and his people these
treacherous practices of the usurping Prelates, that so neither the King may
think evil of his good people, nor they have the least jealousy, that his
Majesty approves and countenanceth, much less wills and commands his
Prelates to commit these their intolerable outrages.

Well, come weenow to a second use, which is of Exhortation and admonition to
all good Subjects, above all things to beware of those, that cunningly
insinuate themselves between the bark and the tree, that labor to divide the
head from the body, and the body from the head, by casting bones between the
King and his good Subjects. And here (Beloved) let me in the name of the Lord
admonish you, that whatsoever passages, or outrages you see to be done by the
Prelates, although they do never so boldly pretend the Kings name for it, ye
believe them not. Let never any Sinister opinion concerning his Sacred Majesty
creep into the closset of your breasts, and as a Snake either sting or poison
your true and loyal hearts toward him. And therefore beware of all those
Factors for Antichrist, whose practice is to divide Kings from their Subjects
and subjects from their King, that so between both they may fairly erect
Antichrists throne again, where it had been in a good measure thrown down,
and cast out, yea by this time utterly rooted out of this Land, if he had not
had such strong Sticklers as his Jesuits and Priests, yea the Prelates
themselves (as their practices plainly show) to keep him in life, and to set
him upon his feet again. But ye Beloved, abhor these Factors. And if ever
they should so far prevail as to open a wide breach to let in a foreign
enemy (which these their practices and proceedings pretend, and tend unto) then
show your selves like those faithful servants of David, stick close to your
King, and if any danger come near his sacred Person, step between, and let
the loss of your own precious life, rescue and secure his, who is worth ten
thousand of us. And so much for this point.

The next point arises from the order of these words, Fear thou the Lord, and
the King: That is, First, Fear the Lord, and then the King. It imports thus
much: That all our obedience to Kings and Princes, and other Point.
Superiors, must be regulated by our obedience to God. We must so obey men, as
we do not there in trench or dash upon Gods Commandment. God must first be
served. Therefore in all Commandments of man, we must consult with Gods
Commandments or Law, that it be not repugnant unto it. This is also intimated
in the order of the two Tables, the First concerning our duty to God, and the
Second to our Neighbor. Exodus 20. Math. 22. 38.
And Christ tell that Questionist in the Gospel, This is the first and great
Commandment, to wit, to Love God with all our heart, and the second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And the like orders it set
down, 1. Pet. 2. Fear God: Honor the King. First fear God.

And this stands with good reason. For, First, the King is Gods Minister and
Vicegerent, and commands as for God, so from God, and in God. So as it is his
office to command nothing against God.

Secondly, If Princes shall command any thing against God, and his Law, then
we must remember, that we are Gods servants too, and therefore must obey man in
nothing, that stands not with our obedience, first to God. For this cause the
same word of God is a rule both for the King, how to carry himself in
governing, and for every Subject, how to carry himself to the King, and first
unto God.

Thirdly, otherwise to obey, or fear man before God, and so above or against
God, is to make an Idol of man, in placing him in a throne above God. This is
that fear of man, which brings a snare (Pro. 29: 25.) but who so puts his
trust in the Lord, shall be safe. So as the fear of man which brings a snare,
argues, a failing of faith in God. And this is a plain defection and falling
from God, when man is obeyed against, and above God.

The use hereof is manifold. 1. For reprehension. Use.
2. For Instruction. 3. For Consolation.

1. For reprehension of refutation of these that so advance man's ordinances,
and commandments, as, though they be contrary to Gods Law, and the funda
mental Laws of the State, yet so press men to the obedience of them, as they
hold them for no better then Rebels, and to As one said to a Minister in
Suffolk, for refusing to do that which was not agreeable to Gods Commandment.
See before. Causa. 11. Qu. 3. Non semper malum est non obedire praecepto, cum
Dominus jubet ca, quae sune conerarse Deo. Tune ei obediendum non est.
Augustinus.
deserve to be hanged, drawn, and quartered, that refuse to obey them. And the
chief Masters of his Mystery, are the Jesuits in their blind obedience: and
they have gotten too many Doctors to be their Disciples, and broachers of this
new Doctrine. New I call it, because it is flat contrary both to the express
Scriptures, and to the judgment of all Divines in all ages of the Church. And
because this their doctrine is So brief now adays, I will set down some
Examples of the ancient Doctors judgment in this point. And I will relate them
out of Gratian himself. As out of Augustine: It is not always evil, not to
obey the Commandment, when a Lord commands those things which are contrary
to God. Then he must not be obeyed. And Hierome: If a And Hieron. in Epist. ad
Ephesians. Si Dominus ea jubet, quae non sunt adversa Sanctis Scripturis,
subijciatur Domino serv^^s: Si vero contraria pracipit, magis obediat spiritus,
quam corporis Domino. Et infra: Si bonum est, quod pracipit Imperator, jubentis
exequere voluntatem: Sy malum, responde, Oportet Deo magis obedire, quam
hominibus. Hoc ipsum and de Servis apud Dominos, and de uxoribus, apud viros,
and de filijs apud Patres, quod in illis tantum debeant Dominis, and Viris,
Parentibusque esse subjecti, quae contra Dei mandata non sunt. Ambros. Iulianus
Imperator, quamvis esset Apostata, habuit tamen sub se Christianos Milites,
quibus cum dicebat, producite aciem cum defensione reipublicae, obedic^ant ei:
cum autem diceret eis, Producite arma in Christianes, tunc cognoscibant
Imperatorem Caeli.
Lord command those things which are not contrary to the holy Scriptures, let
the Servant be subject to his Lord: but if he command contrary things, let
him obey rather the Lord of his Spirit, then of his body. And a little after:
If it be good which the Emperor commands, execute the will of the
Commander: If evil, Answer: It behooveth to obey God, rather then men.

And this also concerns Servant to their Masters, and Wives to their husbands,
and children to their Parents, that they ought in those things only to obey
their masters, and husbands and parents; which are not contrary to Gods
Commandments. And Ambrose: Julian the Emperor, although he were an Apostate,
yet he had Christian Soldiers under him, to whom when he said, bring forth
your army for the defense of the Commonweal, they did obey him: but when he
said unto them, Draw out your weapons against the Christians, then they
acknowledge the Emperor Aug. ibid. Qui resistit potestati, Dei ordinationi
resistit: Sed quod si illud jubeatur, quod non debeas facere? Hic sane contemn
potestatem. Ipsos humanarum leg^m gradus adverte: Si aliquid jusserit Curator,
faciendum est; tamen si contra Proconsul jubeat, non utique contemnis
potestatem, si eligis majori servire: Nec his minor debet, irasci, si major
praelatus est. Rursus si ipse Consul aliquid jubeat, and aliud jubeat
Imperator: vel si aliud jubeat Imperator, and aliud Deus: quid judicas? Major
Potestas Deus. Da veniam O Imperator: tu carcerem, ille Gehennam minatur: Hic
jam tibi assumenda est fides tua tanquam Scutum, in quo possis omnia ign^a
^acu^a inimici extinguere. Et aliu^ Pater: Si quis alterius erreri consentit,
siat se cum illo simili modo culpabilem iudicandum. Et Isidorus. Si quis
prohibet vobis, quod a domino praeceptum est: vel rursus imperat fieri, quod
Dominus prohibet: execrabilis sit omnibus, qui diligunt Deum. Item, is qui
praeest, se praeter voluntatem Dei, vel praeter quod in Sanctis Scripturis
evidenter praecipit vel dicit aliquid, vel imperat: tanquam falsus testis Dei,
aut Sacrilegus habeatur. Cum ergo Subditi excommunicantur ideo, quia ad maium
cogi non possint, tunc sententiae non est obediendum: quia iuxta illud Gelasij:
Nec apud Deum, n^c apud Ecclesiam ejus, quemquam gravat iniqua Sententia. Et
Bernard: de mode been vivendi. cap. 19. O spousa Christi, ita obedias homini,
ut non offendas voluntatem Dei. In malis operibus nunquam sis obediens. Noli
obedire in malo cui quam Potestati, etiamsi poenae compellat, si supplicia
immineant, si tormenta occurrant. Melius est mortem pati, quam mala jussa
implere. Melius est ab homine jugulari, quam aeterno judicio damnari, etc.
of heaven.

Again Aug. He which resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God. But
what if that be commanded, which thou ought not to obey? Here surely regard
not the Power. Observe the degrees of humane Laws: If the Substitute shall
command that which ought not to be done: Yet if the Proconsul command the
contrary, thou do not contemn the power, if thou choosest to obey the
greater. Nor ought the lesser be angry, if the greater be preferred. Again,
if the Consul himself command one thing, and the Emperor another: If the
Emperor command one thing, and God another: what think thou? the greater
power is God. Pardon O Emperor: Thou threatenest a prison, He hell. Here then
thou must take thy faith as a Shield, wherein thou may quench all the fiery
darts of the enemy. And another Father: If any consent to another error, let
him know he is to be judged as equally culpable with him. And Isidor. If any
forbid you that, which is commanded of the Lord: or again, command that to
be done, which the Lord forbids: let him be execrable to all that love God:
Also he that rules, if he, either prescribe or command any thing, besides
the will of God, or besides that which he evidently commands in the holy
Scriptures: Let him be accounted as a false witness of God, or a sacrilegious
Person. When therefore the people are excommunicated, even because they cannot
be compelled to evil: then they are not to obey the sentence: because
according to that of Gelasius, neither with God, nor with his Church does a
wicked sentence bind any man. So in Gratian. I will add one more out of
Bernard. O spouse of Christ, so obey man, as thou offend not the will of God.
In evil works never be obedient. Do not obey in evil any Power, although
penalty compel, if punishments be threatened, if torments be set before thee.
It is better to suffer death, then to fulfill wicked commands. It is better for
a man to be killed, then to be adjudged to eternal damnation. So Bernard.

I shall need to say no more to convince the novell impiety of those, who do
with all rigor impose, and the sinful infirmity at least, if not base
cowardice of them that obey such commands, as not only Gods word, but even
their own Consciences tell them, they ought not to do. Blush then and be
ashamed, O all ye Jesuitical novell Doctors, that suspend, excommunicate,
persecute with all fury Gods faithful Ministers, and all because they will
not, they may not, they dare not obey your wicked Commands, which are
repugnant to the Laws both of God and man: Certainly hell inlargeth herself
for you, and your damnation sleeps not, if you speedily repent not. Shall
honest Christians and good Subjects, be as rebels, factious, and I wott not
what, because they will not obey your factious rebellion against God? I say,
will not. This seems a sore word, and you lie at catch, If a Minister say, he
will not. Why I pray you? Is this so heinous a word? What say you then to the
3. Children, when the King himself in person threatened them with his fiery
furnace? O Nebuchadnezzar, we are not careful to answer thee in this matter.
If it be so, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace; and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King. But if not, be it
known unto thee, O King, that WE WILL NOT serve thy Gods, nor worship thy
golden Image, which thou have set up; See, WE WILL NOT. The Scripture sets
this down thus in Commendation for them, and for imitation to us in like cases.

Well, the second use is for instruction, concerning the duty of a Christian in
this point, and the rather, in regard of the snares; which Satan lays to
entrap souls this way in these days, by the new Jesuitical doctrine of blind
obedience. As therefore the Apostle John says, Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the 1 John. 4. 1.
Spirits, Whither they be of God, because many false Prophets are gone out into
the world: So I may say here: Many false Prophets are now abroad, being
possessed with the spirit of the Beast, which so magnify the power of man, and
his authority in commanding, that ipso facto all must yield obedience
thereunto, without further ado. Now this spirit is known by opposition to God
and his word. It sets man above God, above his word: and therefore we must
beware of it. We must therefore So obey God in the first place, by guiding our
selves in all things according to his word, as no command of man prevail with
us to cross that. It is for beasts without reason, to yield a blind obedience
to their Masters: but men, are of another stamp, who have not only reason, but
religion to be the rule of their actions.

The last use is for Consolation to all those that follow this rule. For
howsoever obedience to God, and the not obeying of man's unjust commands fares
ill in the world oftentimes, and never more, then in these days of ours,
wherein though wicked Imposers are not able to give any other reason of their
impious commands, but Volumus and Iubemus, Sic volo, sic jubeo, stat pro
ratione voluntas, so as if present obedience be not yielded, they cry out,
Rebels, they suspend, excommunicate, sequester, undo, threatening moreover
halter and hatchet, as was noted before: yet a faithful, honest, godly
Minister, or Christian, being constant to his God and to his Word, as Daniel
and the three Children were, shall find it more happy and comfortable to Iustum
and tenacem Propositi virum, Non Civ^ ardor prava jubentium, Non vultus
instantis Tyranni, Mente quatit solida, Horat. Hic murus abaemus esto, Nil
cons^ire sibi nulla palles^cre culpa.
keep his Christ, and a good conscience, though with the loss of all these
outward things, then to hold them with the loss of his conscience, and
confidence in his Lord and Master Christ. Yea and herein have we cause to
comfort our selves, and to bless the name of our God, who has not left
himself without witness, but has raised up many zealous and courageous
Champions of his truth, I mean faithful Ministers of his word, who choose
rather to loose all they have, than to submit and prostitute themselves to the
wicked unjust, and base commands of usurping Antichristian Mushromes. Surely
this is an infallible sign to persuade me, that God will not desert his cause,
seeing he thus stands by his Servants, making them Romans 8.
more then Conquerers through him that loves them. Yea their very not yielding
in this battle, is a present victory. For as the Holy Ghost says: They
overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and
they loved not their lives unto the death. Therefore rejoice ye Revel. 12. 11.
The Churhes of Christ.
heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the That is Carnal nen, that ove
the ^orld, and prefer it before be a^. (...) Revel. 17. 13. 14.
inhabitants of the earth. And surely this shall be the certain issue of that
maine battle, that is now a fighting between the Beast, and Christ, between
the Dragon and the Lamb. For though the Kings of the earth have one mind, and
give their power and strength unto the Beast: So as all these make war with
the Lamb: yet the Lamb shall overcome them: for he is the Lord of Lords, and
King of Kings: and they that are with him, are Called, and Chosen, and
faithful. Yea even those ten horns, even all those Kings that take part with
the Beast, these shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked,
and shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. So as Antichrist with all his
train and confederates for all their malice, power, policies and
machinations, that Babilonian Tower, with all their strong walls mounting up to
heaven, must all down to the ground: and then it shall not repent those, that
have been faithful unto death, who shall receive a Crown of life.

Come we now to the last point in the exhortation, which is the connection of
these two, the fear of the Lord, and of the King. Whence we learn.

That the fear of the Lord, and of the King, (their Point.
order duly observed) ought not to be separated. No more, then the two Tables
of the Decalogue. For God must so be honored, as we do also in the second
place honor our Superiors: And our Superiors must so be honored, as in the
first place we honor God; as was said before. Separated they must not be.
For they are like the two pillars in the Porch of Salomons Temple, the one
Strength, the other Stability, which bear up the most beautiful Fabric of
the Church and State well compacted together, and established in the true fear
of God, and of the King.

Here then are condemned sundry dividers in this kind. As first, the
Anabaptist, who deny lawful Magistracy. They pretend to fear God, but they
refuse to honor the King with their obedience. And therefore they do not
truly fear God.

Secondly, here are condemned the Papists, who divide and Decretal. Greg. De
Majoritate and obed. l. 1. tit. 33. Innocent. 3. Chap. 6. Soli^a. Episcopus non
debet subesse Princpibus sed praeesse. Duo magna luminaria, Pontificialis, and
Regia Potestas. Et quanta est inter solemn and Iunam differentia, tanta inter
Pontifices and Reges. Frgo Pontificialis dignitas est quadragesies septies
major rigali dignitate. Gloss. ibid. Rodulph Cupers Comment. ad C. Oportebat.
79. distinc. Art. 7. n. 62. page 257. Papae conferens Imperium Caesari, illius
jura a se non abdicat, cum solum exer^itium imperandi conferat: cum directum
Imperij Dominium penes Deum remaneat, and consequenter, penes Papam. And Johan.
a Capistrano: de Papae and Council. authoritate. Page 92. Humilitatis causa
Summus Pontifex motus dicit se nolle usurpare regiam dignitatem, vel Imperialem
authoritatem. And Page 94. Papae tanquam Christo ^lectatur omne ge^. And: Ipse
excommunicare and privare potest Imperaterem. Ipse potest aliquem absolvere ab
obligatione qua tenetur homini, de plen^dine potestatis quam habet.
separate the fear of the Lord from the fear of the King. And that two ways.
1. In that they allow by their good will, no honor, fear, or obedience to
Kings from their Subjects, unless they will kiss the Popes toe, that is,
acknowledge the Popes Supremacy, as well in Temporalties as in Spiritualties.
For the Pope challenges a power over all Kings and Princes, comparing himself
to the Sun, and the Imperor, and so Kings and Princes to the Moon, which is
47 times less then the Sun, and must borrow their light and luster from the
Pope, as from the Sun. As Cupers one of their Canonists says, The Pope
conferring the Empire upon Caesar, does not abandon the Privileges thereof
from himself, seeing he conferres only the exercise of ruling: Seeing the
direct dominion of the Empire is resident in God, and consequently in the Pope.
And John a Capistrano, (or of the halter) says: It is for humility sake, that
the Pope is moved to say, that he will not usurp the regal dignity, nor the
Imperial authority. Let every knee bow to the Pope, as unto Christ. And, He
the Pope may excommunicate and deprive the Emperor: and absolve any man from
his allegiance, which he owes to man, by the plenitude of power which he
has. And Angelus Summus Pontifex Tiara coronatur, quam regnum mundi appellant:
and tres ejus Corona Imperatoriam, Regiam, and Sacerdotalem, plenariam
scilicet, and vniversal^m totius orbis autoritatem reprasentat. Per Tiara
Imperialis and temporalis potestas: per Mitram Pontificia and spiritualis.
Rocca in his Vaticana Bibliotheca, page 5. The Chief Pontife (or Pope) is
crowned with a Tiara, or round bonnet, which they call the Kingdom of the
World; and his 3. Crowns do represent the Imperial Regal, and Sacerdotall,
that is, the plenary and universal authority of the whole world. By the round
Bonnet the Imperial power is signified: by the Miter the Pontifical and
spiritual. So he. Thus we see this great Antichrist exalts himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped. Thus he intercepts from the
King that fear and obedience which is due unto him from the Subjects, and
takes it to himself. And thus he not only separates the fear of God, and of
the King, but destroys them both, in assuming and usurping them both to
himself, as being both God and the King. Secondly, They separate Gods fear
from the King in this, that they altogether free all their Votaries, and
infinite Orders from the terrene power of Kings and Princes. As the Pharisees
did nose-wipe Parents of the obedience of their Children by their device of
Mat. 15. 5.
Corban. And as our Prelates (right chips of the old block) do labor tooth
and nail to withdraw their necks from under the yoke of the Kings Laws;
which their practice plainly prooveth, as we touched before.

A second sort come here to be reprooved, that on the other side separate the
fear of the King from the fear of the Lord: and those are such as attribute
to Kings such an unlimited power, as if he were God Almighty himself; so as
hereby they would seem to ascribe that Omnipotency to the King, which the Pope
assumes, and his Parasites ascribe to his Holiness. And this these Parasites
and paramours of Kings Courts do, not for any true love, or reverence they
bear to the King, but in special for these ends: 1. That they may by this
means nourish a heart-burning between the King and his good Subjects, that so
they may never meet together in Parliament, for the redressing of those many
enormities and grievances both in the Church and commonweal, whereof these
makebaites are the principal causes; and so least they might be brought
Coram. Secondly, that so they may by their intoxicating flattery so indeere the
King unto them, as to his most entire and intimate friends, and the only
Supporters of the Prerogative royal; for as Invi^ia saeculi non inventre
Tyranni, Maju^ tormentum.
much as they have justly incurred the hatred of the whole Land, and so lie
open to all the hazards, which envy may bring them into. Thirdly, by this
means they are bold tousurpe a lawless and unlimited power over the Kings
good Subjects, as if their advancing of Kingly power above its limits, were
but to serve their own turn in executing their lawless tyranny, by a kind of
borrowed and abused regal power. And lastly, that they may by this means
trample the Laws and Liberties of the Subjects under their feet, and in fine
bring the whole State of the Kingdom, King and all, under their g^^dle. For
they must be true to their Principles, whereof this is one principal. Decret
de Major and Obed. Tit. 33 Inn^. 3. Illustriss^o Imperators Constant.
Episcopus non debet subesse Principibus, sed praeesse. A Bishop ought not to
be subject to Princes, but to rule over them. And this they have sufficiently
proved by their late practices, wherein they exercise a transcendent power over
all Laws both of God and man; but whence they have it, I suppose themselves
want good evidence, and I hope will be afraid to say, the King has given them
that Power, which himself would never either practice or yet challenge, as
which God never dispensed to any humain Creature, and which his Majesty has so
often solemnly protested against, as we showed before. And thus (I say) these
men crying up, and exacting universal absolute obedience to man: they do
hereby cast the fear of God, and so his throne, down to the ground.

Let this then in the least place teach men how to keep this knot of the fear
of the Lord, and of the King, inviolable. For to separate them destroys both.
And this is both the doctrine and practice of true Christians, and that of old.
For Tertullian says, that though the Christians were traduced to the Emperor;
as if they were enemies to the State: yet those traducers, as the Albiniani
Nigrani, etc. Were found to be those enemies. But Tertull. ad Scapulam lib.
initio. Christianus nullis est hostle ne dum Imperatoris: quem sciens a Deo suo
constitui, necesse est, ut ipsum diligat, and revertatur, and honoret, and
salvum velit, etc. Colimus ergo and Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet,
and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a Deo secundum: and quicquid est, a Deo
consecutum, solo Deo minorem. Hoc and ipse volet. Sic enim omnibus ^major est,
dum solo vero Deo minor est. Itaque sacrificamus pro salute Imperatoris, sed
Deo nostro and ipsius: Sed quomodo praecipit Deus, puraprece.
a Christian (says he) is enemy to none, much less to the Emperor: whom
knowing to be ordained of his God, he must of necessity both love and fear,
and honor, and wish him safe. We therefore love the Emperor, so far as it
is both lawful for us, and expedient for Him, as a man next under God: And
whatsoever he is, he has it of God, being less then God alone. And this he
himself wills. For he is so greater then all, while he is less then the
only true God. Therefore we Sacrifice for the safety of the Emperor, but to
our God, and his: but as God has commanded by pure prayer. For the
Propitiatory Sacrifice of the Mass was not known in those primitive times.

And again the Et Tertull. Apologet. Temperans: Majestatem Caesaris infra
Deum, magis illum commendo Deo, cui soli subjicio: subjicio autem, cui non
adaequo. Non. n. Deum Imperatorem dicam, vel quia mentiri nescio, vel quia
illum deridero non audeo, vel quia nec ipse se Deum volet dici, si homo sit.
Interest hominis Deo cedere. Satis habeat appelari Imperator. Grande and hoc
nomen est quod a Deo traditur. Negat illum Imperatorem, qui Deum dicit. Nisi
homo sit, non est Imperator, etc. Sed quid ego amplius, etc.
same Author in another place speaks to this purpose thus: Placing the
Majesty of Casar beneath God, I do the more commend him to God, to whom alone
I subject him: and I do subject him, to whom I do not equal him. For I will
not call the Emperor God, either because I know not how to lie, or because I
dare not deride him, or because neither himself will be called God, if he
be a man. It behooves man to give place to God. Let it suffice him to be
called Emperor. This also is a great name, which is given of God. He denies
him to be Emperor, that calls him God. Unless he be man, he is no Emperor.

But (says he) what need I speak more of Christian Sed quid ego amplis us.
etc.
Religion and Piety toward the Emperor? Quem necesse est suspiciamus etc.
Whom we must of necessity honor, as Him, whom our Lord has chosen, that I
may truly say, he is the more our Caesar, as he is appointed of our God,
therefore as being mine, I do the more labor for his safety, So Tertullian.
So we also. And herein may all true Christians triumph, and make a holy boast
against all Jesuitical Sycophants, that do traduce them to Kings and Princes,
as enemies to their government: What one Protestant can they bring, that ever
committed treason against his King, or lifted up a hand against his Sacred
Person? But we can fill large volumes of Examples (if need were) of Jesuits,
Priests and Prelates, that have been notorious traitors to their Emperors,
and Kings, and some of them, that have laid violent hand upon the Lords
anointed. And howsoever they cry thief first, and their cry being louder,
prevails most, especially being ushered in with the very name of Puritan (as
of old Tertul. Non scelus aliquod in cause esse, sed nomen. Apologet. adversus
gentes.
the very name of Christians, was crime enough) yet they which thus abuse the
ears of pious Princes, both by base flattery, and mallicious traducing of good
men, the Kings good Subjects, unto His Majesty, incensing him against them,
that so they may more easily work their own mischievous ends: these will be
found to be the great thieves, as will appear by that, which now follows in
these words: And meddle not with them, that are given to change. Point.



These words are an admonition to all that fear the Lord and the King, not to
meddle with them that are given to change, that is, not to have fellowship, or
partnership with them, as before was opened.

The point we learn hence, is, That the true servants of the Lord, and
subjects of the King, ought not to join with those, that are given to change,
whither it be in the State of Religion, or of the Commonweal. This is
confirmed, first, with sundry places of Scripture. As Prove. 22. 28. Remove not
the ancient Land-marke, which thy Fathers have Set. This alludes, as Lavater in
bunc locum. Et Mercerus.
Divines interprit, to the alteration of the State of the true Religion, and of
good Laws. So Eccl. 10. 8. Who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.
An hedge is a bounder, or fence, between man and man. This is forbidden with a
curse, Deutr. 27. 17. And the Princes of Judah were reprooved, as those, That
remooved the Bound, to wit, of the Laws, Hose. 5. 10. Which Zanch. Comment. in
Hos. 5. 10.
Zanchie expounds as the other. And the Ordinary Gloss Ordin. Qui transferunt
terminos, aliud praedicant, quam ab Apostol^ accep^^unt.
Gloss expounds it of Trelates, (which would be accounted Princes) that
remoove the bounds, that is, Preach other doctrine, then they have received
from the Apostles. So as the Doctrines of the Apostles are the ancient Bounds,
which must not be remooved.

Now with Innovators, such as fear the Lord, and the King, must not meddle nor
partake, and that for sundry weighty reasons.

1. Because the accessory is equal with the principal, Reasons.
both in fact and punishment. As Obad. 11. Edom is as deeply charged, as the
Heathen actors, for but looking on, while they spoiled his brother Jacob, and
took no compassion on him, much les aided him against his enemies. And in our
Law, misprison of Treason, that is, concealment of it, is punishable, as
treason. So when we see wicked men go about by their Innovation, to undermine
and overthrow the State of Religion, and of the Commonweal, if we be silent,
and do not detect them, nor labor to defeat them, but out of a base fear,
hold our peace, when the State of things call upon us to speak: we shall be found
guilty before God, (though the State take no notice of it) of the same Sin
with them, and so partake of the like punishment.

2. Because Pasai m^tobolai thana^aphoroi. A Maxim in the Politics, malista
^^micron pholatein. Arist. de Repub. lib. 5.
Innovation of Religion, and the Republike, is, and ever has been held
dangerous to a State; especially when the change is for the worse. As 1. in
point of civil government, to change a Kingdom, settled on good Laws, into
Tirany, is very dangerous. And ever States have been wary hereof. Insomuch as
the Locrians ordained, that who so would mo^ion a n^w Law, should come with an
halter about his neck, that is it were not liked, he should be hanged in his
halter. And it was the speech of Heraclitus Ephesius: That Citizens ought to
fight no less for their Laws, then for their walls. Because Demosth. Oration
Contra. Timocr. Apud Diog. Laertium-Cives non minus oporiere, pugnare pro
legibus, quam pro manibus. Lavater. in Pro. 22. 28.
a City may stand without walls, but without Laws it cannot. For a State can
no more stand without good Laws, as it were the Soul of it, then the body can
live without the soul. Lycurgus therefore, to preserve his Laws unto
perpetuity, covenanted with his Citizens, that they should alter nothing, till
his return: whereupon he voluntarily became a perpetual exile from his
Country. Eu men tais, oukekramenais politciais, etc, Arist. de Repub. lib. 5.
Aristotle compares changes in a State, which at first seem but small and
insensible, to the expenses of a house, and the wasting of a man's substance by
little and little, which in a short time consumes all. And in his Third Book
ibid. Showing the difference between a King, and a Tyrant, he says, The
Citizens defend with Arms their King, but Strangers a Tyrant. For Kings do
rule according to Law, and over willing Subjects: But Tyrants against their
wills. So as Kings have a Guard of their people, but Tyrants against them. So
he. Whereby we see the usefulness of good Laws, as combining King and
peoples, as the head and members. Secondly, in point of Religion. A notable
example hereof we have in Deuteronomy. 13. Where if Sons of Belial have drawn a
City of Israel to Idolatry, upon the inquiry of the Truth, all Israel is to
smite the Inhabitants of that City, with the sword, destroying utterly all
therein, both man and beast with the edge of the sword, and the whole City with
all the spoil therein shall be consumed with Fire, and made a heap for ever,
that so Israel may be guiltless, and blessed of God. So for all Ieroboams
policy, which yet to carnal judgment seemed very subtily, and safe for his
Kingdom, the erecting of his Calves proved the bane of his House, and Kingdom
for ever. And the like ruin fell upon Jerusalem afterward, with the Babilonian
Captivity for 70. years. And the cause was partly changing of the Laws
(whereof before) and partly and especially changing of Religion, as these two
changes go commonly hand in hand together. So Iere. 2. 36. Why gaddest thou
about so much, to change thy way? So verse. 11. Has a Nation changed their
Gods? which yet are no Gods. But my people have changed their glory, for that
which does not profit. And Esaias, puts all together Saying, The earth is
befiled under the Inhabitants thereof, because they have transgressed the
Laws, changed the ordinance, broken the Everlasting Covenant: Therefore has
the curse devoured the earth, and they that dwell therein, etc. Innovation in
Religion breeds oftentimes troubles and distractions, especially after a long
settling. And for this cause the first Reformers of our Religion were very
tender of settling such an exact reformation in all things, as perhaps they
desired. As the Lord Cromwell having set forth the Psalter in English, with
omission of the Letany: there was such discontent about it, as he was forced
to put it in again. Some indulgence must be given. According to that
observation of Beati Rhenani Annot. in Tertull. librum de corona militis, opus
erat olim multa Christianis indulgere, qui plerumque jam Senes de Paganismo ad
nostram Religionem convertebantur, difficulter ea relinquentes, quibus per
omnem vitam assueverant.
Beatus Rhenanus upon Tertullian: it was needful, (says he) in ancient times
to give indulgence to Christians in many things, who commonly when they were
old, were converted from Paganism to our Religion, with great difficulty
relinquishing thosethings, unto which throughout their whole life they had been
accustomed. So he. And although but a few Ceremonies were retained, and so
limited by Act of Parliament: yet old Doctors popishly affected do so doat
upon their humane inventions, and their old mother of Rome her superstitions,
that they cannot be in quiet till res novas moliendo, they may set up Popery
again in her full equipage, though thereby they hazard not only the peace and
welfare of the State (which every good Patriot ought to be more tender of,
then of his own life) but themselves too, as follows in the next reason.

For, thirdly, its dangerous to meddle with these Novellers, because such do
bring commonly an old house upon Vt sementem feceris ita and metas. Authorem
repetit scelus. In authorem sceler tredierunt sua. Sen.
their own heads, and so consequently upon them, that join with them. First
upon themselves. Ecel. 10. 8. He that diggeth a pit, shall fall into it: and
who so breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him. So Hos. 5. 10. Princes of
Judah were like them that remoove the bound: therefore will I power out my
wrath upon them as water. And Esaias. 29. 16. Surely your turning of things
upside down shall be esteemed as the Potters clay. What befell Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, Numb. 16? What Numb. 16.
Achitophel? What Absalom? And not only the principal actors, but the fautors
and accomplices, such as partake with them, are served with the same sauce, the
same punishment. Therefore Moses warns the people to avoid, and not to come
near the tents of those rebels, least they be swallowed up with them. As the
voice from heaven warnes Gods people to come out of Babylon, saying, Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers Revel. 18. 4
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. It is historied of
Tarquinius Superbus, that because he went about to turn the Regal
government into a Tyranny, and so committed many outrages, the Romans for that
cause banished the very name of Tarquinius out of their dominions. And King
James does in two words excellently express both the nature and event of such,
as would turn the Regal government, established upon good laws, into a
lawless Tyranny, by terming them (as was touched before) Vipers and Pests:
Vipers eat through their dams belly; and Pests; the Pestilence destroys not
only the house where it is, but all that adjoyne unto it. And Esaias says, They
hatch Cocatrice eggs, and weave the Spiders web: he that earth of their
eggs dies and that which is crushed, breaks out into a Viper. Nothing but
destruction and calamity is in their paths. The Spiders web is to catch the
flies. And notwithstanding the Spider loves to be in Princes Palaces (as
Solomon says) where she may fasten her Prove. 30. 28. Obad. 4.
netts on high, and be out of the reach of the broom: Yet (as the Lord says)
though they make their nest as high as the Eagle in the rocks, or among the
Stars, thence will he bring them down. All Hamans Cobwebbs could not
preserve him from his own gallows, but make a halter for him.

And the calamity and ruin of these innovators is described in the 22. verse:
first, by the suddainenesse and unexpectedness of it: for their calamity shall
rise suddenly: 2. By the manner of it, shall rise, as it were from beneath
them; whereas their height seems to secure them from all danger as trampling
all under their feet, and who shall be able to bring them down? yet by that,
which seems to them most contemptible, shall they fall; from that which is
below them shall their calamity arise, as we see Hamans did from Mordechai,
whom he so scorned. 3. By the certainty of it, It shall arise; there is no
preventing of it: and 4. By the efficient causes of it, And who knows the
ruin of them both: where (as was opned before) ruin actively understood, as
noting whence it comes, namely from them both, to wit, both from God, and from
the King, as in the former verse; who shall both jointly bring ruin upon those
that be given to change. As we see in the example of Haman, whom God did
ruin, by so ordering the Kings heart, and so disposing of things, as all
conspired thereunto. For the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water, Prove. 21.
he turns it whither soever he will. Histories furnish us with infinite
examples in this kind; but this suffice.

A fourth reason, why good Christians and subjects should not meddle with them
that be given to change, is, because they fear not God, but are enemies unto
him. For here we see how these are set in opposition to those that fear God.
My son, fear thou the Lord, and meddle not with them that are given to
change: implying, that they which are given to change, do not fear the Lord.
And yet who make fairer pretense (in their kind of way) of Religion, devotion,
and the fear of God? How holy would they seem to be in their new guise of
devotion, and in a curious formality, and punctual observance of their holy
rites: as in a lowly bowing at the name Jesus, in an humble adoration to the
Altar, in standing bolt upright at the Gloria Patri, and at the Gospel, and the
like? Would not the world believe these men to be very regular, very religious,
devout, holy? Surely, if true religion and holiness stood in outward rites of
man's devising, and in false shows, and will worship, in a kind of Courtship,
in a complement, in a Congee, in making of a leg, in bowing of the body, or
the like: these were very religious men. And ignorant persons, who are not able
to judge of colors, take them to be so, and have them in great admiration.
But bring these counterfeit coins to the touch, and by and by they are
discovered. And the touch is Gods Word which says: In vain they worship Math.
15. 9 Col. 2, 20. 21. 22. 23.
me, teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men. Yea if we compare their
shows of devotion, to their other practiced, there need no other trial to
discover them. They pretend great love and reverence to Jesus, while they are
so zealous and devout for bowing to his Name, and so to their Altar, as who so
refuses to do it, Minister or people, must be excommunicated. Pious men
sure. But while they pretend such extraordinary respect to Jesus, and persecute
and crucify Christ in his Ministers, and members; also in his Word, and the
Ministry of it, by laboring tooth and nail to oppress and overthrow it; and
in the power of religion, by crying down all true piety; and in the worship of
God, by corrupting it with their Superstitious and Idolatrous rites, and so
trampling under their feet Christ's Kingdom, that they may set up Antichrists
throne again: If this be piety, if this holiness, then is Popery piety, and
Superstition holiness; as they would feign make it, as we shall see anon.
But all their holiness is but Pope-holinesse.

The last reason, why we may not meddle, or partake with these men, is, because
they are also enemies to the King; for they fear not the King, they honor him
not, they love him not, they obey him not. How? Do not these novellers honor,
love, fear the King? Who seem more? True. Yet (as was showed before) these
are the most dangerous enemies of the King, who under a pretense of honor and
love, do machinate the overthrow of his Kingdom and State, as by altering the
State of religion, and by that means alienating and unsettling the hearts of
his Subjects, by filling them with fears and suspicions, as if the King gave
these novellers authority so to do; which far be it from every good
Subjects heart once to imagine. For the King and Novellers here do stand in
opposition one against the other. Can those be the Kings friends, that go
about to divide between him and his good Subjects? Or to expose his Kingdom
to Gods displeasure, by corrupting his worship, and oppressing his truth? Its
impossible. Therefore to join with such, is to partake with the Kings false
friends, and fawning enemies.

Now for the close of all, with application to this present occasion, in the
thankful memory of this days deliverance from the Gunpowder plot (a
deliverance never to be cancelled out of the Calender, but to be written in
every man's heart for ever) this serves first for caution to all, to take heed,
how they any way partake with those that be given to change. And to the end
we may the better take heed, I will propose only two examples, which it
concerns us most at this present to take notice of. The first, of the
Gunpowder Plotters, who, if their plot had taken effect, had prooved notorious
Changers. For as Popery it self is a religion of Changes, as from antiquity of
truth to novelty of error (though they falsely pretend the contrary, like the
Gibeonites with their old shoes, and moldy bread, as if they had come from
far, when they dwelt hard by, so it can rest no where, but is a Mother
pregnant in plotting, and producing of changes in States, Kingdoms,
Commonweals, only unchangeable in this, that she makes her self Supreme and
Sole Mistress, where ever the comes. Accordingly, those her Sons, whom she
had fostered, as fit sparks for such a combustion, were set on work to
produce the most monstrous Change, that ever the world saw on such a sudden,
Quis tal^^ fando, Myrme donum, aut Dolopum^ aut duri miles, Vlisse^, Temperet a
lachrymus?
if it had taken place. But our God though he winked at them, and suffered them
to come to the very upshot of their hope, strikes in on a sudden, and in the
very nick puts a divine sentence in the lips of the King, who by a strange
interpretation of a word in one of their own Letters to a Popish Nobleman, not
according to the Grammatical sense of the Letter, smelling, a sent of fire,
from the mention of burning the Letter, and the danger is past, thereupon sent
the Lord Chamberlain to search about the Parliament House, and under it. Where
entering into the Sellar underneath the upperhouse, he found a great many
Billets and Faggots heaped up, not yet suspecting what lurked underneath. But
the last search was made, for more privacy, by Sr. Thomas Knevet who first met
with Faux and his Lantern, with his Matches about him, ready against the next
morning to blow up King, Queen, Prince, Peers, Nobles, Knights, Burgesses,
assembled then and there in Parliament: and making him sure, first entered the
Sellar, and found no less then 36. Barrells of Gunpowder, lying Couchant
under Billets, and Bars of Iron. Thus through Gods mercy, the change was
prevented: the change of a Noble Kingdom into an Anarchy, and Babilonian
tyranny: a change of Christ's Religion into Antichrists: of Tables into Altars:
of Preaching Ministers of the Gospel, into sacrifising Mass Priests: of light
into darkness: of Christ into Belial: of the Temple of God, into a temple of
Idols: of fundamental just laws of a Kingdom, into Papal Canons: of the
Liberty of the Subjects, into the servitude of slaves: N^ (...) ^ T^ (...) Quis
al^^ fando^ Temperet a ^ms.
of Regal Edifices and Monuments, into vast solitude, and ruinous heaps. Yea,
what tongue can tell, or what heart conceive, the miserable changes, that must
have ensued, upon that desperate design, if it had been effected. But blessed
be God, who has not given us over as a prey unto their teeth: but has turned
the Change another way: for in stead of taking us in their snare, themselves
were taken therein: in stead of blowing up the heads and bodies of this
Kingdom together, with the house and all, their own bodies were quartered,
and their heads set upon the top of the Parliament House, to their perpetual
infamy: and in stead of a day of lamentation and woe, and crying in the
streets, we keep it a day of rejoicing, of solemn thankesgiving, and of
singing of Psalms, ever since till this every day. And ever may we so in all
thankfulness celebrate the memory of this day, that we may never provoke God
to deliver us up into the hands of those merciless Philistimes. Finally, as
the Lord has made our Fifth of November a glorious day by such a deliverance:
So on the other side, He has branded their fifth of November with the note of
a perpetual curse and ignomy; as in that fall of the House in the
Blackfriars, on their fifth of November, when one of their Popish Priests or
See (...) foot ^ut of the (...).
Predicants, would presume to Preach, like a Roman Fox to the English Geese,
the house by the special judgment of God, suddenly falling upon their heads,
which flew both the Preacher, and some hundreds of the hearers. So as we have
cause to remember that Fifth of November, also to the glory of our God, who
alone avenged his cause on those Idolaters.

But notwithstanding, all these things so remarkable, both Gods great mercy in
delivering us on our fifth of November, and also his severe and just judgment,
in noting the fifth of November in their Calender, with purple Letters, died in
the blood of so many persons: Yet do they relent? Are their Consciences
convicted? Is their malice abated? alas, no such thing. But as the Prophet told
the King of Israel, when God had given him the Victory over the King of Syria,
Go strengthen 1. Kings. 20. 22.
thy self, and mark and see what thou do: for at the return of the year,
the King of Syria Will come up against thee. And so it prooved. For the
servants of the King of Syria said unto him, Their Gods are Gods of the hills:
Verse 23. Quan. hac no succissit, alta aggred^^ndion est ^ia.
but let us fight on the plain, and we shah be stronger than they. So the
Pontificians: not succeeding that way, they try another way.

What is that way? We cannot better compare it, then to that of Baalam, who
when he could not by all his Enchantments, conjure up from hell one curse upon
Gods people, then he goes a politic way to work, he gives Balack the King
of Moab crafty counsel, to Revel. 2. 14 Numb. 25. 1. 2. 3.
cast a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication; as ye may see, Numb. 25. 1.
2. etc. This indeed was the ready way, that would not fail to bring a curse
upon Israel, by enticing them to Idolatry with Moabs wiles. And this is the
course that the Balaamites of Rome, and their confederates, have holden less
or more, ever since the Gunpowder Treason, until this very day.

And in tracing their footsteps, and graduall proceedings, weshall observe how
they have kept the same order, for the reerecting of the throne of the Beast in
this Land, which has been observed by the founders and builders of the
Spiritual Babylon in former ages. And that we may not expatiate beyond those
narrow bounds, within which we have proposed to our selves to limit this our
short discourse, we will instance in the Antichristian Hierarchy, to the top
whereof, by what degrees it has ascended, I refer the Reader, as to the
Centuries, and other Histories of the Church, so in special to the Lord of
Plessie, his Mystery of iniquity: Also of the Mass, the whole body whereof
was imped with the feathers, and patched with the pieces of sundry Popes
inventions in their several ages; for which also, See the same Author, his
learned discourse of the Mass, Polidor Virgil, de inventoribus rerum, with
others. Du Plessis. Of the Mass-Booke. 4. cap. 6.
Also in the Sacrament, Transsubstantiation was not known among the ancient
Fathers, for above 600. years: afterward it crept in by degrees, and was
indifferent to be holden, or not: at last Pope Anno 1215. See Plessis of the
Mass Book 1. cap. 10. 11.
Innocent 3. decreed it in the Council of Lateran, as a matter of faith,
necessary for all to believe. So for the Sacrament in one kind: anciently it
was in both kinds, until the Council of Constance, but by degrees the people
came to be nose-wiped of the Cup, by a custom of omitting it in some places,
before it came to be made a Law. Besides both these authors and instances, the
like is observed by De Eccles^^. lib. 3. n. ^1. Tant^mo^^ erat Romanum condere
cul^um.
Dr. Whitakers, of the graduall growth of Antichrist, as also, of the abuse of
Images in Churches, how they crept in, first to be mute teachers of the blind,
and then to be dumb gods to be worshipped. Thus (I say) as of old, the Mystery
of iniquity could not be produced in one day, but (as the Elephants brood) was
many years a hatching, before it came to any perfection: So our new refounders
of Popery could not accomplish their work in one day, but it requires some
longer time, although a man would wonder to see in so short a space such a
monstrous and sudden alteration, notwithstanding the long establishment, and
clear light of the Gospel, and the strong sense of good Laws, whereby it is
hedged about. So if ours would set up the Masse-God in our Churches, they
cannot effect it all at once. They must first down with Tables, and up with
Altars. For that cause all Seats must down at the end of the Chancell, that
the Altar may stand closse to the wall, because (as their Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury.
Oracle says) none must sit above God-Almighty. And if Ministers be so stiff
as not to yield to this innovation, at least the Table must be rayled about,
that none touch it, as being more Sacred, then Pulpit, Pew, or Font. Then some
adoration as lowly bowing, must be given to it. Then the second Service, as
dainties, must be said there, as being more holy; than the Readers Pew. And
what then? Surely a Priest is not far off. But where is the Sacrifice? Stay a
while: that service comes last, and all these are preparations unto it: as the
trimming of a Rome, and spreading of the table, bodes the banquet to come
anon. So as all these preambles do at length usher in the great God of the
Host, so soon as it is well baked, and the peoples stomachs sitted to digest
so hard a bit.

But what be those Changes, and how came they? What they be, we shall show by
and by: but how they come, it cannot be imputed to any other cause, than to
that Spirit, which rules in the air, and which does usually haunt the Palaces
of Prelates. And such a poison has this spirit infused into the Chair of the
Hierarchy, as that man, who fits in it, had need to be strongly fortified with
preservatives and antidotes of true Real Grace, (not nominall and titular)
that is able to overcome the infection of it. For demonstration hereof we
begin with those Reformers of Religion in See Fox his Acts and Monuments Vol. 3
page 146. etc. Print. 1631.
King Edward 6. his Reign, who yet prooved Martyrs in Queen Mary's.

Is it not to be admired, that Archbishop Cranmer, and Bishop Ridley of
London, should be so stiff against holy and learned Hooper, who being by the
King chosen Bishop of Gloucester, and having obtained the Kings favor not to
wear the Rochet, and square Cap, as being offensive to his Conscience, yet
they would not yield unto it, although both the King himself, and a great
Harle in the Kings name, did earnestly write unto them for the same? Mr Foxes
words are: But I can not tell what Sinister and vnlacky contention concerning
the ordering and Consecration of Bishops, and of their apparel, with such
otherlike trisles began to disturb the good and lucky beginning of this goldly
bishop. For notwithstanding that godly Reformation of Religion, that began in
the Church of England, besides other Ceremonies, more ambitious then
profitable, or tending to edification, they used to wear such garments and
opparell, as the Popish Bishops were wont to do. First a Chymere, and under
that a white Rochet, then a Mathematical Cap with Four angles, dividing the
whole World into Four parts; These trifles, tending more to Superstition, then
otherwise, as he could (...) abide, so in no wise could he be persuaded to
wear them. For this cause he made Supplication to the Kings Majesty, most
h^^bly desiring His Highness, either to discharge him of his Bishopric, or
else to dispense with him for such Ceremonial orders. Whose Petition the King
granted immediately, etc.

But (I say) the Bishops would not. Yet at the length the fire reconciled them
all, when they laid aside their Pontifical robes, and offered up their lives
in sacrifice for the Truth.

Now if such a spirit did cleave to the very Chair, then, when those pious men
sat in it, who were Reformers of Religion for the Substance of it, and who
afterward were persecuted, and suffered Martyrdom for the faith of Christ:
What may we expect in those Prelates, that show themselves such enemies of
that Religion, for which those suffered, and persecute the faithful Ministers
thereof, and are not content with those ceremonies limmited by the Laws of the
Land, but bring in a number of other Superstitious and Idolatrous Ceremonies of
Rome, to the intolerable burthening of men's consciences, and insnaring of
their Souls, Bodies and estates, both against the Law of God, and the Liberty
which Christ has purchased for us, and also the Laws of the Land? Nor let our
present Prelates glory, that they can show us such Predecessors, Prelates, who
were Martyrs, unless they themselves will therein be their Successors.
Bellarmine makes it one note of their holy Mother Church, namely the Sanctity
of the life of the authors, and prime Fathers of their Religion.

But as the heathen Seneca says, Qui genus jactat suum, aliena jactat.

The Jews were never a whit the more holy, for Successores omnes cupiunt esse,
imitatores pauci: Says Bern.
calling Abraham Father. But alas our new Masters account those Martyrs
fools, in suffering for such toys, as the denial of the Real Presence, and
the like wherein they of Rome and our new Romanists can well agree: and for
which they never mean to be, but to make Martyrs.

Come we therefore to those usurpations of the Prelates in succeeding ages.
For we meddle not with that rigidnesse and stiffenesse which has been used
all along with all extremity against such godly and peaceable ministers, whose
conscience could not yield to that Conformity which the Law of the Land seems
to require. And yet this I confess, if such be the affinity, or rather
consanguinity between our Prelates, and those of Rome, that neither Gods Law,
nor man's Law, nor Religion, nor Conscience, can contain them within those
lists, which humane Laws have confined them unto, but according to that
Principle which they derive from their original, and that Spirit of Rome which
breaths in them, they are so strongly biassed to wheel about to their Roman
mistress, (as every element has a natural effection and inclination to its
proper place, and rests not out of it) and if it be not possible for them to
govern as Fathers (as the Law intended) but that they must needs tyrannize as
Lawless Lords, and lift themselves up in a transcendent degree above the Kings
Laws, so coming between Him and his people, as they intercept from the
people that gracious influence of protection, which properly and by right
appertains unto every good Subject from his natural Prince against all such
usurping Tyrants: and if they can do no other, but show what kind they come
of, in laboring to overthrow the true Religion, to corrupt the worship of God
with Superstition and Idolatry, to trouble the peace of the Church, to
captivate men's consciences with their humane invention, and their bodies with
their vexatio^s, in persecuting God faithful Ministers lawlessely, in stopping
the course of the Gospel by all the wiles and ways, which either the policy
or power of man can take: and if they cannot choose but hate the power of
Religion, and the very name of holiness, and cry against it, and down with it
with might and maine, because it crosses the course of their lives: and if
they cannot but seek the ruin of Christ's Kingdom, being altogether
Spiritual, and a Kingdom of righteousness, and not of this world, because
their own is of this world, a Kingdom of pride, and pomp, a Kingdom of
outward riches and glory; no way suitable to the Kingdom of grace, and so they
cannot stand together, but the one must fall: and in a word, if they cannot
content themselves with that title of Jurisdiction, which the King by his Laws
has conferred upon them, but they must needs pretend to hold it from Christ
and his Apostles, than which nothing is more derogatory to the honor of Christ,
nothing more contrary to his Word, nothing more opposite to the example of
Christ and his Apostles, while under pretense of their jurisdiction from
Christ, they exercise such Lordly tyranny, as the Gentiles did, which Christ
prohibited to his Apostles; So as such a claim from Christ is blasphemous, as
making Christ the author of their Antichristian usurpations: All these things,
and many more well considered; I confess, were it a Law in England, as it was
once amongst the Locrians, that whosoever would propound a new Law, should come
with a halter about his neck, that if it pleased not the Senate, the hangman
was ready to do his office: and the opportunity served, I should come with an
halter about my neck, with this Proposition, that it would please the great
Senate of this Land to take into their said consideration, whither, upon such
woeful experience, it were not both more honorable to the King, and more safe
for his Kingdom, and more conducing to Gods glory, and more consisting with
Christian Liberty, and more to the advancement of Christ's Kingly office, which
by usurping Prelates is trodden down, that the Lordly Prelacy were turned into
such a godly government, as might suite better with Gods Word, and Christ's
sweet yoke: I speak not this (God is record) out of any base envy to their
Lordly honor and Pomp, which is far beneath my envy: but rather for the
good of their souls. Brun^ Sig^inas when a Bishopric was offered him,
refused it, saying, A Bishopric was altogether to be forsaken of that man,
that would Contur. Magd. 12. cap. 10.
not be set at Christ's left hand. And Pope Marcellus 2 (as Onuphrius relates
in his life) smiting his hands upon the table, said, I do not see, how they
who possess this high place, can be saved. And Chrysostom. See our Homil^ for
W^d. day. part. 2.
one says, He who loves primacy upon earth, shall find confusion in heaven.
And how many do we read of, that have some refused, and others disburdened
themselves of their Bishoprics? Claudius Espenc^^^ (in Timotheum, Digress.
lib. 3. cap. 4.) presents us many notable examples of pious and learned men,
who refused Bishoprics in good earnest, and not with a counterfeit. Nolo,
Nol^. And our Savior Christ says, It is hard for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Hea^^n. But this is strange Divinity in these days. But I speak
this wishing their salvation, not destruction. And this by the way. But
according to our Text, we are professedly against all those usurpations and
innovations, which the Prelates of later days have haled in by the head and
shoulders, being besides and agaisnt the Law of the Land, and much more against
the Law of God.

And these innovations or changes we may reduce to eight general heads.

1. Innovation in Doctrine. 2. Innovation in Discipline. 3. Innovation in the
worship of God. 4. Innovation in the Civil government. 5. Innovation in the
altering of Books. 6. Innovation in the means of knowledge. 7. Innovation in
the rule of faith. 8. Innovation in the rule of manners. First, they have
labored to bring in a Change in Doctrine: as appears by these instances. 1.
By procuring an Order from King James of famous memory to the Universities,
that young Students should not read our modern learned writers, as Calvin,
Be^^, and others of the reformed Churches, but the Fathers and Schoolmen. This
(I say) must needs be of the Prelates procuring, it being no part of that
noble Kings meaning, that Scholars should be debarred from the reading of
those excellent, and orthodox authors, whom himself so much approoved and
magnified, both for their great learning, sound judgment, and religious lives.
For did not that excellent King give the right hand of fellowship to those
reformed Churches, which those authors had either planted, or watered with
their famous labors, when he said, He would exhort all those reformed
Churches to join with HIM in a Common Council, for K. James his Works.
Declaration against Vorstius, p. 356.
the extinguishing and remaunding to hell those damnable Heresies, which then
began to spring up among them, by the means of those Seeds men, Arminius and
Vorstius? And were not the learned Works and Writings of those Worthies of the
Reformed Churches (next after the Scriptures) the most fit to cope with those
Heresies, as being better exercised against them? And does not the King (page
377.) call that the Orthodox faith, which the reformed Churches did profess,
and whereof Calvin, Beza, Zanchie, Iunius, and others, were the planters and
founders amongst them? And in particular, did not King James commend Calvin, as
the most judicious and sound Expositer of the Scripture? Nay, can any man be
so impious, as to imagine King James should do any act in prejudice of Calvin,
Zanchie, Beza, P. Martyr, and the rest, whose names and reputation De
Praefatione ad Ecclesias ante Acta Synods.
Arminius himself labored tooth and nail to disgrace, that so he might
advance his own cause? Did not King James write to the States against
Arminius, calling him that Enemy of God? How then can any man be so injurious
to the memory of that Orthodox King, as to think he ever intended to inhibit
young Students the reading of those excellent, judicious, learned, illustrious
lights of the Church, and to restrain them to the ancient Fathers and
Schoole-man, in whose writings, though many things be good, and excellent, yet
their works are not without their navi, or spots, so as they that read them
must Margaritas e caeno legere, Gather Pearls out of the mud, as Virgil says
of the reading of Ennius. And young Students have not the maturity of
judgment, to put an exact difference, to make choice of the things that are
excellent, and to leave the refuse. And (...) the same Ibid. page 366.
King James applies that old Verse to this purpose, Or Quod nova testa capit.
inveterata sapit.
Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem Testa diu. The vessel will taste a
long time after of that liquor, wherewith it is first seasoned. And what shall
become of the little brooks, if their fountain be corrupted? So the King. And
we know, that the Fathers and Schoolmen, being commended, and presented to
young men in the habits of venerable antiquity, are apt to beget in them the
greater reverence and credence to their writings, in comparison of those that
are modern, and as it were but of yesterday. And therefore young Students had
need rather to be admonished not to meddle with Fathers and Schoolmen, till
they come to riper years, and be well seasoned with the pure liquor of
Truth, both immediately drunk in from the fountains of the Scriptures, and
derived by those incorrupt Conduit-pipes, the Divines of the Reformed Churches.
An unexpert Seaman, must not adventure his vessel on the Seas, without an
experienced Pilot, that knows the Shelues, or shallowes, and Rocks, least he
commit shipwreck before he be aware.

Again, we know what a learned Champion King James was against Popery. Now an
injudicious Reader, not being well grounded aforehand, coming to read some
Fathers and Schoolmen, may in some passages (perhaps foysted in by the false
fingering of the Monks; as many of the writings in the volumes of the Ancients,
are factious and spurious) be infected with the poison of Popish error and
Superstition, before he be aware. Therefore how can we imagine, that any such
Order was the Kings, but rather that it proceeded from some of the Prelates
about him, thereby the more easily to make way for the accomplishing of their
plot, so long a hammering for the reinducing of Popery.

And to this purpose they procure another order in King James his name, for the
inhibiting of young Ministers to preach of the Doctrines of Election and
Predestination, and that none but Bishops and Deanes shall handle those points.
And after that, there is set forth a Declaration before the Articles of
Religion in King Charles his name, which (though as we noted before) it was
far from his Majesty's pious intention to inhibit any part of Gods truth to
be preached, but the contrary heresies, yet the Prelates perverted and
extended it to an universal silencing, and suppressing of all those saving
Doctrines, of Election, Predestination, effectual vocation by grace,
assurance, perseverance in opposition to the contrary Arminian heresies; so as
neither Prelates nor Presbyters must meddle with them. Thus the Doctrines of
the Gospel must be for ever hushed, and laid a sleep. Thus our Articles of
Religion, to which all our Ministers subscribe, are hanged up upon the wall, and
cashered, as the heathen Oracles of old. Thus the Ministry of the Gospel is at
once overthrown, and nothing but orations of morality must be taught the
people. And herein do our Prelates follow the rule of Cont^en the Jesuit in
his Politics, who prescribes this Contzen Politic.
rule of silencing Controversies, as an excellent way for restoring their
Roman-Catholicke Religion in the Reformed Churches. For if truth and error be
both suppressed, truth by and by vanishes, but error does by necessary
consequence come instead thereof, and prevail. As if a man should be
hoodwinck it for the space of 24. hours, that he should neither see the day,
nor C^nturia. 6. Epistola Dedicatoria.
the night, by this means all is night to him. Nor is this a devise of
yesterday: but Satan had broached it long ago. For the Centuriators observe,
that the Authors and Advocates of corruptions and errors, procuring by their
flattery and fair shows to great men, an opinion of great learning, and so
much the greater, by reason of their high Grace and dignity which makes them
the more admired; Nefarie conciliare praesumunt. Crescunt sub Amnestias pallio
ac tutela corruptelae, and aliae Ecclesiae Dei Pestes. Discant igitur omnes
hujus mundi Potentates etc. See Athanasius de Synodis Arimini, and Seleuciae.
Epist. ad Orthodoxos. Also Contur. 4. cap. 9. de Synodis Selentia.
and being the Patrons of great men's vices; therefore, those errors being
opposed by the Orthodox, they labor to compose all Controversies with an
Amnestia, or silencing of all disputes, and by that means they wickedly
presume to reconcile Christ with Belial, Truth with Error, a believer with an
infidel. So as the Emperor Anastasius, being a favourer of the Arrian heresy,
was moved by such counsels, to bury the Controversies of the principal heads
of Doctrine under an Amnestia. But in vain: This counsel is not of God, but
of men. Under this cloak and patronage of Amnestia, do corruptions, and other
plagues of the Church of God increase. Let therefore all Potentates of this
world learn, that the most weighty Controversies of the Articles of faith
cannot be abolished, or quieted by Amnesties: but rather let them be determined
by the Word of God, etc. So they. The like did the Arrian Bishops in a
Council, at Seleucia, called by Constantius an Arrian Emperor, who did therein
suppress by a perpetual Amnestia the mention of homousios and homotousios,
that so they might coin a new faith, and utterly extinguish that of the
Council of Nice. Thus we see the antiquity of this practice. But we have
before sufficiently cleared our gracious Sovereign from having the least
intention of Suppressing any part of Gods truth by that his Declaration, but
only of the contrary errors, although the Prelates do pervert and press it
upon Ministers for the Suppressing of those very truths or doctrines of our
Church, clearly, though briefly expressed in the 39 Articles, and especially
that of Election and Predestination; as before we noted. Now will any man Say,
that the Declaration is prefixed to the Articles, that they should be void and
of none effect, or that they should be as a nose of wax, or a D^lphicke
Oracle, to be taken in two contrary senses? Its impossible. And therefore it
is too great impiety to fasten such a diabolical practice upon the Sacred
person of so noble a King, as the author of it.

But in the mean time a fearful innovation of doctrine is by this very
means broken in upon us. Now the doctrines of Gods free grace and man's
salvation, are hushed, and banished out of City and Country. For where is
there a Minister almost among a thousand, that dare clearly and plainly
according to the Word of God, and the Articles of our Church, preach of these
most comfortable Doctrines to Gods people, and so soundly and roundly confute
the Arminian heresies, Acts. 20. 26. 27: 28. Book of Ordination. After the
Oath of the Kings Supremacy.
repugnant thereunto? Although both by Gods Word, and by our Ordination, we are
bound thereto. So as the matter of our preaching must be but morality at the
best. The mystery of God touching his Grace may not be opened, as it ought.

And to this purpose Mountagues Appeal (the first part allowing altogether of
Arminianisme, the second of Popery) was published, and that by the special
approbation and allowance of the Prelates. But it pleased our Gracious
Sovereign to call it in. Also the Historical Narration, being a notorious
pack and plot of knavery, for the concluding of the Arminian Tenants to be the
doctrins of the Church of England, was by them published, being allowed in
London house. Dr. George Abbot.
Although the Archbishop that then was, called it in. Also D. Iacksons books
were to maintain Arminianisme. So that book of a namelesse author, called
Gods love to mankind, although it has no express privilege, yet it goes
abroad by connivence, being printed, as they say, in London. Also Cosens
Private Devotions, which did maintain prayer for the dead, till after the
outcry, being questioned in Parliament, that point was purged out, but yet the
whole book is popish, and wears the Jesuits badge in the front of it. Also a
Sermon of one Brown preached in Oxford, in the prayer whereof printed before
the Sermon, is an express prayer for the dead. And it passes for current
uncensured. Also the book of Franciscus a S. Clara, which has been now
thrice printed and that in London (as they say) and much applawded of our
Innovators; and most boldly dedicated to the Kings Majesty, and (they say)
presented to the King by a Prelate; the scope whereof is, to reconcile our
Religion, and so Epist. Apologet. in fine.
to cast of the old man, that is, the Calvinisticall, to reduce our Church to
Mother Rome again. In so much as he endeavors by shuffling, and packing, and
false dealing, with his paraphrases upon all our 39. Articles to make his own
game so fair, as he hopes to win us back again to Rome. Yea, he says, we
agree Epist. Apologet.
in justification inherent by works; which is to reconcile light with
darkness. And Article 37. he labors to reduce our King unto Subjection to
the Apostolic Sea, the Pope. That's their aim indeed, as being the principal
Fundamental, wherein consists the unity of all Churches under one Head, the
Pope. And all this according to the sense of Trent. Now let any man but of
common sense judge. The Pope being cast out of this Kingdom, with all his
false doctrines, can any man imagine, that the Articles of our Religion could
bear any such sense, as to bring us back again to Rome, to bring our King
under the Popes girdle again, to conspire with all those blasphemous doctrines
and decrees of that most Antichristian Council of Trent? What man in the
world, were he not a Iesuited Devil incarnate, but would have blushed and
been ashamed to have undertaken such a monstrous Task as this, to reconcile
the Articles of our Religion with the Council of Trent? How comes it then to
pass, that till now of late, all our grave and learned Divines, yea Prelates
and others, have maintained an immortal war, and which can never admit of a
Truce, against the Pope and all his Antichristian heresies packed up in that
Diabolical Council of Trent? And their learned works do still live, and
that with triumphant Lawrells upon their heads, standing to this day unanswered
and unanswerable? And yet one Franciscus a St. Clare, with the very breath of
Ipse dixit, will on a sudden overthrow all the writings of those Worthies, and
by a Romish rack, serve up our very Articles, to speak whatsoever language
Mother Trent will have them. For this take another instance or two. One is our
Eleventh Article, which shows our Justification to be by faith, without the
concurrence of works in justification: and whereas our Homily by him alleged
(Probl. 22. versus finem) Says, That the habit or act of Faith in us, does not
justify us, for this were to attribute justification to some virtue, or act in
us, etc. Videtur (says he) negare jus^itiam inhaerentem, sed vere nihil minus
intenditur, quia ^^a^im subditur; Deus est qui justificat: This seems (says
he) to deny inherent righteousness, but in truth, nothing less is
intended, because it is by and by added, It is God that justifies. Now see
this man's impudent nonsense. The whole scope of the Homily is, to set forth
most clearly the formal cause of our justification, to be, by imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, which Gods free mercy accounts ours, not in any work
of grace in us, in whole, or in part, no not in Homil of salvation. Part. 2.
page 15. 16. 17.
faith it self, as it is an habit, or act inherent in us, but as an instrument
apprehending and applying Christ. And it utterly and expressly excludes al
inherent righteousness in us, and all merit of works, as the Page 17. ibid.
greatest arrogance and presumption of man, that Antichrist could set up
against God. So as the Homily setting down these two as opposite one to the
other, namely, Faith as a virtue in us, does not justify us, and, It is God
that justifies: with what mouth of impudency can any man Say, that the Homily
intended nothing less, then to exclude justification by works? But he has
gotten a Dispensation from the Father of lies, and from the Pope, to coin
brutish lies at his pleasure. Add we a second instance, which is that of the
24. Article, concerning Prayer in an unknown tongue in the congregation, in
these words: It is a thing plainly repugnant to the Word of Article 24.
God, and the Custom of that Primitive Church, to have public prayer in the
Church, or to Minister the Sacraments in a tongue not understood of the people.
Now what does Franciscus paraphrase upon this? Namely, that this Article
determines, it is repugnant to the Scriptures, that is, not to the doctrine of
the Scriptures, as if it ordained any thing to the contrary, but to the
writing, or tradition of the Scripture, which among the Corinthians was in the
vulgar tongue. Here all that hear, may hiss. But what says he to the 28.
Article, which condemns Transubstantiation? Surely his Reconciliation here
is at a stand. For he is forced to Say, that Negare Transubstantiationem
divine, etc. To deny divine Transubstantiation, in this fearful Mystery is
against the verity of Faith, as it is defined in the Councels of Lateran, and
Trent. It is well then. Herein, in the point of Transubstantiation no
Reconciliation between us and Trent. Then what hope has he to reduce us to
Rome, or to re-erect his Mass in England? yes he has one hope. What is that?
By calling here a national Synod. Of whom? Not of those whom he calls
Calvinists and Puritans, who are of the Orthodox party. For he says, Epist.
Apologet. in fine.
Deponentes secundum pristinam conversatione^ verterem homine^ (nempe
Calvinisticum) qui corrumpitur etc. Putting off, as touching the former
conversation the old man (to wit, the Calvinisticall) which is corrupted. And
in his Paraphrase on the 37. Article, utinam denuo etc. Now I would to God,
that by public authority, the matter for the dignity of it (Puritanis non
^ntermixtis, the Puritans not intermedling, or intermixed) might out of an
affection of reunion, be thoroughly scanned. For I know the Puritans abhor
this. For they fly all communion with us, and abominate us as the body of Satan
and Antichrist; as Cassander said of some Christians. This does Franciscus
apply to the Puritans, whom he would have utterly excluded from a Synod,
assembled to reunite Rome and England. And can ye blame him? Did not the
Trent-Conventicle in truth, though they pretended the contrary, exclude
Protestants from them? And did not the Protestants, being invited See Histor.
Coun. Tri^. lib. 1.
as warily refuse to come, and that by the example of John H^ss, when they
might answer the Popes counterfeit invitatio^, as the Fox did the sick-Lyon,
refusing to visit him in his de^ne, Quia me vestigia terrent, etc. No, no quoth
Ren^ld, for full well I see, All foot-sleps toward you, none toward me. Now
who are those Puritans he excepts against, as not to be admitted to the Synod?
Perhaps he may find some few Puritan (tantum non in Episcopatu) Bishops that
are for doctrine Orthodox; So also many Doctors and Divines that are Orthodox;
these must have noe place in his Synod. And why? Good reason. For how else will
he reconcile Romes night, and our English twilight together in one League, if
the meridian light come between? Or how shall Romes cold and livelesse religion
have fellowship with ou^ Lukewarm Neuters, and moderate men, if true Christian
zeal come between, and make an interruption? Away, therefore with Puritans,
and Calvinists out of their Synod. Who then? Only peaceable and indifferent
men, as Ely, Chichester, and all other well affected to Rome, and above all,
the Arch-Prelates, as to whose definitive sentence all other Divines must veil
Bonnet, captivate their judgments, and therein rest themselves. For these, or
one of them with his mighty train, is able to sweep down the third part of
the stars of heaven. But this by the way for Franciscus. And to this agrees
the common cry among the Factionists, and Factors for Rome, that we and they
Contrary to the 19th Article: The Church of Rome has erred in matters of
faith, and Homily for W^t-Sunday Second part.
differ not in Fundamentalls. Yea, a great Prelate in the High Commission
Court, said openly at the Censure of Dr. Bastwick. That we and the Church of
Rome differ not in Fundame^talibus, but only circa Fundamentalia. Though the
distinction be absurd, it being all one, according to the Apostle, to err in
fide, and circa 1. Tim. 1. 19. Poritopistin enavagysan. circa fidem,
naufrag^verunt Latin. Chonaei Collectiones Theologicae. Cap. 16. Discourse of
the Sabbath. Epistle Dedicatory page 4. See the Answer to it.
fidem. For circa fidem, concerning, or about faith, men may make ship-wracke.
Yet this he spoke, in defense of a little Pamphlet of one Chowne, which he
dedicated to his Lordship, wherein he affirms, That the Church of Rome and
we, differ not in Fundamentalibus: and that the Church is one over the World,
whereby he would conclude our Church to be one and the same with that of Rome.
And to this purpose is that of Dr. White, in his Epistle Dedicatory to the
Lords Grace of Canterbury, before his discourse of the Sabbath, in these words:
But from this which is delivered, I shall intrea^e your Grace, and all other
impartial, and intelligent Readers to consider, the uncharitable construction
of Romish adversaries, who from the rising up of some Schismatic Spirits
amongst us, conclude, that the maine body of our Church is Schismatic. And
page 5. ibid. Now Schismatic (here) must needs be in relation to the Church
of Rome: as from which Romish adversaries, object we are Schismatic: which
Dr. White clears, and calls it an uncharitable construction of Romish
adversaries. So as here is a change of our very Church, and a bringing of us
back to a reconciliation and union with the Church of Rome, as from which we
have made no such Schism, as they uncharitably charge us withal. And thus
will come in an universal change in all our Doctrines. As in the Commencement
at Cambridge, not long ago, was openly maintained justification by Works: As
F^ a Sancta Clara in Artic. 23. mak^ mention, and much glories of page 1^ 191.
(...) 9. (...). 1. (...). 10^5.
And Shelfords book will prove justification by Charity. And that Against all
our worthy Divines as Dr. John White in his way to the true Church. Sect. 61.
n. 4. For as much as the State of the Papacy, the Pope and his Religion, is
Antichrist; we say, all that obeyed the same, are eternally damned. So he. See
also Dr. Whitakers de Antichristo. Also Dr. Downham, D. Abbor, D. Sharp, D.
Suteliffe and others. And our Homilies (justar omnium) call the Pope The
Babylonical Beast of Rome: and the Church, The Kingdom of Antichrist. For
White l. 2. a sermon. 6. against Rebellion.
the Pope is not Antichrist, contrary to the resolved Doctrines of our Church,
in our Homilies, and elsewhere. As Homily against wilful rebellion, part. 6.
The Pope is the Babilonicall Beast of Rome, etc. Also the Second part of the
Sermon for Whit-sunday: The Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of
Antichrist. And in a Prayer for private Families in the Communion-Booke, by
public authority, Confound Satan and Antichrist, etc. And Shelfords Second
Treatise, is to beat down true Preaching and Pulpits; for he says, he
cannot find a Pulpit in all the Scripture: How? Did the old Priest never read
the 8. of Nehemiah, appointed to be read for the 27. of May, wherein he might
find both a Pulpit, verse. 4. and Preaching, verse. 8? I omit many more passages
in that Author, of the like nature, all contrary to the express Doctrines of
our Church, according to the Scriptures. And yet this Book was licenced by the
Vicechancellor of Cambridge that then was, Dr. Beale, and published at the very
Commencement (whereat my self then was) that so it might poysonall England.

Add we hereunto another Book, entitled the Female glory, By Anthony
Stafford, printed by authority, 1635. Wherein he mightily deifies the Virgin
Mary, calling her, The Page 148.
grand white immaculate Abbess of the Snowie Nunneries of those votaries, to
whom he speaks, before whom he would have them to kneel, presenting the
All-saving babe in her arms, with due veneration. Lo here a change of our
God into a Goddess. And page 157. Our sweetest Lady.
there he commends the Sacred Arethmitick in praying on their beads. And page
153. he commends Candlem as day for the Lights burning, and Masse-singing,
taken from the Heathen guise, and converted into Christian. And, Page 154. 155.
This day made holy by the purification of the Mother. And page 21. he calls
her white spotless soul. And page 37 Purity it self. And page 45. Her.
allholy heart. As page 130 All holy Lord. So page 60.
That which was performed by Superstitious Idolaters in honor of Ceres and
Proserpina (Heathen Goddesses) may be turned into the praise and glory of the
Virgin Mary: And page 209. The Assumption of his Lady is set forth with a
picture, how she is taken up into Heaven with Verses. And page 212. He seems
to hold the Virgin Mary to have been without sin. And page 219. 220. He
boldly bears himself upon the approbation of the Church of England, in
magnifying the Virgin Mary, as considered, not as a mere woman, but as a type
and Idea of an accomplished piety. And page 158. of Sanctity it self. And page
220. he preferres the error of the adoring extreme, before the Puritans,
neglecting of her in calling her Mal, Gods maid, and rejecting Hayle Mary full
of grace. And page 223. he says, Of one thing I will assure them, Till they
are good Marians, they shall never be good Christians. And page 235. Of sundry
Grandees, he says, All which are Canonized for Saints, having erected and
dedicated Temples to her memory. Neither have the Princes of this our I Will been
defective in doing her all possible honor, and in Consecrating Chapels and
Temples to her memory. And ibid: My arithmeticke will not serve me, to number
all those, who have registered their names in Page 236.
the Sodality of the Rosary of this our Blessed Lady: the original is derived
from the battle of Naupactan gained by John of Austria, and the Christians,
which victory was attributed to the intercession with her Son. And page 236.
he recites the many holy orders of this Sodality, Styling them, Great, worthy
and pious people, and concludes thus, For shame, let not us alone deny her that
honor and praise, which Lo here the new great Goddess, Diana, whom the whole
Pontifician world worshippeth.
all the world allows her. And page 247. he Invocates her, saying, O pardon,
gracious Princess, my weak endeavors to sum up thy value, etc. And page
248. Thou deservest a Quire of Queens here, and another of Angels, in heaven
to sing thy praises, etc. And, I confess, O my sweetest Lady. And page 249. To
give thee an estimation answerable to thy merit, is a thing impossible, I must
therefore be content to do by thee, as the ancient heathen did by the images of
their gods, when by reason of their height they could not place the Crowns,
they humbly laid them at their feet: many more passages might be added: as page
150. he calls her, woman's dearest mistrisse. And page 32. a glorious Empress.
And page 3. Empress of this lower world. And page 2. If Christ was fair above
the Sons of men, should not she be so above their daughters? And in his
Epistle to his feminine reader, speaking of the Virgin Mary: This is she, who
was on earth a confirmer of the good, and a reformer of the reprobate. Al her
visitants were but so many converts, whose bad affections, and erroneous
opinions, the sweetness of her discourse had rectified. The Leprosy of sin was
her daily cure, and they, whom vice had blinded, were by her restored to their
in ward sight, and their prostrate souls adored divine, Majestical virtue,
residing in this Sacred Temple. The knowledge of her humbled the most proud
natures, for the luster of her merits rendered their own obscure. And in his
Epistle to the Masculine Reader: Truly I believe, that the under-valuing of one
so great, and dear in Christ's esteem (as his Mother) cannot but be
displeasing to him, and that the more we ascribe to her, (setting Here he
contradicts his own practice, as page 247. O pardon gracious Princess etc.
invocation apart) the more gracious we appear in his sight. And he
concludes it thus: I will only add this that since the finishing of this
Story, I have read a book of the now Bishop of Chicester, entitled Apparatus,
etc. and I am glad to find that I have not digressed from him in any one
particular. So he. Lo therefore what a Metamorphosis of our Religion is here.
Here is a new goddess brought in amongst us. The author glories, that he is
the first who has written (as he says) in our vulgar tongue, on this our
Blessed Virgin. And God grant he be the last. But he bears himself in all this
upon the Church of England, where, I pray you? At last I perceive this Church
of England is the now Bishop of Chicester in his Apparatus, etc. From whom he
has not digressed in any particular. And surely it were strange that such a
mystery of iniquity could be found, but in a Prelate, and in this one by name
for a tried Champion of Rome, and so a devout votary to his Queen of heaven.

Again, they have labored to make a change in the doctrine of obedience to
Superiors (of which we spoke before) setting man so in Gods Throne, as all
obedience to man must be absolute, without regard to God, and conscience,
whose only rule is the Word of God. But we spoke of this sufficiently before.

We will conclude with one instance more touching change in doctrine, and that
is, concerning the doctrine of the Sabbath, or Lord's Day, wherein our novell
Doctors have gone about to remoove the institution of it from off the
foundation of divine authority, and so to settle it upon the Ecclesiastical or
human power. For maintenance hereof they have strained the veins of their
Conscience, no less then of their brains. And they are so mad upon it, that
no shame will stay them, till confusion stop their mouths. It is reported,
that Doctor White has sent an answer to A. B. which is now at the press.
Surely, he will sacrifice all the remainder of his reason (if any be left in
him) upon it. Sure I am, he can never answer it, except with railing and
perverting, wherein lies his principal faculty, in fighting against the
truth, which (be he well assured) is too hard for him, and all his
confederates. But herein he has great advantage, that he may print what he
will at hand: But the contrary side with much difficulty and delay. Otherwise
he had had his hand full before now, when he should have been put to the
task to answer the full answer at large, to his tedious Treatise, of which A.
B. was but a taste. Well, thus much of the first and grand change, to wit, in
doctrine, which our Prelates, especially of late days have been a hammering,
and now almost (except the Lord Christ strike in, and prevent them) brought to
perfection. We shall be much shorter in the rest, and dispatch them in a Word;
because they have been touched before.

The next change is, innovation in Discipline, which in a word is this, that
whereas of old, the Censures of the Church were to be inflicted upon
disordered and vicious persons, notorious livers, as drunkards, adulterers,
heretics, Apostates, false teachers, and the like: now the sharp edge thereof
is turned mainly against Gods people and Ministers, even for their virtue, and
piety, and because they will not conform to their impious Dat veniam Corvis,
vexat censura Columba^.
orders. Our Homily proves Rome no true Church, as wanting the three essential
marks, the Word, Sacraments, and Discipline. And of this last it says: Christ
ordained the authority of the Ke^es to excommunicate notorious sinners, and to
absolve them which are truly penitent. They abuse this power at their own
pleasure, as well in cursing the godly with Bell, Book, and Candle, as also in
absolving the reprobate, which are known to be unworthy of any Christian
society. And what can the Prelates and their Court say for themselves, why that
of Bernard may not be applied to them, which he spoke of the Prelates in his
time? Quem dabis mihi de numero Episcoporum, qui non plus invigilet subditorum
evacuendis, marsupijs, qua^ vicijs extirpandis? Vbi est, qui flectat iram? Vbi
est, qui praedicet annum placabilem Domini? Propterea relinquamus istos, quia
non sunt Pastores, sed traditores, and imitemur illos, qui viventes in carne
plant^verunt Ecclesiam sanguine suo. Successores omnes cupiunt esse, imitatores
pauci. Whom will thou show me of all the Bishops, who is not more vigilant to
empty the peoples purses, then to root out their vices? Where is he that
seeks to appease wrath? Where is he, that preaches the acceptable year of
the Lord? Wherefore let usabandon these men, because they are not Pastors, but
Traitors, and let us imitate those, who living in the flesh, have planted the
Church with their blood. So he. I will not speak of their domestical
discipline, but for the present; and for brevity sake, pass it over. But from
the beginning it was not so. Negotiatorem clericum and ex inopi divitem, ex
ignobili gloriosum, quasi quandam pestem fuge. Hierom. ad Nepot.
Hierome says: A negotiating Clerk, and of poor rich, of ignoble glorious,
fly from, as from a kind of plague.

The 3. Change is in the worship of God; which they go about to turn inside
outward, placing the true worship, which is in Spirit and Truth, in a
Will Worship of man's devising, consisting in some external complements, and
gesticulations, as cringing and crouchings, bowing, or standing upright at some
Scriptures, more than at others; also a punctual observance in these
formalities, as in bowing to the name of Jesus, to the Communion table, or
rather Altar, as to the Mercy-seat, as Reve. Schelford. Morton. Dr. White Dr.
Pocklington.
they teach in their books, praying with their faces toward the East, thus
tying God to a fixed place, standing at reading of the Gospel, and the like.
Also reading their second service at their Altar, as we touched before, and
many the like. And who so will not worship after their new fashion, their new
discipline is to excommunicate them, or to bring them into the High-co^mission,
a place which they make worse the^ Purgatory it self. Al which oppression,
being an innovation, is directly contrary to the Act of Conformity before the
Communion Book, bringing the Prelates into little less, then a Praemunire.

The 4. change is in the civil government, which they labor to reduce and
transfer to Ecclesiastical, while they seek to trample upon the Laws of
the Land, and step between the King and his people, exercising such a lawless
tyranny over their bodies and goods (as also over their consciences) as is more
intolerable, then the Egyptian servitude of Israel under their Taskmasters, in
regard whereof (the Sea before, the ^p. of London in the High Commission,
threatening those, that should bring Prohibitions to that Court. Cum duplicantur
Lateres, tunc venit Moses
Prelates power over-swaying the subjects right in the free use and benefit of
the Laws) the people of the Land are used, rather as vassals and slaves to the
Prelates, then as the free subjects of the King. And this is the case of all
England at this day, the people every where groaning and sighing for this their
bondage, and their miserable vexations in the Ecclesiastical Courts. Well,
could they but cry mightily to the Lord, and make their just complaints to his
vicegerent their King, as their cause requires, he would quickly send a Moses
to deliver them. And so much the more should they be sensible of this evil,
by how much the glory of the Kings government over a free people, according to
his righteous Laws, is lamentably eclipsed, his power infringed, and his
regal Prerogative undermined.

The fifth innovation, is in the altering of Prayer-Bookes, set forth by
public authority. And first in the Communion Book, set forth by Parliament,
and commanded to be read, without any alteration, and none other, they have
altered Sundry things: as in the Collect for the Queen, and the Royal
Progeny, they have put out Father of thine elect, and of their Seed, as it In
the Editions since 1619.
were excluding the King, Queen, and Seed Royal, out of the number of Gods
Elect. Also in the Epistle for Sunday before Easter, That in the name of Jesus,
they Altered since 1619.
have turned into, At the name of Jesus; that so it may make the fairer color
for their forced bowing to the name of Jesus: for which there is neither
Scripture, nor ancient Father.

The second Book, is the Prayers set forth by authority of Parliament, for
Solemn thankesgiving for our deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason, of the
Papists, on every Fifth of November: where in stead of this passage, Root out
that Babilonish and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jerusalem, etc. They in
the last Edition, 1635. set it down thus, Root out that Babilonish and
Antichristian Sect OF THEM, which say of Jerusalem, etc. Now whereas the words
of the Original copy do plainly mean, That all Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and their confederates, are that Babilonish and Antichristian Sect, which say
of Jerusalem, etc. This latter Book either restraines it to some few, that are
of that mind, or else mentally transferres it to those Puritans, that cry,
Down with Babylon, that is, Popery, which these men call Jerusalem, and the
true Catholic Religion. Again, in the same Prayer, the old copy has these
words, And to that end, strengthen the hands of our gracious King, the Nobles
and Magistrates of the Land with Judgment and Justice, to cut off these
workers of iniquity (whose religion is rebellion, whose faith is faction, whose
practice is murdering of souls and bodies) and to root them out of the
confines of this Kingdom, etc. But the new Book has it thus, And to that end
strengthen the hands of our Gracious King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the
Land, with Judgment and Justice, to cut off these workers of iniquity, WHO
TVRNE RELIGION INTO REBELLION, AND FAITH INTO FACTION. Thus these Innovators
would not have the Popish Religion to be termed Rebellion, and their faith
Faction, as the ancient copy plainly shows it to be: but turn it off from
the religion, to some persons, which turn religion into rebellion, and faith
into faction. So as by this turning, they plainly imply, that the religion of
Papists is the true religion, and no rebellion, and their faith the true faith,
and no faction. Thus with altering of a word, they have quite perverted the
sense, and so turned the Cat in the Pan, so as the blame is quite taken off
from the Church of Rome, and laid upon a few (who ever they be) who turn
Religion into Rebellion, and Faith into Faction. Thus what dare not these men
do, that are not afraid to alter those things, which are by authority of
Parliament (which it seems they make but light account of) published as
Authentic Acts, not to be altered by private spirits. But who they be, it is
hard for me to divine; it pertaines to those to find them out, of whom Solomon
says, It is the honor of Kings to search out a matter.

Now having fallen upon this so important a passage, wherein the Innovators
would not have the Romish Religion to be called Rebellion, or their faith
Faction, and the like, but labor all they can to wash this Blackamore white,
while by their index expurgatorius, they purge out of all our authentic
records, all monuments and memorialls of this Strumpets Stains, painting her
haggs face with the counterfeit colors of Christ's Spowse: I will crave leave
in this place briefly to show, how truly (according to the judgment of our
Church, grounded upon manifest and undeniable proofs) the Romish or Popish
Religion is here in this Book (set forth by the Parliament) called Rebellion,
and their faith Faction.

First, that the Popish religion is rebellion, is prooved by the universal
practice of Papists, both Jesuits, Priests and other Recusants. For whereas in
3. Iacobi, cap. 4. the Oath of Supremacy is enjoined to all Papists: all
Jesuits and Seminary Priests, refuse it, and all Iesuited Papists: and if any
Papist do take it, he is excommunicated for it. And their reason is, Because
they hold and adhere to the Pope, as the only Supreme head and Sovereign over
all powers on earth; this being the prime and fundamental Article of their
Creed: and so consequently, they hold and teach those doctrines concerning the
Popes usurped power over Kings and Princes, in deposing them, and disposing of
their Kingdoms, in Excommunicating them, and so exposing them to the rebellion
of their people, as being now freed from their allegiance.

Secondly, that the Popish religion is rebellion, is prooved by their writings,
positions and doctrines, which they profess and teach concerning the Popes
usurped power and Sovereignty over all Kings and Kingdoms of the earth. Here
of the Reader may take a brief and full view both in Doctor John White, his
Defense of the way, chap. 6. and in Doctor Crakenthorpe, his Treatise of the
Popes temporal Monarchy, Cap. 1. First, Dr. John White, in answer to the
Jesuits bold challenge, has in the said place, collected no less then 40.
instances of Popish Authors, who exalt the Popes power over Kings, in deposing
them, and exposing their Persons to the danger of Rebels, Traitors, and
Murderers, commending, and highly magnifying, as a meritorious act, the killing
of Kings, as of Henry the Third, and Henry the Fourth, of France, as there is
to be seen. Therefore (says he) I say still, and here write it in capital
Letters, that THE CHVRCH OF ROME TEACHES DISLOYALTY AND REBELLION AGAINST
KINGS, AND LEADS HER PEOPLE INTO ALL CONSPIRACIES, AND TREASONS AGAINST STATES
AND KINGDOMS. This I show by the Doctrine and Assertions of the chiefest
Divines therein. So he. Let the Reader peruse the whole chapter at large;
where among other remarkable things, is this Passage out of Capistranus: that
so soon as any one (King) for Apostasy from the faith, by judgment is
denounced Excommunicate, IPSO FACTO, HIS SVBIECTS ARE ABSOLVED FROM HIS
GOVERNMENT, AND FROM THE OATH OF ALLEGIANCE. So there.

The second Learned Author of ours, is Dr. Crakenthorpe, who in the forenamed
place, has collected the Sentences of many Poopi^h Authors concerning the same
point. Some of them saying, That Christian Kings are Dogs, which must be
ready at the Sheepheards hand (to wit, the Pope) or else the Shepherd must
presently remove them from their office. This (says Becanus) does reason
teach, this does the Council of Lateran Decree. And Scioppius: that Reges
Catholici sunt Asini cum tintinnabulis: Catholic Kings are Asses with bells
about their necks, as being the fore-asses, which lead the way to other
inferior Asses. The whole Chapter is worth the reading, being full fraught
with such stuff. Yea the Popes own Decretalls are full of the like
arrogancies. What should I speak of their Books of the Sacred Lab. 1.
Consc^ratio and C^ronatio Pontificis.
Roman Ceremonies, wherein are setdown the several Offices, which Emperors,
Kings, Princes, according to their several ranks must perform to the Pope,
either at his Coronation, or when he rides in Soleme Procession in his
Pontificalibus; how the Emperor, or some great King must lead the Popes horse:
and if the Pope be carried on a Seat, then four great Princes, whereof the
Emperor, if present, must be one, or some great Prince, for the honor of the
Savior Jesus Christ, shall carry the Seat with the Pope upon their shoulders.
Also which stirrup the Emperor must hold. How the Elect King of Romans must
implore the favor and grace of the Apostolic Sea, and offer himself to
perform whatsoever Oaths of fidelity to the Roman Church. How the Chore sings
the Antiphona, The Lord has chosen him, and has exalted him above the Kings
of the earth. And the like. By these and many Sect. 13.
more, it plainly appears, that the Popish Religion is Rebellion, and that
Papists are an Antichristian Sect, as is expressed in the said Prayer.

Again, as their Religion is Rebellion, so their faith is faction; as there is
added. For proof hereof, I refer the Reader to Doctor Crakenthorpe, Of the
fifth general Council, Chapter 13. where he learnedly prooveth, that [the
Church of Rome holds no doctrine by faith. And this from the Council of
Lateran under Leo 10. wherein they laid another foundation, then Christ; the
Popes words, in steed of Gods, and Antichrists instead of Christ's. For before
that Council of Lateran though they believed the same heresies and errors,
yet it was because they thought the Scripture to be the maine ground thereof:
but in this Council, they must believe all these things, because the Pope has
so resolved and defined. So as though the Materials of Popery were the same,
yet the formality and foundation of their faith and Church was quite altered.
So as from hence Papists are so truly called, from the Pope, as the prime Head,
Rock and foundation of their faith. For as we make Christ and his Word, so
they on the contrary, make the Pope, that is to say, Antichrist and his word,
the ground and foundation of faith. In regard whereof, as the faith and
religion is from Christ, truly called Christian, and they truly Christians:
So the faith and religion of the other is from the Pope, or Antichrist, truly
and properly called Papisme, or Antichristianisme, and the Professors of it
Papists, or Antichristians. And the ground of all this is, because they hold
the Popes judgment to be Supreme and infallible; and so build their faith on
him, as on the foundation thereof, which their own Church never did, till the
time of Leo the tenth. It is not then the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, but the
Lion of the Lateran Synod, who is the foundation of the faith of Papists, and
from whom therefore they justly took their name of Papists, to distinguish
them from true Christians, which from that time they have held to this day. And
thus all the members of the present Roman Church, do both err, and are
heretics, and, which is the worst degree of heresy; are Papists, that is,
Antichristian heretics, not only holding, and that in the highest degree of
pertinacy, those heresies which are contrary to the faith, but holding them
upon that foundation, which quite overthrows the faith.] thus and much more,
this learned Dr. of our Church. So as here is a clear demonstration, that the
faith of all Papists at this day, is a Popish faction.

And our Homilies do affirm So much. For in the Second part of the Homily for
Whit-Sunday, we read thus:

THe true Church is, an universal congregation or fellowship of Gods faithful
and Elect people, built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone. And it has always three notes
or marks whereby it is known: Pure and Sound Doctrine: the Sacraments
ministered according to Christ's holy institution: and the right use of
Ecclesiastical Discipline. Now if ye well compare this with the Church of
Rome, not as it was in the beginning, but as it is presently, and has been for
the space of nine hundred years and odd: you shall well preceive the state
thereof to be so far wide from the nature of the true Church, that nothing can
be more. For neither are they built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, retaining the sound and pure doctrine of Christ Jesus, neither yet
do they order the Sacraments, or else the Ecclesiastical Keys in such sort,
as he did first institute and ordain them. To be short, look what our Savior
Christ pronounced of the Scribes and Pharisees in the Gospel, the same may be
boldly, and with safe conscience pronounced of the Bishops of Rome, namely that
they have forsaken and daily do forsake the Commandments of God, to erect and
set up their own constitutions. Which thing being most true, as all they which
have any light of Gods Word must needs confess, we may well conclude,
according to the rule of Augustine, That the Bishops of Rome, and their
adherents, Aug. contra Pe^^liani Donat. epist. cap. 4.
are not the true Church of Christ, much less then to be taken as chief heads
and rulers of the same. Whosoever (says he) do dissent from the Scriptures
concerning the Head, although they be found in all places where the Church is
appointed, yet are they not in the Church: a plain place concluding against
the Church of Rome. Where is now the Holy Ghost, which they so stoutly do
claim to themselves? Where is now the Spirit of truth, that will not suffer
them in any wise to err: If it be possible to be there, where the true
Church is not, then is it at Rome: otherwise it is but a vain brag and
nothing else. Saint Paul says, if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, the
same is not his. And by turning the words, it may be truly said: if any man
be not of Christ, the same has not the Spirit. Now to discern who are truly
his, and who not, we have this rule given us, that his sheep do always
hear his voice. And Saint John says: He that is of God, hears Gods voice.
Whereof it follows, that the Popes in not hearing Christ's voice, as they
ought to do, but preferring their own Decrees before the express Word of
God, do plainly argue to the world, that they are not of Christ, not yet
possessed with his Spirit. Also their intolerable pride shows the same,
etc.] So and much more the Homily. Wherein, as it is plainly prooved, that the
Church of Rome is no true Church of Christ, as being built upon another
foundation, then the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone. And preferring their own Decrees before the Word of God,
and so consequently, the Popish Faith is a mere Fiction: So let our Innovators
well consider, whether they be any members of the true Church of Christ, that
thus plead for, and take part with the church of Antichrist, laboring by all
means to bring her into favor again with us, while they audaciously presume
to alter the authentic Book set forth, and commanded by Parliament, for
public and solemn Thankesgiving of our great deliverance on the Fifth of
November, from the Popish Powder Plot, as if neither their Religion were
Rebellion, nor their faith Faction.

And the Homily concludes thus:

TO conclude, [Yee shall briefly take this short lesson, wheresoever ye find
the spirit of arrogance, and pride, the spirit of envy, hatred, contention,
cruelty, murder, extortion, witchcraft, necromancy, etc. assure your selves,
that there is the spirit of the Devil, and not of God, albeit they pretend
outwardly to the world, never so much holiness. For as the Gospel teaches us,
the Spirit of Jesus is a good Spirit; an holy spirit, a sweet Spirit, a lowly
Spirit, a merciful Spirit, full of charity and love, full of forgiveness and
pity, etc. The Rule that we must follow, is this, to judge them by their
fruits: which if they be wicked and naught, then is it impossible, that the
tree of whom they proceed, should be good: Such were all the Popes and Prelates
of Rome, for the most part, as does well appear in the Story of their lives,
and therefore they are worthily, accounted among the number of false Prophets,
and false Christ's, which deceived the world a long while. The Lord of heaven
and earth defend us from their tyranny and pride, that they never enter into
his Vinyard again, to the disturbance of his seely poor flock: but that they
may, be^ utterly confounded and put to flight in all parts of the world: and he
of his great mercy so work in all men's hearts, by the mighty power of the holy
Ghost, that the comfortable Gospel of his Son Christ may be truly preached,
and truly followed in all places, to the beating down of sin, death, the
Pope, the Devil, and all the Kingdom of Antichrist, that like scattered and
dispersed sheep, being at length gathered into one fold, we may in the end rest
together in the bosom of Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob, there to be partakers of
eternal and everlasting life through the merits and death of Jesus Christ our
Savior. Amen.] And of the like effect is that Prayer, which some of Romes
factors have so altered, [Be thou still our mighty protector, and scatter our
cruel enemies, which delight in blood: infatuate their Counsel, and root out
that Babilonish and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jerusalem, Down with it,
Down with it, even to the ground. And to that end strengthen the hands of our
gracious King, the Nobles and Magistrates of the land with judgment and
justice, to cut off these workers of iniquity, whose religion is rebellion,
whose faith is faction, whose practice is murdering of souls and bodies, and
to root them out of the confines and limits of this Kingdom, that they may
never prevail against us, and triumph in the ruin of thy Church, and give us
grace to avert these and the like judgments from us. This Lord we earnestly
crave at thy merciful hands, together with the continuance of thy powerful
protection over our dread Sovereign, the whole Church, and these Realms, and
the conversion or confusion of all implacable enemies, and that for thy dear
Sons sake, our only Mediator and Advocate.]

Thus the conclusion and prayer of the Homily, and this Prayer of the 5. of
Novem. being well weighed together, we see (unless in so praying we play the
most notorious hypocrites and dissemblers before God and men) in what a sacred
bond all the Magistrates in the Land, from the highest to the lowest, do engage
themselves unto the great God of heaven and earth, to root out the whole
Babilonish Sect of Jesuits and Seminary Priests, out of these confines and
limits of these Kingdoms, and not to suffer them to roost here, to the great
dishonor of God, scandal of our Religion, danger to the State, and
destruction of the souls of Gods people, and of the Kings. Nor this only, but
if our Prelates (as they plainly show by their open practices) be found to be
fast friends to Rome, confederates with Jesuits and Priests, active Agents and
factors for the rearing up again of that religion, which is rebellion, and that
faith which is faction, and co^seque^tly that practice, which is murdering of
souls and bodies, and for the advancing of that Babilonish and antichristian
sect, which say of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it even to the ground:
while they labor by all ways and wiles, yea by an open Lawless force to beat
down the Kingdom of Christ in the Ministry of the word (as too lamentable
experience can witness) and to destroy all true religion, holiness, and
piety: then how does it concern our Gracious King, our Nobles and Magistrates
of the Land, to strengthen their hands with judgment and justice, to cut off
these workers of iniquity, and to root them out of the confines and limits of
this Kingdom, that they may never prevail against us, and triumph in the
ruin of the Church, by reducing us under the Babylonian and Antichristian
yoke again, which they labor with might and maine to effect, as their
notorious practices plainly tell us? And how should all the Kings good people
in the Land make this their daily prayer, which is publicly used once in the
year, and teach it to their children, that so at the least wise it may be
propagated entire to all posterity, and so vindicated from the injury, of time,
which our Innovators would bring upon it: and never give over thus praying,
till it shall please God to return a gracious answer in the fulfilling of it?

Yet are they not content herewith, but (like themselves) they practice the
like in the last Fast-booke, and that contrary to the Kings express
Proclamation, which orders the book for the former Fast to be reprinted and
published, as it follows.

The third Prayer Book, which they have pitifully mangled, is that, which was
set forth by the King for that Public Fast, in the first of his Reign, for
the averting of the great Plague of Pestilence, that the^ devoured many
thousands in this City, and elsewhere in our Land: and which his late
Proclamation commands to be reprinted and published, and so read in
Churches every Wednesday. But do they, or durst they alter that Book, which
the Kings Proclamation has so lately commanded to be reprinted and published?
Yes, even that, and that in such wise, as I see not with what warrant any
Minister may read it, as being not according to the Proclamation. Now the
Alterations in the new Book be these. In the first collect is left out this
remarkable pious Sentence entirely, This is one of those things objected to me
in their Articles. O boldness, to defend it.
Thou have delivered us from Superstition and Idolatry, wherein we were
utterly drowned, and have brought us into the most clear and comfortable light
of thy blessed Word, by the which we are taught how to serve and honor thee,
and how to live orderly with our neighbors, in truth and vertty. Lo, here,
these men would not have Popery to be called Superstition and Idolatry, nor
would they have the Word of God to commended, as that clear and comfortable
light, which teaches us all duties to God and man. Secondly, that collect
which begins thus, It had been the best for us, etc. is wholly left out in the
new Book. And wot ye, why? Alas therein is commended the profitable use of
continual preaching the Word of God; So as this collect would not have suited
well with such a Fast, wherein all preaching is prohibited in all places
infected. And in the very last page, Order for the Fast, these words are left
out in the new Book, To avoid the inconvenience that may grow by Fasting; Some
esteeming it a meritorious work: others a good work, and of it self
acceptable to God, without due regard of the end, etc. What? Do they esteem
their Fast a meritorious work? Must the condemnation hereof be expunged? And
do they account their Fast a good work, and of it self acceptable to God,
without due regard of the end? It seems so too. For the end of a true Fast, is
reformation of our evil ways, as the King of Nineveb proclaimed, and which
he and his people performed. But these men (it Jonah.
seems) have no such purpose, propound no such end to themselves, as the
reformation of all their violent oppressions, and outrageous tyrannizing over
Gods Ministers and people, to the utter overthrow of Religion; and setting up
of Idolatry and Superstition in the worship of God; which one sin alone is
enough to bring the Pestilence, and all other plagues upon a Land.

Beside these, they have guelded the Book in sundry These passages also
objected to me in their Articles.
other particulars: as in the Collects, and Prayers for the Royal Progeny,
they have left out the mention of the Lady Elizabeth and her children,
expressed in the former book. They have left out the collect for the Kings
Navy, and for seasonable weather: whereas there was never more need to pray for
seasonable weather, than since this fast began, when so many tempestuous
storms, and immoderate raines have been, as have endangered Ships in the very
harbor, Shipwrackt some of great price, and caused great Floods, threatening a
Famine, by drowning the Seed under the clods. Also sundry Psalms and Collects
besides are omitted, and a whole passage in the Exhortation, applyable enough
to the present occasion.

Now whither it be for these alterations, wherein both the Kings Order in his
Proclamation is not observed, and God is dishonored, by leaving out such our
humble acknowledgements, both of his mercies, in delivering us from
Superstition and Idolatry, and bringing us into the clear and comfortable
light of his blessed Word, and of our sins, in not harkening to His Word
continually Preached unto us, and the like; and Gods Ministers and people are
abused, by having such Books thrust upon them, which they cannot with a safe
warrant, and good conscience use: or whether it be, that in the Fast Day, all
preaching is prohibited in all places whatsoever infected: Sure we are, that
God has given us sad signs of the little pleasure he takes by such a Fast.
For the very first week of the Fast (whereas before the Sickness had a
weekly decrease, and was likely, through Gods mercy, more and more to decline)
what a sudde^ terrible increase was there, of no less than 377. which was
double to any weeks increase, since this Sickness began? Was there nothing in
it, trow ye? was there not something in this Fast, wherewith God was so much
displeased? Surely we should be very brutish, and worse than heathenish, not
to lay it to heart.

But here the Prelates will perhaps quarrel me, for Without all peradventure
they have d^ in their Articles.
imputing any thing to the Fast, as being appointed by the King. I answer, God
forbid, that I should intertaine the least Sinister opinion of my gracious
Sovereign, that he had the least meaning by his Proclamation to debar and
forbid Preaching of Gods Word in any place. And my reasons are these.

First, because the Proclamation says, that his Majesty propounds the example
of pious Kings, in former ages, for his precedent in this Fast, who ever in all
former ages not only not restrained, but likewise allowed, prescribed, and
commended Preaching, as a principal and necessary part of a public Fast, yea
as the very life and soul of it.

Secondly, because his Majesty's Proclamation commands this so religious an
exercise to be performed with all decency, and uniformity, which I humbly
conceive cannot be, when preaching is restrained in some, and those the most
eminent and necessary places (as this great City in special) in respect
whereof (as I conceive) this Fast was specially commanded, and yet in other
places allowed and prescribed.

Thirdly, because the Proclamation relates, that his Majesty resolved upon a
grave and Religious form of Solemnizing thereof, straightly charging and
commanding that this Fast be religiously and solemnly observed, and
celebrated weekly upon every Wednesday, throughout the whole Kingdom: and
therefore never intended (as I humbly conceive) to restrain Preaching in any
place, without which a public Fast cannot be gravely, religiously and
solemnly observed, and celebrated.

Fourthly, Because the Proclamation both directs and commands, that the book
of prayers for the Fast, formerly set forth by Authority, should be reprinted
and published, and likewise used in all Churches and places at the public
meetings of this Fast: now the book formerly published by his Majesty's
authority in the first year of his Reign, upon the like occasion, allows
and prescribes two Sermons every Fast Day, as well in the City and suburbs of
London, as in other places, whither infected or not; yea notwithstanding the
infection was then far greater, and the Summer season far more dangerous.

Fifthly, because in all public and general Fasts, both in his Majesty's own
Reign, his late Royal Fathers, Q. Elizabeth's, and other his Royal
Progenitors, upon this, or any other the like occasion, Preaching in all places
without restraint, both fore-nooue and afternoon, has been approved, and
never prohibited, but enjoined and commanded: now his Majesty has often
solne^ly protested in his public Declarations (as before is mentioned) to all
his Loving Subjects, that he will never give way to the licensing or
authorizing of any thing, whereby ANY INNOVATION in the least degree might
creep into our Church: and therefore I humbly conceive, that his Majesty never
intended to authorize to give way to such an innovation as this, to inhibit
Preaching, and that in the time of a public Fast, contrary to all former
Precedents.

Therefore I verily believe, that this was a mere devise of the Prelates, by
whose advise the Proclamation says, his Majesty resolved upon a grave and
religious form of Solemnizing a Fast. So as this of prohibiting Preaching, was
rather added by them than admitted by his Majesty, seeing it is (as I humbly
conceive) neither a grave, nor religious form of Solemnizing a Fast; and I had
rather dye, than conceive such an opinion of my King, that he should be the
author of such an inhibitio^.

And therefore if the Season served, to have access unto his Majesty, I should
in all humility, address my self humbly to petition his Majesty to take off
this restraint: And that for these reasons.

First, because not only it is contrary to all Precedents in former ages, and
such an innovation, as (I believe) the like was never heard, nor read of in the
world: but also because it much dampes and deadens the hearts and spirits of
the Kings loving and faithful subjects within the City, who much lament and
grieve, that in the Fast Day they are restrained of the spiritual Food of
their souls, when they desire and need it most, when as Preaching is likely to
work most good upon their souls, which stand in more need of spiritual
Physic and Phisicians, to cure the plague of their souls which has brought
the pestilence upon their bodies, than their bodies do of corporal.

Secondly, because this restraint of Preaching (the chief means to humble men
for and turn them from their sins, without which God will not turn from his
wrath) will in all likelihood procure the continuance of the plague, as the
beginning of it brought in with it a lamentable increase that very week, as is
before noted. Yea forbidding of the Word to be preached, brings the wrath of
God upon a people to the uttermost, as 1. these. 2. 16.

Thirdly, because Preaching is no more dangerous on the Fast Day, the^ on the
Lords day, to increase infection.

Fourthly, because upon prayer and preaching the last great Fast, a greater
plague than this was suddenly and miraculously remooved; yea though the
preaching was continued in the heat of Summer.

Fifthly, because this restraint, together with the said alterations of the
Fast-booke, and other innovatio^s in the land foreme^tioned, do fill the
peoples minds with jealousies and fears of an universal alteration of
Religion.

Sixthly, because (as the Prelates do extend the letter of the Proclamation, if
but one Parish in London, or suburbs thereof, or but one house in that parish
be infected, the pestilence thus continuing but in the least degree, and the
Fast not ceasing, all Wednesday sermons in the whole City, must be suppressed.

Seventhly, because the restraint of preaching on the Fast day, is (as we find
by experience) a great prejudice and impediment to the free and liberal
Collection for the poor, which is recommended in the Fast, in this calamitous
and necessitous time, wherein the Plague brings with it a Sore famine upon many
thousand families, which before this Sickness lived in good fashion, and were
able to give relief to the poor. For no where, and at no time, are men's
hearts more enlarged, and hands extended in bounty to the poor, than where
Gods word has been and is most powerfully and plentifully preached, as this
our City may serve for a precedent and proof. And for this very cause (were
there no more) Preaching was never more necessary in this City, than at this
time, which does so swarm with multitudes of poor, who without some present
competent relief must needs perish, and so would heap upon this City yet
greater Sins, which is ready to sinck under the heavy burdens both of Sins
and Plagues.

I might note again, as an 8. reason, that great and extraordinary increase
the very first week of the Fast, together with most hideous storms, fearful
and foul weather, immoderate rain, ever since it began, God testifying by his
reviving and renewing of the Plague, and by the sad and black countenance of
the skies, and those many great losses both by Sea and Land, that he abhorres
such a Fast, as of which his very judgeme^ts Speak, Call you this a Fast? Yea
also a 9. reason, because according to the Prelates practice, this Fast is made
a mere This also objected to me in the Article of High Commission.
mock Fast, wherein God is mocked to the face. For do the Prelates propose
this, as the principal end of their Fast, to break off their violent and
tyrannical proceedings against Gods Ministers, and so against the State of
Religion? I fear it. And so long let us never look for any good issue of this
Fast, but rather further judgments to be powered upon the Land.

For these reasons (I say) I could wish with all my heart to be an humble
Petitioner to the King, who I am persuaded would speedily hearken to such a
request, and would certainly answer, that it was never his mind, that
Preaching should be in this Fast prohibited. The king prohibit Preaching? Noe,
noe; we all see who they be that prohibit Preaching, even those that labor
tooth and nail to Suppress Preaching, and lay snares to entrap all painful
Preachers, as the pressing of the book for Sports for instance; they being not
content, that the book be read by the Curate, but the As in the case of Mr.
Valentine.
Incumbent himself must read it, or else abide extremity, as Suspension from
his Ministry, Excommunication out of the Church, Sequestration from his living,
and Ecclesiastical means, the great crying Sin of this Land at this day.

But I will add no more. So as the Ninivites shall rise in judgment against
this generation: for they upon occasion of Jonas preaching, proclaimed a Fast,
and reformed their lives, and their violent dealing: but these men under
pretense of a Fast (as Iezebel did to devour Naboths vinyard) would devour
Christ's Vinyard, while they Suppress the Preaching of the Word, whereby men
should be convinced of their Sins, and converted from them, and bring forth
good fruits of the Vine; and thereby harden their necks against the Lord, and
strengthen their hands in violence to fill up their sins allway.

The sixth Innovation, is about the means of the knowledge of God, and of the
Mystery of our Salvation. That may be verified of many Prelates in these days,
which Christ charged the Pharisees with all, Woe be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men; for
ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that were entering to
go in: Matthew. 23. 13. Which in Luke 11. 52. is expressed thus, Ye take away
the Key of Knowledge. And do not our Prelates thus, when they hush and silence
all Lectures in whole Diocese? When they suppress, and cut short Preaching
all they can? When they lay snares to muzzle Gods Ministers, that they may not
Preach? When they disgrace and traduce Preaching, calling it in scorn,
Sermonizing? When they forbid Ministers to use any prayer before their Sermons,
but that bare and barren form of words in the Canon, wrapping all * Treatise
of the Sabbath See Bispop Wrens Articles. All these particulars objected
against me in their Articles.
up in the Lords Prayer? When they must use no Prayer at all after the Sermon,
but come down, and read a second or third Service at the Altar, where in great
Churches half the people cannot hear a word? When they must not preach at all
in the Afternoon upon the Lords days? When they must only Catechize for
half an hour, and that, not by expounding the Principles of Religion (which
may well be called the Key of Knowledge, which they take away) but only by the
bare questions and answers in the book, teach the children like Parats, so as
they can never come to give a reason of their faith with understanding? When in
a great City, or in the As in Oxford, and elsewhere, She^ford. Sermon of
Charity. (...) 36. ^inted by the allow ance of the Vice Chan^^llorer of
Cambridge even at the commencement time. (...).
Universities, they limit all Sermons to one hour, so as the hears cannot
enjoy the benefit of more then one Sermon a day? Yea what devises have they not
put in practice to put the light of Gods word under a bushel, if not rather
altogether to quench it, if it were in their power? What invectives are in
Shelfords ad Treatise, against Preaching, and the peoples knowledge? How does
he find fault with the Peoples desire of Sermons? And page 47. he Says, Our
Soli Sermonists, and Solifidians, so they may have a Sermon or two on the Lords
days etc. And page 91. he allows of Preaching with a restriction, and
limitation, as being not fit for every Minister, but for This he^ speaks of
the Prelates: For who but they can make new Laws and Canons.
extraordinary and excellent men, called by God, and the Church to reform
Errors and abuses, or to promulge to the world new Laws and Canons. And
again, least this should be too great a burden to these his extraordinary
men, he qualifies the matter, by restraining their preaching to certain
extraordinary times in the year, page 94. as Easter, Whit-Suntide, Christmas
day, and to extraordinary places too, as Cathedralls, and for this cause (page
93.) he would have many Ministers unfurnished of their licenses, especially
those that preach twice every Lords day; and those that are permitted to
preach, to be restrained to certain times, and seasons, as once a Month at
most. And he gives the reason of all, because the Church is now settled, and
therefore does not need preaching, as once it did in its infancy. So he. Thus
they labor tooth and nail to cry down Preaching. For (says he) p. 94.
Reading is the ordinary preaching, ordained by God himself. And this is that
maine mark which they al shoot at, to mould up all in the Lump of the
Communion Book, and make that the Sum and Scope, and the very Circle of al
Religion and Knowledge.

The Seventh innovation, is in the rule of faith: for whereas the sole and
complete rule of faith, is the Holy Scripture, as. 2. Tim. 3. Our new Doctors
cry up the dictates of the Church, to wit, of the Prelates, to be our only
guides in Divinity; as in Reeves Communion book Catechism expounded page 20.
and 206. where all Ministers must submit to the judgment of the Prelates in
all matters pertaining to religion: and all Prelates must submit to the
Arch-Prelate, as having a Papal infalibility of spirit, whereby as by a Divine
Oracle, all questions in Religion are finally determined.

And here I cannot forget a speech of the chiefest Prelate of England, in the
High Commission, who at the censure of Doctor Bastwicke, for oppugning the
Jurisdiction of Bishops jure divino, as being no where found in the Scripture,
but the contrary, said openly, that in matters of divinity we are not tied to
the Scriptures, but to the Universal Catholic Church in all ages; for how,
(said he) shall we know the Scriptures, but by the Church. And therefore not
without some reason does that Jesuit (in his Pamphlet printed in English,
1636, entitled A Direction to be observed by N. N.) make a laudable mention
of that great Prelate, saying, Page 14.
Although I ought not to dissemble, but do gladly acknowledge, and deservedly
publish in this occasion, for a pattern to others in this Realm, the care of
the Chiefest Prelate in England, in prohibiting the sale of Books tending to
Socinianisme. So there; But what means the Jesuit here by Socinianisme. He
tells us plainly, page 16. and 17. in these words: First then, I say, that the
very Doctrine of Protestants, if it be followed closely, and with coherence to
it self, must of necessity induce Socinianisme. This I say confidently, and
evidently prove, by instancing in one error, which may well be termed the
Capital, and mother Heresy, from which all other must follow at ease: I mean,
their here^y in affirming that the perpetually visible Church of Christ,
descended by a never interrupted succession fromour Savior, to this day, is
not infallible in all that it proposes to be believed, as revealed truths.
For if the infallibility of such a public Authority be once impeached; what
remains, but that every man is given other to his own wit, and discourse? And
talk not here of holy Scripture? And a little after: And indeed, take away the
authority of Gods Church, no man can be assured, that any one Book or parsell
of Scripture, was written by divine inspiration, or that all the contents are
infallibly true, which are the direct errors of Socinians. So he Where we
see what his meaning is, when he commends the chief Prelate, as a pattern to
all other in prohibiting such books, as exalt the sole authority of holy
Scripture, as the only Rule of faith. Thus not unde servedly he commends him
for upholding the authority of the Church (to wit, of the Pope primarily, and
next after him the Prelates) as whereon depends the authority and sense of
Scripture. Well? But is this the way of settling the faith of Christians in the
true religion? Nay, is it not the high and ready way to unsetle all, and to
make religion a wether-cocke, to be turned this way, or that way, as the wind
of man's unstable and erroneous fancy shall blow and move it? And for proof
hereof, Ibid p. 21.
let us but observe what the same Jesuit faith a little after. For writing of
the present state of our Church, and that since this new generation of Doctors,
and Prelates has Sprung up amongst us (I know not from what Popish root) he
says, * And to speak the truth, what learned judicious man, can, after
unpartiall examination, embrace Protestantisme? which waxes even weary of it
self; Its Professors, they especially of greatest worth, learning, and
authority, declare themselves to love, temper and moderation, allow of many
things, which some years ago, were usually condemned, as Superstitious and
Artichristian, and are at this time more unresolved where to fasten, then at
the infancy of their Church. Thus by the way he shows who they be, that
are the chief Fathers of that new-fangle religion of Protestancy of late birth
in England, namely those of greatest worth, learning, and authority, as the
Prelates are counted to be, who are of that temper and As I was lately charged
in the Articles of High Commission, (...) that my sermoni offended the more
moderate bearers.
moderation, as they allow of many things, which some years ago, were usually
condemned, as superstitious and Antichristian. But how does the Jesuit
demonstrate this? Page Twenty two, He says, For do not the Protestant
Churches begin to look with another face? Their walls to As with dumb
Pictures and Images, Laymens books, in steed of Scripture Sentences.
speak with a new language? Their, Preachers to use a By speaing smooth
things, and not roughly against Popery and sin.
sweeter tone? Their annual public Tents in their See before Franciscus a
Sancta (...) note of Cambridge Commencement.
Universities, to be of another style, and matter? Their books to appear As
Dr. Coosens Private Devotions, with the Jesuits badge. Here ^e quotes these in
the margent. For ^mple. The Pope not Antichrist. Prayer for the Dead. (...) bus
Patrum, Pictures: That the Church has authority to determine Controversies in
faith, and to interpret the Scripture about Free will, and Predestinat^on,
Universal grace; that all our works are not sins; merit of good works,
inherent justice, Faith alone does not justify. Charity (...) to be preferred
before knowledge, Traditions, Commandments possible to be kept.
with titles and arguments, which once would have caused a mighty scandal among
the brethren? Their doctrine to be altered in many things, and even in those
very paints for which their Progenitors for sooke the then visible Church of
Christ? Their 39 Articles, that is, the sum, the Confession, and almost the
Greed of their Faith, are patient: Patient? They are ambitious of some sense,
wherein they may seem, to be Catholic. To allege the necessity of wife and
children in these days, is but a weak plea for a married Minister to compass
a Benefice. Fiery Calvinisme, once a darling in England, is at length accounted
Heresy; yea and little less then Treason. Men, in word and writing, use
willingly the once fearful names of Priests and Altars. Nay, if one do but
mutter against the placing of the Altar after the old fashion, for a warning
he shall be well warmed by a A little Treatise so entitled, and printed 1636.
coal from the Altar. English Protestants are now put in Sunday no Sabbath. A
Sermon printed 1636. page 38.
mind, that for exposition of Scripture, by Lib Can. An. 1571. Can. 19.
canon they are bound to follow the ancient Fathers. And to conclude all in one
maine point: The Protestant Church in England willingly professes so small
Antiquity, and so weak subsistence in it self, that they acknowledge no other
visible being for many Ages, but in the Church of Rome. So the Jesuit. Behold
here now, Protestant Reader, what testimony a Jesuit can give of the present
state of our Church, and that out of his own reading and observation, and
which we our selves cannot deny; all which he ascribes to the Prelates, as
those whom he indigitates for men of greatest worth, learning, and authority,
who declare their Innovations; as Sodom her sins, and hide them not, even
our enemies, now their friends being witnesses, who gladly feed their infants
with the pappe of our new Papisme.

But to return to our particular point of Innovation concerning the rule of
faith, which our Prelates have turned off from the holy Scripture, to the
authority of the Church: this is the maine upshot in Dr. Whites Treatise of the
Sabbath day, wherein he ties the observation of the Lord, day to that
limitation, which the Prelates of the Church do, or shall prescribe; and so
also all other matters of Religion. And do they not also overthrow the
Scriptures, as the rule of faith, in that they restrain the preaching of them
to their illiberall allowance, inhibiting such and such points to be meddled
with; as before is showed? and do they not place the Communion book as a rule
of faith in all matters of Religion, wherein the Archbishops definitive
sentence must determine, as Recv. ibid. p. 206.

The 8th innovation or Change, is in the rule of manners: which rule, must not
be any more the word of Christ, and the writings and examples of the holy
Apoles, wherein they followed Christ; for that is counted too precise and
puritanicall: but our Prelates have prescribed a new rule of Christian manners,
to wit, the example of their own lives, and the dictates of their writings;
the Sum whereof is, to make a mixed Religion and conversation of Christians,
which is partly holy in an external form of godliness, without the power
thereof and partly in admitting, allowing, approving, applauding countenancing,
and dispensing by Episcopal authority, of a heathenish kind of life, and that
especially in most Sacred times, as the Lords day; which though dedicated
wholly to the worship and service of God, yet the rule of the Sanctification
hereof; which is the 4th Commandment, and the example of Christ's and his
Apostles, these novellers do altogether reject, as abolished, and instead
thereof advance their new Traditions, which is to allow one part of the Day for
God, and the rest to man's carnal Lusts, Sin, the world, the Devil, as our
Homily Says. So as the due observation and Sanctification of the Lords day,
being a platform and pattern of a Christian Conversation, a Christian being
that in his whole life, in a proportion, which he is on the Lords day; and this
platform being defaced and broken by our Anti-Sabbatarians: it follows that
together with their impions crying down of the 4th Commandment, and so
accordingly the due Sanctification of the Lords day entire, without mixture of
heathenish. Sports and Pastimes, they deface and destroy the very face, beauty
and power of all religion, and so do set up a new Form of it, never allowed of
(as by a Law) in the world, before. And herein do our Apostates out strip the
very Pontificians themselves who did never yet make a Law, nor take upon them to
allow any other rule of Christian life, than the Scriptures; although they have
(with our innovators) denied the Scripture to be the only and absolute rule of
faith, independent upon any humain power. For even Bellarmine exclameth
against, Bellar. Concio. 20 Pars Altera. de Dominica Quinqnagess. O qualem
(inquiunt) Christiam Deum habent, quam egregiam Legislatorem, qui haec vel
pracipit, vel (...)? etc.
and disclameth that dissolute profanation of Sacred days, in practice among
the Papists, in their vain Sports and Pastimes, for which cause, the very
Turks do scorn (says he) the Christian Religion, Saying, O what a God have
the Christians, what a famous Law giver, who ^ither commands, or permits
these things? Now if the Turks: should upbrayd us in England, and cast us in
the teeth with our Lord and Lawgiver Jesus Christ, as if he either commanded,
or allowed Sports and Pastimes upon the Lords day: our answer must be, that
our great Lawgiver Christ does not any way tolerate, much less command any
Sports or Pastimes on his Sacred day, as wherewith both God is dishonored, and
his day profaned: but out Lord-Prelates are they, who do usurp unto
themselves a Lawless power to dispense with that part of the Lord's Day as they
please, wherein men may run riot, and keep their Bacchanals, and their
Floralia, without controwle, such as Christ and his word forbids to be done on
any day.

Much more might be spoken of the Late Changes, but this suffice for the
present All these things they do most boldly maintain, while they Article
against me for laying these to their charge
But what speakewe of Changes? Our Changes do plead, that they bring in no
changes, but revive those things, which ancient Canons have allowed and
prescribed: as standing up at Gloria Patri, and at the reading of the Gospel:
bowing at the nameing of Jesus, and to the High Altar: remooving the Communion
Table to stand Altarwise, at the East End of the Chancell: praying with the
face toward the East, where the Altar stands: placing of Images in Churches:
erecting of Crucifixes over the Altars; commanding of long Martins instead of
Preaching, and the like. To this we answer, that we in this Land are not to be
ruled by the Popes Canons, or the Canon Law, but by the Law of God, and of the
King. Although I In the High Commission not long since in a cause about a Pe^^
in the Church.
once heard a Papal Canon was alleged in opposition to a Parliamentary
Statute in K. Edw. 6. his reign alleged by the adverse Advocates, and it
passed for Current, none gainsaying it. But as for those Rites and Ceremonies
to be used in our Church, they are by an Act of Parliament (prefixed to the
Communion book) restrained to those only, which are expressed in the same
book; and if any, by private authority, shall presume to introduce into
practice any other besides these, he is to suffer imprisonment for a time, and
if he persist, perpetual imprisonment, and loss of all his spiritual
promotions during his life.

But besides all this, these men have one special Sancturary to fly unto, and
that is, their Cathedral Churches, where they may lay hold upon the horns of
their Altars. These be their old high places not remooved. These, as they are
commonly used, be the ancient dens of these old Foxes to which they fly,
being this pursued; of whom the Scripture says, Take us the Foxes, the little
Foxes, that spoil the Vines: These be those nests and nurceries of
Superstition and Idolatry, wherein the old Beldame of Rome has nuzzled up her
brood of Popelings, and so preserved her usum Sarum in life to this very day.
And now these are be come impregnable bulworkers to patronize our Re-builders
of Babell, in all their innovations. Innovations, Say they? We bring in no
innovations, no new rites, but what has been in use ever since the
Reformation, and that in the most eminent Places, even the Mother Churches of
the Land. Now all that we go about, is to reduce inferiot churches to an
unity, and conformity to their Mother Churches; So as thus bringing all to
unity, we shall take off that reproach, which the adversaries cast upon us in
this kind; and which we shall then retort upon themselves, for their
diffentions between their Regulars and Seculars. Thus do our Master Builders
plead, and so by their cunning insinnuations, under a pretense of Piety and
peace, of unity, and uniformity, preaching peace, peace, when nothing but war
is in their heart and hand, (as Psalm. 55. 21. and 59. 7.) do so far
prevail, that before we be aware, they will by this means pretrily reduce
us to a perfect peace and unity with old Mother Rome again.

For these Mother Churches, to which all Danghter. Churches must conform, are
they not the natural daughters of Rome? Do they not from top to toe exactly
resemble her? Her pompous Service, her Altars, Palls, Copes, Crucifixes,
Images, superstitious gestures, and Postures, all instruments of music (as at
the dedication of the King of Babylons Image) Long Babylonish Service, so
bellowed and warbled out, as the heareers are but little the wiser. Are not
these high Places also the receptacles and nurceries of a number of idle
bellies, to say no worse? Do not the fat Prebends So cramme their
Residenciaries, that the while their starveling Flocks in the country do
famish for want of spiritual Food? But as Erasnius said of Luther, how his
fault was, that he meddled with the Popes Miter, and the Monks bellies. But
this I note by the way, to show how all those, that are maintained by
Cathedralls, are engaged to help forward those Innovations that are now on
foot, because they make much for the supporting of their Papal Pomp.

But let us a little examine what force there is in this Argument: Cathedralls
are so and so: therefore all other Churches must conform to them. I deny the
Argument. Legibus vivendum est, non exemplis. We must live by laws, not by
examples. The rites and ceremonies of all our Churches are prescribed, and
precisely limited by the Laws of the Land, by Act of Parliament, and are not
left at large to the Example of Cathedralls. Nay, how comes it about, that
Cathedralls have usurped that Lawless and boundless Liberty of conforming
themselves to Rome in all those their ceremonies? What law can they show for
this? Will they plead prescription? For how long time? What prescription can
Durhams Cathedrall-Church plead for her new service, new Cop^s, new Images of
Saints and Angels, new rites on Candlemas day, with their hundreds of tapers,
and candles; and instead thereof bringing a Spiritual darkness upon men's
souls, by shutting out the ancient morning Prayers, and other means of true
knowledge and devotion? Are not the authors of this innovation yet alive? What
Prescription of long custom can the Cathedral Church of Bristow plead, which
now of late also has set up new Images of the Apostles and other Saints? What
Prescription can Paul's Cathedral bring for those mitred Images and Statues
newly erected, and for those winged Angels round about the Quire? What
Prescription can that Cathedral Church at Wo^verhampton in Staffordshire plead
for her goodly costly new Altar, with the Dedication thereof within these 2. or
3. years last past, in which Dedication, all the Roman rites were observed,
as Censings, washings, bowings, Copes (though but borrowed from Lichfeild)
chantings, abusing of Scripture (as John. 10. 22.) to prove dedication of
Altars, and the like? or what custom can the Same Church plead, for erecting
their new Altar, and throwing out of their ancient and M. Le^.
painful Preacher? What warrant have they for setting up such Altars for Baal,
such dumb gods, and casting down the throne, and stopping the mouth of the
living God? The like may be said of many other Cathedrals, if not all, which
within these few years, yea but Yesterday, have been strangely metamorphosed
into a Curtizan-like garb? and now must be, Like Mother, Like Daughter. Must
therefore all Churches conform to their new Romish Pashions? Must therefore
the Cathredrals in Oxford, I mean these C^lledge-Churches, as Magdale^s,
Christ's Church, Queens, S. John's, and others, as also those Chapels in
Cambridge, as Peter-house Chapel, S. John's, Kings, Queens, become the
^^rceries and Springs of Superstition and Idolatry to the whole Land, because
of late days they have crested goodly new Altars, Images, Crucifires, and such
like orn^ments of the Romish where? And because they both practice and press
the bowing to those Idols, must therefore all Scholars bow unto them? To what
end then shall men send their Sons to the Universities, if there they must be
trained up to the Superstition, and Idolatry, of Popery.

Thus we see how unlike our Cathedrals be to that they were formerly, being
newly set out with a Romish dress, according to those Spirits which rule in
the air: so as their examples ought to be no Laws to bring in an universal
conformity to these yesterday innovations, in Mother-Cathedrals.

Again, by what title do Cathedrals came to be Mothers to other Churches?
what Mothers? Except Step-Mothers. For they never bore, nor brought forth those
Churches, whom they call daughters. And right Step-Mothers they be that cheat
the children of their Est mihi namque domi Pater, est injusta Noverca.
Fathers inheritance, as these would do, who rob the Spowse of her Jewels, and
put upon her the cast attire of the whore.

But they allege the Order for St. Gregory's by Paul's, wherein there is an
imitation of this conformity of other Churches to their Mother-Cathedrals. I
answer, our gracious King at that, as at other times (as still lik^ himself)
plainly said that he would have no innovations. Nor can we imagine, that it was
any part of his meanning, that all Churches should in all things conform to
Cathedralls, much less that all Cathedralls should bring in new rites, that so
other Churches might conform to them. What? Must other Churches have Organs,
Singing Quires, Altars, Images, Crucifixes, Tapers, Copes, and the like,
because such is the guise of Cathedralls? Must long chanting Service go up,
and preaching go down, because it is So in Wolverhampton, Durham, and other
Cathedralls? But by what Law? By the Popes Canon? Does not our Law exclude out
of all Churches all other rites, besides those in the Communion Book? Does not
the Homily forecited praise God, for the purging of our Parish Churches from
piping, chanting, and the like, as wherewith God is so sore displeased, and the
house of Prayer defiled? And does not another Homily condemn the setting up of
Images, Homily of the place and time of prayer, part. 2. page 131. Homily of
Idolatry, part. 1. 2. and 3. Homily of the place and time of prayer, part. 2.
page 131.
Crucifixes, and such Relics in Churches; and all for the peril of Idolatry,
which does necessarily attend the same? And does not the Queens Injunctions
forbid all skrines and relics of Idolatry and Superstition? And does not
another Homily condemn many Altars, Images, and Idols, as heathenish and
Jewish abuses? How then will our new Masters, our Innovators make good the
bringing in of these things afresh into Cathedrals, and forcing all petty
churches to conform thereunto? would the Prelates thus make the Mother
Cathedrals, (thus by themselves made and adopted Romes daughters) their
Concubines, whereon to beget a new bastard generation of sacrificing,
Idolatrous Mass Priests throughout the Land, which our good Laws, and all our
learned and pious Divines proclaimed illegitimate, and abominable? So as I
cannot but wonder (though I hope better) that these, desperate and all daring
Popish Innovators, turning off the State of the Kingdom, and Church upside
down, beating themselves either upon the Popes Canon Law, overtopping the
Regal power, or upon the evil example, of their lately metamorphosed
Cathedrals conformed to Rome, that so they may finely or furiously enforce all
the Churches in England to the like conformity, and so reduce Quae bellua
ruptis cum semel effugit, redded se prava Catenis.
England under the Papal yoke again (they being now dead, that felt the
intolerable pressure of it, and a new generation sprung up, that affect
novelty, and to trade with Rome again) and Genesis 11. 6
nothing can now stay them, but they will either break all in pieces, or their
own necks: that they are not cited before the Royal Tribunalls of Justice,
and the Judges and Justices in their Circuits and assizes do not take
Cogniscance of such perturbers, who undermine and overthrow the State of Church
and Common weal, and mingle heaven and earth together, and so condignely
punish them for their intolerable usurpations: So should my text be here made
up, My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them, that are
given to change: For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the
ruin of them both?

But (alas!) have they not got the Laws under their girdles, and do they not
trample them as dirt under Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
their feet? And therefore with what chains shall we bind these men? How
shall we bind these all-shapeturning Monsters to good behavior? May not this
whole State say, as that good King Ieh^shaphat in the straites of Jerusalem,
We know not what to do, but our eyes are toward (...), O Lord?

And besides all this, in the last place, being pulled away from the horns of
their Cathedral Altars, as not able to shelter them from their pursuers, they
fly (as to their last refuge, and most impregnable Fort, as they conceive) to
the Kings Chapel. Wherein they do as the Fish Aeliani vari^ historiae. lib.
c. 1.
Polypus, or many-foot, which gets her self closse to the rock, and putting
on the color of the rock, so as she seems to be a part of it, when other
fishes swim toward the rock for shelter, she catches them unawares in her
net-like hairs or horns. So our Innovators getting closse to the King, as
unto the rock, assimiling themselves to the manners of the Court, when the
fishes think to find shelter and protection, under the Rock, they are ready
with their fangs to entangle and devour them. Well, what say they of the Kings
Chapel? They plead the whole equipage, furniture, and fashion thereof, as a
pattern for all Churches. There (say they) is an Altar, there bowing toward
it, there Crucifixes, there Images, and other guises. And why should Subject,
be wiser then the King? Totus componitur orbis Regis ad exemplum.

To this I answer: 1. Why should subjects think to compare with the King in
the State of his royal Family, or Chapel? 2ly there be many things in the
Kings Chapel which were presumption to have in ordinary Churches, and some
things cannot be had or maintained in them, as a quire of Gentlemen, Singing
men, and other Choristers, which daily sing Service in the Chapel; and
sundry, other. 3ly. The worship and service of God, and of Christ, is not to be
regulated by human examples, but by the Divine rule of the Scriptures. In
vain they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men. The
three children would not bow to the Kings goodly golden Image. The old
Christians would not so much, as offer incense in the presence of Julian the
Emperors Altar, and at his command, though he propounded, golden rewards to
the doers, and menaced fiery punishments to the denyers. 4ly, The external
rites and ceremonies in the Church are limited by Act of Parliament, prefixed
to the Communion book, and no more to be added or used in Churches. Lastly,
Suppose (which we trust never to see, and which our hearts abhor once to
imagine) Mass were set up in the Kings Cappell; is this a good argument: why
it should be admitted in all the Churches throughout the Realm of England. But
enough of this. And here an end for this time; and thus far of this text,
which as I began, so I will conclude with all, My Son, fear thou the Lord, and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their calamity
shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both?

FINIS.

