A COMMENTARY: OR, SERMONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE FIRST Epistle of
Saint Peter: WHEREIN METHOD, Sense, Doctrine, and Use, is, with great variety
of matter, profitably handled; and sundry heads of Divinity largely discussed.

By NICHOLAS BYFIELD, late Preacher of God's Word at Isle-worth in Middlesex.

LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes for George Latham, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the brazen Serpent. 1623.

TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHT, SIR HORATIO VERE, General of the English forces in
the Low Countries; and to his most worthy Lady, the Lady MARY VERE; all
happiness that a poor widow may, in their behalf, pray for at the Throne of
Grace.
My much-honoured Lord and Lady:
AS that special duty which I my self owe to you both; so that purpose which
my dear husband had (while he lived) of dedicating to you this Commentary of
his upon S. Peter's Epistle, binds me (who am left his sole Executrix, to see
his Will every way performed) to set out this first of his works published
since his death, under your Honorable Names. It pleased you to take into your
Family a child of his body: be further pleased (I pray you) to take into your
Patronage this child of his soul; which, as an Orphane, yea, as a Posthumus,
in all humility is presented unto you. You manifested more than ordinary
kindness to my husband while he lived; we and ours have often tasted of the
sweetness of your bounty: so that I should deserve to be accounted most
ungrateful, if I should bury so many favors in oblivion, or neglect to
provoke others to love and good works, by proposal of your example. Accept, I
beseech you, this poor acknowledgement of thanks; which is most due, first, to
that primary Fountain of all goodness, Almighty God, for keeping your Lordship
safe in your late employment in the Palatinate, and for freeing your Ladyship
from those fears whereunto you could not but be subject, by reason of his long
absence; and for giving you both, a mutual and comfortable fruition one of
another: And next, to your selves, for all those kindnesses, which, while my
husband lived, you did to him and his, and since his death you continue to do
to such as he has left behind him. Now, the good God continue his blessed
protection over you both, and take all that belong unto you, under the wings of
his fatherly Providence. And so I rest, with the renewall of my suit, that you
would cast your eyes upon this Work of him who much honored you in his
lifetime; and is, after his decease, offered to you by

Your humble Oratrix, ELIZABETH BYFIELD.

To the Christian Reader.
MAny and great are the means which the Lord has been pleased, since this
latter Spring of the Gospel (begun above an hundred years ago) to afford
unto his Church, for opening of the mysteries of the Gospel. Never since the
Apostles times were the Scriptures more truly interpreted, more fully
expounded, more distinctly divided, or more powerfully pressed, then in our
Times. The number of those who have taken good pain in this kind, is not
small. We may well put into the Catalogue of them, the Author of this
Commentary upon the second Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Peter, Master
Nicholas Byfield by name; who continued, for the space of twenty years, to
take more then ordinary pains in the work of the Lord. He had a singular gift
in diuing into the depth of those points which he undertook to handle. As the
many other Treatises which in his life time he published, do verify as much;
so, in particular, this Commentary here commended unto thee. In it thou shall
find, besides the Grammatical exposition, Logical resolution, and Theological
observations, many divine points copiously handled by way of Commonplace;
which has made the book to arise unto that bigness that it has. In this
manner of handling the holy Scriptures, he has not gone alone. Many of the
main Pillars of the reformed Churches have beaten out a path before him; as,
Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchius, Lauater, Perkins, and sundry
others. The large volume of Peter Martyrs Common-places, was gathered out of
his Commentaries on the holy Scriptures. The Church of God has reaped much
good by such copious and distinct handling of heads of Divinity. Their labors
therefore, who take pains therein, are not to be concealed from the Church.
If it had pleased the Lord to have continued the life, liberty and ability of
this his Servant longer unto his Church, he had (questionless) gone on further
in this course which he so well began: and so might we have had by his pains
as complete a Commentary on the two Epistles of Saint Peter, as we have upon
the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, published by this Author. In his
lifetime he entered upon the third Chapter, and went through a good part
thereof: all which is fairly copied out, and prepared for the press. But
there is so much matter in that which remains, as it will make a competent
Treatise by it self. This I make known, not that thou should let this Book
alone, till the other be published: for, when it is published, it cannot be
bound up with this in one volume, by reason of the bigness of both of them. As
care has been had to print this Commentary on the second Chapter, every way
answerable to the former on the first Chapter: so like care shall be had of
printing that which remains, answerable to them both; that so you may have all
the labors of this faithful and painful Minister of Gods Word, on this part
of Scripture, in three even volumes: which is in a manner as good, as if they
were all in one volume. They may, for their matter, be well distinguished into
several volumes: for, though one continued Scripture be handled in them all,
yet the points in every of them are different. In this respect, there is an
Alphabeticall Index in the latter end, that by the help of it, you may the more
readily find out such points as you most desire to read.

If the Author be of force to commend a Work the more, this Work may receive
no small commendation from the Author of it: for, he was a man of a profound
judgment, strong memory, sharp wit, quick invention, and unwearied industry.
He was in his Ministry very powerful, and that unto all turns, as we speak.
When he had to do with tender and troubled consciences, he was a Barnabas, a
son of comfort: but when he had to do with impudent and obstinate sinners,
he could make his face hard and strong, and show himself like to Boanerges,
the sons of thunder. Grave, sober, and temperate he was in his carriage; and
yet, with his entire familiar friend, he could be modestly pleasant. God gave
him a great measure of patience; and he had in his very body that which tried
his patience: for, it appears, that he carried a torturing stone in his bladder
fifteen years together, and upward. I have heard it credibly reported, that
fifteen years before his death, he was by a skillful Surgeon searched; and
that, upon that search, there was a stone found to be in his bladder:
whereupon he used such means as were prescribed to him for his ease, and
found such help thereby, as he thought, that either the Surgeon which
searched him, was deceived; or that the means which he used, had dissolved the
stone. But time, which manifests all things, showed, that neither his
Surgeon was deceived, nor yet his stone dissolved: for, it continued to
grow bigger and bigger, till at length it came to be of an incredible
greatness. After his death he was opened, and the stone taken out; and being
weighed, found to be 33 ounces and more in weight; and in measure about the
edge, fifteen inches and a half; about the length, above 13 inches; about the
breadth, almost thirteen inches: it was of a solid substance; to look upon,
like to a flint. There are many eie-witnesses besides my self, who can justify
the truth heerof. A wonderful work of God it was, that he should be able to
carry such a stone in his bladder, and withal to do the things which he did.
He was a close Student, witness the many Treatises which time after time he
published in print. He was also a diligent Preacher; for, constantly he
preached twice on the Lords Days: and in Summer, when many of the Gentry and
City came to his Parish at Isle-worth, and dwelt there, he spent an hour on
Wednesday, and another on Friday, week after week, in expounding the Scripture
in his Church: very seldom was he hindered by the forementioned stone in his
bladder. This course he kept till about five weeks before his death; when the
pain came so violently upon him, as it wasted his vital vigor, yet did it no
way weaken his faith: but, as the outward perished; so was the inward man
renewed in him. He earnestly praid, that the extremity of the pain might not
make him utter or do any thing unbeseeming his vocation and profession: but
withal, he advised his friends to consider, that he was but as other men; and
thereupon to judge charitably of his carriage in that case. Many heavenly
meditations issued from him in that time of his visitation, unto the last
period thereof. Quietly, meekly, and patiently he endured; till that surest
Surgeon of all, Death, had eased him of all his pain. In his soul he ever
lives: and in his name he will continue to live so long as the Church enjoys
his Works, more lasting than Marble Monuments.

Now, O blessed Savior and Head of thy Church, as thou transplantest some of
thy Plants out of thy Nurcery, the Church militant; plant others, we beseech
thee, in their rooms, that thy Church may never be unfurnished of able,
painful, faithful, and powerful Ministers.

WILLIAM GOVGE.

AN EXPOSITION of the Second Chapter of the first Epistle general of PETER.
1. Pet. 2.1.2.3. 1. Wherefore laying aside all maliciousnes and all guile and
dissimulation, and envy, and evil speakings:

2. As newborn Babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby;

3. If so be ye have tasted, that the Lord is bountiful.


FRom the thirteenth verse of the 1. The coherence.
Chapt. to the eightth verse of the third chapter is contained matter of
exhortation: and the exhortation is either general, or special: The general
exhortation concerns all men. Chap. 1.13. to Chap. 2 13: The special
exhortation concerns only some men, as subjects, servants, wives, husbands,
from chap. 2.13. to chap. 3.8.

The general exhortation stands of two parts. first the one concerns the
matter of holiness: secondly, and the other the means of holiness. Of the
matter of holiness in the later part of the former chapter.

In these words and those that follow to the thirteenth verse, is contained an
exhortation to the right use of the means, by which we might grow up in all
holiness, and acceptance with God.

The Analysis of the first part of this chapter.
In the exhortation two things must be distinguished: first, the substance of
the exhortation, secondly the conclusion of it. The substance is contained from
verse the first to the eleventh; the conclusion in the eleventh and twelfth
verse.

For the first there are two things, in which if we be rightly ordered, it
cannot be, but we must grow wonderfully in grace and holiness: first, The one
is the word: secondly, The other is Christ. To a right order of ourselves in
respect of the word, he exhorts, verses 1.2.3. To a right order of our selves
in respect of Christ, he exhortes, verse 4. to 11.

The part of the exhortation, that concerns the word, has three things.
First, what we must avoid, we must lay aside Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, etc.
secondly, what we must do, we must desire the word, as the child does the
breast: thirdly, Why so; where diverse reasons are imported. First, we are
babes: Secondly, we are but as new born babes: Thirdly, the word is sincere
milk* Fourthly, it will make us grow: fifthly, have we not already tasted of
the sweetness of it? verse the third.

That part of the the exhortation that concerns Christ, has likewise three
things in it, which I will here but touch: First, what we must do, verse 4.
Secondly, how we must do it: verse 5. Thirdly, why so: viz. for two reasons.
First, the one taken from the testimony of Scripture, which is alleged verse
the sixth, and expounded verse 7.8. Secondly, the other taken from the
con^iderati-of our prerogatives we enjoy in Christ, which are set down, first,
positiuely, verse 9. Secondly, and comparatively verse 10. And this is the
breef order of the whole first part of this chapter.

The first thing then in the exhortation is about the word: and therein the
first thing is about the things, which must be avoided, if we would profit by
the word: of which in the first verse.

THere are five things we should lay aside and be sure we be free from, 5.
Things to be avoided, if we would profit by the word.
when we come into gods presence to hear his word, or to be exercised in it:
viz. Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, Envy, and evil speaking.

Two things distinctly must be considered in verse first, the sins to be
avoided: viz. those five before named. Secondly, the manner of avoiding them*
imported in the metaphorical term laying aside. In general diverse things
may be noted.

First, General observations.
that it is exceeding profitable to gather special catalogues of our sins
which we should avoid, The benefit of brief catalogues of sins, or duties, or
graces.
to single out such sins as we would specially strive against, and do more
specially hurt us, and hinder good things from us: I mean not of all sins, so
much as of special certain choice evils that yet remain in greatest force in
us. We may observe a great wisdom of the holy Ghost in many places of
Scripture, drawing such catalogues according to the state of the people to whom
they are given: and so it were of excellent use, if we did gather catalogues of
the duties which specially concern us, or of the graces we would strive most
to excel in, to the intent to keep them daily in our minds and memories,
striving to force in us the special holiness required in them. It were
exceeding useful to observe in several Scriptures, how the holy Ghost singles
out choice directions according to the diverse states of the people whom they
concern.

Secondly, the Minister ought to info^me his flock concerning the particular
and special faults that hinder the work of his Ministry where he lives, and
accordingly to set himself against those sins. It is not enough to reprove
sin, but there is a great deal of discretion and judgment to be expressed in
applying himself to the diseases of that people.

Thirdly, the Apostle does not name here all the sins that hinder the word:
but he imports, that in the most places these five sins here named do much
reign, and usually do maruellously let the course of the word: they are the
five most usual sins in the auditories of Christians.

Fourthly, it would be considered, how these sins do hinder the word. These
sins do hinder the word many ways.

1. These sins make wicked men many times to set themselves against the word,
How many ways the sins heer-mentioned do hinder the word.
and to strive to suppress the liberty of the word.

2. These sins hinder the word, in that they hinder many times other men from
the love of the word. The word is not glorified, yea, it is euill-spoken of,
and why? Do not many men and women say they like not this going to Sermons,
etc? for, they see, that such persons can live in malice and deceit, and envy
one another, etc.

3. These sins hinder the Ministers from discerning the work of their
Ministry in their hearers. Paul cannot see or judge, that the Corinthians are
any more than carnal, or at the best but babes in Christ, because there was so
much envy and strife, and division among them, 1. Cor. 3. verse 1.2.3.

4. These sins cause God many times to take the word from men. When the Jews
grew so untoward and envious at the Gentiles, and to have such ill tongues in
their heads toward their Teachers, what follows? but that the LORD should turn
the labor of his servants from them, and employ it among the Gentiles, Acts 13,
etc.

5. These sins hinder the word, because they hinder the persons in whom they
are, from a right disposition to, or use of the word. Any of these sins are
like poison lying at the stomach, that infects all the food which comes there.

And therefore for these reasons, and many more which might be alleged, we
should bring a general resolution to make conscience of our ways; and to
avoid these, and all, and each of these sins.

The first then of these sins is Malice.

Of Malice. Acceptance of the word.
The original word is diversely accepted. For sometimes it signifies misery, or
grief for affliction; and so it is used to signify the evil of the day,
Matthew. 6. vlt. Sometimes it is rendered naughtiness, or wickedness in
general, and so it imports vile crimes, or notorious offenses, and so it is
taken, Iam. 1.21. Acts 2.22. In this sense it may be taken here: For it is
certain, that if men be guilty of wickedness, and come in the love of any
sin, the word is poisoned in them: especially whoredom and wine take away
men's hearts from the word, Hos. 4. Lastly, it is rendered in diverse places,
malice: as 1. Cor. 5.8. Colos. 3.8. and so it is here.

Malice then is the first sin we should be careful to avoid: Malice, in
short, is anger inueterate; It is an inward hatred, or grudge harbored in the
heart against others, and it may be known by diverse signs: As, 1. When a man
bears a constant base estimation of another, Signs of malice.
and inwardly loathes him. 2. When a man has frequent desires of the hurt of
others, and longs for ability or opportunity of revenge. 3. By inflation: when
a man carries himself so proudly, and arrogantly, as he would have it
appear, that he despises others. 4. By the habitual backbiting, judging,
and censuring of others. 5. When a man resolves not to forgive a wrong done
him: By these and the like signs may men try themselves, whether they be
guilty of malice, or no.


Now, there are many reasons, why this sin should be wonderfully hated, Reasons
against malice.
and shunned; why we should carry a constant malice against the sin of
Malice.

First, From the causes
if we respect the causes of this evil. For malice comes, first, from an ill
nature; it cannot be in a good nature: secondly, It comes from the Devil the
first deviser of this abominable poison: thirdly, It comes from anger, as the
next usual immediate cause. The infirmities, or wrongs of others may be the
occasions, but they cannot be the causes of malice. Now we should be ashamed to
father any of the former three evils.

Secondly, if we respect the effects of malice: and that either in our selves,
From the effects. 1. In us.
or in God. In our selves, malice will work, first, a conformity to the nature
of the Devil. For it was used to be noted, that to be angry was humane, but
to persevere in anger (which is this malice), was devilish: Secondly, It will
plead forcibly man's unregeneration. Malice is noted as a mark of the
unregenerate man: Tit. 3.3. 1. Ioh. 2.9. Thirdly, If we have any gifts, it is
certain malice is like leaven, it will sour them, and spoil the praise, and
acceptance of them: 1. Cor. 5.8. Fourthly, It hinders prayer and the word.
That it hinders prayer, is proved, James, 4.1.2.3. That it hinders the word,
this text proves. Fifthly, It bringes a man many times to wonderful shame, and
by a just providence of God to open foiles and disgraces. Prou. 25.8. et.
26.26. And many times they fall into the pit they dug for others: Prou.
26.27. A malicious person knows not, what shall be come of him self 1. John
2.11. In God.
Now the effects which the malice of man after a sort produces in God are
first to make him to hate us wonderfully: he accounts the malicious person, as
a murderer, not respecting only what he does, but what he would do: 1.
Ioh. 3.11. Secondly, He will never forgive a man his sins because he does
not forgive his brother: Math. 6.14. Thirdly, The judgments of God are pulled
down upon him: God may make the malicious, as the grass on the howse-top,
whereof the mower fills not his hand, nor they, that go by, say we bless
you in the name of the Lord: yea, let me^ look to it, lest they be cast into
prison and never come out, till they have paid the utmost farthing.

The use may be,

First, For humiliation to all such, as find this vile poison in themselves:
Uses.
they are in a miserable case, and extremely and dangerously diseased;
especially, if men be guilty of the aggrauation of malice: Aggrauations of
malice.
Malice is evil in any, and in any measure, and toward any: but it is
extremely evil, first, when men put on a resolution not to amend, but
confirm themselves in their malicious courses, and will not be entreated or
persuaded to peace and love: Secondly, when men suffer their malice to carry
them into suits, and quarells and open contentions. Thirdly, when men malice
the Godly, and such as fear God, and love the truth. 1. Ioh. 3.15. Fourthly,
when they malice their friends and familiars, the men of their peace. To hate
them that love us is abominable, so is that domestical hatred between
brethren: Prou. 18.19. and between Man and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants. Fifthly, when men hate those that reprove their sins: Amos 5.10.
as some do their Ministers. Sixthly, to hide hatred with dissembling lips, and
to lay up deceit in his heart: Prou. 26.24.25. and 10.28. Seventhly, to sow
discord among brethren: this is one of the six things God hates, Prou. 6.19.
Eightthly, to conceive malice against whole states of men, to hate whole
Churches and Assemblies that profess the Name of Christ, this is the devilish
malice of Heretics and Schismatics: Note.
and the beginning of these loathings must be looked-to in such as yet have not
proceeded so far as to a separation. If to hate one man be so ill, what is this
offense of base estimation, inward loathing, and distempered censuring of the
Churches of Christ? Ninthly and lastly, it is one monstrous aggrauation of
malice, for a man to rejoice in it, boast of it, account it his honor to
contend, and overcome in contending, to triumph in malice.

Secondly, for instruction: and so we should all learn all remedies and
directions to avoid malice. These remedies either concern malice in our
selves, Remedies for malice.
or malice in others: For both, we need rules to direct us. Now for avoiding
malice in our selves, these rules are of excellent use.

First, Watch thine own heart, for pride, and envy, In our selves.
and passion: For from hence flows all contention and hatred: Prou. 13.10.

Secondly, Avoid three sorts of men, and thou may be free from malice.

The first is the talebearer. Where no wood is, the fire goes out: and where
there is no talebearer, strife cease. Prou. 26.20. The second is the
scorner: for, Cast out the scorner, and contention cease. Prou. 22.10. The
third is the contentious man, the froward person, the man of imaginations, he
that is apt upon every trifle to snuff, and contest. For as coals are to
burning coals, so is a contentious man to kindle strife: Prou. 26.21.
Thirdly, Do thou mislike any thing in thy brother? go to him, and reprove
him plainly, never hate him in thy heart, Note.
but tell him of it plainly. Many times a godly reproof, cures both the
reprouer, and the reproved.

Fourthly, Will not all this help? then go in secret, and humble thy self
before God for that vileness, that cleaues to thy heart: Many prayers and
confessions before God, will make a great alteration in thy soul, it will purge
out this leaven wonderfully.

Fifthly, Meditation of two things in Christ: his Passion, and his Second
coming. In his Passion, consider a man infinitely just, suffering for the
unjust, and from the unjust: Never so much innocence, never so great wrongs,
never worse enemies; yet see, he can forgive even upon the Cross, when they
took his life from him. In his Second coming, consider first, that then there
will be an end of all wrongs, thou shall never be molested more. Secondly, That
an exquisite revenge shall then be executed upon all that do thee wrong, if
they repent not. Thirdly, a retribution shall be given to thee in glory for
all the indignities thou have patiently endured in this world. And thus of
malice in thy self.

For malice in others, In others.
it must be considered two ways: First, how thou must do to cause it to
cease, when it is conceived against thee already: Secondly, how thou may
avoid it still, if thou live free from it.

For the first, if any body hate thee, observe these rules: 1. Render not
evil for evil to any man, at any time: Romans 12.17. 2. If thou have any way
done wrong, seek to be reconciled: Matthew. 5. 3. If the contention be secret,
complain to no body, but go and debate the matter with thy neighbor
himself, and discover not thy secret to any other: Prou. 25.4. 4. Be courteous
and patient, and tender hearted, and ready to do any good to them, speaking
no evil of them without a calling: Romans 12.17. Ephesians. 4.3. Tit. 7.2.


To keep thee from other men's malice observe these rules.

First, Keep thee from other men's strife: meddle not with the strife, that
belongs not to thee: Prou. 26.17.

Secondly, Wrong no man, but follow that which is good, both among your selves,
and toward all men: 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

Thirdly, S^riue to show all meeknes, and softnes to all men: Titus. 3.2. Iam.
3.13.17.

Guile.]

Of Guile. The acceptance of the word.
The second sin to be avoided is Guile.

The word here rendered Guile is diversely accepted in scripture. Sometime it is
taken in good sense, and so there is a justifiable Guile: so, Paul caught the
Corinthians by craft, he won them by his discretion and godly policy. 2. Cor.
12.6. So, Samuel, by a godly policy, giving it out that he came to sacrifice,
did safely perform his chief business of anointing David. 1. Sam. 16. and so
did Paul deal cunningly, when in the broile he cried out he was a Pharisie.
But most usually this word is taken in ill sense, and so sometimes it is all
one with hypocrisy: as Hosh. 11.12. Psalm. 17.2. But so it is not taken here by
all likelihood, because hypocrisies are mentioned in the next words: sometimes
it signifies frawd and falsehood in opinions: either in the matter, when the
doctrine is strange and false: and so the false Apostles were deceitful
workmen, when they put in that for good stuff, which was counterfeit and
devilish, 2. Cor. 11.13. Or when good doctrine is handled corruptly and
deceitefully for wicked ends, 2. Cor. 42. 1. These. 2.3. Sometimes it signifies
deceit in words, and so flattery is Guile, Psalm. 12.2, 3. And lying is Guile,
Mich. 6.12. Zeph. 3.13. And so is all false Testimony. Sometimes it signifies
deceit in works; and so false weights and balances, and all fradulent
dealing, and cousenage in buying and selling is Guile, Mich. 6.10.11. So there
is Guile in Tything, Malach. 1. vlt. And so al lying in wait to seek occasion
against others, and all subtle dealing to oppress others, is Guile: Psalm. 105.
2. Cor. 11.12, 13. Math. 26.4. Mark. 14.1. and such Guile was in them that
would make a man sin in the word, Isaiah. 29. Briberie also is Guile, Job. 15
vlt.

Now if any ask me why this sin should be avoided in them that desire to
profit by the word; Ob.


I answer, Sol.
It is to be avoided as it is a sin that much dishonors God and the
profession of godliness: Why Guile is to be avoided.
It is a shameful offense in any that would seem to love the word; but more
particularly the sins of deceit are a great impediment in hearing the word:
For, first the guile of false opinions and strange doctrine is like a poison to
the sincere milk of the word, and to be eschewed of all that follow the Truth.
Ephesians. 4.14.15. He. 13.7 Secondly, a heart accustomd to deceit and subtlety,
cannot be a plain and honest heart: and, without a plain, honest, and good
heart, men can never receive, with any fruitfulness, the seed of eternal
life. Luke 8. Thirdly he that is false to men, will never be true to God, he
that will lie to men, will lie to God: Also he that is not faithful with men,
will compass God about with deceit, Hosh. 11.12. He will never be faithful in
the true treasure, that is unjust in outward things. Tuke 16. Fourthly, it is a
sin that God, in a special manner, hates, Psalm. 5.7. Fifthly, the sins of
deceit usually attend upon some Idol in the hearts of men, which has such
command over the deceitful person, that he cannot attend to the word of God,
or not have leisure to practice it; he is so mastered by this particular
corruptition, Ierem. 9.

Use 1.
The use of this may be threefold.

For Humiliation to all deceitful persons, that use lying, fraud, subtlety and
guilefull dealing in their trades and callings, and course of dealing, and
conversation with men; they shall never prosper in spiritual things. The
Ordinances of God are blasted to them: The misery of deceitful persons*
Morouer, there are two cnosiderations which should wonderfully affright such
as are accustomed to lying and deceit.

First, It is certain they are wicked men, and have not the fear of God
before their eyes: they are the children of the Devil, and enemies of
Righteousness; as these places fearfully show, Psalm 36.1, 3. and 10.7. Romans
3.13. and 1.29. Acts 13.10.

Secondly, the curse of God is upon them; God will weigh them in the balance,
Job. 31.5. They are an abomination to the Lord, Prou. 11.1. and 20.23. The
Lord will surely visit, and his soul will be avenged on such persons, Ierem.
8.26, 27, 29. They shall be destroyed, Psalm 52.4. They shall not live out
half their days, Psalm. 55. vlt.

And as this is terrible to all deceivers, so especially to such as are guilty
of the aggrauations of the sin. The aggrauations of the sin of deceit.
As, 1. When deceit is covered with smooth words, The manner of deceiving.
and a flattering style, Ierem. 9.8. Prou. 26.24, etc. 2. When men delight in
it, and take a contemplative kind of pleasure in their guilefull proiects; as
the voluptuous person does in his lust: When men's bellies prepare deceit; Job.
15. vlt. not their heads, but their bellies, Psalm 52.2, 4. 3. When men make a
trade of it, give their tongues to evil, and will frame deceit. Psalm. 50.19.
Bend their Tongues to lies, and teach their tongues to speak lies, and weary
themselves to commit iniquity, Ierem. 9.5. 4. When men think all time spent
about Gods service too long; they would have the Sabbaths over, that they might
practice deceit, Amos. 8.5. 5. When men Swear deceitfully, Psalm. 24.4. 6. When
men boast of it, Psalm. 52.1, 3.


And as deceit is aggrauated by the manner, The persons upon whom it is
practiced.
so may it be by the persons upon whom it is practiced: and so it is an
aggrauation to deceive ones neighbor and ones brother, Ier. 9* 5: and so it is
to deceive the harmless, and quiet of the Land, Psalm. 35.20. The time.
And as by the persons, so by the time: It is an aggrauation, when men imagine
deceit (as the Prophet David says) all the day long, Psalm. 38.12.

Now, if the former terrors belong to deceitful persons in the general, how
much more to them that are guilty of deceit with all these or any of these
aggrauations.

Ob. 1.
Some one might here say, We feel the sweetness of it: we grow rich by it; and
we see many men in the world wexed great by the same courses: and if we should
not lie and deceive, we might giue-ouer our trades, etc.

Sol.
For answer heerunto; Let all such know, that though it be true, Of the misery
of such as thrive by deceit.
that some men are wext great and rich by such courses, yea, though they be
fat and shine, yet the Lord will visit them, and his soul will be avenged upon
them, Ier. 5.28.29: For, wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, Pro.
13.11: and the tabernacles of bribery and deceit shall be desolate, Mich.
6.10. to the 16. All such as conceive with guile (by that time they have
reckoned their months aright, though they grow never so big) shall bring
forth nothing but wind and vanity, Job 15. vlt. What shall be given thee, or
what shall be done unto thee, O thou lying and deceitful tongue? thou shall
be smitten with some strange and strong hand of God, as with the arrows of the
mighty: so as thy stroke shall be incurable and deadly, and thy destruction
shall be as with the coals of Juniper, that is, Note.
both fierce in respect of thy self, and pleasing in respect of others. For,
men are wonderfully well pleased, when they observe, that ill-gotten goods do
not prosper. This hand of God smells like the burning of Juniper.

Some others might say, Ob. 2.
We are servants, and we must ly, and defraud others to satisfy our masters.

The Prophet Zephany reports, Sol.
that the Lord will punish all those very servants that fill their masters
houses with violence and deceit; Servants must not use lying and deceit to
please their masters.
the servants (I say) as well as their masters.

But, Ob. 3.
might some others say, My courses are so secret, that my deceit shall never be
found out.

Let such men learn, Sol.
that the Lord found out this sin in Ephraim, Of secret cosenage.
Hosh. 11. and will punish it, though Ephraim said he was grown rich, and in
all his labors they should find none iniquity in him, that were sin. He
thought himself sure enough for being discovered: and therefore he would
contest vehemently, and cry out upon such dishonesty in men, as to use false
words and waights: besides, it is worthy to be observed, that God many times
does not only discover these secret fraudulent courses, but discouers them
openly; so as their wickedness is showed before the whole congregation, Pro.
26.26.

But, Ob. 4.
others may say, In other things I am just, and besides I am forward in
religion: and therefore this offense is not so great.

Shall I account thee pure, says the Lord, with wicked balances? Sol.
Mich. 6.12. as if he would say, All the shows of religion in the world will
not serve the turn, if sins of deceit reign in a man's dealing.

Use 2.
And therefore the consideration of all this should in the second place instruct
us, and that three ways:

First, to look to our own carriage; and, as we desire to live long, and to
see good days, to refrain our tongues from evil, and our lips that they speak
no guile; in all our dealing to detest lying and deceit, Psalm. 34.13; and so to
live, as we may be always ready to put our selves upon Jobs trial, Job 31.4.5.

Secondly, to lay to heart the consideration of the horrible inundations of
deceit, that has ouerflowed all states and callings of men: and so it should
work in us both lamentation and supplication before the Lord. For lamentation,
we may take up all the old complaints of the Prophets: Our times have reached
to the measure of iniquity then reproved; The iniquity of the time.
or rather, men now ouerpasse the deeds of those wicked men: wickedness is in
the midst of us: deceit and guile depart not from our streets, Psalm. 55.11.
Treasures of wickedness are in the house of the wicked; wicked balances, the
bag of deceitful waights and scant measures (which are an abomination to
the Lord, and for which he threatens vengeance) every where to be found, Mich.
6.10.11. Men lay wait, as they that set snares: they set traps to catch, not
beasts or foul, but men. As a cage is full of birds: so are men's houses full
of deceit and deceivers. It is now the usual course for men to wex great and
rich withal, Ier 5.26 27* yea, this sin so spreads, that we may truly
say, From the least of them to the greatest of them they are given to deceit,
and will deal falsely, Ier. 6.13. Every brother will supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with lies and slanders. They will deceive one another, and
not speak the truth. A man can dwell no where, but his habitation is in the
midst of deceit: and therefore certainly God has a resolution to stretch out
his hand still by public judgments. How can it be, but God must visit and be
avenged for these great abominations? What should he else do, but melt his
people in the common furnace of great judgments for such common sins? Ier.
9.3. to 10. And as it should teach us lamentation, so it should teach us
supplication too; even to go to God: and that in two respects. First, to
implore his help and mercy for the Church: that he would be pleased to spare
his people, and keep them from the infection of these vile sins; and, if it may
stand with his good pleasure, to work a repentance in men's hearts that are
guilty of these crimes: and withal to beseech him for our selves, to keep us,
that we fall not into the hands of deceivers (for, as it is a sin to deceive,
so is it a misery to be deceived, Psa. 12.1.2, etc.) and to give us wisdom to
beware of men, Ier. 9.4. Mat. 10.17. and to deliver us from the men of deceit,
Psalm. 43.1.

Thirdly, it should teach us (seeing the world is so full of guile, and that it
is so hateful a sin) therefore to honor and esteem such as we find to be
true hearted; Plain men with Jacob, without tricks and subtletie, and true
Israelites with Nathaniel, in whose hearts and mouths is no guile: We should I
say love them, delight in them, and stick to them, never to forsake them, but
to account them the very Ornaments of the World, and great lights in this great
and general darkness, and to account our selves wonderful rich and happy in
their fellowship and friendship.

Use 3.
Thirdly, this prohibition of Guile may inform us, Against equivocation.
and by intimation show us the hatefulness of the doctrine of the Papists, and
practice in the point of aequiuocation* contrary to the express Scripture;
that forbids all lying and deceiving of others, and commands us to speak
truth, and that every one (Priest and people) and that to his neighbor: how
much more to the Magistrate? Ephesians. 4.25. And Job shows that we ought not to
talk deceitfully, no not for God, to speak for him what is not right, Job.
13.7.

Use 4.
Lastly, this may be implicitly a singular and secret consolation to honest and
upright hearted men, that hate this hateful sin of Guile; that speak the
truth in their hearts, and make Conscience of their words, I mean those true
Nathanaels, of whom Christ speaks: And for the better imprinting of this use,
I will show you two things. First, the signs and marks of a man without
Guile, even of a true Israelite. Secondly, the encouragement and comforts that
belong to such men, etc.

The signs of a man without guile.
For the first, A true Nathanael has these praises and especial marks: 1. He
shunnes Guile in his Spirit as well as in his words or works: Psalm. 32.2. What
he accounts vile to speak, he accounts vile to think. 2. His praise is of
God, and not of men: Romans 2.26. He more strives to do good, then to get credit
and applause; and if God accept him, he cares not though all the world deride
him. 3. When he confesses his fault to God, he will not hide his sin, but
confesses all his sins; that is, all sorts of sins, and his sin without
extenuation, or excuse, Psalm. 32.2.5. 4. If he offend, it is of ignorance, and
he will not receive doctrine of trust; and, if he be showed the truth, he
quietly yields, and gives glory to God, Ioh. 1.46, 47, 48. 5. He is a plain
man, and speaks the truth in his heart: What he says, he says without
fraud or dissembling, he says it from his heart; his heart and his words
agree; he hates lying, and all deceit: Psalm. 15.2. Zeph. 3.13. though he
might gain never so much, yet will he practice no untruth. 6. He is a constant
man, just of his word, he will perform his promise, though it be to his own
hindrance, Psalm. 15.4. He will not deny the truth though it be to his extreme
danger.


Such men as these, Encouragements to such men.
have many encouragements to hold on their courses. It was a chief praise of
Christ, that he was without Guile, 1. Pet. 2.7. and so was it in the Martyrs
and Saints, Revel. 14.15. It is one of the signs and marks of Gods household
servants, Psalm. 15.2. Of a true Convert, Zeph. 3.13. These men are faithful
with the Saints, and rule with God, Hosh. 11.12. Such as these will abide the
Balance (to be weighed) and God will acknowledge their integrity, Job. 31.5.
The wealth of these men gotten by labor and just dealing, shall increase, when
riches gotten by vanity shall diminish, Prou. 13.11. And those lips of Truth
shall be established for ever, when lying tongues shall be but for a moment,
Prou* 12.19.

And thus much of Guile.

Note, that he says all malice and all Guile.
Only before I pass further, it is worthy the noting that he says of these two
first sins, that all Malice, and all Guile, must be laid aside: which
imports; that, howsoever some other infirmities be in the Godly, yet they
should be found far from all Malice and Guile; not a jot of either of them
should be found in them: Malice must be in them in no kind, nor in no measure;
neither secret nor open Malice, neither grudge nor desire of revenge, neither
at home nor abroad, neither in civil things, nor in matters of Religion,
neither in any of the aggrauations, nor in the least drop of it: And the like
may be said of Guile. It were a shameful thing, that any kind of Guile should
be found in a Christian, in any of his dealings, at any time, with any sort of
men, or in any measure. For, if but a drop of Malice, or Guile, be left in us,
It may break out again, and our hearts prove like a festered sore. Malice is
like leaven, a little of it will sour the whole lump. It is like Poison, a
drop may spoil us. It is like a coal of fire within, it wants nothing but the
Devil to blow it, and ^hen into what a flame may it kindle? And therefore we
should all look to our hearts, to see that we be free from Malice; and look
to our ways, that we be guilty of no kind of Guile: Such as are reconciled,
should note this point to see to it, that they keep not the least drop of the
poysonfull grudge in their hearts. It is not enough that they say daily, they
will forgive, or can receive the Sacrament. For, if they cannot respect them
with a free heart, without reservation, they are still infected with the
disease of Malice.

Hypocrisy.]

The third sin to be avoided is Hypocrisy.

Concerning Hypocrisy, I propound two things to be considered. First, how many
ways men commit Hypocrisy: Secondly, what reasons there are to dissuade us
from Hypocrisy.

For the first, How many wais men commit Hypocrisy.
the Scriptures discover many ways of the practice of Hypocrisy: In the 23 of
Matthew, our Savior notes eight ways of being guilty of Hypocrisy.

1. To say and not do: verse. 3. 2. To require much of others, and plead for
great things to be done by others, and not at all do it our selves, as we
prescribe it to others, verse 4. 3. To do what we do to be seen of men,
verse. 5. This is at large opened, Math. 6.1. to the middle of the chapter. 4.
To affect greatness in the respects and entertainments of others, v. 6. to 1^.
5. To do duties of Religion of purpose to hide some foul sin. v. 14. 6. To be
curious and strict in small matters, and neglect the greater duties, verses 23,
24. 7. To be careful to avoid outward faults, and to make no Conscience of the
inward foulness of the heart, verses 25, 27. 8. To commend and magnify the
godly absent, or of former ages; and to hate and abuse the godly present, and
of our own times, v. 29. to 36.

There are diverse other Hypocritical practices noted in other Scripture: as,

9. To serve God outwardly, and yet our hearts to be carried away with vile
distractions, Esaias. 28.13. This is a chief Hypocrisy to be avoided, in such
as come to the word. 10. To pray only in the time of sickness or danger, when we
are forced to it, and to show no love of prayer or delight in God, in time of
prosperity or deliverance, Job. 27.8, 9. 11. To judge others severely for
smaller faults, and to be guilty themselves of greater crimes, Math. 7.5. 12.
To be just overmuch; I mean, to make sins where God makes none, Luke 13.15.
13. To be convinced in his own Conscience, and yet not confess it, nor
yield, though they know the Truth, Luke 12.56, 57, etc.
Thus of the diverse ways of Hypocrisy.

Motives against Hypocrisy. The effects of Hypocrisy, both privative and
positive.
There are many reasons to declare the hatefulness of this sin of Hypocrisy:
I will instance only in the reasons from the effects.

The effects of Hypocrisy are either, first, to others: Or, secondly to the
Hypocrite himself.

First, to others the Hypocrite is a continual snare: He walks in a net, that
conuerseth with an Hypocrite, Job. 34.30.

Secondly, to himself the effects of Hypocrisy in the Hypocrite, are both
privative and positive. The privative effects which the Scripture instanceth
in, are chiefly three. The first is, that the Hypocrite loses all his service
of God; In vain do Hypocrites worship God, Math. 15. Secondly, he infecteth
all his gifts and praises: Hypocrisy is like leaven, Luke 12.1. It sowreth all
gifts and graces; a little of it will mar all his praises and gifts
whatsoever for the acceptance and use of them. Thirdly, he loses all reward
of his good works, Math. 6.1. An Hypocrite may do good works, though he
never does them well; and for the good he does, may have his reward with men,
but this is all; for, from God he shall have no reward.

The Positive effects of Hypocrisy, may be referred to two heads: For some
effects may fall upon him; and some effects must and will befall him.

The effects that may follow his Hypocrisy are three: What may befall him.
For, first, he is apt to be seduced by evil Spirits, and the doctrine of
Devils: An Hypocrite is in the greatest danger of most men to be seduced into
vile opinions, 1. Tim. 4.1.2. Secondly, he may fall into a spirit of slumber:
his conscience may be scared with an hot iron. Thirdly, he may fall into most
woeful terrors: such a fearfulness may surprise the hypocrite, that God may be
to him as devouring fire, and as everlasting burnings, Esaias 33.14. Job 18.14.

What will befall them.
The effects that will certainly fall upon the hypocrite, are these which
follow: 1. Judgment in his own conscience. He goes about as a condemned man:
for, he is always condemned in himself. 2. The discovery of all his villainy:
for, there is nothing hid in his intents and dealings, but all shall be laid
open, Luke 12.1.2. 3. The miscarrying of his hope. The hope of the hypocrite
shall perish, Job 8.11. to 16; and that with these aggrauations: that his hope
will perish, first, easily; secondly, speedily; thirdly, unrecoverably. Easily;
for, God can destroy his hope as easily, as the maid can sweep down the house
of the spider with her besome: Speedily; for, it will wither while it seems
rooted, and is yet green before any other herb: yea, though it grow up, yet it
is like grass on the house top: Unrecoverably; for, his hopes being but as the
house of the spider, they will be dashed down for ever; and though he would
lean to his house, and take hold of it, yet his hopes shall perish for ever:
and when this day comes, his hopes shall be as the giving up of the ghost. 4.
Strange punishments in his death and condemnation. And therefore when our
Savior Christ would express a special terror in the plagues of especial
sinners, he says, They shall have their portion with hyp^crites and workers of
iniquity, Matthew 24. and the last verse. Job 27.8.


And these effects will appear the more terrible, if we consider, that the
Scriptures take off all the objections of hypocrites; to show, that they be
left naked to the fury of God: for, all this will come upon them;

Though they be many in number, The objection of hypocrites removed.
Job 15.34.

Though they be rich, Job 27 8.

Though they triumph in all jollity now, Job. 20.5.

Though they be young, or widows, or fatherless, Esaias 9.17.

Though they cry at their later end, Job 27.9.

Though they do many good deeds, Mat. 6.

Though their wickedness be yet hidden, Luke 12.1.2.

The use may be, Uses.
first, for information; secondly, for instruction; and thirdly, for
consolation.

First, For information.
for information: and so it may show us,

First, what to think of the great shows of holiness and mortification made in
the Church of Rome. Their fastings, and their prohibition of marriage, vows of
chastity, and wilful poverty, have a show of wisdom and piety, in not sparing
the flesh: but, the holy Ghost tells us, that all this is but hypocrisy, 2.
Tim. 4.1.2.3.4. Col. 2. vlt*

2. How miserable the estate of multitudes of our own people is, by these
signs we may perceive, that the plague is wondefully spread in Israel. Note.
There are whole congregations of hypocrites, that is, of men that say and do
not, that come near to God with their lips, and their heart is far from him,
that seldom or never pray but when they be sick; that regard not the inward
foulness of their hearts, so their lives be either civil, or evil but in
secret, Job. 15.34. Isay. 9.17.

For instruction.
Secondly, for instruction; and so it should teach us all to beware of this
leaven of Hypocrisy, Luke 12.11. and if we would be thought to have the true
Wisdom from above, then let us show it by our fruits, that they may be
without Hypocrisy, Iam. 3.17. And for the better enforcing of this use, I will
put you in mind of two things: First, the sorts of Hypocrisy, you are most in
danger of: Secondly, the remedies or preservatives against Hypocrisy.

The sorts of Hypocrisy we are most in danger of.
The sorts are chiefly these.

1. The distraction in Gods worship, which is a most woeful fault, and most
common: This was it was showed before that so angered God, Isaiah, 28.13. 2.
Secondly, the omission of private worship, I mean to make a show of Religion
and the love of God, and yet neglect reading of the Scriptures, prayers,
conference and secret communion with God: This as was showed will provoke God
to stop his ear at our cry, because we do not pray at all times. Job. 27.8,
9. 3. Neglect of mortification of inward sins, and secret faults; taking
liberty, so it be but sin in the heart or in secret. This will undo thee for
ever, if thou look not to it in time. 4. Affectation of praise and credit with
men, to do our works to be seen of men.
Now, there are diverse rules to be observed, if we would not be poisoned with
the reign of Hypocrisy.

1. Keep thy self in Gods presence; Preservatives against hypocrisy.
forget not God; Remember always that his eyes are upon thee: Thus David set
the Lord always before him, Psalm 16.8. And this God commands Abraham to
do, if he will be upright, Genesis 17.^. 2. Thou must pray much and often to God
to create a right Spirit in thee: For, by nature, we have all double and
Hypocritical hearts, Psalm. 51.10. 3. Keep thy heart with all diligence,
watching daily and resisting distractions, wavering thoughts and
forgetfulness. And to this end, mortify the first beginnings of this sin in
thy heart, mourn for it as soon as thou discernest it, and judge thy self
seriously before God. Iam. 4.8. Math. 23.26. 4. In all matters of well doing
be as secret as may be, Matthew 6. both in Mercy, Prayer, Fasting, Reading
and the like. 5. Be watchful over thy own ways, and see to this point, That
thou be as careful of all duties of Godliness, in prosperity as in
adversity, in health as in sickness, Job 27.9, 10. 6. Converse with such as
in whom thou discernest true Spirits without Guile, and shun the company of
open and known Hypocrites. 7. Be not rash, and easy to condemn other men for
Hypocrites, only because they cross thy opinions, or humors, or will, or
practice. It is often observed, Note.
that rash censurers, that usually lash others as Hypocrites, fall at length
into some vile kind of Hypocrisy themselves.
Ob.
But may we not call an Hypocrite an Hypocrite?

Sol.
Hypocrites are not all of one sort. Some are close Hypocrites: About censuring
other men for Hypocrisy.
some are open. The open Hypocrite thou may show thy dislike of his courses,
and avoid him: But the close Hypocrite thou can not discern, or not
certainly; and if thou follow thine own conjectures, thou may sometimes
condemn a dear child of God, and approve a detestable Hypocrite.

Quest.
But how may the open Hypocrite be discerned?

Ans.
By diverse signs.

How an open Hypocrite may be discerned.
First, by an ordinary and usual affectation of the praise of men, in doing
good duties. When a man constantly sets himself out to the show, it is an
apparent mark of a false heart. Mark, that I say an usual affectation.

Secondly, if a man make a show of the means of godliness, or liking the
means of godliness, or of the persons that are godly; and yet it be manifest
that he hates to be reformed, lives in known gross faults; and being rebuked
by the word, or servants of God, will not reform, but carries a grudge at the
parties that labored his reformation: This is an evident mark of an
Hypocrite. Now to judge these is no offense.

Thirdly, It is a sign of an Hypocrite, when a man will be godly, and
^estrayned, and zealous in some companies, and in other company take liberty
for gross p^ophanenesse.

Lastly, he that will be rid of Hypocrisy, must look to himself, to keep
himself free from the causes of it, and take heed that he be not bewitched in
those things that have bred hypocrisy in other men.

What is it can make a man an Hypocrite? Ob.


First, Sol.
sometimes fear will do it: as in time of trouble or persecution; What makes
an Hypocrite.
men, to avoid dangers, will play the Hypocrites, Luke 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

Secondly, sometimes desire to get credit, and to be well thought on
(especially when it is mixed with envy at the respects of others) drives some
men headlong into Hypocritical courses, Math. 6.

Thirdly, sometimes men are emboldned unto Hypocrisy, by a secret persuasion,
that Christ will defer his coming, and they shall not of a long time be
brought to account, Matthew 24.48, 50.

Fourthly, men fall into Hypocrisy for gain, to hide their wicked and
deceitful courses: So the Pharisees, Math. 23.14. so 1. Tim. 4.2, 7.

Fifthly, forgetfulness of God is a great cause of Hypocrisy, and the reign
of it in many hearts, Job 8, 13.

Sixthly, Lust, and some vile wickedness, drives many men and women into
Hypocrisy, 2. Tim. 3.

These things we must take heed of, and preserve our selves from them, if ever
we would not be wretched hypocrites before God.

Use 3.
Thirdly, here is also consolation to all the godly whom God has kept upright,
and free from this damned vice (I mean, from the reign of it: for, there is no
man but has some dregs of hypocrisy in him).

Quest.
But how may a man know that he is not an hypocrite?

Ans.
By many signs.

How a man may know that he is not an hypocrite.
First, when a man had rather be good, than seem so.

Secondly, when a man makes God his secret place, strives and desires secrecy
to worship God, Matthew 6.

Thirdly, when a man loves no sin, but would fain be rid of every sin, and so
has respect to all Gods commandments.

Fourthly, when a man confesses his hypocrisy, and mourns for it, and strives
against it.

Fifthly, when a man accuses himself for it to others whose respects he most
desires.

Sixthly, when a man keeps his heart close to the substance of godliness, and
labors to be built up without distraction in the main things needful for his
salvation, and is not carried to spend his time most about unnecessary or
impertinent cares or studies, 1. Tim. 4.2.7.8.

Seventhly, when a man is as careful to serve God in prosperity, as well as
adversity, Job 27.9.

Eighthly, when a man delights in the Almighmighty, and loves all the means by
which he finds any communion with God, Job 29.9.

Ninthly, when a man, from the hatred of hypocrisy, is stirred up against
hypocrites, cannot abide them, nor will converse with them, Job 17. verse 8.

Lastly, Job comforts himself, that he was no hypocrite, by three arguments.

1. He would trust in God, though he did slay him. 2. He would reprove his
ways in Gods sight. 3. He sought Gods presence, and set himself always before
him: none of which an hypocrite could do, Job 13.15.16.
Thus much of Hypocrisy.

Envy.]

The fourth sin to be avoided is Envy.

Envy is nothing else but a vexation or inward displeasure conceived at the
good of another: viz. either another credit, gifts, preferment, profit,
success, or the like.

This sin, though in the world it be little thought of, yet in it self is a
most fearful vice; and should be so accounted of by christians, for many
reasons.

First, The hatefulness of the sin of envy.
if we consider the subject persons in whom it usually is. It is found most in
natural men, Tit. 3.3; yea, in silly men, Job 5.2. This was the sin of Cain,
Genesis 4; yea, of the devil himself. The main sin of the devil was the envy of
man's happiness. It reigned in the devilish Gentiles, Romans 1.29.

Secondly, if we con^ider the cause of it, it is for the most part the daughter
of pride, Galat. 5.26; sometimes, of covetousness, Pro. 28.22; and often, of
some egregious vile transgression, such as in Romans 1.29: but ever it is the
filthy fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5.25.

Thirdly, if we consider the vile effects of it, which are many: for, 1. It
has done many mischiefs, for which it is infamous. It sold Joseph into Egypt,
Genes. 37: and, which should ever make it abhorred of us, it killed the Son of
God, Mat. 27.8. 2. It deforms our natures: it makes a man suspicious,
malicious, contentious: it makes us to provoke, backbite, and practice evil
against our neighbors. It is ill for our sight: for, the envious man has
always an evil eye, and a cast-down countenance with Cain also many times. 3.
It begins even death and hell, while a man is alive. It kills the silly one, Job
5.2. It destroieth the contentment of his life, and burns him with a kind of
fire unquenchable. It feeds upon the envious man, like the moth or worm, by
degrees: and it hasteneth mischief in the envious man, because it makes the
person envied more glorious; and, besides, it is a vice that drives a man from
among men, in respect of comfortable society: for, it was long since advised,
Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye, Pro. 23.6: and no man by his
good will, if he can be free, will converse with such as he perceiues to be
envious.


Fourthly, this place manifestly imports, that it is a notable hindrance to the
profit of the word, and so no doubt it is to prayer and all piety, as evidently
it is a let of charity; unless it be, that men in hypocrisy to disgrace
others, will for envy do some good: as they preached Christ for envy in the
Apostles time, Phil. 1.15.

Uses. The use should be threefold.

First, for instruction, to teach us to follow the advice here given, in
putting away Envy, and clensing our hearts of it: and to this end, think much
of the reasons against it, and withal remember by confession and godly sorrow
to cleanse thy heart carefully of it. For, those things help wonderfully in the
putting of it away.

Secondly, this may serve for great reproof of many that profess the fear of
God, who daily shame themselves by discovering this vice in themselves. This
was it the Apostle complained of in the Corinthians; and showed, that it is a
vice which not only houlds down a Christian from growing, but it makes him
look like a carnal man, 1. Cor. 3.3.

Thirdly, for consolation, if we find our selves freed from this vice. Signs
of a man free from envy.
And we may know, that we are not envious, 1. If we love the good things in
others, and can rejoice in their prosperity, and mourn for their miseries. 2.
If we be vile in our own eyes, and lowly minded. 3. If we enjoy contentation
in our own estate, and are well pleased to be that which GOD will have us to
be. 4. If in giving honor we can heartily go one before another.


Thus much of Envy.

Evil speaking.]

This is the fifth sin to be avoided.

If we would profit by Gods word, we must look to our own words, etc.

Evil speaking, generally taken, comprehends all the faults of the tongue in
speaking: and so it is true, that a man can never be soundly profited by the
word till he makes conscience of evil words, as well as evil works. But I
think it is taken more restrainedly here.

There are many kinds of evil speaking that are to be avoided. Lying is evil
speaking: and it is true, that he who is false to man, will never be true to
God. But I think, Lying is not here meant.

Flattering is evil speaking: for, he that praises his friend with a loud
voice, it shall be counted to him as a curse. It is a curse, to be troubled
with a flatterer: and it is a kind of cursed speaking, To flatter. But I
think, this is not meant here neither.

But I think, the sins here meant are, Backbiting, judging, slandering, and
complaining one of another, and all bitterness of speech between man and man.
These hinder charity, and provoke God, and let the growth of piety in the hearts
and lives of men. And therefore these kinds of evil speaking should be
detested of Christians, and altogether laid aside.

These sins as they are hateful in themselves, and in the least degree, or in
any kind: so Evil speaking is made more vile in the aggrauations of it. The
aggrauation of Evil speaking.
It is evil to speak evil any way, or of any: But it is much more vile,

First, when we speak evil of the absent, that cannot defend them selves:
Backbiting is a hateful degree of evil speaking, 2. Cor. 12.10. Psalm. 140.11.

Secondly, when we speak evil of such, as God has humbled, or afflicted:
Leuit. 19.14. Obad. 12. Prou. 26.28.

Thirdly, when we shall speak evil of such, as are in authority. Eccles.
10. vlt. Iud. 8. Leuit. 19.

Fourthly, when we speak evil of the godly, especially before the wicked, or
for things indifferent, or without cause: James 4.9. Romans 14. Psalm. 31.18. or
for lesser failings: Math. 7, 1.2. but especially their good conversation: 1.
Pet. 3.16.

Fifthly* When we speak evil of our professed friends: Psalm. 5.6.13. Lament.
1.2.

Sixthly, when we speak evil of Gods messengers, taxing their persons: as,
their carriage, especially when they labor, and take pains, watching over us
for our goods: Ierem. 26.8.9. and 18.18. Amos 5.10. 2. Cor. 3.6.16. 1. Tim.
4.10. Ierem. 15.10. 1. Cor. 4.3.5.

Seventhly, when we speak evil of father and mother, or such as are nearly
knit unto us: so it is also monstrous uncomely to see the wife speak evil of
the husband, or contrariwise: Prou. 20.20. Leuit. 20.9. Mich. 7.6.

Eightthly, when we speak evil of godliness, even of the good way of God,
calling sweet sour, and good evil, Esaias, 5, 20. scorning Gods Sabbaths, and
deriding sanctification, and reformation of life, 1. Cor. 15 32.33. Acts, 19.9.
especially, when we do it out of an inward hatred of holy duties: Let such
take heed of despighting the spirit of grace: Heb. 10.29.

Ninthly, when men speak evil of God himself: as does the swearer, and
for-swearer, the murmurer, and such as reason Atheistically, against the
nature, counsels, or providence of God: Comm. 3. Psalm. 73.9.

And as evil speaking may be aggrauated by the persons against whom: so may
it be by the manner: For if it be evil to speak evil in any fashion, then
is it much more evil,

First, to rail: 1. Cor. 6.10. mouth full of cursing: Psalm, 10, 7. Romans 3.14.

Secondly, to complain in all places for slight occasions, or trespasses.

Thirdly, to hide hatred, with lying lips: Psalm, 62.4. Prou. 10.18. Psalm.
41.6.

Fourthly, to go about to carry tales, and slanders, Leuit. 19.

Fifthly, to speak evil of others, when we are guilty of the same offenses
our selves, or greater. Romans 2.1.2.3. Math. 7.1.3.

Sixthly, to reveal secrets, this is slander: Pro. 11* 13.

Neither are men free from this vice, or guilt, when they are whisperers, and
do it secretly, and as many do with charge that they speak not of it again,
yet them selves in the very next company will tell it out again: 2. Cor. 12.20.
Nor when they join with their evil speaking the acknowledgement of their
praises of whom they speak. For many times their [ but] tendes to a greater
defamation, and by praising them they only save them selves from blame, and
intend thereby to enforce their defamation the more. Nor is it an extenuation,
when they revile their inferiors: For, Masters must not threaten their
servants, Ephesians. 6.9. nor parents must not provoke their children to wrath: Ephesians.
6.4. nor husbands be bitter to their wives: Col. 3.9. Nor great men may Lord it
over their poor tenants, or people: Prou. 13, 8. Nor men, that excel in gifts,
be masterly in their words to their inferiors in gifts: James, 3.1. Nor when
men revile being reviled: For, this is also prohibited unto Christians. 1. Pet.
3.9.

There are also many reasons, Reasons to diswade from Euil^ speaking.
why we should put away evil speaking.

First, from commandment. Men are straightly charged by God to refrain their
tongues from evil: Psalm. 34. and not to speak evil one of another: James,
4.9. to speak evil of no man: Tit. 3.1. nor to render reuiling for reuiling.
1. Pet. 3.9 we must bless, and not curse: Romans 12.14.

Secondly, from the consideration of our own persons, and estates in Christ. We
are called to blessing, and are the heirs of blessing: and therefore it is
monstrous uncomely for us, that are free borne, to use such servile and base
language 1. Pet 3.9.

Thirdly, from example. Michael the Archangell, when he contended with the
Devil, durst not bring against him any railing accusation: Jude 9. The Apostle
shows their practice herein* being persecuted they suffer it: being reviled,
they bless 1 Cor. 4.12. When Shemei cursed David, and called him a son of
Beliall, and a bloody man, he said: Let him curse, because the Lord has said
unto him, curse David, It may be the Lord will look upon my affliction, and
the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day. Thus he bore it,
though he continued cursing, and cast stones, and dust at him: 2. Sam.
16.8.10.11.12.13. But above all we should learn this of our Savior Christ,
In whom was found no guile, in his mouth, who, when he was reviled, reviled
not again, when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed him self to
him, that judges righteously: 1. Pet. 2.23.

Fourthly, from the causes of it. Bitter speaking comes from a bitter root of a
cursed disposition in our natures: Heb. 12.14.15. It proceeds sometimes from
envy at the good of others, sometimes from malice and secret grudge, sometimes
from guile and fraudulent purposes, Note.
sometimes from Hypocrisy also: For, he that is much in judging other men, is
seeldome without great store of Hypocrisy in his heart. Well therefore is this
sin put last in the Catalogue, as that, which may be engendered of any of the
former.

Fifthly, from the effects; Effects I say both of restraining it, and committing
it. If we did restrain judging, reuiling, backbiting, and all bitterness, How
happy would our lives be; How comfortable would our conversation be? We
should live long and see good days: Psalm, 34.12. Besides: it is a wonderful
praise of the gifts of God, and sign of a large measure of grace, to avoid
evil speaking: He is a perfect man, that sins not in these customary sins
of the tongue, James, 3.2. and it is always a man's Honor to cease from strife,
Prou. 20.3.

The effects of committing it are many and foul: and that both to others, and
to them selves.

First, to others and so first it greeues the spirit of God* by which we are
sealed to the day of redemption. For, a bitter spirit is a wonderful cross to
that meek spirit of Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 3.31. secondly, it is a singular injury
to men, at whom we cast our bitter words. For we trouble their peace and
work much disquietnes: and besides, when men contend by evil words, it can
hardly be avoided, but many will be defiled, yea many besides them selves as
they are severally inclined to either party, Heb. 12.14.15. Thirdly, and it is
certain in Gods account, and in men's too, thou were as good shoot arrows at
them, as bitter words, and run them in with swords, or cut them with sharp
razors, as mangle their names and credits, with thy censures, or flanders, or
reproaches.

Secondly, to them selves. They bring much hurt to them selves, that accustom
them selves to ill language in any of these kinds. For, they make them selves
guilty of a world of wickedness. James, 3.9. First, they wrong the law of God.
For he that judges his brother, condemns the law: Iam. 4.9. Secondly, they
transgress against the lawgiuer, whose proper office is to judge the ways of
all men. James, 4.10. Thirdly, they discover also their own folly and weakness.
For, it is a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be
meddling: Prou. 20.3. Fourthly, they shame the profession of Religion. For,
this is thank worthy, if a man suffer evil for well doing. 1. Pet. 2.19. But
what a shame is it, when thou suffrest as a busy body in other men's matters: 1.
Pet. 4.15. Fifthly, besides it is certain, Evil words corrupt good manners:
thou losest so much of thy honesty, and piety, as thou admittest of evil in
thy tongue: 1. Cor. 15.33. And if you bite and devour one another, take heed
you be not consumed one of another: Gal. 5.15. And if thou judge, thou shall
be judged. He that is given much to censuring, seldom or never scapes great
censures him self: Math. 7. Sixthly, Besides, also, these courses will increase
unto greater condemnation: God may be provoked to take thee in hand, and thou
may be in danger to be plagued for it for ever in Hell, Iam. 3.1. Seventhly,
and if this evil vice grow in thee, thou art fit to be cast out of the
Communion of Saints: men are charged to avoid thee, and not to eat with thee,
1. Cor. 5.11. And though that censure be not executed by the Church always,
yet God many times makes such persons so loathsome, that every body auoids them
as much as they can. Eightthly, further, this very effect here mentioned should
persuade much with us. It is a sin that greatly hinders the profit of the
word: bitter-tongued persons never grow much in religion. For, it is required,
that we should receive the word with meeknes, and lay aside all superfluity of
maliciousnes; such as this evil speaking in these kinds is, Iam. 1.21.
Lastly, as men love cursing, so it shall come unto them: and as they love not
blessing, so it shall be far from them, Psalm. 109.17.

The use should be both for Humiliation, and for Instruction.

First, for Humiliation. It may greatly abase many Christians that are
extremely guilty of this sin. How has this wickedness prevailed in many
places! The way of peace few men have known: there is almost no meekenes, but
lying and flattering, and censuring, and railing, and slandering, and reproach
upon reproach, and backbiting every where: Yea, what are the families of the
most, but as so many kennels of Curres, such snarling, and biting, and
provoking one another? Husbands bitter to their Wives; Wives contentions, like
a continual dropping; Masters threatening their Servants, and Servants
answering again and cursing their Masters. How are the lives of the most,
destitute of contentm^nt, and their states of prosperity, even by reason of
this sin?

But, let all that fear God, learn from henceforth to make more conscience of
their words, and refrain their lips from evil.

Quest. But what should a man do to keep himself free from this vice, or that
this fountain of evil speaking may be dried up?

Rules against evil speaking.
Ans. He that would restrain himself from being guilty of backbiting,
judging, reuiling, or any kind of evil speaking, must observe such rules as
these.

First, He must learn to speak well to God, and of godliness: if we did
study that holy language of speaking to God by prayer, we would be easily
fitted for the government of our tongs toward men: we speak ill to men, because
we pray but ill to God.

Secondly, he must lay this rule upon himself, and watch to the performance of
it, he must study to be quiet, and meddle with his own business, and not
meddle with the strife that belongs not to him; resolving, that he will never
suffer, as a busy body in other men's matters. 1. These. 4. 1. Pet. 4.15.

Thirdly, he must keep a Catalogue of his own faults continually in his
mind: when we are so apt to tax others, it is because we forget our own
wickedness.

Fourthly, his words must be few: for, in a multitude of words there cannot
want sin, and usually this sin is never absent.

Fifthly, he must not allow himself liberty to think evil. A suspicious
person will speak evil.

Sixthly, he must pray to God to set a watch before the doors of his lips.

Seventhly, he must avoid vain and provoking company. It may be observed
often, that when men get into idle company (which perhaps they like not) the
very complement of discoursing extracteth evil speaking to fill up the time;
especially, he must avoid the company of censurers: for, their ill language,
though at first disliked, is insensibly learned.

Eighthly, he must especially strive to get meekness, and to be soft, and show
his meekness to all men. Tit. 3.1.2.

Ninthly, if he have this way offended, then let him follow that counsel, Let
his own words grieve him, Psalm. 56.5; that is, let him humble himself
seriously for it before God by hearty repentance: this sin is seldom mended,
because it is seldom repented of.

Quest. But what should I do to avoid evil speaking in others?

Ans. What we should do to avoid evil speaking in others.
First, live honestly and without offense: and then though men be never so
crooked and perverse, yet either they will be silent, or in the day of Gods
visitation they will glorify God, Phil. 2.15. 1. Pet. 2. verse 13.

Secondly, if men will yet revile, learn of David and Christ, and the godly, to
be patient, and not revile again, but rather bless them, 1. Pet. 3.5. and
2.23. 1. Cor. 4.12.

Thirdly, if men be still unreasonable and absurd, betake thy self to prayer:
and then either God will turn their hearts, or quiet thine, Psalm. 104 2.3.4.

Fourthly, thou must not give thy heart to all that men say; but be sometimes
as a deaf man that hears not, and as a dumb man in whose mouth are no words of
reproof, Eccles. 7.23.24. Psalm 38.13.14.

Fifthly, if yet thou be pursued, then remember this comfort, The curse that is
causeless shall not com, Pro. 26.2: and though they curse, yet God will
bless, Psalm. 109.28. God will turn their cursing into a blessing, and he will
curse them that curse thee, Numb. 24.9.: and if thy reproaches be for the
cause of religion and righteousness, blessed art thou that art accounted worthy
to suffer for it: For, Great is thy reward in heaven, Mat. 5.11. Acts 5.41.
Thou have cause to rejoice in such contumelies, 2, Cor. 12.10.

Hitherto of the catalogue of sins to be avoided. The manner here follows to
be considered of: and that may be noted from the word laying aside, and from
the manner of expressing the sins.

Out of all, there are briefly five things may be noted.

First, that by nature we are all inclined to and clogged with these sins:
General doctrines.
for, that the word laied-aside imports. For, it shows, that by nature they
hang upon us, Tit. 3.3: which should teach us to watch our hearts against these
sins, seeing they are so natural to us; and to pursue the reformation of
them with so much the more constancy and diligence, by how much it is the more
hard to shake off what is natural to us. Secondly, it should teach us to
forbear intemperate words and carriage toward others, in whom we discern
these sins so far, as they are infirmities: but rather we should be soft,
and show all meeknes to all men; considering, that we our selves also were
infected with the same faults.

Secondly, that the natural man is daily guilty of these sins, and uses
them as if they were necessary to his well-being. He cannot be without them: he
wears them as his garments, or betakes himself to them as to his weapons: he
thinks he is adorned by them. This is imported by the metaphor: He thinks, if
he did not ease himself by hypocrisy, the service of God would destroy his
contentment. If he did not use guile, he should never thrive. If he did not use
violent speeches, he should be despised: and so of the rest. Note.
This may serve to put a difference betwixt the wicked and the godly in the
guiltiness of these sins: for, a godly man may by frailty be tainted with
some of these; but then he does not account them necessary, or place
contentment in them, or daily fall into them; he dislikes them, and would fain
be rid of them: whereas the wicked think their lives naked without them.

Thirdly, that true grace and respect of the word of God must put off and
banish all these things. He that would have comfort in his conversion, or bring
sound affections to the word, must take a course to mend these faults, Ephesians.
4.22. Col. 3.8. This should be for great reproof of such Christians as shame
their profession of godliness by not shaking off these faults; and, besides,
greatly darken the comfort of their calling, by walking so carnally heerin, 1.
Cor. 3.1.2.3.

Fourthly, for the manner, how these sins are to be avoided in special:
Here are diverse things to be noted. The metaphor imports, that we must lay
these things aside, as the Porter lays aside his heavy burden; or as the
Rebel lays aside his Arms and weapons; or as the weary Pilgrim lays aside
his foul and troublesome long garments; or as the captive Maid, when she was
to be married, laid aside the garments of her captivity, Deuteronomy. 21.13. Now we
thus lay them aside chiefly two ways:

First, by confessing them, and mourning for them, Heb. 12.

Secondly, by renouncing and forsaking the practice of them: but then we must
further note, that they must be so laid aside, as they be never taken up
again. We must not lay them aside as we ordinarily do our garments, to wear
them again the next day or the next week. Besides, it is here to be observed,
that these sins are not rooted out in a moment. A Christian is long laying
them aside. He does speak of the present endeavor: It must be an euery-daies
work, To judge ourselves for them, and resist them, till the power of them be
broken. Lastly, we may hence note, that we should giue-ouer the practice, but
not the remembrance of our former sins. For he says, Laying aside; not
burying them, or renting to pieces, or the like phrase, which might import the
utter forgetting of them. To remember our faultiness in these things, will
keep us humble, and make us more innocent and free from them, and more
compassionate over others.

Fifthly, note the extent in setting down the sins to be avoided: whence
observe two things.

1. First, that he says all malice, all guile, and all evil speaking; to
note, that a Christian should not bear with himself in the least measure of
failing in any of these: For a little of this leaven will sour the whole
lump, and a small root of any of these will grow up to a great deal of
trouble and infection. 2. Secondly, In that he says Hypocrisies, and Enuies
in the plural number, and so evil speakings: To note, that we should search
our hearts so, as not to tolerate in our selves any kind of these evils. It is
not enough to be free from some kinds of Hypocrisy, but we must be free from
all: and our sincerity shows it self herein, that seeing we cannot be wholly
rid of Hypocrisy, yet we will hate it, and strive against every part, and
kind of it.
Verse 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby.


HItherto of the things to be avoided: Now follows the second thing, and that
is, what we must do, that we may profit by the word, namely that we must
get tender and constant affections to the word, if we would ever grow by it in
knowledge and grace: and this is set out metaphorically by the comparison of
appetite and desire in new born babes unto milk. The meaning is, that
Christians, that would profit, must be like children in their affections to the
word: they must love it, and long for it, and delight in it, and have their
hearts set upon it, as affectionately, as children do naturally thirst after
the breast: This is a point of singular use, and such, as all of us ought to
take notice of, to get our hearts rightly framed, and firmed herein. The
disease of the most hearers lies in the defect of this: and the happiness of
such, as do thrive apace in godliness, is to be ascribed to this affectionate
love of the word.

There be three things about these desires for matter of observation, must be
distinctly noted: The first concerns the necessity of this desire: The second,
the vtility: And the third, the true nature of this holy desire.

For the first: It is evident from hence, that all that come to the word, It is
indispensably required, that they come with appetite: men must bring affection,
and desire after the word, if they would ever grow by it. If we would ever
drink freely of the water of life, we must be such as thirst after it: Revel.
21.6. If we would have God to feed with milk and wine, we must be such, as
have a true thirst after it. Isaiah. 55.1. If we would not have all success
blasted in us, we must take heed of loathing the means, that is, despising
prophecy: 1. These. 5.21.

For the second: It is likewise evident from hence, that though we have many
wants, and ignorances, and weaknesses, yet if we have affection to the word,
we shall never be destitute of some happy success in the use of it. The
former places assure gods blessing and confirm it, that God will not be
wanting to any, that has this appetite: It is all that God stands upon. Every
one, that thirsts may come, and buy and eat, and drink abundantly: Isaiah.
55. 1.2, 3. Let us be careful of the condition: to desire the word, as the
child does the milk; and God will not fail to give the success, we shall
grow by it.

Now for the third point. It is here to be carefully noted what kind of
desire of the word is that, to which this promise is annexed: The true desire
after the word has chiefly four distinct things in it.

First, Estimation of the word above all other outward things. When we can
account it a great blessedness to be chosen of God to this privilege to
approach unto him in the courts of his house. Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 119.127.128.
When we can say with David, Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles, and think it
better to be a door keeper in Gods house, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness: Psalm. 84.1.10. When we esteem the directions, and comforts of Gods
word above gold and silver: Psalm. 119.127. and with Paul account all things but
lost in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ, which may be here
had. Philip. 3.9.

Secondly, Longing and appetite after it, as true and certain, as the very
appetite of a child is to the breast: This is expressed by the similitudes of
panting, thirsting, and watching after the word in diverse scriptures: and when
this longing is more vehement, it is set out by the passion of fainting for it,
and of the breaking of the soul for it: Psalm. 42.1. et 84.2. et 119.20.40. et
131.

Thirdly, Satisfaction and contentment, when we speed well in the word: As the
child is quieted, and sleeps in the rest and virtue of the milk it has
received: David, says his soul was satisfied, as with marrow: Psalm. 63.1.5.
and is granted of all the godly and chosen ones, Psa. 65.4. When it is sweet
like honey to our taste. Psalm. 119.103.

Fourthly, Constancy and the renewing of affection. A childs appetite is
renewed every day, though it seem to be full for the present, and such is the
true desire of the godly. It is not a desire for a fit, but is renewed daily,
as the appetite to our appointed food is: Job, 23. He that has this desire
may be found daily waiting at the gates of wisdom: Prou. 8.34.

Use 1. The use of all may be chiefly threefold: For,

For trial.
First it may serve for trial: we should every one examine our selves, whether
we have this true desire after the word, or no. For, if we find this, we are
sure to prosper: and if we find it not, we are nothing but staruelings in
matter of godliness.

Question. But how may we know, whether we have this estimation, longing
after, and constant affection to the word?

Answer. It may be known diverse ways; especially if our affections be grown
to any good ripeness, and tenderness, in the measure of them: For it may be
evidently discerned.

First, How we may discern our desire and affection after the word.
If we seek the blessing of the word of God, as a chief happiness, we would
desire of him in his specially mercy to give it unto us. Psa.
119.68.132.155.144. and so by the constancy of prayer we may also discern the
constancy of our appetite.

Secondly, If we can be diligent, and content to take any pains, or be at
any cost, that we may be provided of this food, that perishes not. Ioh. 6.27.

Thirdly, If we can hoord and hide up the word in our hearts, as worldly men
would do their treasures, Psalm 119.11. Ioying in it as much, as in all
riches, Psalm 119.14.162. especially, if we can batten and wex fat by the
contentments of it; as carnal men do, when they live at hearts ease. Psalm
119.70.

Fourthly, If it will still our crying: that is, If it will comfort us, and
quiet our hearts in all distresses: Psalm. 119.50.143.92. so as nothing shall
offend us. verse. 165.

Fifthly, If we make haste and come willingly at the time of assembling: Psalm.
110.3. But especially, if we make haste, and not delay in practicing, what we
learn thence: Psalm. 119.60.

Sixthly, If we be thankful to God, and abound in the free will offerings of our
mouths for the good we get by the word: Psalm. 119.7.108.164.171.

Seauenthly, If we can be truly grieved, and say with David, Sorrow takes hold
on us, because the wicked keep not gods law 119.159.

Eightthly, If we delight to talk of gods word, and to speak of his wondrous
works discovered in his word. Psalm. 119.27.172, etc.

These things and the like are in them that have their affections tender, and
striving in them: Now whereas many of gods children may have true desire to the
word, and yet not find evidently some of these signs: therefore I will give
other signs of true affection to the word, Note.
though there be not always such delight in it, as they desire. The lesser
measure of true appetite to the word may be discerned by some of these signs,
that follow.

First, it is a sign, that we do heartily love the word, when we can from our
hearts love and bless them, that do love the word, accounting them happy for
their very love to the word: Psalm. 119.1.12.

Other signs of true desire.
Secondly, It Is a sign of desire after the word, when we can stick to the word,
and the constant frequenting of it, notwithstanding the scorns and shame of
the world: Psalm. 119, 31, 46, 141. It is a sure testimony of our love to the
gospel, when we can forsake father and mother, brother and sister, house and
land for the Gospells sake: Mark. 10.29.

Thirdly, It is a sign of love to the word, and of desire after it, when we
can mourn for the famine of the word, as a bitter cross. Psalm. 42.3.4.

Fourthly, Yea, when men have the word, and yet find not comfort in it, it is
a sign of their true affection, when they long for those comforts with
heaviness of heart, and account themselves in an uncomfortable distress, yea
bitter distress, till the Lord return to them in his person in the power of
the means. Psalm. 119.82.83.123.131.

Fifthly, It is a sign we love the word, when such as fear god, are glad of
us: it is a sign, that the godly do discern appetite in us, though we do
not, when they are tenderly affected toward us. Psalm. 119.74.

Sixthly, We may know our affection to the word, by our willingness to be ruled
by it: If we can make the word our Counselor, it is sure we we do delight in
it, whatsoever we conceive of our selves. Psalm. 119.24.

Lastly, To strive against our dulnes constantly, and to pray to be quickened,
is a good sign, that we have some desire to the word. One may love gods
precepts, and yet need to be quickened. Psalm. 119.159.

Use 2. Secondly, this doctrine of desire, and appetite after the word may much
humble the most of us; some being altogether void of all desire after it, more
then for fashion sake: and the better sort have their appetites either dull, or
decayed.

Quest. Whence comes it that people have no more affection to the word, or that
men are so clo^ed with the word?

Ans. The lets of appetite and affection to the word may be considered two
ways: Impediments to true desires: external.


First, as they are without us.

Secondly, as they are within us.

Without us, the cause of want of affection is sometimes in the Minister:
sometimes in the Devil: sometimes in the company men sort withal: and
sometimes in God himself.

1. In Ministers there are two things, which maruelously hinder the admiration,
and desire after the word. The first is, the manner of their teaching, when
they teach unskillfully, deceitfully, vaingloriously, negligently, or coldly.
When there is not a majesty, and purity, and life in the Teacher, it is no
wonder if there be no affection in the people. 2. Cor. 4.2. 1. Thessal. 2. 2,
3, 4, 6, 8. 1. Cor. 2.4. 2. Tim. 2.15. The second is their ill lives. What made
the people in Elies time so loath the service of God, but the wicked lives of
Hophni and Phineas. 1. Sam. 3. Ministers must teach by example as well as by
doctrine, if they will not be despised. 1. Tim. 4.12.

2. The Devil, that god of this world, does mightily labor in this point to
keep men from affecting the Gospel. If he cannot hinder men from hearing,
then his next work is by all possible endeavors to blind their minds, and
mar their tastes, that they may not perceive nor regard the glorious things
of God in Christ: 2. Cor. 4.4.

3. Evil company is a wonderful impediment, it causes perpetually hardness of
heart, and carelesnes: it keeps the hearts of the wicked men in a continual
habitual deadnes, and the best men seldom light into profane company but
they get some degree of dulnes, and deadnes of affections by it. Pro. 9.6. Psa.
119.115.

4. God himself being provoked by man's extreme wilfulnes in sinning, gives
them over to a spirit of slumber, and curses their very blessings; yea,
restrains sometimes the very gifts of his servants, that so he may execute
his judgments upon a rebellious people. The Lord hides his statutes from
them; and withholding his spirit, keeps back the life of the word in their
hearts. Esaias 6.10. yea many times to scourge the unthankfulness, and
unprofitableness, of his own people, he does for a time hide his testimonies
from them. Psalm. 119.19.

Thus much of the lets without us.

The internal lets must be considered. First, In the wicked. Secondly, In the
godly.

The cause of this hartlesnes and want of affection in the wicked, is,

First, Inward lets in wickedmen*
their ignorance, they know not either the word, or the worth of the word, or
their own need of it.

Secondly, their profaneness and irreligiousnes: They live without God, or
without Christ in the world, they make no conscience of their ways. They
forget their later end: they mind not the good of their souls, but only
earthly things: they never tasted of the bountifulnes of the Lord, but were
altogether corrupt, and strangers from the life of God, only greedy in sinning.

Thirdly, Atheism. There is in the hearts of all wicked men in some degree
abominable conceits concerning God and his word. They either doubt, whether the
scriptures be the true word of god: or else they are strongly carried to
resolve, there is no profit in the knowledge of gods ways, or in serving the
almighty. Job. 21.14. Malac. 3.15.

Fourthly, Cares of life: The love of the profits, or pleasures of this life,
choke the word, and the power of it, as is apparent by these places. Math. 13.
Luke, 14. Psalm. 119, 36, 37, etc.

Fifthly, In some either whoredom or wine: for these two sins together, or
either of them take away men's hearts, they are void of all due consideration,
and of all affection to gods word: They are senseless creatures. Hosh. 4.

Thus of the cheef letts in the wicked.

The lets of affection in the godly are diverse.

Lets of affection in the godly.
First, Sometimes it is their worldliness, their too much minding and plodding
about the things of this life, or their excessive burthening of their heads
about their calling. They have too much to do, or they have too much care;
care, I say, that is, distrustful and carking care. Psalm. 119.36.

Secondly, Sometimes it is want of comfortable fellowship in the Gospel.
Affection, that is alone, is seldom constant in the same degree. There is much
quickening and comfort and incitation in a constant, and tender, and profitable
society with such as love the word, Psalm 119. verse 63.

Thirdly, sometimes it is some secret sin that gets too much dominion over
them. As affection may stand with mere frailties and infirmities: So, on the
other side, if any sin once get head, and men yield to it, and agree to obey
it, their affections to the word presently die within them, Psalm. 119.133: yea,
if this sin be but in the thoughts, and be yielded to and delighted in, and
that constantly they seek the pleasure of contemplative wickedness, and do not
resist it by praying against it, even vain thoughts may dead the affections,
and poison them, Psalm. 119.113.

Fourthly, sometimes it is neglect of mortification. The soul will gather
abundance of humors, as well the body: and therefore Christians should not go
too long, especially if they feel a kind of fullness to grow upon them; but
take a purge, that is, seriously and secretly set time apart to humble
themselves before God, purging out their most secretest corruptions with all
hearty confession before God.

Fifthly, sometimes it is want of practice or want of an orderly disposing of
their ways in godliness. If they rest only in hearing, their affections
cannot last long sincere: and, besides, the most Christians burden their own
hearts for very want of order, and that they go not distinctly about the works
of godliness, but rake together a great heap of doctrine which they know not
what to do withal, Psalm. 50. vlt.

Sixthly, sometimes again it is occasioned by inordinate feeding: when
Christians begin to affect novelties, and seek to themselves a heap of
teachers, they escape not long without fullness, and the fits of loathing, 2.
Tim. 4.3.

Seventhly, sometimes very idleness is the hindrance. The want of a particular
calling to employ themselves in the six days, breeds a general kind of
weariness and satiety; which extends the heart of it, not only to the times
of private duties in the working days, but to the very Sabbath also. They
cannot work at Gods work with any great delight, that had no more mind to
their own work.

Eightthly, sometimes it is neglect of preparation and prayer, before we come
to the word.

Ninthly, sometimes it is a violent kind of ignorance and unbelief, when a
Christian knows not his right to the word, and will not be persuaded of the
fatherly love and presence of God in his ordinance. If Preachers must say, I
have believed, therefore I will speak: so must Hearers say, I have believed,
therefore I will hear. They should know, that they are welcome to Christ, and
may eat and drink, Cant. 5.1. and that their heritage lies in the word, Psalm.
119.

Tenthly, sometimes it is a very disease in the body; as, melancholy, or some
other: which does so oppress the heart, that it does not take delight in any
thing. But of this more in the next Use.

Lastly, any of the sins mentioned in the former verse, will hinder
affection: Malice, Hypocrisy, or Envy, or any of the rest.

Use 3. The third use may be for instruction, to teach us to strive for
affection to the word, and to provide to order our selves, so as we be not
wanting in the direction of the Apostle: and so two sorts are to be taught,
that is, such as want appetite; and such as have it, that they may keep it
aright.

Quest. What must such do as find either want of appetite, or decay of it?

Ans. Such as would get sound affections to the word, must do six things.

First, Means to get true desires to the word.
they must refrain their feet from every evil way. It is impossible to get
sound affections, without sound reformation of life, Psalm 119.

Secondly, they must pray for it: they must beseech the Lord to quicken them,
Psalm. 119.37, and to enlarge their hearts, verse 32. especially to give them
understanding, verse 34. and to open their eyes to see the wonderful things of
his law, verse 18.

Thirdly, they must choose an effectual Ministry to live under it, such as is
executed with power and demonstration to the conscience, 2. Cor. 4.2.

Fourthly, they must remember the Sabbath day; and that they do, when they
empty their heads and hearts of all cares of life which might choke the word;
diligently doing their own works on the six days, and finishing them, that
they may be free for the Lords work on the seventh day. The cares of life
choke the word, Matthew 13.

Fifthly, they must converse much, if it be possible, with affectionate
Christians. For, as iron sharpneth iron: so does the exemplary affection of the
tenderhearted whet-on the dull spirits of others.

Sixthly, they must purge often. They must be frequent in the duties of
humiliation, by solemn fasting, and prayer, and sound confession; striving,
when they feel fullness to grow upon them, to disburden their hearts, and to
quicken their spirits more forcibly to the love of Gods name and word.

Quest. But what must such do as have gotten some affections to the word, that
they neither lose them, nor be unprofitable in them?

Ans. They must look to diverse things.

Rules for the preserving of good desires.
First, they must hate vain thoughts, take heed of those secret vanities of
imagination, and that delightful contemplation of evil in the mind, Psalm
119.113.

Secondly, they must try all things, and keep that which is good. They must
hear with judgment, and make special account of such parcels of doctrine as
do most fit their particular needs; laboring by all means, that such truths
run not out, 1. These. 5.21.

Thirdly, they must take heed of itching ears. For, where men's desires are
still carried after new men, they are in great danger of fullness, or of
declining; and, which is worse, of being carried about with diverse doctrines,
and at length to be a prey to deceitful mockers.

Fourthly, they must preserve by all means the fear and trembling at Gods
presence, and humiliation of mind. For, so long as we can dread the presence
of God in his ordinances, we are in no danger of losing our love to the word,
Psalm 119.120.

Lastly, in Esaias 55.1.2.3. we may note diverse things that GOD requires in
such as have the same thirst.

1. They must come to means. 2. They must buy and bargain with God by prayer
and vows. 3. They must eat, that is, they must apply it to themselves. 4. They
must be instructed against merit in themselves, and bring faith to believe
success, though they deserve it not: they must buy without money. 5. They must
harken diligently. 6. They must eat that which is good: that is, they must
apply effectually that doctrine they feel to have life in it. 7. Their souls
must delight in fatnes: that is, they must be specially thankful and
cheerful, when God does enliue his promises, and sweeten his words to their
tastes. 8. They must, after all this, incline their ear, and come to God. They
must make conscience to strive against dulnes and distractions, and seek God in
his word still, or else their affections may decay: and then if they do this*
they shall live and enjoy the sure mercies of David by a perpetual covenant.
Question. But what shall such godly persons as are afflicted with melancholy
do in this case of affections?

Answer. They must attend these things:

Rules for such as be afflicted with melancholy.
First, they must be persuaded to see the disease in the body which extends the
oppression of it to the very affections.

Secondly, they must remember times that are past, and judge of their estate by
what it was before.

Thirdly, they may be infallibly assured, that they are in a right way, because
they desire to live uprightly, and to forsake the corruptions that are in the
world.

Fourthly, they must know, that it is a greater glory in faith to believe now,
when they feel not, then to believe when the heart abounded with joy.

Fifthly, They may judge of their affection to the word by their preparation
before they com, and by their only liking of such as love the word, and by
their constant frequenting of it, and by their sorrow for their dulnes, and
unprofitableness.

Hitherto of the duty, to which he exhorts: The motives follow, and they are
four: The Motives*
First, ye are newborn babes: Secondly, the word is sincere milk: Thirdly, ye
may thereby grow. Fourthly, ye have tasted the sweetness of the bounty of God
in his word already.


The first reason tells what they are: The second, what the word is: The third,
what they shall be: The fourth, what the word has been.

As newborn babes.]

These words are taken in diverse senses. For properly they signify infants,
while they are tender and vnweaned from the breast: Sometimes they signify
unable men, and such as have no fitnes for their callings: so Isai. 3.4.
Sometimes they signify such as be weak in faith and in the gifts of the
spirit, whether they be newly regenerated or lying in sin 1. Cor. 3.1. Heb.
5.13. and so it is taken here.

And so the words are a reason to induce them to an affectionate desire after
the word. Inasmuch as they are so weak, they can no better live without the
word, then the child in nature can live without milk.

Diverse things may be from hence noted.

First, that grace is wrought in Christians by degrees. Christ is revealed in
us by four degrees. First, as a child, or little babe new formed and borne:
Secondly, as a young man in more strength, and vigor, and comeliness, and
actiueness: Thirdly, as a father, or old man settled with long experience:
these three are in this life, and mentioned 1. Ioh. 2.14. Now the fourth is,
when Christ shall appear in us as the Ancient of days, like God himself in a
marvelous glorious resemblance of the holiness, and properties of God: And this
shall be in another world. The use should be both for thankfulness, if Christ
be formed in us to any degree, and to incite our industry in all the means
appointed of God, seeing we receive gifts by degrees, and not all at once.

Secondly, that true grace may stand with many weaknesses. A child does truly
live, and yet it is very ignorant, and infirm, and weyward, and fit for little
or no imploiment: such may Christians be for a time, such were the very
disciples of Christ for a time: such were the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.1. and the
Hebrews, Heb. 5.13. The use should be to restrain censuring of others,
because of their infirmities, to have no grace at all: Whereas we should rather
bear with them, and believe all things, Romans 15.2. 1. Cor. 13.5. And besides,
those that are distressed in mind should comfort them selves with this, they
may be full of weaknesses, and very unprofitable, and yet have the true life
of Christ in them.

Thirdly, that the most Christians are but newborn babes, infants in grace,
not only such as are newly converted, but such as have spent a longer time in
the profession of godliness: The Apostle here takes it for granted, that all
they to whom he writes were little better, or stronger: and so it is usual in
all times and places.

Question. How comes it to pass, that the most Christians live still but as
weak ones and babes in Christ? especially why thrive they not according to
their time of their age in Christ?

Answer. In nature a child gets out of his childhood, as his years grow upon
him, but in religion and grace it is not so: It is not time brings any of
necessity out of the cradle of Religion. Now the cause why the most are but
babes, The causes why the most are but babes in religion.
and that after a long time, may be such or some of these.

First, some as soon as they are borne, are destitute of the breast, have no
nurse, are taken away from the means, and deprived of the powerful preaching
of the word, which did beget them unto God. This comes to pass sometimes by the
violence of others, or by the afflicting hand of God upon their bodies, or
sometimes by their own carlesnes, that for worldly respects remove to places
where they have not the means to build them up.

Secondly, some are infected with some bitter root of passion, or envy, or
malice, which was left behind in their repentance, not fully subdued, and this
holds them so down, that they cannot thrive, but are stocked in godliness;
that after many years, they show little bigger or better, then they were in
knowledge or grace: 1. Cor. 3.1.2.3. 1. Pet. 2.1. 2. Ephesians. 4.15.16. 1. Pet. 3.7.

Thirdly, others at their first setting out are entangled with doubtful
disputations, and carried about with odd opinions, or strange doctrines, and so
ensnared with controversies about words, or things of less value; that
misplacing their zeal, and misled in their knowledge, they thrive little or
nothing in the maine substance of godliness, but need be taught the very
principles, To. 14. 1. Heb. 13.7. 2. Pet. 3.17. especially when they be apt to
receive Scandal, and admit offense: such were the believing Jews the most of
them.

Fourthly, some are merely held back by their worldliness: they relapse to
such excessive cares of life, and so devour up their time about earthly
things, that they cannot profit nor prosper in better things.

Fifthly, many thrive not, or not sensibly, being hindered by the ill company,
which either voluntarily or necessarily they are plunged into, and cheefely for
want of fellowship in the Gospel with such as might be patterns to them in
knowledge, and the practice of faith, and piety.

Sixthly, spiritual laziness and idleness is the cause why many grow not. They
will take no pains: but after they have repented, and believed in some
measure, Heb. 5.13. and be gotten a little whole of the wounds they were
diseased withal in their conversion, they fall into a kind of security, and
rest in the outward and formal use of the means, and neglect many precious
things, which from day to day they are moved and counseled to by the word, and
spirit of God: And this disease is the worse, when it is joined with spiritual
pride, and that vile conceitednes, which is seen to come daily in many.

Seventhly, some Christians after calling are ins^ared, and deceived by the
methodes of Satan, and so live in some secret sin against their own knowledge.
In favor of which they forbear the hearty regard, and use of Gods ordinances,
and so dangerously expose themselves to the reign of hypocrisy. These are
wonderfully stocked, and grow worse and not better.

These are the reasons, why Christians thrive not: and who almost is it whose
case some one of these seven is not? Let us every one examine our selves: for a
thousand to one we are kept back by some one of these. Note.
It were singular wisdom to note which it is, and to strive to amend, that we
may not be such staruelings in godliness still.

The point then is clear, that most Christians are but as newborn babes. Now
what use should we make of it.

First, It may serve to humble many of us, that have had time enough, and
abundance of means and helps to have been like teachers, and yet have even
now need to be taught the principles again. To us belongs justly that reproof
in the fifth to the Hebrews, 13.

Secondly, many duties must be urged upon us, if we grant ourselves to be but
as newborn babes. For, 1. We must therefore be teachable and tractable,
obeying them that have the oversight of us, bearing their words of admonition,
and loving them with a singular love. 2. We must therefore be the more willing
to bear the chastizements of God, Special duties of such as be but new born
babes.
that father of our spirits. For if we have had the fathers of our flesh, which
in our young years have corrected and that often for our profit, to subdue the
faults in us, which that age did breed, and sometimes, when they corrected for
their own pleasures, more than for our profit: How much more should we subject
our selves to the corrections of God, that find in us, being but babes so much
perverseness, so much negligence, such headstrong passions, such frequent
disobedience: and the rather because he never corrects us for his pleasure
only, but for our profit, that he might make us more holy and more fruitful,
and more meek, as the Apostle shows. Hebrews 12. 3. We must therefore stick
more affectionately, and constantly to the word, and suffer our souls to be
daily fed with this sincere milk of the word; without which it is no more
possible for us to grow in grace, then a weak child can do in nature without
milk and food. 4. Yea the consideration of our estate, that we are but
children, should beget in us a desire to express those praises spiritually,
which that infant estate in nature does resemble. For, Special praises in
children by nature to be expressed by us.
1. Children in nature are without malice, they may fall out one with another*
but they carry no malice, they are quickly friends again: so should we much
more. 1 Cor. 14, 20. 2. Children live without care, they are never troubled for
what they shall eat, or what they shall put on for the time to come: so should
we do, as our savior Christ shows. Math. 6. 3. Children are not lifted up
with pride for the great things they are borne unto; nor does the child of a
Prince scorn the fellowship of the child of a beggar, but can play with him,
and make himself equal to him: so should it be with us, we should be void of
great thoughts of heart, and not be lifted up in our selves, or despise others;
but make our selves equal to them of the lower sort, especially seeing there
is no difference in our birth. They are borne again by the same immortal seed
that we are, which our Savior Christ is peremptory in, Math. 18.3.

Thus much of the third point.

4. A fourth thing may be here noted, and that concerns the privilege of weak
Christians, viz that they are esteemed of God, and not deprived of his favor
or care for them because they are weak.



1. Parents love their little children, Privileges of weak Christians.
as well as their elder children: so does God.

2. Parents provide means to bring up their little children, so does God: They
shall have sincere milk to make them grow.

3. Parents provide such as shall tend their children, and little ones: so does
God, he has committed them to the charge of Christ, so as the least grace in
them shall be preserved, though it were but like a bruised reed, or the smoking
week of a candle. Math. 11.

4. Parents bear with the natural weakness of their children, without lessning
their fondnes to them: so does God with infinite indulgence. Psalm. 103.

5. Parents will not endure it to let them be wronged, or hurt, and much more
woe shall be unto them, that offend one of Gods little ones, Math. 18.

6. Parents provide portions and inheritances for their little children: so
does GOD acknowledge them for his heirs, yea heirs with Christ his eldest
son, Romans 8.17.

A fifth point that may be noted from hence, is, that only converted Christians
can desire the sincere milk of the word with true affection: wicked men can no
more affectionately desire the word, than a dead child or no child can do the
breast.

Quest. But, have wicked men no desire after the word?

How far wicked men may desire after the word.
Ans. They may have: but only it is for the most part in two cases. First,
when they desire to hear the word only for men's wits or eloquence, or the
like carnal ends: and so they desire not the sincere milk of the word.
Secondly, in the case of a temporary faith; where the delight and desire after
the word is not constant, like the appetite of a child to the breast: for,
they will fall away in the time of temptation; and all their desires prove but
as the morning deaw.

Desire the sincere milk of the word.]

Hitherto of the first reason taken from the consideration of their present
estate, and need of the word. The second reason is taken from the consideration
of the nature of the word which they should desire. It is sincere, pure: there
is no deceit, no mixture in it. And it is milk: it is wonderful apt for
nourishment.

There are two things then here said of the word in praise of it: First, that it
is milk; secondly, that it is sincere.

Milk.] This is a metaphor. Sometimes by milk is meant a man that is godly cast
into affliction; by which, God strains all the moats of corruption from him,
while his heart is poured out like milk with grief and fear. Thus Job says of
himself, GOD had strained him out like milk, Job 10. verse 10. Sometimes by
milk is meant the rudiments of religion, the principles and grounds of
Catechism: and so it differs from strong meat: so it is taken, Heb. 5.12. 1.
Cor. 3.2. Sometimes it signifies the word of God in general, which is given
to the Church for nourishment of their souls to eternal life: and so it is
taken here; as, in Esaias 55.1. the word is called both milk, and wine, and
water; and, in other places, honey. It is honey, for the sweetness of it. It is
wine, for the power it has to revive and refresh the spirit of man, and make
his heart glad. It is water, for cooling and quenching of his spiritual
thirst: and it is milk for nourishment. It does more for nursing up man's soul,
than the milk of the breast can for the bodies of infants.

The consideration whereof should work in us the desire to which the Apostle
here exhorts: and withal we should bring with us faith to believe, that
Gods word shall turn to our nourishment. Shall we trust nature for the goodness
of milk? and shall we not trust God for the efficacy of his word, when he tells
us it will nourish like milk? And the rather should we make our recourse with
gladness to the word, because it is so cheap a food: we may buy this milk
without money; that is, without merits: only, if we will hear, our souls
shall live, Esaias 55.2.4; yea, let us for ever be thankful to God for his word,
in this respect. Was it so great a blessing, that GOD brought the Israelites to
a land that flowed with milk and honey, for their bodies? for the greatness of
which blessing, God does so often put them in mind of it: Note.
How great then is the marvelous goodness of God, that has made us to live in
these times of the Gospel, when the Land flows with this spiritual milk and
honey! Let us labor to be thankful, and bring forth fruits worthy the bounty
of God; le^t the Lord send the men of the East to dwell in these palaces, and
to eat our milk, and we be cast out, as it was said in the Letter, Ezech. 25.4.

Oh that we could see our happiness in these days of salvation! This is that
milk of the Gentiles prophesied of, which we enjoy, and suck now from the
breasts of Kings, living under christian Magistrates that command the preaching
of this sincere word of God, Esaias 60.16.

Sincere.] The word may be said to be sincere in two respects. First, in it
self: secondly, in effect. In it self it is sincere, because it is without
error, without sin, and there is no deceit in it at all, Pro. 8.7.8. Psalm
19.8.9: and because it has no composition in it, but is the very pure word of
God, as it came from God himself at first. There is not a word in it, but it
was written by men inspired immediately by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. vlt. And
as it is in it self, so it is by effect. It makes men sincere. It makes crooked
things straight. It purges out hypocrisy and all leaven out of the minds and
hearts of men It both teaches and works in the godly a spirit without guile,
Psalm 19.8.9.

The Use may be both for Instruction and Reproof. For Instruction both to the
people and to Ministers.

To the people: and so men should here learn,

First, to love the word, and long after it for this very reason, because it is
so pure and sincere, so void of harm or danger: so did David, Psalm 119.146.

Secondly, when we find our natures crooked and corrupt, and deceitful, and
tending to hypocrisy, we should bring our hearts to the word to be mended.
For, this you see is a property of the word, It will make men sincere, Psalm.
19.8.9. and 119. John 17.20: and as any men have more betaken themselves to the
word, the more sincere they have always grown.

Thirdly, to receive the word with full assurance: we may trust upon it: it
cannot deceive us: what we find for comfort or directions in Scripture, we
may build upon it. Never man was disappointed of his expectation, that trusted
upon the word of God: but in God they have ever praised his word, 2. Pet. 1.20.
Psalm. 56.10. and 10.6.

Fourthly, as the Ministry of Gods servants does more declare the sincerity of
the word, so we should be more in love with it: we should like prayer,
preaching; I mean, not witless and unlearned preaching, but such preaching as
makes demonstration to the conscience, out of the pure word of God, in things
that concern the good of the souls of men, and the glory of God. The word
does ever profit men most, when it is most sincere, that men only speak the
words of God.

Fifthly, to stick to the word of God, without going to the right hand or the
left. There can be no sin but what is condemned in the word: nor can there be
duty not commanded therein: nor can there be matter of faith not propounded
therein. Oh how happy were we if we could stick to the old foundation, even
the sincere word of God, and not add nor diminish! The hatefulness of
departing from the word on the left hand, is in most places discovered. But Oh
the deceitfulnes of men's hearts; and the wretched pronenesse of men to sin,
by finding out many inventions! Men run out, and that very fast on the right
hand: we have new opinions and strange fancies coined every day. Little do the
better sort of people (many of them) think of traditions on the right hand.
Their faith is led into bondage, when they can yield no better reason, than It
is such a man's judgment, or else he thinks so himself: Note.
or the reasons brought are urged without any demonstration from the word of
God, and Scripture. Happy, above the most Churches under heaven, were this
nation, if this point were understood and carefully observed, if we could
stick to our first grounds in parting from the Church of Rome; viz. to admit no
opinions, nor charge our conscience with more obligations, but out of the word
of God.

Ministers also may learn from hence, what and how to preach. That is the best
preaching which is eminent for two things: First, that tends to beget
sincerity, cleernes of judgment, distinct evidence of assurance, and strict
holiness of life in the hearers; secondly, that shines in the native luster of
the word, in it self without mixture, when men know no matter, no style, no
wisdom co^parable to that which may be had in the word.

This also may serve for reproof,

First, of such Ministers as preach not sincerely: and such are they that
preach for corrupt ends, though they preach true doctrine, Phil. 1.17; and they
that preach obscurely and carelessly, and strive not to set out the glory of the
truths they propound; and they that are like le^d Vintners, which mix the word
with the errors of their own brains, or with the traditions of men, or with a
manifest strife to bring in man's wisdom to Gods word; more desiring to show
their own wits and learning, than the glory of the scriptures, 2. Cor. 4.2.
and 1. Cor. 1.17, and 2.4.5.13.

2. Of the people, for that great want of appetite to gods pure word, and the
plain preaching of it.

Thus of the second reason. The third is taken from the effect, and the profit,
which will follow: viz, they shall grow thereby.

That ye may grow thereby.]

This point of the growth of a Christian is of singular use, and meet to be
fully and particularly opened: and therefore I will observe five things
concerning it more especially.

First, that we ought to grow in grace.

Secondly, in what things we should labor to grow and abound.

Thirdly, what are the rules to be observed, that we might grow.

Fourthly, the signs of growth.

Fifthly, the uses of the whole.

First, for the first: Christians are bound not only to get grace, but they
must labor to increase in the gifts they have received: It is not enough to
begin the work of God, but we must labor to abound in it, and increase in
well doing, we must go on, and finish the measure of the work required of us.
These places evidently prove, that God looks for growth at our hands. 2. Pet.
3.18. 1. Cor. 15.58. 1. These. 4.1. Prou. 4.18. 1. Cor. 14.12.

Diverse kinds of growth.
Secondly, for the second: before I number particulars, I might tell you of
diverse kinds of growth, or increase in the kingdom of Christ. Christ himself
is said to increase, Job. 3.20. The word is said to grow, Act. 6. and in other
places: and Christians are said to grow: and so either first jointly in the
mystical body, Ephesians. 4.16. Col. 2.19. or secondly, severally every one by
himself. Christ was said to increase not only in stature, and the declaration
of his gifts: Luke 2.40. but also in the glory of his kingdom, and the
advancing of his dominion amongst men. The word grew, when the number of
faithful laborers was increased, and when the light of the truth was more
glorified, and received by the people. Christians are said to grow chiefly in
two respects. First, in the number of believers, when there are daily added to
the church: Secondly, in the power and practice of their gifts, and this last
is here intended. The word rendered Thereby, might be read either in him: or in
it: or, as it is, thereby. In him, that is in Christ. In it, that is in the
word: or thereby, that is by the word: This last is intended here in all
probability: Now then to the point. There are certain things wherein a
Christian should strive to grow: It is true we should grow in every good gift
and work, but if we mark the scriptures, these things in particular are
especially to be labored after as being things that do wonderfully honor
God, and credit the Gospel, and bring a singular increase of happiness to a
Christian man's life, and it is wonderful profitable to keep a Catalogue of
these particulars still before us, that we may every day be put in mind of what
we should especially labor after.

These are the things then we should distinctly labor to grow in. In what
graces Christians ought especially to grow.


First, we should labor to grow in wisdom: Gods people should appear to be a
wise people above all the people of the earth. Christ grew in wisdom: Luke
2.40. Now wisdom has two things in it. First, knowledge: and secondly,
discretion. In both these we should grow: For knowledge, the word of God should
dwell plentiously in us, Col. 3.16. and we should increase in the knowledge of
God, Col. 1.10. and for discretion, we should abound in knowledge; yea and
says the Apostle in all judgment too: Phili. 1.10.

Secondly, we should grow in faith. That, which is lacking to our faith, must
be made up: 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. and we should still be praying with the Apostles,
Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. 2. These. 1.11. Now there be two things
distinctly, which we should grow-in about faith: viz. First, assurance; and
secondly, the exercise of it. For assurance, we should hereunto give all
diligence, that we might get the full assurance of faith and hope to the end:
we should never be quiet till it be established, and rooted, and soundly
grounded in our particular assurance of Gods favor in Jesus Christ, and our
own eternal salvation: Heb. 6.11. Col. 2.6.7. And for the exercise of faith:
we should strive to learn every day to live by faith in all the occasions of
our life; spending the remainder of our lives in the faith of the Son of God,
holding fast our confidence, and not withdrawing our selves Heb. 10. Gal. 2.20.
Yea we should strive to be examples one to another in our faith in GOD, 1.
Tim. 4.12.

Thirdly, we should abound in love one to another, and toward all men: This
the Apostle prays earnestly for, and this we should show by all diligence,
Philip. 1.10. 1 These. 3.12.
in preserving peace and unity amongst ourselves: so as there should be but
one heart and mind amongst us. Philip. 2.1, 3.
To this end bearing, and forbearing, and supporting one another, we should
grow also in the tenderness and hartines of our affections one after another,
Ephesians. 4.3.4.
longing one for another, and delighting one in another, yea our love sholud
grow even in seeking to enlarge our acquaintance with such, as fear God, but
especially in the labor of our love to do good to such as fear God should we
grow, etc.

Fourthly, we should grow in mercy, and that both in the bowels of pity, and in
the abundance of the fruits of mercy, Col. 3.12. 2. Cor. 8.2, 7. and 9.11.
James 3.18.

Fifthly, we should grow in patience, and meeknes, and lowlines of mind.
Patience should have his perfect work, and it wonderfully would become us, if
we could increase in the image of Jesus Christ for meeknes and lowlines. To be
free from passions and pride, oh, how it would adorn us! It is that one grace
Christ so much urges upon us, and was most eminent in himself, Math. 11.29.
James 1.4.

Sixthly, We should grow in prayer, and the gifts that concern our communion
with God, we should labor to be mighty and powerful in prayer, able to
wrestle with God himself* and overcome him, as Jacob did: and to this end we
should pray always, and learn to pray all manner of prayers in all things,
making our requests known to God with supplication, especially we should
strive to abound in thanksgiving to God, in all things giving thanks. This is
the greatest honor we can do to God, 1. These. 5.18, 19. Philip. 4.7. Psalm.
50.23. Col. 1.11. Ephesians. 6.18. 2 Cor. 4.15.

Seventhly, We should grow in the contempt of the world, and the lesser
estimation of the things of this life, we should strive more and more to
express a mortified conversation, using the world, as if we used it not,
setting our affections on the things that are above, and having our
conversation in heaven, confessing our selves to be strangers and pilgrims,
and with all eagerness embracing the praises of a better life, Hebrews 11.13.
Philip. 3.20. in nothing being careful, Philip. 4.6. hastening to the coming
of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 3.11.

Eightthly, We should exceedingly strive to grow in the holy, and reverent use
of gods ordinances, striving to come with more fear, and sense of the glorious
presence of God. This is a wonderful hard lesson, and little heeded of the
most. Oh that we could get it, to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice,
but yet with trembling! Oh blessed is the man, that can fear always, and work
out his salvation with fear and trembling.

Ninthly, There is another gift we should grow in, and it is maruelously
necessary, and comely, and yet extremely neglected, and that is utterance, of
which the Apostle makes mention in his short Catalogue, 2. Cor. 8.7. utterance
(I say) to be able to speak one to another with profit and power in the things
of the kingdom of God. This is an admirable grace: and such as attain it and
grow in it, how precious are they amongst the Saints!

Tenthly, In that, 2. Cor. 8.7. you may see two other things we should increase
in. The one is, in all diligence: we should more and more every day cast about,
how we might take more pains to do good, and be more profitable to others:
and for our own souls, we should increase our pains.

Eleuenthly, The other grace we should grow in, there mentioned, is the love to
our teachers: as God abounds toward us in the profit of their pains, so we
should grow in affection to them, till we get that singular love of them, which
the Apostle speaks of, 1. These. 5.

Twelfthly, Now there is one thing more, which being added, would make us
wonderful complete Christians, glorious shining lights in the world, that hold
forth the life and power of the word, in the midst of crooked and perverse
multitudes of men; and that is contentation: Oh the gain of godliness, if we
were settled and contented with that we have, and could learn of the Apostle
in all estates to be content! To have the skill to want, and to abound, and yet
by Christ to do all things: This would finish the glory of the whole frame of
godliness, and be like a crown to all other gifts and graces, 1. Tim. 6.6, 7.
Philip. 4.11, 12, 18.

Now for the third point, namely, the rules to be observed* That we may grow.
They may be referred to these heads: Rules to help our growth.


First, We must be diligent and conversant in searching the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, in the name of Jesus Christ, as the chief cornerstone,
and then the promise is, that our hearts shall be so sweetened, and seasoned with
these divine knowledges, that God himself shall be with us, and dwell in our
hearts as a holy temple, and we grow more and more in acquaintance with God,
Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

Secondly, We must bring so much sincerity to the grace of Christ, and the use
of the means, as to resolve to seek growth in all things, as well as one,
setting our hearts wholly upon the kingdom of God; we must not go about
godliness with a divided heart, we must grow up in all things, or else in none:
we shall not prosper, if we be falseharted in any part of Gods service, Ephesians.
2.15.

Thirdly, We must in all things depend upon God, and seek to him by daily
prayers for a blessing upon our desires, and the means, and our endeavors. For
else Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God, that must give the
increase, 1 Cor. 3.6.

Fourthly, We must be careful to employ the gifts we have, and to practice, as
fast as we hear. For to him, that has for use, shall be given: but from him,
that has gifts, and will not use them, shall be taken away that which he has,
Math. 13.11.

Fifthly, We must get an humble heart, and preserve in us the sense of our own
vileness, and a lowly mind, and conceit of our selves, accusing our
euery-daies evil ways before the Lord. For Gods promise is to give more grace
to the humble, James. 4.7.

Sixthly, It is a great occasion of increase, when a man does Gods work, with as
much cheerefulnes as he can. God loves a cheerful giver, and will make all
grace abound to them, that strive to live to be his servants, 2. Cor. 9.7.8.

Seventhly, You must pray, that your masters, or if you will, ministers may
have their hearts enlarged, and made fat, and that they may come unto you and
convert you with abundance of the blessings of the Gospel. For if there be
famine, or scarcity, and barrenness in Gods House, you will not thrive well at
home, Rom, 15.29.

Eightthly, We must take heed of al such things as hinder our growth, as
namely: 1. Hypocrisy, Impediments of growth.
When men advance a profession of Religion only for carnal ends, and seek
more the praise of men then of God. These men's hearts will be fearfully
blasted. 2. Errors in opinion of strange doctrines, 2. Pet. 3.17, 18. Hebrews,
13, etc. 3. Spiritual pride, 2. Cor. 12.6, 7. For God gives grace to the
humble, Iam. 4.7. 4. Headstrong affections, as the passions of anger, or the
like: these pull men back, and hinder the growth maruelously, 1 Cor. 3.2, 3.
Ephesians. 4.30.31. 5. Living in places, where we have not powerful means for our
souls, Ephesians. 4.13. For where vision fails, they perish, must needs faint, and
be starued in the famine of the word. 6. Discord with such as fear God. For if
we grow, we must grow up in love, holding communion with the body of Christ,
Ephesians. 4.15.16. 7. Domestical unquietness, and disorder: For that will hinder not
only prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7, but all other parts of piety. 8. Worldliness. This
was the sin did undo Demas. 9. Sinister judgment of our own practices in
godliness when we are either just overmuch, that is, think too highly of what
we do; or wicked overmuch, that is, think too vilely of the grace of God in
us, or the good we do: both these hinder Christians extremely. 10. The love
of any particular sin. For if once we dally with any corruption, grace is
dulled, and the spirit of grace grieved and vexed in us.


Now for the fourth point: we may know whether we grow or no, by diverse signs.

Signs of growth.
First, if we be planted near the rivers of water, if the Lord make us happy in
living in such places where the means of grace aboundes, and the ordinances of
God flourish in their life and power, Psalm 1.3. Ephesians. 4.13: Else if a good tree
be planted in a dry heath far from water or rain, no marvel if it grow not.
And when the Lord does make the means plentiful, he does usually make his
grace plentiful in so many as are ordaind to life.

Secondly, and especially if we be conscionable in the use of the means: if we
measure to God in sincerity, in hearing, praying, reading, and receiving the
Sacraments, etc. there may be no doubt, but God will measure to us in the plenty
of his blessings: if we suck the milk of the word with desire, we shall grow.
We need no more doubt whether our souls grow in grace if we can bring
constant affections to the means, than we would whether the bodies of our
children would grow, if they have good nurses, and do suck the breasts well.

Thirdly, grace grows in us, as humility does grow: God will give more grace to
the humble, Iam 4.8. And look how we thrive and continue in true humility, so
we thrive in grace: and contrariwise, as pride and conceitednes grows in us,
so does true grace wither. And the like may be said of meeknes, which is a
grace that orders the affections, as humility does the mind.

Fourthly, we may try our growth by our love to the godly, the members of the
mystical body: for, the body of Christ increases in the edification of it
self through love. As the love of Gods children grows or decaies in us: so
does grace grow or decay, Ephesians. 4.15.16. This love is the bond of perfectnes,
Col. 3.13.

Fifthly, we must try our confidence in God, and the assurance of our faith.
For, as grace grows: so do we grow more established and settled in God, and
the hope of his kingdom. This is to abide in Christ: and thus to trust in the
LORD, has a promise of such a blessing, as that man shall not wither, Ier.
17.7, 8.

Sixthly, we may discern our growth by the decay of taste in sin and the
world. As the violence of temptation, and the admiration of the pleasures and
profits of this life, go out of us: by the same degrees does the holy Ghost get
the victory, and the Spirit settles the possession of grace in us, etc.

Seventhly, we may discern it by our teachablenesse, and honoring of
prophesying, when our Teachers according to their lines may be enlarged, and
live without suspicion or censure: when we can believe them, and rest in their
testimony above the whole world, 2. Cor. 10.15. 2. These. 1.10.

Eightthly, we may easily discern it by our constancy and frequency in good
works, either of piety, or mercy, or righteousness, either at home or abroad.
For, to such as have for use, it is certain more is given, Mat. 13.11.

Ninthly, we may know it by the frequency of our communion with God. If the
Lord daily dwell in us, or with us, and reueal himself to us by the signs of
his presence, there is no doubt to be made of our growing. The heart of a
christian is Gods Temple: and you may be sure, all prospers well in the
Temple, when the cloud sits there, or often appears there, Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

Use. The use of this whole doctrine concerning growth, may serve, first, for
humiliation: and so in many things.

First, our hearts should smite us for our ignorance. There are many things of
excellent fruit and praise, which we have not at all labored in; diverse of the
twelve things before.

Secondly, for our deadnes of heart, Vnprofitableness of life aggrauated in
many respects.
and unprofitableness of life, which is aggrauated against us, 1. When God
gives us much means. 2. When we are insensible, or at least incorrigible;
know all is not well, and feel our selves to be lashed, and yet mend not. 3.
When we are slothful and weary, will not stir up our selves, nor receive
direction for the making up of what is lacking to our faith, or to any other
gifts; especially when we are weyward, and will go about, rather than be at
the trial of direction or asking the way, Ier. 31.21.


3. Much more to such as are so far from growing, that they fall away, and
decline; lose their first love, and what they have wrought, begin in the
Spirit, and end in the flesh. This much vexes God, and is extremely dangerous
to the parties, Esaias 1.4. Ier. 7.24. and 15.6. 2. Pet. 2.20. But, that this may
not either pearce too far, or fall too deadly or flat upon any that are
guilty, we must know, there is a double declining or apostasy: The one,
Apostasy is two fould.
inward; the other, outward. First, the inward is, when a man's heart is fallen
off from the care of godliness, and the means of it, and regards iniquity
constantly, being possessed of the reign of habitual hypocrisy: and this may
be in men that outwardly frequent the means, and make a show of godliness.
Secondly, the outward declining or Apostasy is, when men outwardly live in
gross sins, or follow scandalous courses, and are at last relapsed to the
violent courses of the world, so as the means of godliness is neglected.
Again, declining is, first, either total: secondly, or in part. First,
total, when we fall off from all godliness, and all the means of it: and so
only they fall, that sin against the holy Ghost. Secondly, in part, is, when
men fall into some sin or error, and not lose all conscience of well-doing,
and such is their Apostasy also, that fall off from the care of some of the
ordinances of God as, when men use the private, and neglect the public; or use
the public, and neglect the private, etc.

Question. But what shall a man do to help himself, that finds he has
declined, etc?

Answer. He must take unto himself words, and confess his sin to God, and
return to the Lord heartily, he will heal even his backsliding: Hose.
14.3.4.5.

Use 2. Secondly, for instruction, and so it should persuade with us mightily
to hold on, and never faint in the way, but strive to the perfection of every
good gift of God, not being weary of well-doing, knowing, that it is ashame
still to be children, and that God does require a righteousness of us, that
should exceed the righteousness of all the Papists, and Pharisees, in the world,
and to this end, we should preserve in us this desire after the sincere milk of
the word, and watch against security and slothfulnes, the dangerous moathes of
godliness.

Use 3. Thirdly, such may be much encouraged, who have their hearts set upon
growth, and do prosper in Gods work, though otherways they have many
afflictions, or infirmities: yea such as with true hearts do mourn for their
not growing, as they think, may consider of many comforts to vphould themselves
by: as, 1. Encouragement for weak Christians.
Our Savior Christ had not all degrees of grace at once, but grew in grace by
degrees. 2. Though thy gifts be small, and grow in thee like a grain of
mustard seed: yet it may grow to a marvelous increase, Math. 13. 3. Though thou
have many infirmities, yet thou may bear abundance of fruit: as the vine,
which is the weakest plant, yet is not therefore barren, Isaiah 27.2. 4. Though
thou have little means to help thy self by, yet thou may by the blessing
of God grow: The lilies spin not, and yet are gorgeo^sly clothed, Math. 6.28.
5. If we sow good seed, it is certain the Lord will give increase, 1. Cor.
9.10.11. 6. Though we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6. yea
though we be extremely oppressed and reproached: as the Israelites grew even
the more they were hated and oppressed in Aegipt, Mark, 4.8. 7. We have great
helps: the word is more effectual to the soul, then milk to the body: and we
receive influence from Christ our head, Colos. 2.19. and every member of the
mystical body makes some supply to further the growth of ^he whole body: Ephesians.
6.16.


Verse. 3. Because ye have tasted, that the Lord is gracious, or bountiful.


THese words contain the fourth reason to persuade to the desire after the
word, and it is taken from the experience they have had of the goodness of God,
comforting them in the word: If ever they tasted the sweetness of the word, they
must needs have an appetite to it.

In these few words there are diverse points of Doctrine to be observed and
explained: as namely,

First, That God is gracious.

Secondly, that God does graciously sweeten the word to his people: as God does
show his graciousnes in the word.

Thirdly, that, where there is a true taste of the sweetness of the word, there
the soul grows in grace.

Fourthly, It is but a taste of the sweetness of God which can be had in this
life.

Fifthly, many live in the church, and yet never taste of the sweetness of God
and his word.

Sixthly, It is a singular shame for such as have felt the sweetness of the word,
to fail in their desire after it.

For the first. Where the Lord is praised for graciousnes, by the word used in
the original here, it is to occasion in us the admiration of the goodness of
Gods nature. For in this one word are many distinct praises imported: As

First, Wherein Gods graciousnes is seen.
That he is free, and does what he does, freely, without respect of merit, or
desert in men: and this is one thing, which if we find, should much incite us
to regard what he says, or requires of us. By this Argument are men called
upon, Isaiah 55.1.2, 3.

Secondly, that he is kind to his very enemies. For so the word is applied:
Luke 6.35. and questionles it should be a great thing to persuade with a man,
when he comes to the word, to regard it with much affection, if he know, that
God thereby will do good to his very enemies: and that in that ordinance, God
is went to show the mirror of his mercy, in revealing his love, and
communicating the blessings of his Gospel to such, as come into his presence
with hatred of their own ways.

Thirdly, that he is courteous, and in a special manner kind to, and fond
over his own people with incomprehensible indulgence: the word is rendered
Courteous, Ephesians. 4.32. And all ages must wonder at this kindenes of God in Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. And thus he delivers his servants from their fears, Psalm.
34.3. or 4.

Fourthly, that he is bountiful and liberal, and gives plentifully: so the
word is used and given to God, Romans 1.5.

Fif^ly, that he is gentle and easy to be entreated, or prevailed withal.
Hence, that his yoke is said to be easy: Math. 11.30. where this word is
translated easy: and hereof comes the word, rendered gentleness: Gal. 5.22. and
thus he is said to be marvelous kind in hearing prayer: Psalm. 31.21, 22. and
34.4, 6, 15.

Sixthly, that he stands not upon respect of persons, and thus he regards the
poor: Psalm. 68.10. and will not disdain to teach sinners his way: Psalm. 25.8.

Seventhly, that he is sweet: that is, wonderful comfortable, pleasing, and
filling with delight.

Eightthly, there is one specialty of Gods goodness, to which this word is
applied, and that is, the accepting of the Gentiles to favor, when the Jews
were cut off: Romans 11.

Use. The use of this point is various: For,

First, It should kindle in us admiration: All ages should gaze and wonder at
such matchless good nature, and kindness in God: Ephesians. 2.7.

Secondly, It should break our hearts with sorrow and repentance for our sins,
to think of it, that we offend a God so kind, so good, so bountiful: Romans
2.4. Hose. 3.5.

Thirdly, It should persuade with men, that never felt this, to taste and see
how good God is, Psalm 34.

Question. What must we do, if we could, or might taste of this sweetness of
Gods nature?

Answer. The Prophet David tells us of two things: Psalm 34. First, thou must
pray unto him, What we must do to taste the goodness of God.
and make him thy refuge in all distress: Secondly, and thou must put thy
trust in him, and then certainly thy face shall be lightened, and thou shall
not be ashamed, and I may add two things more. First, Thou must love his Word,
waiting upon him in his Sanctuary. Secondly, and yield thy self over to be his
servant, and thou can not fail to find this goodness of the Lord.

Fourthly, It should inflame affection in the godly: They should fall in love
with God. Oh love the Lord, all ye his Saints, Psalm. 31.19, 21, 33. What can
more draw affection, then sweetness of nature?

Fifthly, It should persuade all Gods servants to live by faith, and not through
unbelief in the time of affliction, or temptation to dishonor god. Why say
thou, thy way is past over of God? Or why say thou, The Lord has forgotten,
or will not forgive? Esaias, 40.27. and. 49.15, 16. Exodus 34.6.7.

Sixthly, It should kindle in us a vehement desire to imitate so sacred a
nature, and continually to strive to be like the pattern in God for courtesy,
Ephesians. 4.32. kindness, 2. Cor. 6.6. and all loving behavior, Colos. 2.12. 1.
Cor. 13.4. and easy to be entreated, Iam. 3.17. and love to our enemies,
Luke. 6.35. We should be followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. we should bear his image
especially herein, Col. 3.10.

Seventhly, How should our hearts be satisfied, as with Manna, when we feel
this sweetness of God to us in particular, either in the Word, or prayer, or in
his works? We should even be sick of love, our sleep should be pleasant to us,
and our hearts filled with gladness. What greater felicity can there be, then
that such a God should love us? Psalm. 63.6. Ierem. 31.26. Cantic. 2.5. or 6.

Eightthly, We should be careful, when we have felt this sweetness of the Lord
to preserve our selves in this communion with God, and abide in his goodness, as
the Apostle uses the Phrase, Romans 11.22.

Lastly, it should much affect with sorrow and shame, all impenitent sinners,
and that in two respects. First, because they have lost their time, and lived
without the sense of this sweetness in God, the Apostle, Tit. 3.5. uses this
Phrase, The bountifulnes of God appeared. The word shined as the sun does in
the rising: which imports, that the world was nothing but darkness, till men
found by experience the goodness of God. Secondly, because they have so long
offended a nature of such infinite goodness, this will prove a grievous
aggr^uation of their sin and misery. For such a goodness so provoked, will
turn into extreme fury: such mercy abused, will be turned into unspeakable
fiercenes of indignation, as appears, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. and Romans 2.4, 5.

Doct. 2.
The second Doctrine is, that God does graciously sweeten his Word to his
people, or God does show his graciousnes especially in his word. Hence it is,
that Gods servants have acknowledge the word to be sweeter then honey, and the
honeycomb. Psalm. 19.10. and 119.103. and the holy Ghost compares it to feasts,
yea royal feasts, Esaias 25.6. Prou. 9.4. Luke. 14.17. and the Apostle
acknowledges a savor of life unto life in the Word, 2. Cor. 2.14.

The consideration whereof should teach us diverse duties.

First, To labor to find the word so unto us, to seek this sweetness in the
word: and to that end we must mingle it with faith, else there will be no more
taste in it, then in the white of an egg: and besides, we must come to it in
the tediousnes of our own vileness. Note.
For we are never fitter to taste of Gods grace, then when we are dejected in
the true feeling of our own unworthiness. God will give grace to the humble:
and further, we must get an appetite and affection to the word. For the full
stomach loatheth an hony-combe, but to the hungry soul every little thing is
sweet, Proverbs 27.7. and lastly, we must take heed, that we mar not our
tastes before we come, as they do, that have sweetened their mouths with
wickedness, and spoiled their relish with the pleasures of beloved sins, Job
20.12. Such as live in the delight of secret corruptions, even they that
account stolen waters sweet, may be the guests of Hell, but Gods guests they
are not: only they that overcome, eat of the hidden Manna, Revel. 2.

Secondly, When we have found honey, let us eat it, Prou. 20.13. That is, if
the Lord be gracious unto us in his word; let us with all care receive it into
our hearts, and with all affection make use of it. Lose not thy precious
opportunity.

Thirdly, It should teach us in all our griefs, and bitterness to make our
recourse to the Word to comfort and sweeten our hearts against our fears and
sorrows. For at this feast God wipes away all tears from our eyes, Esaiah
25.6, 8.

Fourthly, The sweetness of the Word, when we feel it, should satisfy us, yea
satisfy us abundantly. We should give so much glory to Gods goodness, as to
make it the abundant satisfaction of our hearts, Psalm. 36.6.

Fifthly, Yea further: we should labor to show this sweet savor of the word in
our conuersations, by mercy to the distressed, by gracious communication, by
our contentation, and by all weldoing, that the perfume of Gods grace in us may
allure and affect others, that the very places where we come may savor of our
goodness even after we are gone.

Sixthly, We should be always praising of God for the good things of his
Sanctuary, acknowledging all to come from his free grace without our deserts,
Psalm. 84.4. entertaining his presence with all possible admiration, saying with
the Psalmist, O Lord, how excellent is thy goodness! Psalm. 36.9*

Seventhly, We should pray God to continue his goodness to them, that know him,
and to vouchsafe us the favor to dwell for ever in his house, Psalm 36.11.

Eightthly, And constantly the experience hereof should set us alonging: our
souls should long for the courts of Gods house, and our hearts cry for the
daily bread in Sion, and we should constantly walk from strength to strength,
til we appear before God in Sion, Psalm 84; and the rather, because, besides
the sweetness, there is a plentiful reward in keeping Gods Word, Psalm 19.20.

Secondly, from hence we may be informed in two especial things.

1. Concerning the happiness of the godly in this life, notwithstanding all
their afflictions and sorrows. Thou see their distresses: but thou see not
their comforts. The stranger does not meddle with their joys. Oh how great is
the goodness of God, in giving his people to drink out of the rivers of the
pleasures in his house, when he makes their eyes to see the light in his
light! Psalm 36.8, 9. Psalm 65.4. 2. Concerning the office of Gods Ministers.
They are the perfumers of the world: the Church is the perfuming-pan: and
preaching is the fire that heats it: and the Scriptures are the sweet waters.
Or, the Church is the mortar: preaching, the pestle: and the promises of God in
Christ are the sweet spices; which, being beaten, yield a heavenly and
supernatural smell in the souls of the godly hearers, 2. Cor. 2.14, 15. But,
then, Ministers must take heed they corrupt not Gods Word; and see to it, that
their preaching be in sincerity, and as of God, and in the sight of God in
Christ, and with demonstration of the truth to men's consciences, 2. Cor. 2.17:
else, any Preacher will not serve the turn. And in both these respects,
Ministers have reason to cry out with the Apostle, Oh! who is sufficient for
these things? If every Sermon must leave so sweet a savor behind it in the
hearts of the hearers, and in the nostrils of God too, who can be (without the
special assistance of God) fit for these things?
Lastly, this may serve for singular reproof and terror to the wicked, and that
in diverse respects. First, for such as are mockers, and call sweet sour, that
is, speak evil of the good word of God: secondly, for the miserable neglect of
that they should account the life of their life. Alas! whither shall we go? or
what is this miserable and wretched life, if we want the sweet comforts of the
word? To dwell without the word, is, To dwell in the parched places of the
wilderness: and this Ministry is the more dangerous in such or to such as are
daily invited, and have all things ready made, and yet will not inwardly obey
gods calling, nor profit by the means, but find excuses to shift off the
inuitation of God. How justly may that curse be inflicted upon them, These men
shall never taste of my supper? Luke 14.17. etc. 24.

Thus much of the second doctrine.

Doct. 3. The third doctrine out of these words may be this, that such as find
a true taste of the sweetness of God in his Word, may conceive hopefully, that
their souls do and shall prosper and grow. There is no doubt to be made of
our growth, if once we come to feel the sweetness of the Word. For the cleerer
understanding of this doctrine, I must answer two questions.

Quest. First, what this true taste is.

Secondly, whether this taste may not be in wicked men.

Ans. For the first. A true taste of the sweetness of the Word, and Gods
graciousnes in it, may be known both by the cause, and by the effects. A true
taste is seen by the cause and effects of it.
The cause of this taste is faith: for, by faith only does the soul taste. Or
that thing that raises so sweet a relish in our hearts, is, A persuasion in
particular of the graciousnes of God to us, even of that graciousnes which the
Word does discover. The effects of this taste are three. For, first, it reuiues
the heart, and raises it from the dead, and frames it to be a new creature;
working an unfeigned change in the heart of man from the world and sin, to the
care of Gods glory, and salvation of their own souls: and thus it is called A
savor of life unto life, 2. Cor. 2.15. Secondly, it settleth in the heart an
estimation of the Word and spiritual things, and the assurance of Gods favor
of al earthly things in the world, Phil. 3.9. Psalm 84.10. Thirdly, this taste
works a heavenly kind of contentment in the heart: so as the Godly, when they
have found this, are abundantly satisfied, they have enough, Psalm 36.10. and
95.4.

For the second question concerning wicked men, and their rellishing of the
sweetness of the Word, I say two things. First, that the most wicked men are
without spiritual senses, and find no more taste in God or his Word, than in
the White of an egg: they savor not the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. Cor.
2.13. Of this afterward. But yet it may not be denied, but that some wicked
men may go so far, as to taste of the good Word of God, and of the powers of
the life to come, and of heavenly gifts, as the Apostle grants, Heb. 6.5, 6.

Quest. Now there-hence arises a great question: What should be the
difference between this taste in wicked men, and the true taste in godly men?

Answer. For answer heerunto, diverse differences may be given.

Wherein the taste of wicked men and the godly differ.
First, in the things tasted there is a difference. For, wicked men may have
common graces, yea, and miraculous gifts too, by imposition of hands, (and
these are a great taste given them of the glory of Gods Kingdom) but they
never taste of saving graces: or if a taste of saving graces were granted, yet
they taste as it were of the River running by them, but not of the Fountain;
whereas the Godly have the very Spring of grace flowing in them.

Secondly, in the time of tasting. This taste in wicked men is but for a
season, it cannot hold long in them: and therefore is their faith and joy said
to be temporary: Whereas godly men may keep their taste to their dying days,
not only in the gifts of saving graces, but in the very sense of the sweetness
of Christ, and the Word too, etc.

Thirdly, in the manner of tasting. For, wicked men may taste of the Gospel
and Religion by senses, or by a dim kind of contemplation, or by a sudden
illumination, as by a flash of lightning; but they cannot taste with their
hearts clearly by Faith: Or thus, wicked men may, in the general, taste; that
is, know, and believe that the Mystery of Christ is true; but they cannot
taste, or know this Mystery, with particular and sound application, as theirs.

Fourthly, in the grounds of this taste or delight: For a wicked man persuaded
by false reasons, settled in the common hope, or transported with an high
conceit of some temporary and common gifts and Graces, may be much delighted
and ioyed in the Word, and the thought of going to heaven for a time; but he
never rightly applied the promises of Grace in Christ, nor does he ever
possess so much as one infallible sign of a child of God.

Fifthly, In the effects and consequents of tasting: for, 1. A wicked man may
taste, but he never digests: An evil conscience casts up the food again, or
choakes and poisons it: whereas in godly men their taste abides in them, and
they digest the food they receive: The virtue of it continues with them. 2. A
godly man is transformed, and made another man by this taste, so is not the
wicked man: It is not a savor of life to the wicked. 3. A true taste in the
godly, works, as is before noted, a high estimation, and sound contentment: so
as the godly place the felicity of their lives in this communion with God, and
his word: But that can never a wicked man do.


Sixthly, and lastly, wicked men may seem to taste, and yet do not: Many men
profess religion, and delight in the word, and in religion, and religious
duties, who yet never did attain to it, but constantly found a wearines,
secret loathing, and many times a secret and inward ill savor in the word, and
in the duties of religion: so as the taste is more in their mouths, when they
talk with others, then in their hearts, when they are before God.

It will not be amiss, particularly to clear that place in the Hebrews in all
the three instances of tasting.

How far the taste of wicked men may go.
First, they are said to taste of heavenly gifts: so they do, when they have
common graces, as sometimes some kinds of faith, Joy, hatred of some sins,
love of Ministers, or some godly praises for some ends, etc. Or when they have
miraculous gifts confirmed by imposition of hands, or otherwise, as they had in
the primitive times; and these gifts are excellent and heavenly, because they
are mighty, by the Spirit of God, and came down from the Father of Spirits: But
saving Graces they cannot have.

Secondly, wicked men may taste of the Spirit and good Word of God, by feeling
some sudden flashes of joy, either out of admiration of the means of
delivering, or from some general conceit of the goodness of Gods praises, Job*
23.12. and the happiness of the godly, Psalm. 119.23, 24, 50. But they can get
no such taste of the Word, as to desire it as their appointed food constantly,
Psalm. 119.14, 72. Or to make it their greatest delight in affliction, or to
love it above all riches, 1 Thessalonians, 1.5. Or to receive it with much assurance in
the holy Ghost, or to redress their ways by it, Psalm 119.9, 45, 59. so as
the taste of the Word, should put out the taste and relish of sin: For, let
wicked men be affected as much as they will, their taste of sin will remain
in them. I mean, the taste of their beloved sins; nor can he deny himself
and forsake his credit, friends, pleasures, profits, and life it self for the
Gospels sake, Mark 10, 29.

Thirdly, wicked men may taste of the powers of the life to come, by ioying at
the thoughts that they shall go to heaven, and pleasing themselves in the
contemplation of it. But it is still a false taste, for they have no sound
evidence for their hope, nor do any ma^kes of a child of God appear in them,
nor can they allege one sentence of Scripture, rightly understood, for the
means of it.

The use of all this may be threefold. Use.


First, for Trial. All men should seriously try their estates, in respect of
this taste, by pondering upon what is before written concerning the nature and
differences of it.

Secondly, it should work exceeding thankfulness to God, if we have found
this sound and secret taste in the Word; we should every one and for ever, say,
In the Lord will I praise his Word, Psalm. 56.

Thirdly, Here is matter of terror unto wicked men, and that first, to such of
them as never felt any sweetness in the Word. How should they be amazed to
think of it, that God does from Sabbath to Sabbath restrain his blessings
from them, and, as contemning them, to pass by them, and take no inward notice
of them? 2. But especially here is unspeakable terror to such as have had that
taste in the sixth to the Hebrews, if they should ever fall from it, as is there
mentioned. For, if this taste go out of thine heart, take heed of the sin
against the holy Ghost: For at the loss of taste, begins that eternal ruin
of these men. If thou be not warned in time, thou may come to such a
condition, as it will be impossible for thee to be renewed by repentance, Heb.
6.5, 6, 7.

But lest this doctrine should be misapplied, as it is sometimes by such as
are distressed with Melancholy or vehement affliction of Spirit; I will a
little more fully clear the secret of that place, about the sin against the
holy Ghost: and therefore wish that these things be observed.

Diverse things noted for clearing the sin against the holy Ghost.
First, that it does not follow necessarily, that whosoever has that taste
there mentioned, shall not be saved: for men may have that taste, and finding
it ineffectuall, go on till they find a true taste: That taste is dangerous,
if men fall away; else there may be good use of those tastes: For, it brings
men near the kingdom of God, and makes preparation for true Grace.

Secondly, that the sin against the holy Ghost cannot be committed but by
such as have been enlightened, and have set themselves to attend upon the Word,
either by solemn profession outwardly before men, or by inward attendance upon
it. Two sorts of men in our times are in danger of this sin, that is,
Hypocritical professors: and those they call the wits of the World, who
afterward fell to all Epicurisme.

Thirdly, that the falling away there mentioned, is not to be understood of any
particular falling into some one, or a few sins, but of an universal
falling away from the care of all godliness, and into such a condition, as to
dislike no sin, as it is sin, and to believe from the heart no part of the
Gospel, nor be afraid to wallow in the sins, which formerly he in a sort
repented.

Fourthly, there is in them a personal hatred of the Son of God; they do
with the Jews, as much as in them lies, crucify him again, loathing him,
and inwardly swelling, or fretting against the doctrine of Christ, and striving
as far as they dare in his Ordinances and people, to put him to shame by
scornings and reproaches, or what way else they can, Heb. 6.6. and Chap. 10.29.

Fifthly, they abhor from their hearts the graces of the Spirit, and loath
them in the godly; despighting the Spirit of grace, Hebr. 10.29. so as they
persecute, to their power, the truth; being carried with incurable malice
against it.

And thus of the third Doctrine.

The fourth Doctrine that may be gathered out of these words, 4. Doct.
is; that it is but a taste of the sweetness of God we can attain to in this
life, we cannot reach unto the thousand part of the joys of Gods presence and
favor, in this world. These are part of his ways, but how little a portion is
heard of him! Job. 26. vlt. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor heart of
man perceived the things, which God has prepared for them that love him, 1
Cor. 2.9.

The comforts we feel in this life, may well be likened to the taste, both
because we have them but in small quantity, and because they are quickly
grown out of sense; they are but of short continuance.

There may be three uses made of this point.

First, it may quiet them that complain out of Scruple of Conscience, that
their joys they have, be not right, because they are so quickly lost; whereas
they must be informed, that the comforts the best men can get in this World,
are but a little taste, given out of the Rivers of Gods pleasures.

Secondly, it should make us the more out of love with this life, and kindle in
us the love of the appearing of Jesus Christ. Why desire we to live so long on
Earth, where we must drink down continually the bitter potions of care and
sorrow; and can get but now and then the taste of the comforts of a better
life? Why long we not to enjoy those pleasures for evermore? Psalm. 17. vlt.
Yea, we may know how good it is to be in Heaven, by the taste we have
sometimes on Earth. If it do us such unspeakable ease and joy to feel of the
sweetness of God for a little moment? Oh how great then is that goodness, God
has laid up for them, that fear him! Psalm. 31.19.

The smaleness of the quantity, and shortness of the continuance of our taste of
the graciousness of God on earth, should make us to use the means of communion
with God, with so much the more feruency, and frequency, and humility.

Doct. 5. A fifth doctrine is, that many in the Churches of Christians, never so
much as tasted of the sweetness of Gods grace and word, and that may be a
cause, why the Apostle speaks with an If, as knowing it was a great question,
whether many of them had had experience of the sweetness of the Word.

Question. Now if any ask, what should be the cause, that many Christians have
so little sense of the sweetness of the word, and Gods graciousness, and
goodness in the Word.

Answer. I answer that it is:

First, The causes why so many have little or no taste of the word.
with many so, because they want the ordinances of God in their power and life
of them. They want powerful preaching: some congregations have no preaching at
all, and many that have preaching, have it not in the life and power. The
spices of the word are not beaten to the smell, as they should be, 2. Cor.
2.15, 16.

Secondly, In others, because the taste of the pleasures, and profits, and
lusts of the world are in their hearts, when they come to the word, and so by
the cares of life, all sense of sweetness is beaten out, Math. 13. Luke 14.24.

Thirdly, It is in the most, because they consider not their misery in
themselves, nor remember their latter end. A man never knows the sweetness of
Christ crucified, till he be pricked in his heart, and afflicted for his sins
and forlorn estate in himself by nature: and till men know how to number
their days, they will never apply their hearts to wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

Fourthly, Some men are infected with superstition, and the love of a strange
god. They prepare a table for the troop, and therefore are hungry when Gods
servants eat, and vexed when they sing for joy of heart. They cannot feel the
sweetness of the Gospel, their hearts are so poisoned with secret popery, Esaias
65.11, 13.

Fifthly, Some men taste not of wisdoms banquet, because they leave not the way
of the foolish. All sense is extinguished by the evil company they keep, Prou.
9.6.

Sixthly, Too many Christians are poisoned with some of the sins mentioned in
the first verse of this Chapter, and that destroys both taste and appetite in
them.

Seventhly, Some are fearfully delivered to a spiritual slumber, the Justice
of God scourging their impenitency and disobedience, that made no use of his
judgments, and the remorses they felt before; And so are in the case of the
Jews, Romans 11.

Eightthly, Because God does for the most part reserve these tastes, as the
only portion of his own people: and therefore never wonder, though the common
multitude attain not to it, Psalm 36.8.9.

Lastly, the best Christians are often much restrained in their taste of the
sweetness of Gods favor and presence, because they are not careful enough to
attend upon God in his ordinances: they do not seek God, and strive to find
Gods favor and presence in the means: they hear and pray loosely, with too
much slacknes and remisnes of zeal and attention.

The consideration heerof should serve much to humble and melt the hearts of
such as feel this to be their case: they should be afraid and tremble at the
judgments of God upon them heerin, and fear their own case, and by speedy
repentance make their recourse to God in the Name of Christ, to seek a remedy
for their distress.

And to this end, 1. They should gather a Catalogue of all such sins as they
know by themselves, for which they might most fear Gods displeasure; and then
go in secret, and humble themselves in confession of those sins, striving
till the Lord be pleased to give them a soft heart and sensible sorrows. This
course will both mar the relish of sin, and besides, it opens the fountain of
grace and joy in the heart of a man, Hosh. 14.3.5. Mat. 5.6. 2. They should
there attend with all possible heed to the Word of the Lord, hearing it as the
Word of God, and not of man; with this sincere covenant of their hearts, to do
whatsoever the Lord commands: and then the Lord will not long withold himself.


Secondly, the Godly that find this sweetness in the Word, should be so much
the more thankful for the gracious entertainment GOD gives them in his House,
in that he has not, nor does deal so with thousands of Christians, as he
deals with them.

Doct. 6. The last doctrine is, that it is a shame for such Christians as have
felt of the sweetness of the Word, to lose their appetite, or any way to abate
of their company in resorting, and constancy of desire after it, or estimation
of it. This answers to the main scope, because these words are brought-in as a
reason to excite appetite. The remembrance of the good we have found in the
House of God, should make us love it still, though we do not always speed
alike: we should believe, that God will return, though he hide his face for a
time. Such Christians then must bear their shame, that have lost their first
love; and repent, lest God take away the Candle-stick from them.

Verse 4. To whom coming, as to a living stone, disallowed of men, but chosen
of God, and precious.


HItherto of the exhortation, as it concerns the Word of God. The exhortation,
as it concerns the Son of God, follows, from verse 4. to verse 13: wherein it
is the purpose of the Apostle, to show unto them in the second place the
principal means of holiness, even the original fountain it self, and that is
Christ; to whom they must continually come to seek grace, if ever they will
prosper and grow in godliness.

In the exhortation, as it concerns Christ, three things may be observed.

First, the Proposition: wherein he tells them what they must do, verses 4 and
5.

Secondly, the Confirmation of it, and that two ways. First, by testimony of
Scripture, showing what Christ is; which Scripture is both cited and expounded,
verse 6, 7, 8. Secondly, by the consideration of their own excellent estate in
Christ; which is set out positiuely, verse 9. and comparatively, verse 10: or
thus it is confirmed by arguments taken from the praise, first, of Christ,
verses 6, 7, 8. secondly, of Christians, verses 9, 10.

Thirdly, the Conclusion: where he shows the use they should make, both in
what they should avoid, verse 11. and in what they should do, verse 12.

That which in general may be observed, is, that Christ is the main Fountain
of all grace and holiness. It is he that fills all in all things, Ephesians. 1. vlt.
All the treasures of wisdom and grace be in him, in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily, Col. 2.3, 9. It is he that is made unto us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1. Cor. 10.30. He was long since
acknowledged to be the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23.6.

The knowledge heerof may both inform, instruct, and comfort us.

First, it may inform us concerning the grieuousnes of our disease. The nature
of man is so far past cure, that unless the Son of GOD sanctify himself
with unspeakable holiness, we can never be sanctified, John 17.19. yea, the
Word it self is not available without the grace of Christ, as it appears in
that seventeenth of John: where both the Word and Christ are entreated of.

Secondly, it may teach us, first, to ascribe glory to Christ, who in this
respect is most worthy to be acknowledged the Head of all Principalities, but
especially the Head of the Church; from whom comes influence of all grace and
goodness, Ephesians. 21, 22.23. Secondly, it should teach us, above all gettings, to
labor to get Christ crucified into our hearts. It is Christ in us, that must be
our riches, and our hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. yea, this will be unsearchable
riches to us: we should determine to know nothing, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified, 1. Cor. 2.2. Thirdly* let him that glories, glory in the Lord
Jesus, 1. Cor. 1.4, 7. And therefore God forbid I should rejoice in anything,
but the Cross of Christ; whereby I am crucified to the world, and the world is
crucified to me, Gal. 6.14.

Thirdly, it should be a great comfort to the Godly, both in respect of their
union with him, in regard their Head is so infinite in holiness, as also in
respect of that supply and help that they may continually have from him against
all their infirmities and defects; and lastly, in respect of the hope of the
full confirmation of their holiness in the day of Christ.

And thus of the general Doctrine.

The first thing in the exhortation to be considered, is the Proposition: in
which, two things are to be marked. First, what Christ is; secondly, what the
Christian must be in respect of Christ.

There are five things in the description of Christ. Christ is diversely
described by the Apostle.
First, he is a gracious Lord: that is imported in the first word. To whom,
that is, which gracious Lord, mentioned in the end of the former verse. Whereby
the Apostle applies that to Christ, which was before spoken of God generally,
as he that is God with the Father, and as that person in whom the Lord shows
his graciousnes to men. Secondly, he is a living stone. Thirdly, he is in
respect of the world, and the base respect and usage of him, once disallowed of
men. Fourthly, he is elect of God. Fifthly, he is precious.

Now, that which Christians must be and do, that they may receive holiness
from Christ, is, that, first, they must come unto him. Secondly they must be
lively stones. Thirdly, they must be built up in him. Fourthly, they must
become a spiritual house. Fifthly, they must be a holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God, such as may be acceptable in Jesus Christ. For,
it is to be noted, that the word Are built up, may be rendered, Be ye built up,
howsoever it be read. The intent is, to persuade them thereto. Ye are built
up, that is, if you be right, that is a thing must not be wanting: so the
sense is the same.

First, then, of the description of Christ. And therein, the first point of
doctrine that offers it self to our consideration, is, that Christ is a
gracious Lord. He is a Lord and Master to all true Christians; and such a Lord
and Master as never men served, for wonderful graciousnes. That he is a Lord
to the faithful; is evident by other Scriptures also, 1. Cor. 1.2. He is said
to be a Lord to all that call upon him in every place. Thus David calls him, My
Lord, Psalm 110.1. And great Apostles confess themselves to be his servants,
Romans 1.1. Jude 1. 2. Pet. 1.1. And that he is most gracious, the Apostle
shows, when he tells, that all Ages have cause to wonder at the marvelous
kindness that God has showed to men in Christ. Ephesians. 1.7.


The use may be both for information, instruction, and consolation.

First, we may hence be informed, that Christ is God with the Father. For, the
which the Prophet David, Psalm 34 (whence the words of the former verse are
borrowed) Give to God, the Apostle applies here unto Christ: and the reason of
the application may in the second place inform us, that God is gracious to men
only by Jesus Christ. It is impossible ever to feel or taste of Gods
graciousnes, but in his Son. And, thirdly, we are here told, as it were, that
Christ is God visible. God is made visible and sensible to men by Jesus Christ:
This is that mystery of godliness: God is manifested in the flesh.

Secondly, Is Christ our Lord and Master? then these things will follow: 1.
That we must live and die unto Christ, Rom, 14.7, 8, 9. we are not our own
men; we must live to him that died for us, 2. Cor. 5. vlt. The love of Christ
must constrayne us, and all old things must be passed, and all things must
become new unto us. If Christ be our Lord, where is his service? he must rule
us, and rule over us. If we walk in the vanity of our minds, according to
the deceivable lusts of our old conversation; we have not yet learned Christ,
nor the truth that is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. And therefore let us every one look to
his ways, as he that must one day give account of himself unto Christ, which
will be Judge both of quick and dead, Romans 14. 2. That every knee must bow at
the name of Christ, and every tongue must confess his sovereignty, to the
glory of God, Philip. 2.1. Romans 14. We must all take notice of his supreme
authority, and form in our hearts, all possible reverence toward him. 3. We
must not judge one another. For, what have we to do to judge another man's
servant? He stands or falls to his own Master, Romans 14.4, 9.


Thirdly, it ought to be the singular joy of our hearts, that we serve so
glorious a Master. Never servants served such a Lord, as may appear by the
enumeration of diverse particular differences, As:

Christ does many ways excel earthly Lords toward his servants.
First, other masters are not wont to die for their vassals: Christ shed his
blood for us, one drop of whose blood, was more precious then all the bloods of
all the men in the World; and this he did, only to ransom and redeem us,
that we might be a peculiar people unto him, Titus 2.13.

Secondly, never Master had such power to prefer his servants: Christ has all
power in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28. and all that, to enrich us.

Thirdly, we serve the best Master, because we serve him, that is King of
Kings, and Lord of all other Lords, Revel. 19.

Fourthly, In the service of other masters, there is wonderful difference of
places, and many of the servants serve in the lowest, and basest offices,
without hope of any gain, or respect: But in Christ Jesus there is no
difference, bond and free, male and female, Jew and Grecian, etc. in Christ
are all one, Col. 3.11.

Fifthly, other Lords may advance their servants to great places, but they
cannot give them gifts to discharge them: but Christ does enrich his servants
with every needful gift for the discharge of their callings, 1. Cor. 1.30.
Ephesians. 1. vlt.

Sixthly, other servants know, that their Lords may and do die, and so they
leave their servants usually vnpreferd: But Christ lives for ever, as the
Authors of eternal salvation to them that obey him.

Seventhly, other Lords may take offense, and do often put away their
servants: But whom Christ loves, he loves to the end, so as whether they live,
or die, they are still Christ's, Romans 14.8.

Eightthly, no Lord can give such sure protection to his servants, as Christ
gives to his: No man shall pluck them out of his hands, Esaias, 4.5, 6. Ioh. 10.
and whatsoever wrong is done unto them, he takes it as done to himself: and
therefore the afflictions of his servants, are called the afflictions of
Christ, 2. Cor. 1.4.

Ninthly, and lastly, never Lord was so boundles in his favor, Christ makes
his servants his fellows, 1. Cor. 1.9. They sit with him there in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. He is not ashamed to own them as his brethren, Heb. 2.
His servants he makes sons, and heirs too: yea, heirs with himself unto
God, Romans 8. Never man was so fond of his wife, as Christ is of his servants,
Romans 7.4. and all the book of Canticles shows it. Finally, they shall all reign
with him, and be partners with him in his glory, after they have labored, and
suffered a little: when he appears in glory, they shall be for ever glorified
with him.

Secondly, The second thing affirmed of Christ, is, that he is said to be a
living stone.

A living stone.]

A stone, and a living stone. The holy Ghost is used in Scripture to liken God
and Christ unto a stone: so Genesis 49.24. God is said to be the shepherd and
stone of Israel, and Revel. 4.3. God is likened to a Jasper stone, and Psalm.
118.22. Christ is said to be the stone, which the builders refused: and so in
many other places.

Christ is three ways called a stone.
Christ is said to be a stone, three ways. First, For he is either a rock or
stone for refuge, because in Christ, men may safely rest against all the
surges, and waves of affliction in the sea of this world, Psalm. 18. Secondly,
Or else he is a stone of stumbling, as the Prophet Esaiah called him long
since, Chap. 8.14. and the Apostle Paul acknowledges the same. Romans 9.33. and
this Apostle in verse. 6. following, Because wicked men take occasion from this
doctrine of Christ to fall into sin, and mischief, and because if Christ may
not be the means of their saluatiton, he will be an occasion of their falling:
but in neither of these senses is it taken here. Thirdly, But Christ is here
likened to a foundation stone, to signify, that it is he, upon whom all the
Church must be built. This is that stone, which was cut out of the mountain
without hands, Dan. 2.45. that hard stone of which the Prophet Zachery speaks.
Chap. 4.7, 10.

He is said to be a living stone: and some think to liken him thereby to a
flint stone, which being smitten, the sparkles (as if it had fire in it) give
fire and light to other things. It is true, that Christ has life in himself,
and does give the sparkles upon the flames of life and light to other men. But
I think, the stone here does not import so much by any likeness in it, because
it is a corner stone in the building, which usually neither is, nor can be of
flint. But he is said to be a living stone, to distinguish him from material
stones; and by that word living, to show what the metaphor stone cannot
resemble: For though a stone might shadow out the continuance, and eternity of
Christ by the lastingnes of it; yet life is given here to Christ, not only
because he lives himself, and can do no more, Romans 6.9. but because he is by
effects, life, that is, he makes life in the godly, whereby they become living
stones also.

The maine doctrine here intended, is, that Christ is the only foundation of
the Church. 1 Cor. 7.8.


Ob. David is said to be a stone, and a hard stone of the corner, Psalm. 118.

Sol. David was so only by way of type, his life being somewhat like the
state of Christ, in respect of the oppositions of men, and preferment from God:
and that that place does specially belong to Christ appears by the application
of Christ himself, Math. 21.32.

Ob. But the Apostles are said to be the foundation of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20.

Sol. The place is to be understood of the doctrine of the Apostles, which
treats in one maine point of Christ.

Ob. Math. 16.18.
But the Church is founded upon Peter.

Sol. The Church is not builded upon Peter, but upon the rock, which was the
confession of Peter, and so the doctrine of Christ: for the text does not say
super hunc Petru^, but super hanc Petra^.

Use. The use may be first, for confuration of the Papists, about their
blasphemous doctrine, in ascribing this glory of being the foundation of the
Church, unto Peter, and so to the pope: which they do most absurdly: for that
place, Math. 16. 18. is not understood of Peter's person, but of his confession.
And besides, if it had been true of Peter, by what word of Scripture shall it
be proved, that it is true of the Pope, who is not once named in Scripture,
except he be described as Antichrist? Besides, if the Church be built upon
Peter, or the Pope, then it will follow, we must believe in Peter and the
Pope, else we cannot be founded on them: which is extremely blasphemous: but
that it may be put out of all doubt, let us hear the testimony of Peter
himself, who best knew his own right; and you see in this text, Peter says.
Christ is the living stone, and not he.

This likewise imports the misery of all such, as run after other gods, their
sorrows shall be multiplied. Psalm, 16.4. They build in the sand, quite
besides the foundation; and so do the Papists, that put their trust in Saints
and Angels.

But especially this should teach us, as we are here exhorted, to build all
our faith, and hope in Christ, and to cleave to him in all vprightnes of heart
and life, and the rather, because this stone has seven eyes, and most
perfectly viewes all and every part of this building, that every stone be set
right, etc. Zachar. 3.9.

Especially we should rest upon this stone, when we have any great suite to
God: and have occasion to continue to hold up our hands in prayer, and so we
shall prosper, as it was with Moses, Ex. 17.12.

Lastly, it should be the singular joy of our hearts, when we see the corner
stone cast down, and God begin to build in any place the work of godliness, and
religion: We have more cause to rejoice for that spiritual work, then the
Jews had to shout, when the corner stone of the Temple was brought out to be
laid for a foundation of the building, Zachar. 4.7, 10.

Thirdly, the third thing said of Christ, is, that he was disallowed of men.

Disallowed of men.]

This is added of purpose, to prevent scandal, which might arise from the
consideration of the mean intertainment, the Christian Religion found in the
world.

The point is plain, that Christ was disallowed of men: and this is evident in
the stone: The greatest part of the world regarded him not: The Gentiles knew
him not, and the Jews received him not: Though three things in Christ were
admirable; his doctrine; his life* his miracles: yet the Jews believed not in
him: He came unto his own, and his own received him not; Nay, they reviled
him, called him Samaritane, and said, he had a Devil. They preferred a
murderer before him, and their wise men, even the Princes of this world,
crucified the Lord of life and glory. This as it was storied by the
Evangelists, so it was foretold by the Prophets: Isaiah 53. and 49.8. and so we
see, he is still of almost the whole world. The Pagans yet know him not: The
Jews yet renounce him: The Turk receives him but as a Prophet: The Papists
receive him but in part; and wicked men deny him by their lives.

Uses. The first impression this should make in our hearts, is, admiration and
astonishment. This should be marvelous in our eyes, that men refuse the Son of
God: miserable men, their Savior; captives, their Redeemer, and poor men,
such unspeakable riches as is offered in Christ, and that almost all mankind
should be guilty of this sin; so as in comparison, he should be Elect only of
God.

Secondly, since this was foreseen and foretold, we should be confirmed
against scandal, and like never a whit the worse of Christ or religion, for
the scorns and neglects of the world.

Thirdly, since the world disallowes Christ, we may hence gather, what account
we should make of the world and the men of the world: we have reason to separate
from them that are separated from Christ, and not to love them that love not
the Lord Jesus, 1. Cor. 16.22.

Fourthly, we may hence see, how little reason we have, to take the counsels
and judgments of carnal men, though our friends, and never so wise in
natural or civil wisdom: Their counsels were against Christ, they disallow
Christ, and all Christian courses.

Fifthly, why are we troubled for the reproaches of men, and why do we fear
their reuilings? Shall we hear, that Christ was disallowed, and shall we be
so vexed, because we are despised? Nay rather, let us resolve to despise the
shame of the world: and to follow the author of our faith, even in this cross
also?

Sixthly, we may be hence informed, that indiscretion or sin, is not always
the cause of contempt: For Christ is disallowed, and yet was without all spot
of indiscretion or guile.

Seventhly, and chiefly, we should look every one to our selves, that we be
not of the number of those, that disallow Christ.

For Christ is still disallowed of men, and if any ask,

Question. Who are they, that in these days be guilty of disallowing of Christ?

Answer. I answer, Both wicked men, and godly men too.

Wicked men disallow him, and so do diverse sorts of them, as,

First, What kind of men disalolw Christ.
Heretics, that deny his divinity, or humanity, or his sufficiency, or
authority, or his coming, as did those mockers mentioned, 2. Pet. 3.

Secondly, Schismatics, that divide him, and rend his body mystical, 1. Cor.
1.10.

Thirdly, Pharisees and merit-mongers, that by going about to establish their
own righteousness, deny the righteousness of Jesus Christ, Romans 10.4.

Fourthly, Apostataes, that falling from the fellowship they had with Christ,
would crucify him again, Heb. 6.2. Pet. 2.

Fifthly, Epicures and profane persons, that will sell Christ for a mess of
pottage with Esau, and love their pleasure more then Christ, Heb. 12.16. 2.
Tim. 3.

Sixthly, Papists: who therefore hold not the head, because they bring in the
worship of Saints and Angels, Col 2.19.

Seventhly, Whoremongers and fornicators, who give the members of Christ unto a
harlot, 1. Cor. 6.15, 16.

Eightthly, Reuilers: that speak evil of the good way of Christ, and reproach
godly Christians, especially such as despise the Ministers of Christ. For he
that despises them, despises Christ himself, Math. 10.

Ninthly, Hypocrites: that profess Christ in their words, but deny him in
their works.

Tenthly, the fearful: that in time of trouble dare not confess him before
men, Mat. 10.

Eleuenthly, All wicked men: Because they neglect their reconciliation with God
in Christ, and will not believe in him, nor repent of their sins: All that
will not be reconciled, when God sendes the word of reconciliation unto them,
Esaias 52.11.

Secondly, godly men sin against Christ, and are guilty of disallowing him.

1. When they neglect the establishing of their hearts in the assurance of
faith. 2. When they faint and wax weary of prayer, and trusting in God in the
time of distress, Luke 18.1, 8. 3. When our hearts wax cold within us, and are
no inflamed with fervent affections after Christ We neglect him, when we do not
highly esteem him above all earthly treasures, Phil. 3.9. The fourth thing
affirmed of CHRIST, is, that he is chosen of GOD.
Chosen of God.]

This is one thing we must carefully know, and effectually believe concerning
Christ, namely, that he is chosen of God. This was conscionably believed
concerning him, as appears, Esaias 42.1. and 43.10. and 49.2. Mat. 12.18. Now,
Christ may be said to be chosen of God in diverse respects. Christ chosen of God
diversely.
First, as he was from all eternity appointed and ordained of God to be the
Mediator and Redeemer of all mankind, 1. Pet. 1.20. Secondly, as he was called
peculiarly of GOD from the womb by a special sanctification unto his office,
Esaias 49.1. Thirdly, as he was by solemn rites inaugurated unto the immediate
execution of his office; as, by baptism, and the voice from heaven, etc. Mat.
3. Fourthly, as he was approved of God, and declared mightily* to be the
Son of God* and the Savior of the world, by the glory done to him of God,
notwithstanding the scorns and oppositions of the world, Esaias 49.7.

The use may be both for Information and Instruction.

For, hence we may be informed concerning diverse things.

First, that Gods work shall prosper, notwithstanding all the scorns or
oppositions of men: God's choice is not hindered, but Christ is separated, and
sanctified, and appointed to the work of redemption, the perverseness of men
notwithstanding. The unbelief of men cannot make the faith or fidelity of God
of none effect, Romans 3.

Secondly, that God does not choose as men do. The mean things of this world
(as the world accounts mean) and the vile things of this world may be dear in
God's sight. For, as it was in the calling of Christ: so is it in the calling
of Christians: such as the world disallows, may be dear to God, 1. Cor. 1.27,
28.

Thirdly, hence we may note the free grace of God in the sending and giving his
Son. He is fain to choose for us: we did not choose Christ first, John 15.16.

Fourthly, that to choose Christ, is, with Marie, to choose the better part: it
is to imitate God, and choose like GOD, to forsake the world, and the wills, and
lusts, and judgments of the wicked men of this world, and to cleave only to
Christ, as our all-sufficient portion and happiness.

Fifthly, that all the enemies of Christ shall be subdued either by conversion
when they come into worship Christ, or by confusion, when they are broken by
the power of Christ. Even Kings shall submit themselves, and worship him that
is thus abhorred and despised of men, etc. Esaias 49. verse 7.

Sixthly, that it is a singular happiness to be chosen of God: it was the
honor of Christ here, etc. And therefore, Blessed is the man whom God chooses.
Happy is the Christian whom God electeth, Psalm 65.4. Luke 10.20.

Secondly, it should teach us diverse duties.

First, to observe, and admire, and acknowledge the Lord Jesus, the Chosen of
GOD, we should with special regard confess unto the glory of God heerin, which
the word Behold imports, Esaias 42.1. We should be Gods witnesses against the
world, and all the servants of any strange god, that this Jesus of Nazareth is
that Son of God, and Savior of the world, Esaias 43.10. It is one main end of
the praises of Christ in this place, To raise up our dull and dead affections
to the highest estimation and admiration of Christ and his glory with the
Father, etc.

Secondly, we should learn of God, how to make our choice. On the one side is
offered unto us the pleasures and profits of the world, and the inticements of
sin and Satan: and the other, in the Gospel of Christ is set forth and
offered to us as the means of our happiness. Now, it is our part to take to
Christ, and renounce the world, and forgo the pleasures of sin, which are but
for a season: we should utterly refuse the voice of sin, never to be the
guests of such folly, but rather to listen to the voice of wisdom, Proverbs 7.
and 8.

Thirdly, Is Christ chosen of God, that one of a thousand? Then it learns the
Church to be in love with him, yea, to be sick of love, as is imported*
Canticles 5.8, 9, 10. An ordinary affection should not serve the turn: our
hearts should be singularly inflamed with desire after such a match, found out
and chosen of God for us.

Fourthly, we should not rest here: but, when God has declared his choice, (as
he did by a witness from heaven, even his own voice, Math. 17.5.) we should
then hear Christ, and, as the Prophet says, wait for his law, Esaias 42.4.

Fifthly, yea, we should so kiss the Son, whom God has declared as King, by
doing our spiritual homage unto him, as that we resolved, both high and low,
the greatest estate as well as the meanest, to serve him with all fear, and
rejoice before him with trembling: we must express our thankfulness by all
possible obedience of heart and life, Psalm 2.11.

Sixthly, we should follow his Colors, and take his part, and contend for the
truth against all the world, and in particular against Antichrist, that man of
sin, Revel. 17.14.

Seventhly, we should imitate the praises and virtues of this chosen One,
especially in two things: to weet, humility and constancy, as the Prophet Esaias
shows, 42.2, 3, 4.

Lastly: and specially this Chosen, or rather this knowledge of this Chosen of
God, should teach us to rely upon Christ without wavering, with all trust and
confidence, for our reconciliation with God, for the obtaining of knowledge,
comfort, deliverance, preservation, yea, and salvation too: for, this is he
whom God has given for a covenant to all people; and his soul delights in
him. And therefore also we may run boldly to the Throne of grace, and put up
our petitions by Christ. For, we are here assured, that God will deny him
nothing, as these places evidently show: Psalm 42.6, 7, 8, 16. Psalm 49.6, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. Mat. 12.17. to 22. But then we must look to it, that we
observe the seasons and opportunity of grace, Esaias 49.8. 2. Cor. 6.2. Let us
therefore embrace, while God is to be found, and offers us Christ: for, we may
seek when God will not be found; as Esau sought the blessing when it was too
late, Heb. 12.15.

And further: this may serve for singular terror to all unbelievers, that will
not have Christ to rule over them. He is elected already of God, and therefore
will mightily pursue all the enemies of God and the Church, and all those that
disobey him whom God has chosen: he will pursue them both with the terrors of
his Word, his mouth being made like a sharp sword, and with the plagues of his
hand, being made like a polished shaft, Esaias 49.2. He will appear to wicked
men in the day of wrath, as a mighty man, and as a man of war: though to his
own he be as a Lamb, to them he will be as a Giant: they shall not be able
to resist; and though he lift not up his voice in the streets of his people,
yet he will set upon them with roaring, and singular terror, even with all
the signs of furious displeasure: and though for a time he may seem to put up
the contempt of men that disallow him, yet at the length he will not refrain,
and will destroy at once, etc. Esaias 42.13, 14, 15.

Besides: this doctrine of Christ's chosen, or of Gods choice, should notably
check that unbelief and fearfulness that is too often found even in Sion, in
the dear servants of God. When God has published his election of Christ for
the service of our redemption, why does some say, The Lord has forsaken, and
his Lord has forgotten him? Can God forget his people? or will he ever deny
his Chosen? Shall not Christ be regarded in our behalf, who is the person whom
his soul loves? Esaias 49.8, etc. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Precious.]

Christ is precious many ways.
Christ is precious many ways. First, in respect of his nature: he is the
choicest substance in heaven and earth; never such a man: all the creatures in
heaven and in earth are inferior to him. Secondly, in respect of his gifts:
he is qualified with all the treasures of wisdom and grace, above all his
fellows, Col. 2.3. Psalm. 45. Thirdly, in respect of his works: never creature
did works of such price, so useful, so exquisite, so transcendent. Fourthly,
in respect of his sufferings: he paid such a price to God in the ransom of
man, as all the world besides could not raise, or any way make. Fifthly, in
respect of effects: he gives the most precious things: no treasures like those
may be had from him: his very promises are precious, 2. Pet. 1.4.

This may serve, first, to inform us in diverse things: as,

First, concerning that matchless love of God to us, that gave us his Son
who is so precious, Romans 8.34.

Secondly, concerning the horrible sin of Judas and the high Priests, that
valewed him but at thirty pieces.

Thirdly, concerning the most miserable condition of all profane people, and
persons, even whole multitudes of people, that so neglect Christ, that can with
Esau sell him for trifles, pleasures, or profits, even as mean sometimes, as a
mess of pottage, etc. The more glorious Christ is, the more vile is their
sin of neglect, or contempt of Christ. Woe to them, that disallow him then:
Even to all those sorts of men before mentioned! Christ will not be a
foundation stone to support them, nor a precious stone to enrich them, but as
the upper and nether millstone to grind them to pieces, or as a rock falling
upon them.

Quest. But what should be the reason, that Christ is in no more request
amongst men?

Answer. Causes why Christ is no more precious with men.
First, one cause is man's ignorance, both of their own misery out of Christ,
as also of the glory of Christ in himself, and of the privileges man might
attain by him, and of the singular glory to come.

Secondly, another cause is unbelief. Men have a secret kind of Atheism in
them, and do not believe the report of the servants of Christ out of the Word,
Esaias 53.1, 3.

Thirdly, another cause is, that the most men look upon the outside of the
kingdom of Christ, and of the estate of Christians; which, because they find it
covered with afflictions, and seated in a low condition without outward
splendour, they therefore contemn it: Our life is hid with Christ in God, Colos.
3.3.

Fourthly, but the maine reason is, because men do falsely esteem of other
things, they set so high a price upon their pleasures, profits, lusts, credits,
honors, hopes, etc. that Christ is not remembered nor valued, unless it be at
Iuda^ his rate, and yet many will not value him at so much as thirty pence,
but they will make shipwreck of a good conscience even for a penny, I mean for
extreme small gain, in buying and selling, and such like dealing.

And thus much of the third thing we may be informed of.

The last is, concerning the wealthy estate of all true Christians. How rich
are they, that possess this Mine of treasure, who have his spirit, graces,
righteousness, ordinances, and glory!

And as it may thus inform us, so it should teach us:

Use 2. First, to account of Christ as most precious, to esteem of him as ever
precious in our eyes, and show it; Pro. 8.11, 16
1. By seeking to get Christ above all gettings. 2. By accounting all things but
as dust and dung, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ,
Phil. 3.8. 3. By selling all, to buy this precious stone, Math. 13. forsaking
father and mother, house and land for Christ's sake, and the Gospels. 4. By
keeping our communion with Christ with all carefulnes. 5. By avoiding all the
ways, by which Christ is disallowed and dis-esteemed. 6. By longing for, and
loving his appearing, 2. Tim. 4. hasting to it, and looking for his coming, 2.
Pet. 3.


Secondly, to consecrate our selves, and whatsoever is dear, and precious to
God, and the service of Christ, striving to be a precious people, and peculiar
to God, zealous of good things, and works, Tit. 2.12, 14.1. Cor. 6.20.

Thirdly, We should live like such, as having attained so precious a treasure.

1. Living by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. 2. Not being the servants
of men, 1. Cor. 7.2, 3. 3. Keeping our selves from all pollution, by which the
Kingdom of God may be defiled, laying up this treasure in a pure conscience.
Lastly, Ministers, that know, that there is no other foundation but this
living and precious stone, should study by all means to build gold, silver,
and precious stones, and not hay and stubble, striving like skillful
master builders, to make the whole frame some-way answerable to the foundation,
1. Cor. 3.12.

Thus of the description of Christ. Now follows what Christians must do,
that from Christ they may receive virtue for the attaining of holiness of life.

First, they must come unto him.

To whom coming.]

Five points in general.
Diverse things may here be noted in the general.

First, that men may come unto Christ, even while they are on earth.

Secondly, that natural men, or naturally men are absent from Christ, or
without Christ.

Thirdly, that without coming to Christ, we can never be sanctified.

Fourthly, that all that once take taste of the sweetness of Christ in his
ordinances, will come unto him.

Fifthly, that to come to Christ, is a continual work: Christians are still
coming, their life is but a continued journey to Christ, or a daily seeking
out of Christ, etc.

But in particular I especially consider two things.

First, how many ways men come to Christ.

Secondly, In what manner men must approach to Christ.

First, we must come to Christ diverse ways.

We come to Christ many ways.
First and chiefly, by believing in him: we must draw near to Christ by the
assurance of faith, Heb. 16.22.

Secondly, by making him our daily refuge in prayer, using him as our
continual mediator, and advocate, Psa. 65.12. Ierem. 31.9. carrying all our
petitions to him, in all our distresses making our moan to him, as the Client
does to the Counselor, or as the oppressed do to the Judge.

Esaias 9.6.
Thirdly, by the frequenting his ordinances, viz. the Word and Sacraments, thus
to come to his feasts, even to his great Supper, Prou. 9. Luke, 14. 17, etc.
Math. 22. Thus we come to worship.

Fourthly, by contemplation, remembering him, and setting our affections on him,
thinking on him that sits at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1.

Fifthly, by receiving his servants, and visiting them in their distresses: He
that receives them, receives Christ, Math. 10. and to visit them in prison,
is to come unto Christ, or to visit Christ, Matthew, 26.

But the fourefirst ways are especially meant, and the first chiefly. For the
second:

We must come to Christ.

First, speedily: as, the men that suffer shipwreck, quickly haste to the shore.

Secondly, In what manner we must come to Christ.
penitently: going and weeping we must go, Ierem. 50.4. He calls to him
sinners, and that to repentance, Math. 9.13. we must come weary and heavy
laden, Math. 11.28. we must return and come, Esaias 25.12. and not, as they
Ier. 7.9, 10. Zachar. 14.1, etc. that came in their sins with Idols in their
heart: We should come to Christ, as Benhadad did to Ahab, with ropes about our
necks: that is, with all readiness to profess against our selves our own vile
deserts.

Thirdly, confidently: and with persuasion of faith, ^esting in his goodness,
and casting out fear and doubts, Heb. 10.22. and 11.6. as the Leper came to
Christ, Math. 8.2. Heb. 4.16.

Fourthly, affectionately: we must come to him, as the Love comes to her
Lover: so the Church to CHRIST, Canticles 2.10, 13.

Fifthly, importunatly, as the woman of Canaan did; so as we will be set down
with no repulses or delays, Mat. 15. as they with the Palsey-man, Mat. 9.
Hosh. 6.1, 2. and as he teaches us to come to God, Luke 18.1, 2, 3, etc. and
as Job resolves, chap. 27.2, 3, 7.

Sixthly, orderly: we should do as Job said: we should order our cause before
him, and fill our mouths with arguments, Job 23.3, 4.

Seventhly, obediently. We should come to Christ, as children to their
fathers, and as the people to their lawgiuer, to receive commandments at his
mouth; so as our hearts might answer, Lo, Psalm. 40.7
I come to do thy will. If we would have God or Christ come to us, we must
be such as David promises for himself, Psalm 101.1, 2, 3, 4.

Eightthly, sincerely. And we must show our sincerity, 1. By forsaking the way
of the foolish, Pro. 9.6, 23, 4. 2. By coming in the truth of our hearts. For,
an hypocrite cannot stand before him without flattering, lying, dissimulation,
or wavering; not as the Israelites came to God, Psalm. 78.32, 34. So as Christ
may discern, that we have a true thirst, whatsoever we want, John 7.37. 3.
Thirdly, by renouncing all other hopes, as they said of God, Ier. 3.22. 4. By
resolving to cleave to Christ in a perpetual covenant, Ier. 50.5. 5. By
coming to Christ, notwithstanding dangers or difficulties: though it were with
Peter to leap into the sea, Mat^. 14.29. or with the wisemen to come from the
East, Math. 2. and though we find Christ in a prison, Math. 25. and though it
were to deny our selves, and to take up our Cross daily, Luke 9.24.


Use. The use of all this should be chiefly to persuade with every one of us,
to make conscience of this duty to come unto Christ, and the rather
considering,

First, Many are the reasons why we should come to Christ.
the necessity of it here imported, in that without coming to Christ we
cannot possibly attain unto sound reformation of life: without Christ we can
do nothing.

Secondly, the encouragements we have to come to him, and these are many. For
1. If we consider the inuitation of Christ, he calls us to come unto him, we
cannot displease him by coming, but by not coming and neglecting him, Matthew.
11.29. Canticles 2.10, 13. Math. 22.3. Ioh. 5.40. 2. If we consider the persons
invited, or who may come: The simple may come, Prou. 9.3. The strangers may
come, even men from afar, Esaias 49.12. and 56.4. Any that are athirst, may
come, Ioh. 7.37. Yea, the basest and meanest may come, which is signified by
that of the Parable, that they by the hedges and highway side are compelled to
come in: Matthew. 22.
nor is there any exceptions at men's sins, but sinners may come, Math. 9.13.
Yea such, as are wounded and smitten for their sins, may come, Hos. 6.2. etc.
Thirdly, if we consider our entertainment when we come. He adopts all that
come to him, John 1.12. He is ravished with affection toward them: we cannot
more please him, than by coming to him, Cant. 4.8, 9. They are sure they shall
not be rejected, John 6.37. Christ will ease them in all their sorrows, Mat.
11.29. He will heal them of all their diseases, of which the bodily cures were
pledges in the Gospel. He will be as Manna from heaven to them: they shall
never hunger, John 6. yea, he will be life to them; the life of their present
lives, and eternal life: they shall live for ever, John 5.40.


Thus of the first things required in Christians. The second is, They must be
lively stones.

Verse 5. Ye also, as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.


As lively stones.]

IT is not unusual in Scripture, to compare men to stones: and so both wicked
men and godly men.

Wicked men are likened to stones, first, for their insensiblenesse: and so the
heart of Nabal was like a stone. Secondly* for their silent amazement, when
iniquity shall stop their mouth: thus they were still as a stone, Ex. 15.16.
Thirdly, for their sinking down under Gods judgments: so the Egyptians sunk
into the sea like a stone, Exodus 15.6. And thus the wicked sink into hell like
a stone. But chiefly in the first sense, for hardness of heart: their hearts by
nature are like a stone. And in the comparison of a building, if they be in the
Church, they are like the stones of the house that had the leprosy, or like
Jerusalem when it was made a heap of stones.

Godly men are like stones too: they are like the stones of Bethel that were
anointed. God is the God of Bethel: and the Godly are as those anointed
pillars, consecrated to God, and qualified with the gifts of the holy Ghost.
They are like the Onyx stones given by the Princes, and set on the breast of the
High Priest, in the Ephod. The High Priest is Christ. The Onyx stones are
Christians. The Princes of the Congregation, are the Ministers that consecrate
the souls of men which they have converted to Christ, who wears them on his
breast, and has them always in his heart and eye. They are like to the rich
stones of a Crown lifted up, Zach. 9.16. They are like the stone with the Book
bound to it, Ier. 51. 63. They are never without the Word of God. But in this
place they are likened to the stones of the Temple, which in the Letter are
described, 1. Kings 6.7, 36. and 7.9, 10. and in the Allegory, Esaias 54.11, 12,
13. Sure it is, that the stones of this spiritual Temple, are the place of
Sapphires, as is said in Job in another sense, 28.6.

Now the godly are likened to stones in diverse respects. In what respcts the
Godly are likened to stones.
First, they are like stones to grave upon, and so they are like those stones,
which must have the law graued upon, set up in mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27, 2, 3, 4.
What is the mount, but the world? and what is Ebal, but vanity, or sorrow? and
what are those graued stones, but the godly with the law of God written in
their hearts, the light whereof shines on the hill of the vanity of this
world, and lasts in the midst of all the sorrows of this world? Secondly,
they are like stones for strength and vnmouednes in all the storms of life.
The rain pierces not the stones, nor do afflictions batter the hearts of
Gods servants: strength is attributed to stones in that speech of Job 6.12.
Thirdly, They are like stones for continuance and durablenes, they will last
for ever: so will their persons, and so ought the affections of their hearts.
Lastly, they are like stones for a building, and that in two respects.

First, If you consider the manner of their calling into the Church: they are
dug out of the quarry of mankind, as stones dug out of the earth, being
in themselves by nature but stones of darkness, such as might never have seen
the light.

Secondly, If you consider their union with Christ, and Christians in one body,
they are like the stone of the house compact in themselves, and upon the
foundation.

Use. The use may be briefly: First, for information: Here is come to pass
that saying that is written, God is able of stones to raise up children unto
Abraham. Secondly, let all the servants of God take pleasure in the stones of
this spiritual Sion, Psalm. 102.15. and let us all learn to be like stones in
the former senses, for the receiving the impression of the law, and for
constancy and durablenes, and for care to keep our communion with Christ, and
Christians.

Lastly; woe to the multitudes of wicked men, whom God neglects with that heavy
curse, so as a stone is not taken of them to make a stone for the building,
Ierem. 50.26.

Thus they are stones: It is added, they must be lively stones, to signify
wherein they must not be like unto stones: they must not be dull, and
insensible, they must be lively and cheerful, and that for diverse reasons.

First, Reasons why we ought to be lively stones.
Because the second Adam is a quickening spirit, and they dishonor the
workmanship of Christ, if they be not lively, 1 Cor. 15.

Secondly, Because one end of the offering up of Christ, was, that their
consciences might be purged from dead works, Heb* 9.14.

Thirdly, They are therefore condemned, according to men in the flesh, that
they might live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6.

Fourthly, Because we have been alive to sin, and it is a shame to express
less life in the service of God, then we have done in the service of sin.

Fifthly, Because we have lively means, we are fed with living bread, Ioh. 6.
and we live by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13 4. and we have the spirit of Christ
in us, which is the fountain of life, and has springs of joy in him, Romans
8.9. Ioh. 6. and the Word of God is lively and mighty in operation, Heb 4.12.
and Christ himself lives in us, Gal. 2.20.

Sixthly, because we profess our selves to be consecrate to God as living
sacrifices, Romans 12.1.

Seventhly, because we have such excellent privileges: we partake of the
divine Nature, and God is a living God; and we have precious promises, 2. Pet.
1.4. and we have plentiful adoption in Christ, and we have a hope of a most
glorious inheritance, which should always put life into us, 1. Pet. 1.3, 4. and
we have a secure estate in the mean time. For to live, is Christ: and to die,
is gain, and whether we live or die, we are Christ's, Romans 14.8. Phil. 1.21.

Use. The use should be therefore for instruction: We should stir up our
selves, and strive after this liveliness, and that for the two reasons
imported in this text to omit the rest. For without a ready heart, we shall
make no riddance in matter of sanctification, and holy life, and besides, we
shall extract but a small deal of influence from Christ. For it is here
required, that we should be lively, when we come unto him.

How we show our liveliness.
Now this liveliness we should show: First, by contentation in our estate:
Secondly, by patience and cheerefulnes in afflictions, Romans 5.2, 3. Thirdly, in
the performance of holy duties with power and life: Thus we should be lively
in prayer, such as will bestir themselves, and take no denial, as, Philip.
4.5, 6.

Quest. Now if any ask, What is good to quicken us against the deadnes of our
hearts?

Ans. I answer: First, faith and assurance makes a man's heart alive, What we
must do to quicken our hearts.
we live by faith. Secondly, we must go still to Christ, who is the life,
and by prayer still draw the water of life out of his wells of salvation.
Thirdly, the word of God is lively, Heb. 4.12. Fourthly, godly society, and a
profitable fellowship in the Gospel puts life into men, there is a great deal
of provocation to good works in it. Fifthly, We should often meditate of the
gain of godliness, and of the privileges of the promises belonging to the
godly.

Use. This doctrine implies a great deal of reproof also: First, to
Hypocrites, that have a name, that they live, but they are dead, Revel. 3.1.
Secondly, to declining Christians, that suffer their first love to abate in
them, and can be contented to lose sensibly the power of affections, which
formerly they had. Thirdly, to many drooping Christians, which out of
melancholy, and unbelief, affect a kind of wilful sadness, and hartlesnes,
hindering thereby their own assurance, and causing the easy yoke of Christ to
be ill thought of, besides many other inconveniences.

Thus of the second thing.

Be ye built up.]

It may be read either in the Imparatiue mood, or in the Indicative. I think,
the Imparatiue answers more to the scope here, it being the drift to show,
what we must do when we come to Christ.

The third thing then we must do, that we might extract virtue out of Christ
for holiness of life, is, We must be built up; which imports two things. First
progression in faith: and secondly, repentance. We must not begin only, and
lay the foundation, but we must still labor to be built up further, we must
still be edified in our most holy faith, Jude 20. verse.

Now, that this may be attained unto, that we may be built up, the similitude
imports diverse things.

Means to build up a Christian.
First, preparation. A man, that will go about the work of godliness, must
think he goes about the building of a town, and therefore must cast up his
accounts for the charge of it, and get his stuff prepared before hand. Pro.
24.27. Luke 14.28.


Secondly, a constant relying upon Christ. If we build, we must build upon
the rock, and not on the sands, Mat. 7. and 16.

Thirdly, the warrant of all our actions out of the Word of God. When Moses was
to build the tabernacle, he made it just according to the pattern in all
things about it, etc.

Fourthly, a respect of things necessary: we must not be entangled with
unnecessary and doubtful disputations. The building of a Christian must be a
silver palace. He must build gold, silver, precious stones, he must keep his
heart to choice and necessary things, Cant. 8.9. 1. Cor. 3. 1. Timoth. 1.4.

Fifthly, Counsel and Direction. Men must endure the hewing, and squaring, 1.
Kings 5.17, 18. To this end are Ministers given, Ephesians. 4.12. The Word is able to
build us up, Acts 20.32. and so good conference may edify, or much edifieth,
Ephesians 4.29.

Sixthly, attendance. This building must have her distractions cast out, 1. Cor.
7.32. David could build the Temple, because of his wars, and his unrest on
every side.

Seuenthy, Order and distinction. Men must not rake together a great deal of
stuff, without order, confusedly: This is to build Babel, and not Sion.

Eighthly, Unity with the godly. The building must hold proportion with the
walls, as well as with the foundation, Psalm. 122.3. 1. Cor. 8.1. and 13. Romans
15.2. Ephesians. 4.12, 16.

Ninthly, Sobriety in the use of lawful things: All things are lawful, but
all things edify not, 1. Corinthians 10.23.

Tenthly, Prayer: for except the Lord build the house, in vain do they labor
to build it, Psalm 127.1.

Out of all this we may inform our selves concerning the causes of not
profiting in many. The reason why many Christians are not built up, or why they
increase not in godliness, is, that they are guilty of these, or some of these
things implied in these directions.

First, Causes why many are so little edified.
some profit not by reason of their irresolution about the taking up of their
cross in following Christ: They thrust into the profession of Religion, before
they have sitten down to cast what this profession may cost them, and so in
the evil day fall away, Luke 14.28.

Secondly, some can never thrive, because they place their godliness only in
the frequencie of hearing the Word, and the outward observance of Gods
ordinances: These build in the sands, they lay no sure foundation, Math. 7.26.

Thirdly, others fail through unbelief, and so either by neglecting the
assurance of Gods favor in Christ, or by misplacing their confidence, trusting
upon their own works, or Saints, or Angels, or the pardons, or penances
granted or enjoined them. These are not built upon the rock, Math. 16.

Fourthly, others prosper not, because they come not to the light of the
Scriptures, to see whether their works be wrought in God, Io^. 13.21.
or no.

Fifthly, others are distracted either with unnecessary disputations, Romans 14.1.
or with excessive cares of life, Luke 21.34.

Sixthly, others are undone with self conceitednesse, they are stubborn, and
will not be advised, or directed, or reproved.

Seventhly, disorder, or confusednes in matters of Religion is the cause in
others: This is a wonderful common defect: men do not go to work distinctly
to see their works finished one after another.

Eighthly others are kept back with personal discords, and iangling* Envy, or
malice, or contention, misrule eat out the very heart of godliness.

Ninthly, others are let by intemperancy, in being drowned in the love of
pleasures: They build, they sow, they eat, and drink, and follow pastimes,
neglecting the care of better things.

Lastly, neglect of prayer is an usual let and grievous impediment.

A spiritual house.]

This is the fourth thing required of Christians. They must be as a spiritual
house unto Christ: they must be that to Christ, that was signified by the
Tabernacle or the Temple. For, every Christian is the substance of that which
was signified by the Tabernacle.

Christ has a fiue-fould Tabernacle. For, first, in the Letter, Christ has a
fiue-fold Tabernacle.
the Tabernacle or Temple at Jerusalem was the House of God and Christ.
Secondly, the whole world is but the Tent of Christ, who has spread out the
heavens like a curtain, etc. Thirdly, the heaven of the Blessed is the
tabernacle of Christ, Esaias 40.^2
the place where God and Christ dwell with the Saints, Revel. 21.3. and 13.6.
Fourthly, the body of Christ is a tabernacle for the Godhead, Col. 2.9. and so
it is, that the Word is said to become flesh, and dwelt amongst us, viz. in his
body, as in a Tabernacle, John 1.14. And thus Christ calls his own body a
Temple, John 2.21. Fifthly, the heart of man is the Tabernacle of Christ: and so
both the whole Catholic Church is his Tabernacle, Ephesians. 2.21. or the public
assembly of the Saints, Psalm 15.1. or else the heart of every particular
believer: and so the power of Christ did rest upon Paul, as in a Tabernacle, 2.
Cor. 12.9. so are we said to be the Temple of God, 2. Cor. 6.17. I take it in
the last sense here.

Every particular believer is like the Tabernacle in diverse respects.

A godly man, like the Tabernacle in diverse respects.
First, in respect of the efficient causes: and so there are diverse similitudes.
For, as the Tabernacle did not build it self, but was the work of cunning men;
so is it with us: our hearts naturally are no Temples of Christ, but are made
so. Secondly, as God raised up skilful men for the building of the Temple or
Tabernacle: so does God raise up Ministers for the erecting of the Frame of
this spiritual House to Christ. Hence they are called Builders, 1. Cor. 3. And
thirdly, as there was difference of degrees, and Bezaleel and Aholiab were
specially inspired of God with skill above the rest: so has Christ given some
to be Apostles, Master Builders; and some, Evangelists and Pastors, and
Teachers, for the building up of the Church, till he come again.

Secondly, in respect of the adjuncts of the Tabernacle: and those were two.
First, moueablenesse: secondly, furniture.

For the first. The Tabernacle, though it were Gods House, had no constant or
certain restingplace, till Solomon, at the building of the Temple, took it into
the most holy place; and was taken asunder, and easily dissolved; such are we:
though honored with the presence of Christ, yet our Tabernacle must be
dissolved, and we shall never be at rest, till we be settled in the most holy
place in heaven, 2. Cor. 5.1, 7.

For the second, which is the furniture of the Tabernacle, it must be
considered two ways: either on the inside, or on the outside. First, for the
inside: there were curtains of fine linen, and blue silk, and scarlet, etc.
and it was furnished with admirable household stuff, as I may so call it. Within
it was the Merci-seat, the Table of shewbread, the Manna, the Altar of
incense, and for burnt offerings, the Candlestick, and such like. Secondly,
without it was all covered with Rams skins died red, and Badgers skins upon
them: and what does all this signify in general, but that the Godly, though
they be outwardly black and tanned with sin and affliction, yet they are
glorious within, and have curtains like the curtains of Solomon; all richly
hanged, as the chambers of Princes, with spiritual tapestry? Cant. 1.5. And in
particular, for the inside of Christians, how glorious is the place of Christ's
Tabernacle in them! There is the Propitiate, Gods true seat of mercy: whence
also he utters his Oracles, even his divine answers. There is the heavenly
Manna that is hid, Reu. 2. There does Christ spiritually feast-it: there he
dines and sups on the table of their hearts: and upon that table stands the
shewbread, inasmuch as the heart of a Christian does preserve a standing
manner of affection to the Saints. There are also both sorts of altars
accordingly; as, faith offreth up to God either the redemption or the
intercession of Christ. There also is the great Lauer to wash-in, called the
sea, because in the heart of every Christian, is opened the fountain of grace;
able, like the sea, to wash them from all their filthiness. There are the
golden Candlesticks, with the lamps of saving knowledge continually burning in
them: and upon the Altar of Christ crucified, and now making intercession, do
they daily sacrifice their own affections; which resemble those sweet odors
with which the Tabernacle was perfumed.

The outward couerings of the Tabernacle do assure safety and preservation to
the Godly; and the rather, because the cloud rested upon them, as is affirmed,
Esaias 4.5, 6. Besides, the double covering of slain beasts may signify, that
God has two ways to provide for the Church. The red skins of Rams may
note Christ crucified, which is that which on the inside of the Tabernacle was
only sewed. The covering of Badgers skins may note, that God will serve
himself of the wicked: their skins shall protect the Church. If Israel want
room, Canaan must die for it.

Now thirdly, the Tabernacle was a type of every believer, if we respect the
end of it. For, the Tabernacle was erected of purpose, as the place of the
presence of God, God's visible House: such are the hearts of Christians: they
are prepared of purpose for the entertainment of Jesus Christ, that by his
Spirit he may live and dwell therein, Gal. 2.20. Col. 1.27. 2. Cor. 12.9. 2.
Cor. 13.5.

Use. The use of all may be both for instruction, and consolation.

For instruction; and so it should teach us diverse things.

First, to abhor fornication, seeing our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost, 1. Cor. 6.21.

Secondly, to keep our selves for being unequally yoked: Because there can be
no communion between light and darkness, the Temple of God, and Idols.

Thirdly, to look to our hearts in respect of inward sins, and to keep the
room clean for the Lord to dwell in, 2. Cor. 7.1.

Fourthly, to stir up our selves to much prayer: if our hearts be the house of
God, let them be a house of prayer also.

Fifthly, let us still lift up our hearts, as everlasting doors for the Lord of
Glory to come in, Psalm 24.7.

For consolation. Shall we not say as Paul does, We will rejoice in our
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in us? How should we hold up
our head against all tentations and afflictions? Is not the grace of Christ
sufficient for us, 2. Cor. 12.9? And shall we not be confident, that through
Christ we can do all things? Will he forsake the house, upon which his Name is
called? Will he not perfect his own work, and repair his own dwelling
place? Was the tabernacle safe in the wilderness, while the cloud was upon it?
and are not our hearts safe, while Christ is in them? How are the abject
Gentiles honored Col. 1.27. whose hearts are so enriched by Christ, that dwells
in them! If the outward Sanctuary were like high palaces, Psalm. 78.69. what is
the heart of man, the true tabernacle? and if he established it as the earth,
how much more has he established us in his favor and grace? so that it may
comfort us in respect of honor done to our hearts, and against tentations and
afflictions; and in respect of hope of perseverance, and also in respect of
increase of power and well-doing. He will work our works for us. And it shows
us also the honor cast upon our good works: they have a noble beginning in
respect of Christ, and as they come from him. Howsoever, we ought to be abased
for our own corruptions, that cleave unto them: Yea, how should it wonderfully
establish our hearts in all estates, to think, that Christ is with us
wheresoever we go, not only as our witness, but as our guide and our protector.
If God be with us, who can be against us. As also it is comfortable, if we
consider the comparisons imported in the furniture of the outward tabernacle.

And thus much of the fourth thing.

The fifth thing is, We must be a holy priesthood unto Christ: which is
amplified both by the labor of it, To offer sacrifice, and by the honor of it,
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

Here are many things to be noted.

The first is, that Christians are priests before God, and Jesus Christ: This
is acknowledged in other Scriptures, Revel. 1.5. Exodus 19.6. The meaning is,
that they are like to the Leuiticall priests, and that in many things.

First, Godly men are priests in many respects.
in respect of separation: they are Gods portion given him out of all the
people: so are the godly all the portion God has in the world. They are said
to be the ransom of the children of Israel, Numbers 8.9.

Secondly, in respect of consecration. The oil of God is upon the godly: and
as it was powered out upon Aaron and his Sons: The oil of grace and gladness
powered out upon Christ, our true Aaron, has run down upon his garments, so as
all his members are Christians, that is, anointed with him, Psalm 133.2. Cor.
1.22.1. Ioh. 2. The holy Ghost is called the anointing in this respect.

Thirdly, in respect of the substance of the ceremonies in their consecration:
for,

First, as it was required in the Law, that the Priests should be without
blemish, Leuit. 21.17. so is it required of Christians, Col. 1.22.

Secondly, as the Priests were washed in the great lauer of water, Exodus 29.4.
Leuit. 8.5.6. so must Christians be washed in the lauer of Regeneration, Ephesians.
5.23. Titus 3.5.

Thirdly, as the Priests had their holy garments, beautiful, and goodly ones,
which they called their Ephods: so does the Queen the Church stand at Christ's
right hand in a Vesture of Ophir, Psalm 45. Thus Iosuah has change of
garments mystically given him, Zach. 3.4. Those garments are promised to such
as have had a spirit of heaviness, Isaiah 61.3. called garments of salvation,
verse 10. and royal garments, and like the new wedding garments of the Bride,
Isaiah 62.5.7. Those garments signified either the singular glory, and joy of
Christians, Esaiah 61.3. or the righteousness of Christ imputed, Revel. 19. or
the excellent divine gifts and graces bestowed upon them.

Exodus 29.21.
Fourthly, The Priest must have blood sprinkled upon his ear, and upon his
thombe, and upon his toe, to signify, that our hearing, practice, and progress
must be all sanctified to us by Christ, and that the maine thing Christians
should express and attend to, should be Christ crucified, and that Christ by
his blood has consecrated them in all these respects, so as their hearing, and
practice, and progress shall all be blessed unto them.

And thus of the ceremonies of their consecration.

Fourthly, We should be like the Leuiticall Priests for knowledge: the
Priests lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
mouth, Malac. 2. And it is true of Christians, that they are a people, in whose
heart is Gods law, Esaias. 57.7. Hebr. 8. Ierem. 31.

Fifthly, We should be like the Priests in respect of the work they did. For,

First, It was the Priests office to carry about the Ark of the Lord, when it
was removed, upon their shoulders. What is the Arc to be carried, but the
doctrine of Christ and the Church? Christians must carry about the Word of God,
and hold it forth, in the light, and life of it, as lights that shine in the
dark places of the wilderness of this world, Philip. 2.15.

Secondly, it was their office to blow in the silver trumpets, and that upon
four occasions, as you may see, Number. 10. First, The one was to assemble the
congregation, or the Princes to the tabernacle. Secondly, The other was to give
an alarm, when there was any remove of the camp. Thirdly, The third was in
the time of War, when they mustred to battle. Fourthly, The fourth was for
joys sake at the time of solemn feasts, and for thanksgiving to God: and in
all these we should be like the Priests: We should be as trumpets to call one
upon another to go up to the house of the Lord, Esaias. 2.2. Secondly, We should
every where proclaim mortality, and signify that the whole host must remove:
we must cry, All flesh is grass, 1. Pet. 1.23. Thirdly, We should also blow the
trumpet of defense, and arm our selves in the spiritual warfare, and call
upon God to save us from our enemies, and stir up one another provoking to
love, and good works, 1. Pet. 4.1, 2. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. We should
cry alowd like a trumpet, in reproouing the transgressions of men, and opposing
the sins of the time, Esaias 58.1. Ephesians. 5. Lastly, we should trumpet out the
praises of God for all the goodness he has showed unto us, we should blow as in
the new moon, Psalm. 81.3. But then in all this we must remember, that we blow
with a silver trumpet, that is, with all discretion and sincerity, etc.

Thirdly, a special work of the Priests was to bless the people, and to put
the name of God upon them. The former whereof is prescribed, Nam. 6.22, 23, 24.
and so should we all learn the language of Canaan, or the language of
blessing: we must bless and not curse, for we are thereunto called. 1 Pet. 3.9.

Lastly, their principal work was, to offer sacrifices: of which in the next
words.

Uses.
The Uses follow.

First, For reproof: For there are many faults in Christians, whereby they
transgress against their spiritual Priesthood: as, 1. When men are yoaked
with unnecessary society with the wicked: for hereby they forget their
separation to God, etc. 2. When men neglect the finishing of their repentance
and assurance, they look not to their anointing. 3. When men are scandalous of
their indiscretions, and faults: they forget, that such as have any blemish,
must not offer the bread of their God, and forget their washing from their old
sins, 2 Pet. 1.7. 4. When men are barren of good works, or are vncheerefull
and dull: they leave off the Priests garments of innocence and gladness. 5. When
the lives and behauiours of men savor of vanity and worldliness: they remember
not the blood of sprinkling. 6. When men are ignorant and idle, seek not
knowledge, or do not teach, and instruct, and admonish; How do the Priests
lips preserve knowledge? or how do they bear about the Ark of the Lord? 7.
When Christians are fearful, and irresolute, and cold, and not frequent in
the praises of God, how do they blow in the silver trumpet? 8. When
Christians are bitter-hearted, and accustomed to euill-speaking, how do they
forget their duty of blessing!


To omit the neglect of sanctifying, till I come to handle it in the next place.

Use 2. Secondly, for consolation to all godly, and mortified, and inoffensiue
Christians: they should be wonderful thankful to God, that has made them
partners of this holy Calling, howsoever the world conceiues of it. God
promises it as a great mercy to his children, that they shall be called the
Priests of the Lord, Esaias 61.6. and the Church is wonderful thankful for it to
God, Reu. 2.6. and 5.10. And the rather should we rejoice in it, because God
has promised to take us to himself, as his portion and peculiar treasure,
Exodus 19.6. And it is his promise also to satiate the souls of his Priests
with fatnes, Ierem. 31.14. And what a privilege is it to have access unto the
Lord, and to stand before God daily? which the Priests not only might, but
were tied to it by their office. But then, for conclusion of this point, let us
all be sure we have our part in the first resurrection, Reu. 20.6. and be
careful to be like the Priests for obedience and sanctity, Exodus 19.5, 6. and
to get knowledge plentifully into our hearts, Col. 3.16. and in the cause of
God to blow the trumpets of zeal and resolution, carrying our selves with all
humility and readiness to do good, and so becoming instruments of blessing
to the people. And, which I had almost forgotten, we must remember to be like
the Priests for teaching, and confuting, and reproving, and informing our
Familiars and friends, as we have fitnes and occasion.

Thus of the Priesthood of Christians in general. In particular, hence is
further to be considered, first, their work; secondly, their honor. Their work
is, To offer up spiritual sacrifices: their honor is, Acceptance and high
account with God through Jesus Christ.

First, then, of the work of Christian Priests, which is, To offer: secondly,
what they must offer, viz. sacrifices: thirdly, the difference of those
sacrifices from those in the Law of Moses: they are spiritual; which word
notes both the substance of Christian sacrifices, viz. that they are such
sacrifices as were not according to the Letter, but according to the mystical
significations of the sacrifices of Moses Law; and withal, the manner how they
must be offered up, viz. spiritually, or after a spiritual manner.

The main thing here intended, then, is, To avouch, that Christians have their
sacrifices which they must offer, and that in a spiritual manner. Now, for the
cleerer opening of this doctrine, two things must be distinctly considered of.
First, what sacrifices can remain to Christians, since the Law of Moses is
abrogated: and secondly, what things are requisite to the offering up of these
sacrifices.

For the first. There are diverse sorts of sacrifices among Christians. Diverse
sorts of sacrifices for Christians.
Some are proper to some Christians only: some are general to all.

The sacrifices that are proper to some Christians, are such as three sorts of
men must offer. First, Ministers: secondly, Martyrs: thirdly, rich men.

First, Ministers have their sacrifice, which they must with all care offer to
God: and their sacrifice is the souls of the hearers. Thus Paul was to offer
up the Gentiles to God, Romans 15.16. And thus it was prophesied, that, in the
time of the Christian Church, the Elect should be brought in as an offering to
God out of all Nations, Esaias 66.20. Ministers sacrifice their people either in
this life, or at the day of Judgment. In this life in general, when they
persuade them to their attendance upon the House of God, and breed in them a
care to come before the Lord in Jerusalem, Esaias 66.20. In particular, when they
work repentance and true conversion in their hearts, and when they make them go
home, and mortify their sins, and tender their vowed service to God.

And thus two things are implied for our information. The one concerns
Ministers: the other concerns the hearers. First, Ministers may hence take
notice of it, that there can never be hope they should persuade with all their
hearers: for, sacrifices were here and there once taken out of the whole herd.
And besides, the hearers may hence see, that they are never so effectually
wrought upon, till they can give themselves over to their Teachers and to GOD,
to obey in all things, though they persuade them to leave the world, and bind
them to the cords of restraint in many liberties they took to themselves
before; yea, though they let their hearts blood, by pearcing their souls with
sorrow for their sins, even to the death of their sins, 2. Cor. 8.5. and
7.15. Secondly, at the day of Judgment also, Ministers shall offer up their
hearers to God, so many of them as are found chaste virgins unto Christ, to
whom they had espoused them before in this life, 2. Cor. 11.3. And thus
Ministers, before they die, must make ready their accounts for the souls of
their people, Heb. 13.7.

And thus of the sacrifices of Ministers.

Ministers have another sacrifice too, viz. the particular texts or portions of
Scripture, which they choose out and divide to the people, as consecrated for
their use. For, diverse think, that that phrase of cutting the Word of God
aright, is borrowed from the Priests manner of dividing the sacrifices; and
especially, from the Priests manner of cutting the little birds. The little
birds, is his text chosen out of the rest, and separated for a sacrifice: which
he must so divide, as that the wings be not cut asunder from the body, that
is, he must so divide his text, that no part be separat from a meet respect of
the whole, Leu. 1.17. and 5.8. 2. Tim. 1.15.

Secondly, the Martyrs likewise have their sacrifices; and that is, a
drink-offring to the Lord, even their own blood: this part is ready to be
powered out as a drink offering to the Lord for the Church, Phi. 2.17. 2 Timothy
4.6. and though we cannot be all Martyrs, yet we should all deny our own
lives in the vows of our hearts, to perform our covenant with God, Mark
8.34.35
if ever we be called to die for Christ's sake and the Gospel.

Thirdly, the sacrifice of rich men is alms, and well-doing, and those
sacrifices they are bound unto, to offer them continually, Heb. 13.16. Philip.
4.18. Prou. 3.9. Alms is as it were the first fruits of all our increase. But
then we must remember that our alms be of goods well gotten: For else God
hates robbery for burnt offering, Isaiah 61.8. And in giving, we must deny
our selves, and not seek our own praises, or plenary merit in it: for it is a
sacrifice clean given away from us, and consecrated only to God, and the use of
his spiritual house the Church.

And thus of the sacrifice proper to some Christians.

There are other sacrifices in the Gospel now, that are common to all
Christians. And these are diverse.

For first Christ is to be offered up daily to God, as the propitiation for
our sins: God has set him forth of purpose in the Gospel, that so many as
believe, may daily run unto him, and in their prayers offer him up to God, as
the reconciliation for all their sins: 1 Ioh. 2.2. Romans 3.25.
and this is the continual sacrifice of all Christians: Without this, there is
the abomination of desolation in the temple of our hearts: This is the end of
all the ceremonious sacrifices; the substance of those shadows.

Those sacrifices served but as rudiments to instruct men, how to lay hold upon
Christ, and to carry him into the presence of God, and laying hands upon his
head to plead their interest in his death, who was offered up, as a whole burnt
sacrifice for their sins. We are Christ's, and Christ is given unto us as our
ransom: we must every day then lay hold upon him, and see him bleed to death
for our sins, and be consumed in the fire of Gods wrath for our sins.

Secondly, a broken and contrite heart is a sacrifice God will not despise, yea
such hearts are the sacrifices God especially calls for from men: He ever loved
them better, then all the outward sacrifices in the Law, Psalm. 51.17. It is the
heart God calls for: Prou. 23.26.
and yet not every heart, but a heart wounded with the knife of mortification,
that is, cut, and bleedeth in it self with godly sorrow for sin, and is
broken and contrite with the daily confession of sin: This is required of all
Christians, and this very thing makes a great deal of difference between
Christian and Christian.

Thirdly, prayer and thanksgiving to God, are Christian and holy Sacrifices, as
many scriptures show, Psalm. 141.2. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 51.21.

Fourthly, we must offer our selves, our souls and bodies as a living
sacrifice to God, Romans 12.2. 2. Cor. 8.5. and that,

First, in respect of obedience, deuoting our selves unto God, living to him,
and wholly resolved to be at his appointment, Psalm. 40.6. Lo, I come to do thy
will: this is in stead of all burnt offerings.

Secondly, in respect of willingness to suffer affliction of what kind soever,
as resolving, that through many afflictions, as through so many flames, we
must ascend up to heaven, as the smoke of the incense, or sacrifice on the
Altar, Acts 14.21. Hence are trials called fiery trials, 1. Pet. 4.12.

Thus of the kinds of sacrifices, which remain unto Christians: Special
laws to be observed in offering up our sacrifices.
The laws about those sacrifices follow: For there be many things to to be
observed by Christians in their sacrifices, if they would ever have them
acceptable to God, which the shadows in the old law did evidently signify, as,

First, the sacrifice must be without blemish, Malach. 1.7. which the same
Prophet expounds, Malach. 3.11. Our offerings must be pure offerings, we must
tender them in the sincerity of our hearts: Our sacrifices are without fault,
when we judge our selves for the faultiness of them, and desire they might
have no fault.

Secondly, it must be presented before the Lord, and consecrated to him: which
signified, that we must walk in Gods presence, and do all in the sight of God,
deuoting all to his glory, Genes. 17.1. Mic. 6.8.

Thirdly, our sacrifices must be daily, some kinds of them: There were
sacrifices every day in the Temple, and it was an extreme desolation, when the
sacrifices ceased: so it must be our every days work to employ our selves in
some of those spiritual sacrifices, Heb. 13.15.

Fourthly, There must be an Altar to consecrate the gifts, Math. 23.19. This
Altar is Christ, who is the only Altar of Christians, Heb. 13.10. Revel. 8.3.
No service can be acceptable to God, but as the Apostle here says, by Jesus
Christ: We must do all in the name of Christ, Col. 3.17.

Fifthly, there must be fire to burn the sacrifice: This fire is holy zeal,
and the power and feruencie of the spirit in doing good duties: The fire on the
Altar first came down from heaven, to signify, that true zeal is kindled in
heaven, and comes down from above: It is no ordinary humor, nor a rash fury:
It is no wild fire: And it was required about this fire, that they should
preserve it, and never let it go out, but put fuel still to it; and so it was
kept for many years: so must we do with our zeal, we must labor by all
means to preserve the feruencie of our hearts, that we never want fire to
burn our sacrifices: Our zeal should be, as the love mentioned, Can. 7.10.
that much water could not quench it: Every sacrifice must have fire, Mark 9.

Sixthly, The sacrifices must be salted with salt: so must our Christian
sacrifices, as our Savior Christ shows, Mark 9.49, 50. And thus we must have
the salt of mortification, and the salt of discretion, and we must look to it,
that our salt lose not his saltnes, but that it have a draining power in it, to
extract corruption out of our sacrifices: our words to God and men must be
powdered with salt, Col. 4.6. and so must all our actions.

Seventhly, the sacrifices must be without leaven, Leuit. 2.11. Leaven is
wickedness, or malice, or sowrenes, or deadnes of heart, or worldly grief: even
whatsoever leaueneth, that is, infecteth or makes the meat offering to be
heavy, or sour, 1 Cor. 5.8.

Eightthly, in the same place of Leuiticus 2.11. Honey likewise is forbidden to
be mingled with their sacrifices: and by honey may be meant, our beloved sins,
or particular corruptions: we should especially watch against them in the time
of performance of holy duties, that they mingle not themselves with our
sacrifices, by infecting our cogitations.

Ninthly, the offering must be waued, and shaken to and fro before the Lord,
Leui. 7.3. And this signified the wauing of our lips in prayer to God for his
acceptance: our sacrifices should be soundly tossed to and fro in prayer
before the Lord: Job prayed before he sacrificed, Job 42.

Tenthly, on the Sabbath the sacrifices were to be doubled, to signify, that
in a special manner we should consecrate our selves to piety and mercy on the
Sabbath day.

Eleuenthly, our sacrifices must be offered up with all gladness of heart, and
spiritual delight. Thus Gods people were said to be a free-harted, and willing
people, Psa. 47.9. and 110.3. And this was shadowed out, partly by the oil
that was powered into the meat offerings, which is expounded to be the oil of
gladness, and partly by the feast they made at the end of their solemn
sacrifices, unto which they invited their friends, to join with them in
reioicing before the Lord: and it is likely David alludes to this feast, when
he says, he would take the cup of salvation, and praise the name of the Lord:
For as yet the Lords Supper was not instituted, nor do we read of any use of a
cup in the sacrifices, or sacraments themselves, Exodus 18.12. 1. Chr. 16.1, 2,
3, 4. Psalm. 116.13.

Twelfthly, If we be called to it, we must not deny unto God the fat of the
kidneies, and the inwards. By the fat was meant the things which are dearest to
us, most beloved, and that most delight us: and if the service of God, and the
Church and the poor require it, we must deny our selves, and sacrifice what
is most dear to us.

Thirteenthly, the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13.13. adds, that we must
not leave off weldoing for reproach sake, but be contented to be like Christ,
who suffered without the gate, as scorned of men, and like the sacrifice was
burnt without the camp. Though all men hate us, and speak evil of us, and
cast us out of their companies, yet we must persist in our intention to
sacrifice still to God.

Fourteenthly, In the Sacrifices God had a great respect of mercy, that cruelty
were not showed, as Leuit. 22.27. When he enjoined, that the creature must be
seven days under the damme, and that no damme with the young one was to be
slain the same day: Certainly, God abhors, that cruelty should be
exercised under pretense of piety. Cursed be those long prayers, that will
devour widows houses, Matthew. 23.

In one thing we differ from the sacrifices: For the sacrifices were dead, or
consisted of things without life; but we must be living sacrifices; we must
do what we will do while we are alive, and must do it lively, with the
affections that belong to the duties to be done.

Use. The use may be briefly twofold: for partly it should humble us for our
neglect of prayers and thanksgiving, and alms and contrition: We omit the
maine duties of our general calling, when we omit these: It was the
abomination of desolation, when the temple was without sacrifices: and how can
it but be exceeding uncomely with Gods spiritual house that has not sacrifices
in it? We are Christians but in name, when piety and mercy is neglected. But
especially we should be instructed from hence to mind our work, and to strive
to answer our high calling, by a continual care day and night to exercise our
selves herein: the smoke of our incense should daily ascend unto God. The
Apostle Paul beseeches the Romans by the mercies of God, to look to their
sanctifying, Romans 12.1. Which shows, it is of wonderful necessity* and would
make us in some measure walk worthy of the Lord. And to the Hebrews he bids
them take heed of forgetting these sacrifices, importing that usually our
deficiency in these services, are from forgetfulness: we forget to pray, and
forget to show mercy, even after we have purposed both.

And thus much of the work of a Christian.

Now his honor follows.

Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.]

Wherein three things may be noted.

First, that howsoever piety, and mercy, and weldoing find little acceptance
in the world, yet it shall never want honor and great esteem with God. Pious
and merciful Christians shall never fail of the love and favor of God: Their
works are accepted. It is true, that God may change his mind concerning the
Ceremonial Sacrifices: but the acceptance of Christian Sacrifices is a thing
established with God, Heb. 10.9. These offerings shall be pleasant unto the
Lord, Malach. 3.4. They are well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.16. They are a
sweet savor unto the Lord, Phil. 4.18. God has a book of remembrance, Mal.
3.17. and our fruit shall certainly remain, Ioh. 15.16. And thus Cornelius his
prayers and alms came up before the Lord, Acts 10.

Secondly, that it is not enough to do good duties, but we must strive so to
do them, that God may accept them, Heb. 12.28. Esaias 1.11, 12, 13* 14.

Thirdly, that now our best works are made acceptable to God only by Jesus
Christ, Reu. 8.3, 4. It is from the presenting of Christ, that we are found
holy and without blame in Gods sight, Col. 1.22. Therefore we must do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.17.

Use. The use of all should be to teach us, with all care to deuote our selves
unto godliness, that thereby we may prove, what this good and acceptable will
of God is. Let us try Gods acceptance; and we shall certainly find, it shall
go well with the just, Romans 12.1, 2. Yea, we should from hence gather much
encouragement to employ our selves in piety and mercy. It is enough if God
accept of us.

Quest. But what should we do, that we may be sure our sacrifices be accepted
of God? How shall we know, when God does accept our service in any holy duty?

Ans. That a man's conscience may be soundly established in this point of God's
acceptance, we must look to three things.

First, What we must do, to get our works acceptable to God.
that the person be sanctified. None but Priests must approach to offer
sacrifice to God. They that are in the flesh, cannot please GOD, Romans 8.8. The
sons of Leui must be purified and refined, as the silver is refined, before
their offering will be pleasing, Mal. 3.3* 4. When the Lord rejected, with so
much disdain, the sacrifices of the Jews, he shows what they should have
done to please him: they should have washed themselves by true repentance, and
put away the evil of their works, Esaias 1.11, 16. Only the works of the
penitent cannot be accepted: if the person be not in favor, the works are
hated. For, they are sanctified by the holy Ghost, Romans 15.16.

Secondly, that the manner of performing our service be right: there are
diverse things in the manner are hateful; and diverse things pleasing. The
things specially hateful, are, first, beloved sins: secondly, hypocrisy:
thirdly, malice: and fourthly, luke-warmnesse. The sacrifice is loathsome, if it
be blind, or lame, or blemished: that is, if men bring to Gods service the
love of any foul sin, the service is loathsome, Malach. 1. So, if men's hearts
be carried away with continual distractions, that service is lost: this is, To
come near to God with our lips, when our hearts are far from him. Hypocrisy
is leaven, as beloved sin is honey; both forbidden. Again, when a man comes to
God's work, and has not forgiven his brother, he keeps the Feast with some
leaven: his Passover is defiled; nor can his own sins be forgiven, because
he forgiues not, Mat. 6. 1. Cor. 5.8. Finally, luke-warmnesse is like a vomit
to God, when we are neither hot nor cold. They are lothed like the Laodiceans,
Revel. 3.

There are other things wonderful pleasing to God: as,

First, when a man does whatsoever he does, in the Name of Christ: this is the
Altar that sanctifies the gift, and the sacrifices are here acceptable through
Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.15. Col. 3.17.

Secondly, when our works are soundly powdered, with salt, that is, when we
soundly confess our own unworthiness, and give all glory to God in Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, when we love mercy and piety, accounting it our delight to do God's
will, and thinking our selves greatly honored, to be admitted to do this
service, Mic. 6.8. 2. Cor. 8.5.

Fourthly, when we can bring faith, that is, a heart well persuaded of God, so
as we can believe all good of him and his mercy. Without faith no man can
please God, Heb. 11.6. and God takes no delight in him that withdraws himself
through unbelief, Heb. 10.36, 37.

Fifthly, when it is our euery-daies work. Sacrifice will please God, if it be
continual, Hebrews 13.15.

Thus of the second thing.

Thirdly, we may know, that our sacrifice is accepted, if the Lord burn it to
ashes with fire from heaven. Thus God did put a difference between the
sacrifice of Cain and Abel, by some visible sign: and though we may not limit
God, and expect he should answer us by visible signs, yet God has not left us
without testimony of his favor. For, by his word of promise, and by his Spirit
bearing witness to our spirits, has he manifested even from heaven his
acceptance: and in particular, when the believer stands before the Lord with
his sacrifice duly offered; when the Lord does ^uddenly fill his heart with
the cloud of his presence, or warm his soul with the joys of the holy Ghost;
what is this but the sign of his acceptance?

Question. What if we be accepted in our service of God? what great thing is
that to us?

Answ. When God accepts thine offerings, thou may be assured of three things.

First, that all thy sins be forgiven thee. God has purged away thine
iniquity: he has received an atonement in Jesus Christ, Psalm 65.2, 3.

Secondly, God is exceedingly delighted in them. Thy sacrifice is a sweet smell
unto God: he rejoices over thee with joy, Phil. 4.18.

Thirdly, it is a pledge unto thee, that God will supply all thy necessities out
of the riches of his glory, in Jesus Christ our Savior, Phil. 4.19.

Verse 6. Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I put in Sion
a chief cornerstone, elect and precious: and he that believes therein, shall
not be ashamed.


HItherto of the proposition of the exhortation. The confirmation follows:
where the Apostle gives reasons why we should make our recourse to Christ, to
seek holiness of life from him; and the reasons are two. The first is taken
from the testimony of God, verses 6, 7, 8. The other is taken from the
consideration of the excellent privileges of Christians, unto which they are
brought by Christ, verses 9, 10. The testimony of God is both cited, verse 6.
and expounded, verses 7, 8. In the testimony of God, observe first, where it is
to be found, viz. In Scripture: secondly, how it is there, It is contained
there: thirdly, what is testified. Now, the matter testified concerns either
the giving of Christ for the good of the Church; or the safety of the Christian
that by faith receives Christ.

The giving of Christ is expressed in these words, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief
corner stone, elect, precious: the safety and happiness of the Christian that
receives Christ, in these words; And he that believes in him, shall not be
confounded.

First, of the place where this testimony is found, viz. in the Scripture.

By the Scripture, What is meant by Scripture* and why it is so called.
is usually meant all the Books of the old and new Testament, written after an
extraordinary manner by inspiration of the holy Ghost. But here he means it of
the Books of the old Testament; but yet so, as the word does agree to all the
Books of both Testaments. Now, this very word gives us occasion to consider of
the nature of these Books, and of their use, and of their excellency, and of
their harmony.

These Books are called Scripture, because they contain in writing, the whole
will of God, necessary to be known of us: they are the Treasures of all truth.
The doctrine, which was before delivered by tradition for 2000 years, was
afterward written down and explained in these Books: so as nothing needful
was left out or omitted.

Secondly, this word imports the excellency of the Bible above all other
books, because it is called Scripture: as if no other writings were worthy to
be mentioned in comparison of these. The Scripture exceedes all others in
diverse respects.

Wherein the Scriptures exceedes all other writings.
First, because these writings were inspired all of the holy Ghost, 2. Tim.
3.17. 2. Pet. 1.21. so were no other writings.

Secondly, those writings contain a wisdom far above all that, that can be
had by the Princes and men of this world, the platform of the wisdom that is
in God himself, 1. Cor. 6.7.

Thirdly, they were penned by more excellent men then any other writings, the
greatest, wisest, holiest men; Moses, David, Solomon, the Prophets,
Evangelists, Apostles, etc.

Fourthly, they have such properties, as no other writings have: they are more
perfect, pure, deep, and immutable then any man's writings: These can tame all
things necessary unto faith, and a good life, 2. Tim. 3.17.18. These writings
only are pure, without fault, or error, or any corruption in them, and for
depth and majesty never any writings came near them, and for unchangeableness,
Heaven and earth must pass away, but a jot of Gods Word shall not pass away,
Math. 5.24. 1. Pet. 1.23.

Fifth, If we consider the effects, that must be acknowledged to the praise of
the Scriptures, which can be true of no writings besides, no writings can
describe God so fully to us: no writings do so bring glory to God, no Scripture
but this can convert a soul to God, Heb. 4.12, 13. Other writings may show us
some faults to be avoided, but give no power to subdue them, Psalm. 19.8. These
writings only can minister solid comfort to us in adversity, and these only
can make us wise to salvation, and perfect to every good word and work. The
consideration whereof should work in us a singular love to this book above all
other books in the world, yea above all the treasures in the world, we should
account them with David more sweet then honey, and more precious then Gold,
Psalm. 19.11. Psalm. 119.14, 15, 27.

Thirdly, the third thing may be noted from hence, is the harmony of all these
books, they all agree, as if they were but one writing, yea one sentence, yea
one word: Though the books were written by diverse men, yet they agree so
perfectly, that they all sound one thing: for they were all inspired by the
same Spirit of God: which should teach us, when we meet with doubts, or
objections, or see^ing contradictions, to condemn our own ignorance, and to be
fully resolved, that there is a sweet harmony, though we do not see it. And
secondly and especially it should knit our hearts to the Scriptures, we should
be affected as with the most delightful music of the world, or in the world.

Fourthly, the fourth thing concerns the use of Scripture, and so we may note
two things. First, that we must receive no opinions but what can be proved by
Scripture, To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to
these, it is because there is no truth in them, Isaiah 8. Secondly, we may note
hence, that the best men must prove what they teach, by Scripture. If the
Apostles did it, who were men privileged from error, then much more must other
men: we must believe no man, above what is written, 1. Cor. 4.6. and he is
accursed, that teaches other things then what is written, Gal. 1.7. though he
were an Angel from heaven. Which should teach us to get proofs into our heads
for all that we believe, and to take heed of receiving traditions even from
good men. For there be traditions on the right hand, as well as on the left,
Ioh. 5.39. Acts 17.1. These. 5.21.

Secondly, Thus of the place, where this testimony is: The manner how it is
there, is in the word Contained: It is contained in Scripture.

Contained.] (...).

There is much ado about the word here rendered, Contained, among Interpreters:
The word sounds actiuely in the Original, as if it were rendered, does
contain; or he contains. But the Translators, and many Interpreters think,
the active is put for the passive: He contains, for, It is contained.

If we read it actiuely, then the Name of God must be supplied thus: He, that
is, God, contained it in Scripture: noting, that as a singular treasure, God
has placed this Testimony in Scripture, concerning Christ, and faith in him:
and sure it is a great treasure, that we may have places in the sure Word of
God, that so plainly testify of Christ, and our happiness in him: we should
take great notice of them, and be much thankful to God for giving us such
sentences so briefly, and yet so plainly and fully to inform us.

Some supply the name of Christ, and so they say, Christ contains, that is,
excels, as the word may signify: He is had fully and excellently in
Scripture, and in particular in this testimony of Scripture.

The word rendered ( Contained) signifies sometimes barely to be had; sometimes
to be possessed, as Luke 5.9. They were possessed with fear. And so we
possess a great treasure in Scripture, when we have such Testimonies as these.

There is a Nowne derived of this Verb, which is thought by the exactest
Divines, to mean a special Section, or portion; and when it is applied to a
place in Scripture, it signifies such a Scripture as is divided from the rest,
as a principal matter either to be meditated of, or expounded. Such was that
special portion of Scripture, which the Eunuch had to meditate of, and Philip
expounded to him, Acts 8.32. where the word is used. And so whether the word
be used actiuely or passiuely, it commends unto us this place of Scripture,
and withal shows us a way, how to enrich our selves, namely by singling out
such choice places throughout the Scripture as may most fittingly furnish our
thoughts for meditation in the maine matters of Religion.

We may here note, what cause we have of thankfulness to God, for the helps
we have in teaching, seeing we have the Chapter and verse quoted to us, which
they had not in the Primitive Church; and withal we may observe, that one may
have the profit of the scriptures, though he cannot quote Chapter and verse.

And thus of the second thing concerning this testimony.

Thirdly, the third follows, which is the matter testified, which concerns
either the giving of Christ, or the safety of the Christian in believing in him.

In the words that describe the giving of Christ observe: First, the wonder of
it in the word ( Behold): Secondly, the Author of it, God, I lay or put:
Thirdly, the manner of it, He laid him down, as the stone of a foundation in
a building: Fourthly, the place where: In Sion: noting, that this gift of
Christ belongs only to the Church: Fifthly, what Christ was unto the Church,
viz. a chief corner stone, elect, and precious.

Behold.]

This word is used in Scripture, sometimes to note a thing that is usually
known, or ought to be known: so David says, Behold, I was conceived in
sin, Psalm 51. Sometimes to note, that some great wonder is spoken of, and
must be much attended. In this place it may note both: For it is certain,
that the testimonies of Scriptures concerning Christ, ought to be familiarly
known of us, and this, as an especial one: But I rather think, it is used to
note the wonder of the work here mentioned, and so the word may import diverse
things unto us.

First, it was a marvelous work, that God should give us his own Son to be
our Savior, and the fountain of life to us. Hence it is, that we may observe
throughout the Scripture, that God does set this note of attention and respect,
both upon the general, and upon many particulars that concern Christ, as it
were by the Word to pull us by the ears to make us attend, or to give us a
sign; when we should specially listen. Thus God brings out Christ to the
Church, and tells, how he loves him, and has resolved upon it by him to save
both Jews and Gentiles, and wills them to behold him, and wonder at him, Isaiah
42.1. So when he promises the coming of Christ, Malach. 3.1 Esaias 55.4
And of the ends of his coming, he makes a proclamation all the world over,
that he has appointed a Savior unto Sion, Esaias 62.11
Thus he would have us wonder at the service of the Angels about the time of
his birth, Math. 1.20. Luke 2.9, 10. and at the miracle of his conception, that
he should be borne of a Virgin, Mat. 1.21. and at the Wisemen led by a star
out of the East, Mat. 2.1, 9. and at the opening of the heavens, when the voice
came down to testify, that Christ was the beloved Son of God, in whom he was
well pleased, Math. 3.16, 17. and at the service, which the Angels did him, and
at his wonderful abasement for our sakes, Mat. 4.11
Math. 21.5. and especially that he should sacrifice his own body for our
sins, 1. John 1.29. Heb. 10.7. and that he is alive from the dead, and lives
for ever, Revel. 1.18. and that he has opened the secret book of Gods counsel,
and made it known to the world, Re. 5.5. and that, after such hard times under
the reign of Antichrist, he should recollect such troops of Gospellers, as
stood with him on Mount Sion, Reu. 14.1. It were too long to number up more
particulars: Only thus much we should learn, that the doctrine of Christ is
to be received with great affection, attention, and admiration.

Secondly, this word strikes us like a dart to the heart: for, it imports, that
naturally we are extremely careless and stupid in this great doctrine
concerning Christ and faith in us. For, when God calls for attention, it
implies, that we are marvelous slow of heart to understand, or with affection
to receive the doctrine. Let the use of all be then, to strive with our own
hearts, and to awake from this heaviness and sleepiness, and with all our
souls to praise God, with endless admiration of his goodness to us, in giving
us his Son.

Thus of the wonder of it.

2. The Author of it follows.

I lay or put.]

God would have us to take special notice of it, that it is he, that was the
Author of this glorious work. He is the work-master, the chief master builder.
It is Gods work, and the knowledge of this may serve for diverse uses.

Use.
For first, it should direct our thankfulness, we should give glory to God, and
praise his rich grace. He will not lose his thanks for Christ. He holds
himself much honored, when we praise him for so great a gift as Christ.

Secondly, it should much strengthen our faith, and make us believe the love of
God, and his willingness to be reconciled. He is the party offended; and if he
were hard to be pleased, he would never have sought out such a project for
reconciliation: Besides, what can God deny us, if he can give us his own Son?
and who is pleased also in his Word to signify so much, and commanded it by his
servants to be told to the parties offending, that he has found out such a
way of perfect peace.

Thirdly, we should hence be comforted in all the straits of godliness: when the
Lord goes about to lay the foundation of grace in our hearts, and to form
Christ in us, we should remember it is the Lords work, and it shall prosper; if
the Lord will have it go on, who can hinder it? The gates of Hell shall not
prevail against it, when God builds it upon this Rock.

Fourthly, it should teach us in all other distresses to trust upon God, and
never be afraid of the oppositions of men, or the impediments of our
deliverance. For what shall restrain Gods mercy from us? If the Lord can bring
about such a work as this, to found Sion, by laying Christ as the chief
corner stone in her; then we may trust him in less matters. The Lord will
accomplish all the Counsel of his will, and he that has promised, that all
shall work together for the best, will perform it. To this end he pleades
this work of founding Christ in the womb of a Virgin, of purpose to give them
thereby a sign of deliverance: then, in a temporal affliction it is easy for
him to save us and deliver us from all our troubles, that can give us a Savior
for all our sins.

Lastly, Ministers that are but vnder-Masons and Carpe^ters, must learn to take
al their directions at god, both to see to it, that they lay no other
foundation, then what God has laid, which is Jesus Christ, and in all things
to be faithful in good works, as such as must make their accounts to God.

And thus of the Author.

Thirdly, The time follows.

I lay or put.]

He speaks in the present time, yet means it of a thing to be accomplished
in the time to come. For God laid Christ down, as the corner stone, partly in
his Incarnation, when he sent him into the world in the flesh to take our
nature; and partly he is said to lay down this corner stone, when spiritually
by means he forms Christ in the hearts of men in the visible Church. Now the
Lord speaks in the present time, I do lay, for diverse reasons. First, To
signify, that the care of that business was then in his head, he was plotting
about it, and did continually mind it. Secondly, to signify, that howsoever
the maine work of the open restoring of the world by Christ, in the calling of
the Gentiles, was long after to be done, yet God did spiritually form Christ
in the hearts of the remnant, so as at all times he did more or less further
his building. Thirdly, to note the certainty of the accomplishment of it, he
says, he did then do it, to assure them, it should as certainly be done, as
if it were then done: which should teach us to believe God, and never limit
him. When we have his promise, let us reckon upon it: if God promise us any
thing, it is as sure as if we had it.

Thus of the time.

Fourthly, The manner follows, noted in the word Laid.

I lay.

There are many things imported under this similitude, that Christ is laid, as
the Mason lays the chief corner stone in the earth. For it imports,

First, The divine nature of Christ, that he was before he was incarnate, That
Christ is laid as a foundation-stone, imparts many things.
as the cornerstone was, before it was laid for a foundation. Christ descended
from heaven, Ephesians. 4.7, 9.

Secondly, The unchangeableness of Gods ordinances concerning the giving of
Christ. He has laid him as a foundation, that he would not have taken up
again.

Thirdly, the hiding of the glory of Christ, and of his life. He is of singular
use to the church, and the Frame of God's work appears in his members: but
Christ himself is hid with God, Col. 3.3. He is like the stone hidden in the
earth: he is buried in the ground: and therefore we should be the more
patient, if our life be hid also with God.

Fourthly, it may be, by this term the mystery of the birth and conception of
Christ is intimated. God dug the ground of our natures in the womb of
Christ, that he might lay Christ there, etc.

Fifthly, so it may likewise import the sanctification of the humane nature of
Christ; who was qualified, as the stone is squared when it is laid down.

Thus of the manner. The place follows.

In Sion.]

Sion, for certain, was a Fort of the Iebusites, built on a hill close to
Jerusalem; which was taken by David, and called the City of David, 2. Sam. 5,
7; the Temple being afterward built here. The Church of the Jews was called
Sion, because here they assembled: and so afterward it was the title given to
the Church of God, both of Jews and Gentiles, that agree in one faith and true
Religion, Zach. 10.11. And in especial, by Sion is meant the place of the
assembly of the Saints, the Sanctuary. In the twelfth to the Hebrews, verse 22.
it is thought to signify the saints in heaven, even the Congregation of the
firstborn. In this place it must needs mean the Christian Church; in which,
GOD built the new world, laying the foundation in Christ incarnate, which began
in Jerusalem, even at Sion in the Letter.

Now, when the Lord calls his Church by this name of Sion, it is to import
diverse things; partly to tell us what we were by nature, and partly to tell us
what we are by his grace and favor.

By nature, what were our assemblies but Forts of Iebusites, in which
multitudes of Iocusts swarmed? we were Canaanites, enemies to God and all true
religion: we were the halt and the blind, mentioned, Mic. 4.6, 7; alluding to
that in 2. Sam. 5.6, 7. But, being conquered by David our King, even Christ the
Son of David, we are new fortified for his use, and our estate is fitly
resembled by Sion.

1. The Church is like Mount Sion for visibility. The Church is like Mount Sion
in diverse respects
Christians are like a City on a hill: they are such as all sorts of men easily
take notice of; not that the men of the world are in love with Christians, but
many times out of the hatred of the truth set they eyes and thoughts upon them,
Matthew 5, etc.

Secondly, the godly are like Mount Sion for vnremoueablenesse: they that trust
in the Lord, are like a mountain: men may as soon remove a mountain, as remove
them from God, and happiness in God, Psalm. 126.1.

Thirdly, the Church is like Sion in respect of Gods habitation there: God
dwells there: he keeps house there, and in the assemblies thereof he feeds his
people. The Sanctuary is Gods foddering place: it is the City of God, the
mountain of his holiness, the City of the great King, the City of the Lord of
Hosts: God shines there, Psalm 48.1, 2, 8. Psalm 50.2. He is known there
familiarly, because his dwelling place is there, Psalm 76.1, 2. He has chosen
his Church out of all the world: it is the place only which he has desired: it
is his rest for ever, Psalm 132.73, 14, 15. It is the place of the Name of the
Lord of hosts, Esaias 18.7. As David by an excellency reckoned Sion to be his
City of residence: so God does account of the Church as all he has, as it were
in the world.

Fourthly, it may be, that the Church is resembled to Sion for the littleness
of it, in comparison of the world: even in Sion, that is so much despised, will
God lay his cornerstone.

Fifthly, but the principal thing here intended, is, To signify to us, that
God loves his Church above all the world, and that he will give Christ to none
but to the Church. Out of Sion there can be no salvation; and in Sion there is
all happiness to be had.

The consideration heerof may serve us for many uses.

Uses. First, we should hence inform our selves concerning the excellency of
the Church of God above all other Assemblies of men in the world. We should
learn to think of the Assemblies of Christians, as the Sion of God: she is the
Mountain of his holiness, the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48.1, 2. the
perfection of beauty, where God shines more than in all the world besides,
Psalm. 50.2. The Moon may be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord is
pleased to show himself to reign in Sion, and before his Ancients gloriously,
Isaiah 24.23. yea the Church of God is an eternal excellency, Isaiah 60.15.
whereas all other glories will vanish. And besides, we should hence be informed
concerning the necessity of obtaining salvation in the Church. For this text
shows us, that Christ is no where laid but in Sion, and can no where be found,
but in the true Church; In Sion only has God placed salvation for Israel, his
glory: Only the godly are Gods Israel: Only in Israel does God glory, and
only in Sion can Gods Israel find salvation, Isaiah 46. vlt.

Secondly, Hence we should especially be moved to an effectual care to make
it so, since that we are in the true Church, and that we are true members of
Sion, and withal we should strive above all things to procure for our selves
the ordinances of God in Sion. It is said of the godly distressed for want of
means, that going they went, and weeping they did go to seek the Lord in Sion
with their faces thitherward, and with a resolution to bind themselves by
covenant to the Lord, to be any thing he would have them to be, only if they
might find favor in his eyes herein, Ierem. 50.5.

Quest. Now if you ask me, how the true members of Sion may be known?

Ans. I answer: Marks of such as are true members of Sion.
first generally, that all that are in Sion are not of Sion, and further that
we must not judge of true Christians by their number. For God many times takes
one of a Tribe, or one of a City, and two of a Tribe, to bring them to Sion,
Ierem. 3.14. But yet to answer more directly: Thou must be a new creature, or
thou art no member of Gods true Sion. For of every one in Sion it must be
said, He was borne there, Psalm. 86.5. The gates of Sion are to be opened
only, that a righteous nation may enter in, Esaias 26.1, 2. Men may deceive
themselves, but God will not be deceived. For he has his fire in Sion, and
furnace in Jerusalem: He will try every man, and make his count only by
righteousness, Esaias 31.9. Romans 9. and therefore the sinners in Sion have reason
to be afraid, Esaias 35.14. And if yet we would have signs more particular, we
may try our selves by these that follow.

First, Sion is a Virgin, and all the Godly are the Daughters of Sion, and so
the chief Daughter of a chief mother. 1 Kings 19.1, 21. Revel. 14.5.
Now this is a true virtue of a true member of the Church, that his love is
undefiled toward Christ; He is not enamored with other things: He will have
no other God, but one: He accounts all things but dross and dung in
comparison of Christ: He harbors no beloved sin, but denies the
inticements of it with detestation, and grief, that he should ever be so
assaulted.

Secondly, God knows his own in Sion by this sign, that they are they, that
mourn in Sion, that are far from making a mock of sin: The Lord himself is
their witness, that their hearts are heavy by reason of their sins, and they
know no grief like to the grief for their sins, Esaias 61.2.

Thirdly, thou may know thy estate by thy subjection to Christ and his
ordinances: For God has set his King in Sion. Now if thy Sovereign be in
Heaven, and thou can be willing to be ruled by his ordinances, this will be
a comfortable testimony to thee: as contrariwise, if thou dislike his
government, and would feign cast his yoke from thee, so as this man may not
rule over thee: thou art of the number of the people, but not of Gods people,
Psalm. 2.6.

Thus of the second use.

Thirdly, we should be careful to celebrate the praises of God, yea and
therefore careful for all the goodness he shows unto us in Sion: Praise should
wait for him. Psalm. 65.1.
The Lord is great, and greatly to be praised in Sion, the City of our God,
Psalm. 48.1. Psalm. 147.12. Esaias 51.16. All that serve the Lord in Sion, and are
refreshed with the comforts of his presence, should get large hearts both for
admiration, and celebration of his goodness, Psalm. 134. the whole Psalm. Come,
say the godly, Ierem. 31.10. let us declare the work of the Lord in Sion, etc.

Fourthly, since Sion is the place, where the Lord keeps house, and gives
entertainment to all his followers, we should call one upon another to go up
to the Lord in Sion; we should run thither to the bountifulnes of the Lord,
and in all our wants show our selves instructed in this point, by making our
recourse unto Sion, as the place where God is pleased most readily to declare
his shining mercies, Ierem. 31.6, 12.

Fifthly, we should be stirred up to much prayer for the accomplishment of the
building of God in Sion; Our hearts should long to see this work prosper: Oh
that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion! Psalm. 14.1. For Sions sake
we should not hold our peace, Esaias 62.1. but still beseech the Lord to do
good to Sion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem, Psalm. 51.20.

Sixthly, we should especially be grieved, if we see that Sion prospers not: Of
all judgments we should most lament the desolation of Sion. The whole book of
Lamentations is spent upon this subject: We should hang our harpes upon the
willowes, if we remember, that Sion lies waste, and there be none to build her
up, Psalm. 137.

Seventhly, the especial use should be for consolation: If the Lord do us
good in Sion, we should account it a marvelous felicity, if the lord admit us
to be members of the true Church in places where Gods work prospers. The Lord
gives this promise in Esaias to comfort them against all the miseries were
outwardly to fall upon them: This work should make amends for all other
troubles: If God build us up in spiritual things, he gives us double for all
outward crosses: we should strive with our own hearts to be exceedingly
affected with the happiness of our own condition on earth, when we know our
interest in Sion: we should live without fear, yea everlasting joy should be
upon our heads, and sorrow and mourning should flee away, Esaias 31.10. and the
rather, if we consider the prerogatives of Sion above all the world besides,
for,

First, Special prerogatives of Sion and the true members of it.
the Lord dwells there: It is the Palace of his residence on earth, as has
been showed before.

Secondly, the favor of God shines there: He delights in his people, and
joys in all the members of Sion: He reioiceth over them with joy, Zeph. 3.15,
16, 17. Psalm. 86.2.

Thirdly, in Sion we are loosed from our fetters and bonds. It is a place,
where the Captives go free: The Lord turns back the captivity of his people,
Psalm. 14.7.

Fourthly, in her Palaces God is known for a refuge in all distresses, Psalm.
48.3. There is wonderful safety there: The Lord does mightily preserve and
defend his people; we are safe, if we be members of the true Church, and have
true grace: the greatest adversaries labor in vain, and seeking see, and
marvel, and haste away, Psalm. 48.11, 12. They shall certainly be confounded,
and turned back, that hate, Sion, Psalm. 129.5. Upon every place of mount Sion
shall be defense. Esaias 4.5, Esaias 33.20.
Sion is a quiet habitation. God has his year of recompense for the
controversies of Sion, and his day of Vengance, Esaias 34.8.

Fifthly, the Law comes out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem:
There we have directions for our life and for eternal life, Esaias 2.3. It is
Gods foddering place, there he gives us shepherds to feed us, Ierem. 3.14.

Sixthly, the inhabitants of Sion have all remission of sins, and the healing
of their infirmities, as the Prophet shows in these words excellently. The
inhabitant thereof shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity, Esaias 33.24.

Seventhly, all the good news is there to be had: we are naturally Athenians,
we love to tell, and hear news: if we were spiritually so, Oh! how would we
rejoice in Sion! whose spiritual glory is to bring good tidings, Esaias 40.9.
and 41, 27. and 52.7, etc.

Eightthly, If the Lord be displeased with Sion, yet it is but for a moment,
he will return in everlasting compassion: It is a sure thing, The Lord will
yet have mercy upon Sion, Psalm. 102.14. He will again comfort Sion, and make
his wilderness like Eden, and his Desert like the garden of the Lord, Esaias 51.3.

Lastly, and specially we should rejoice in Sion because the Redeemer comes to
Sion, and to them that turn from their transgressions in Jacob, Esaias 59.20.
Yea salvation only comes out of Sion, Psalm. 14.7. In Sion only has God placed
salvation for Israel his glory, Esaias 46. vlt.

And therefore we should labor to walk worthy of so great mercies of God, and
live with all contentment, whatsoever our outward estate be: Every poor
Christian should think themselves abundantly happy: What shall one answer the
messengers of the nations, says the Prophet! Why thus: That the Lord has
founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it, Esaias 14.32.
Especially, if we consider that of the Psalm, that the Lord has there
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3.

Thus it should serve for consolation.

Eightthly, It imports and imputes also great reproof: Use 8.
and so to two sorts of men.

First, to the godly themselves, that live not comfortably, and are daily
distressed with unbelief, shall any distresses now make Sion droop? The Lord
takes it wonderfully unkindly, that Sion said, God has forsaken me, and my
God has forgotten me, and pleades earnestly to prove, that it was false.
What, says the Prophet Micah, Esaias 49.15*
is there no King in thee? why do thou cry out? Mic. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13. And the Prophet Jeremy notes it with indignation: Behold, says he, the
voice of the cry of the daughter of my people, because of them that dwell n
far countries: Is not the Lord in Sion? Is not her King in her? Ierem. 8.19.

Secondly, to careless and carnal Christians. Is the Lord about so great a
work, as founding of Sion, and forming Christ in the hearts of men? Then woe to
them that are at ease in Sion, and can sit still, and securely neglect so great
salvation brought unto them, Amos 6.1.

A corner stone.]

Christ is described by these words: A corner stone, elect and precious* He is
likened to the foundation stone in the corner of the building, by which
similitude diverse Doctrines are imported, as,

First, that Christ is the foundation of all the building of grace and godliness
in the Church, and the only corner stone, Hebr. 1.3. Ioh* 5.39. Other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1.
Cor. 3. which should both teach us, and inform us: it should teach us, where
to begin, when we go about the work of godliness, and eternal life: We must
begin at Christ: All the building of true grace must begin at Christ, and our
redemption in him: till we have learned Christ, we have learned nothing: and
it should teach us also to stay our hearts in all estates upon Christ; we
should rest in him, as the building does upon the foundation: And further it
should teach us to ascribe all the praise of the grace or hope we have
received, unto Christ, and the support we have from him: And it may inform
us, concerning the dotage of the Papists, who make Peter the rock and
foundation of the Church: and yet here we have the testimony and Doctrine of
Peter himself to the contrary, teaching us to acknowledge no other rock of
foundation, but Christ himself.

Secondly, we here are instructed concerning the Union of Jews and Gentiles
in one Christ: The two sides of the building meet all in the corner, and are
both fastened upon this one foundation of Christ crucified.

Thirdly, it is here imported, that Gods building, even in these times of the
Gospel, is not finished, nor will be in this life, till all the elect be
called: He is for the most part employed in laying the foundation, and fastening
the Elect, as they arise in their several ages, as lively stones upon this
living stone. But the work will not be finished, till we be settled in that
Building made without hands in heaven.

Fourthly, hence we may gather a testimony of the two natures of Christ or in
Christ. He is God, because he must be believed on: and he is man, because he
is part of the Building, and was laid down of God as the cornerstone.

Elect and precious.]

There are two Epithets, by which the corner stone is commended, as meet to be
the only head of the corner. The first is, that it is an Elect one, a choice
one, that one of a thousand, there was not such another to be found in all the
heap of the creatures to make a corner stone of. This is he that is separate
from sinners, and acknowledged to be better and fitter for this work, then the
Angels in heaven. There can be no other name, upon which we may be founded,
but only the happy name of Jesus. And therefore for the use of it, let every
knee bow at the name of Jesus, and let every tongue confess to the glory of
God the Father, that he has been wonderful in his choice. Let us adore him,
whom God has chosen, and given unto us as the foundation of all our happiness,
especially let us learn of God to make our choice of him. Note.
Oh Infidelity, Infidelity, how just is thy woeful destruction for thy
unbelief! Oh man, that might have been for ever happy in this choice! Oh
let us be warned, and save our selves from the common ruin of the world. Let
all this be vile in respect of Christ. Let us choose him above all the world.
He is worthy, upon whom all our souls, and all our mind, and all our joy
should be set. God forbid we should rejoice in any thing, but in Christ, and
him crucified. Let us be crucified to the world, so we be loved of Christ.
Shall we wilfully make our selves like the miserable Jews? Shall we choose
rather Barabbas then Jesus; and Belial, rather then Christ? If the daughter of
a beggar should be offered in marriage, whether she would choose of a matchless
Prince, or a base and servile pesant, would we not detest such folly, if she
should neglect the Prince, and choose the pesant? And yet this is our case. God
requires no more of us, but to choose his Son before the world, or Satan, or
the flesh; and we are assured of eternal advancement: and yet behold, we choose
not, we defer the time, we court the pesant, that will for ever undo us,
and neglect the continual solicitations of the Heir of all things. Lord, put
to our faith, and make us for ever resolute to cleave to the Lord Jesus, and
him alone.

Secondly, he is said to be precious. Of this before, but yet somewhat note for
the use: Is he precious? O then first, how should we admire the glory of that
building, when the foundation is laid with precious stones? Secondly, this
should begette in us an high estimation of Christ.

Quest. What should we do to attain to this, heartily to account of Christ, as
so excellent above all other things?

Ans. First, How we may get an esteem of Christ above all things.
we must think much of our misery, and our need of Christ. The true reason, why
we are not more ioyed in Christ, is, because we are not soundly Catechized in
the particulars of our misery in our selves; we should seriously lay that
doctrine one time after another upon our hearts, and it will make us run to
Christ with singular affection.

Secondly, we should get Catalogues of the great things, purchased by Christ,
and of the wonderful precious promises made unto godliness both for this life,
and that which is to come. This would put all other proiects from the world, or
the Devil, or the flesh, because there can be nothing in any degree
comparable unto the unsearchable riches is to be had by Christ. Oh the
preferment of a true Christian, if he had studied the premises soundly! If we
could effectually think upon the favor of God, the pardon of all sins, the
inhabitation of the H. Ghost, the gifts of the Spirit, and all other sorts of
spiritual blessings, if there were nothing else to be had by Christ, what can
be equal in value to that immortal inheritance reserved for us in heaven?

Thirdly, we should much think of the dignity of the person of Christ, of whom
it is true, that when God brought out his first begotten Son, he said, Let
all the Angels of heaven worship him; As also of his transcendent preferment to
be carried up to heaven, and there sit at the right hand of the Majesty on
high; a King of all Kings, even such a King, as all the Kings of the earth must
cast down their Crowns at his feet. It is unspeakable stupidity, that keeps
us from being fired with these things.

Fourthly, we should often contemplate of our interest in Christ, and the
assurance that he is of God given to us: All things are ours, because Christ is
ours, as the Apostle Paul speaks.

Question. But how should we show, that we do account Christ as dear and
precious?

Answer. I answer by diverse things.

How we manifest our account of Christ, as precious.
First, By longing for his coming again to us, mourning for our own absence
from him. Then we did indeed soundly show our love to Christ, when we did feel
our hearts affectionately moved with a vehement desire after him. It is a dull
love of Christ, that can be content with his absence.

Secondly, while we are here in this world, we may show the high account we
make of Christ, by ioying in him, that is, by taking comfort in the means of
his presence, or in the thoughts of his love to us; when we can prefer our
entertainment in the House of Christ, above our greatest joys on earth.

Thirdly, when in our conversation we can be contented to shun all the baits of
the world and Satan, and, in respect of Christ, contemn all those sensual
pleasures, profits or honors that entice us to make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience. Then we love Christ indeed, when our credits, friends,
riches, yea, life it self is not dear unto us for Christ's sake and the Gospel.

Fourthly, when we can renounce our own righteousness and praises, and seek
only to be found clothed with his righteousness.

Fifthly, we signify our respect of Christ, by the very respect we show to the
members of Christ. He loves Christ with all his heart, that loves and
entertains Christians as the only excellent people of the world.

Hitherto of that part of the testimony which concerns Christ: the other part,
that concerns Christians, follows.

He that believes on him, shall not be confounded.]

In which words the happiness of the Christian which believes in Christ, is
expressed.

There are many points of doctrine may be observed out of these words; as,

First, in general, it is faith that makes the difference among men before
God: men are judged of before GOD by their faith or unbelief. GOD, to find out
a worthy man, does not ask, what money, or land, or birth, or offices he has;
but what faith he has, Gal. 5.6. He is rich and happy, that believes; and he
is miserable, that believes not, whatsoever his outward estate be. Which
should cause us more soundly to inform our selves, and not to be lifted up in
our selves for any outward things, nor to be dejected if our faith prosper: and
it should be a great comfort to poor Christians in all their wants, if the LORD
have made them rich in faith. He is a great rich man, that has a strong faith.
And therefore also we should learn to judge of men, not according to the flesh
or these outward things, but ever acknowledge more honor to a faithful
Christian, than to any rich wicked man. And it is a great sign of our own
vprightnes of heart, when we can judge of Christians as GOD judges, and
without dissimulation account them the only excellent Ones.

Secondly, in particular we may here observe the necessity of faith, in respect
both of the favor of God, and the merits of Christ: we cannot please God,
though we be in Sion, without believing, Heb. 11.6. and without faith we see
here, we are not built upon the foundation, and so have no part as yet in
Christ. And therefore we should every one be thoroughly awakened, to examine our
selves whether we have this precious faith or no, 2. Cor. 13.5. and to keep our
own souls with so much attendance heerupon, as to be sure the Tempter deceive
us not in our faith, 1. These. 3.4. And here especially take heed, that thou
dash not thy soul upon the rock either of ignorance or presumption: of
ignorance, as many do, that to this day know not what a true faith is; of
presumption, as many do, that entertain, without all ground from Gods
promises, a hope to be saved, which they call a strong faith in Christ* and yet
live in their sins without repentance, and here never taste of the sweetness
of spiritual things, nor show the affections of godliness in God's service.

Thirdly, note that he says, He that believes, indefinitely; meaning any, of
what nature, or condition, or state of life soever. And therefore when this
Text is quoted, Romans 10.11. and 9.33. he says, in stead of He that, Whosoever
believes: which shows us plainly, that in matter of faith God is no accepter
of persons. No man can say he is exempted. A poor man, a Gentile, a Barbarian,
an unlearned man, a servant, etc. may believe as well as the rich, learned,
free, etc. There is no exception against any calling of life, or any sex. Faith
will make any one a child of GOD, and a member of Christ. The several sorts
of men are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26, 28. This is the large extent of
God's love to the world, that whosoever believes, should be saved, John 3.16.
Mark 16. The proclamation is to all that are athirst, they may be possessed of
those treasures of gold without money, Esaias 55. Which should much embolden us
to go unto God with a true heart, in the assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. And
withal it should cause us to cast out of our hearts all the wauerings and
doubts of unbelief, arising from our own condition in unworthiness.

Fourthly, we may hence note, that faith in Christ was ever required in all
sorts of men. It was required of them in the Prophet Esay's time; and it is
still here required in the Apostles time. Thus Paul, Heb. 11. shows, that
faith was the character of the Godly in all Ages before the Flood and after the
Flood, before the Law and after the Law: and he proves it by an induction of
particulars in their several ranks. Which again should both serve to take down
carelessness, seeing never man could please GOD without faith: and withal it
should much persuade us, to get and preserve faith, seeing we have such a
cloud of witnesses; and that every godly man, in every Age of the world, did
provide himself of faith, whatsoever he wanted.

Fifthly, observe here the nature of true faith. To believe God in any thing,
he says, will not save us, if we believe not in Christ. The object of faith
is Christ: for, though we believe other things, yet either they are not things
that directly concern salvation, or else they are founded upon Christ: nor is
it enough to believe Christ, or to believe that he is sent of God, but we must
believe in him, that is, out of sound judgment we must with all our hearts
embrace the happy news of salvation by Christ, and rely upon him and his
merits only for our own particular salvation. The very comparison here
imported, shows us the nature of faith. Christ is like the foundation of a
house: now, to believe in Christ, is, to fasten our selves in our confidence
upon Christ, as the stone lies upon the foundation. To believe in Christ, is,
to lie upon Christ immovably, and not flee out of the Building. And it is to
be noted here, that the apostle adds these words, in him, to the Text in Esaias,
of purpose to explain the Prophets meaning, and to show what kind of believing
the Prophet intended. Therefore it is apparent, that Pagans cannot be saved,
because they believe neither God nor Christ: no Jews and Turks, because they
believe God, but not Christ; nor the common Protestant, because he only says
he believes, but does not believe indeed; nor the Papist, because he believes
not in Christ, nor places his confidence in him alone, but in his own works,
or in Saints, or Angels, or in Popes pardons and indulgences.

Sixthly, note here the circumstance of time, by which he describes a true
faith. He does not say, He that shall believe, or, He that has believed, but,
He that does believe: which is to show us both what we should do with our
faith, and what in some measure is done by every believer: for we should not
believe at one time only, but at al times, we should every day live by our
faith, Gal. 2.21. Christ lives in us by faith, and so long as we go about
without faith, we make Christ to be in us, Note.
as it were without life. To spend one day without faith, is, to bury Christ,
as it were for so long. Now, the life of Christ must be considered of us two
ways: namely, as it is in it self, and as it is in our sense. For this
latter, it is true, when we employ not our faith, we let Christ dye in us, in
respect of sense. But for the first way, it is certain, a Christian does
always believe, after the life of faith is once conceived in him. There is no
time, in which it can be truly said, Now he believes not. Therefore does the
Apostle here say, He that believes. It is true, that in some particular
points or promises, a Christian may fail through unbelief; but not in the
maine point, or promise of salvation by Christ. It is true also, that a
Christian may oftentimes, and usually, want the feeling of his faith, and go
without the ioies of the Holy Ghost, but yet he wants not faith: yea, a
Christian may violently object against believing, and think he has not
faith, by the temptation of Satan, and the rebellion of that part of him that
is unregenerate; and yet God can dispell al these clouds, and in the very
dunghill of his unbelief, and sinfulnes, can find out his own part of faith.
In plain terms there is no time, after conversion, but if a Christian were
thoroughly sifted, and put to it, he would be found resolved in that point, to
rest upon the covenant of grace, for all happiness by Christ alone: I say at all
times, in that part of him that is regenerate. Christ can dye in no man: and if
faith could dye, then should Christ also die in us, seeing he lives in us by
faith. Note.
A man may be without faith in the judgment of the world, in his own
judgment; but never is without faith, in the judgment of God. A man may want
this or that faith, but not faith simply, as that faith, Luke. 18. to rely upon
God without failing, and to call upon him with continual perseverance, as
resolved, that God will help us in that particular. It is true, If the Son
of man come to search amongst men, he shall scarcely find that faith upon
earth; but yet a true faith in the general, he will find in the breast of
every godly man and woman. Peter's faith did not fail, when he denied his
master. For Chist had prayed, that his faith should not fail, and was heard in
that he prayed.

Shall not be confounded.]

The Prophet Isaiah has it thus: He that believes shall not make haste, and
it may be understood either as a precept: Let him not make have, or as a
promise, He shall not make haste. Men make haste two ways, either in their
behavior, when they run headlong upon the duties they are to do; or when,
through impatience, they will not tarry Gods leisure for their help and
deliverance; but fall to use unlawful means, and take that which comes next
them, without consideration of the lawfulness of it.

Now, the believer must avoid both these, and God will, in some measure,
sanctify and guide the believer thereunto.

The Apostle Paul, Romans 9.33. and 10.11. And the Apostle Peter in this place,
following the Greek translation, read it: He that believes shall not be
ashamed, as in the Romans, or confounded, as here.

They swerve not from the meaning of the Prophet. For by this term is
avouched; That the Godly, that believe, shall never have cause to repent
themselves, or to fly from God to use ill means.

The holy Ghost, then, in this place is pleased to assure the believer, that he
shall not be confounded.

To be confounded, signifies sometimes to be reproached, so Psalm. 14.6. The
wicked are said to confound the counsel of the godly, that is, they reproached
it. Sometimes it signifies to be daunted, or dismayed. Psalm. 127.5.
Sometimes to be disappointed, or broken in their purposes, as Esaias 19.9, 10.
Sometimes to be extremely shamed: and so it is rendered, Romans 10.11. Sometimes
to be put to a Non plus, as Acts. 9.22. Sometimes to be driven into amazement,
or wonder, Acts 2.6. Sometimes to be brought into such a strait, as one has
neither hope, nor help, 2. Cor. 4.8, 9. Lastly, it signifies to perish
utterly, or to be undone, or damned for ever, and so con^usion shall come to
all, that hate Sion, or serve graven Images.

It is true, that sometimes to be confounded, is taken in the good sense, and
signifies either the affection of wonder, as before, Acts 2.6. or else a
spiritual grace in the heart of a Christian, by which his soul mournes, and
is abashed, and ashamed with him. And so there may be three reasons, or rather
causes assigned, wherein the godly ought to be confounded.

As first, in repentance for their sins, of which these places entreat, Ezech.
36.32. Ierem. 31.19. Ezech. 16.61. and for this cause rebellious offenders must
be noted, and their company shunned, that they may be confounded in
themselves for their sins, 2. These. 3.14. and the Lord complains, that the
people were not ashamed for their sins, Ierem. 6.15. Secondly, when God, or
Religion, or the godly are reproached, and disgraced: thus Psalm 44.15, 16.
Ierem. 51.51. Thirdly, the people that profess the truth, do err through
indiscretion, or give offense, or live in any grievous evil, Isaiah 29.22, 23.
Ezra 9.6, 7.

Now because the confusion here mentioned, Means by which God keeps the
believer from being confounded.
is a misery God will turn away from the believer: therefore I will explain
that point, and show, how many ways God keeps the believer from being
confounded.

They shall not be confounded.]

This, God will make good unto them both in this life, and in the day of
Judgment: In this life they shall not be confounded, neither in respect of
their outward estate, nor in respect of their spiritual estate.

For their outward estate: whether we respect their condition and credit, or
the means of their preservation: For their credit, God will do one of these
two things: For either God will make them exceeding glorious, and make them
high in praises, as Esaias 49.2, 3. or, at the least, though they may pass
through evil reports, yet they shall not be utterly shamed: God will give them
good report amongst the godly, and will greatly esteem them himself, 2. Cor.
6.8. Heb. 11.2. Faith shall obtain a good report.

And for the means of their preservation: Either first God will save them from
the temptations that fell on the world, so as in the evil time they shall be
provided for, and preserved from distress, as, Psalm. 37.19. or else, secondly,
God will not disappoint their trust, but come to their succor, and deliver
them, as Psalm. 22.6. and 25.3. and Romans 5.3. or else, thirdly, if God do
defer for a time, he will in the mean time refresh their hearts, and
lighten their faces with the comfort of his favor and presence, as Psalm. 34.6.
Or else fourthly, if the Lord let the affliction yet continue, he will give
them strength to bear it, and patience and magnanimity, so as it shall be no
great burden to them, as it is showed of Christ, Isaiah 50.6, 7. so of Paul,
Philip. 1.20. 2. Tim. 1.12. Or else fifthly, though they may be many ways
distressed, yet they shall never be forsaken, or perplexed, so as to have
cause to despair: They shall not be destroyed, 2. Cor. 4.9. In all these
senses, they shall not be confounded in respect of their outward estate.

In what things the believer shall not be confounded.
And for their spiritual estate they shall not be confounded, and this may be
showed in diverse things: First, in respect of illumination, they shall not
abide in darkness, Ioh. 12.46. Secondly, in respect of justification, their
sins are not imputed to them, and the Lord so surely forgiues the believer,
that the conscience shall be satisfied with that propitiation is made in the
blood of Christ: for, it is not ashamed of the former evil ways, because it
believes, that they enjoy Gods pardon, as if they had never been, Romans 3.25.
Zeph. 3.11. Thirdly, in respect of Adoption, because by believing they are
made the sons of God, and so need not be ashamed at any time of their
condition, Ioh. 1.12. Fourthly, in respect of access unto the presence of God.
For by faith he is privileged, he may go with boldness and confidence into the
presence of the King of Kings; and therefore what should confound them? Ephesians.
3.12. Fifthly, in respect of the promises of God. For by faith, he obtains
many rich and precious promises, each of them like a Well of joy, and a very
spring of contentment, 2. Pet. 1.4. Heb. 11.13, 33, 34 Sixthly, in respect of
the hope of glory. For by faith we have access to this grace, whence we stand
and rejoice in the hope of the glory to come, Romans 4.2.

And for the Day of Judgment, it is certain, they shall not be confounded in
two respects: First, they shall have boldness at that Day and hour, and praise
before all the world: They that are not a shamed of Christ in this world, he
will not then be ashamed of them: And secondly they shall be delivered from
eternal confusion, and damnation: They shall enjoy everlasting salvation, and
shall not be confounded world without end, Isaiah 45.17.

Quest. So that by this which has bin said, we may in part know, how to answer
that objection which may be made: For some one may say, The Scripture in diverse
places seems to grant, that Gods servants have bin ashamed, and confounded.

Ans. Now for answer heereunto, diverse things must be distinctly considered of.

First, How far the godly may be confounded.
the godly shall not be ashamed, or shamed with everlasting shame, or they
shall not be ashamed at the day of Judgment: though it were granted, they
might be ashamed in this life, Esaias 45.17. in that World, which is without
end, they shall not be ashamed.

Secondly, we may answer with the Prophet Daniel, that shame and confusion
belongs unto the godly, if we respect their deserts, but they are freed from
it by the covenant of grace in Christ, Dan. 9.7.

Thirdly, if we consider of the state of the Church in the public condition
of it, as both good and bad are mingled together: so God may power out terrible
shame and confusion upon visible Churches for their great prouocations, as,
Ierem. 9.19. and 17.13.

Fourthly, this promise shows, what God will make good to the believer, if the
fault be not in himself: he shall be set in such a condition, as he shall
have no reason to be ashamed, but in all distresses two things shall be
certain: first, that God will come quickly to his succor, Heb. 10.35, 36.
Secondly, that till his deliverance he shall have a fair assurance and
evidence for his hope in God, by his promises: so as if he do not withdraw
himself through unbelief, in rest and quietness he shall be fortified, Esaias
30.19.

Fifthly, if we restrain the sense to the coherence and particular drift of
this place, we may answer three things. First, that he shall not be so
confounded, as to be driven to run headlong upon the use of any unlawful
means. Secondly, that he shall not fall down from the foundation, which is
Christ, though he should endure many a sore storm. And thirdly, he shall not
be ashamed in the point of Justification: he shall never repent, that he
relied upon Christ, and his merits and righteousness.

Sixthly, It is true, that in some temporal crosses they may be foiled in the
judgment of the world, and in their own sense, as the Prophet confesses,
Psalm. 48.9. and so far as this promise reaches to temporal things, it must
be understood with that common limitation, Esaias 54.4. viz. so far, as it is
good for them, they shall be kept from shame, as for poverty, or sickness, or
the like, that is, if it be good for them. But yet if this temporal shame do
fall upon them for their sins, repentance will remove it, as is promised,
Joel 2.13.26.

Lastly, the Lord will give his people double for all their confusion, Esaias
61.7. and therefore it is not to be reckned as a cross, for which they have so
much recompense made them.

Uses. The use of all this remains then to be considered of, which concerns
first, the godly; secondly, the wicked.

The Godly should here learn,

First, to take notice of their privileges above other men in this respect,
etc.

Secondly, To sue out this promise upon all occasions. For since they have a
grant of freedom in this kind, they should seek unto God for the obtaining of
it, as they shall find need: when either their crosses press them, or their
hearts fail them: so did David in many places of the Psalms, as Psalm. 31.1,
17. and 119.116. and in diverse other places.

Thirdly, but they must ever look to it, that they be such as may answer the
conditions of this promise, expressed in this or in other Scriptures; as,
Conditions of such as will not be confounded.
1. They must preserve a constant respect unto God's commandments, and in all
their ways be sound in God's statutes; else, wilful sin and shame will be
companions, Psalm 119.6, 80. 2. They must not be ashamed of GOD's truth, and
the profession of it, but witness a good profession before all men, Psalm
119.46. 3. They must not be too tender in matter of reproach from the world,
but learn of Christ to despise the shame and scorns of men, Heb. 12.2. Esaias
51.6, 7. 4. In this Text they must hold fast their faith, and live by it: it
is a promise to the Godly, as he is a believer, and will rely upon Gods mercy
in Jesus Christ: we must be established in the faith.


The wicked may hence gather an argument of of singular terror. For, this Text
imports, that such as live in their sins without repentance, and have not a
lively faith in Jesus Christ, shall certainly be confounded: and this will more
particularly touch such sorts of men as are distinctly designed out to shame
and confusion.

Quest. Now, if any ask who are they shall be ashamed and confounded?

Ans. I answer out of several Scriptures, They shall be ashamed and confounded,

What sorts of men shall suffer shame and confusion.
First, that worship graven Images, and trust upon them, Psalm 97.7. Esaias 42.17.

Secondly, that wish evil, and hate the Godly, and rejoice at their misery,
and seek to do them mischief, Psalm 44.7. Psalm 129.5. Esaias 26.11. and 41.11.

Thirdly, that are proud, and deal peruersly: for, pride is a forerunner of
shame, Pro.

Fourthly, that call not upon the Name of the Lord, that use not prayer, Psalm
53.5.

Fifthly, that use customary lying: they shall be loathsome, and come to shame,
Pro. 13.5.

Sixthly, that put their trust in men, and not in the Lord, Esaias 20.5.

Seventhly, that are ashamed of Christ and the Gospel in this world, Mark 8.38.

Lastly, that go about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.4.

Verses 7.8. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, it is precious: but unto them
which be disobedient, the stone which the Builders disallowed, the same is made
the Head of the corner,

8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient; unto the which thing they were even
ordained.


IN these words the Apostle expounds or applies the former testimony of
scripture, which he urges both for the believer, and against the unbeliever.
The believers he calls upon to take notice of their felicity; assuring them,
that that Scripture does avouch, that Christ is an incomparable treasure to
them. Concerning the unbelievers he speaks terrible things; whom he describes
both by their sin, and by their judgment. The sin is disobedience: their
judgment is to be considered as it is denounced, first, against their Leaders,
whom he calls Builders; and then, against the whole body of unbelievers. The
plague upon the Builders, is, that the Kingdom of Christ shall be advanced in
spite of their hearts: they shall perish and be confounded, but Christ shall
reign and flourish. The plague upon the body of unbelievers, is, that Christ
shall be to them a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense; which is
amplified by the consideration of the causes, partly in themselves, which is,
their stumbling at the Word, and disobedience; and partly in God, who in his
justice has appointed them thereunto.

Thus of the order of the words.

Now, before I come to the full opening of each particular in these two verses,
I may observe diverse things from the coherence and general consideration of
all these words.

First, in that the Apostle does not rest satisfied to allege the Text, but
does withal apply it, it shows the necessity of application. We cannot profit
by the Word, if it be not laid particularly to our hearts: as food does not
nourish, if it be not eaten; nor a medicine cure the distaste, if it be not
taken; nor a plaster heal the sore, if it be not laid to it; nor are our
wants supplied by coming to the market, if we do not buy and carry home. Which
should work in us a sound care of application of the Word we hear or read: and
withal it should waken us to a care of observing all the rules that may
further us in applying; which are these, and such like.

First, Rules for the applying of the Word aright.
we must be careful to understand rightly the Scriptures we would apply: this
is the very foundation of all application that is profitable, 2. Pet. 3. else
we may grow perverse, and wrong both the Word and our own selves.

Ob. But some private man might say, This is hard: how can we learn to know
the clear meaning of the Scripture, and the sense of the Text?

Sol. For answer heerunto: thou must know, that there be diverse rules that
may help thee to understand, or at least, keep thee from wrong and dangerous
mis-application.

First, thou must be wise to sobriety, and not presume to know above what is
meet, nor to meddle with such Secrets as should lead thee into knowledges that
belong not to thy calling, or are not evidently revealed in Scripture.

Secondly, thou must have respect unto other Scriptures, to take no sense that
is contrary to other apparent Scriptures.

Thirdly, thou must have respect to the Analogy of faith, to avoid all senses
which oppose any article of faith, or thy faith, Romans 12.3.

Fourthly, thou must avoid all doubtful disputations, and unprofitable
questions, and vain ianglings, that tend not to edification, and the salvation
of thy soul; and account it as a happiness, to be able to keep thy self free
from intanglements therein. And therefore stand at the door of every opinion,
and, before thou let it in, ask this question: What shall my soul be
aduantaged by this opinion at the day of JESUS CHRIST? And if it cannot answer
to it directly, reject it, Psalm. 119.66. David prays God to teach him good
judgment and knowledge.

Fifthly, let the public Ministry of GOD's servants be the ordinary rule of
thy interpretation, so long as no sense is taught there contrary to the former
rules, 1. Cor. 14.36. and where thou doubtest, thou must seek the law at the
Priest's mouth, and be very fearful, in any thing to be wiser than thy
Teacher; I mean, to nourish private opinions, which are not justified by
public doctrine.

Sixthly, pray to God to ^each thee, and to give thee his Spirit to lead thee
into all truth: understanding is God's gift, 2. Tim. 2.7. and he will teach
thee humbly his way, Psalm. 25.

Thus of the first rule: we must first soundly understand the sense of the
Scripture we would apply.

Secondly, thou must bring a mind apt to be taught, willing to be formed, and
to be all that which God would have thee to be: thou can never profit by
application, without a penitent mind; a mind that will part with any sin God
shall discover in thee, and a mind careful to observe the conditions
required, as well as the promise tendered, James 1.21. This is indeed to glorify
the Word.

Thirdly, it is an excellent help in application, to follow the guiding of the
holy Ghost in thy heart: thou shall find in all doctrines a difference. Some
things, read or heard, have a special taste put upon them by Gods spirit, or a
special assurance of them wrought at the time of reading or hearing. Now, thou
must be careful to take to thee these truths which the Spirit of GOD does
cause to shine before thee. Eat that which is good, Esaias 55.2. Try all things,
and keep that which is good, 1. These. 5.20.

Fourthly, know, that serious and secret meditation upon the matter thou
hear, is the principal nurse of fruitful application: it is but a flash
can be had without an after and deliberate meditation; and about meditation,
remember these rules: 1. Let it be secret. Rules for meditation.
2. He must let it be full. Give not over, till thou have laid the truth up in
thy heart: take heed of that common deceit, Psalm 119.45. of resting in the
praise or liking of the doctrine: be not a Judge against thine own soul.
For, if the doctrine be worthy of such praise, why dare thou let it slip and
run out? Let not the devil start it out of thy heart, Mat. 13.20. or the cares
of life choke it, Luke 11.28. 3. Let it be constant. Be at the same point
still from day to day, till it be soundly formed and seated in thy heart. How
rich might many Christians have been, if they had observed this rule! Psalm.
1.2. Psalm 119.3, 5. Esaias 26.9.


Fifthly, be wise for thy self: take heed of that error of transposing thy
applications: say not, This is a good point for such and such, till thou have
tried thine own heart, whether it belong not to thee, Psalm 119.59. Pro. 9.7.

Sixthly, by any means be careful of the seasons of doctrine: be wise to
understand the season. There be many truths, which if thou let pass the
opportunity of informing of thy self, thou may perhaps never have it so
again: and therefore take heed of losing precious things, when thou have the
time and means to attain them, etc.

Thus of the first point.

The second thing is the special duty of Ministers, to apply the Scriptures to
the hearers, that belong to their charge: we see the Apostles do it, and for
this purpose has God set apart the ministry of the Word, that by them it
might be applied. God inspired the Scriptures, and the Ministers are to urge
them, and whet them upon the hearts of their hearers for their Instruction,
Reproof or Consolation, 2. Tim. 3.17. They are like the Priests for cutting
up, or dividing of the Sacrifices, 2. Tim. 2.15. And this may serve to justify
the course of godly and painful ministers, that most study the sound
application of their doctrine, and secretly staineth the pride of these men,
that avoid with scorn, application, vainly affecting the praise of wit and
learning.

Thirdly, we may hence note, that all men, in the visible Church, have not a
right to the comforts of the Scripture; and it is the Ministers duty to drive
wicked men off, from claiming any part in the promises, which are the only
treasure of the Saints, as here we see in these two verses, the Apostle
carefully does: Men must do the works of Jacob, if they would have the
comforts of Jacob, Micah 2. verse 7. A Minister must separate betimes the
clean and unclean. His word must be like a Fan, that will drive the chafe
one way, and the Wheat another; and though wicked men brook not this, yet God
requires this discretion at the hands of his people. Gods Ministers must not
dawbe with untempered mortar, or give the childrens bread to dogs, or cast holy
things to swine.

Fourthly, they may hence clearly also see, that no other difference may be put
between many, then what faith and unbelief, obedience and disobedience make.
Men must not be known after the flesh.

Fifthly, it is hence also apparent, that all the godly have a common right to the
promises made in Christ. The godly in the Apostle Peter's time had right to the
former consolation, as well as the godly in the Prophet Esaies time: God is no
respecter of persons, Col. 3.11. Thus in general.

Two things are to be observed in particular:

The one concerns the godly, who are comforted. The other concerns the
wicked, who are terrified.

The Godly are comforted in these words:

To you therefore which believe, he is precious.]

In which words, it is the drift of the Apostle to raise a use for consolation
out of the former Text: whence consider,

First, the persons comforted, viz. you that believe.

Secondly, the happiness applied unto them, He is precious.

For the first. It is manifest, that the Apostle directs them to look for faith
in their hearts, if they would have comfort in God's promises. It is not enough
to know, that believers shall be saved, but we must be sure, that men in
particular are believers: we must examine our selves whether we be in the faith
or no, 2. Cor. 13.5. Which should both reprove and direct. It reprooues the
great shameful slothfulness of Christians, that suffer the tempter to keep
them without the assurance of faith: some have no faith at all; and the better
sort live in too much doubtfulnes in the point of the assurance of faith. And
therefore we should be warned and directed to try our faith, and to make it
sure, that we are believers.

Quest. What is it to be a true believer?

What it is to believe, and in how many things it is seen.
Ans. It is, To embrace with our hearts the reconciliation and salvation which
by Christ is purchased for us, and by the Gospel is offered to us. Now, that
this point, being of such singular weight, may be clearly understood, I will
break it open into particulars, or into particular parts or steps of
judgment and practice in the believer.

First, he must acknowledge, that by nature he stands bound to observe all the
moral Law.

Secondly, he must see, that he has broken all those holy laws of God, and is
therefore guilty before God of the curses of the Law, and so of eternal
condemnation.

Thirdly, he must know, that GOD sent his own Son in the flesh to obey the
Law, and satisfy the justice of God, by making an expiation for man's sins.

Fourthly, he must learn, that God has bound himself by promise, that
whosoever imbraceth the agreements in this new covenant in Christ, shall be
saved.

Fifthly, that when a man does, in his own particular, discern this gracious
offer of God in the Gospel, and goes to God, and with his heart relieth upon
it, then he does truly believe, and is justified, and shall be saved.

Quest. But many men are persuaded, that God has given Christ for them, and
yet it is evident, that they do not believe, because there is no appearance of
any repentance or reformation in them: many say they have a strong faith, and
yet have none. How shall the persuasion of the godly man be distinguished from
this vain presumption in wicked men?

Ans. That persuasion of Gods grace in Christ, which is true, and of the nature
of true faith, does prove it self to be right, by many infallible signs.

First, Marks of a true saving ^aith.
by the renouation of the heart. The knowledge of God's love in Christ, does
make the heart of man new: it cleanses out the old dross, and makes a man hate
his secret and most secret sins. Faith purifieth the heart, Acts 15.

Secondly, by the joy and comforts of the holy Ghost; with which the beleeuer's
heart is refreshed from the presence of God, 1. Pet. 1.9.

Thirdly, by the victory of the world. For, the true believer is so satisfied
with God's goodness in Christ, that he can deny his profits, pleasures, credit,
friends, and the like, for Christ's sake and the Gospel: yea, faith marres the
taste of earthly things, and makes a man able to forsake the love of worldly
things, 1. John 5.5. It will endure the trial of troubles, of afflictions, and
temptations, and persecutions, for the Gospels sake, 1. Pet. 1.7. without
making haste to use ill means in the evil day.

Quest. But, how may faith be discerned in such as say they are not persuaded
that they have faith; which sometimes proves to be the case of diverse dear
children of God?

Ans. Their faith may be discerned,

First, by repentance, which cannot be separated from it: Signs of a weak but
yet a true faith, in weak Christians.
the sight, hatred, confession, and sorrow for their sins, is an argument of
true faith, because without faith no man can have true repentance.

Secondly, by their complaining of their unbelief, and desire of faith. I
believe, Lord, help my unbelief, was the voice of him that had true faith.

Thirdly, by their daily renouncing of their own merits, begging favor of
God, only for the merits of Christ.

Fourthly, by the love of the Godly: for faith works by love, Galat. 5.

Fifthly, by other marks and signs of Gods children, which can never be had,
but faith is had also: such as are, love of God, and his Word, and of their
enemies, and vprightnes of heart, and the spirit of prayer, and the like.

Precious.]

Christ is precious to them that believe, not only in their account, but by
effect; and so, both because he is great riches unto them, as also because he
is an honor unto them. He is great riches unto them, yea unsearchable riches,
Ephesians. 3.6. All ages ought to wonder at the riches of Gods kindness to the
believers in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. Christ in us is our riches, Col. 1.27 and
thus he inricheth us with the favor of God, his own merits and righteousness,
the grace of the Spirit, and the promises of the Word, and the hope of glory.

The Uses are many.

Uses. First, woe to the rich men of this world, that are not rich in God and
Christ, Luke 12.16.21. Let not the rich man glory in his riches, Ierem. 9. 24.

Secondly, let the brother of low degree rejoice, in that God has thus
exalted him, James 1.9. For, godly Christians are the richest men in the world:
for their possessions are greatest, because they possess Jesus Christ, and his
treasures James 2.5. For God is rich to all that call upon him. He cannot be a
poor man, that can pray, Romans 10.12. Christ makes amends to the poor
Christian for all his wants.

Thirdly, hence we may gather another sign to try our faith by. If Christ be
more precious to us, then all the world besides, it is certain we are true
believers: For Christ is precious to none, but believers, Phil. 3.9, 8.

Fourthly, we should strive with all thankfulness to admire, and praise the
grace of God, that has bestowed such riches upon us in Christ, Ephesians. 1.7.

Fifthly, we should hence learn to make more account of our faith, which is
therefore precious, because it applies Christ unto us: Hence poor Christians
are said to be rich, because they have faith, and assurance of faith, and he
calls it all riches of full assurance, Colos. 2.2. 2. Pet. 1.4. Iam. 2.5.

Sixthly, we should live securelesse. Men would promise to live at all hearts
ease, if they were rich enough: why, Christians are exceeding rich, and
possess more treasure, then all the world besides, and therefore should live
henceforth by the faith of the Son of God, which was given to them, Gal. 2.20.

Seventhly, look to it, that thou keep Christ, whatsoever thou losest:
resolve to lose father, mother, wife, children, friends, house, lands, yea and
life too, rather then lose Christ, who is so precious.

Eighthly, We should show it, that we account him our greatest riches: and that
we shall do, first, by esteeming the Gospel, that brings us daily tidings,
above gold and silver. Secondly, by often receiving of the Sacraments: we
should account the Word and Sacraments as Gods Exchequer, whither we always
come to receive more treasure. Thirdly, by making much of them, that resemble
his virtues. Fourthly, by longing for his appearing.

Thus, as Christ is our riches. Now secondly, he is precious, in that he is
an honor unto us, and so some translate it. Christ then is a singular honor to
every believer, and he is so both in heaven and in earth. First, in heaven he
is an honor to us, because he graceth us before God, and the Angels, covering
our nakedness with the rich garment of his own imputed righteousness, and making
daily intercession for us to God, and covering our imperfections, and
presenting our works, and prayers to God, and giving the Angels a charge to
look carefully to us. Secondly, And so he is an honor to us on earth, both
amongst the godly, and amongst the wicked: First, He graceth us amongst the
godly, by giving us a room in their hearts, causing them to love us, and
honor us even for Christ only, whom they discover in us by our love to
Christ, and faith in his name, and imitation of his virtues. Secondly, and he
graceth us also amongst the wicked, by protecting and acknowledging us in times
of greatest distress, and by washing out the blemishes, which our own
indiscretio^s at any time brought upon us, and by clearing our innocencies from
their unjust aspersions.

The use may be, first for confutation of their folly and madness, Use.
that account it a course of abasement to follow Christ, and leave the vanities
of the world. Godly courses are honorable courses: No man ever lost honor by
cleaving to Christ, and living so as might become the faith and love of Christ.
Secondly, and withal we may hence be informed, that all the honor that is
without Christ, is but obscure baseness: no man can be truly honorable
without the faith of Jesus Christ in his heart. Thirdly, we should hence be
resolved to make more account of the Godly, because Christ is to them al
honor: they are the only excellent ones in the world. Fourthly, we should
labor also to be an honor unto Christ, and to the faith and profession of
his name, and service: we must remember, that he is our surety to God for us,
and has undertaken for our good behavior, and therefore for that reason we
should be careful of our duties: and besides we see, that the disorders of
great men's servants leave an imputation on their master, and so it is with us
and Christ. If we live righteously, and soberly, and religiously, we honor
Christ our Master: but otherwise if we be scandalous, we dishonor Christ,
and therefore had need to look to our ways. And lastly, we should account
Christ sufficient honor to us, and not regard the scorns and reproaches of
the world, but rather with Moses esteem the reproaches of Christ, greater
riches then the treasures of Egypt.

Thus of the consolation to the godly.

The terror to the unbelievers is expressed, first, partly by charging upon them
their offense: secondly, and partly by describing their punishment.

Their offense is disobedience.

To them that are disobedient.]

All unbelievers stand indicted of disobedience, Unbelievers are guilty of
disobedience in diverse respects.
and that in three respects: For first, they are guilty of Adams disobedience:
For by the disobedience of one man many are made sinners, Romans 5.19. Secondly,
they are guilty of disobedience against the moral Law, which they have broken
by innumerable offenses, and in respect thereof are liable to all the curses of
God, Deuteronomy. 28. Thirdly, they are guilty of disobedience against the Gospel.
For there is an obedience of faith: Romans 1.5. and the Lord complains, that
they obeyed not the Gospel, Romans 10.16. and for this disobedience, God will
render vengeance in flaming fire at the Day of judgment, 2. These. 1.8. Now men
disobey the Gospel not only, when they are bewitched to receive false opinions
in religion, Gal. 3.1. But also and chiefly when they believe not in Jesus
Christ, but live in their sins without repentance.

Uses. The use should be for humiliation unto impenitent sinners; they should
take notice of their indictment, and make haste to humble themselves before the
Lord, lest Sentence come out against them, and there be no remedy; and the
rather, because God will aggrauate against them their disobedience. Now, there
are many ways by which a sinner may take notice of the aggrauations of his
disobedience; as,

Disobedience aggrauated.
First, by the number of his offenses, if he consider, that he has made his
sins like the hairs of his head. To be guilty of treason but in one
particular, should occasion fear: but he that is guilty of many treasons, has
great reason to be extremely confounded in himself; and this is thy case.

Secondly, thy disobedience is the more grievous, because thou have received
abundance of blessings from God, who has by them wooed thee to repentance; and
this will heap much upon thee, Romans 2.4. Esaias 1.3.

Thirdly, thou must consider all the means thou have had of amendment; God
has planted thee in his garden the Church, he has commanded his vine-dressers
to bestow the pains, and apply the means of growth to thee. If now thou be
not fruitful, this will be pleaded against thee, which art still a barren
figtree, Luke 13.6.

Fourthly, it increases thy disobedience, that thou have been guilty of
diverse heinous, and foul evils, as if thou have been a drunkard, a filthy
person, a blasphemer of the name of God, a man of blood, or the like.

Fifthly, the continuance in sin: thou have long abused the patience of God,
and this heaps coals of further indignation against thee, Romans 2. 4, 5. and
the rather because thy heart has been to sin ever: for there is in the
heart of unregenerate men, a desire to sin for ever, and it is a grief to them
to think, that at any time they should not be able to live in sin still.

Sixthly, thou have offended against thine own vows and covenants, and the
promises thou have made to God, both in baptism and the communion, and in
other passages of thy life.

Seventhly, it increases thy offense, that thou have dealt wickedly in the
land of uprightness, Esaias. 26.11. There thou have offended, where thou have
had the example of the godly to show thee a better course. It is ill to sin
any where, though in Babel: but it is worse to transgress in Sion, or
Jerusalem, even in the glorious Churches of Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, thy incorrigiblenes adds to the heap of sin: though the Lord has
afflicted thee, yet thou have not learned obedience by the things thou have
suffered, but thou have made thy heart like an adamant, so as thou would not
return, Ierem. 5.2, 3.

Ninthly, it is yet more, that thou have been so far from reforming thine
own life, that thou have scorned and reproched the good conversation of the
godly, thou have spoken evil of the good way of God.

Thus and many other ways may the sinner charge his own heart, and thereby
prepare himself to return to the Lord, while there is yet hope. For if thou
would return with all thy heart, and take unto thee words, and confess thy
sins, and pray for forgiveness, and mourn before the Lord, and turn away
from thy own wickedness; the Lord would show mercy, and the obedience of
Christ would heal thy disobedience, and God would love thee freely, and the
blood of Christ would cleanse thee from all thy sins, Hosh. 14. Isaiah 55.7.
1. Ioh. 1.7. and while it is yet to day, the Lord sends to thee, and
beseeches thee to be reconciled, 2. Cor. 5.19, 21. Consider, that God has
been with thee all this while, having sent many others to hell for their
sins, and there is hope of forgiueness: the Lord has received great
offenders to mercy, as the Israelites, that often fell away from him, Judges
10. and Mary Magdalene, and Peter, and David, and the thief upon the Cross:
Consider, that God has offered thee thy pardon in the Sacrament: Fear the
Lord therefore and his goodness, and return with all thine heart, and iniquity
shall not be thy ruin.

Hitherto of their sin: their punishment follows; and so first upon their
rulers and leaders, in these words: The Stone which the builders refused, is
become the Head of the corner.

Which words are taken out of Psalm. 118.22. where they are used by the Prophet
David, and here quoted by the Apostle Peter.

The words have a double sense: for, they did concern both David and Christ. As
they concerned David, this was the meaning: that Though the Nobles and
Courtiers did despise, and reject, and oppose David; yet such was God's
providence, that the man whom they rejected, GOD made King of Israel, and the
chief stay and support of that State.

Now, for this sense of the words, diverse things may be noted.

First, that God ^ath raised up great men in the Commonwealth, for this end,
that they might seek the public good, and employ their labors for the
building up and prosperity of the State. Which should both teach great men to
think of their duties, and the accounts they must make to God: as also it
should teach the people to pray the more heartily for them, and to obey them in
all lawful things.

Secondly, we may hence gather the imperfection of all humane things. For, in
that earthly Kingdoms need building up still, it shows, that they attain to
no perfection, but at the best are still in progress.

Thirdly, that many times great men wilfully oppose the right, and set
themselves against the righteous, and resist the will of GOD. Which should
teach us, not to place our confidence in the great men of this world, nor to be
always led by their example in opinions.

Fourthly, that God will find out the wickedness of great men, and bring them
to confusion. God accepts not persons: he hates sin in great men, as well as
in mean men, and will cross and confound their godless and ungodly coun^els.

Fifthly, that God takes to himself the power to dispose of earthly Kingdoms,
and to give Kings and Rulers at his own pleasure. It was the Lord's doing,
and it was marvelous, that David should become the Head of the corner, Psalm.
118.23. The Lord pleads it as a part of his sovereignty and prerogative, To set
up Kings. By me Kings reign, Pro. 8. Which should teach Princes, and Judges,
and Nobles, to do homage to God, and acknowledge him for their Soueraign, and
therefore serve him with fear, Psalm 2. And it should teach the people to give
honor, and tribute, and custom, and obedience, for conscience sake, to their
Rulers, seeing the power that is, is of God, Romans 13.

Now, as these words were understood in the case of David, so was David heerin
a type of Christ: and so the words are to be understood in the case of Christ
also, as our Savior himself applies them, Mat. 22. and as it is evident to
be the meaning of the Apostle here.

And it is the drift of the Apostle, to strengthen weak Christians against the
scandal that might arise from the opposition of the Kingdom of Christ. For,
it might trouble them, and amaze them, to consider how Christ was opposed by
the Scribes and Pharisees, who were the great learned men of the time, and such
as were eminent in the Church; and, in the account of the most men, were the
chief persons that took care for Religion and the state of the Church, and did
excel all other sorts, etc.

Now, that this scandal might be removed, he shows in these words,

First, that nothing did therein fall out, but what was the lot of David in his
time.

Secondly, that all this was foretold in the old Testament, and therefore might
not seem strange.

Thirdly, that all those oppositions should be in vain: for, GOD would reject
and confound those opposites, and would prosper and advance the right of Jesus
Christ, without the help of those men.

In the particular consideration of these words, three things must be noted.
First, the persons threatened, viz. the Builders, that is, the Scribes and
Pharisees* and those that under pretense of religion, did oppose Christ.
Secondly, the cause of their punishment, viz. the refusing of Christ the
foundation stone. Thirdly, the judgment inflicted upon them, which is twofold:
the one implied, the other expressed. There is a judgment implied, viz. that,
Though they were by calling, and in the account of the multitude, Builders; yet
God would reject them, and go on with his work, in converting both Jews and
Gentiles without them. The judgment expressed, is, that Christ, whom they so
much hated and opposed, should be, in spite of their hearts, and to their
extreme vexation, made King of the Church, and exalted to supreme power over
all things, and the only stay of the whole Church both of Jews and Gentiles.
And heerin it is to be noted, both the manner how this shall be done, in the
word, is become, or is made; and also the time, in that he says, It is made.

Builders.]

Quest. A question may be moved here for the sense; viz. how the Scribes and
Pharisees, and such like men can be said to be builders?

How far wicked men may be called Builders.
Ans. For answer whereunto, we must understand, that the Scribes and Pharisees,
and so wicked men, that possess eminent places in the Church, may be said to
be builders. First, in the account of the multitude, whatsoever they were
indeed; yet they were commonly so accounted, as builders, and prime men in
managing the affairs of the Church. Secondly, the Scribes and Pharisees may be
acknowledged in some respects as builders indeed: they did God some work. For
howsoever they did not soundly teach Christ, yet they drew the people by their
doctrine, to avoid on the right hand the Stoicall strictness of the Essenes,
and on the left hand the profane irreligiousnesse of the Sadduces. Thirdly,
they were builders by calling: they have the name not so much, from what they
were, as from what men in their places had been, or ought to have been: And
these are the persons that oppose CHRIST, and are thus severely judged of God.

Diverse things may be hence noted.

First, that men may be great in their own opinion, and in the account of the
world, who yet are nothing set by of God: such were these Pharisees, Luke 16.14,
15. And therefore we should labor for a spirit without guile, and not be wise
in our selves, or rest in outward shows, but seek the praise of God: we are
safe if God allow of us, though all the world disallow us.

Secondly, that God will acknowledge freely any good he finds in his very
enemies; as here the Pharisees are not denied the title of Builders, for that
general work they did in encountering the Sadduces and Essenes. And as they are
called Builders: so are the devils called Principalities and Powers, to import
what is any way of praise in them, notwithstanding their horrible fall. Which
should teach us to learn of God, to do likewise toward all our enemies: and
withal it may much comfort us. If God will do thus with his enemies, what will
he do with his own children and servants! how will he honor and reward them!
and if the notorious oppositions of the Pharisees cannot hinder God's
acknowledging of that little goodness was in them, how much less shall the mere
frailties of the Godly (that will do nothing against the truth, though they
cannot do for the truth what they would) hinder the glorious recompense of
reward and acceptance with God!

Thirdly, we may hence note, that Christ and Religion, and the sincerity of the
Gospel, may be disallowed and opposed by great learned men, by such as are of
great mark in the Church, even by such as were Gouerners of the Church in name
and title.

Quest. 1. Two questions do easily rise in men's minds, upon the hearing of
this doctrine. The first is, Whence it should be, that learned men, who have
more means to understand the truth, than other men, and by their calling more
especially tied to the study of all truth, yet should be drawn to oppose or
reject Christ and the truth.

Ans. I answer, that this may come to pass diversely.

How it comes to pass, that many great and learned men oppose the truth of the
Gospel.
First, sometimes it is because of their ignorance; neither may this seem
strange, that they should be ignorant: for, though they may be very learned in
some parts of study, yet they may be very blockish in some other. Besides, the
natural heart of man does not take any great delight in the study of the
Scriptures: and therefore the answer of Christ was proper, Ye err, not
knowing the Scriptures, or the power of God.

Secondly, in some it is, because of their secret Atheism. Many learned men
be very Atheists in heart; and such were some of the Pharisees: for, they
neither knew the Father nor Christ, as he charge them.

Thirdly, some have a spirit of slumber: they have eyes, and yet cannot see;
as, in the case of some of those Pharisees: they could not apply the very things
themselves spoke. For, being asked about the King of the Jews, Matthew. 2. they
could answer directly out of the Scriptures, and give such signs of the
Messiah, as did evidently agree to Jesus Christ: and yet these men were so
infatuated, that when God shows them the man to whom their own signs agree,
they cannot allow of him.

Fourthly, in some it is envy. They are so fretted at the credit and fame of
Christ, or such as sincerely preach Christ, that for very envy they strive to
destroy the work of God, and to disparage the progress of the Kingdom of
Christ: they cannot endure to see all the world (as they account it) to follow
Christ.

Fifthly, in others it is ambition, and desire of preeminence, and the quiet
usurpation of the dignities of the Church, that they alone might reign, and be
had in request: this, no doubt, moved the Pharisees, and was the cause why
Diotrephes made such a stir in the Church.

Sixthly, in others it is covetousness and desire of gain. These are they that
account gain to be godliness, as the Apostle speaks: and such were some of the
Pharisees, Luke 16.14.

Seventhly, in others it is a wilful and malicious hatred of the truth: and
such was it in those Pharisees, that were guilty of the sin against the holy
Ghost.

Quest. 2. But how shall a simple ignorant man stay his heart, and be settled
in the truth, when the wise and learned men of the world oppose it? how can he
tell, it is the truth which they reject, who have more learning and wit than
he?

Ans. I answer: A simple and single-hearted Christian may somewhat be helped
against the testimony of those wise men of the world, if he mark but their
lives: for, usually by their fruits they may be known, By what means an
ignorant and simple man may stay his heart, notwithstanding the oppositions of
learned and wise men.
Mat. 7. For, commonly, such as oppose Christ and the Gospel, or the sincerity
of the Gospel, are men that may be apparently detected of profaneness, as our
Savior Christ shows by diverse instances in the Pharisees, Mat. 23.

But because sometimes the messengers of Satan can transform themselves into
Angels of light, therefore I answer secondly, that all the Godly have the sure
Word of the Prophets and Apostles, which may be the touchstone to try the
opinions of men by; which, in the points absolutely necessary to salvation, is
evident, and plain, and infallible to the Law and to the Testimonies: if they
speak not according to these, it is because there is no light in them, Esaias
8.20.

And that they may be sure, let them pray to God to teach them: for, he has
promised to teach the humble his way, if a man come to God with an humble
mind, and with desire of reformation of his life, in that he knows, God has
bound himself to show him his will, Psalm. 25.9. John 7.17.

Besides, every child of God has the Spirit of God in his heart, who knows
the things of God which indicted the Scriptures, and is the only supreme Judge
of all controversies. He that believes, has a witness in himself, the Spirit
working much assurance in his heart, and anointing him with ey-salue, and
leading him into all truth. And by this help, the entrance into the Scriptures
gives light to the simple.

Use. The use of the point then, is

First, to inform us concerning that great Justice of God, in hiding his truth
from the wise, and revealing it to babes and children, or infants: which our
Savior and Saint Paul take notice of. Mat. 11.15. 1. Cor. 1.28.


Secondly, to confirm us against the sinister judgment of worldly-wise, and
learned men, and in matter of religion not to be swaied by that inducement,
since it is thus plainly told, and foretold.

Thirdly, to confute the Papists, that plead unto the ignorant, that their
religion is the right, because it is, and has bin maintained by such a number
of Popes, and Cardinals, which have excelled in learning, and greatness of
place: for here we see, the builders reject the head stone of the corner.

Fourthly, to show us, that whatsoever wicked, wise, great men pretend, yet
their quarrel is against Christ, and his Kingdom.

Fifthly, to reach us therefore to pray for our teachers, and governors, that
God would guide them by his good Spirit, and assist them in their callings, etc.

Sixthly, to be more thankful to God, when the Lord gives us builders, not in
name only, but in deed, that settle about Gods work with all their hearts, and
labor with all faithfulness to promote the Kingdom of Christ.

Hitherto of the Persons.

The cause of their punishment is their refusing of Christ.

Refused.]

They refused Christ, they disallowed him, as unfit for the support of the
building: They cast him away, as rubbish, they rejected him, or accounted him,
as a reprobate.

Christ is many ways refused.
Christ is refused, or disallowed many ways.

First, when the Gospel of Christ is contemned, or neglected, that is, when men
neglect, or contemn the doctrine of salvation by Christ, and live still in
their sin without repentance, and seek not reconciliation with God, through
the blood of Christ.

Secondly, when men go about to establish their own righteousness, and
neglect the righeousnes of Christ: and so when men fly to the intercession of
Saints, or Angels, and use not the intercession of Christ.

Thirdly, when men follow wicked company, and leave the care of the service of
Christ; this is to choose Barabbas to be given unto them, rather then Christ.

Fourthly, we may be guilty of this sin in the time of the use of Christ's
ordinances, as in the Sacraments, when we discern not the Lords body, or in
hearing, or any other ordinances, when we entertain contemplative wickedness,
and so commit spiritual dalliance with strangers before the face of Christ.

Fifthly, when men fall away from the grace of Christ, and so joy with the
Jews, as it were to crucify the Son of God afresh, Hebr. 6. and 10. And so
he is also refused, when in time of persecution he is denied before men: Thus
Peter refused him, when he denied him.

Sixthly, when his servants are rejected: and so either in general, when
Christians are exposed to publik scorn, and made as it were the offscouring
of all things; or in particular, when his Ministers are despised. For he that
despises them, despises him, etc.

Quest. But how do the builders, that is, Churchmen, refuse Christ?

Ans. I answer many ways.

First, How Churchmen, viz. builders may refuse Christ.
when they will not preach in his name: when they preach not at all: For this
is to let Christ live, as it were in the rubbish still, and not to separate him
out for the building, etc.

Secondly, when in preaching they preach themselves, and not Christ crucefied,
leaving the word of Christ, to show their own wit and learning, etc.

Thirdly, when they oppose the sincerity of the Gospel, in the conversion of
the souls of men, or in the practice of godly Christians.

Fourthly, when they teach the Doctrine of merit of works, or prefer the
traditions of men before the commandments of God, as did the Pharisees.

Use. The use of this Doctrine concerning the refusing of Christ may be diverse,
for

First, it may teach us patience, when we are refused in the world: it is no
other thing, then what did befall Christ himself; especially it should
confirm us against the scandal arising from the discountenancing of godly
men, which are crucified by all sorts of people in the world: If Christ
himself were no better used, why should we wonder at it, to see godly
Christians so neglected? And if the most powerful doctrine of Christ were so
securely despised; what wonder is it, if the good way of God be now evil
spoken of?

Secondly, it may much comfort us, and that especially two manner of ways.

First, by reasoning for the contrary. For if it be a sign of a notorious
wicked man, to let Christ lie like rubbish, or refuse stuff, then is it an
excellent sign of a godly mind, to love the Lord Jesus, and to account all
things but dung, in comparison of Christ, and his merits, and righteousness.

Secondly, by considering the effect of Christ's refusal. For he was refused
as our surety, that we might be received to favor. He was cast off by men as
a reprobate, that we might enjoy the admirable privileges of the Elect of
God; and besides, by enduring this contempt of men, he bare the punishment of
all our neglect and contempt of God, and his holy Commandments.

Thus of the cause. The punishment it self follows.

Is made the Head of the corner.]

Two things are here intended, as punishments to these builders. First, The
one implied. Secondly, The other expressed.

First, that which is implied, is, that God will pass by these workmen, and
reject their service. This I gather from hence, that whereas these builders
would not make use of Christ in the building; it is here repeated, that the
building does go on, and Christ is laid as the Head of the corner, which
importes that God had rejected them. Now God reiects wicked Ministers two
ways. First, one, when he curses or blasteth their gifts, and refuses to be
glorified by them, when he causes the night to come upon their divination, and
puts out their right eyes: Secondly, the other is, when he roots them out by
death, and makes their places spue them out: The first is here chiefly
intended, Note.
and so it notes, that it is a great curse of God upon learned men in the
Ministry, when God will not employ them, or make use of their gifts: A learned
man, that either labors not, or proposes not in his labors Gods glory, is
a public and standing Monument of Gods displeasure for men to stand and gaze
at: as it is a great argument of disgrace done to a Carpenter, or Mason, to
stand by while the house is builded, and they not entreated or suffered to work,
and yet have their tools ready. Oh it is a marvelous Justice of God to see
learned, but not godly men pass by, so as they have not the honor to do any
work in the Church for the salvation of the souls of men! and contrariwise it
should rejoice the hearts of godly Ministers, that God (as Paul says of
himself) will account them faithful to put them into his service, and to give
their labors any success.

Secondly, the expressed punishment is the preferment of Christ, and the
promoting of his Kingdom: He is made the Head of the corner: which words must
be considered either in relation to the builders, or in themselves, as they
concern the exaltation of Christ. First, in relation to the builders, it
imports, that it is a punishment to wicked Ministers that love not the Lord
Jesus, that Christ and his Kingdom should flourish. As it fretted the Pharisees,
so it does and will fret the heart of wicked men, till the day of Christ; and
it is a punishment, because of their envy at it, and because they find, that
they have no part in Christ, or the happiness of his Kingdom, their consciences
accusing them, and besides, because they are openly crossed in their
oppositions, and so shamed before men. Which observation may serve for trial:
For it is a certain note of a wicked man, who loves not the Lord Jesus, that
he is crossed, and accounts himself afflicted, or shamed, because the
Kingdom of Christ prospers.

The words in themselves concern the exaltation of Christ, and show, how God
raised him out of the heap of rubbish, as it were, and carried him up to
heaven, and made him their Head and King. Head, I say, over all things, giving
him power over all things, and in particular in respect of the Angels, head of
principalities and powers; and in respect of men, Head of the Church. Nor is it
barely said, he is head, but head of the corner, which is a Metaphor borrowed
from the building; where the holy Ghost intends to show, that he is the only
foundation of the Church, as has been showed in the first verse of this
Chapter. And he is well said to be Head of the corner, because upon Christ
meet (as the two sides meet in the corner stone) both Angels and men; and
amongst men, both the Saints in heaven, and the godly on earth; and amongst men
on earth, both Jews and Gentiles, even all the Elect of all nations, ages, and
conditions in the world.

The uses of the exaltation of Christ briefly follow. Uses.


First, It should teach us to strive by all means to get into his service,
that is so powerful, and able to do so much for his servants.

Secondly, It shows us the end of the oppositions of all wicked men: Christ
shall increase and prosper, and they shall be confounded and perish.

Thirdly, It should especially enforce the necessity of believing in Christ: we
should lie upon him with all our weight, as the building does on the foundation.

Fourthly, It should comfort us in all distresses, considering what end God
gave to the sufferings of Christ, and so it is urged, Hebr. 12.2.

The consideration of the manner and the time, follows.

Is become, or is made.]

He does not tell how, but leaves that, as granted to be effected without
hands, even by the special providence of God, which gives us occasion to take
notice of the truth, that in things of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, God is
pleased to make his work, or to work sometimes without using any of the
means, which the world takes notice of, he neglects all those means, which
fall within the expectation, Psalm. 118.20, 21. as here for the proclaiming of
the Messiah, there was not any one order, or rank of men eminent in the world,
which God made use of. But by a way altogether strange to the world, erected
the Christian Monarchy, which should teach us, not to limit God to the means
which is likeliest to us, but to live in all things by faith; and where means
seem to fail, then with Abraham above hope, and under hope, to give glory to
God, and cast our selves, and all our care upon God.

Thus of the manner.

The time follows,

In that he said, It is become. Christ was Head of the corner according to the
present time. First, if we consider the type of it, Christ was become head of
the corner, in that David was made King of Israel, as a type of Christ's
Kingdom over the Church. Secondly, Christ was Head, in that in the Apostles
time he had received power after his Ascension, over all things, though as yet
the Gentiles were not so fully converted. Thirdly, that he is become the head,
may be taken prophetically. For the Prophets, to express the certainty of a
thing to come, utter it in the words of the present tense. It is so, because it
shall as surely be so, as if it were already done.

Verse 8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were even
ordained.


HItherto of the punishments upon the builders. The punishment upon the whole
body of unbelievers, is contained in this verse. Wherein note first, the kinds
of punishment. Christ is a rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling. Secondly,
the causes both in themselves, and in God, in the words that follow.

A rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling.

Since wicked men have refused Christ, and will not believe in him; He, that
may not be a stone of foundation, will prove a stone of stumbling, and a rock
for them to dash on, till they be dashed to pieces: which words import the
fearful judgments of God, spiritually inflicted upon unbelievers, which is
twofold. First, they shall be given up to scandal; and then secondly to
despair.

Before I open the words particularly, diverse things may be noted in general.

First, Judgments, inflicted on some particular offenders, belong to all for
diverse reasons.
that the punishments that light upon particular wicked men, are to be
accounted the punishments of the whole body of unbelievers, as here despair
and taking offense at Christ, it may light upon some particular offenders only,
yet they are punishments belonging to all.

1. Because there is no judgment, but all wicked men have deserved it. 2.
Because, when God plagues some, he means all, he threatens all. 3. Because no
wicked man can be sure for the time to come, that he shall not fall into them.
4. Because the afflictions of this life are typical to wicked men; as, despair
is a typical hell, and so all other judgments are but little hels. And this
doctrine should much amaze impenite^t sinners, if they consider, that any
fearful judgment they see fall upon others, may fall upon them; and that GOD
is as well displeased with their sins, as with the sins of those he so plagued,
as Christ shows, Luke 13.1, to 6.
Secondly, that from one and the same cause, may arise diverse and contrary
effects: as, Christ, that is a stone of foundation to the believer, is a stone
of stumbling to the unbeliever. Thus, in Luke 2. he was appointed for the
rising and falling of many in Israel. Thus the Gospel of peace is to wicked men
a fire, a sword, a fan: It is a savor of life to the Godly, and a savor of
death to the Wicked, 2. Cor. 2. as the Sun melts the wax, and hardneth the
clay. This comes to pass by accident, and by the corruption that is in the
hearts of wicked men, and by the fearful judgments of God.

Use. The use should be to teach us therefore not to rest in the having of the
means of salvation; as, the preaching of the Word, etc. For, through thy
corruption it may be a means of greater damnation.

Thirdly, that of all judgments in this life, spiritual judgments are the
worst; which appears from hence in this, that when the LORD would declare his
special displeasure upon wicked men, he threatens these in this place as the
most fearful. Now, for explication of this point. All judgments in this life
are either spiritual or temporal. By temporal judgments, I mean such as
have their proper effects on the outward man, such as are, poverty, disgrace,
sickness, imprisonment, losses in men's estates, and the like. By spiritual
judgments, I mean such as have their proper effects upon the soul; as for
example, hardness of heart, the spirit of slumber, dissertion, or the absence of
GOD, the taking away of the gifts of the mind, the withholding of the
Gospel, the delivering of men up to the power of Satan, or to the love of
lies, terrors of despair, or taking of offense; of which later, in this place.

Now, Spiritual plagues are worse than temporal crosses, for diverse reasons.
these spiritual judgments are much worse than any of the former temporal
crosses; first, because these judgments light upon the best part of man, which
is the soul: and by how much the soul is better than the body, by so much it
is worse to be distressed in soul than in body. Secondly, because they
with-hould from us the best Good, which is God or Christ: now, that which
straightens us in the best things, must needs be the worst kind of restraint.
Thirdly, because these crosses are more hardly cured: it is much easier to heal
a sickness in the body, than a disease in the soul. Fourthly, because these
judgments for the most part are inflicted upon the worst offenders; I say, for
the most part: for, sometimes the Godly themselves may be scourged for a time,
and for just reasons, with some kinds of spiritual judgments.

Use. The use may be, first, for reproof of the madness of multitudes of
people in the world, that can be extremely vexed and grieved for worldly
crosses, yet have no sense or care of spiritual judgments: they howl upon
their beds, if GOD take from them corn, or wine, or the fruits of the field;
but never grieve, if God take the Gospel from them: they are much troubled if
they lose the favor of their greatest friends; but never mourn because GOD
has forsaken them: they are very impatient if their bodies be sick, and yet
very quiet if their souls be sick: they would think themselves undone if they
were carried to prison, who yet are not much moved at it, that God should
deliver them up to Satan. And yet I would not be mistaken. Note.
I do not mean to say, that wicked men should not mourn for worldly or outward
crosses. It is true, godly men should not, or not with great sorrows; but for
wicked men, they ought to be extremely grieved for every outward affliction,
because it comes in wrath from God, and is but the beginning of evils. But then
two things must be noted: First, that their sorrow should be godly, viz. for
their sins that brought those judgments, not for the cross it self;
secondly, that they ought to be more troubled for spiritual judgments, than
for temporal.

Secondly, this should much comfort godly men and women in all their
afflictions, and it should make them patient, because though God afflicts them
in their bodies or states, yet he spares their souls, and does not execute
those outward crosses but with much compassion.

Thirdly, it should teach us how to pray in the case of afflictions: if they
be spiritual judgments, we may pray directly for the remoueall of them; but
for temporal judgments, we must pray with condition.

And thus of the general observations.

Before I enter upon the particular breaking open of the doctrine of this
verse, it will not be amiss to show, that this, and such doctrine as this, is
not unprofitable.

Quest. For, some one might say, To what end serves this doctrine of God's
dealing with unbelievers?

Ans. I answer: it is profitable both for godly men and wicked men. For, wicked
men may hence hear and fear, and do no more wickedly, seeing hence they may
discern what they may come to, if they prevent it not by repentance. And for
godly men, they may hence be the more inflamed with the admiration of Gods
goodness, when they shall hear of their own privileges by grace. Such
Scriptures as this, contain the arraignment and trial of the ungodly. Now, it
is very profitable for us to stand by, and hear the trial. We know multitudes
of innocent men flock to the Assizes to hear the araignement of malefactors,
which breeds in them, first, contentment in the observation of the solemnity
and manner of administration of Justice: Secondly, a fear to offend: the
terror of their sentence frightes the heart for many days after: Thirdly, a
love of innocence: it makes men love innocence much the better for a long while
after: Fourthly, compassion to malefactors: it softens the heart, and makes men
fit to show mercy to these poor condemned men. The like to all this is bred by
the consideration of such Doctrines as this.

In the words of this verse then two things are to be noted: first, the kinds
of punishments inflicted upon the body of unbelievers: secondly the causes of
it. The kinds are two: first, God will deliver them up to scandal, and then
to despair: to scandal, as Christ is a stone of stumbling: to despair, as
Christ is a rock of offense.

These words are taken out of the Prophet Esaias, Chapter 8. where the Lord
intends by them to denounce the reprobation of the Jews, as some think, or
rather foretells the spiritual Judgments, which shall be inflicted upon them.
The Apostle in this place applies the words to the unbelievers of his time,
among whom the obstinate Jews were chief, to show, that as the other
Scripture was comfortable to the Godly: so were there places, that did threaten
the wicked: and that as the former place did prove Christ a stone of foundation
for the godly, so this did show, that Christ was a stone in another sense to
the wicked.

Christ is a stone of trial to all men in the Church, because the Doctrine of
Christ tryes men whether they be elected, or rejected: good, or bad: so Esaias
28.16. Again Christ is a precious stone to the believer: and thirdly, here a
stone of stumbling to the unbelievers.

Now, that we may know, what offense or scandal is, we may be helped by the
Etimology of the original words: For Scandal in the original is either
derived of a word that signifies, to halt, or else it notes any thing that
lies in a man's way a stone, or a piece of wood, against which, he that
runs, stumbleth, and so hurts or hinders himself: It most properly
signifies rest, or a certain crooked piece with a bait upon it in
instruments, by which mice, or wolves or foxes are taken: and thence the Church
translated the name of scandal; to note the snares, by which men are catched,
as beasts are in grins, and baits: so the word, it seems, is used.

So then, Scandal defined and distinguished.
a scandal is any thing, which causes, or occasioneth offenses, by which a
man is made to halt, or is brought into a snare, or made to stand still, or
fall in matter of Religion, or salvation: And so the sorcerers were a stumbling
block to Pharaoh, and the false prophets to Ahab, and the lying signs of
Antichrist, to such as love not the truth.

Now, all scandal may be thus divided: Scandal is either active, or Passive,
that is, given, or taken: Scandal given, is, when the author of the action is
likewise the cause of the hurt that comes by it: Thus Elies sons were
scandalous: thus David by his grievous sins gave offense, 1. Sam. 2.17.2.
Sam. 18.22, etc. and thus Scandal is given either by evil doctrine, first,
whether heretical, secondly, or superstitious: or else by wickedness of life,
or by wilful abuse of Christian liberty.

Offense taken, is either from our selves, or from others: A man may be an
offense, a stumbling block to himself, by dallying with some special beloved
corruption: of which our Savior Christ says, If thine eye offend thee, pull
it out, or thy hand, or thy foot, etc. Math. 5.29. Scandal taken from others,
is either that they call humane, or that they call diabolical: Scandal taken,
which they call humane, may either be found in Godly men or wicked men: Godly
Christians that are weak, may be offended, or hindered in Religion diverse ways:
as either by reason of the persecution and oppression of the godly: or by the
Heresies, or dissensions of men in the Church, or by the flourishing estate and
prosperity of the wicked: as also by the liberty some of the godly take in
things indifferent, for the advancing of the Gospel in case of necessity: As
when Paul, for the gaining of the Gentiles, neglected Moses Law. This was an
offense to many believing Jews et contra, etc.

Wicked men also take offense, as here in this text is manifest. Now, the
offense which they call Diabolical is that, when men wilfully and peruersly
will provoke themselves to sin freely, because of the examples of the vices of
Godly men: as when the drunkenness of Noah, the incest of Lot, the adultery and
murder of David, the perjury of Peter, or the like is alleged to maintain
themselves in a liberty of sinning: It is the scandal of wicked men, which is
here meant.

Now wicked men make themselves miserable in this case of scandal both ways:
By giving offense, and by taking offense. By giving offense, and so Christ
curses them for offending his little ones: Math. 18.
Wicked men offend them either by the subtilty of false and corrupt Doctrine,
or by provocation and inticement: or by evil example, or by discouraging them
with reproaches, threats or oppositions, or the like: but this kind of offense
is not meant here. It is offense taken, which is noted here, as a grievous
curse upon them; and amongst offenses, taken, this is their misery that they
gather offense, from what should have bin the cause of their holiness and
happiness, even from Christ.

Quest. Might some one say, What should men be offended at in Christ?

The Jews were offended: Ans.
1. At the vileness of his person, Wicked men were offended at Christ in many
things Esaias 53.2. Ioh. 18.36 Math. 9 10.
or his mean co^ditio^* 2. At the poverty and simplicity of his disciples. 3.
At the obscurity of his Kingdom, being without worldly pomp and glory. 4. At
his conversation, because he kept company with sinners. 5. At his doctrine:
partly, because he reproved their superstition, and hypocrisy, and the
traditions of their fathers, and partly because he taught, that Justification
could not be had by Moses Law, but must be sought by believing in him, as
also by other particular directions; as, that man must eat of his flesh; that
he was the Son of God; that he was older then Abraham, etc. Lastly, at his
miracles: for they thought, he did it by some Devil.

Thus in our times the Papists, they take offense at the newnes of our
Religion, as they pretend; at the freeness of the people that profess it; at
the doctrine of Justification by faith alone, etc.

Thus also wicked men in the Church are offended at the small number of such as
are sincere; at the plainness of the preaching of the Gospel, or such like.

Quest. 2 Might some one say, What if wicked men be offended, is that such a
great misery?

Ans. Yes: for it is many times the occasion of their ruin, for we see many
men keep these objections in their hearts till their death, by which they are
hardened from all care of salvation by Christ, at the best it is a notable
hindrance for the time; it frustrates them of the Gospel, and of the communion
of Saints, etc.

Use. The use may be first for information: We may hence see, what an
infectious sorceresse unbelief is: It can make things exceeding good, to prove
exceeding evil to them: it can make God, the Word, the Sacraments, and Christ
himself (all good) to be occasions of extreme evil to him. Wicked men are
like spiders, that can suck poison out of the sweetest flowers.

Secondly, this should serve for great humiliation unto all wicked men, that
find themselves stopped, or hindered, or cast out of the way by receiving
scandal into their hearts: They should here take notice of it, that it is a
singular curse of God, when God leaves a man to the liberty of admitting
poisonfull objections, and thereby to be hardened against the care for his own
soul in matters of Religion. Men little think of the fearefulnes of such men's
cases, which must needs be extremely evil, either if they look upward to
see, that God does expose them to this offense, as a way of singular
punishment, or if they look to the effect, whatsoever they can say, yet their
poor souls in the mean time are left destitute of mercy, or the profit and
power of it.

Might some one say, Ob.
How can they help it, seeing Christ is a stone of stumbling unto them? It
seems they cannot avoid it.

Christ is a stone of stumbling, Sol.
not actiuely, but passiuely: Note.
he does not make them stumble, but they through their ignorance (walking in
darkness) or through their precipitation running headlong in things, or through
the poison of some beloved sin, which has altogether corrupted their taste,
do fall at the Doctrine of Christ, or turn the precious things of Christ into
poison, by reason of the venom lying in themselves.

Thirdly, such taking offense is a judgment. Weak Christians should be
warned and temper themselves so, as to refrain that weakness of being so apt to
be offended at the liberty of strong Christians; and to this end they should
take heed of doubtful disputations, or ensnaring themselves about the use of
indifferent things. For though God pities them, yet they are much plagued by
their opinions, and intanglements herein. For first, they sin against their
brethren by rash censure, and despising them: and secondly, they wrong their
own souls: for sometimes they are hindered in the Word, and sometimes lose the
benefit of the Sacraments by their ignorant scruples, and sometimes they draw
much trouble and molestation upon them; and lastly they many times open the
mouths of wicked men to revile them, and exasperate them against the good way
of God. To conclude therefore this use: Since offense is the rod of the wicked,
let not godly men suffer it to rest on their lot.

Fourthly, since wicked men, by the judgment of God, and their own
frowardnes, are so apt to receive offense, it should teach the godly to order
themselves so toward them, that they give no offense unto them, I say, give no
offense, so as the fault should be in the godly, but rather they should strive
to overcome this frowardnes of wicked men, by all possible care, both to put
them to silence, and by keeping them silent. Now, because there be some things,
wherein regard must not be had of the offense of wicked men, I will open this
point distinctly, and show,

First, in what things the offense of wicked men is not to be regarded.

Secondly, in what things we must take heed, we give them not offense, or in
what things we may be guilty of giving offense to them.

Thirdly, what rules may be observed in our carriage, which may silence wicked
men, or compel respect and estimation from them, or at least put them to
silence, etc.

For the first, Wherein we are not to regard the offense of wicked men.
if wicked men be offended for doing good, we are not to regard their
offense: As when the Pharisees were offended at Christ, he cared not, but said,
Let them alone, they are blind, and leaders of the blind, etc. Math. 15.14.
And so the Apostles answered, It is better to obey God then men, Acts 5.29. It
is better, that scandal arise, then that the truth should be forsaken. Thus
Michaiah cares not for the offense of Ahab, nor Eliah: and in this case, Leui
is not to respect father, or mother, brethren or children, Deuteronomy. 33.9. And so
though wicked men be offended, we must preach the Gospel with all
plainness, and not affect wisdom of words, 1. Cor. 1.23. and we must labor
for the meat, that perishes not, and must pray unto God, and use religious
exercises in our houses, as Daniel did: we must renew Justification by our
own works, and we must suffer in a good cause, and we must with strictnes
avoid the excesses of the time.

In what things we may be guilty of giving offense to wicked men.
Now for the second: we may be guilty of giving offense to the wicked: First, by
scandalous and vicious life: thus David gave offense. Secondly, by indiscretion
in the manner of doing good duties, as if men pray, or fast, or give alms to
be heard, or seen of men. Thirdly, by rash zeal, as when men proclaim to
the world a great deal of strictnes in things that are not grounded upon the
Word, and yet are tainted openly with known infirmities, and sins: or when
men are violent and rash censurers, especially in things they commit
themselves: or when men neglect their calling, and live inordinately, and are
busybodies under pretense of Religion: or when men that have a fair door
opened to do good by preaching the Gospel, will not yield in some indifferent
things, that they may win them; as, woe had been to Paul, if he had not
been a Jew with the Jews, that he might gain the Jews thereby: or
necessity lay upon him the preaching of the Gospel, or to preach the Gospel,
though it were clogd at that time with condition of yielding to the Jewish
ceremonies, 1. Cor. 9.

Now for the third, there are diverse excellent rules that may much adorn the
lives of Christians in their courage toward the wicked; and so either prevent
scandal, or leave them without excuse, Rules for the preventing of scandal.
themselves being Judges, as they will confess in the day of visitation. These
things then will much advance our cause before wicked men, to show in our
conversation, 1. Integrity, and harmelesnes, and sound care of the practicing
of godliness, Philippians 1.15, 16. 2. Submission and obedience unto the King,
and his humane ordinances, 1. Peter 2.13.14.15. 3. Reverence and fear, when we
entreat of any thing, 1 Pet. 3.16.
that concerns God, and Religion. 4. Meeknes of wisdom, expressing a mind
free from conceitednes, frowardnes, or affectation, Iam. 3.13. 5. Mercy to the
poor, and a mind free from the greedy desire of earthly things, a serious
declaration of the contempt of the world, Iam. 1.26. Math. 5.16, etc. 6.
Quietness and peace to be showed first in studying to be quiet, and to meddle
with our own business: secondly, in making peace amongst others, Math. 5.8. 7.
Love to our enemies, being ready to pray for them, or do them any good.


Lastly, hence may be gathered some matter of consolation for the godly. For
first, if the Lord have kept them from taking offense, he has freed them from
a great and sore spiritual judgment. Secondly, if the wicked should be so
perverse, as to take offense, when he gives none; yet this may stay him, that
Christ himself was an offense unto them. Thirdly, as it is a great judgment
to be offended at Christ: so it is a great mercy and supernatural grace, when
the Lord makes our hearts able to love the Lord Jesus in all sincerity.

Hitherto of the first kind of punishment: the second is, that Christ shall be
to them A rock of offense, that is, they shall fall upon Christ, as the ship
does upon the rock, and be broken all to pieces: There shall be a desperate
anguish upon their consciences, perceiving themselves to have no right in
Christ, by the fear of which, as men that have suffered shipwreck, they shall
be out of all hope of mercy. Thus he that falls on this stone, shall be
broken, and upon whom it shall fall, he shall be ground to powder, Luke 20 17.

The consciences of wicked men are diversely affected: some are without feeling
of any grieuance in the matters of their souls; some have feeling. The
conscience is without feeling, either through a continual security, and
sleepines, which is in all men, or through a searednes, by which some men are
grown past feeling. Now those wicked men that have any feeling in this text,
are cast into two sorts; for either they are offended, or they despair. Christ
is to those latter, an occasion of their ruin, they suffer shipwreck upon
Christ, which is joined with singular offense, or pain, or grieuance of their
consciences. This rock is like that in the Judges, chap. 6.21. out of which
fire went and consumed them.

The despair that wicked men feel, is of two sorts. For either it is a
despair, which rises from their persuasion of their want of help in
spiritual things, or from their want of help in outward things: sometimes they
fall into desperate torments, and griefs, and fears about outward things,
either upon fear of danger, or upon an apprehension that they are utterly
undone, or shall be in matters of the world: Deuteronomy. 28.96.67.
this was the despair mentioned: and this despair was in Saul, Achitophel and
Belshazzer, Dan. 5. and in the Jews, when they said there was no hope, Ier.
2.25. and this was in the Egyptians, Babylonians, Tyrians; and their case in
the desolation of their estate by war, mentioned in many chapters of the
Prophet Esaias. But, this despair is not meant here: for, this is a despair of
all help or salvation of the soul by Christ; conceiving, that they are utterly
cast off of God, and shall perish for ever. Thus Cain and Judas despaired of
all mercy in God.

And this despair of salvation and all happiness, How many ways wicked men
may despair.
is felt either in hell, or at the day of Judgment, or in this life.

First, it is certain, that the Wicked feel an eternal despair in hell, which
increases their torments, because they have no hope of ease or help: and thus
also the devils despair. This despair in hell, is a mere gnawing the
conscience, and tormenting it, which never dies.

Secondly, they also feel despair with singular horror, when they come to
appear before Jesus Christ at the last Day, when they behold the face of the
Judge, and feel within them a witness that tells them they shall be damned. This
torment will then come upon them, like the pains of a woman in travel; and
their anguish will be so great, that they will cry to the mountains to cover
them from the face of the Judge, Reu. 1.7. and 6.16.
1. These. 5.3.

Thirdly, now the first degree of this despair, is felt by diverse wicked men
in this life, as it was by Cain and Judas: and of this he speaks here. And
thus wicked men despair, when they think their sins cannot be forgiven, and
that they have no benefit by Christ, and shall certainly perish for ever.

And this is noted here as a grievous curse of God inflicted upon unbelievers.
Despair is one of God's most fearful judgments in this world; which when God
inflicteth, he may be said to rain upon them fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, Psalm. 11.6. Most fearful is their case, when the wrathful
Arm of God takes hold of them, and he poures out his indignation upon them:
this will make their loins to shake, Psalm 69.23, 24. They are then like the
raging sea, having no peace within them, Esaias 57. vlt. They are brought to the
King of terrors, and their confidence is rooted out, Job 18.11, 14. There they
were in great fear, Psalm 14.5. They are said to blaspheme God, and gnaw their
tongues, Revel. 16.9, 10.

While God's Saints sing for joy of heart, they howl for vexation of spirit,
Esaias 65.14. They could be glad to run into the holes of the rocks, and into
the caves of the earth for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty, when
he comes thus terribly to shake the earth, Esaias 2.19. Surely, such is the case
of the Wicked; and this is the portion of their cup that know not God. And how
terrible this torment is in the heart of a wicked man, may appear, if we
consider but what torment the very Godly suffer in their despair, which is far
easier than that of the wicked. David says, The pains of hell compassed him,
Psalm 18.5, 6. and 116.3. and that God's terrors did cut him off; and that he
was ready to die; and that, while he suffered God's terrors, he was distracted,
Psalm. 88.15, 16, 14. As also it may appear by those torments which the very
despair for outward things has put wicked men to, which is far less
grievous than this despair of God's mercy and eternal salvation: and yet in
that case their pains are compared to the pain of a woman in travel, Psalm
48.6.

See more at large of the horrible plight wicked men have been in in this
respect, in the description of the judgments should fall upon the foreign
nations, rendered by the Prophet Esaias in many chapters.

Uses. The use may be, first, for great amazement to wicked men, that now
perhaps laugh and sing in the iollity of their hearts. O let them remember,
what God may do to them! What case will they be in, if God bring them once to
despair? And this is the por^ion of their Cup. Oh! if the terror of a King be
as the roaring of a Lion; what then is their case, if God shall reueal his
wrath from heaven upon them for their weighty sins! And the more should they
be affrighted, because despair is but as it were the beginning of evils. They
feel it for a short time on earth, but shall feel it for ever in hell. And
therefore, if it be possible, they should be persuaded in time to repent,
that they may be delivered from this great wrath to come. Oh how easy, in
comparison, might men's repentance be, if they would be warned in time!

Secondly, this doctrine may breed in us a wonderful awfulnesse and fear of
God: when we read of such judgments in Scripture, or behold any poor wretches
tormented with this judgment, it should breed in us not only an infallible
assurance that there is a God, or that there shall be a hell of woeful
torments, or the like; but it should especially make us think of God with all
reverence, and be afraid to displease him: for, dominion and fear are ever with
him, Job 25.2. This doctrine should make us resolute to go our ways, and sin
no more: the counsel of the Wicked should be far from us, seeing he can
thus put out their candle, and make them drink of the wrath of the Almighty,
Job 21.17, 20.

Thirdly, it should work in all of us a care to use all means, that we may be
kept from despair.

Quest. What then should we do, that we fall not into despair?

Ans. Some things are to be avoided: some things are to be done.

If we would not fall into despair,

Preservatives against despair.
First, we must take heed of wilful unbelief, such as was in the Jews; when
men not only neglect the assurance of salvation brought by Christ, but contemn
it, and strive to put all such cares out of their heads.

Secondly, we must take heed of stumbling. If men feel their hearts to be
ensnared in respect of Christ, and that they are tossed with vile objections,
etc. let them look to themselves, and amend in time: for, if Christ be a stone
of stumbling, he may be a rock of offense.

Thirdly, we must take heed of security, and contempt of the knowledge of
God's ways. Despair will work terribly, when it lights upon a mind that has
contemned knowledge, and lived in all ease and security, Job 21.1, to 20.

Fourthly, we must take heed of apostasy from the profession of the love of
the truth: for, despair is many times a woeful scourge to such kind of
creatures; as the stories record, and experience shows.

Fifthly, we must in general take heed of all gross and presumptuous sins,
especially the sins against the third, sixth, and seventh commandments: for,
usually these sins go before in the desparation; such as are, swearing, and
cursing, and perjury, and murder, and incest, and whoredom, etc. The Wicked
flee, when none pursues them: but the righteous are bold as a Lion, Pro. 28.1.
and 14.14.

Now, secondly, there are other things which we must do, that we may avoid
despair.

First, we must not smother our doubts in matters of Religion, especially in
the cases of our conscience, but take the pains to ask and seek resolution:
else, that which is but doubting at the first, may prove to be despair in the
end. Those lesser sores in men's hearts, may fester and rankle within us, till
they prove to this great disease.

Secondly, we must store our heads with the promises of the Gospel, and those
comfortable places of Scripture, as may breed in us a full persuasion of God's
singular compassion and mercy toward all penitent sinners; and withal do show
us that plentiful redemption in Jesus Christ, and the marvelous efficacy of
his blood to cleanse us from all our sins.

Thirdly, we should, above all things, put on the shield of faith; I mean, we
should use all diligence to get the assurance of GOD's favor in Christ: for,
assurance will preserve us safe from despair. For, as unbelief brings it: so
faith preserues us from it.

Fourthly, we should be careful upon all occasions to keep our assizes; and if
we be endangered by any sin, we should make haste to judge our selves, that
we be not condemned of the Lord. For, the attendance upon this point, makes
all safe: whereas the long neglect of our daily sins, without any humiliation
for them, may turn in the end to the pangs of some miserable despair.

Use 4. Fourthly, hence the Godly may comfort themselves, because Christ is to
them a rock to build on, Mat. 16. a rock for refuge and safety, Psalm. 18.2. a
rock for shadow, Esaias 32.2. And therefore let the Inhabitants of the earth
sing, Esaias 42.11. and withal, if they consider how God shows them, they
should account their other afflictions but light, in comparison of what falls
upon wicked men.

Ob. But we read, that godly men have been in despair; as, David, Job, and
others.

Sol. It is true: but yet there was ever great difference between the despair
of the Godly and the Wicked, which I will briefly note.

First, Special differences between the despair of the Godly and the Wicked.
they differed in the causes. The honors of the Wicked proceeded from the curse
of God: whereas the sorrows of the Godly proceeded from his mercy.

Secondly, they differed sometimes in the ob^iect: for, godly men despair of
themselves; wicked men despair of God. It is a grace usual in repentance, to
despair of all happiness from our selves: but now wicked men are out of all
hope of God's mercy and help.

Thirdly, they differ in the effects. For, Cain blasphemes God in his despair,
and says, his punishment is greater than he can bear, or his sins greater
than can be forgiven: but the Godly give glory to God, and account him always
just and good. Again, wicked men rage and repent not: but godly men bewail
their sins, and cry mightily to God, Reu. 16.9, 10. Ier. 18.12. Wicked men
be in travel, but they bring forth nothing but wind: they are never the
better when they come out of their affliction, no though they poured out a
prayer to GOD in the time of distress, Esaias 26.16, 17, 18. Thirdly, the
confidence of the wicked man is swept down as the house of a spider, they have
no hope at all, Job 8.13. and 11. vlt. Whereas godly men, at the worst, are
supported with some kind of hope, or persuasion of mercy: and therefore
usually they rather ask whether God's mercy be clean gone, than say it is so,
Psalm 77. and they rather complain, that God hides himself from them, than that
God hates them, Psalm 88.15.

Fourthly, they differ in the measure too. For, God always has respect to the
strength of his children, to lay no more upon them than they are able to bear:
whereas he respects the sin of wicked men, and regards it not, though they
cry out with Cain, they cannot bear it.

Fifthly, God gives issue out of the trial, and returns from his displeasure in
a moment, when he deals with the Godly, Esaias 54. whereas wicked men can have no
such hope.

Lastly, seeing despair is such a curse, and is so far from leading men to
Christ, that it makes them suffer shipwreck upon Christ; Ministers and all
others should take heed of driving the people upon any pretense, into this
kind of desperation: let men be taught to despair of themselves, but never to
despair of God.

Hitherto of the kinds of punishments.

The causes follow: first, in themselves; secondly, in God.

In themselves it is their stumbling at the word, and their disobedience.

To them which stumble at the Word.]

There is a diverse reading. The old reading was thus: To them that offend in
the Word; noting either in general, that Gods word, or Christ, does not profit
these men that were guilty of evil speaking, and the gross abuses of the
tongue: or in particular, it should note the sins of the stubborn Jews, who
offended in word, when they blasphemed Christ, and denied him.

But I rather take it as here it is translated: and so it notes the causes, why
many men fall into scandal, and from thence into despair, viz. because they
bring ill hearts to the Word of God, they have minds that are rebellious, and
will not be subject to the Gospel, but intertaine it with diseased and
cauilling minds. Those persons are likely not to receive any good by Christ,
that quarrel at the Word of Christ. Now, that this may not be mistaken or
neglected, I will show, first, what it is, not to stumble at the Word, lest
some weak ones should be dismayed: Then secondly, how many ways wicked men
stumble at the Word.

For the first. How and wherein men take offense at the Word.
To be grieved in heart for the reproves of the Word, is not an offense, but
a grace: so we are troubled not with dislike of the Word, but of our own
sins. Secondly, to inquire of the truth, and that which is delivered, and to
try the doctrine, by turning to the Scriptures as the Bereans did: this is not
condemned here; nor is it a stumbling at the Word, to put a difference
between the teaching of Christ, and the teaching of the Scribes and Pharisees.

Secondly, but men are said to be offended at the Word, when their hearts rise
against it, or they ensnare themselves through their own corruption by
occasion of the Word. To speak distinctly, wicked men are offended at the word
with a threefold offense. First, with the offense of anger, when they rage and
fret at the Word, or the teachers thereof, because their sins are reproved,
or their miseries foretold. And this offense they show, either when they envy
the success of the Word, Acts. 4.2. or rail and revile Gods Saints, as Ahab
did Michaiah for telling him the truth: or when they mock at the Word, as the
Pharisees did, Luke 16.14. Secondly, with the offense of scandal, when they
take occasion from the doctrine they hear, to fall off from hearing, or from
the true Religion, or from the company of the godly. Thus they stumbled at
those hard sayings of Christ, that departed from him for that cause or reason,
Ioh. 6. Thirdly, with the offense diabolical, when men pervert the good Word
of God, to inflame themselves the more greedily to sin, making it a doctrine of
liberty, or taking occasion to commit sin from the Law, that rebukes sin.

Uses.
The use may be first for information, and so two ways. For first, we may
hence see the reason, why many hearers profit not by the Word. It is not
because the Word wants power, but because they stumble at it. They nourish
cauils and objections against it: they oppose reason to faith. Secondly, we may
hence take notice of the difference of a regenerate and unregenerate heart. To
the one the Word is a savor of life, to the other it is a deadly savor, and
full of offense to them. And withal, this may humble wicked men. For this is a
sure truth, that so long as they are offended at the Word, so long they have no
part in Christ: and withal it may comfort all those that love the Word, and
receive it with joy constantly. For that is a means and sign of their
interest in Christ.

Being disobedient.]

These words contain another cause why Christ was no better rellished by them,
and why they found such an ill taste in the word of Christ: it ^as the
wickedness that was in them: Sin had marred their tastes: sweet meats have
but an ill relish with those who have corrupt and diseased stomachs, and the
cause is apparent, the ill humors in their stomachs, and nothing in the meats
they eat: But of their disobedience before: and therefore this shall suffice
in this place: and thus of the cause in themselves.

The cause in God follows.

Whereunto they were appointed.]

There is much difference of the reading of the original words in the
translations.

Some read thus: They stumble at the Word, and believe not in him, in whom
they are placed, or set; and expound it thus, In whom they live, move, and have
their being: some read, in stead of disobedient, They believed not: But for
these words, read them as here. But then their meaning is, that the Jews
believed not, though they were thereunto appointed, that is, though they had
the promise of salvation, and were a people separate thereunto: and so it is an
aggrauation of their unbelief.

This sense and reading is not to be despised.

But I take it, as I find it in the translation: and so the sense is, that
these men, whether Jews or Gentiles, that are here spoken of, were appointed
to this misery by the decree of God: and so they are words that express the
substance of that part of Gods decree, which Divines call Reprobation.

And so it is to be observed from hence, that wicked men are appointed from
everlasting, to the enduring of the misery which are inflicted upon them in
this life, or in Hell: This is a doctrine which is extremely distasted by flesh
and blood, and proves many times more offensive to the common people, and is
always to be reckned as strong meat: and therefore, that I may fairly get
off this point, I offer two things to your considerations: First, the proofs
that plainly avouch so much, as is here observed. Secondly, I will set down
certain infallible observations, which tend to quiet men's minds, and persuade
them against the seeming difficulty, or absurdity of this truth.

Proofs of Reprobation.
For the first, the Apostle Jude says, that the wicked men he treats of, were
of old ordained to this condemnation, Jude 4. and the Apostle Peter says, that
the ungodly were reserved unto the day of Judgment to be punished, 2. Pet.
2.9. and verse 12. he says, that they are natural brute beasts, made to be
taken, and destroyed: and it is manifestly implied, 1. These. 5.8. that God has
ordained wicked men to wrath: so Romans 9.22.

For the second* though this doctrine seem wonderful hard, Certain
observations for the quieting of our minds in the doctrine of reprobation.
yet to assure us, there is no hard dealing at all in God, there be many
things may confirm us, and ease our minds, though for the present we cannot
understand how this should be, and perhaps are much troubled about this point,
and therefore seriously consider,

First, for thy self; that if thou have truly repented, and do believe in
Jesus Christ, and have in thee the signs of a child of God; for thy part thou
art free from this danger, and out of all question art in safe estate, and
therefore ought not to grieve, but rejoice with singular praise to God.

Secondly, seeing God has comforted us with many doctrines, and trusted us
with many clear points of knowledge, can we not be contented, that God
should speak darkly to us in one point? Especially when we are told
beforehand, that there is an Abyssus: a depth, yea many depths in this
doctrine? Shall we be wayward, because one truth will not sink yet into our
heads? We are told, that this is a point unsearchable, Romans 11.32, 33. and
the rather, because weak Christians are not tied to eat strong meat: they may
safely let this doctrine alone.

Thirdly, that no man can know his own reprobation, nor ought to believe so of
himself: but is called upon to use the means by which he may be saved.

Fourthly, we have this oath of God for it. That he desires not the death of
the sinner, but would have all men to repent and be saved.

Fifthly, that whereas Divines make two parts of the decree of reprobation:
Praeterition and Praedamnation; All Divines are agreed for the latter, that God
did never determine to damn any man for his own pleasure, but the cause of
his perdition was his own sin. And here is reason for it: For God may, to
show his sovereignty annihilate his creature; but to appoint a reasonable
creature to an estate of endless pain, without respect of his desert, cannot
agree to the unspotted Justice of God. And for the other part of passing over,
and forsaking a great part of men for the glory of his Justice, the exactest
Divines do not attribute that to the mere will of God, but hold, that God did
first look upon those men as sinners, at least in the general corruption
brought in by the Fall. For all men have sinned in Adam, and are guilty of high
treason against God.

Sixthly, that sin is no effect of reprobation, but only a consequent: Gods
decree does not force any man to sin, etc.

Seventhly, that what soever God has decreed, yet all grant, that God is no
way any Author of sin: he does not cause sin in any, but only permits it, and
endures it: and whereas the most that can be objected, is, that God hardneth
whom he will, Romans 9. it is agreed upon in the answer of all sound Divines,
that God does not infuse any wickedness from without, in men's hearts: but
whereas their hearts are in themselves by custom in sin hardened, as a just
Judge he gives them over to Satan and his power, who is as it were the Iayler,
but does never restrain them from good, and the means of it.

Eightthly, now may men say, that ^^nne came upon men by reason of the rigor
of Gods Law: For it was impossible to be kept. For this there is a clear
answer: When God gave his Law at first, man was able to keep it; and it came by
his own default, that he was not able to keep it afterward. A man that
sends his servant to the market, and gives him charge to do such and such
business for him; if that servant make himself drunken, and so be unfit to do
his masters business, he is worthy to be punished, because he was fit to do
it, when he was first sent about it.

Ninthly, it is plain in this verse, that those men of whom he here speaks, are
indicted of grievous sin against Christ and the Gospel.

Tenthly, that things may be just, though the reasons of them do not appear
unto us: if it be true of some cases of justice among men, much more in this
case of God's justice.

Lastly, it should much satisfy us, that in the day of Jesus Christ, those
mysteries of Religion shall be broken open, and all then shall be made clear
unto us, as clear as the shining of the Sun at noonday.

Thus of the punishment of unbelievers, and so also of the first argument,
taken from testimony of Scripture.

Verses 9, and 10. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priest hood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of h^^
that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light;

Which in times past were not a people, yet are now the people of God; which
had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.


THese words contain the second argument to persuade Christians to make their
constant recourse unto Christ, and from him to procure virtue to enable them
for holiness of conversation: and it is taken from the consideration of the
excellency of that estate, unto which they were brought by Christ. For the
description whereof, the Apostle singles out two places of Scripture, with
which he makes up a complete narration of their great prerogatives above all
other people, and above that they themselves were in former times. The places
of Scripture he makes use of, are Exodus 9. and Hosh. 1.

And before I open the words, two things may be here noted. First, the
Apostle's care to prove what he says from the scripture, whether it be
against wicked men, or for godly men: which shows, that we should much more take
heed to GOD's Word, being less than Apostles, especially such an Apostle.
Secondly, we may hence note, that the promises or praises given to the Godly in
the old Testament, are not envied to Christians in the new Testament. God is no
respecter of persons: but we have free liberty to search the books of God, and
to choose out of all the examples of the suits of godly men, or the preferments,
what we will: and if we make a suit of it to god, he will not deny it, but show
us their mercy.

Now, for the particular opening of these words, we must observe, that it is
the purpose of the Apostle to show briefly the privileges of the godly above
all others, or what themselves were before their conversion.

And the privilege of their estate may be considered either positiuely in it
self, or comparatively. It is described positiuely, verse 9. and comparatively,
verse 10.

In the ninth verse, there he reckons up a number of prerogatives belonging to
the Godly, and withal shows the use they should make of them, or the end why
they were conferred upon them.

The Godly excel in diverse respects, if we consider,

First, their election: they are chosen of God.

Secondly, their alliance or kindred: they are a chosen kindred.

Thirdly, their dignity above other men: they are royal Kings.

Fourthly, their function or private imploiment before God: Priests.

Fifthly, their behavior, or outward conversation: they are holy.

Sixthly, their number: they are a Nation.

Seventhly, their acceptance with God: they are a peculiar people.

First, for Election.

The Apostle, looking upon the words in Exodus 19.5, 6. and seeing that they
described the happiness of Christians in this life, does in the Forefront
put-to this privilege of their election, as the foundation of all the rest,
and would have Christians much affected with the consideration of this
prerogative.

It is one of the chief and prime comforts of a Christian, to consider, that he
is elect of GOD, Psalm 106.4, 5. 2. Pet. 1.9. elect, I say, both before time,
and in time. Before time, in God's decree: and in time, when the Godly are
singled and called out of the world, and picked out, one of a city, and two of
a tribe, in all the ages of the world, and distinguished from other men, by
believing in Jesus Christ. As the Israelites were chosen out of all the nations
of the world; so now the Elect out of all the Ages of the world.

Quest. But, what is there in the election of a Christian, that should so much
affect him, as to account himself so wonderful happy in that respect?

Ans. There are many things in our election, which should much ravish us: as,
to consider,

The specialties of Election.
First, when we were chosen, viz. before the foundation of the world from all
eternity. Oh what a favor is it to think, that God had such thought of us
before ever we had any being! Ephesians. 1.4.

Secondly, by whom we were chosen, viz. by God. Men are wont to be affected, if
any of any degree almost do point out them above others, unto any condition of
praise or preferment. To be beloved and in request with any, is a contentment:
but especially, if Kings or great persons should choose us out to set their love
upon us, how would we be moved with that! Oh! what comparison can there be
between the greatest men on earth, and the great God in heaven?

Thirdly, to what we were chosen, viz. to a Kingdom and great glory. For
meaner persons to be chosen to any preferment, it would prove a great
contentment; but especially, to be advanced to the highest honors: why, God
has chosen and called us to no less an happiness than a Kingdom and glory,
yea, his Kingdom and glory in heaven, Mat. 25.34. 2. These. 2.13, 14.

Fourthly, for how long this choice must last, viz. for ever. To be chosen to a
great office, though it were but for a year, is a great honor in the account
of some men, but especially to enjoy a kingdom, if it may be for diverse years,
as 20, 30, 40, or the like, how would men rejoice, that could attain to such an
election? But behold, our happiness is greater. For we have by our Election an
entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, upon what reasons we were chosen. viz. upon God's free and mere grace
and goodness: he chooses whom he will. It was his good pleasure to choose us to
such a Kingdom: we had it not by descent, or desert, Romans 9.18, 21. Ephesians.
1.11.

Sixthly, in what manner he chose us, viz. unchangeably, to be chosen to so
great an estate, though it had been but during pleasure, and that pleasure to,
such as might change, had been a great advancement. But Gods purpose remains
according to his choice, Romans 9.
and whom he elected, he calls; and whom he calls, he iustifies; and whom
he iustifies, he glorifies, Romans 8.30. The foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Lastly, to consider whom he chose, which has a double incitation in it. For
first, the Scripture tells us, Many are called, but few are chosen. Now this
increases our honor, that but a few only can be admitted to the
participation of it. If many had enjoyed it, the commonnesse of it might have
had in it some occasion of lessening the value of it, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. Math.
20.16. Secondly, God chose us, that were most vile creatures polluted in blood,
covered with filthiness, fallen from him by vile Apostasy and our rebellion in
our first parents, and being guilty of many treasons in our own actions. And
this should much move us, that God should set his heart upon such vile wretches,
as we every day are proved to be.

Uses.
The use of this may be diverse. But I will only stand upon two uses. First, the
consideration hereof should enforce upon us a care to make our Election sure,
2. Pet. 1.9.

Question. Now if any ask, by what signs I may know, that I am elected of God?

Answer. I answer, There be diverse infallible signs of Election: as for
example,

First, Signs of Election.
Separation from the world: when God singles us out from the world, it does
manifest, that he has chosen us from al eternity. Now, that this separation
may be proved sure and infallible, we must know, 1. That it is wrought in us
by the Gospel, 2. These. 2.14. 2. That it contains in it a contempt of earthly
things, so as our hearts do unfeignedly dislaime all happiness in the things of
this world, as out of true judgment resolving, that all is vanity and vexation
of spirit. The love of God, and the love of the world cannot stand together, 1
John. 2.14. 3. That it with-drawes us from needeles society, or delight in the
men of this world, who follow the lusts of life, and mind only earthly
things. Psalm. 26. 4. An estimation of spiritual things above all the world.


Secondly, a relying upon Jesus Christ, and the covenants of grace in him, so
as we trust wholly upon him for righteousness, and happiness* Hence it is, that
faith is called the faith of Gods Elect, Titus 1.1.

Thirdly, the Sanctification of the spirit, 3. These. 2.13. which has in it
both the reformations of those evils, which were wont to prevail over us, and
were most beloved of us, as also the qualifying the heart with such graces as
are supernatural, such as those mentioned in the Catalogue 2. Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. and such are those graces heertofore mentioned in the sight of salvation.

Fourthly, the testimony of the spirit of Adoption. For every godly man has a
witness in himself, 1. Ioh. 5.10. Romans 8.15. Gods Spirit does assure Gods
Elect, that they are elect, and that it does principally, by sealing up unto
them the promises of Gods Word, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

Fifthly, by the conformity of Christians unto Christ in affliction: for the
Elect are predestinate to be made like unto Christ in sufferings. Now, because
this sign must be warily explicated, we must understand, that barely to be
afflicted, is not a sign of Election. For so may, and are wicked men, as well
as godly men: but to become like Christ in the suffering, is the sign; which
that it may be more infallible and clear, we must observe in these sufferings.

Marks of such as truly suffer with Christ.
1. The kinds, as for example, to be hated and scorned of the world, and
reviled and persecuted, is a token, that we are not of the world, because the
world would love his own. Ioh. 15.18, 19.
2. The causes, as if we be hated for goodness, and do not suffer as evil
doers, Ioh. 1^* 8.21. Psalm. 38.20. when our afflictions are the afflictions of
the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.8, 9. Mat. 5.12. 3. The effects, that we love obedience
by our sufferings, Heb. 5.8. and be made more holy and fruitful, and quiet,
and meek, and humble by them, Heb. 15.11. So as we can say, It was good for
me, that I was afflicted, Psalm. 119. 4. By the manner, that we be like Christ
in silence, Esaias 13.7. patience, and despising the shame of the cross, Heb.
12.1, 2. 1. Pet. 2.21, 22, 23. prayers to God, and submission to Gods will,
with strong cries and feruency, Heb. 5.7. 5. By the issue, when God gives a
like end to the trial of his servants, as he did unto the Passion of Christ,
making all work together for the best, Romans 8.28. 6. The intertainement, which
God gives unto his servants in the means of communion with God: For when we
meet with God familiarly, and continue in his ordinances, that is an infallible
sign and note of Election: as when a man finds constantly the pleasures of
Gods house, Psalm. 65.4. power and much assurance in hearing the Word, 1. These.
1.4, 5. an inward sealing up of the comforts of the covenant, in receiving of
the Sacraments, testified by the secret and sweet refreshing of the heart in
the time of receiving, the conscience being comforted in the forgiveness of
sins past, Math. 26.28. an answer and assurance, that God has heard our
prayers, and been with us in his service, Job. 15.15, 16. and the like.
Use 2. The second use should be to work in us a care to live so, as may
become the knowledge, remembrance, and assurance of our Election: and so we
shall do,

First, Rules to live so as becoms the assurance of Election.
If we stir up our hearts to a continual praising of God for his rich and
freegrace herein, Ephesians. 1.3, 6.

Secondly, if we strive to joy, and glory in it continually, Psalm. 106.5, 6.

Thirdly, if we love one another, Ioh. 15.17. and choose as God chooses, Ephesians.
1.4. not despising the poorest Christian, Iam. 2.5.

Fourthly, if we set up the Lord to be our God to love him with all our heart,
and to serve him, and in all things to show our selves desirous to please him,
and to be resolved to please him, and his truth, and to his glory, etc. Deuteronomy.
26. Esaias 44.1.5.

Fifthly, if we confirm our selves in a resolution to have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, nor to suffer our selves to be unequally
yoaked: but since God has chosen us out of the world, to keep our seluesse
from needless society with wicked men.

Sixthly, if we continue in the Word, and be patient in afflictions, and show
contentations in all estates, as knowing, that it is our Fathers pleasure to
give us a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. and that all shall work together for the best,
Romans 8.28. and that the very hairs of our heads are numbered, Math. 10. and
that nothing can be laid to our charge to condemn us, Romans 8.33. and that God
will never cast away his people, whom before he knew, Romans 11.2. because his
foundation remains sure, and he knows, who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19.

Seventhly, if we strive to live without blame and offense, that God may no way
suffer dishonor for our sakes, Ephesians. 1.4.

Thus of the election.

The next thing by which they are commended, is their kindred and generation.

This word generation signifies sometimes an age, or succession of men, or so
many men as live in the world, in the age of one man: so one generation
passes, and another comes, etc. Eccles. 1. Sometimes it signifies a progeny
or offspring, that is, so many as do descend out of the loins of such a one:
as, the generation from Abraham to David, Mat. 1. Sometimes it signifies a
kindred or stock; and so, not only carnal, but spiritual: and thus, wicked
men are said to be an adulterous and untoward generation, Mat. 12.39.
faithless and perverse, Mat. 17.17. and so it is no privilege to be one of
that generation: but we are called upon to save our selves from this untoward
generation, Matthew. 12.40. so that it is a privilege to be one of this sort or
kindred. They are the generation of vipers, Mat. 3. Now, there is another kind
of spiritual alliance, and that is it whereby all Christians are akin one to
another through the blood of Christ, as they all descend of the second Adam:
and of this it is, that the Prophet speaks, Esaias 53.8. when admiredly he
says of Christ, Who can tell his generation? And thus the Godly are begotten
of the best blood in the world, because they are begotten of the blood of
Christ, John 1.13.

The doctrine then is, that Godly men are the happiest men in the world, in
respect of their kindred and alliance. None come of so good a kindred as godly
Christians, which may appear by diverse reasons.

Godly Christians come of the best kindred, which appears by many reasons.
First, because they descend of the best blood, being the generation of Christ
the second Adam; and so are better born than they that can tell of their great
Nobility and Blood, both by the father's and mother's side, John 1.13.

Secondly, because they are a chosen picked children or kindred, all the kindred
culled out of all mankind; and so is no kindred in the world. For, in all other
kinreds are all sorts of persons to be found, good and bad, virtuous and
vicious: but of this kindred are none but good.

Thirdly, because the whole kindred is royal; they enjoy all great preferments:
whereas there be few kinreds in the world, but there are some poor in it; but
this generation has not one poor man in it: all the kindred are Kings.

Fourthly, because all are fit for imploiment: all the kindred are Priests, and
can sacrifice, which was not true of the very Tribe of Leui. There is not one
Christian, but he can perform the work of the Priesthood, and does in his order.

Fifthly, because there are so many of the kindred. The meanest Christian is
a-kinne to all the Saints in heaven, and to all the Godly in earth or on earth:
and there is no kindred in the flesh, that can attain to the like number of
kinsfolks in any degree of comparison worth the speaking of.

Sixthly, because they are all accepted into high favor with the King of kings.
Though a King on earth, out of his love to see one person, would do much for
many of his kindred, yet it is never seen, that all the kindred universally are
preferred and entertained into special favor with the King: yet so it is with
all the Godly: it is true of all, and of every one, that they are his peculiar
treasure.

Seventhly, because all our kindred will do for us: there is none of them but
are able to pleasure us: whereas in carnal kindred, one may be a-kinne to so
great persons, that they will do nothing for them.

Eighthly, because other kindred may and will die, and leave us: but all this
generation lives for ever.

Uses. The consideration whereof may serve for diverse reasons.

First, hence godly Christians may gather comfort against the best of their
kindred in the flesh, whether they be lost by displeasure, or by death: for,
God here makes a supply of better kindred. It should not therefore be grievous
to the Godly to forsake their fathers house, Psalm. 45.

Secondly, hence we should learn how to esteem of godly Ministers: for, heerby
is implied, that they are the Fathers and Princes of the Tribes in this holy
Nation.

Thirdly, it should teach us many duties concerning the Godly, to whom we are
allied.

1. To study our genealogy, and get the knowledge of as many of our kindred
as we can. 2. To glory in our kindred, to joy in our happiness heerin. 3. To
do all good we can to our kindred, even to the household of faith, for this very
reason, because they are our kinsmen in the Spirit; and, in particular, we
should be ready to do all that for them, which the law of kindred binds us
unto, viz. 1. We should acknowledge them, and not hide our selves from any
that is godly. 2. We should receive one another heartily and willingly, without
grudging or murmuring. 3. We should defend one another, and be ready in all
oppositions to stand for the godly. 4. We should show all bowels of mercy, and
tender kindness, and pity, and sympathize in their necessities and miseries.

Fourthly, we should hence learn to be provident to preserve our own
reputation, that we be no way a dishonor and shame to our kindred, but learn of
the wise steward, by lawful means to preserve our credits, and provide for
our selves, though he did it by unlawful: for, our Savior noted this defect,
when he said, The children of this world are wiser in their generation, than
the children of the light, Luke 16.8.

Thus much of their kindred or generation.

A royal Priesthood.]

These words contain the two next prerogatives; which have so much connection
one with another, that they are joined together as inseparable.

The Apostle makes a comely and effectual inuersion of the words recorded in
Exodus 19: for, there they are said to be a Kingdom of Priests, which the
Apostle more plainly expresses in the words, A royal Priesthood.

They are both Kings and Priests, but both with difference from other men of
either of those callings. They are Kings, not profane or civil only, but
sacred Kings: they are Priests, not common or typical Priests, but royal.

The one word tells their dignity to which they are ordained; the other, their
office in respect of God.

These words, with those that follow, are in Exodus expounded, or rather
propounded indefinitely to the Israelites, but in this place limited to the
Elect only; which shows, that promises and privileges of right belong only
to the Elect and Chosen of God, etc.

Royal.]

Christians may be said to be Royal in four respects.

First, Godly men are Royal many waeies.
comparatively with wicked men: for, whatsoever their condition be, yet if
their estate be compared with the miserable condition of all impenitent
sinners; it is a Royal estate, they are like Kings in respect of them.

Secondly, as they are united to his body, who is the greatest King, as members
of Jesus Christ, who is King of kings, Revel. 19.

Thirdly, because they look for a Kingdom. It is their Fathers pleasure to
give them a Kingdom; They shall one day reign, and therefore are Royal.

Fourthly, because for the very present, in this life they have the state of
Kings: They have the state of Kings in this life, I say. For, first they
appear clad in purple. The Romans knew who was King, when they saw the man
clad in purple Robes: Christians have royal Garments, Garments of Salvation;
the righteousness of Christ does cover them, which so soon as they put on,
they are saluted for Kings in Heaven. Secondly, they have the attendance of
Kings, a great train and guard about them; no King like any of them, that is
not one of them; for they have the Angels for their guard, and as ministering
Spirits to them, Psalm 34. and 91. Hebr. 1.14. Thirdly, they have the dominion
of kings, and sovereignty and power of Kings: and so, first, the whole world is
their kingdom, in which they reign: they are heirs of the world, Romans 4. and
so our Savior says, They inherit the earth, Matthew 5. Fourthly, their own
hearts are as a large Kingdom, in which they sit and reign, governing and
ruling over the innumerable thoughts of their minds and affections, and
passions of their hearts: among which they do justice, by daily subduing their
unruly passions, and wicked thoughts, which, like so many Rebels, exalt
themselves against the obedience should be yielded to Christ the supreme Lord
and Emperor; as also by promoting the weal of all those saving graces which are
placed in their hearts, nourishing and lifting up all good thoughts, and
cherishing all holy desires and good affections; conscience being, by
commission, the chief Judge for their affairs of this whole Kingdom. Fifthly,
it is something royal; and, which proves them to be Kings, they have a regal
supremacy. A King is he that judges all, and is judged of none: such a one
also is every spiritual man said to be, 1. Cor. 2. vlt. Sixthly, they prove
themselves Kings by the many conquests they make over the world and Satan,
sometimes in lesser skirmishes, sometimes in some main and whole battles.

Ob. Might some one say, Is this all the Kingdom of a Christian? This is
infinitely below the magnificence and honor of an earthly kingdom, etc.

Sol. GOD has done more for the natural man, or for the nature of men, for
providing means for this spiritual Kingdom, than in opening a way for earthly
Kingdoms; which may appear by diverse differences. For,

First, Differences between spiritual and earthly Kings.
none but great men, and of great means, can attain to the Kingdom of this
world: but here the poor may have a Kingdom, as well as the rich. Blessed are
the poor in spirit: for, theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, while the father lives, the little child cannot reign: whereas, in
this Kingdom, little-ones attain to the Kingdom, and safely hold it, Mat. 18.

Thirdly, this kingdom is of heaven, whereas the others are only of the earth.

Fourthly, these Kings are all just, there is none unrighteous can possess
these thrones: They are all washed, justified and sanctified. There is not a
drunkard, a railer, a buggerer, an adulterer, a murderer, or any the like
amongst them, which is no privilege belonging to the kingdom of this world,
Romans 14.17. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Gal. 5.21. The godly are Kings, such as
Melchisedech was, somewhat obscure in the world, but they reign in
righteousness, in peace, none like them, Heb. 7.

Fifthly, the godly have received a kingdom, that cannot be shaken. Their
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, Heb. 12.28. But all the kingdoms of the
world may be, and have been shaken, and will be ruined and end; whereas the
godly that set out in sovereignty over lesser dominions, and with less pomp,
yet increase so fast, till at length they attain the most glorious Kingdom in
the new heavens, and new earth.

Uses.
The use of all this may be diverse.

First, for singular comfort to the godly: what account soever the world makes
of them, yet here they see, what God has ordained them unto: It matters not
for the worlds neglect of them; for Gods Kingdom comes not by observation: and
in particular it should comfort them in two causes. First, in matter of
service, when they come to stand before the Lord, they must know, that they are
honorable in Gods sight He respects them as so many Kings in his presence.
Secondly, in the mortification of vices, they have received power and authority
as Kings, and therefore no rebellious conversation can so exalt it self, but
it may be subdued. The oil of God is upon them: and what can the greatest
Rebels do against the power of the King?

But secondly, withal here is terror to wicked men. For this is the
privilege only of the godly; and it is certain, that wicked men are in Gods
account as base, as the godly are honorable, they are thrust besides these
thrones: And so both sorts of wicked men: For not only openly profane men are
to be smitten with this terror, but also hypocrites. It is true indeed, that
hypocrites act the parts of Kings: but they are only such Kings as Players are
upon a stage, they speak of the words, or the words of Kings: but are not
indeed. For they are by the wiser and better sort accounted as Rogues, and the
scum of the people: even so are wicked men in Gods account, neither will their
outward shows help them. For the Kingdom of God is tried not by words, but by
the power of it, 1. Cor. 4.20. And withal unruly Christians may be hence
checked, such as will not be ruled by their teachers: such were the
Corinthians, they reigned without Paul, and their godly teachers. But the
Apostle wishes they were indeed Kings, or did indeed reign. Why bear thou
the name of a King, and can not rule thy passions?

Thirdly, diverse uses for instructions may be hence gathered: for,

First, we should hence learn to honor poor Christians: They are spiritual
Kings, as well as the Kings of the earth: and we know, what a stir we
would make to entertain the Kings of this world, Iam. 2.5.

Secondly, we should hence be stirred up in desire after this Kingdom, to
pray for it, that it may come, and that God would count us worthy of such a
Kingdom, Math. 6. 2. These. 1.5. and to this end we should look to two things.

First, that we seek this kingdom, first, above all other things, Mat. 6.

Secondly, that we should refuse no pains nor handship for the entertainment
of true godliness: This Kingdom of heaven should suffer violence, and the
violent only will take it by force. Mat. 11.12.
It is an easy thing for John to be a partner in the patience of the brethren,
when he is a partner with them in the Kingdom: of Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.9. It
is no great thing men can suffer, if we consider, it is for a Kingdom: and
the want of outward things should the less trouble us, if God make us so rich
in spiritual things.

Thirdly, we should hence especially learn to live in this world like Kings:
and this Christians should show,

First, by declaring their conquest over the passions and desires of their own
hearts: It is a royal quality in a Christian, to be able to show all meeknes
of mind, and temper, and sobriety, in being able to deny unto himself what
may not be had without sin, or offense. He that winnes the conquest over
his own heart, is greater then he that winnes a City.

Secondly, putting on the Lord Jesus: The righteousness of Christ is the robe of
a Christian: and since all the life of a Christian is a high feast, he should
always put on his robe, to distinguish him from all other men: and this
righteousness is both the imputed righteousness of Christ, as also the inherent
virtues of Christ.

Thirdly, by serving the public. Kings are the common treasure of the
subjects: they are appointed for the good of many Christians, and should show,
that they remember, that they are Kings, by deuoting themselves to all possible
profitablenes of conversation.

Fourthly, by their contentation. What should they fear? or what should
discontent them? Has not GOD given them a Kingdom, and great glory?

Fifthly, by subduing carnal and servile fears of men: Why should Christians
fear the faces of great men on earth? are they not spiritual Kings themselves?
and is not the breath in the nostrils of the greatest men on earth? why art
thou then afraid to come before them? etc.

Priesthood.]

The fourth thing, for which Christians are commended, is their Priesthood,
which notes the honor of their imploiment in things that concern God and his
service, Esaias 61.6. Revel. 1.6, etc.

Now, the Priesthood of Christians is a singular privilege, if we, first,
either consider the kinds of Priesthood: or secondly, the specialties of
their calling and imploiment. First, for the kind: The Priesthood of
Christians is better then the Priesthood of the Levites the sons of Aaron,
because it is a royal Priesthood: They are Priests after the order of
Melchisedech, as Christ himself was, in which order every Priest was a King:
so were none of the sons, or house of Aaron: Secondly, and for the
specialties of favor imported in the Priesthood of Christians, diverse
prerogatives are included in it: For first, the Priesthood of a Christian
imports separation, and consecration to God: The godly of all the people in the
world are the only people that are devoted to God, and chosen out of all the
world as his portion, as the Levites were out of all Israel. Secondly, it
imports neernesse and constancy of communion with God: The Priests lived in
Gods House, and stood always before the Lord, dwelt in his presence, and did
approach nearer to him, then all the people else: so do the godly spiritually:
They only dwell in his sight, and enjoy his special presence, and see the
glory of his presence, and have their souls satiated with fatnes, arising from
the comfort of Gods favorable presence, Ierem. 31.14.

Uses. Now the consideration of this excellent Priesthood of Christians should
serve, first, for consolation: secondly, for instruction: and thirdly, for
great reproof.

First, it should much comfort godly and careful Christians to consider, how
near God has placed the^ to himself even in his chamber of presence, as it
were: and how meanly soever the world does account of their service, yet they
hence know, that their Priesthood is a Royal Priesthood, and the godly
imploiments of Religious men are more honorable, then the greatest employments
of the greatest Monarchs of the earth, and withal it may specially comfort
fearful Christians against one scruple: They sometimes are afraid to go into
Gods presence, or they doubt their access, they are so unworthy to come before
the Lord. Why? this word Priesthood satisfy them: For it imports, that they
are priui-should ledged by their calling to come before God. The Priests might
enter into the House of the Lord, yea they must do it, it was required of
them: It was a sin, if they did it not, and they did not sin by doing it.

Secondly, the Priesthood of Christians should put them in mind of diverse
duties, as

First, it should work in them a care of knowledge: the Priests should preserve
knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth. A godly Christian should
be able to direct others, and hold forth the light of the Word for the profit
of others: and as dumb Ministers are to be disliked, so are dumb Christians
too.

Secondly, it should teach Christians to strive to be of an harmless, and
inoffensiue disposition. The Priests in the Law of God were men without
blemish: and so should Christians in the Gospel, Phil. 2, 15.

Thirdly, we should hence learn to set the Lord always before us, and to
walk before him, seeing it is our office to keep in the Temple, and to be
near the Lord.

Fourthly, it should compel upon us a care of our sacrifice: The maine work
of the Priests was, to offer sacrifices: Now our sacrifices are principally
prayers and good works, as more at large is showed on the notes of verse 5. and
in these we must be daily employed: But then we must in all our services look
to the rules of Sacrificing, which as I said, I have handled at large verse 5.
only for the present remember these few things: 1. That their sacrifices are
worth nothing, without an Altar to sacrifice them on: and this Altar is Jesus
Christ, Heb. 13.10. 2. That thou must have fire to burn the sacrifice on the
Altar; and this fire is holy affections, Mark 9. 3. That in all thy sacrifices
thou must keep out leaven: now the spiritual leaven, that marres thy
sacrifices, are: first, malice: secondly, any notable wickedness: thirdly, evil
opinions, fourthly, worldly grief and passions, which like leaven sowreth the
sacrifice.


Thus of the second principal use.

Use 3. This may serve for reproofe-of diverse sorts of men, as,

First, of the Papist: They have fire, but no Altar, and therefore cannot
sacrifice: They have zeal, but not knowledge, as was said in the case of the
jews, who knew not the righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, of the carnal Protestants. They have an Altar, in that they
profess justification by Christ: but either they have no sacrifice, or no
fire. The rich among them bring not their sacrifice of alms, and all sorts
neglect prayer and good works; or if they do any service to God, there is no
fire to burn the sacrifice: they serve God without zeal and holy affections.

Thirdly, hypocrites are here rebuked. They bring, for matter, the right
sacrifices sometimes, and they have fire too: but it is strange fire many
times: they have zeal, but it is rash and unwarranted: they do good duties in
an ill manner, or spend their zeal on traditions, either on the left hand, or
on the right.

Fourthly, fearful Christians are here reproved, because when they have
sacrifices, and an Altar, and fire too, yet they believe not the atonement may
come by it, or the acceptance of them from God.

Thus of the fourth point.

An holy Nation.]

The holiness of a Christian is his fifth prerogative, wherein he excels all
other people: and the Godly are holy many ways. Some are less principal:
some are more principal.

First, Christians are holy many ways.
they are holy in respect of GOD's appointment and calling: God has decreed
them to holiness, Ephesians. 1.4. and created them to good works, Ephesians. 2.10. and
called them to be Saints, 1. Cor. 1.16.

Secondly, they are holy in their sect or kindred. They are of a holy kindred:
for, their Head Christ Jesus is infinitely holy, and their brethren are holy
brethren, Heb. 4.1.

Thirdly, they are holy in their Laws. No people have so holy, just, and exact
Laws: there is no defect or error in them. The Word of God is perfect, Psalm.
19. Pro. 8.5, 6.

Fourthly, they are holy in their signs: they wear the badges of righteousness.
The uncircumcised were accounted unholy; and the Jews, a holy nation, because
being circumcised, they had the sign of righteousness: so are Christians holy
by Baptism sacramentally.

Fifthly, they are holy, in regard of separation from the wicked and the World.
A thing was said to be holy, in the Law, which was separated from common uses,
to the use of the Tabernacle: so are the Godly holy, because separated from the
unholy.

But, chiefly, the Godly excel for holiness, if we respect the holiness,

First, of justification: they are holy by the imputation of the perfect
holiness of Christ, and so are they as holy as ever was Adam in Paradise, or
the Angels in heaven.

Secondly, of sanctification: they have holiness in their natures, and they
practice holiness too: and thus they are holy in heart, and by inchoation.
They have grace in all parts, though not in all degrees, and they are not
destitute of any saving or heavenly gift, 1. Cor. 9.11. And this kind of
holiness must not be slighted or meanly accounted of: for, first, it is a
holiness wrought by the holy Ghost. Secondly, it is presented to God by the
intercession of Christ; whereby all imperfections are covered. And thirdly, it
is acknowledged in the covenant of grace, which admits of vprightnes and
sincerity in stead of perfection, which in the other covenants were required.

Thirdly, they are holy in hope, because they look for perfect holiness in
nature and action, in another world. There is a righteousness which they wait
for, that exceeds all the righteousness that ever was in any man in this world,
Christ Jesus excepted.

But I conceit, it is the holiness of sanctification which is here meant. Now,
this holiness consists either of mortification or vivification. Mortification
is employed about the subduing of corruptions; and vivification, about
qualifying the heart and life of the believer with holiness. Vivification also
is exercised either about new grace in the heart, or new obedience in the
conversation. I take it, the later is here meant: and so the Apostle intends to
say, that no people are like the believing Christians, for the holiness of
their conversation.

Uses. The use of this point may be, first, for great encouragement to the
true Christian, notwithstanding all his infirmities with which he is burdened:
and therefore he should take heed, that he be not wicked overmuch, Eccles. 7.
that is, he should not think to vilely of himself: For though he be guilty
of many sins, yet he is truly holy, and that many ways, as was showed
before. God has done great things for him, that has given him a holy head,
and a holy calling, and especially that he has already made him perfectly holy
by Justification, and will make him perfectly holy in Sanctification in another
world, yea he ought to take reason of comfort for his holiness of
Sanctification; as for the reasons before, so the very holiness of his
conversation is much more exact, then is the conversation of the wicked, or
then was his own before his calling.

And withal this should much stir up godly men to the care of sound holiness
in their conversation, and the rather, because, first, they were redeemed from
a vain conversation by the blood of Christ, 1. Pet. 1.18. Secondly, they should
much thereby advance the profession of true Religion, Phil. 1.27. Thirdly,
because a holy conversation is a good conversation, God requires nothing of us
to do, but it is all fair work, and good for us, whereas when we have done,
the Devil, the world, and the flesh work that, which was extremely ill for us.
Fourthly, we hold our profession before many witnesses, many eyes are upon us,
and the most men are crooked, and perverse, 1. Tim. 6.12. Phil. 2.15. and the
best way to silence foolish men, is by vnrebukeablenes of conversation, 1. Pet.
2.15. Fifthly, our heavenly Father is hereby glorified, Math. 5. and 6. Sixthly,
it will be a great comfort to us in adversity, 2. Cor. 1.12. Lastly, great is
our reward in heaven. For hereby will be ministered abundantly an entrance
into the glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, 2. Pet. 1.11.

But then we must look to diverse rules about our conversation, that it may
be right: for,

First, Special rules for the right ordering of us in an holy conversation.
it must be a good conversation in Christ, 1. Pet. 3.16.

Secondly, it must be a conversation discharged from those usual vices, which
are hateful in such as profess the sincerity of the Gospel, and yet common
in the world, such as are lying, wrath, bitterness, rotten comunication, or
cursed speaking, or the like, Ephesians. 4.25. Col. 3.8. 1. Pet. 1.14.

Thirdly, it must be all manner of conversation, 1. Pet. 1.15. we must show
respect to all Gods commandments, at home, and abroad, in religion, mercy,
righteousness, or honesty.

Fourthly, we must show all meeknes of wisdom, when we hear outward praise,
or do good, or are to express our selves in discourse, or otherwise, Iam.
3.13. 2. Cor. 1.12.

And that we may attain to this holiness of conversation,

First, Means for obtaining an holy conversation.
we must walk according to the rule of Gods Word, and let that be a light to
our feet, and a lantern unto our paths, Gal. 6.16. Ioh. 3.21.

Secondly, we must set before us the pattern of such Christians, as have most
excelled that way, Phil. 3.17. and walk with the wife.

Thirdly, especially as obedient children, we should learn of our heavenly
Father, to fashion our selves according to his nature, and in all conversation
strive to be holy, as he is holy: and as it follows in this verse, we should
study and strive to show forth the virtues, that were eminent in Jesus
Christ, 1. Pet. 1.15, 16. and 12.10.

Thirdly, in so much as holiness is the prerogative of a Christian, it should
teach all sorts of men to try themselves, whether they have attained true
holiness, or no: so as they be sure their holiness exceed the holiness of the
Scribes and Pharisees. For else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven:
For a Christian must have that holiness of conversation, which no wicked man can
attain unto. Now that this trial may be done effectually, I will show
wherein the holiness of a true Christian exceedes the holiness,

First, of a mere civil honest man.

Secondly, of the most glorious Hypocrite.

Differences between the holiness of conversation in civil honest men and Gods
elect.
First, for the mere civil honest man: the true Christian exceedes his
righteousness, both in the righteousness of faith, and in the internal holiness
of the heart, and the power of holy affections: but because it is holiness of
conversation, which is especially here meant, I will touch the differences in
conversation, and so,

First, they differ in one maine cause of orderly life. For the holiness of the
godly Christian proceeds from a regenerate heart: whereas the mere civil man
is so naturally, or only by restraining grace: He has not been in the
furnace of mortification for sin.

Secondly, the mere civil honest man glories in this, that he paies every man
his own, and is no adulterer, or drunkard, or the like notorious offender: But
for the most part he is altogether defective in the religious duties of the
first table, especially in the duties of the Sabbath, and the religious duties
he should perform in his family.

Thirdly, the mere civil honest man makes conscience of great offenses, but
cares not to be stained with lesser sins, whereas the true Christian lives
circumspectly, and makes conscience of the least commandment.

Secondly, now for the Hypocrite: though the difference be hidden, yet it may
be assigned in diverse things, as,

First, Differences between the Hypocrite and Gods elect in the holiness of
conversation.
the holiness of the godly Christian slowes from a pure conscience, and faith
unfeigned: whereas there is no such repentance, or faith in the Hypocrite.

Secondly, the true Christian has his praise of God, but the Hypocrite of men,
Romans 2.26.

Thirdly, the true Christian obeyes in all things: The Hypocrite but in some,
as here for the most part, they may be found tainted with some evil vice.

Fourthly, the true Christian is careful of his conversation in all places,
and companies: The Hypocrite only, or chiefly, when he is, where he thinks,
he shall be observed, and marked.

Fifthly, the true Christian will not cease bearing fruit, what weather soever
come, Ierem. 17.7, 8. But the Hypocrite gives over, when hard times come He is
not like the good ground, that brings forth fruit with patience: The Hypocrite
will not hold our till the end, though the times be peaceable till his death.
For the most part, he then bears the burden of his Hypocrisy, he cannot die
in peace.

Use.
Lastly, this is a terrible doctrine for open and notorious offenders. For
hereby it is apparent they are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
are not of this nation, their language and their works betray them: Drunkards,
Adulterers, Swearers, Liers, Usurers, and such like cannot inherit, or have any
lot in this heavenly Canaan. For all this nation is holy, and such are not
they, their own consciences being Judges.

Nor is it a pleasing Doctrine to scandalous professors: For such as give
scandal, are either Hypocrites, or godly: If they be Hypocrites, their
scandals betray them, and testify to their faces, they have no lot amongst the
Saints: and if they be godly Christians, that have fallen through weakness, yet
they have cause to be much humbled: For by them the name of God is blasphemed;
and besides many other inconveniences, that will pursue their fall, this is not
the least, that hereby they have weakened their evidence, and wonderfully
darkened the marks of their happiness: For if the Godly be a holy nation, how
discomfortably have they provided for themselves, and their own souls, that
have so stained their profession of holiness!

An holy nation.]

The sixth prerogative of Christians is imported in this word Nation, The sixth
prerogative is their number.
which shows the number. For though all the wicked are more in number then the
godly: yet such is the glory and greatness of the number of all the godly of all
ages, that if we could behold them on earth, as we shall see them in heaven,
and at the last Judgment, we would wonderfully admire the beauty, and
multitude of the Christian Army. All the godly together make a goodly nation,
and though in largenes of number, they do not go beyond the wicked, yet in the
privileges of their number, they go far beyond them. They are all one, and a
whole nation of them, which imports diverse privileges.

First, they are all originally of one blood, born of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, they are all governed by one Ruler: their Noble Ruler is of
themselves: there is one heart in them to serve the Lord.

Thirdly, they are all governed by one book of Laws.

Fourthly, they all enjoy the same privileges in the communion of Saints, even
those before contained in this verse.

Fifthly, they all enjoy the love of God: they are his portion. As Israel was
his out of all the world: so the godly are his, and make all but one nation.

In that all the godly are one nation, diverse things may from thence be
observed by way of use.

Use.
First, it should be very comfortable to all that are truly godly, and so it
should comfort them diverse ways. First, against the fewness of them that live
in one place, and so against the reproach of the world for that reason. For
here they may know, that if all the godly were together, there would be no
cause to despise them for their number. Never such a nation of men, as they.
Secondly, in the case of adversaries, the gates of hell shall not prevail
against them. They are a whole nation of them, they may be oppressed, but they
can never utterly be rooted out. Thirdly, in respect of their consanguinity
with all the godly, though they differ much in estate or condition, yet
wheresoever, or howsoever they live, they are all countrie-men, they are all of
one nation; the partition wall is broken down. All godly Christians, whether
Jews or Gentiles, are but one nation. Fourthly, in respect of the government
and protection of Christ over them. Why criest thou then, O Christian; Is there
no King in Sion?

Secondly, hence some use for instruction may be made. For first, we may here
learn to know no man after the flesh. All other relations are swallowed up in
this relation: when thou art once converted, thou needst not reckon of what
country thou art, or how descended, for thou art now only of the Christian
nation. All godly men should acknowledge no respects more then those are
wrought in them by Christ. Secondly, since Christians are all countrie-men, and
seeing they are like the Jews dispersed up and down the world, they should
therefore be glad one of another, and make much one of another, and defend one
another, and relieve one another by all means of help and comfort.

Thirdly, they should therefore observe the fashions of the Godly, and be more
strict to follow the manners of their nation, wheresoever they come.

A peculiar people.]

The Latins render the words of the original, The acceptance of the words.
Populus acquisitionis. In the Greek it is, (...). The word, rendered peculiar,
signifies sometimes conservation or saving, as Heb. 10.39. to the saving or
conservation of the soul: sometimes, purchase, as, the Church was purchased by
his blood, Acts 20.28; s^metimes, possession or obtaining, as, He ordained us
to the obtaining of salvation, 1. These. 5.9 and the glory of Christ, 2. These.
2.14. Neither do Interpreters agree about the attributing of what felicity the
word imports. For, one would have the sense thus: Populus acquisitionis, that
is, the people he could gain by; intending thereby, that the Apostle should
say, that the Godly were the only people that God could get any thing by.
Others would have it thus: A people for obtaining, that is, of heaven: and so
the sense is, 1. These. 5.9. that they are a people God has set apart to obtain
heaven, or to gain more than any people. Others, thus: A people of purchase,
that is, such as were purchased, viz. by the blood of Christ. And so the people
of God were purchased out of the world by the blood of Christ; and the
Israelites were typically redeemed out of Egypt by the blood of the Lamb. The
Godly are a people bought at a great price; none ever so dearly ransomed. But I
take it as it is here rendered, A peculiar people: and so the word may intima^e
a double reason. For, Doct.
first, they are a peculiar people, because God has every way fashioned them
for himself. Secondly, they are a peculiar people, because they are his
treasure, yea, all his treasure. The Godly comprehend all his gettings: they
are as it were all he has. And so Exodus 19. verse 6. may explain it.

Use. The use may be partly for consolation, and partly for instruction.

First, it should exceedingly comfort the Godly, to know their acceptance
with God: they are in high favor with him: they are his very Favorites. And
this should distinctly comfort them diverse ways: as first, that God does make
so much account of them to love them, as any covetous man can love his
treasure. Hence God is said to delight in them, to rejoice over them with joy,
and his mercy to them pleases him. Secondly, it should comfort them in respect
of the suits they may obtain from God. He is rich to all that call upon him. No
King can do so much for his Favorites, as God can and will do for his. God's
Favorites may ask whatsoever they will, and be sure to have it: and therefore
it were a shame for them to be poor. Thirdly, the Favorites of earthly Princes
may lose all, and fall into the King's displeasure, and so be undone for ever,
and go out with singular disgrace and ruin: but God's Favorites have this
privilege, they shall never lose the favor of God. He will love them to the
end, John 13.1. Nothing shall separate them from the love of God in Christ, To.
8. vlt. God has not appointed any of them to wrath, but to the obtaining of
salvation, 1. These. 5.9, 10. And all this should be the more comfortable,
because God respects no persons. Every Subject cannot be the King's Favorite;
nor is every servant, in Ordinary; nor is every one that serves, in the Chamber
of Presence, or Priuy-Chamber: but, in God's Court, all servants are
Favorites; and he has treasure enough to enrich them all, and affection
enough to love them all.

Secondly, diverse instructions may be here gathered: for, if we be God's
Favorites, and his treasure, it should teach us, 1. To live comfortably, even
to live by faith, to trust upon God's favor for life and salvation; nor need
we doubt our pardon, nor question our preferment. 2. To live humbly, to be
ever ready to acknowledge, that it was God's free grace that has rai^ed them
up from the very dung hill, as it were, to such high preferment: we must
confess, that we hold all from him: we must humble our selves, seeing we have
this honor to walk with our God. Pride is one of the first things destroies the
Favorites of the world. 3. To live holily, denying ungodliness and worldly
lusts, and living religiously, and soberly, and righteously in this present
world: since he has redeemed us to be a people peculiar to himself, we
should be zealous of good works. An exactness of living is required of such as
must live in Princes presence: and since GOD has bought us at so dear a rate,
we must not live to our selves, but to him that died for us, 2. Cor. 5.15.
Tit. 2.12, 14. 4. To submit our selves to God's disposing: we are his
treasure: it is reason he should do with his own what he will; and the
rather, because he will never employ his treasure, but for advantage. He that
blamed the evil servant for not gaining by his talent, will certainly himself
gain by all the ways he imploies his own treasure.


This doctrine should serve also for a double warning to wicked men. First, to
take heed how they wrong God's people: if they touch his Anointed, they touch
the apple of his eye. He will be sensible, and requite it. They are not in a
safe condition, that wrong the Favorites of Kings; their backs are as good as
broken; and every man is afraid of them: and it is no less danger, to be
injurious to that people which is so dear to God. And withal, this doctrine
should teach us and them, that if they have any desire to get the King of
heavens pardon, or to obtain favor with him: if they have any mind to
repent, they should do well to get some of those Favorites to commend their
suit to the King; God will not deny them: The prayers of the righteous avail
much, especially if they be earnest with him.

Hitherto of the enumeration of the particulars of the prerogatives of the
godly: The end of them follows, viz. That they may show the virtues of Christ
that called them.

Virtues.]

The original word here translated virtues, is but sparingly used in
Scripture: the Apostle Paul only uses it once, viz. Phil. 4.8. and the
Apostle Peter here: and twice in the next Epistle: neither do Interpreters
agree about the translation of it. The sense, as the word is taken for praises
For many following the Syriach, render it praises, and not virtues: And so the
meaning is, our privileges are bestowed upon us to this end, that we should,
show forth the praises of Christ, and that diverse ways.

First, by embracing these prerogatives themselves, For these do set out much
the praises of Christ: as his love to man, his wisdom, and power, that could
redeem a people out of such misery to happiness, and his singular acceptance
with his Father, from whom he obtained such large prerogatives for his
servants.

Secondly, by thanksgiving, when we praise God for Christ, and give praise to
Christ for all his goodness, and love to us.

Thirdly, by commending the riches of the love of Christ to us, setting forth
his praise from day to day, as we have occasion by discourse to others.

Fourthly, by living so, as that God in Jesus Christ may be glorified in the
world, especially in the Church.

Now other writers follow the native signification of the word, and translate
it virtues, but with different interpretation. For some by the virtues of
Christ understand the benefits exhibited to us by Christ, and so we are
enriched with the former privileges, that so we might make it appear, how
much we have gained by Jesus Christ: And these benefits of Christ, we show
forth by thanksgiving to God, daily praising him for them, as also by the word
of exhortation, when we call upon others to seek after them: and lastly, by
carrying our selves so, as may become so great treasure, keeping them with all
care, esteeming them above all gettings, and living as contentedly, as if God
had given us a kingdom on earth, and ordring our conversation so, as men might
see our care of good works, becoming such high preferment.

But I rather follow those Interpreters, that take the word, as it properly
signifies for the gifts of the mind in Christians bestowed upon them by
Christ, and so it is originally a philosophical word, expressing those
indowments of the mind, which Philosophers in their Ethics prescribed, and it
is the more sparingly used by the Apostle, because it is too low a word to
express the worth of the rich mercies and graces of Christ: and the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 4.8. when he says, If there be any virtue, etc. means, that if
there were any virtue, in which Philosophers did excel, they should strive not
to come behind those natural men, even in those virtues, such as were
chastity, liberality, temperance, sobriety, magnanimity, truth, justice, and
such like.

Now as the Scripture takes notice of virtue, it belongs to the duties of the
second table, as godliness does to the first; and though virtue considered
morally, has nothing supernatural in it: yet considered, as it is propounded
here, it is of singular worthiness to be regarded: For though those virtues
which were in the Philosophers, were but natural: yet there were certain
virtues in Christ, belonging to the second table, which as the pattern is
given us in him, could never be found in mere natural men; so that the
Apostle does of purpose separate the consideration of virtues, and in especial
call upon us to get framed in us those virtues, which did most shine in the
nature, and conversation of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now in all the words four things must be distinctly handled. The division.


First, that every Christian is bound to imitate the special virtues of Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, that it is not enough to have those virtues, but they must show them
forth accordingly.

Thirdly, how those virtues thus showed forth, are still called the virtues of
Christ.

Fourthly, the Periphrasis, by which Christ is described, is to be attended
when he says, It is he that called us. The first part.
For the first of these, It is apparent, that the Apostle takes all the godly
bound to the imitation of the virtues of Christ.

Note by the way, that it is the virtues of Christ that are to be imitated. For
every thing in Christ is not to be imitated, As

Five things we are not to imitate in Christ.
First, not his infirmities: for though they were unblameable, and without sin:
yet they imported weakness: and so, though they be in us, yet we are not to
strive after the attainment of them.

Secondly, not his works of Divinity; as his miracles, curing of men with a
word, walking on the water, fasting forty days, and such like.

Thirdly, not his works of Office, such works as he did in that singular
obedience to that singular commandment of his Father, in dying to redeem the
Church: and so all the works of his Mediator-ship, as he was the Mediator
between God and man.

Fourthly, not his works of obedience, as the son of Abraham to the Moisaicall
Laws, those that were Ceremonial: for Christ must be considered, as the son
of Adam, and not as the son of Abraham. As the son of Adam, he was bound
to the Moral law, whether as it was first written in men's hearts: or as after
it was taught by tradition: and at length by the Writings of Moses.

Fifthly, we are not bound to follow every action of Christ in indifferent
things, no not in such, as had some circumstantiall relation to religious
duties: such as were to sit and preach, or to preach on mountains, or by high
way sides, and in a ship: or to pray all night, or to wear a garment without a
seame, or to sit at the Paschall Supper, and a multitude of such like
instances; such as was the commandment to his Disciples to take nothing for
their journey, neither staves, nor scrip, nor money, nor two coats, and so he
preached the Gospel freely himself, and such was his lifting up of his eyes
to heaven in prayer.

They are the virtues of Christ only, which we are bound to follow: and among
these, such as he did chiefly win reputation in, are in this place specially
commended.

It is the duty then of every Christian to study the life of his Savior, and
to seek to imitate those things were most eminent in him. Now that this point
may more distinctly be observed, we must consider what those virtues are, and
were, which in Christ did so much excel, and in Scripture we are charged
specially to imitate, and would so much adorn the lives of Christians.

There are nine virtues, 9. Virtues in Christ, which we must show forth in our
lives.
which did exceedingly excel in Christ, and would maruilously adorn the lives
of Christians, if they would walk as Christ has left them example, which I may
reckon in this order:

The first was wisdom, Wisdom:
and discretion. The people wondered at his gracious words, and the wisdom,
that was in in him, Luke 4.22. and he requires of his Disciples, that they
should be wise as serpents, and innocent as doves, and they should grow in
understanding, and wisdom, Col. 2.2, 3. and 3.10.

Now, this wisdom of Christ we should show,

How we should show it, viz. five ways.
First, by restraining rash zeal and furious sentences upon wicked men, as
Christ did, Luke. 9.55.

Secondly, by avoiding with discretion the snares, which are laid for us by our
adversaries, being advised, how we let fall any thing might bring dishonor to
our profession, and needles danger to our estates: This discretion our Savior
Christ showed, when he was tempted with hard and dangerous questions, as that
about Caesar, and the questions of the Lawyers, and Sadduces.

Thirdly, by avoiding in indifferent things, what by experience we see is
misliked in others, as when the austerity of John was censured, Christ took
his liberty in the use of the creatures, and convenient company-keeping. Luke
7.33, 34.

Fourthly, by giving place oftentimes to the sudden, and violent furies of
wicked men, when they will run on wilfully, till there may be convenient
time to deal with them: so did Christ often avoid the commotions of his
adversaries.

Fifthly, By gracious words, and fruitful communication, when we so speak as
becomes the Oracles of God, with all reverence and power, 1. Pet. 4.11. Luke
4.22. It was, in particular, a singular discretion in Christ, that, when he was
asked vain questions, or such as were not so fitly propounded, he answers so
as may most profit, declining the answer that should only feed curiosity, or
the like ill humors.

But yet it manifestly appears by the practice of Christ, What it must not have
in it.
that this wisdom must not have in it either forbearing of just reproofs, or
dissimulation, or the omission of necessary duties, or the practice of
unlawful things, for fear of men, or a subtilty only to compass great things
for ones self, or a denial of the truth, or such like.

The second thing in Christ, Meeknes*
was meeknes: and this we are charged to learn of Christ, Mat. 11.29. And thus
Paul beseeches them by the meeknes of Christ, 2. Cor. 10.1.

Now, showed in four things.
we should show this meeknes, first, by restraining the passions of our
hearts, such as are, anger, malice, wrath, bitterness, and the like: this way
our Lord Jesus did wonderfully excel. Secondly, by avoiding strife and
contention. Do nothing through strife, says the Apostle, Phil. 2.4. but let
the same mind be in you, that was in Christ. Thus is it a singular praise to
be gentle, Iam. 3.17. Thirdly, by an easy subjection to God's will to bear
the yoke of God, is to imitate Christ heerin, to be easily persuaded or
entreated to do those things which belong to our duty and Christian obedience,
Mat. 11.29. Fourthly, by gentle dealing with such as have fallen through
infirmity: this is required of us, Gal. 6. 1. And thus did Christ toward Peter
after his fall: he never showed his displeasure, when he saw he was displeased
with himself.

Humility:
The third virtue is humility or lowliness of mind. This is also required of
us, Mat. 11. as a virtue we should imitate in Christ. Now, Christ showed his
humility,

which is showed 3* ways.
First, by making himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.8. He abased himself, to
take our nature upon him. He hid, for a time, the glory he had with the
Father; and besides, he showed it by avoiding many times applause and fame of
the people. He sought not the honor of men. He suppressed often his own
praises, John 5.34, 44. And thus we shall do likewise, if our praise be not of
men, but of GOD, and that we do nothing through vainglory, Phil. 2.4, 6. And
as he did not seek the applause of others, so he did not give witness of
himself, John 5.31. He praised not himself: and we should show our humility by
a low opinion of our selves, thinking better of others, than of our selves,
Phil. 2.4.

Secondly, by making himself equal with them of the lower sort, which is
required of us, Romans 12.16. and was performed by him, when he sorted with
Publicanes and sinners, and the meanest of the people, magnifying the poor of
this world.

Ob. Might some one say, Yea, this shows the pride of Professers now: for,
they will not sort nor converse with their neighbors, especially if they be,
as they account them, but guilty of any crime, such as drunkenness, whoredom,
swearing, etc.

Sol. The example of Christ is peruersly alleged, to condemn the Godly heerin:
for, they do only profess a resolution to shun all needless society with
open wicked men. Two things may be said about Christ's practice heerin. First,
that he conuersed with them, not as a companion, but as a Physician. He came to
them, as the Physician does to his Patient, to heal them: and thus it is not
denied, but the company of the worst men may be resorted unto, viz. when we
have a calling and fitnes to reclaim them. Secondly, consider well what these
persons were, with whom Christ sometimes kept company. The Publicanes were such
as gathered toll or tribute-money for Caesar, and for that reason were
extremely hateful among the Jews, who liked not to be subject to foreign
government: but it is not manifest, that they were men of notorious evil
conversation. It was the stomach of the Jews, not the wickedness of the men,
made Publican^s to be so hateful. And whereas it is added, that he kept
company with sinners; it may be answered, that they were penitent sinners, as
our Savior said of them, Mark 2. It is true, some of them had been notoriously
wicked, as Mary Magdalen, who once had been a most wanton woman, but was now
received to mercy, and had repented with many tears; which though the Jews
acknowledged not, because she was one of Christ's Conuerts, yet to us it ought
to be evident. Thirdly, Christ showed his humility by bearing the infirmities
of the weak, unto which we are exhorted, Romans 15.1, 2. and Ephesians. 4.2. and Christ
practiced it daily, by bearing with the strange weaknesse^ of his disciples.

Now, these duties of humility we are the more bound unto, more (I say) than
Christ, first, because we are sinful creatures, and ought ever to bear upon us
some part of the shame of our offenses. Secondly, because we are infinitely
inferior to him, in respect of his greatness. If he, that was so great by
relation to God, equal to God, and by birth and office, etc. if he (I say)
carry himself so humbly, how little reason have we to stand upon birth, riches,
calling, gifts, or the like? etc.

Contempt of the world*
The fourth virtue that was eminent in Christ, was contempt of the world; an
admirable thing, that he, who was Heir of all things, could show so little
regard of worldly things: and this he showed,

showed in four things.
First, by living in such want of all things, as he affirms, Luke 9.57, 58.

Secondly, by refusing the preferments were offered him upon sinful ^earms;
whether by the devil, who offered him all the glory of the Kingdoms of the
world; or by men, who would have made him King.

Thirdly, by knowing no man after the flesh, by his neglect of earthly kindred:
his hearers were his father and mother, brothers and sisters: he esteemed of
men according to their spiritual estate in Gods Kingdom, and not according to
their outward estate in the world.

Fourthly, by seeking the things of others, more then his own: his life was
wholly devoted to the profiting of others.

Thus should we show our contempt of the world also, by using the world, as
though we used it not, 1. Cor. 7.31. by not caring for the things of this life
with distrustful cares, Mat. 6. by not seeking great things for our selves,
and by looking on the things of others, as well as our own things, Phil* 2.4.
and by acknowledging of spiritual relations with our best affections.

The fifth virtue eminent in CHRIST, was Mercy: Mercy.
which he showed not only by counsel, persuading his hearers to all sorts of
mercy upon all occasions, but by his practice also, by healing both the souls
and bodies of all sorts of diseases in all sorts of men, going about and doing
good in all places, where he came: This is a virtue in many Scriptures much
urged upon Christians, Col. 2.12. Romans 12. 1. Tim. 6. Iam. 3.17. and our mercy
should have the same praises, his had: First, it should be all sorts of mercy
to soul and body: showed four ways.
Secondly, we should be full of mercy: Thirdly, we should be ready to
communicate, and distribute: Fourthly, it should be with pity and bowels of
mercy. All this was in Christ, and is required of us.

The sixth virtue in Christ, Patience
was patience: This virtue we are charged withal, and urged to it by the
example of Christ, Heb. 12.1, 2. And thus we are to learn of him to be a
patient people, both for the matter, that we endure the cross, Luke 9.23. 1.
Pet. 4.1. and 2.24. and for the manner, to be showed four ways.
we must suffer, as he did: First, with silence: he was as a lamb dumb
before his shearer: Secondly, with subjection to Gods will: Father, thy will
be done: so David, I should have been patient, because thou did it, Psalm.
39. Thirdly, with long suffering: Christ bare his cross daily, and so should
we. Fourthly, with willingness: we must take up our cross, Luke 9. Christ
despised the shame, Heb. 12. And the rather should we be formed unto patience
in all tribulations, Motives.
because we are, first, sinful creatures, and have deserved our crosses: so
did not Christ in his own person: secondly, we suffer not such extreme
things, as Christ did: thirdly, we have reason to be silent in the evil day,
because we have not such wisdom to speak, as Christ had.

Compas^ion to enemies.
The seventh virtue eminent in Christ, was his compassion to his enemies, which
he showed diverse ways, as

First, by praying for them on the cross, when he suffered the extremest
things from them: Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Secondly, by restraining reuiling, and revenge: he rendered not evil for
evil, he reviled not again, 1. Pet. 2.24. Romans 15.3. He would not send fire
from heaven upon them, Luke 9.55.

Thirdly, by doing them all the good he might: He instructed them with
patience: He was the good Samaritane, that healed their wound, and was at cost
with them.

Fourthly, by receiving them with gladness, when they repented as he did, the
thief on the cross.

Fifthly, by mourning for the hardness of their hearts and impenitency: thus he
weeps over Jerusalem.

All this is required of us, we should pray for them that curse us, Math. 5.
We must not render reuiling for reuiling, 1. Pet. 3.9. and 2.24. we should
mourn for them in their miseries: so did David, Psalm. 35.13, 14. and we
should overcome their evil with goodness, as Romans 12.19, 20.

The eightth virtue in Christ, Inoffensiuenes
was harmelesnes and inoffensiuenes, and we are exhorted to vnrebukeablenes:
and to live without offense, because we are the sons of God, Phil. 2.15. and
Christ requires in us the innocence of doves, and for the same reason co^pares
the godly to sheep* Where I say, we should live without offense, I mean,
without giving offense: For Christ himself, that most innocent Lamb of God,
was rebuked, and reproched, and reviled, and so may the most godly Christians.
It is a blessed thing to be reviled for following goodness, and for the Gospels
sake.

The last virtue, which I reckon in Christ, was, his love to the godly: Love to
the godly.
which we are required to imitate, Ephesians. 5.7, 8. 1. Ioh. 3. Now there are
diverse things we should learn of Christ, in our love to the godly.

First, to love them with a preventing love: For Christ loved us first.

Secondly, to love them, though they be our inferiors: so did Christ love us.

Thirdly, to love them not withstanding their infirmities: Christ loved the
Church, though she be black, Cantic. 1. and full of spots, and wrinkles, Ephesians.
5.

Fourthly, to love them fervently: Nothing should be too dear to part with for
them: Christ shed his blood for our sakes, Ephesians. 5.2. 1. Ioh. 3. And withal we
should show the feruency of our love by defending them, as Christ did his
Disciples, and by Sympathy in all distresses, and temptations, as Christ has a
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. so we should be like affectioned one
to another, Romans 12.15.

And thus much of the first point.

The second thing hence to be noted, is, that it is not enough to have the
virtues of Christ, but we must show forth the virtues of Christ: Now we show
forth the virtues of Christ diverse ways.

How many ways we show forth the virtues of Christ.
First, By observing certain public solemnities, as by the use of the
Sacraments. For therein we not only remember the praises of Christ, till he
come again, but also we enter into bond with God for the imitation of the
holiness, which was in Christ.

Secondly, by Martyrdom, when we can resolve to suffer the extremest things,
rather then forsake our innocence. This makes men acknowledge the virtue of
Christ in us.

Thirdly, by the power of practice in our conversation, and so to show them
forth, is, 1. To practice them to the life: To make a clear impression of them
in our works: The word here rendered to show forth, signifies to preach, and
so it may note, that we should practice those virtues so clearly, that our
lives might be as so many Sermons upon the life of Christ. 2. To practice them
so, as others may observe them: and so it importes, that upon all occasions in
our conuersations, which are before other men, we should be sure, not to be
wanting in those virtues, when we are provoked to the contrary vices.


Quest. But may we do things for the show? Is not that Hypocrisy, and
vainglory forbidden unto Christians?

Ans. There are some virtues, we can never offend that ways by showing them:
as we can never show too much wisdom: we may be vainglorious in too much show
of our knowledge: We may offend in bringing our zeal too much to the show, but
we can never show to much true patience, Phil. 4.5.
or meekness, or moderation of mind, we may offend, in making show of diverse
duties of piety in the first table, as alms, prayer, fasting, Math. 6. But
those virtues here mentioned, may on all occasions be lawfully held out to
the best show: But that I may express my self more distinctly, outward shows
are then condemned, as sinful, viz.

Ways wherein we may offend by outward shows.
First, when sinful things are showed, as carnal passions, and railing, in
stead, of true zeal.

Secondly, when secret duties are done openly, and for show, as when private
prayer and fasting is so performed, as that others may manifestly observe them,
Mat. 6.

Thirdly, when outward shows are purposely affected: affection and hunting
after applause is condemned.

Fourthly, when care in lesser things is showed, and the care of greater things
is manifestly neglected, this has grievous irritation in it, and is
Pharisaicall, Math. 23.

Fifthly, when the things showed, are done deceitfully: such was the practice of
Ananias, and Saphirah, Acts 5.

Sixthly, when men multiply the use of the means of holiness, but neglect the
practice of it, Esaias 1. Mic. 6.

Seventhly, when we show our gifts, of purpose to the contempt and disgrace of
others, Romans 12.16. Iam. 3.10. 1. Cor. 8.3.

The use briefly may be

Use.
First, for humiliation, and so first unto ungodly men in the Church that
profess the service of Christ, and claim the privileges of Christians, and
yet in stead of showing forth the virtue of Christ, show forth the wickedness
of the Devil, by their lewd conversation causing the name of God to be
blasphemed by Papists, and Atheists, and all sorts of Heretics, and Sectaries,
by their whoredoms, swearing, malice, drunkenness, and the lusts of their
father the devil; and those of all sorts. These are they that carry Christ
about in scorn, to be derided of the enemies of the truth: for, when with their
words they profess Christ, by their works they deny him themselves, and cause
him to be denied by others. Were there not a remnant that bear the Image of
Christ in sincerity, who would ever embrace a religion that were professed by
men of such wicked conversation? Secondly, it should exceedingly humble
scandalous Professers, that would have the world think better of them than of
the former sort, and yet become grievous to men by their vile offenses.
Thirdly, unfruitful Christians, which lie in a continual barrenness, whose
ground is always fallow, have but little consolation from hence: for, though
they are better than the former, in that they are not openly wicked, yet they
fall short of their duty here, because they do not more effectually show forth
the graces of Christ. And that there may be a healing of this error, they must
mend, first, their ignorance, and pray to GOD to teach them to profit:
secondly, their slothfulness, rowzing up themselves to more zeal of good
works, and care to answer the opportunities of well-doing.

Use 2. Secondly, for instruction. All that love the Lord Jesus, should hence
be persuaded to increase in all care of well-dooing, and study how to show
forth the light of their works before men; and the rather, because, 1. They
have received such singular mercy from the Lord. Motives to the show of virtue.
2. They shall heerby glorify their heavenly Father, and make Religion to be
well-spoken of, Phil. 2.15, 16. 2. These. 3.21. and put to silence the ignorance
of the foolish: we should be as tender of the honor of our profession, as of
our own honor. 3. They shall heerby wonderfully establish their own hearts in
the assurance of their calling and election, 1. John 1.5, 6. 2. Pet. 1.5. to
10. and much increase their own contentment, and joy in the Lord, 1. Cor.
15.58. 4. They shall have a full and plentiful reward in the day of the Lord,
Romans 2.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 5. The hearts of their Teachers shall be heerby filled
with joy, when they see they have not labored in vain, Phil. 2.16. 2. Cor.
3.1, 2, 3.


Of him that, etc.]

In the third place, it may be here considered of, why those virtues, showed
forth by Christians, are yet called the virtues of Christ. For answer
whereunto, we may be informed, that they are the virtues of Christ in diverse
respects.

Why the virtues in us, are called the virtues of Christ.
First, because they are such virtues as are had only by such as be in Christ
by effectual calling: for, all the Wicked are strangers from the life of God.

Secondly, because they are received from the Spirit of Christ: of his fullness
we have all received these graces, John 1.14. Ephesians. 1.21.

Thirdly, because they are showed forth for his glory. All our gifts and
services are devoted to the glory of Christ: as they are in him, so they are
for him.

Lastly, I think they may be called the virtues of Christ, because they
resemble his virtues: as the picture of a man is called by the name of the man
himself.

And the consideration heerof should the more incite us to the care of these
virtues, seeing we are here to follow no worse a pattern than the example of
the Lord Jesus himself: and withal, we should be the more humble, when we
have had and done all we can, seeing we have nothing but what we have received.
And since all should be for his glory, we have reason to say at the best, We
are unprofitable servants. And withal, it should comfort us against the sense
of our infirmities, to consider, how weak soever we have been; yet our gifts
are acknowledged for the virtues of Christ himself; and, by the benefit of
Christ's intercession, are accepted of God, as if they had bin found in the
person of Christ himself.

Thus of the third point.

He that has called you.]

The fourth thing to be noted, is this Periphrasis here given of Christ. In
stead of saying, the virtues of Christ, he says, the virtues of him that
called you; which he does of purpose to exalt the praise of the gifts of God in
our calling; and partly to show, that we enter upon the possession of the
former prerogatives, the most of them, when we are called by the grace of Jesus
Christ, and partly thereby guiding us to the knowledge of that work of God,
which may assure us of our interest in the former prerogatives. All which
shows, that we have great reason seriously to study the doctrine of our
calling by Jesus Christ.

Sorts of callings
Calling is either personal, or natural, or spiritual, or supernatural. The
personal calling is to some office; the natural, to the exercise of some
moral virtue: the spiritual or supernatural, is to Christ, calling us to
seek happiness and blessedness in him. This is here meant.

And so the calling of a Christian is to be reckoned among the gifts or
endowments God bestows upon his people: which that we may distinctly
understand according to the order of them, there are seven gifts of God.

Gifts of God.
First, vocation; by which he calls men out of the world, into the Church.

Secondly, justification; by which he forgiues the Called their sins, and
clothes them with the rich Robe of Christ's righteousness.

Thirdly, sanctification; by which he qualifies their nature with all heavenly
gifts necessary for their salvation.

Fourthly, adoption; by which he acknowledges and receives them for his
sons and heirs.

Fifthly, Christian liberty; by which he frees them from all things that might
hold them in bondage, or in a servile condition; as, from the rigor and curse
of the Law, from the dominion of sin, from the burden of Moses ceremonies,
and humane traditions, and from those servile fears in God's service, bred by
the spirit of bondage.

Sixthly, consolation; by which he keeps them in this happy condition: which he
performs three ways.

1. By defending them against all adversaries. 2. By delivering them out of
their many troubles in their militant estate. 3. By bestowing upon them the
gifts of perseverance to the end, and for ever.
Seventhly, temporal blessings; by which he furnishes them for this present
life.

The six first of these, are gifts principal: the last is but accessory. The
three first are the chief gifts: and the three next are such as arise out of
the first.

Now, Distinction of calling.
this work of calling men into the church, is either external or internal. By
the external, men are called into the visible Church: by the internal, men
are called into the invisible Church. And that we may conceive of this
distinctly; in respect of calling, all men may be cast into four companies.

First, some are not called at all any way by the Gospel; as, many of the
Pagans, etc.

Secondly, some are called only externally; as, those in Mat. 20. Many called,
but few chosen.

Thirdly, some are called internally only; as, the thief on the Cross.

Fourthly, some are called both internally and externally: so the Elect of God
for the most part and ordinarily.

It is the last sort of men, that are understood here.

Now that this work of God calling us, may in the order of working be more
clearly understood, we may conceive it thus:

things in the order of working our calling.
The first cause, is Gods love of men, his kindness and love to men, as the
Apostle calls it, Tit. 3.4. First, that God conceiues in himself a
compassionate love of man, lying in his extreme natural distress.

Secondly, Christ then as Mediator lays the ground of this calling, and so he
does two ways. First, by remoouing what might hinder the work, as the
displeasure of God, and the curse of the Law, which he did, by being made sin
for us, 2. Cor. 5.22. Secondly, by purchasing, and bringing to light
immortality, and also the people that should possess it, which purchase he
made with his own blood, Acts. 20.28. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.

Thirdly, then God sends the Word of reconciliation, furnishing men with gifts
to preach the Gospel, and so uses their ministry of reconciliation, as the
only ordinary means of calling men, 2. Cor. 5.18, 19. Romans 10.14, 17.

Fourthly, the Spirit of Christ does inwardly persuade the hearts of men to
receive the Word, and so to be reconciled to God.

Use.
The use of this doctrine of our Christian calling may serve both for
instruction, and for terror: for instruction, and so it may teach,

First, unregenerate men in the Church, as ever they would be saved, to awake
to the care of of their calling, Ephesians. 5.14. and to be entreated while they
have the ministry of reconciliation, 2. Cor. 5.20. and to open, when Christ
knocks. Reu. 3.21. taking heed, they be not as the horse or Mule, Psalm. 32.9.
and that they may prosper in this work of their calling, they must look to two
things.

1. That they be not hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin, Heb. 3.13. 2.
That they despise not professing, but account the feet of them that bring the
glad tidings, to be beautiful, Esaias 52.9.
There are four reasons assigned by the Apostle, Heb. 3, etc. Fourthly, why
men should be ruled, when Christ graunts them the means.

First, because it is to day, they know not, how long they shall have the
means, Heb. 3.7, etc.

Secondly, because of all deceits, it is most miserable to be deceived of the
things offered us in the Gospel, verse 13.

Thirdly, because God is extremely grieved, and provoked by our neglects
herein, verse 16.

Fourthly, because else we shall fail of the promise of entering into his rest,
Heb. 4.1, 2.

Secondly, godly men should hence learn diverse things.

First, to be diligent above all things to make their calling sure: now there
be diverse signs of a true effectual calling, such as these: As Eight signs
of an effectual calling.
1. The opening of the heart to receive the Word of God, and to attend the
things which are spoken, Acts 16.14. whereby they are enabled to hear, as the
learned, Esaiah 51.6. 2. The wearines of heart under the burden of sin, Math.
11.29. and 9.13. 3. The answer of the heart to the voice of Christ, consenting
to obey, and to enter into covenant with God, Esaiah 1.18, 19. 4. The taking
away of the detestable things, and their abominations from them, Ezech. 11.17,
21. Col. 2.11. Ezech. 11.18.
5. The knitting of the heart to the godly. 6. The remoouing of the stony heart,
and the planting of the heart of flesh, Ezech. 11.19. 7. The virtues of Christ,
as in the coherence in this text. 8. In general, the truth of our calling
appears by the demonstration of the spirit and power. The holy Ghost quickening
the heart to new obedience, 2. Cor. 2.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.5.
called the manifestation of the spirit. Secondly, it should teach them to
strive to walk worthy their calling: for the manifestation of the spirit was
given to profit withal: and we are therefore called, that we might be to the
praise of his rich grace. Now that we may walk in some measure, as becomes this
great gift of God;


Rules that show us how to walk worthy of our calling.
First, we should be humble, and not wise in our own conceit, though hardness
lie yet upon the hearts of some, Romans 11.25, 30, 31. For the wind blows where
it lists, and the Spirit of Christ works where and when it pleases him,
John 3. and we have nothing, but what we have received.

Secondly, we should be exceeding thankful to God for his rich grace in our
calling: And the rather, 1. Because this is no common favor, but in special
grace communicated to us: For no man comes, but whom the Father draws. 2.
Because it was done without respect of our own works, without al desert on our
part. 2. Tim. 1.9. For God called us, that were worldly, carnal, natural, and
sinful men, strangers from the life of God, dead in sins, serving the lusts,
and diverse pleasures, yea such as never sought God, we were miserable sinners,
Ephesians. 2.1, 12. Mat. 13. 3. Because of the means and manner of our calling:
God the Father works his part, and I work, says our Savior: An excellent
work, when such workmen are needful to it, and in this work the ministration
of the spirit exceedes in glory, 2. Cor. 3.7, 8. and it is a holy calling,
wherewith he has called us, 2. Tim. 1.9. 4. Because they are so great
happinesses, to which he has called us: As to the fellowship of his Son: To
be sons, and heirs with him, 1. Cor. 1.7. and to a Kingdom, and so great
glory, 1. These. 2.12. 2. These. 2.14. 5. Because Gods gifts and calling are
without repentance: He will never repent, that he has so called us, Romans
11.29. Esaias 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Iam. 1.17.


And thus of the second way, by which we should show our selves desirous to
walk worthy of our calling.

3. We should show this by well doing, we must be careful to maintain good
works, Tit. 3.8. For we were called, that we might serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75.

4. We should therefore live contentedly, when we are assured of the work of
Christ in calling us with such a calling. Jacob should not now be ashamed, nor
his face wax pale, Esaias 29.23, 24.

5. We should in our particular be careful to rest where we are, in the
doctrine we have learned, and been taught, and not be carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 14.

Thus, as the uses are common to the Godly in general.

Thirdly, Ministers in particular from the consideration of this doctrine of
our calling by Jesus Christ, should learn to preach Christ, and him crucified,
and to deny the excellency of wisdom, or words, that men's faith may be in the
power of Christ: It is Christ must give them increase* they should learn of
Paul, 1. Cor. 2.2, 4, 5.

One thing by the way I might note concerning the time of our calling: we
should not be curious about that, to know the day or hour, when it was, but
we must rest satisfied to know, that we are the Called of Jesus Christ.

And thus of the uses for instruction.

Use 3. Hence also may be concluded much terror to wicked men, that are not
called, in that this work of calling is the door of all grace communicated to
us: Now wicked men not called, are of two sorts: first, some outwardly refuse
their calling: secondly, some seem to obey it, but it is not effectually: both
are in miserable case, but not both alike: For the later are near the Kingdom
of God many times.

The first sort resist the holy Ghost, The misery of such as refuse their
calling, showed in eight things.
put the Word of Christ from them, refuse to answer, or obey, reject the
counsel of God, harden their hearts, and are therefore extremely miserable:
for,

First, they judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Acts 13.46.

Secondly, they are in danger to be left, and forsaken of God, and have the
means taken from them, John 12.39.

Thirdly, God will provoke them many times to jealousy, by calling a people to
himself, whom they account foolish, Romans 10.19. especially when they have
rebelled against the means, Ezech. 3.6, 7.

Fourthly, God will laugh at the calamity of such men, Prou. 1.26.

Fifthly, and they may be taken away with sudden destruction, Prou. 1.17.

Sixthly, if they call to God, it may be, he will not answer hereafter, Prou.
1.28, 29, 30.

Seventhly, if they live in prosperity, that shall destroy them, Prou. 1.31.

Eighthly, the dust of the feet of Gods servants shall witness against them in
the day of Christ, and then they shall be fearfully punished. Math. 10. Of
the estate of such as have temporary grace


Now there are another sort of wicked men, that are called externally, and in
some respect internally too, and yet are not right: such as have temporary
grace, do obey their calling after a sort, and for a time; for they assent
unto a part of the Word of God, which they receive with joy: and this is called
a taste of the good word of God: they may also be persuaded to leave diverse
sins, as Herod was, and may be endued with diverse graces of the spirit,
which they had not before, Heb. 6.4, 5. Now this calling yet is not that
effectual inward calling, which is in Gods Elect. For they receive not the
promise of grace in Christ to them in particular, to rely upon it, nor are they
persuaded to for sake all sin, nor have they any one saving grace, which is
in the godly: Now these men are miserable, because they are not truly called;
and the more, first, because they were near the Kingdom of God, and yet want
it: secondly, because they will be the hardlier drawn to see their miseries:
Harlots and Publicanes may enter into the Kingdom of heaven before them.

Hitherto of our calling, and so of the positive description of the happiness of
a Christian: the co^paratiue follows in the last words of this verse, and the
whole 10. v. where the Apostle intends to show the^ their happiness now in
Christ in comparison of that miserable estate they lived in before: so that he
compares the estate of a Christian in grace with the estate of a Christian in
nature: and this he does, first, in metaphorical terms, in the end of this
verse: and then in plain words, verse 10. In this verse he compares their
misery to darkness, and their happiness to marvelous light.

Out of darkness.]

From the general consideration of all the words, two things may be observed.

First, that it is profitable even for godly men to be put in mind of the
misery they were in by nature. For the consideration hereof may 1. Keep them
humble, The remembrance of our misery past, is pofitable in ^^x respects.
to remember how vile they have been. 2. Quicken them, to the reformation of
the sin that yet hangs upon them, Col. 3.5, 6, 7, 8. 3. Work compassion in
them toward others, that lie yet in their sins, and teach them to deal
meekely with them, Tit. 3.2, 3. 4. Make them more watchful, to look on a
nature which has been so vile. 5. Quicken them to redeem the time they have
spent in the service of sin, 1. Pet. 4.3. 6. It should set the greater price
upon our happiness in Christ, and so is the consideration used here.


Secondly, that a mind, that is truly cured of sin, can easily bear the
remembrance of it, as it is past: A man that has been wounded in his arm,
will endure you to gripe him, when he is well healed: A sign he is not well
healed, when he cannot be touched: so is it with sinners.

Thus in General.

The first thing then to be considered of, is the misery of men by nature
expressed in the word darkness.

Darkness.]

The darkness that is in the world, is not all of a sort: The acceptations of
the word darkness.
For there is, first, darkness upon the earth, which is nothing but the absence
of the light of the Sun. Secondly, there is darkness upon the outward estates
of men in the world, and that is the darkness of affliction: Now afflictions are
called darkness in diverse respects: As, first in respect of the cause: when they
fall upon men by the anger of God: The want of the light of Gods countenance,
is miserable darkness: the absence of the Sun cannot make a worse darkness.
Secondly, in respect of the effects, because afflictions darken the outward
glory of man's estate, and withal breed sorrow and anguish, and the clouds and
storms of discomfort and grief; and, for the time, deprive the heart of
lightsomnesse and joy. Of both these respects, may the words of the Prophet
Esaias be understood, Esaias 5.30. and 8.22. And so God creates darkness as a
punishment, upon all occasions, for sin, Esaias 45.7. Afflictions may be
compared to darkness in respect of another effect, and that is the amazement
bred in the heart; by which, the afflicted is unable to see a way out of
distress, and unresolved either how to take it, or what means to use for
deliverance. Thus it is a curse upon wicked men, that their ways are made
dark, Psalm. 35.6. Thirdly, afflictions are called darkness when they are secret
and hidden, and fall upon men at unawares, when they are not dreamed of, Job
20.26.

And thus of darkness upon men's estates

Thirdly, there is a darkness falls upon the bodies: and so it is either
blindness, wanting the light of the Sun, or else it is death and the grave.
Death and the grave is called darkness, Job 17.13. and 10.21, 22. Psalm. 88.13.

Fourthly, there is a darkness upon the souls of men: and that is spiritual
blindness, when the soul lives without the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ
especially. As it respects the will of God in general, it is the darkness of
ignorance and error: and as it respects the promise of grace in Jesus
Christ, it is the darkness of unbelief, Ephesians. 4.

Lastly, there is a darkness shall light upon both souls and bodies of wicked
men in hell: and that is called utter darkness, Mat. 8.12. and 22.15.

So that darkness, as it comprehends in it the misery of wicked men, is either
temporal darkness upon the estates or bodies of men, or spiritual darkness upon
the souls of men, or else eternal darkness in hell.

This darkness also may be considered in the degrees of it. Degrees of darkness.
For, besides the ordinary darkness, there is, first, obscure darkness, called
also the power of darkness: and such was the darkness of Gentilisme: and such
is that darkness threatened to such as curse father and mother, Pro. 21.20. so
was the darkness, Ier. 2.1, 2. and that our Savior Christ speaks of, Luke
22.53. Such also was that night brought upon the Diuiners, Mic. 3.6, 7.
Secondly, there is utter darkness, or eternal darkness in hell, which is the
highest degree of the misery of wicked men.

I take it, it is especially the darkness of ignorance is here meant, though the
other cannot be excluded.

That which is evident to be observed from hence, is, that all men that are
not effectually called, live in darkness, and walk-on in darkness, Ephesians. 4.17. 1.
John 2.9. Psalm. 82.5. It is a continual night with them: they are like the
Egyptians, that could have no Sun to light them, but were covered with
palpable darkness. Neither are they helped, that they enjoy the light of the
Sun: for, of all darknesses, that which comes from the absence of the Sun,
is the least, or has least distress in it. If a man lived where he should
never see day, or were born blind, yet his distress were nothing, in
comparison of the darkness, especially spiritual, that lies upon the poor
soul of an unregenerate man, which lies shut up in miserable darkness: which,
these men may feel in themselves, by their living without GOD in the world,
and by the absence of the ioies of God, and by their singular vncapablenesse in
the things of the Kingdom of GOD, and by their strange and absurd errors in
conceiving of matters of Religion, and by their monstrous thoughts and
objections they feel at some times, and disability to conceive of the worth of
eternal things, though the least of them be better than the whole world; and,
lastly, by their want of discovering what to do, almost in all the occasions of
life.

Use. The use may be for singular terror to wicked men, if they had hearts to
consider of it, to know, that they live in such a condition as no prisoner can
suffer in the worst dungeon of the world; and the rather, if they consider the
aggrauation of their distress, in respect of the darkness they live in, or are
likely to live in: as,

First, that they have the Devils, as the Rulers of the darkness they live in;
Nine aggrauations of the darkness is in wicked men.
who, like cruel Iaylers, will see to it, that they be kept still in their
dungeon, with all increase of heaviness and misery, Ephesians. 6.12.

Secondly, that their darkness is also the shadow of death, a most deadly
poisonfull darkness, that daily increases in the infection and annoyance of it,
Esaias 9.2.

Thirdly, that they suffer so many kinds of darkness in the vexations and
discomforts of each of them.

Fourthly, that it is such gross darkness, so thick and palpable, without any
mixture of true light or comfort: if they had but starlight or moonlight, it
were some ease.

Fifthly, that they are neither safe, walking nor lying still. If they walk,
they go in singular danger: for, they know not whither they go, 1. John 2.11.
Job 18.5, 6, 7. If they lie still and sleep it out, they are in danger to be
swallowed up eternally.

Sixthly, that this darkness will not hide from God. All they do, is manifest
before him, Esaias 29.15.

Seventhly, that it is a continual darkness: it will never be day with them, so
long as they live in that estate without repentance, Job 15.30. All his days
he eats in darkness, Eccles. 5.17.

Eightthly, that they are in danger every hour to be cast into utter darkness,
where will be no ease nor end. He knows not, that the day of this darkness is
ready at hand; into which if he fall, he shall never depart out.

Ninthly, that this is the case of every unregenerate man: the whole world of
them lies in darkness, and not one escapes it: their whole earth is without
form, and void; and their heavens have no light in them, Ier. 4.24.

Ob. But we see, wicked men have joy and comfort many times.

Sol. They have certain sparks of light, like the light smitten out of the
flint: first, they cannot warm themselves by it, nor see how to direct their
ways: secondly, it will quickly go out: thirdly howsoever it be for a time
here, yet at length they must lie down in sorrow, Esaias 50.10.

And the consideration hereof should in the second place much reprove the
peruersenes of wicked men, and that in diverse respects, and considerations.

First, that they can be silent in darkness, as the phrase is, 1. Sam. 2.9.
that they can live so securely, and never make moan, or humble themselves in
their distress.

Secondly, that they dare, which is worse, many times call darkness, light, and
light darkness, and defend it, that they are in as great liberty and safety as
the best of them all. Oh woe unto them, because they call darkness light, Esaias
^.20.

Thirdly, that they will not come into the light, when the door is opened, and
while there is spiritual means of light. What a thing is this, that light is
come into the world, and the darkness comprehends it not? Ioh. 1.5.

Fourthly, this is their condemnation, that they love darkness more then light,
and prefer their vile condition before the condition of the children of the
light, Ioh. 3.21.

Thirdly, let these poor wretches be instructed, if it be possible, 1. To
embrace the means of light. 2. To pray to God to be entreated of them to
lighten their darkness: does not he justly perish, that may enjoy the light for
asking for it, yet and will not?


Ob. If any ask, how may they know? that they are in darkness?

Ans. I answer,

First, Signs of spiritual darkness.
By the vncapablenes and insensiblenes of the soul in the things of the
Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 4.17. 1. Cor. 2.14.

Secondly, By the works of darkness, by the continual practice of sin
without sound repentance, Romans 13. 1. John 1.6, 7.

Thirdly, in particular, by the habitual hatred of the godly, because they
follow goodness, 1. Ioh. 2.9, 11.

Fourthly, by the absence of God in the use of his ordinances, who is as the
Sun to the Godly, Psalm. 84.12.

And thus of the use that concerns the wicked.

Use 2. Godly men should from hence gather increase of consolation in their
hearts, from the consideration of Gods mercy, in translating them from the
Kingdom of darkness, into the Kingdom of his dear Love, Col. 1.12, 13. they
are the men, upon whom God has accomplished the prophecy and promise of his
grace: They are the deaf men that are made to hear the words of the book: and
the blind men, that see out of obscurity and darkness, Esaias 29.18, 19. The Lord
has made darkness light before them, and brought them, being but blind men, by
a way they knew not, Esaias 42.16. The people that sat in darkness, have seen
great light, Esaias 9.1. These men are the prisoners, that once were in darkness,
and God sent his own Son to the prison door to bid them come forth, and
show themselves, Esaias 49.9.

And their deliverance from darkness should be the more comfortable, if they
consider,

First, what a world of people are yet covered with darkness, Esaias 61.1.

Secondly, that darkness shall never return: They enjoy a day that never shall
have night following.

Ob. But is there not darkness still in godly men, as well as in other men?

Sol. I answer, In some respects there is, and in some respects there is not.
It is true, that in respect of the ignorance yet upon godly men in this life,
they may say, as it is in Job 19.8. God has set darkness in our paths, and
fenced up our ways, or Job 37.19. Teach us what we shall say unto him: for we
cannot order ourselves because of darkness: and sometimes in their afflictions
they may say, as aforesaid: But yet not withstanding there is great difference
between the state of the godly, and the state of the wicked: for

First, Differences between the darkness is in godly men, and that which is
in wicked men.
the godly are delivered from utter darkness altogether.

Secondly, for their darkness in this life, it is true, they may be subject to
such darkness as clouds may make, or an Eclipse, but the night is clean passed
with them, Romans 13.12.

Thirdly, though they have darkness, yet they are not under the power of
darkness, Col. 1.13. He that believes, cannot abide in darkness, but is getting
out, Ioh. 12.46.
as one made free, and set at liberty.

Fourthly, their darkness is not a gross and palpable darkness, they can see
their way, and are all taught of God: It is no darkness can hinder their
salvation.

Fifthly, though their afflictions may increase upon them, yet God will not
forsake them, but will show them great lights: Esaias 50.10. Mich. 7 8. Psalm.
1^2.^.
the Lord will be light unto them for comfort for the present, and will send
them the light of deliverance in due time.

Sixthly, they have their Patent drawn, and sealed, and delivered them, whereby
they are appointed to enjoy unspeakable light, and an absolute freedom from
all darkness: They are children of light, and are borne to singular privileges
in that respect: the time will come, when there shall be no ignorance, no
affliction, no discomfort any more.

Thus of their misery, and so of the estate, from which they are called.

Now follows to be considered their happiness, to which they are called,
expressed by the metaphorical term of light, and commended by the Epitheton of
marvelous.

Light.]

Acceptations of the word Light.
Light is either uncreated, or created: The uncreated light, is the shining
essence of God, infinitely above the shining light of the Sun: Thus God is
light and dwells in that vnapprochable light, 1. John 1.6. 1. Tim. 6.16. The
created light is that, which is made and begotten by God; whence he is called
The Father of lights, Iam. 1.17. and this created light is either natural, or
spiritual: Natural is the light of the Sun in the firmament: The spiritual
light, since the fall, was all collected, and seated in Christ. As God gathered
the light of the two first days, and placed it in the body of the Sun, as
the original vessel of light: so did the Lord collect, and gather the light
together after man had fallen, and placed it in Christ, that he, as the Sun of
righteousness, might be the fountain of light unto the spiritual world. And
thus Christ is said to be light, John 8.12. the light of the world, that
lighteneth every man that comes into the world, Ioh. 1.9. The beams of this
light in Christ, are diffused all abroad upon men: and so the light
communicated from Christ, is either temporal or eternal. Temporal light is
either the blessing of God in Christ, making the outward estates of God's
servants glorious and prosperous, Job 29.3. Hest. 8.16. Or else it is that
light that shines upon the souls of men; which must be distinguished
according to the instruments of conuaying or receiving it. The instrument of
conuaying it, is, outwardly the Law and the Gospel; and, inwardly, the Spirit
of Christ. The instrument of receiving it, in respect of the general will of
God, is the understanding; or, in respect of the promise of grace, it is faith.
The Law is a light, Pro. 6.23. of the light of the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.10. 2.
Cor. 4.6. Knowledge is light, Acts 26.18. and of the light of faith, John 8.12.

Eternal light is the light of heaven, where the inheritance of the Saints
lies, Col. 1.12. Reuelat. 18.19.

It is the spiritual light upon the souls of men, the light of knowledge and
faith is here specially meant, which is conuayed and increased by the Gospel.

Doct. The point then hence is clear, that God's servants, in comparison of
their former condition, are brought into great light. The spiritual light
shines upon every one that is to be converted, Acts 26.18. God has promised
light to every penitent sinner, Job 33.28, 30. Esaias 42.16. And Christ was given
to be the light both of Jews and Gentiles, Esaias 42.7. and 49.6. Hence it is,
that Christians are said to be the children of light, Luke 16.18. John 12.36.
yea, light it self, Ephesians. 5.6. the lights of the world* Phil. 2.15. And thus
they are so, by reason of the light of Jesus Christ, shining in their hearts
through the knowledge and belief of the Gospel. All the world is like unto
Egypt, smitten with darkness: and the Godly are like the children of Israel in
Goshen.

Use. The use may be, first, for instruction to the Godly: since they are
called to such light by Christ, they should 1. Believe in the light: since they
see now what they do, they should establish their hearts, in the first place,
in the assurance of God's love, since his shining favor shows it self in
the Gospel. 2. They should do the works that belong to the light: they may
now see what to do, and therefore ought not to be idle, but to work while they
have the light, 1. John 2.8. And to that end, they should daily come to the
light, that it may be manifest, that their works are wrought in God, John
3.21. And they should now abound in all goodness, and justice, or righteousness
and truth, Ephesians. 5.8, 9. proving, what that acceptable will of God is, verse 10.
3. They should* therefore cast away the works of darkness, and have no
fellowship with the children of the night, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5 7.
to 14. For, what fellowshippe between light and darkness? 2. Cor. 6.17. 4. They
should, in all difficulties and ignorances, pray to God to show forth his light
and truth, seeing they are called to light, Psalm 43.3.


Use 2. Secondly, godly men should hence be comforted, and that in diverse
respects. First, though they may have many distresses in their estates, yet
light is risen to their souls: though they may for a season suffer some
eclipse of their comfort, yet light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. And the more they should be glad of their
portion in light, when they behold the daily ruins of ungodly men. The light
of the righteous reioiceth, when the lamp of the wicked is put out, Pro. 13.9.
In 2. Cor. 4.4, 6. there are three reasons of consolations assigned. First, the
light we have should comfort us if we consider how many men have their minds
blinded by the god of this world; and of those, many of them great, wise, and
learned men. Secondly, if we consider what darkness we have lived in: God has
done as great a work upon our hearts, as he did when he commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, in the beginning of the world. Thirdly, if we consider
what glorious things are revealed unto us: for, by the gospel, he has caused
to shine in our hearts the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. Finally, it is
the more comfortable, in that the Apostle calls this light, marvelous light;
which is now in the next place to be opened.

Marvelous light.]

The spiritual light, which shines in the hearts of the godly by the Gospel, is
a marvelous light, either because it is such as the Godly do marvel at, or
because it is such as they ought to marvel and wonder at.

In how many respects the light of the godly is marvelous.
When men first enter into the truth, that is, when they are first converted,
Christians being (for the most part) full of affections, as they that have
escaped lately singular danger, and as they that never before saw the Kings
Court, they are frequently stirred up with admiration at the glory of the
Gospel: they wonder at and are vehemently affected with the new discovery of
the riches of Christ, showed them in the preaching of the Gospel: and thus it
is a marvelous light in this sense, Esaias 30.26.

But I rather consider of it in the other sense; It is a marvelous light,
though we should not have the heart to be so affected toward it: it is
marvelous, I say,

First, because it is a light that needed the Mediator to procure it: none but
Christ can give us this light. Other light is free, we pay nothing for it: but
this is carried in the hand of the Mediator to us, and for us, Esaias 42. and 49.

Secondly, because it comes after so long a night of ignorance and sin: they
must needs account the light precious, that have not seen it a long time; Esaias
9.2. Mat 4.16.
as blind men when they receive sight.

Thirdly, and more, because it is a light commanded to shine out of darkness, 2.
Cor. 4.6. That God should call light out of such darkness as was in our hearts,
is marvelous.

Fourthly, in comparison with the times of the Law, and the shadows of the old
Testament.

Fifthly, because it is a light comes not from any creature, but from God the
Creator. God is our light, Esaias 6.19. And in this respect, this light is like
the light that shone about Paul, Acts 22.6.

Sixthly, because it is a light that shines at the time of the evening of this
world. That the Sun should shine in the day time, is no wonder: but, that it
should shine in the night, or at evening, were a dreadful wonder: even so it
is in this last age of the world, Zach. 14.7.

Seventhly, because it is a knowledge above the reach of reason: it is the
light of faith.

Eightthly, because it shines only to the godly. It is light in Goshen, when
there is no light in Egypt; that was marvelous: and so is it when we see the
light shining all abroad, and many men sit in darkness, even in the same place,
in the same congregation, city or family. When the Godly see clearly, the
Wicked discern nothing: light is withheld from the Wicked.

Ninthly, because it has more force than any other light: for, it is the light
of life: it quickens the soul, and enlyues it, John 8.12.

Lastly, because it is an everlasting light: it is such a day, as no night
follows it.

The consideration of all this should work diverse things in us. For, if in all
these senses it be a marvelous light, then

First, we should be maruelously affected with it, and strive to be exceeding
thankful for it. How have we deserved to be cast again into darkness for our
extreme unthankfulness! How have we given God cause to take away the
Candlestick from us! Let us therefore strive after thankfulness and admiration:
and if the Lord do work it in us, let us take heed we lose not our first love.

Secondly, we should arm our selves for the defense of the light: we should
preserve it as a singular treasure: both in our hearts and in our Churches; we
should with the more resolution resist the works of darkness, standing always
upon our guard, Romans 13.12.

Thirdly, we should strive after all the degrees of the assurance of faith.

Fourthly, we should strive to make our light shine the more excellently, both
for the measure of good works, Malac. 5.16. and for the strict and precise
respect of the exact doing of good duties. Now we have the light so clearly
shining, we may do every thing the more exactly, then if it were dark, Ephesians.
5.15. Our gifts must not be hid. The light must not be put under a bushel,
Math. 5.15. Phil. 2.15. We should now avoid not only greater faul^s and
falls, but lesser stumblings, 1 Ioh. 2.10.11. We should do all things to the
life and power of them, and show discretion as well as knowledge.

This doctrine also does imply the grievous misery of wicked men: for if it be
marvelous light, into which the godly are called, there is a marvelous darkness,
in which wicked men live. The whole creation of God had been but a confused
heap, if God had not set in it the light of the Sun: such a confused Chaos is
the world of men, if the Gospel shine not into their hearts.

Finally, this should much comfort the godly, they are called into marvelous
light in all the senses before named: which should much inflame their hearts,
and they should rebuke their own hearts for not valuing so rich treasure. We
may from hence take occasion to note, how little we should trust to the
judgment of flesh and blood, in valuing spiritual things, when the very godly
themselves do not so much esteem of them as they should. Whatsoever we think,
yet in Gods account, the light of the Gospel, the light of faith and knowledge,
the light of Gods countenance, etc. is marvelous light. But if the light of the
godly be marvelous in this world, what shall it be in the world to com, when
God and the Lamb shall be their immediate light? Here God lights us by the
means: there God himself will be our everlasting light. Here our light may be
darkened with clouds of affliction and temptation: there shall be an eternal
light without all darkness. Here we have no light, but what is infused into us:
there we shall our selves shine as the Sun i^ the firmament.

Hitherto of the description in Tropicall terms.

Now it follows in plain words.

Verse 10. Which in times past were not a people, yet are now the people of
God: which in times past were not under mercy, but now have obtained mercy.


THe Apostle takes the words of this verse out of the Prophet Hosea, chapter
1.11. where the Lord promises that the number of the children of Israel shall
be as the sand of the sea, and in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are
not my people, it shall be said unto them* Ye are my people. Now the Apostle
applies that sentence to the people to whom he wrote, showing, that it was
accomplished in them.

Quest. The question is, of whom the Prophet and Apostle spoke.

Ans. Some say, Of the Israelites in the letter, both because the same chapter
shows, that they were cast off, and called Loammi, not Gods people: as also
because the Apostle is thought to write only to the Jews. But the Apostle
Paul, Romans 9.24, 25, 26. apparently. expounds it of the Gentiles chiefly, and
therefore we must rest in his sense, which by the way shows, that this
Epistle was written to the Elect amongst the Gentiles, as they were strangers
and pilgrims in the world, and not to the provincial Jews only.

The Apostle then, to the singular comfort of Christians in those times,
shows, that now were the Prophesies accomplished concerning the calling of the
Gentiles; which was before a great mystery, hidden from ages and generations,
Col. 1.26. admired by Angels, Ephesians. 3.10. 1. Pet. 1.12.

Before I open the words of this verse in particular, some use would be made of
this great work of calling the Gentiles; and so, from the consideration of
their estate, both before and after calling.

And first, Of the calling of the Gentiles in general.
for the meditation of the estate of all the world, or the nations of the
world, before Christ preached unto them: note,

First, the horrible infectiousnes of sin: whole worlds of people are poisoned
with it.

Secondly, the dreadful horror of God's Justice against sin: which as we may
see plainly in the sufferings of Christ; so also very lively in the desertion
and forsaking of the Gentiles, so many millions of men perishing without pardon
or pity: and therefore it was never safe to follow a multitude in evil, nor to
plead the practice of fathers or forefathers, with the like.

And for the meditation of their calling again in Christ by the Gospel, we
may gather matter,

First, Use.
of information; and so, first, that God is not tied to any place. If Israel
after the flesh will not serve him, he will raise up children unto Abraham from
among the Gentiles, Mat. 21.43. Secondly, that the Church of Christ is now
Catholic, of all nations; and therefore Christ's Kingdom the largest kingdom
in the world, and the glory of it must not be restrained to Rome, or any one
place.

Secondly, of consolation: for, here we may observe, 1. The infallibility of
Gods promises: these promises concern the calling of the Gentiles as being
dead, and were most unlikely, and yet we see them fulfilled: which should
teach us to trust upon God. 2. The wisdom and power of God, working light out
of darkness. The rebellion of the Jews is so far from laying Sion waste, or
dissoluing Religion, that it is an occasion of a greater work of God among the
Gentiles: yea, when profaneness seems to ouer-growe all, and the whole world
seems to live in wickedness, yet we know not what times may come for the glory
of Religion among Jews and Gentiles. 3. God's wonderful love to his Elect:
he will gather them from all the four winds of heaven: though they be few in
number, in comparison, and live dispersed in every Country, yet God, the great
Husbandman, will not want means to fetch them home into his garner. A
husbandman, that had all his field grown over with weeds, save here and there
one grain of corn on a land, would never be at the pains of gathering and
separating: yet God will. 4. The great encouragement that poor sinners and mean
persons have to come to Christ, and seek God. For here we see, he has showed
mercy to the very abject Gentiles, against whom he had infinite cause of
exception: and the rather should we be encouraged, because wheresoever we
live either in East or West, we may sit down with Abraham, Isaak, and Jacob in
the Kingdom of God, Math. 8.11.


And withal, here is matter of instruction, for, 1. We must look to our
faith: For God justified the heathen only by faith, Galat. 3.8. 2. We must
not be secure, but must learn to observe all things, that are commanded us,
Math. 28.20. The name of God must be great amongst us, and we must offer
incense, and a pure offering, Mala. 1.11. We must be fruitful, especially we
that live in these latter ages of the world, lest God hasten the calling of his
nation of the Jews, and cast us off for unbelief and unfruitfulness, Romans 11.


And thus in general of the calling of the Gentiles. In particular in this
verse here is a twofold comparison: first, the one respects, what they were to
God: secondly, the other respects what God was to them. They were to God by
nature no people, by grace they are his people: and God withheld from them his
saving mercy by nature, and now by grace they are under mercy: First, of their
being a people to God: And then of Gods mercy to them.

Which in times past were not a people.]

The word people is diversely taken: Many sorts of people in Scripture.
For sometimes it signifies any multitude, or great number of any sort, and so
Ants are said to be a people, Pro. 30.25. and Caterpillars, Joel 2.2, 5.
Sometimes it signifies the lower sort of men, as they are distinguished from
the Nobility in any State: and so they are used and styled the common people.
But, properly and originally, the word populus was thought to signify a
multitude of citizens in one city, enjoying the right and communion in society
and imploiments, under one Head and Gouerner.

Now, the holy Ghost in this place affirms, that men that live in their
sins, without faith and repentance, are not a people, though they be never
so many in number, or other prerogatives: and the nations of men living without
God, may be said, not to be a people,

Why wicked men are said, not to be a people.
Either because they are a people of no note, in no request in respect of true
greatness: as the Jews did vilely esteem of all the uncircumcised:

Or because they were not a peculiar people, or (as the Antithesis shows it)
were not the people of God. Now, till men subject themselves to God's
government by Jesus Christ, they are not a people. The Empire of the whole
world belongs to God and his Son Christ, Psalm. 2.10. Now, all nations that
come not in to kiss the Son, are no members of the Empire of the
Commonwealth of Israel: let them have what Heads or rulers they will, they are
but as so many Rebels, or (at the least) as so many strangers from God's
Kingdom; therefore called strangers and enemies, Col. 1.22. They are neither
born of the blood of Israel, nor have they any right of inheritance from God,
nor live they under the laws of the Empire, nor made free denisons: yea, this
p^^^se seems to import, that all men that are not gathered into the number of
God's people, are but a confused heap, and disordred multitude, never happy in
respect of any government: they are brought into no order; and, as the Prophet
also further says, they are good for nothing* Ier. 13.10. God regards them
not, nor looks after them as it were: and though they have Laws, and a kind
of government, yet their Laws and Customs are vain, Esaias 10.3. altogether
insufficient to make them live happily.

Use. The use may be,

First, for information: and so it may inform us in two things. First, the
vanity and insufficiency of worldly things, riches, power, honor, conquests,
carnal parentage, and the like, avail men nothing unto a blessed life: the
Gentiles had all these in their greatest glory, and yet not worthy to be called
a people. Secondly, we may hence gather the reason of these strange devouring
judgments, which fall upon the world by wars, famine, pestilence, etc. For,
inasmuch as worlds of men live without the compass of the obedience to God's
government, and stand out as so many Rebels; the Lord therefore, seeing they
will not be his people, fights against them from heaven, and makes wonderful
hauock among them; as a great King, that reuengeth himself by the strength of
Armies, upon Rebels.

Secondly, for instruction: and so we, that were sinners of the Gentiles,
should hence learn to acknowledge and praise the free grace of God, who without
our deserts has reckned us in the Court of his people; we that were by
nature, viz. none of God's people.

Thirdly, and especially it should set out the misery of all men living in
their sins without repentance: and the rather should we be moved with this
terror, 1. Because no place can privilege impenitent sinners: for, not only
professed Gentiles, but even wicked Israelites are in Scripture reckoned as no
people. The wicked are accounted as no people, though they live in the Church,
and dwell among God's people. For, what is the chafe to the wheat, though both
lie together? Yea, though men bear the name of God's people, yet God hates them
never a whit the less for that: and therefore to distinguish them, and show
how little he regards them, he calls them the evil people, Ier. 13.10. the
disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10.21. the people of Gomorrah, Esaias
1.10. the people of my curse, Esaias 34.5. 2. Because God will show by his fierce
wrath, that he does not reckon of them at all, but will cast them off as a
girdle that is good for nothing, Ier. 13.10. Many places of Scripture show
this. All the sinners of the people shall die, Amos 9.10. God will take away
his power from them, even his loving kindness and mercies, and would not have
them much pitied, Ier. 16.5. Behold, says the same Prophet in another place,
the whirl-winde of the Lord goes forth with fury: a continual whirlwind; it
shall fall with pain on the head of the wicked, Ier. 30.23. so Ezech. 11.21.
Esaias 34.5.


Ob. But, when men live in the Church, and are baptized, etc. how may it be
known, that they are not Gods people? what signs are there of men that are
not Gods people?

Sol. They are described in diverse Scriptures, where we may find out what
people it is God excepts against.

First, such as can live without God in the world, Who are not Gods people.
are not Gods people, Ephesians. 2.12. Such as can go whole days, weeks,
months, years, without any hearty care of God, or his glory, or favor. These
are evidently not a people.

Secondly, such as are of a stifneck: such as will not let Gods yoke come upon
them, such as will not obey his voice, but walk in the imaginations and counsels
of their own evil hearts, Ierem. 7.23, 24, etc. 13.10. especially such as
refuse to hear his voice, and are withal gainsaiers, and such as are talkers,
whose lips carry about them the infamy of Gods true people, and the blasphemy
of Gods name, Romans 10.21. Ierem. 10.13. Ezech. 36.3, etc.

Thirdly, it may be discerned by their manner of serving of God: for such as
God reiects from being of his people: may draw near to him with their lips,
but their hearts are from him; and they do him no service, but as men's laws
fear them to it. A constant habitual alienation of the heart from the care of
Gods presence in Gods ordinances, is a sure sign of persons God regards not.

Ob. But there are faults in the best men in the world, and therefore why
should such as live in the Church, and profess the true Religion, be cast off
only for living in sin, seeing all are sinners?

Sol. I answer with the words of the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6. Their spot is
not the spot of Gods people; that spot that is in the wicked, is a spot of
leprosy, and therefore they ought to be put without the Camp till they be
cleansed: The sins of the Godly, are sins of infirmity; and the sins of the
wicked, are sins of presumption: The wicked never obey from the heart, which
all the godly do; sin does not reign in them as it does in the wicked.

Thus of their estate by Nature: as they were not a people: their estate by
Grace is described in those words; Are now the people of God.

Are now the people of God:]

The difference of reading here, from that of the prophet is to be noted* for,
whereas in the prophet it is thus. In the place where it was said, ye are not my
people; it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God: which
words are somewhat doubtful: for some might gather, that therefore all which
were not a people, should in time be the people of God. The Apostle therefore
applies it so, as that it may appear, that the comfort only belongs to godly
Christians; and in stead of the words, Ye shall be called the Sons of the
living God, he says, Ye are now the people of God, which in sense differs not:
and the Apostle leapeth to the direct Antithesis, and takes it for granted,
that all God's People are God's Sons also, unless we conceive, that he
borrowed these words out of Hosh. 2. vlt. which I rather incline unto, though
Interpreters most take to the words, and the first Chap.

Ye are now the people of God.]

For the sense of the words, we must understand, that men are in Scripture said
to be God's people three ways.

First, in respect of eternal Praedestination, see Romans 11.2. Men are Gods
people three ways.
He will not cast off the people he knew before.

Secondly, in respect of the covenant in the Law, and so the sons of Abraham
were God's people, and none other, as many Scriptures show.

Thirdly, in respect of the covenant in the Gospel; and so it is to be taken
here: and all unregenerate men were not a people, and all that believe, are
God's people by the benefit of the covenant of Grace in the Gospel.

Now for the coherence I might note,

That they that are not the people of God, may be the people of God, and so
acknowledged of God himself; which should teach us with meekness and
patience, to wait when God will turn those that lie in their sins, and
despair of no man, and restrain fierce and perverse censures, concerning the
final estate of other men: But the maine point is, that God's people are the
only people in the World; None worthy to be called a people, in comparison of
them! No subject, in any government, so happy as Gods people, under his
government in Christ! and therefore to be made the people of God here, is
reckoned as a condition beyond all comparison: Now that Gods people excel all
other Subjects in the World, may appear many ways:

First, in respect of the love of God that he bears to his people, which has
four matchless praises, that no King on earth can afford to his Subjects:
Ier. 31.3.
For, first it is an everlasting Love, when all the favor of the Princes on
earth is both mutable, and mortal. Secondly, it is a particular love to each
Subject; All the people are loved, and by name, Deuteronomy. 33.3. The Lord counts,
when he reckons his people, he was become their God, Psalm. 87.5, 6. Thirdly, it
is a free love; There was no desert in us: whereas Princes look at somewhat
that may pleasure themselves, even where desert is less. Fourthly, How Gods
people excel all other people.
it is a tender Love; and therefore Gods people are said to be married to their
King and God, Hosh. 2.19. and therefore God is said to account his People to be
his Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9.

Secondly, they are an elect People; which has a twofold consideration in it:
For, first, they are elect from all eternity, and so every one of the People
has a particular act of Parliament to assure his right, Romans 11.2. And
secondly, they are elect in time, that is, they are separated and culled out of
all the people of the World. Exodus 33.6.


Thirdly, all Gods People have a general pardon given them for all offenses,
Ierem. 31.34. He saues his People from their sins; and this pardon is
grounded upon a sufficient atonement made by a most faithful high Priest for
them, Heb. 2.17. Who also sanctified all this People with his own blood, Heb.
13.12. Christ is given for covenant: he is their surety for them, and their
witness, Esaias 42.6. and 55.5. Who also redeemed them with his blood: All, a
People of Purchase.

Fourthly, all Gods People are qualified with new gifts, above all the people
in the World; their natures be amended, they are all washed and cleansed from
their filthiness: there is not one vile person amongst them, Ezech. 36.25. and
37.23. etc. He has formed them for himself, and his own service, Esaias 43.22.

Fifthly, all Gods Subjects are adopted to be Gods sons: and so can no Prince
on Earth say of his: they are, as it were, the fruit of his womb, Psalm. 110.3.

Sixthly, the Laws by which they are governed, are the perfectest in the whole
world: For the Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 119.8.

Seventhly, all Gods people live in his presence, and see his glory, Exodus
33.16. Leuit. 26.11, 12. Zach. 1.10, 11. Psalm. 95.7. Other Kings have many
subjects they never saw, and few that have that preferment, to live in the
Kings presence, or near about him.

Eightthly, God feasts all his subjects, and that often, and in his own
presence, and with the best provision of the world, Esaias 25.8. Esaias 65.13, 14.
Ierem. 31.14. Kings would soon consume their treasure, if they should do it
often, or almost once, etc.

Ninthly, no people so graced of their King in hearing requests, and receiving
petitions. For all Gods people may cry, and be heard, and at all times, and in
all suites, which no King on earth can grant to all his subjects, and seldom
or never so much as to any one, Esaias 30.19. John 14. Whatsoever they ask in
the name of Christ shall be granted unto them.

Tenthly, they are the longest lived of any people: As the days of a tree are
the days of my people, says the Lord: They may endure many a storm, but they
are fast rooted still. Mine Elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands,
Esaias 65.22. For, first, they only have the promise of a long life in this
world, and it is limited only with that condition, If it be good for them.
And secondly, if that God take away some of his people, and that quickly, out
of this world: yet that shortens not their life, or dependence upon God: For
when they dye a bodily death, they are said to be gathered to his people, or
their people, and there receive eternal life instead of it: Death does not put
them out of service, or deprive them of the Kings presence, but remoueth them
only out of one room into another: whereas they stood below stairs before,
they serve now above stairs, and are all of the Presence, and Priuie-Chamber
to God.

Eleuenthly, they are the wealthiest people in the world, none better provided
for: For, first for Spiritual gifts, and rich favors from the King of kings,
they are not destitute of any heavenly gifts, 1. Cor. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.3. And for
outward provision, God has taken all the chief creatures, and bound them to
serve them with provision in whatsoever they want: The heaven, the earth, the
corn, etc. all are bound for the supply of their wants, Hos. 2.21, 22, 23.

Twelfthly, they excel for protection: Whether we respect their preservation,
or the revenge is done upon their enemies: For their preservation, though the
earth and the heavens should be shaken, yet God will be the hope of his
people, Joel 3.16. and as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
about them that fear him, and therefore they cannot be moved, Psalm. 125.1, 2.
and if the rod of the wicked do enter upon them, yet it shall not rest upon
their lot, v. 3. of the same Psalm. And for vengeance: It is certain, the
Lord will avenge their quarrel upon all their enemies, though they be unable
to right their own wrongs; and because God would have it done thoroughly, he
reserues the work of vengeance to himself, to make the recompense, Heb. 10.30.
Romans 12.20.

Uses. The use may be both for Consolation, and Instruction: For it should
exceedingly comfort Gods children, considering what singular happiness they
enjoy by the government of Jesus Christ. Oh! blessed are the people, whose God
is the Lord, Psalm. 33.12. and 144.15. Moses admires, a little before his death,
the wonderful felicity of the godly, considered as they are God's people.
Israel is happy; none like to God's people, or this people: nor is there any
like unto the God of Jerusalem. For, God rides upon the heaven, in their help:
the eternal God is their refuge; and underneath are the everlasting Armies. He
will thrust out their enemies before them, and say, Destroy them. Israel alone
shall dwell in safety. The Fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and
wine: and his heavens shall drop down deaw. They are a people saved by the Lord,
who is the shield of their help, and the sword of their excellency. Their
enemies shall be found liers to them, Deuteronomy. 33.26. to the end.

And this excellent estate is the more comfortable to be thought upon, 1.
Because people of any nation may be admitted to this estate, and the Lord,
without respect of persons, will bless them with the blessing of his people,
as the Prophet excellently shows, Esaias 2.19. and 19.24, 25. The Gentiles have
come to rejoice amongst his people, Romans 15.9, 10, 11. They were hard times,
when the Lord's dominion was in a manner confined in the Kingdom of Judah and
Israel. 2. Because it is so great and glorious a work on God's part, to make us
his people: for, he does as it were plant the heavens, and lay the foundation
of the earth, that he may say unto Sion, Thou art my people, Esaias 51. verse
16. 3. Because in the hardest times that can befall the godly, the Lord will
have them plead this privilege: and they may go to God, and he will
acknowledge them in all their distresses, and sanctify their afflictions, and
deliver them at the voice of their cry, Esaias 64 9. Zach. 13.19. 4. Because they
shall yet enjoy a far more excellent estate in another world, than now they
have, Reu. 21. They are now but as the children of Israel in Goshen, or in the
wilderness.


Use 2. Secondly, diverse things may be hence observed for instruction; as, 1.
Such as live in the Church, and yet have not the marks of God's people on them,
should awake, and look about them, and labor to get into the number of God's
people. These fools among the people, as the Prophet David calls them,
should understand; and these evil neighbors unto Israel, should be persuaded
to learn the ways of God's people, and so they may be built up in the midst
of Israel, Ier. 12.16. And it should be their daily prayer unto God, to grant
them this one request, namely, to bless them with the favor of his people,
Psalm. 106.3, 4. 2. The penitent sinner, that feels his heart called by the
voice of Christ, should hence be moved to enter into the covenant of God, and
speedily to take the oath of subjection and allegiance, binding himself with
all his heart to God, and his divine service, deu. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. Ier.
50.5. 3. Such as have taken the oath, and are acknowledged for true Subjects,
should for the rest of their time study how to carry themselves as becomes the
people of God: and so,


In general, they should remember two things.

1. To give ear to God's Law, and hearken what the Lord will say unto them
from time to time, Psalm. 78.1. Esaias 51.4. 2. To lead a holy life and
conversation: for, therefore has God severed them from all nations, that they
might be holy to him, Leuit. 20.26. All God's people are righteous, Esaias
59.21. and 62.12. And Christ has redeemed them from all iniquity, and purified
them, that they might be a peculiar people unto him, zealous of good works,
Tit. 2.14. They must therefore be no more polluted with their transgressions,
nor be fashioned to the lusts of their former ignorance, Ezech. 14.11. and
36.25, etc.
In particular they should 1. Give God thanks for ever, for blessing them with
the blessing of his people, Psalm. 79. vlt. 2. They should humble themselves, to
walk with their God, Rules for Gods people, how to carry themselves to God.
Mic. 6.8. being humbled at his feet, to receive his Law, Deuteronomy. 33.3. bowing
down with all reverence to worship him, Psa. 95.7. For, God is a great God
above all gods, and a great King above all kings. 3. They must avoid needless
society with the wicked, 2. Cor. 6.16. and take heed, that they learn not the
manners of other nations, Leuit. 20.24. 4. The Law of GOD must be in their
hearts. For, they should be a wise and understanding people above all men: and
this is the sign of God's people, Esaias 51.7. Deuteronomy. 4.6. And it is God's
covenant, to write his Laws in their hearts, Ier. 31.33. 5. They must avoid
Idols, and keep Gods Sabbath: this, God requires perpetually, Leuit. 26.1, 2,
3, 11, 12. and graciously accepts, when he finds this care, Esaias 56. with
protestation against those that will not keep his Sabbaths, Ier. 17, etc. 6.
They must walk confidently in the trust upon God's goodness and covenant with
them, as the godly resolved, Mic. 4.5. All people walk in the name of their
god: and therefore we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and
ever, resolving to cleave to God in a perpetual covenant, Ier. 50.4, 5. 7.
They should approve themselves to be God's people, by their language: their
language should be a pure language, not speaking lies: a deceitful tongue
should not be found in their mouths; and their words should be gracious, such
as might minister grace to the hearers, Zeph. 3.9, 13. Ephesians. 4. Col. 4. 8. They
should be patient in all adversities, as being of Moses mind, that it is
better to suffer affliction with God's people, than to enjoy the treasures of
Egypt, Heb. 11 25. 9. They should obey according to all that God commands them,
showing a respect to all God's Commandments; seeing they serve God, and not
men, and that all dissimulation will be open before his eyes, Jeremy 11.
verse 4.


And thus of the second way of comparison.

In the last words of the verse, their estate is considered in relation from
God to them. And so, in the state of nature they were not under mercy: but, in
the state of grace, they are now under mercy.

Not under mercy.]

Doct. All the time that men live without repentance for their sins, and faith
in Jesus Christ, they live without the mercy of God: they are not under mercy:
God loves them not, nor regards them: they are children of wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. and
the wrath of God abides on them, Ioh. 3.36. Yea, though the Lord be exceeding
merciful in himself, and to the faithful, yet by no means will he clear the
guilty, Exodus 34.6. Number. 14.18. Now, this not being under mercy, imports
diverse things.

First, that their sins are not forgiven or pardoned.

Secondly, that their souls are not healed of their original diseases, but
they live still in their blood.

Thirdly, that they are liable unto all sorts of judgments: and those which
are upon them, came from the wrath of GOD, which hates them, etc.

Fourthly, that they are in danger of eternal condemnation; in general, that
they live and lie under the forfeiture of the covenant of works, and have no
part in Christ, or the covenant of grace.

Use. The use should be therefore to teach wicked men, to take heed how they
presume of Gods mercy: they may deceive themselves; but God will not be mocked,
Gal. 6.7. For such things as they are guilty of, the wrath of God comes upon
the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.5. They that live after the flesh, shall
die, Romans 8.13. For the more distinct understanding of this point, four things
would be considered of.

First, that wicked men are exceeding apt to plead Gods mercy, though it belong
not to them; and do not believe, that God will deal so with them as they are
threatened.

Secondly, that God directly declared himself, that he will not show mercy or
pity toward diverse sorts of offenders.

Thirdly, that the things men usually object, will not be auailable to deliver
them from Gods wrath.

Fourthly, what sorts of men, in particular, God will not be merciful unto.

For the first: that men are apt to plead God's mercy when it belongs not to
them, is apparent through the whole course of Scriptures, to have ever been in
the disposition of most wicked men: they bless themselves in their hearts,
when their iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36.2. They live at ease,
and put far away the evil day from them, Amos 6.1, 3. They cry Peace, peace,
when sudden destruction is made to come upon them, 1. These. 5.3.

For the second: that God will not be merciful to many a man that lives in
the visible Church, is manifested by many Scriptures; as, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Ier.
16.5. Ezech. 5.11. and 7.4, 9. and 8.18. Hosh. 1.6. and 2.4. and in many other
places.

For the third: their excuses and pretenses are all vain: for, 1. If they stand
upon their greatness in the world, Excuses of wicked men refuted.
it is certain, that riches will not avail in the day of wrath, Job 36.18, 19,
etc. 2. Nor will it help them, to be born of godly Ancestors: for, rather than
God will be tied to the wicked seed of Abraham, he will raise up children of
the stones, to Abraham, Mat. 3. 3. Nor can multitude privilege them. For,
though hand ioin in hand, yet sin shall not go unpunished: and God turns
nations of men into hell, Psalm 9.17. 4. Nor will their outward serving of God
serve their turn. It is bootlesse to cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, if men redress not their ways, Ier. 7.4, 8, 9, 10. 5. Nor will it
help them, that some Ministers speak comfortably to them, and by their
preaching they may expect mercy: for, GOD will judge those Prophets that
strengthen the hands of the wicked. The stubborn people were never a whit the
safer, when the Prophet told them they should have peace, and no evil should
come unto them: but the Lord protests, that the whirlwind of his fury should
fall grievously upon the head of the wicked for all that, Ier. 23.15, 19, 20.
that at length they should consider it perfectly: and the Lord threatens that
he will rent the wall of security which the Prophets have built with untempered
mortar, that he will rent it even with the fierce wind of his fury, and there
shall be an ouerflowing shower in his anger to consume it, Ezech. 13.10. to 15.
6. Neither may the patience of God prove, that he means to show expected
mercy: for, though a sinner prolong his days an hundred times, yet it shall
not be well with the wicked, nor ought he to settle his heart the more freely
on his sin; because sometimes it is not speedily executed: for God will find
a time to set his sins in order before him, and then he may tear him in
pieces, and none can deliver him, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 50.19. 7. Neither
will it ease them, that there are so many promises of mercy in Scripture. For
they are limited; and besides in diverse places where mercy is promised, the
Lord explains himself, by showing that he will not cheer the wicked, Ex.
34.7. as was alleged before, so Nahum 1.3. and v. 7. compared with the 6. 8.
Neither will their Baptism help them: for neither Circumcision nor
vn-circumcision avails any thing, but a new Creature, Gal. 6.


Ob. If any say, But though they be not now under mercy, yet hereafter they may
be upon Repentance.

Ans. I answer, that in this they say truly, but yet not safely: For, many
men that have promised themselves the late Repentance and mercy, have died in
their sins before they could ever repent. And thy times are in Gods hands, thou
know not when, nor how thou shall die: and therefore the surest way is, Now
to turn to God with all thy heart, as they were counseled more at large, Joel
2.12, 13.

Now for the fourth, it may awake some sort of offenders the more effectually,
that besides the general threatenings against wicked men, they in particular
are assured that they are not under mercy:

As first, such as show no mercy to men, Iam. 2.13. and such as transgress of
malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59.6. and such as are people of no understanding,
Esaias 7.11. and such as walk after the imaginations of their own wicked hearts,
and will not harken unto God, Ierem. 16.5, 10, 12. and such as bless
themselves in their heart, when they hear the curses of the Laws, Deuteronomy.
29.19. and such as steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, Ier.
7.9. and many other particulars. Catalogues might be instanced in all the
several Scriptures: the Prophet Malachy puts in such, as deal corruptly in
tything, and offering, Malach. 1.8, 9.

To conclude; the counsel of the Prophet Jeremy is excellent in this case, who
most effectually speaks thus: Hear ye, give ear, be not proud: for the
Lord has spoken, Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness,
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness: But
if you will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and mine
eye run down with tears, Ierem. 13.15, 16.

Use 2. Secondly, the consideration of this doctrine may justify the practice
of godly Ministers, that denounce the judgments of God upon their hearers,
that live in sin without repentance: It is their duty to show them, that
they are not under mercy; they are required to cry aloud, and to show Gods
people their sins, Esaias 58.1. And the Prophets, that cried peace, peace, are
extremely threatened of God, so as for not warning the people, the blood of
their souls is required of the Prophets, Ezech. 33. verse 2. to 10.

Use 3. The third use may be therefore for the singular humiliation of wicked
men, that live in the assemblies of Christians: Though they have obtained a
place in Gods Church, yet they have not obtained mercy, but live under the
fearful displeasure of God: and this is the more terrible, if they consider
three things.

First, that this is the case of multitudes of men in the Church: but a remnant
are under mercy: which will appear more distinctly, if you draw out of our
assemblies, such as in Scripture are expressly said not to be under mercy, as,
1. Take all such as yet live in their natural Atheism, What wicked men in
particular are not under mercy.
that mind not God, nor Religion, that only care for earthly things, and show
it by a constant either neglect, or contempt of the public assemblies of
Christians amongst us: These cannot obtain mercy, because they refuse to
hear Gods voice, and to seek to the ordinary means of mercy, Isaiah 50.1,
2. Heb. 3.7. 2. Draw out then secret offenders, such as sin in the dark, and
say, Who sees us? There are many amongst us, that for ough^ ^ee know, live
honestly, who yet in secret are polluted with desperate abominations, as,
fearful deceit in their callings, prodigious filthiness of body, or the like.
3. Remove from us likewise open and notorious offenders, such as are
drunkards, outrageous swearers, known adulterers, or fornicators, murderers,
railers and extortioners: For to such belongs not Gods mercy, or Kingdom, 1.
Cor. 6.9. 4. Then separate from us such as are only ciuilly honest, and not
religious: There are many, that are far from gross offenses, either open, or
secret, who are not yet under mercy, which is discovered diverse ways; as by
their ignorance: For God will not have mercy upon people that have no
understanding, Esaias 27.11. And by their impenitency, they never soundly and in
secret confessed their sins to God: They never mourned for their many
corruptions: There is a world of inward wickedness, which they were never
humbled for: And also by their unbelief; they know no way, how to be saved by
Christ by effectual believing on his mercy, but think to be saved by their
own good deeds, or else they live in a general security, not looking after
salvation, but thinking it enough, that they are well accounted of amongst men.
5. Lastly cast out Hypocrites, that only make a show of godliness, and have
not the power of it: that draw near to God with their mouths, but have their
hearts far from him. These in vain worship God. These are Jews outward, but
have not the circumcision of the heart, and therefore their praise is not of
God.


You may easily conceive, how small a number will remain, if all these be
deducted out of the societies of Christians.

Secondly, if they withal consider, that if mercy be not obtained, all else
is in vain. It does not profit him to obtain credit, riches, friends in this
world, long life, or ought else, if he obtain not mercy: what shall it
advantage thee to obtain the whole world, if for want of mercy thou lose thine
own soul.

Thirdly, it increases their misery, that they may dye in the case they are
in. For either God may take away the means of mercy from them, or may leave
them to so much insensiblenesse, as they may remove themselves from the means
of mercy; or God being provoked by their long obstinacy, may deliver them up to
a reprobate sense; or God may suddenly take them away by death, and then woe
unto them: it had been better for them, they had never been borne.

Quest. But some one may ask, What should be the cause, that so many obtain
not mercy of God, seeing God is in his own nature so gracious, and they are in
so great need of mercy?

Ans. I answer, that the cause why some obtain not mercy, is,

Why many obtain not mercy.
First, because they seek it not: they be at a great deal of care and pains
many times to seek other things, but they altogether neglect their own mercy,
and seek not for it. Now God stands upon that, That he will be sought unto:
The house of Israel must know, that though God be many ways gracious, as is
showed at large, Ezec. 36.25. etc. yet for all this, he will be sought unto;
or else even Israel may want mercy, verse 32.

Secondly, others are so far from seeking mercy, that they refuse mercy, when
God in the Gospel daily calls upon them, and beseeches them to be reconciled:
yet they are so busily employed in following foolish vanities, that they
forsake their own mercy, Jonas 2.8. They will not answer, when God calls, but
reject his Word, and grieve his good Spirit, and abuse his patience and
bountifulnes, and so heap up wrath against the day of wrath.

Thirdly, others seek mercy, but they seek it not aright; they fail in the
manner, as either they seek it coldly, and carelessly, praying but for fashion
sake, or with their lips without power of affections. They speak for mercy, but
they do not care for mercy: They neither observe, nor regard, whether their
petitions be granted, or denied: and this is the condition of the ordinary
sort of men: or else they seek mercy corruptly without sincerity of the heart.
As when men pray God to forgive them the sins, which yet they mind not to
leave. Now this is a shameful kind of seeking mercy: For God stands upon it,
that we must forsake our wickedness, or else he will not forgive, Esaias 55.6.
2. Tim. 2.19. Or else lastly, men seek it too late, as Esau sought the
blessing, when it was gone, Heb. 12.15. They may call, when God will not
answer, Pro. 1. Zachar. 7. And this is the case of some, that put off their
repentance, until the latter end.

But have now obtained mercy.]

Doct. The godly are exceeding happy in the obtaining of Gods mercy: All that
are called in Christ Jesus, even all that have truly repented themselves of
their sins, are certainly under mercy, and in that respect, in a marvelous
safe and happy condition.

Three things are distinctly imported in the observation. First, the one is:
that God is merciful: Mercy may be obtained, Jonah 4.2. Psalm. 116.5. and 86.
Secondly, that penitent sinners do obtain mercy, Joel 2.13. Esaias 55.7.
Thirdly, that such as have obtained Gods mercy, are in a marvelous happy case,
in comparison of what they were before in. It is enough, if we obtain mercy,
whatsoever we obtain not: Hence the Phrase, Thou have covered him with thy
mercy.

And our happiness in respect of the interest we have in Gods mercy is the
greater, if we consider either the properties, or the effects of God's mercy.

There are four admirable properties in the mercy of God, which he shows to
his people.

Properties of Gods mercy.
First, his mercy is tender mercy, Psalm 51.1. which he shows in diverse things:
as, It is tender many ways.
1. That he is full of compassion, in pitying the distresses of his people: no
father can so pity his child, Psalm 103.13. Hence, his bowels are said to be
troubled for them, or to sound in him. Where is the sounding of thy bowels,
says the Prophet? Esaias 63.15. Ier. 31.20. The word Misericordiam imports as
much: for, it sounds misery laid to the heart. God then is merciful, in that
he lays our miseries to his heart. 2. That he waits to show mercy, Esaias 30.18.
watching for all oportunities, as it were, to prevent us with his blessings. 3.
That he is slow to anger; not easily stirred to displeasure, when he has
showed his favor, Psalm. 103.1. He is a God of judgment, that considers the
weaknesses and infirmities of his servants, as knowing whereof they are made,
Esaias 30.18. Psalm 103. 4. That if he do see some more prevailing evils in his
people, yet he will spare; as a father spares his only son, Mal. 3.17. And
if he do chide, yet he rebukes his people still with great affection, Ier.
31.19. and he will quickly giue-ouer, and not chide always, Psalm 103. He is
ready to forgive, as soon as they call unto him, Esaias 65.23. and 55.7. Psalm
103. 5. That if he do bring affliction upon his people to humble them, yet he
will not consume them, but will repent him of the evil, Joel 2.13. Deuteronomy.
32.36. Amos 7.36. 6. That in showing his love, he is of great kindness, called
the marvelous loving kindness, Psalm 17.7. hence, resembled to
marriage-kindnes, Hosh. 2.19. No husband can be so fond of his wife, as God is
of his people: nor can any man devise such ways to express kindness, as GOD
does to his people. 7. That his mercy is without all grieuance to him. Mercy
pleases him, Mic. 7.18. It breeds as it were an unspeakable contentment in GOD
himself, when he has dealt mercifully with his servants.


Secondly, It is immense.
his mercy is immense, unmeasurable: and this is expressed by diverse forms of
speech in the Scripture. Thus, God is said to be plentious in mercy, Psalm
86.5. abundant in mercy, 1. Pet. 1.3. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. His mercy is
great above the heavens, Psalm. 108.5. Gods Word heerin has magnified his name
above all things, Psalm 138.2. He has a multitude of mercies, Psalm 51.1.
manifold mercies, Nehemie 9.19. They are unsearchable, high as the heaven is
from the earth, Psalm 103.11. His kindness is said to be marvelous loving
kindness, Psalm 17.7. Which must needs appear to be so, because he is a Father
of mercies: all mercies in the world flow from him, 2. Cor. 1.3. and all his
paths are mercy and truth. Whatsoever he does to his people, is in mercy,
Psalm 25.6. And therefore the Prophet, that could find similitudes to express
the faithfulness and judgments of God by, yet is fain to giue-ouer when he
comes to his special mercy to his Chosen, and vents himself by exclamation, Oh
how excellent is thy mercy! Psalm 36.7.8.

It is free mercy, and that diverse ways.
Thirdly, this mercy is the more admirable, in that it is free: which appears
diverse ways. First, in that it is showed without deserts on our parts: which
the term gracious, every where given to God in Scripture, does import.
Secondly, in that God is tied to no man, nor to any posterity of men: he has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9. Thirdly, because it is extended to all
sorts of people. If the rich mercy of God could have been obtained only by
Kings, or Apostles, or the like, it had been the less comfortable unto us: but
bond, as well as the free; the Barbarian, as well as the Grecian; the Gentile,
as well as the Jew; the poor, as well as the rich, may be possessed heerof. He
does not spend all his mercy on Abraham or David, but he reserueth mercy for
thousands, Exodus 34.6. and will bestow the true mercies of David upon meaner
men, Esaias 55.4. His mercy is over all his works, especially over all his
spiritual works in Jesus Christ, Psalm 145.9. Fourthly, it appears to be free,
because it can be alone: God can love us, though no body else do: though
Abraham know us not, yet GOD will be a Father unto us, and never leave us nor
forsake us, Esaias 63.15, 16.

Ob. But, might some one say, In the second Commandment it is plain, that GOD
shows mercy ^o them that keep his Commandments. It seems then, his mercy is
not free, but he has respect to deserts in us.

Sol. First, our keeping of the Commandments is not alleged as the cause of
mercy, but as the sign of mercy: The words show to whom God will show mercy;
not for what cause.

Secondly, when he says he will show mercy, it evidently excludes merit: For,
it is mercy, that God will bestow such great things upon men for their works;
for there is no proportion between our works, and the goodness we receive
from God: When we have done all, we should account our selves unprofitable
servants.

Ob. But it seems, God's mercy is caused by merit; for God shows us mercy for
the merits of Christ: If Christ deserve it, then it seems it is not free?

Sol. First, mercy excludes merit in us, though not in Christ. Secondly, it was
mercy that God gave us Christ to merit for us. And thus of the third property
of God's mercy.

Fourthly, Gods mercy is eternal.
God's mercy is the more admirable yet, in that it is eternal: God will not
change his word: He keeps his covenant and mercy with his servants, 1. King
8.23. God's mercies have been from all eternity, Psalm 25.6. and he will
not take away his mercy from his servants, Psalm 89.34. but his mercy and
loving kindness shall follow them all the days of their life, Psalm 23. vlt.
His mercies are new every morning, he has never done showing of mercy, Lament.
3.23. Esaias 33.3. He is still building up his mercies, and will never leave,
till he have finished them in an everlasting frame of unspeakable glory,
Psalm 89.2. His mercy is everlasting and endures for ever, Psalm 103.3. and
136. from everlasting, to everlasting, Psalm 103.17. God may forsake his
people for a moment, to their thinking, and in a little wrath he may hide his
face, but with everlasting mercies he will receive them: As he has sworn that
the waters of Noah shall no more cover the Earth: so has he sworn he will no
more be wroth with his people. The hills may be removed, and the mountains may
depart, but God's covenant of peace shall not be removed, says the Lord, that
has mercy on thee, Isaiah 54.7. to 11. If God's covenant be not with day and
night, and if he have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; then
may he cast away his servants and their seed, Ierem. 33.25, 26. But we see the
course of nature is firm, and therefore ought to be more assured of the
firmness of the covenant of God's mercy to his people.

The effects of mercy follow.

To obtain mercy, is, to obtain those benefits which God has promised to his
people, as the fruits of his mercy. Where God shows mercy,

First, he will hear their prayers graciously: this is promised, Effects of
Gods mercy.
Isaiah, 30.18, 19. and pleaded by David, Psalm 4.1.

Secondly, he sanctifies all afflictions, so as whatsoever befalls the godly,
proceeds from mercy, and not justice in God; and shall work for the best,
Romans 8.28. It is God's love that makes him correct, Heb. 12.6, 7.

Thirdly, he heales their natures from the diseases of their minds: for, to
show mercy, is likewise to cure us, and sanctify us; and God promises it,
Hosh. 14.3.

Fourthly, he multiplies pardon, Isaiah 55.7. It is not grievous to forgive
sin daily, when they seek to him for forgiveness.

Fifthly, he delivers the soul, absolutely, from the pit: they are free from
condemnation, Job 33.27. Psalm. 86.13, etc.

Sixthly, In all dangers and weaknesses his mercy holds them up, even when the
godly say their foot slippeth, Psalm. 94.18.

Seventhly, he guides them in all their ways: He that has mercy on them
(says the Prophet) shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he
guide them, Isaiah 49.10. The World is like a wilderness, the wicked are like
wild beasts in a desert; God's children are so provided for, that God
preserues them, yea and himself finds them out means of singular refreshing
all their days.

Eightthly, He crowns them with blessings, Psalm. 103.4.

Ninthly, he gives them assurance of an immortal inheritance, 1. Pet. 1.3, 4.

The consideration of this marvelous mercy, which the godly have obtained, may
teach us diverse things.

Use. 1.
First, with all thankfulness to acknowledge the mercy of God: we should
always mention the loving kindness of God, in all the experiences we have of
the truth of his mercies toward us, Esaias 63 7. We should frame our selves to an
easy discourse of the glory of God's Kingdom, and talk of his power, Psalm
145.8, 9, 10. We should be so persuaded of this truth, as freely to say, that
we know that the Lord is gracious and very merciful, Psalm 116.5. It is a
great sin, Not to remember the multitudes of God's mercies, Psalm. 106.7. Oh!
that men would therefore indeed praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. Psalm
107. four times repeated in that Psalm: Christians should glory in it; not in
their riches, strength, wisdom, etc. but in this, that they know God that
exercises mercy, Ier. 9.24.

Secondly, in all our ways heartily to disclaim merits of works, or opinion of
our worthiness or deserts: say still, with the Prophet in the Psalm, Not unto
us, not unto us Lord, but to thy Name give the glory, for thy mercy and truths
sake, Psalm. 115.1. The whole frame of our salvation depends upon God's Grace,
not on works, Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3.5.

Thirdly, let us with David resolve to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever,
since our happiness lies in mercy, and since we have the tidings of mercy in
God's house: there the fountain of this grace is daily opened unto us, and we
may draw water still with joy out of this well of salvation in the Gospel,
Psalm. 5.7. and 23. vlt.

Fourthly, we should learn of God to be merciful: Let us strive to comfort
others with showing them mercy, as we have received mercy from the Lord. Oh let
us be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.

Fifthly, we should hence be encouraged, and resolved, since we know our
privileges, to go boldly unto the throne of Grace upon all occasions, to
seek mercy to help in the time of need: We have obtained mercy of the Lord,
and therefore may, and ought to make use of our privilege, Heb. 4.16.

Secondly, this doctrine of God's mercy, may serve for singular comfort to the
godly, Use. 2.
and that both in the case of sin, and in the case of afflictions.

1. Against the disquietnesse of the heart for sin, it should much refresh
them, to remember that they have obtained mercy, yea though innumerable evils
have compassed them about, Psalm. 40.11, 12. and though our offenses are
exceeding grievous, Psalm. 51.1. Exodus 34.6, 7. 2. Secondly, in the case of
afflictions, many things should hence comfort us. 1. That howsoever it go with
our bodies, yet God has mercy on our souls. 2. That it is mercy, that our
afflictions are not worse, that we are not consumed, Lamentations 7.22. 3.
That in the worst afflictions God does many ways show mercy, his mercies are
new every morning, Lament. 3.23. 4. That though God cause grief, yet he will
have compassion to regard us according to our strength, he will deal with us
in measure, Lament. 3.32. Esaias 27.7. 5. That he does not afflict willingly,
Lament. 3.33. 6. That all shall work together for the best, Romans 8.28. Deuteronomy.
8.16. 7. God will give a good end, Iam. 5.11. He will lift up from the gates
of death, Psalm. 9.13. God will give thee rest from thy sorrows and fears, and
hard usage, Esaias 14.1, 3. Psalm. 57.3. He will send from heaven to save thee. 8.
He will afflict but for a moment, Esaias 54.7.

But in both these cases we must remember,

First, to seek mercy of God, Ezech. 36.32.

Secondly, if we be not presently answered, our eyes must look up to God,
and we must wait for his mercies, Psalm. 123.3, 4.

Thirdly, we must check our selves for the doubtfulnes of our hearts, as David
does, Psalm. 4.7, 8. and 77.10.

Fourthly, because we live too much by sense, we must beseech God not only to
be merciful, but to let his mercy be showed, and come to us, Psalm. 85.8. and
116.77.

Fifthly, we should also beseech God not only to let us feel his mercies, but
to satisfy us also early with his mercies, Psalm 90. verse 14.

Sixthly, we must look to it, that we walk in our integrity, Psalm 26.11.
and live by rule, Gal. 6.16.

Lastly, howsoever: we must trust in God, and look to it, that we rest upon
the Lord, Psalm. 32.10. and 33.18, 22. For God takes pleasure in those which
hope in his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Quest. But how may a man, that is not yet comforted with Gods mercy, take a
sound course to obtain mercy?

Ans. That men may obtain mercy;

First, Helps to obtain mercy.
they must take unto themselves words, and confess their sins to God, and
heartily bewail their offenses, Joel 2.13. Hosh. 14.3.

Secondly, they must turn from, and forsake their evil ways, and their
unrighteousness inward and outward, Esaias. 55.7.

Thirdly, they must be careful to seek the Lord, while he may be found,
Esaias 55.6.

Fourthly, they must be merciful, and love mercy: For then they shall
obtain mercy, Math. 5.6.

Fifthly, they must learn the way of Gods people, and learn them diligently,
Ierem. 12.15, 16. They must have pure hands, and a clean heart, and not lift
up their souls to vanity, Psalm. 4.5.

Sixthly, they must hate the evil, and love the good, Amos 5.5.

Seventhly, they must cry unto God daily, Psalm. 86.3.

Eightthly, there must naught of the cursed thing clean unto their hands,
Deuteronomie 13. verse 17.

Ninthly, when the Lord says, Seek ye my face: their hearts must say, Thy
face (O Lord) will we seek, Psalm. 27.7, 8.

Verses 11.12. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul:

And have your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that they which speak
evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see,
glorify God in the day of their visitation.


THese words contain the epilogue or conclusion of the whole exhortation, as it
concerns Christians in general, from verse 13 of the former chapter, hitherto:
and it has in it matter both of dehortation and of exhortation, as answering
in the substance to all that he has hitherto entreated of by way of use. The
dehortation is in verse 11; the exhortation, in verse 12: in the one, showing
what they should avoid; in the other, what they should do. They should avoid
fleshly lusts: and that they should do, is, to live honestly.

In general, we may note, that it is the proper effect of all sorts of
doctrine in scripture, to make an impression of care in our hearts, about the
reformation of our lives; that it is in vain heard, which does not some way
breed in us a hatred of vice, and a love of honesty: this is the use of all
Scripture, 1. Tim. 3.16, 17. Which may serve for trial of such as come to the
Word: they may know whether they be good or evil hearers, by the impression
made upon their hearts by the Word. And it may serve for information, to show
us the excellency of the Word above all other Writings, because there is no
line in Scripture, but some way it tends to the redress of our natures from
sin, and to plant holiness in us: which can be true of no human Writings. And
withal, it shows the happy estate of the godly, who, though they have many
diseases in their natures, yet they have wonderful store and variety of
medicines in God's Word, to heal their natures. If, for the diseases of our
bodies, there be but one herb in the whole field that is good for cure, we
have reason to think, that God has provided well in nature for us: but how is
his mercy glorious, who, in the spiritual Field of his Word, has made to grow
as many herbs for cure of all our diseases, as there be sentences in Scripture!
And, lastly, it should teach us to use the Scriptures to this end, to redress
our ways by them. And thus in general.

The first part of the epilogue has in it matter of dehortation: where obserne,

First, the parties dehorted; who are described by an epithet importing their
privilege above other men, viz. Dearly beloved.

Secondly, the manner of propounding the dehortation, viz. by way of
beseeching: I beseech you.

Thirdly, the matter from which he dehorts, viz. fleshly lusts.

Fourthly, the manner how they are to be avoided, viz. abstain from them.

Fifthly, the motives: First, Ye are strangers and pilgrims: secondly, these
lusts are fleshly: thirdly, they fight against the soul.

Dearly beloved.]

This term is not used complementally or carelessly, but with great affection
in the Apostle, and with special choice and fitnes for the matter entreated
of; which we may observe in the most places, where this lovely epithet is given
to the godly in other Scriptures. GOD is exceeding choice of his words: he
never mentions the tea^ms of love, but he brings to his children the
affections of love, as I may so say. Men, through custom, use fair complement
of words, when their hearts be not moved: but let our love be without
dissimulation. But let that go. The point here to be plainly observed, is,
that Christians are beloved: of all other people they are most loved. How many
ways Gods people are the only beloved ones.
I will but briefly explicate this. First, GOD loves them, and that with
infinite and everlasting love, and has manifested it by sending his own Son,
to be a propitiation for their sins, 1. John 4.9, 10. Secondly, Christ loves
them, which he showed by giving his life for them. Thirdly, the Angels of
heaven love them; which they show by ioying in their conversion, and by their
careful attendance about them. Fourthly, the Godly, in general, love them.
There is no godly man, that knows them, but loves them: for, every one that
loves God that begot them, loves every one that is begotten of God; every one,
I say, that he knows, 1. John 5.1. Lastly, the godly Teachers love them; which
they show, in that they are not only willing to impart to them the Gospel,
but even their own souls, because their people are dear unto them, 1. These.
2.8.

Now, Use.
this love of God, of Christ, of the Angels, of the godly men and Ministers,
should serve to support us against the contempt and hatred of the world: we
have a love that is much better than the love of worldly men can be to us.
First, because it is of better persons: and secondly, because it is of a better
kind; for, it is more fervent, and it is more pure, and more constant. Worldly
men can show no love that has comparison to the love of God, or Christ, or any
of those, for the feruency of it. And if worldly men love us, it is to draw us
unto one evil or other; and besides, it will not last: for, wicked men will
agree with themselves no longer than so many Curres will agree: they are
always contending, hateful, and hating one another. Secondly, this point
should much check the unbelief of Christians, and their unthankfulness: for,
many times they are affected, as if they were not beloved of any: whereby they
much dishonor the love of God, and of Christ, and of Christians toward them
also; and thereby they flatly contradict the Text, which says, They are
beloved. Thirdly, impenitent sinners should be moved heerby to become true
Christians, because till then, they are monstrous hateful creatures: GOD
loathes them and their works, John 3.36. Esaias 1.11, etc. And such vile persons
are vile and odious in the e^es of the godly, Psalm 24.4. Psalm 15.

How Christians may preserve this love.
Fourthly, Christians should labor to preserve this love unto themselves, with
increase of the comfort of it: and so diverse things would much advantage them
in this love; as, 1. Faith. To live by faith, commends them wonderfully to
God's love, as being the condition mentioned, when he sent his Son into the
world, John 3.16. For, without it, it is impossible to please God. 2. Humility
would much commend them to the love of the Angels; who rejoice more in one
sinner that is penitent, than in 99 just men that need no repentance. 3 The
fruits of wisdom, mentioned, Iam. 3.17. have a marvelous force to win love
among men. To be pure, in respect of sincere Religion; to be gentle and
peaceable, free from passion and contention; to be easy to be entreated; to be
also full of mercy and good works, and all this without judging or hypocrisy;
to be no censurers, nor counterfets: oh! this is exceeding amiable, if these
things were carefully expressed. 4. And for their Ministers, two things would
much increase their love to them. First, obedience to their doctrine: for, this
will preuail more than all the bounty in the world, 1. These. 2.13. Heb. 13.18.
Secondly, to converse without backbiting, or uncharitable judging of them. By
these two, the Philippians and Thessalonians were highly advanced in the
affection of the Apostle: and through the want of these, the Corinthians lost
much in the love of the Apostle.


Thus of the persons dehorted.

The manner of the dehortation follows.

I beseech ye]

In that the Apostle, in the name of God does beseech them, diverse things are
imported, as

First, the marvelous gentleness and love of God to men: he that may
command, threaten, punish, yea, cast off; yet is pleased to beseech men.

Secondly, the dignity and excellency of a clean heart, and honest life; It
is a thing which God (by his servants) does vehemently beg at our hands.

Thirdly, the honor of a Christian; he is spoken to as to a great Prince, as
the two former reasons show him to be.

Fourthly, a rule of direction, how to carry our selves toward others in the
case of reformation; we must learn of the Apostle to express a Spirit of
meekness, and love, and humility: Passion and pride work unspeakable
prejudice and hurt in the care of other men's faults.

Fifthly, with what reuerentnesse, and earnestness should we speak to God,
when he speaks thus to us?

Thus of the manner of propounding the dehortation.

The matter to be avoided, is lusts.

Abstain from fleshly lusts.]

By lusts are sometimes meant gross sins, and disorders, which are the fruits
of lust, and so the sins mentioned chapter 4.4. of this Epistle, are called
lusts of the Gentiles.

By lust, is sometimes meant corruption of nature: But I think, it is taken
neither of these ways here.

By lust, is sometimes meant the filthy desire of the heart after bodily
uncleanness, and so called the lusts of uncleanness, Col. 3.5. Romans 1.24.

But by lusts here (I take it) is meant all sorts of evil desires in the
heart of man, and so called worldly lusts, Titus 2.12. And in special these
sorts of lusts are named in Scripture, which Christians should especially avoid.

Iusts to be especially avoided
First, the lusts of uncleanness: filthy desires.

Secondly, the lusts of covetousness, and worldly cares.

Thirdly, the lusts of vainglory, whether of envy, conceitednes, or desire of
applause.

Fourthly, the lusts of Epicurisme: Those desires after delicious or excessive
fare, or vain apparel.

Fifthly, the lusts of malice, and revenge.

These and such like, are the lusts which Christians must forsake.

The use is diverse.

Uses. First, for information: and so it may show us, 1. That outward honesty
will not serve the turn: It is not enough to be free from gross sins: what
case then are civil honest men in? 2. That in reformation it is not enough to
forsake the evils we have no desire after, but we must leave our own lusts.


Secondly, for consolation. Here is imported an excellent comfort to the godly
in the case of inward and hateful temptations. When vile things come into the
mind of the godly, if they dislike them, and do not lust after them, nor
intertaine them with spiritual dalliance, they may be assured, that those
evils shall not be charged upon them: For before a temptation can be a sin,
it must have somewhat of coveting in it. Christ was tempted as we are, and yet
he sinned not, because he liked them not, but rejected them.

Abstain from them.]

The manner how they are to be avoided, is contained in this word, abstain:
which does import diverse things.

First, that without departing from iniquity, we cannot have comfort of our
repentance. To come into the company of the godly: to make show of Religion: to
come to Church: or use private means: or barely to confess sin, or to feel
terrors for sin, is not enough, unless we leave sin. Judas, Demas, Cain,
and the wicked Israelites could do the former; yet never repented.

Secondly, that the occasions of lusts will be daily offered to us from the
world, or the Devil, or our own corrupted nature: Now it is not an argument of
our misery to have them, but to entertain them.

Uses. The use may be, 1. For Information: The true abstinence is to abstain
from sin: The other abstinence from meat, or the like, is but
circumstantiall, and not in it self acceptable to God, Esaias 58. 2. For trial:
Those are sound Christians indeed, that abstain from fleshly lusts.


Quest. But are there not lusts in godly men, as well as in wicked men?

Ans. There may be, but with great difference, for Differences of lusts in
Godly men and wicked men.
1. The godly man may be entangled with evil desires, but the wicked man is
more: For he burns in lust, yields himself over to his hearts lusts: He is
given up to his lusts, he takes care for the lusts of the flesh to fulfill
them: He serves his lusts, etc. Romans 13.13. and 1.24. Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.3. 2.
The godly man, if he be overcome of his lusts for a time, yet he humbles
himself, and judges himself for them, and grieves for them, whereas the
wicked boasts himself of of his hearts lusts, and places his contentment in
them, Psalm. 10.3. 3. The godly man, if he be yet overcome, he will break off
his iniquity by repentance, whereas the wicked in his lusts is like the Devil.
He is incorrigible, no ill success, or Judgment, or reproof can break off
his desire of transgression: yea, his lusts are called, The lusts of his father
the Devil, Ioh. 8.44.


Thirdly, all godly Christians should learn from hence to be seriously bent
to preserve themselves in the purity of Christian Religion, and to keep their
hearts from these foul annoiances.

Quest. But what should we do to be preserved from lusts?

Ans. First, thou must avoid the occasions of lusts: such as are, 1. Evil
company, Helps to avoid lusts.
and therein evil example and evil counsel, Psalm. 1.1. 2. Idleness and
solitarines. 3. Excessive desire after, and delight in riches, 1. Tim. 6.9. 4.
Ignorance, 1. Pet. 1.14. 5. Intemperance, drunkenness, and fulness of bread, and
deliciousnes of fare, and apparel. 6. Hardness of heart, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.


Secondly, we must walk in the Spirit, cherishing all good motions, and pure
imaginations, yielding our hearts over to the government of Gods Spirit, doing
all duties with the powers of our soul, Gal. 1.16.

Thirdly, we must crucify them, if they arise among our selves, with the same
mind was in Christ, and resolve to suffer in the flesh by the sound practice of
mortification.

Fourthly, we must strive after contentation, 1. Tim. 6.

Fifthly, we must get knowledge: For as ignorance brings them in: so knowledge
fills the heart, and dares them out.

Thus of the manner of avoiding them. The motives follow: and the first of them
is,

Ye are strangers and pilgrims.]

A stranger is he that lives in a place that is not his own Country, or
Kingdom, or Nation, whither by right he belongs: so Abraham was a stranger,
Genesis 21.23. and the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 2.12. Now, a pilgrim is he that
rests not in a place, but trauelleth onward from place to place.

Godly men are said to be strangers, and not strangers, in diverse respects. It
is said, they are not strangers in respect of freedom to the City of God, and
the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.29. They are strangers in respect of their
absence from the heavenly Canaan, which is their own home, to which they were
born by regeneration.

In this world, then, all the godly are but strangers and pilgrims; which may
serve,

Use.
First, for reproof, even of diverse godly men, and that in diverse respects.

1. For their too much minding of earthly things. Why do our hearts carry us
away after the world, considering, it is but an Inn to be in for a little
time? 2. For their meddling with other folks business. A stranger only thinks
of his own affairs, and does not interpose himself in the affairs of others:
so should we study to be quiet, and meddle with our own businesses. 3. For
discouragement of heart under the sense of our own weaknesses and weariness
in spiritual things: we must expect in such travel, much weakness and
weariness. 4. For impatience, either under the crosses of life, cast on us by
GOD (whereas strangers arm themselves to bear all weathers) or under the scorns
and contempt of the world: whereas we should look for it, that the world
should gaze at us, and deride us, as usually men do at strangers. Nor should
Christians be at leisure to stay their journey, by seeking revenge for their
wrongs, or be troubled if they cannot get preferment in the world.
Secondly, for instruction. It should wholly impose upon us the care of
carrying our selves like strangers and pilgrims.

1. By having our conversation without covetousness. 2. By our language,
speaking always as may become the people of God, and heirs of heaven; that the
men of this world may perceive by our speech, that we are not of this world. 3.
By our circumspection, and desire to live without offense: as a stranger is
very heedfull of his ways in all places where he comes. 4. By our daily
enquiring after the particular way to heaven. 5. By our thankfulness for the
favors we find while we are in the world, seeing it is a place we are not to
look for much in. 6. By our apparel. If strangers be known by their garments,
then is it a great fault for christians, to be found in the fashions of this
world. 7. By our delight in good company: we should be glad of any that would
go with us to heaven. 8. By our affection homeward: our minds should still be
in heaven.
Nor should godly men be overmuch troubled, that they are strangers here in
this world, and pilgrims, in the condition of travelers: for,

First, they are not strangers in the Commonwealth of Israel, and in the
Kingdom of Christ: at the same time they are strangers, in respect of their
condition in this world.

Secondly, they are well prouided-for at their Innes: God prouides their
resting-places, and no good thing will he withold from them. That God, which
commands men to regard strangers, and show them mercy, will himself much more
be careful for his strangers.

Thirdly, their pilgrimage will not be long.

Fourthly, they have good company: all the godly travel their way.

Fifthly, God has appointed them guides: yea, Christ himself will be their way.

Sixthly, by prayers they may send home continually.

Seventhly, it should much comfort them, to think what a glorious condition
they shall be in, when they come home, in the new Jerusalem.

Thus of the first reason.

Secondly, the lusts must be avoided, because they are fleshly.

Fleshly.]

These lusts are fleshly in diverse respects.

First, Lusts are fleshly in diverse respects.
because they please after the flesh, which is, the corrupt nature of man: they
hold no delight, or show of profit, but to the flesh: they are exceeding
noisome, and grievous, and foolish to the Spirit.

Secondly, because they reign only in fleshly persons: they be the lusts of
Gentiles, and such as are strangers from the life of God. Godly men complain of
them as an extreme misery, Romans 7. 1. Pet. 4.3.

Thirdly, because they arise most from the body, which is but a servant to the
soul: and it is an extreme vnmanlinesse, for the soul to be at the command
of her servant the body; which concludes against the lusts of uncleanness,
riotousnes, drunkenness, vanity of apparel, etc.

Fourthly, because they proceed from the old man, or corruption of nature, or
the flesh, considered as the enemy to God, and man's salvation: and so it is an
argument taken from the hatefulnes of the flesh, and her working in us. The
lusts and desires of the flesh ought to be hateful, and we should suspect and
abstain from the proiects of the flesh, if we consider, 1. That the flesh
sauoureth not the things of God, Evil properties and effects of the flesh.
Romans 8. 2. That she opposes all good ways, partly by obiecting against them,
and partly by making evil present, when we should perform them, To. 3. That
her wisdom is against God: her fairest reasons are pleaded for things that are
hateful to God: such also are her excuses, and extenuations, and promises. 4.
That, if she be followed, she will lead us by degrees into all abominations;
as, whoredoms, murders, debates, heresies, etc. these are her fruits, Gal. 5.
5. She will betray us to Satan, that he may by himself set up strong
fortifications in our fowls: and her treason is the more dangerous, because
she is a domestical enemy; and, by his working in secret, our hearts may
become a very cage or stie of unclean spirits. 6. She has already spoiled the
Image of God in us, and made us look most deformedly. 7. If she once get power,
she is most tyrannical: no respect of credit, profit, no nor salvation it
self, can stir: she will be served, whatsoever come of it. 8. We should abhor
her, for the very mischief she does to our posterity: we cannot look upon our
children, but we may see what woeful hurt she has done by the infection they
received in their propagation.


Uses. The use may be,

First, for reproof of such as lay the blame of their faults upon their evil
luck, or evil counsel, or the devil: whereas they ought to lay the fault
upon their own flesh, even their own ill nature. The devil nor the world
could never hurt us, if the flesh did not betray us by defect, or consent, or
evil action.

Secondly, for information. We may see what we should mortify, and abstain
from. Religion does not bind men to mortify the substance of the flesh, but
the lusts of the flesh: we are not to destroy any faculty of the soul, or in
the soul, or part of the body; but the inordinate appetite and desires of
either: we are not to abstain from the necessary means of life, as, house,
lands, diet, apparel, company, etc. but the evil concupiscence about these.

Thirdly, for instruction. It should teach us therefore to restrain the flesh
as much as we can; and therefore we shall, with the same labor, restrain the
lusts of the flesh: and to this end, 1. We must, with all fear and jealousy,
watch our own natures, as mistrusting. 2. We must silence the flesh, and not
suffer it to plead for sin. 3. We must, by a daily course of mortification,
judge the flesh; that so we may be as it were condemned in the flesh. 4. We
must keep from it what may pamper it; as, idleness, excess of diet, apparel,
recreation, etc.


Which war against the soule]

These words may be considered either in their coherence, or in themselves: in
their coherence, and so they are the third reason taken from the evil effect
of those lusts. In themselves, there are two things to be opened; both what
the soul is, and what this war in the soul is.

The point is clear, that fleshly lusts do much hurt the souls of men; and
so, both the souls of wicked men, and of godly men.

First, of wicked men. These lusts hurt the souls, How these lusts hurt the
souls of wicked men,
1. Because they provoke the wrath of God upon them. The Israelites were not
estranged from their lusts, and therefore the wrath of God came upon them,
Psalm 78.29, 30, 31. 2. Because they make us resemble the devil, John 8.44. 3.
Because they hinder the power of the Word from them: they will never come to
the knowledge of the truth, 2. Tim. 3.6. 4. Because it brings the soul in
bondage: so as all the conversation of the soul is in a manner about those
lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.2. 5. Because they make all their prayers
abominable, Iam. 4. 6. Because sometimes they are scourged with a reprobate
mind, being given up to their lusts, Romans 1. 7. Because they may drown the
soul in perdition, 1. Tim. 6.9.


If godly men entertain these inward evils in their thoghts and affections,
many evils will follow.

as also the souls of godly men.
1. They hinder the Word. 2. They grieve the good Spirit, by which they are
sealed to the day of redemption. 3. They harden the heart, and blind the
understanding. 4. They hinder good duties, Gal. 5.17. 5. They wound the soul.
6. They make the mind foul and loathsome: they defile. 7. They may bring
outward judgments upon thee, or inward terrors of conscience.
Use. The use may be partly to declare the misery of such Christians, as are
fallen away from the acknowledgement of the truth, by intertaining these
loathsome lusts, of whose fearful estate at large, 2. Pet. 2.18. to the end.

Partly it should work in all the godly obedience to the Counsel of the
Apostle here, in abstaining from these lusts, as grievous hurts to the soul,
or their souls: They should put on the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and never more
take care to fulfill these lusts of the flesh, Romans 13.13.

Thus of these words in the coherence: The sense will be more full, if we
consider more at large two things in the words.

First, what the soul is.

Secondly, what this war in the soul is.

Two things have made the inquiry about the soul exceeding difficult. The first
is the nature of the soul. For it is a spiritual essence, and therefore
wonderful hard to be conceited of. There be three things cannot fully be
conceived of, or defined by man: first, God: secondly, an Angel: and thirdly,
the soul of man. Now besides this transcendency, as I may call it, of the
soul, the fall of man, and custom in sin, and the remainders of corruption
in the best, have made this doctrine so hard, that wicked men scarce discern,
that they have a soul; and godly men are very ignorant, and impotent in
conceiving the condition of the soul.

This word soul is diuersely accepted in Scripture: for it signifies sometimes,

The life of man, as Math. 6.25. Be not careful for your souls, Soul taken
in diverse senses.
what ye shall eat, etc.

Christ: because look what the soul is to the body, that is Christ to the
whole man: so Psalm 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in Hell, that is,
Christ, Acts 2.25, 29. etc. and 13.35, 36.

The dead bodies, Leuit. 19.28.

The whole man, so Gene. 46.26. by a Synechdoche.

But here it signifies that part of man, which is called his spirit.

By the soul then we understand that part of man which is invisible, and
inuisibly placed within the body of man. Now the things which are fit for us to
inquire into and know, concerning the nature and excellency of the soul, may
be comprised briefly in this description of the soul.

The soul of man is a substance incorporeall, invisible, A description of the
Soul.
and immortal, created of God, and united to the body, and endued with the
admirable faculties of vegetation, sense, and reason, to this end principally,
that God might be of man truly acknowledged, and duly worshipped.

Every branch of this description contains an excellent commendation of the
soul, and should much affect us with admiration of Gods workmanship, and his
love to us in making us such excellent creatures; and withal it should breed
in us the care which the Apostle here calls for, of avoiding all things that
might defile our precious souls.

The soul is the abridgement of the invisible world, as the body is the
abridgement of the visible world: Man is rightly said to be a little world: God
made man last, and in man made an Epitome of all the former works: For all
things meet in man, who consists of a substance partly corporeal, and partly
spiritual. For all things, which God created besides man, are either such
creatures, as are discerned by sense being bodily, or such creatures, as are
removed from sense, being spiritual, as the Angels. Now I say, man may
resemble both sorts of creatures; the visible in his body, and the invisible in
his soul.

Now the former description of the soul of man does commend the soul for
seven things.

First, that it is a substance.

Secondly, things very considerable in man's Soul.
that it is incorporeall.

Thirdly, that it is immortal, and cannot die.

Fourthly, that it is created of God immediately.

Fifthly, That it is joined to the body after a wonderful manner.

Sixthly, that it has these excellent faculties.

Seventhly, that hereby man has honor to know God and his works, which all
other creatures in this visible world want.

The first thing then to be inquired after, is, what the soul is in respect
of the being of it: and this I must answer: first, by remoouing from the
consideration of it, what it is not.

First, the soul is not the harmony, or right temper of the harmonies of the
body, as Galen, that great Physician, is said to affirm, which appears
evidently by these reasons.

1. That then every body, in which the harmonies, or four elements are
tempered, should have a soul in it, and so stones should have souls yea such
as man has, endued with reason, etc. And therefore simply the soul cannot be
the (...), or temperature of the elements, or humors. 2. It is apparent, that
the soul gouerns the excesses, which arise from the humors of the body, as a
man, that by temper is apt to be angry or heated, yet has something within
him, which bridles this anger, notwithstanding the heat of his body. 3. If the
soul were nothing else, but the temperament of the humors, then it were but a
mere accident, in that it can be present or absent as the corruption of the
body: but we see that cannot be: For remove the soul from the body, and it
cease to be a living body. 4. By Scripture it is evident, that when the body
was formed, the soul as a thing distinct from it, was infused into it by God
himself, Genesis 2.7.
Secondly, the soul is not a power, force, or faculty infused into the body, by
which is is able to live, or move, or work: For then remoouing the body from it,
it cannot subsist; whereas we shall prove afterward, that the soul will
subsist without the body, and therefore cannot be an accident in the body, or
a power only of the body. Besides, the soul is the subject of virtues and
vices, of sciences and arts: Now, no accident can be so.

Thirdly, the soul is not the life of man: That is apparent in scripture, when
a difference is put between the soul and life, Psalm. 49.18.
as, what soul shall be blessed in life? So 2 Samuel 11.11. By thy life, and the
life of thy soul.

The soul then is a substance of it self, put within us by God, distinct from
the body: this may be evidently proved.

First, The soul is a substance.
God, after he had made the body, is said to breath into it the breath of
lives, to note, that his soul was a substance distinct of it self.

Secondly, because it can subsist without the body, as is apparent in the soul
of Abraham, Lazarus, and Dives, Luke 16. And of the soul of the thief on the
cross it is said, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Thirdly, God is said to have formed the Spirit in the midst of man, so it is a
substance of it self: Note, he says, in him, not of him.

Fourthly, those words of David and Christ prove it: Into thy hands I commit my
spirit: the body being committed to the earth, there remained a substance
delivered to God.

Fifthly, that place of Ecclesiastes, Chapter 12. is most plain; The body
returns to dust, and the Spirit to God that gave it: Therefore there is in man
a Spirit, which returns to GOD.

Sixthly, Paul desires to be dissolved, and to be with Christ: so there was a
substance which should enjoy the presence of Christ, Phil. 1.23.

The second thing to be proved is, that the soul is incorporeal. It is joined
to the body, but it is no body; it informs the matter of man which is his
body: but it is without matter it self: It is immateriall: It is wholly a
spiritual substance: It is not a bodily substance, no, not a most subtle, or
pure body: but altogether incorporeall: This is a high doctrine, and shows the
soul to be an admirable kind of substance. Now that the soul is void of
matter, and is no bodily substance, may be plainly proved, though not easily
explicated.

First, The soul is not a bodily substance.
it is expressly said to be a Spirit: now Spirits are not flesh and bones, or
any like bodily substance, Psa. 31.6. Eccle. 12.7. and Zach. 12.1. It is
reckned one of the wonders of Gods creation, that he made in man a spirit.

Secondly, the soul is after the Image of God, and has imprinted upon it the
similitude of the goodness, wisdom, and holiness of God: Now it were not like
God, if it were a body, nor were it capeable of such habits, which can be
stamped upon mere natural, or bodily things.

Thirdly, the soul performs those actions, which depend not upon the body,
and are done without bodily instruments: for it understands and wills.

Fourthly, if the soul were a body, then it must be corpus animatum or
inanimatum: but, to say it is without life, is sense-lesse, because it enlyues
and animates the body; and to say it is animatum, enlyued it self, it must then
be so by some other body. All which the same questions will be asked, and so
run into an infinite.

The third thing is, that the soul is invisible: this shows the
transcendencie of the nature of it; and experience in all men proves this: for,
who ever saw a soul?

Ob. The soul of Dives in hell saw the soul of Abraham and Lazarus: and John
saw the souls of those that suffered for the testimony of Jesus, Reu. 20.4.

Sol. These souls were seen by the eyes of understanding, not by the bodily
eyes.

The fourth thing to be proved, The soul is immortal.
is, that the soul is immortal, it cannot die: when it is once kindled, it
will never go out, or be extinct; as the Sadduces wickedly imagined, and some
Atheists still think the contrary. This is a point necessary to be known; as
for the truth it self, so for the use of it in our lives: for, to doubt of
immortality, makes us miserable; and to believe, the souls are mortal, makes
men Epicures: Let us eat and drink; for, to morrow we shall die. But, to be
fully assured of an estate after life, makes a man careful to avoid sin,
lest his soul live for ever miserably; and to serve God, that he may live for
ever happily.

Now, things may be said to be immortal two ways: either absolutely, and in
their own nature, and so God only is immortal: or else they are so by the
will and pleasure of God, and not by their own nature; and so the souls of
men, and so the Angels are immortal.

There have been two sorts of men that have denied the immortality of the
soul. The one were the Sadduces among the Jews; who held, that in death the
soul of man is utterly extinct, as the soul of a beast. The other were
certain Arabians, Eus. Eccl. Hist. l 2. c. 26. Aug. tom. 6. de haeres. c. 8.3.
of whom Eusebius and S. Augustine make mention; who said, that the soul died
with the body, and so remained dead till the day of Judgment: and then they
revived with the resurrection of the body.

Now, against the first fort may be produced many reasons, as also evident
Scriptures.

The reasons are such as these.

1. The providence and justice of God proves the immortality of the soul.
For, here in this life good men have not all their happiness; and evil men
live in prosperity: so there must be another life, where justice must be done.
2. Religion confirms this: for, to what end were Religion and serving of God,
if the soul died, like the soul of the beast, seeing in this life the most
godly are outwardly in great misery many times? For, if Paul say, If the dead
rise not, then of all men are we most miserable; it will hold much more
strange, if the soul live not at all after death. 3. The wisdom of God proves
it: for, else man were not in better case than the beast, yea, in some cases
worse. For, man, from his infancy to his death, is liable to many diseases,
subject to cares and griefs, which the beast is free from* yea, this adds to
man's misery, that he knows he must die; which the beast does not. Now,
shall man, that was counted like God, be thought to have no better end than
the beast, that did exalt himself so much in the glory of his beginning? 4. The
conscience of malefactors proves this, who fear a judgment after this life,
and an estate of misery. 5. The nature of the soul proves it: for, it is
simple, and void of all contrariety, and accidents, and causes of corruption or
putrefaction, and is, besides, the Image of GOD. Now, no mortal thing can be
the image of that which is immortal.
These reasons make it exceeding probable. But I am of their minds, that think
it may be believed by faith, but not be proved by reason.

The Scripture therefore only makes this point clear, such as these:

First, our Savior proves it out of the Word of God; saying, I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.

Secondly, it is most plain, Mat. 10.28.

Thirdly, eternal life is every where promised to them that believe.

Fourthly, such places as entreat of the resurrection, last Judgment, and the
glory of heaven, prove it.

Now for the other sort, that confess the life of the Soul after the last
Judgment, but deny that the Soul lives after death till then, there are
diverse Scriptures against their opinion, As

First, the former Scriptures. The Soul cannot be killed at all, Math. 10. And
God was presently the God of Abraham, as then living: and for eternal life, it
is not said, He shall have; but, He has eternal life, that believes.

Secondly, Christ said to the thief: This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; not at the last day.

Thirdly, Romans 8.38. Death cannot separate us from God in Christ, as it would,
if the Soul were dead, or a-sleepe, and did not enjoy God.

Fourthly, the dead that die in the Lord, are forthwith blessed, Revel. 14.14.

Fifthly, the souls of Abraham and Lazarus were in joy and alive after death;
so was the soul of Dives in hell.

Sixthly, John saw, under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for the
testimony of Jesus, and they cried with a loud voice: O Lord, how long? etc.
Revel. 6.

Seventhly, the souls of the wicked die not, but are kept in prison, and are
now in prison too, 1. Pet. 3.19.

Before I leave this point of the immortality of the soul; it is profitable,
briefly, to answer certain objections which may be brought out of some words
in the Scriptures, as

Ob. 1. The Soul that sins, shall die, Ezeth. 18. Therefore it seems the
soul is mortal, or at least for sin it must die; and the rather, because it
was threatened in Paradise: That day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death.

Sol. The Scriptures evidently show, that since the fall, and sin, yet the
Soul does not die, as the places before alleged prove: But the answer is,
that this death threatened, or inflicted, is not the destruction of the being of
the Soul; but the depriving of it of the grace, and favor, and presence of
God.

Ob. 2. Eccles. 3. It is said that there is one end of the man and of the
beast; As dies the one, so dies the other.

Sol. These are not the words of Solomon, but of the Epicure, who is here, as
in other places of that book, brought in, declaring his mind of things: For,
Solomon himself concludes evidently, that the Soul returns unto God that
gave it, as in the last Chapter.

The other objections are the objections of the dreamers, that is, of such as
imagine that the Soul lies a-sleepe till the day of Judgment, and perceiues
nothing, and is without operation, which is to say, it is dead; seeing life is
nothing else but the continual motion and action of the Soul.

Ob. 1. It is said that man, when he dies, that he sleeps; as Christ said,
that Lazarus, He sleeps: and Stephen slept in the Lord, John 11. Act* ^7.

Sol. Other Scriptures add another word, viz. in the grave, or in the dust,
Job 7.21. and Psalm 78. sleeping in their graves; but it is evident, that the
Soul cannot sleep in the grave, but the body only: And Stephen delivered his
Spirit to Christ.

Ob. 2. Paul says, that if the body rise not, we are of all men most
miserable; That it seems cannon be true* if the Soul enjoy blessedness
without the body.

Sol. The immortality of the Soul, and the resurrection of the body, are
conjoined: For the Soul without the body, can be for ever, because it is the
form of the body; though God for the time do, by his power and grace, provide
for the Soul in glory, yet it is not at full happiness, till it be joined to
the body again: For, without the body it has no use of vegetation, or senses,
but only of reason. But for the Argument of the Apostle, it holds good of that
part of man which is in question, which is the body of man: For the bodies of
Godly men are more miserable then other men; kept under and exposed to many
restraints and pains, either by mortification, or persecution, which the
bodies of wicked men are not exposed unto.

Ob. 3. It is said of the spirit of Princes, that it returns to his Earth,
and in the day of death his thoughts perish: So the Soul thinks of nothing
after death, till the day of judgment.

Sol. The place is corruptly alleged two ways: One in the Words, the other in
the Sense: for the text does not say, That his Spirit returns to his earth;
but thus, his Spirit returns, viz. out of his body to God, and he not it,
returns to the earth, viz. in respect of his body: for the other, these
words, his thoughts perish, must not be understood of his understanding after
death, but of his proiects, while he lived. For men are exhorted not to trust
in Princes: For they may die, and then all their promises and proiects* will
be of no use, and come to nothing.

Object. 4. It is said, that the dead cannot praise God, Psalm. 88. and 1*13.
and 30.

Sol. That the souls of the godly in heaven do praise God, is manifest, Revel
5.11, 13.14. and 19.1. Now the Scriptures cannot be contrary one to another:
and therefore the places in the Psalms must not be taken simply, but only in
some respect. The dead do praise God, but not as the li^ing did in their
lives: their praises cannot provoke other men to believe in God, or serve him,
as in this life they might.

Thus of the immortality of the soul.

The next thing to be inquired after, The original of the Soul.
is, about the original of the soul: and about this point in several ages
diverse men have breathed diverse and strange conceits, erring because they knew
not, or regarded not the Scriptures.

First, some conceived so highly of the soul, as to think, it was no creature,
but uncreated, and eternal, without beginning, but this must needs be false.

1. Because then the soul should be God, and infinite too, For God only is
uncreated. 2. Because then the soul had understanding, and thoughts, and
willed from eternity, whereas till it was in our bodies, it did not work: and
to imagine, it should be as a dead lump all that while, is monstrously absurd.
Secondly, others have conceived, that when men die, their souls go into the
bodies of other men, that be borne; and so our souls heretofore were the
souls of some men that be dead: This was the opinion of diverse of the
Philosophers: and it is apparent, that diverse of the Jews were infected with
it: for about Christ they said, some, that he was Elias, some, that he was
Ieremias; and some, one of the Prophets, and some, John Baptist. Now they saw
that his body was not theirs, and therefore they thought, that his soul was
the soul of some of them. Now this opinion cannot be true.

1. Because no Scripture gives any notice of it: For in that place the conceit
of the Jews is told with dislike. 2. Because the souls that were delivered
out of the miseries of this life, should be brought from their blessedness into
misery again, which in most absurd.
Thirdly, Others have imagined, that the Angels should beget our souls, as our
parents beget our bodies: But this is extremely absurd.

1. Because then our souls should be in the Image of Angels, whereas they
were made in the Image of God. 2. Because this was an heresy long since
condemned, and with hatred cast out of the Church.
Fourthly, many Divines, both of ancient and modern Writers, have declared
themselves to be of the mind, that the soul comes from the parents by
generation, Anima non est ex traduce.
per traducem, and that the parents do beget the whole man, which consists of
soul as well as body. Now, though it be true, that this opinion has had, and
still has great patrones, and that it may not be denied, but that it is
defended with marvelous great appearance of reason and truth; yet it is
rejected, and has been by the greater part of sound Divines, and by reasons
unanswerable: for, if the soul come from the parents, then it must come either
from the body of the parents, or from their souls. Now, it is apparent, it
cannot come from their bodies, 1. Because a bodily substance cannot beget a
spiritual substance, because it cannot derive from it self that which it has
not. 2. Because the soul must consist of the four elements, of which the body
is compounded: but, it is apparent, there are no bodily humors in the soul;
for, it is not hot, nor cold, nor moist, nor dry. 3. Because nothing that is
mortal, can beget a thing that is immortal, such as the soul has been
proved to be.


Nor can the soul come from the soul of the parents,

First, because if it did, either the whole soul was derived of the parents,
or but a part of it. If the whole soul was derived, then the parents should
die: nor can a part of the soul be deriueed, because the soul is
indivisible: there can be no partition in an essence which is simple and
uncompounded.

Secondly, we know, that the Angels produce not Angels: nor can the souls of
men produce souls, because they are spirits, as the Angels are.

Nor can the soul come from the whole man:

First, because it is evident by experience, that after the parents have done
the work of generation, the first matter lies diverse days in the womb; in
which, the parts of the body are secretly formed, before it have life, or a
living and quickening soul: which is an evident demonstration, that from the
parents comes nothing but the bodily substance, which is fashioned by degrees,
to be a meet Tabernacle for the soul afterward to be infused into.

Secondly, because if the parents did propagate the soul, they must propagate
such a soul as at that time they had; which cannot be: for, then godly
parents should derive a soul to their children, which at the least in part was
regenerate. But this is evidently against all Scripture; all confessing, that
the child is born infected with original sin.

Thirdly, because it is contrary to the Scriptures; which acknowledge, that the
soul was formed by God himself: which was true both of our first parent Adam,
Genesis 2.7. and of the souls of all his posterity, which are expressly said to
be made by GOD, Esaias 57. verse 16.

Lastly, it remains then, that the souls come from God. Now, if the souls
come from God, then it must needs be, as GOD is the material cause, or as he
is the efficient cause.

It is true, that some have imagined, that the soul of man was made of the
substance of God, because it is said, GOD breathed into man the breath of life,
Genesis 2.7. as if he infused into him somewhat from himself, as a part of his
divine substance. And the Apostle Paul says, Acts 17.18. We are the Progeny of
God: and Saint Peter says, We partake of the divine Nature, 2. Pet. 1.4.

Now, this opinion cannot be true, and was worthily condemned by the Fathers,
as heretical: for,

Then man should be God. For, whatsoever God begets from himself, is God: and
therefore we say, Christ is God.

Then some part of God's nature should be infected with sin and ignorance,
and be damned in hell too; which is wonderful blasphemous to believe.

Now, for the places alleged, That in Genes. 2. must be understood
figuratively: for, God has not properly breath; but he means, that God after
a wonderful manner did infuse the soul into the body. And for the place in
the Acts, we are said to be the progeny of God, not in regard of substance, but
in respect of resemblance in gifts, with which man's nature is adorned. And for
the place in Peter, we are said to partake of the divine nature in the same
sense, namely, as we are qualified with gifts; as, wisdom, goodness, holiness,
in some kind of likeness of God.

It remains then, that we are of God effectually, because God has created our
souls, God creates the soul.
and formed them in us. This then is the truth, that God does create the
particular soul of every man, and inhere it to the body, when it is formed and
distinguished in the parts thereof. This may be proved diversely.

First, it is clear, it was so done with the soul of Adam: for, his body was
already framed, and then his soul breathed into him. Now, if the soul of Eve,
and of all others, had another manner of beginning than the creation of GOD, it
would have been mentioned in the Scriptures: but that is no where mentioned.

Secondly, Moses calls God the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 16.22. and
27.16.

Thirdly, David says, The Lord fashioneth the hearts of all men alike, Psalm.
33.15. It is GOD's work then to create the heart.

Fourthly, Solomon says, Eccles. 12.7. The body returns to the dust, and the
soul to GOD that gave it: in the dissolution of all things, they return to the
first causes and matter. As the body may be proved originally to be of the
earth, because it returns to dust: so must the soul be of God, because it
returns to God which is said to have given it.

Fifthly, the Prophet Esaias uses this phrase concerning God, and in his name:
The souls which I have made, Esaias 57.16. Do you ask how the soul comes into
the body? The Lord answers, I made it.

Sixthly, the Prophet Ezechiel, showing how man becoms a living creature, speaks
thus: Thus says the Lord to these bones: I will cause a spirit to enter into
them, and they shall live, Ezech. 37.5.

Seventhly, the words of the Prophet Zachary are yet more clear. Thus says
the Lord: The Lord which spreads out the heavens, and foundeth the earth, and
formed the spirit of man in him. Out of these words it may be proved, that God
created the soul of every man, and that it is his only work. For, first, he
says expressly, God formed the spirit in man. Secondly, this work of God is
compared to two other works, viz. the spreading out of the heavens, and the
laying of the foundation of the earth. Now, it is evident, that those two
things he did of himself, of nothing, without any means.

Lastly, that place in Hebr. 12.9. is most clear. The words are these: We have
had the fathers of our flesh, which chastised us, and we reverenced them: how
much more should we be subject to the Father of our spirits, and live? Where
is a manifest antithesis between the flesh and the Spirit; and the fathers of
our flesh, and God the Father of our spirit: we had our flesh from our
parents, and our spirit from God. I might add the reason, taken from the
manner of giving of the soul of Christ: for, he was made in all things like to
us, sin only excepted. Now, it is evident, that Christ's soul was not begot
by carnal propagation; and therefore it was created of God.

Object. Now, against this is strongly objected, that, if the soul be created
immediately of God, then it is created either pure, or sinful; if pure, then
how is it, that the soul is guilty of original sin? if impure, then how can
it be avoided, but that God must be the Author of sin?

Answer. This reason drove diverse of the Fathers in the time of Hierome,
especially the Western Fathers, to believe, that the soul was propagated from
the parents: and Saint Augustine is doubtful which opinion to take to, the
inconveniences of each opinion seemed so great.

But, other Divines answer this objection in this manner:

First, that the soul is created of God, pure, but joined to a body conceived
in sin: which is no injustice in God, because he delivers the soul but into
such an estate as man had cast himself into by his own wilful sin, bringing
this corruption not only upon himself, but upon all his posterity, who fell in
him. He, by agreement with GOD, being as the common sort of mankind, was with
him to stand or fall, in that general respect. Nor may it be doubted, but that
the body may work upon the soul: as we see by experience, when the body is
full of choleric humors, it inclines the soul to anger; and so when the body
is burdened with melancholy humors, it evidently makes sadness even in the very
mind, etc.

Another answer may be this: God creates the soul pure; but yet that soul is
guilty of owing, though not of doing; debendi, though not agendi: it is
charged with the debt of Adam, as children may be charged with their fathers
debts. Now, this is one part of original sin. As for the other of corrupt
inclination, it is to answer modestly, if we say we understand not, being
assured of two things: The one, that God is the Father of spirits; and the
other, that all men are infected with sin from the womb. Both are to be
believed, though in this life we cannot explicate it: and what hurt is it if
we be ignorant how sin entered into our natures, seeing it concerns us to
know it is there, and to learn how to get our natures recovered?

Objection 2. Other living creatures beget the like to themselves, both in
body, and in soul too: and therefore by this doctrine, men should be more
unable and imperfect than any living creature. For, if he do begette but
only the body, he does not beget one in specie like to himself.

Answer. Though GOD create the soul, yet it follows not, but that it may be
truly said, that man begets a man, and that he is not more imperfect in
generation than any other creature: for,

First, the Virgin Mary did bear Christ man in her womb: and Christ man is said
to be of the seed of the Virgin, and yet his soul was created of God, as has
been showed before.

Secondly, though there be some dissimilitude in the generation of man, and of
a beast, yet it does not follow, that man is more imperfect. As for instance:
The beast begettes his young, and brings him forth strong, covered with a hide,
able to feed himself presently, full of leaping, and other actions: But man
brings forth an Infant, weak, crying, naked, unable to feed it self. What,
is man therefore more imperfect? No. For, the perfection of generation does not
consist of these things, or in these things. For here man excels all other
living creatures in the world in generation, because he is Gods instrument for
the begetting of a body fit to be united to such a soul. God also does hereby
commend the generation of man, and dignify it, that he is pleased so to work
in man's generation, as he does not in any other creature, vouchsafing to give
unto man's generation such an admirable soul to his body. For, therefore was
the creation of the first man more excellent then the creation of other
creatures, because God, having framed his body of the dust of the earth, did
infuse such a soul into him.

Object. It is a peevish objection that some make thus: If God create the soul
in all men, then when any is born of Adultery, God should cooperate with the
adulterer, and so be either the Author, or the approuer of the sin, that will
give the soul to such a wicked generation.

Solut. Some answer thus: that God is not the author or approuer, because out
of evil he only works good for his own glory.

Others answer, That God only cooperates with the action, not with the sin
of the action, or the evil of the action, or the evil which is in the will of
the agents.

But the best answer is theirs, that answer by a similitude thus: The earth
has received her nature and vigor from God, to nourish and bring forth the
seed that is cast into it, without difference, whether the seed be lawfully
taken out of the barn, or stolen by fraud. The stolen grain does not cease to
grow in the earth, nor is it to be expected, that nature should cast out such
seed, and yet the earth does not justify the action of him that stole the
grain: so is it with God that works according to the grounds of nature, and his
own decree and providence. He is not to be blamed for the evil of the action,
when he works according to the rules of nature, and will glorify himself by
raising a frame of good out of that which by men was ill done.

Object 4. We see, that children resemble the virtues or vices of their
parents; and therefore as from the bodies of their parents they receive a
likeness to them in body: so is it, that from their souls they receive this
similitude of their virtues or vices.

Solut. Experience shows, that this is not always true. For many children
have no resemblance in them of their parents qualities. Secondly, where this is
true, it is not because their souls are derived from the souls of their
parents, but they have it from the bodies of their parents: For the soul after
suffers from the sympathy with the body, as by reason of certain humors in
the bodies of parents, that incite wrath or grief, or lust, or the like, may
come infection to the child, but not from their souls. Thirdly, rather the
Argument may be retorted upon them, that in as much as the souls of all
children are not like in qualities to the souls of their parents, that
therefore they receive not their souls from their parents.

Object. 5. Genesis 9. Leuit. 17. The soul is said to be in the blood: Now it
is evident, that the blood is from the parents.

Solut. The soul is in the blood, but how? By the effect of it, which is life:
otherwise the soul is neither devoured in the blood, nor depends upon it in it
self.

Object. 6. It is said, Genes. 2. That God rested from all his works. Now if
he did daily create new souls, then he rested not from all his works, but
continues creation still.

Solut. The meaning of Moses cannot be, that God rested simply from all
creation. For then it must needs follow too, that the soul of Christ was not
created* but propagated: which cannot be true. But his meaning is, that he
rested from creation of things in specie; he made no more new sorts of
things. That hinders not creation in indiuiduo, which is a work of God,
preserving those sorts he had made at the first, by creating successively a
new supply, as in this case of the souls of men. That God did not rest
absolutely, is plain by the words of our Savior Christ: My Father works
hitherto, and I work, John 5.

Fifthly, hitherto of the Original of the Soul: The union of the soul with
the body follows, which is a consideration of no less difficulty, then the
former, no less needful to be known, no less certain. That it is united to
the body, so as to make it one man, is apparanti by the words of God in the
creation: He breathed into him the breath of lives, and so Adam became a
living soul: He became then a man, or a living creature, distinct from other
creatures, upon his conjunction of the soul with the body. And by this union
with the body, does the Spirit of man differ from the Angels, who are Spirits
separate, and such as exist without relation to a body: whereas the soul of man,
in the creation of it, and the disposition of it also, tends unto this
conjunction with the body, and does not fully exercise it self living without
the body; and that is the reason, why man is not absolutely perfect after death
in his soul, till the day of Judgment: For though the soul do enjoy an
estate free fron sin, or pain, or misery: yet two of the faculties of the
soul are without exercise, till it be united again to the body, viz. the
faculties of vegetation, and sense, which cannot be exercised but in the body.

The manner how the soul is united to the body, Union of the Soul^ with the
body, how.
is full of difficulty to express: The question is, whether the soul work
upon the body from without, and so is by that means joined to it, or whether it
be placed in the body, and work there, and from thence. This later is the
truth: for, the soul does not work from without, which I show by a comparison.
The light and the eye are joined together in seeing; but how? The light, from
without, extends it self to the eye, and so is joined to it: so is not the
soul joined to the body, but is seated within the body; which appears so,
partly by experience: for, we may all perceive, that our thoughts, reason,
will, affections, etc. do discover themselves within us; and it is manifest,
that God infused the soul, not upon the body, but into the body, seating it
within us.

The soul, then, is within the body, and so joined to it; but how? Divines
have sought out diverse similitudes to express their minds. And first to show
how it is not joined:

First, not as water, and the vessel that holds it, are joined by contact, or
touching one another: for, the soul is not a bodily substance, and therefore
cannot be joined by touching; nor do the water and vessel make one thing, as
the soul and body do one man; nor do they work together, as the soul and
body do: for, the water does all the work thereof in watering or clensing,
without the vessel.

Secondly, not by mixture; as water and wine are mingled together: for, things
mingled cease to be what they were: for, there is no longer water nor wine, now
they are mingled; nor is the soul material, to suffer such a mingling.

Thirdly, not as the heat of the fire is united to the water, when the water is
heated: for, though the heat be joined to the water as the former, yet it is
but an accidental form; and they are one by accident, not per se.

Thirdly, not as the voice is in the air: for, though the voice be dispersed
abroad the air, and do likewise carry something to the understanding, besides
the sound, yet does not this reach to express the union of the soul with the
body. For, the voice is not the form of the air, nor is it conceived in the
air, without the breaking of the air; and besides, it presently vanishes:
whereas the soul is a substance, and does not easily depart out of the body.

Fifthly, nor as the Mariner is in the ship with the Gouerner, for the
dispatch of his journey: for, though the body be as a tabernacle wherein the
soul dwells, yet that similitude does not express this union, because the soul
and body make one thing; whereas the ship and the Mariner do not make one
thing, but are two distinct sorts of things: yea, the soul and body are so
one, that by sympathy what one suffers, the other feels; whereas the wounding
of the Mariner is not the tearing of the ship, or contrariwise.

There are two similitudes do more nearly reach this Secret.

The first is of Christ. For, as God and man make one Christ: so the soul and
body make one man. But I will not meddle with the breaking open of that
dreadful mystery.

The other is of the light of the Sun in the air: for, there are many things in
this comparison, do fitly resemble this divine light which is, our souls, as
they are joined to our bodies.

1. This light does fitly resemble the soul, because it is a thing that cannot
be corrupted or divided. 2. This light does so pearce into, and penetrate the
air, that they are both made one, and are not separated: so does the soul the
body. 3. The light and the air, though joined together, are not confounded or
mingled together: for, the light remains light, and the air the air: so is it
in this union between the soul and the body. 4. The light is so in the air,
that the air being smitten, yet the light is not touched, nor divided, nor
carried about, as the air is: so does the soul remain vnpearced, though the
body be wounded, and fall, yea, and die too. 5. As the light is only from the
Sun: so is the soul only from God. 6. As the air, without the light, is as it
were dead, because it is dark, and cold, and will putrefie: so is the body,
without the soul. 7. As no man can show, by what bands the light is fastened to
the air: so is it extremely difficult to show how the soul is fastened to the
body.
This similitude, we see, does in many things fit this case, but yet not
fully. For, the light is not the essential form of the air: only this
comparison does in many things satisfy the question, in that it shows, that
the soul is in the body by Penetration, or Immeation, as they call it: It
pearceth through the whole body, only we must take heed of two things.

First, that we imagine not the soul to be in the body, as in a place, or as
contained of it: For the soul cannot be circumscribed by the measure of a
place: we may not imagine, that the soul is just as big as the body, and no
bigger: For though it be true, that the soul is in the body, and the whole
soul too, yet it is not contained there, as bodies be contained in their
places: For rather the soul sustaineth the body.

Secondly, God is said to be in us: and so is the soul, but not alike. For
God is in us by his virtue, and grace, and operation, but not as our former:
whereas the soul is the form of the body, and both make one man.

Quest. But some one will say, Can it not be showed by what band the soul is
tied to the body?

Ans. Some divines and Philosophers undertake to determine that, and say, that
God has created in the body of man a certain humor, which is fitted for this
union; and so they say, the soul is united to the body by the vital spirits,
which are of nature mixed, partly Corporeal, and partly Spiritual: For as
those vital spirits do consist for the matter of them, of the radical heat
and moisture in man, so they are corporeal; and as they have an inexpressible
nimblenes in working, or sparkling in the body: so they draw near to the nature
of the soul; and by these vital spirits thus inliued, are the soul and body
joined together.

Quest. There yet remains another question, and that is, Where the soul
resides in the body, in what place is it centred?

Ans. The most say, that the whole soul is in the whole body, and the whole
soul in every part of the body.

Others say: It is a vain question, seeing the soul is not in the body as in
a place. For it cannot be measured by length, breadth, or depth, but it is in
the body as the essential form is in the matter, which cannot be locally.

Others say, that the soul is seated in one principal place of the body, as
the chief palace and seat of residence, and is in all other parts by diffusion
of virtues, through the instruments thereunto fitted, and placed of purpose by
God in the framing of the body: and thus the soul reasons in the head, wills
and affects in the heart, sees in the eyes, etc. The chiefest mansion of the
soul seems to be in the heart, because it is the last that dies in us.

Sixthly, hitherto of the union of the soul with the body: The faculties of the
soul follow.

There are three faculties, or powers of the soul, by which it works: or there
are three things which the soul effects, viz. The faculties of the soul.
1. Vegetation: 2. Sense: 3. Reason.


And thus the soul may be considered, either as it works upon, or by the body
only, or as it works in and by it self chiefly. Upon the body, and by certain
instruments in the body, it works vegetation, and sense; and by it self,
without the necessity of using the body, it works reason.

The first power then is vegetation, Vegetation.
by which the soul works four things distinctly upon the body.

1. Life: 2. Nourishment: 3. Growth: 4. Procreation.
The first thing then by the vegetative power of the soul, wrought upon the
body, is life, which is in respect of the body nothing else, but the kindling
the radical and vital heat in the body, through the conjunction of the soul
with the body, and the continuation of that heat, until the time appointed of
God for the dissolution of it; so that life is two ways to be considered:
first, either in the breeding of it: secondly, or in the continuance of it: The
breeding of it is in the very first moment* of the union of the form with the
matter, and by that instrument of the vital, or radical heat: The continuance
of it, is nothing else but the preservation of the motion and duration of the
working of these vital spirits.

The second thing wrought upon the body by the vegetative power of the soul, is
nourishment: and this power of nourishing, is a faculty, by which food taken
into the body by the force of natural heat, is turned into the substance of
the body, for the repairing of that which is consumed in the body: And this is
a work rather to be admired: For the soul, by the use of natural heat, is
feign to subdue the nature of the food received, and having melted it, as it
were in a furnace, it casts out what is contrary to the body, and extracts for
the use of the body, so much as is now made like unto it.

The third thing, which the soul works upon the body by the vegetative power,
is growth, and this it does, by employing that part of the food, which is now
made like to the body, unto the extension of the body, unto the Dimensions
thereof, even to the increase of bigness, and force, which increase for the
convenient actions of the body: and this work is done upon the body, but unto
a certain time of man's age, or till about 30. years; and then, because nature
tends not into Infinitenes, she gives over this work.

Lastly, Procreation is the fourth work of the vegetative faculty of the
soul, by which it raises up seed in the body, and forms in it a mere
substance like unto the body, from whence it comes unto the perpetual
preservation of the sort of the creature: And this is an admirable power. For
hereby living creatures do approach unto eternity, and are made as it were
immortal. For though the body dye, yet by procreation it is as it were kept
alive, and so the kind of creature is perpetuated: for the other two works of
nourishment and growth, only serve for that body in indiuiduo; but this power
of procreating reserues the sort or species from ceasing to be.

Thus of Vegetation: Sense follows.

The second thing the Soul works either upon or by the body, Sense.
is Sense; and by this faculty, a man, in his body, is enabled to discern
things without himself, and accordingly to desire and move to them, which the
former faculties did not reach unto. Now as the Soul works sense upon, or by
the body, it must be considered two ways: First, as it works either
apprehension: Secondly, or motion.

The apprehending senses wrought upon the body by the Soul, are of two sorts:
First, either outward; Secondly, or inward.

Outwardly the Soul works upon the body five senses, Outward.
or five ways of apprehending things by sense.

The body of a man is enabled by the Soul, to discern of things without it
self, by outward helps five ways: viz. By Seeing 1. Hearing 2. Smelling 3.
Tasting 4. Feeling 5.


And these ways of discerning, are not to be contemned: For, admirably ought
it to be conceived of Gods wisdom in and toward man, even in these.

For, first by the sight, through the benefit of light, which God has caused
to shine upon his whole creation, man may see what God has wrought; whereas
else, if the light be taken out of the air, or sight from man, the works of
God are buried, as it were, in the dark; yea, the body of a man is, as it
were, but a Dungeon without sight; and what the Sun and Moon are in heaven,
that are the eyes in man, shining in his head, as these Stars in the
firmament. The sight is a chief help for all the great employments of life in
all callings: The eyes are as watchmen set on high in their Watchtower, to
discover the coming of enemies. The eyes are also as the true windows of the
Soul, by which the Species or forms of things are taken into the Soul: For,
God has caused all substance in the World, to cast out beams, as it were,
which have the pictures of the things themselves carried about; and these
coming to the sight, are by it (above all other senses) taken in, and
delivered to the Souls within, the eyes being a looking glass that resemble
the things seen: and this noble sense may put us in mind of God's knowledge,
if we mark the degrees of seeing. The eye of man discernes, at once, a great
share or quantity of things together: The mind of man will take in a far
greater quantity and number, and yet is finite, for it cannot reach to all
things that God has made at once. Now God's understanding is infinite, and
beholds all at once.

For the second, the sense of hearing is worthy to be thought on, if we
consider either the benefits come by it, or the manner how it is performed; for
by hearing is let into the Soul and Body, not only sounds of delight or
wonder, but also sounds of necessity, both for natural life, by letting in
speech and discourse, and for eternal life, by letting in the Word of GOD.
First, the manner of hearing is admirable: Sound is the breaking of the air,
stirred up by the dashing or collision of sollid bodies, and is spread in the
air, as a stone cast into the water, makes and draws from it circles: Thus
the sound is brought to the ear, the hollow turnings in the ear gather and
hold the sounds, as it were canes: The sound at length rusheth upon a little
bone, or gristle like a hammer, which moved, smites upon another bone like an
Anuel, by which stroke the spirits in the hearing move, and are stirred up: and
so they take in the sound, and carry it to the brain, the seat of inward
senses.

These two are the most noble outward senses, yet there is great use of the
other three:

Thirdly, for by tasting, we discern of meats profitable or hurtful for the
body.

Fourthly, by smelling, we receive in those delightful savors God has caused
to arise from diverse of his creatures, and to avoid things by savor ^oysome to
the body.

Fifthly, and touching, though it be the most stupid sense, yet is of great use
for the safety of the body. All these senses are as a guard for the body, and
as Intelligencers for the Soul.

Inward sense.
Thus of the outward senses. The Soul works likewise inward senses upon and
by the body; and the general use of these inward senses, is to receive, and
lay up, what is brought unto them by the outward senses; for the outward senses
are like servants, that trade abroad, and get together the images of diverse
things, which they carry with them home to the inward senses: Now there are
three inward senses.

1. The common Sense. 2. The Fantasy. 3. The Memory.
And these are lodged in three several rooms or little cells in the brain.

First, the common sense lies in the former part of the head, and contains
all that store, by which all the outward senses are furnished: For spirits
fetch the vigor of each sense from this the common sense. As the lines that
go to the Circumference, meet all in the Center: so do all the outward senses
meet in the common sense: and hither likewise are all the forms of things
taken by the outward senses, brought, and distinguished.

Secondly, the fantasy is lodged in the middle part of the brain, where, as
in a shop it takes in the images of things brought to the common sense, and
there forms them more exactly, and oftentimes makes new after an admirable
manner, by thinking, and then, after it has separated what it likes not, it
delivers the rest over to the memory, which is lodged in the

Thus of the senses. But before I pass from them, it is profitable to note
certain things, which befall the senses for the good of the body and soul,
and that is the binding and loosing of the senses. For God has so tempered the
state of the senses in man, that they should neither always rest, nor always
work: Hence, from their resting comes sleep, and from their working comes
waking, or watching: we wake, when the senses are loose; and sleep, when the
soul binds them up: both are thus wrought, when the vegetative power wants
help for concoction of the meat, the natural heat is sent from the senses to
dispatch that work, and then we sleep; and when that is done, the heat returns
to the senses, and tickles them, and so they awake.

But it is to be observed, that though in sleep the common sense, and so the
outward senses are all bound, yet the fantasy and memory do not cease, but
being now freed from the attendance upon the intelligences of them, or the
outward senses, as if they were at more liberty, they are exercised more
freely, and often fall to new forming, and compounding of the Images brought in
before by the common sense, and so erect a new frame of things, which are
vented and expressed by dreaming: In which, a secret and admirable working of
God by the soul may appear, if we consider the strange things are fashioned
in our imagination in our sleep: yea the reasonable soul in sleep comes into
this shop of the fantasy, and there does strange works, which, as I said, are
vented in our dreams; in which we find as effectual use of reason, as as we
had waking.

Thus of the soul, as it works apprehension. Now follows it to consider,
how the soul works motion upon the body.

It is out of all doubt, that motion in the body is from the soul. For of it
self, it is but a dead lump, as it shows it self to be, when the soul is
gone out of it.

Now the soul gives unto the body a threefold motion.

First, the vital motion.

Secondly, the motion of appetite.

Thirdly, the motion from place to place.

The vital motion given to the body by the soul, is wrought two ways, both
by the pulse, and by breathing; both of absolute necessity to preserve life in
the body.

The motion of pulse is begun at the heart, which is made continually to beat
by the soul, which beating of the heart begets those sparkles, which we call
vital Spirits, arising out of the finest of the blood, which spirits are
carried by the pulse through the arteries, and they shine in the whole body,
according as their passages are more or less open.

Breathing is another strange motion of the soul in the body, by which both
air is fetched in continually for the cooling of natural heat in the heart,
and other members, and the spirits refreshed, and also the gross and more
smoaky spirits are exhaled out of the breast.

Thus of the vital motion.

The motion of appetite is a contrary commanding motion in the creature, by
which he is inclined to take to him such things from without, as he conceiues
good and needful for him, and so likewise to avoid things hurtful, and so the
soul begets diverse appetites and desires: as, the desire after food, which we
call hunger and thirst; and the desire after procreation, and the appetites,
we call affections or passions, so far forth as they are seated upon the
body, and exercised by instruments in the body; such as, in general, breed
sorrow, or pleasure, or passiueness in us; such as are, joy, grief, anger, and
the rest, etc.

It were too difficult and too tedious for popular teaching, to show in
particular, and distinctly, how the soul admirably works about each of these.

The motion from place to place, is the last: and this is a strong work of the
soul, driving on the body to the motion of the whole, or of some part of the
body. The body cannot remove it self, but it is of the soul, that it is
stirred up and down: for, when the soul is gone, it can move no longer. And
in vain were appetites or desires given to the creatures, if this motion from
place to place were not given, because without it, it could never compass
things desired.

Hitherto of the working of the soul upon the body, and those strange things
it does in the body, by the faculties of vegetation and sense. It is true, that
those things are done by the souls of brute creatures: but, as their souls
differ exceedingly from the glory and excellency of the souls of men, so are
the effects upon their bodies but certain glimpses of those things which are
done exactly by the souls of men; I mean, in respect of the inward senses of
fantasy and memory, there is in beasts but only a dark shadow of them, in
comparison of what is in men.

But for the third faculty of the soul, Of the faculty of reason in the soul,
and wherein it excels.
which is reason: therein men excel all creatures in this visible world: and
it is profitable for us to know what God has done for us in our souls,
generally considered above all other creatures; and so man excells in respect
of his reasonable soul, 1. In that he can conceive of things by the light of
understanding, as well as by sense. This light is admirable, whether we
conceive of it as proceeding from GOD, who shines upon the soul, as the Sun
does upon the body: or whether we believe it to be a light conferred upon the
understanding; by which, from within, it discerns things. 2. In that it can
conceive of things that never were in the senses; as, things absent, that never
were seen, yea, things, altogether immateriall; as, Angels, and virtues, and
vices. 3. In that it can conceive of the nature of God, and discern God from
his works. 4. In that it can conceive of things by a discerning reflection; as,
it can conceive of it self, and understand, that it does understand. 5. In
that it can distinguish between good and evil, truth and falsehood; I say, of
the moral goodness of things: whereas the fantasy can judge only of so much
of the natural goodness of things, as they show to the outward senses. 6. In
the largenes of the extent of our understanding. For, the understanding can, in
a small moment of time, go almost over the world, and view it all, as it were,
at once: whereas the senses are forced in within a narrow compass. 7. In that
it can invent things that never were in being: and thus we see daily, what
strange things, for number and skill, are invented for the use of the life of
man, by art and skill of man's understanding, in every calling of men. 8. In
that the reasonable soul gouerns and appoints, and crosses, and fetters, and
alters, and rectifies the other faculties of vegetation and sense; and, in
respect thereof, can turn, and tame, and rule, and order all sorts of other
creatures. 9. In that, by begetting with strange variety, it can make known
what images are within, whether begotten by the senses, or by the mind it
self. 10. In that it is the faculty by which only true blessedness is
apprehended and attained. 11. In that man's understanding is made, after a sort,
all things. For, the understanding becomes the things understood, in that it
does conceive a true and evident image of the thing to be understood: so that,
as man is the Image of God, so has he in him the images of all things, printed
as it were, in his understanding. This is a most dreadful dignity in the
souls of men; yea, heerin he resembles God in the creation of the world: for,
man's reasonable soul does, as it were, form worlds of things in it self. If
any object, that the sensitive soul has the images of things in it: I answer
two things. First, that the sense can receive only the images of a few things,
that is, only of such things as have color, sound, taste, smell, or touchable
qualities: but the mind can beget the images of all things. Secondly, that
those images in the senses, are dull, and dark, and confused, in comparison of
the likeness of things in the mind. 12. In that he has a will, in choosing or
refusing things good or evil, that cannot be compelled. The liberty of the
will is inseparable to it, in what it chooses or refuses: for, it implies a
contradiction, that the will should be co^straind. 13. In that it has in it
that divine thing which we call conscience, which is given to the soul as a
guardian, as it were, to attend it, from God; the effects whereof are admirable
in us: for, it testifies to our actions: it accuses, or excuses: it comforts,
when we have well done, above all outward comforts; and it terrifieth and
scourges the soul with inexpressible afflictions many times for sin: it is a
Judge, witness, and executioner many times in us.


Now, if the soul be thus admirable in any estate (for, all these things are
true of the reasonable soul, even in the estate of corruption) then how
excellent was the estate of man, in respect of his soul, before the Fall! and
how does it excel in the godly, who have their souls enlightened with the
light of faith, and garnished with saving graces! but, especially, how shall it
exceed in glory, when it shall be presented before God in the Kingdom of
heaven!

So that, as the whole man, made in God's Image, is (as it were) the visible
God in this great world: so the soul is as it were a little God in the lesser
world, which is the body of man.

And thus much of the faculties of the soul.

The end why the soul was made.
Now the end of all this follows: The Lord made the soul, and endowed it with so
excellent a being, and so admirable faculties, that so the Lord might in this
visible world have a creature, that would know him and serve him rightly. The
creatures without sense are Gods workman-ship, but discern nothing of God, or
themselves, or other things. The creatures with sense discern other things by
sense, but know nothing of God: Now God made man, as the abridgement of all he
had made, and gave him this soul, of purpose that he might discern God
aright, and serve, and worship and praise him.

Use 1. The consideration of the excellency of the soul, and of the end why it
was created, should stir us up to make conscience of the service, and
knowledge of God: It is as if we had never been, if we answer not this end:
We should be fired to the observation and praise of God, and of his love to
man.

And withal it should make us wonderful careful of our souls, since we see
they are such excellent creatures: Our soul is more worth, then all this
visible world besides.

Especially it should fire us to a care of things, that concern the blessed
Immortality of our souls: we should be forced to all possible care of all
such things, as might be provision for the eternal well-being of our souls.

And in particular the excellency of the soul should dissuade us from fleshly
lusts, and all inward impurity, by which the soul is defiled or wounded.

Hitherto of the description of the soul: The war against the soul is now to
be considered of: Concerning which I propound these things to be handled.

First, who are the combatants.

Secondly, by what ways and means the soul is assaulted and opposed.

Thirdly, why God would suffer the soul to be thus assaulted.

Fourthly, what reason Christians have to be careful of themselves and
provide against this war.

Fifthly, by what means we must resist and defend the soul.

Sixthly, what hope there is of victory.

Seventhly, how many ways we may obtain victory.

Eightthly, by what signs we may know that we are not overcome.

And then the use of the whole.

For the first, Kinds of war against the soul.
there are four kinds of war waged against the soul, as it is encountered
by four sorts of adversaries. For, both God, and the world, and he devil, and
the flesh, war against the soul of man: briefly of the three first.

God wars against the soul, either in earnest and in deed, or in show and
appearance, and not as an adversary in deed. In earnest God fights against the
soul, by the threatenings and rebukes of his Word, when he smites and beats
men down by the word of his mouth, Esaias 11. and also by torments of conscience
powered out upon the wicked men; and so he fought against Cain and Judas.
Sometimes, God is but a putatiue adversary, and does but seem to fight
against them; and so he warreth against his own servants: either by outward
crosses, or by disertion, or by fear and terror; and thus he fought against
Job: And in this case, God is like a Captain trayning his soldiers, or like a
Fencer teaching his scholar to fight.

The world wars against the soul, two ways, by the inticements of profits,
pleasures, honors, evil counsel, or example: and by persecution either of
the tongue or hand.

The devil wars against the soul, by evil doctrine, or temptations or
illusions. But none of these three are principally intended here: it is the
flesh, that makes war against the soul, that is here meant.

By the flesh, is meant the corruption that is in the nature of man, called the
old man and the Law of the members. By the soul is here meant the spirit, or
regenerate man, the new man, the grace of Christ in the soul. Thus of the
first point, who are the combatants: the flesh is the assaylant; the Spirit,
the defendant.

For the second point: the flesh incounters and wars against the soul
diverse ways, and by strange kinds of fights; as, 1. By mists of ignorance:
it casts mists before the eyes of the soul, The flesh wars against the soul
five ways.
that it might be blinded; for, there is a manifest combat between the
natural understanding, and the regenerate mind: carnal reason and saving
knowledge often fight it out within a man. 2. By doubtings and distractions:
and so the flesh casts out such questions as these, as so many darts into the
soul; Whether there be a God, or the Scripture be the Word of GOD? Whether
Christ be the Son of God, and our Mediator? Whether it be the true Church we
are in; or whether our sins be forgiven, or we be in the state of grace?
whether there shall be any resurrection, or heaven, or hell, or immortal
Being of the soul? Against all these, the soul is driven to make often
defenses, and drives them out with hard conflicts. 3. By rebellious denial of
obedience to the law of the mind; exalting it self against the obedience
enjoined by Christ to the soul, Romans 7. 2. Cor. 10. and casting out
resolutions of denial, and thoughts that say they ought not, or will not obey.
4. By hindering the work of the soul, that ouercomes the former resolutions,
and will obey: and that it does by making evil present, when she should do good;
or by hindering and dulling of the affections of the heart, or by casting in of
other proiects, of purpose to breed distractions in the time of doing good
duties, Rom 7. 5. By lusting, that is, by bringing-in of contrary desires,
evil concupiscences, longings after forbidden things: and in these lusts
usually the flesh combines with the outward adversaries of the soul, the world
and the devil; and kindles the fire of those inordinate desires, by dalliance
with the world, or the diuel's temptations. And thus of the second point.


The third thing is a question; Why GOD should suffer the soul to be thus
annoyed by the flesh; saying, He could have made man again in Christ, as he
made Adam in Paradise, and so have utterly abolished the flesh? Why God does
suffer this war.
For answer heerunto, three things may be said. First, that we are bound with
all thankfulness to praise God for that grace he has given us in Christ,
though it be not full perfect; and so ought not to reason with GOD, why he
gave us not more grace; and the rather, because we look for a time, when we
shall be more happy in that respect, than ever Adam was: and besides, though
grace given us, be imperfect, in respect of degree, and so, less than Adam's
was; yet it is perfect, in respect of continuance: and so it is better than
Adam's. Thirdly, there may be diverse reasons assigned, why GOD did suffer the
flesh to remain in us after calling, for a time, that is, while we war in
this world: for, 1. It shows the greatness of God's power, that can keep us,
notwithstanding such continual danger we are in. 2. By this conflict, diverse
graces of the Spirit are raised up and exercised, which else were of little
use; as, godly sorrow, poverty of spirit, desire of death, and faith also has
much employment about this combat. 3. By this combat, all the graces of God's
Spirit are proved to be right, and not counterfeit in the true Christians: for,
no man can constantly bear arms against the flesh, but he is a new creature.
This combat, then, serves for the trial of the gifts and graces of
Christians. 4. By this combat, we are cured of the horrible disease of
self-loue and pride in our selves, and made more to love God, and trust in him;
as knowing, that we deserve no favor at his hand, nor can be strong in our
own might. 5. It is equal we should war, before we triumph; that we should
fight in the battles on earth, before we reign in heaven.


Lastly, it makes heaven and grace more precious in our sight, and breeds in us
a desire to be dissolved, and so warns from the love of this present evil
world.

In the fourth place we must consider, by what means the soul may preserve it
self against the treacheries and assaults of the flesh: and so the means is to
be used either before the conflict, or in the conflict, or after the conflict.

Before the conflict, if we would take a sound course to be preserved against
the danger of the flesh, we must look to these things: 1. We must stand upon
our guard, and keep a daily watch over our hearts and ways, and not be
retchlesse to despise our own ways, or never take notice of our hearts: he
lives dangerously, that lives securely: we must take a diligent view of our
own natural dispositions, to be able to discern distinctly, what it is the
flesh usually is prone to, or employed in. 2. We must be sure to commit our
selves to God, and by faith lay hold upon Jesus Christ, and settle our selves
in our assurance: for that cuts off many of the maine advantages of the flesh,
especially it quenches all those hellish darts that arise from doubtings and
despair: which is to discern the flesh. 3. We must quicken in us our hope of
a better life: for that will show us so much glory to be had in the service of
Christ, as all the motions of the flesh will seem vain in comparison: we are
never allured by the lusts of the flesh, but when we have forgotten heaven, or
are destitute of the lively hope of it. 4. We must be sober, in the use of
outward things, 1. Pet. 1.13. and remove from the flesh, those things we
observe the flesh to be apt to dally withal: if the flesh could be divorced
from the world, there were little or no danger. 5. We must with all readiness,
upon all occasions, entertain all good motions any way cast into us by Gods
Spirit: for as those are set up and nourished, the flesh is subdued and kept
under. 6. We must daily commit our selves and our souls to God by prayer, and
beseech him to keep us, and accordingly to beg strength to avoid those
evils, which by nature we find our selves most prone to, 2. Tim. 1.12.


Now if the flesh, notwithstanding, do on the sudden (either provoked by the
world, or entised by the devil) make assault and lust after evil things: then
in the conflict, our armor must be, 1. Contrary lustings, Gal. 1.17. The
Spirit must lust against the flesh, by raising up holy desires, and loathing of
those base affections of the flesh. 2. Prayer: we must crucify them, drag them
before the Cross of Christ, and there accuse them, shame them, judge them,
condemn them, and beg virtue from the death of Christ to kill them. 3. The
Word of God. For as Christ beat away the devil, by alleging what was written:
so should we get store of places of Scripture, which we might allege to our
own hearts, when we are entised to any sin: and so the promises of the
Gospel would be as shoes to our feet; that neither thorny care prick, nor
vain pleasures defile us: and so those promises are, because they both show us
greater things then fleshly pleasures can be, and withal show us such
treasure in Christ, as may free us from living in care.


Two rules are of excellent use for this purpose.

1. To silence the flesh: When it assaults, not to suffer it to plead much, but
presently resist it. 2. To look to the beginnings of any corruption: not to
dally with it, and give it way upon pretense of safety: for it may strangely
provoke, and beyond expectation, if it be not looked to at first.
After the conflict, we must remember two things.

1. To give thanks to God for the help of his presence, as accounting it a
singular favor to be protected against so vile an enemy. 2. To take heed of
security; so to consider of our present deliverance, as to look for more
conflicts.
In the fifth place it is profitable, considering what reasons Christians have
to be careful of themselves, and attend their souls in respect of the flesh:
for, 1. This combat is a daily combat: the war is never at an end: it is an
adversary, that never takes so much as a day of truce. 2. There is no safety or
help, by running away: for thy adversary is seated within thee, and thou can
not run from thy self. 3. The flesh has might and continual aid from the
devil and the world; which, almost with infinite variety of occasions,
ministers obstinacy to the flesh. 4. For want of care, many worthy Champions
have been for the time foiled shamefully; as were Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and
others. 5. No Christian can avoid it, but has this combat within him, Gal.
5.17.


And as these or the like reasons may breed care and watchfulnes: so has the
true Christian no cause of despair, but rather many arguments of hope of good
success, and daily victories and triumphs over the flesh, if he be watchful:
for, 1. God has provided him of armor against those kinds of assaults: and
it is mighty to preserve and subdue, 2. Cor. 10.3, 4. 2. Christ in his power
does rest in us, for this end, to assist us in the combat, as we cry for help,
2. Cor. 12.10. 3. We fight against an adversary has been often foiled by all
sorts of Godly Christians, and by our selves in diverse particular combats;
yea, against an adversary, that has received a deadly wound that cannot be
cured: for, so the flesh the first day of our conversion was mortified. All
that are Christ's, have mortified the flesh with the lusts thereof. 4. We have
assurance of victory, if we resist, Romans 8.38. 5. An incorruptible Crown is
laid up for all that overcome, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8. Reu. 2.


Now, for the seventh point: we obtain victory against the flesh diverse
ways, as, 1. In our justification, How many ways we get victory over our
lusts.
when we by faith obtain the pardon of our sins committed, and a
righteousness able to cover us, notwithstanding all the spite the flesh does us.
This is our victory in Christ, Romans 7. 2. In our sanctification: and so we get
victory. 1. When we conquer some sins wholly, so that we never commit them
again. 2. When we turn, and subdue the power of the sin that remains; so as
they cannot reign, though they rebel. 3. We shall have our final and full
victory in our glorification in the day of CHRIST, when the flesh shall be
utterly abolished for ever.



Now for the eightth point: we may know, that we are not at any time
ouercomne, by these signs, if we find them in us.

Signs to know whether we be ouercomne of our lusts.
1. If we judge our selves for all known sins; so as there be no sin arising
from the flesh, but we condemn it, and keep our selves as men condemned in the
flesh, being grieved at the rebellion of the flesh in us, Romans 7.1. Pet. 4.7.
2. If we hold fast our assurance of faith, we are safe, so long as we keep the
faith, 2. Tim. 4.7. 3. If we go on in our Christian way or course, and do
not giue-ouer the practice of known duties, against the light of our
consciences: if we finish our course, 2. Tim. 4.7.
Use 1. The use of all should be,

First, for information; and so two ways: for, 1. It shows the miseries of
such persons as never feel this combat, that have all quiet in them: it is a
sign, the flesh and the devil rule all, and there is no sanctified Spirit to
resist. 2. It shows the folly of some godly persons, that are troubled, as if
their states were not right, because they find such a combat in themselves:
whereas they should rather conclude the contrary, that therefore there is some
workmanship of Christ in them, which is so opposed by the flesh and the devil;
and that it is the case of all the godly, to be assaulted with rebellious
thoughts and desires, and other practices of the flesh, reckoned up before.


Secondly, for instruction: and so it should teach Christians, and warn them to
take heed of three things, viz. of security, despair, and fainting: for, all
these are mischievous. We may not be secure, since we have such an enemy within
us: nor must we be too much out of hope, or despair of success, for the
reasons before alleged: nor yet must we give way, so much as to fainting of
spirit; but pluck up our own hearts, and, with trust in God's grace, resist
still the risings of corruption, till we get a final victory.

Verse 12. And have your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles; that they
which speak evil of you, as evil doers, may by your good works which they
shall see, glorify God in the day of their visitation.


HItherto of the dehortation. The words of this verse are an exhortation:
wherein consider both what he exhorts to, and by what reasons. The matter he
exhorts to, concerns their outward conversation, which he would have to be
honest and amiable. The reasons are,

First, because the Christians lived among Gentiles, that embraced not the true
Religion.

Secondly, because diverse of these Gentiles were so spiteful against the
Christians, that they would take all occasions to speak evil of them.

Thirdly, because some of them that now did speak evil of them, might
hereafter be converted to the true Religion.

Fourthly, because if they now observe their good works, when they shall be
visited of God, they will much magnify them to the great glory of God.

That which he then exhorts them to, is the care of their conversation, which
he amplifies, by showing what kind of conversation he would have it to be,
viz. A fair or honest conversation.

And have your conversation honest.]

Diverse things may be hence observed.

First, that a sound Christian must show himself to be so by his
conversation; a Christian must show the power of his Religion by his works, and
by sound practice; and that too, amongst men abroad, he must be known by his
fruits, Col. 1.9, 10. Tit. 2.12. and therefore the Apostle beseeches them to
prove before the Gentiles, that they were true Christians, by their works and
conversation. This reproues their coffeehouse that are vexed, because they
are not reputed for sound Christians, and yet show no care of a conscionable
behavior in their dealings and carriage among men; and withal, this may warn
all sorts of Christians to look to themselves, that they be not deceived with
vain shadows in pretenses; for it is not talking and discoursing of Religion
will serve turn, nor the frequenting of the exercises of Religion; nor is it
enough to do secret duties: but they are bound to the good behavior generally
in their carriage amongst men. This is the first point.

Secondly, from the coherence we may note also, that a man must first reform
his heart, and then his life; he must first get a clean heart, freed from
lusts, and then look to his conversation: Holiness must be both within and
without; he is an hypocrite, that has a fair conversation, and a foul
heart: neither may he plead the goodness of his heart, that leads a foul
conversation; both must be joined together.

Thirdly, we may hence note, that every Christian must be careful, and look
to it in particular, that his conversation be honest: honesty of life, is with
special care to be intended; now this must be explicated.

The word translated Honest, signifies properly, Fair; and the Translatours
respecting the matter of our conversation, render it well, Honest; so as
withal for the manner we add, that it be a fair conversation: so that two
things must be observed in our conversation, the Matter and the Manner. For
the Matter: We must be sure that we be honest: It is a vain thing to think
of being religious, if we fail in honesty; we must not only study the
duties of the first Table, but we must be careful to prove the power of our
Religion in the sound practice of the duties of the second Table: we must live
righteously as well as religiously, Tit. 2.12. we must add virtue to our
faith, 2. Pet. 1.5. and withal, we should labor to excel in honesty, to carry
our selves so in all our dealings, that our carriage might allure, through the
fairness of our behavior; we must in the things of honesty, strive for an
alluring carriage. There be diverse things in our outward conversation, which
set a great gloss upon many actions, and certain particular duties which show
exceeding comely in a Christian man's behavior; those the Apostle would have us
to study and be careful of, even all things that are honest, and might win
credit to the profession of Religion, Phil. 4.8.

This then is the question: What are those things which would so adorn the
outward conversation of Christians and make it fair and amiable? Six things to
be looked to, to express a fair conversation.
For answer heereunto there are things distinctly which are of singular praise,
and much adorn a Christians conversation, and make it fair.

The first is harmelesnes, to be free from all courses of injury, and cruelty,
and oppression and the like. A hurtful and injurious conversation is a foul
and unseemly conversation.

The second is discretion: when men carry themselves with all due respect of
their words, and the consideration of the time, place, and persons with whom
they converse: a discreet conversation, is a wonderful fair conversation:
when as a foolish, vain, rash, conceited, talkatiue behavior, is extremely
irksome and loathsome, Col. 4.5. Iam. 3.13.

The third is quietness and gentleness, which excels, as it shows it self.
First, by humblenes of mind, thinking meanly of himself, and esteeming others
better then himself, Esaias 4.2. in giving honor, going before others, Romans
12.13. Secondly, by peaceablenes, when men study to be quiet, Ephesians. 4.11, 12.
and meddle with their own business, and avoid contention by all means, rather
suffering wrong then prove quarelsome, Heb. 12.14. Thirdly, easines to be
entreated in case of offense taken, and willingness to be guided in things
profitable and good, Iam. 3.17.

The fourth is sobriety. When a man lives so, as he is not blemished, either
with filthiness, or drunkenness, or covetousness: a man that is unspotted of the
world for any foul crimes, and withal can show a mind not transported with
the greedy desires after earthly things, is much honored, and justly amongst
men: the worst man cannot but acknowledge the praise of such: So as men show
this in their dealings evidently, Romans 13.13. Iam. 1.26.

The fifth is fidelity and plainnes: when men are just and true in all their
dealings, and will keep their words and promises, and abhor the sins of
deceit, and avoid subtilty and worldly wisdom, and show themselves to be
plain men, as it was said of Jacob, that he was a plain man, not like
subtle Esau. This ought much to be sought after by Christians, that men may
see their hearts by their words, 2. Cor. 1.12.

The sixth is profitablenes: rendered in the end of this verse, good works. They
lead a fair conversation, that do good, and are helpful to others, and ready
to show any kindness or mercy to any that live near them, or have occasion to
use them. This is an admirable praise.

Use.
The use should be, therefore, to teach us to study how to adorn our
conversation with such integrity and virtuous behavior, as may win praise
and reputation to our profession; especially we should at least shun all
those hateful evils, which by experience we find to be grievous and
loathsome, and are to be accounted as blemishes in our conuersings, being things
as are in a special manner loathsome, and provoke ill opinion in others, as
being against honesty and that fair conversation should be found in us: as,

First, the sins of uncleanness, and whoredom, and fornication, and
lasciuiousnes, and filthy speaking, Romans 13.13. Ephesians. 5.3, 4.

Secondly, the sins of drunkenness and riotousnes, Romans 13.13. 1. Pet. 4.3.

Thirdly, the sins of passion, malice, wrath, bitterness, crying and evil
speaking, Ephesians. 4.31.

Fourthly, sins of deceit, lying, dissimulation, and hypocrisy.

Fifthly, Pride, statelines, desire of vain glory, Gal. 5.26.

Sixthly, backbiting, complaining, censuringe, judging, Mat. 7.1. Iam. 4. Gal.
5.13.

Seventhly, idleness and slothfulness, 1. These. 4.11, 12.

Eightthly, to be a busie-body in other men's matters, prying, and inquiring,
and meddling with things that belong not to them, 1. These. 4.11, 12. 1. Pet. 4.
To which, add prattling and talkatiuenesse, 1. Tim. 5.13.

Ninthly, such courses as have appearance of evil in them: such are, the use
of vain apparel, and wilful resorting to persons and places that are of evil
report.

Thus of the matter to which he exhorts. The reasons follow, why they should
be careful of an honest and fair behavior; and first, because they live
among the Gentiles.

Among the Gentiles.]

Those Gentiles were such as lived in their natural idolatry, the nations that
had not received the Christian faith.

Those that think this Epistle was written only to the provincial Jews,
allege the words of this verse to prove it: for, they say, it was written to
such as lived among the Gentiles, and were no Gentiles: and they only were the
Jews.

But this reason is of no force: for, those Gentiles, that were converted to
the Christian faith, became Christians, and so were no more Gentiles or Pagans:
and so these words may be understood of all sorts of Christians that lived
among the unconverted Gentiles, whether they were in their natural estate,
either Jews or Pagans.

In that the Christians lived among the Gentiles, and must, by their fair
conversation, be rightly ordered toward those Gentiles, diverse things may be
observed.

First, we may hence note, how hard a thing it is to recover men from a false
religion, though their religion be grossly absurd. In this place, whither the
Gospel came, we see multitudes of men remained Gentiles still, and would not
receive the Christian faith. And this is the more to be noted, if we either
consider the reasons the Gentiles had to remain in their religion, or the
manifest causes they had to move them to embrace the Christian Religion: for,
for their own religion, they might easily observe these things amongst many
other: First, their palpable and sottish idolatry, in worshipping so many gods,
and those so accounted to be gods, being many of them apparently but
senseless creatures; as, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, others of them but dead
men; and others of them such, as of whom there was not the least color or
appearance of Divinity. Secondly, the most notorious wickedness of life, which
did every where abound in all the nations that were Pagans, Romans 1. Thirdly,
that they followed a religion that gave them no hope of a better life after
death, nor could describe any estate worth the desiring. Fourthly, there was no
agreement among them, what should be the chief Good, while they lived: but men
were carried according to the sensual desires of their own hearts.

On the other side, for the Christian Religion, they saw that the doctrine of
it was every where proved by miracles; and that their own Oracles, in every
place where the Gospel came, were put to silence. Besides, they might observe,
that the Christian Religion did teach the most absolute way for holiness of
life, and that the Christians did live the most vnrebukeably of all others,
yea, did with gladness dye in the defense of their Religion: and further, the
Christian Religion did show them the glory of heaven, and discovered that
certain estate of most blessed Immortality.

Quest. But, may some one say, What might be the motives to the Gentiles, to
make them continue so obstinate?

Ans. There were, chiefly, five things which caused this obstinacy in the
Gentiles. The first was the tradition of their fathers and forefathers: they
would not forsake that religion, which for so many hundred years their
Ancestors had professed, 1. Pet. 1.18. Secondly, the god of this world did
mightily labor to blind their eyes, that they might not understand the
Gospel, 2. Cor. 4.4. Thirdly, they saw, that the Christian Religion was
persecuted in all places, both by reproaches and martyrdom. Fourthly, they
would not receive the Christian Religion, because there were but few that
professed it, and that their wise men and great men of the world, for the most
part, did reject it, 1. Cor. 1. The last and chief reason was the love of their
sins, which they saw they must forgo, if they embraced the Christian Religion.
It was true also, that the wickedness of some hypocrites that crept in among
Christians, did make the way of God evil spoken of, and many Gentiles to
blaspheme, Romans 2. I might add, that the doctrine of Christ's Passion, was a
scandal unto many Gentiles, who accounted it as a foolish thing, to believe
him as a Savior, that could not save himself from so ignominious a death;
being willingly ignorant of the necessity of that oblation of Christ, as the
Surety and Sacrifice for our sins.

It is profitable to consider of the obstinacy of these Gentiles, together with
their motives: for, first we may see that they stood upon the same grounds in
effect, upon which the Papists do rest at this day; for the Papists maine
allegations are, the traditions of Fathers and Forefathers, together with the
multitudes of people that follow their Religion; but especially the
consideration of the woeful estate of forlorn men, should teach us with the
more thankfulness to celebrate the praise of Gods mercy to us, that did subdue
our natures, and draw us out of blindness and wickedness, into the true
Religion, and into the kingdom of Jesus Christ: And Ministers should hence
learn with patience to do their work, and not to be discouraged, though
multitudes of people be not brought to the obedience of Christ; they must not
look to speed better then the Apostles, who in all places left thousands of
people that would not regard them nor their Ministeries, 2. Tim. 2.25, 26.

Lastly, we should learn even of wicked men, how we should entertain the
truth; for if it be so hard a matter to get men to change their minds when
they hold gross errors and falshoood; how ought we to stick to the truth when
we have received it, and not receive any other doctrine, though an Angel from
heaven should teach us otherwise then is written in the Word of God? Gal. 1.7.

Doct. 2. We may hence also note, that God is pleased to suffer his children
in this life to live amongst wicked men. A godly man can live no where, but
there are some wicked living there; the tares will grow up with the Wheat.
There may be diverse reasons assigned of this, why God does not gather his
people altogether from the places where wicked men dwell, as: First, God does
hereby try his people, whether they will forsake the inticements of the wicked,
and cleave to him and his truth; the more by-waies there are, the more praise
to him that keeps the right way. Secondly, God does by the wicked many times
refine and purify his servants; by reason of the wicked, he both keeps them
clean, and if they gather any filth, by them he washes them: wicked men are
many times God's Laundresses to godly men: for, if God appoint them to chasten
his servants; they will do it thoroughly, both by reproaches, and other ways.
Thirdly, the Kingdom of Christ must be set up among wicked men, because
amongst them are many of God's Elect, which are in due time to be converted
from their wickedness. Fourthly, hereby the power of Christ is magnified, that
can set up and maintain his Scepter in the midst of his enemies. Fifthly, by
this course God's patience is prolonged; for God is pleased, for the godlie's
sakes, to forbear those destroying Judgments which else would fall upon the
wicked.

The use should be, to teach us to bear with patience the inconveniences which
befall us in our places and callings, by reason of the neighborhood of wicked
men, as knowing that it is the condition of all the Godly, and has always
been so, and is so in all places; and therefore to resolve with our selves,
rather to learn how to carry our selves fairly and honestly among them, then
through impatience without calling, to shift our places, or without charity, to
make any schism or rent in the Church. Secondly, since on Earth it will be no
better with us in respect of our habitation; we should therefore learn the
more to desire to be in heaven, where all the people shall be righteous: since
there is so much unrighteousness in this World, we should long for these new
heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. We should be the more
thankful, if God ease us, in any degree, of the molestations of wicked men,
either ridding out manifest Idolaters, Pagans, or Papists, or restrayning those
that are with us, from unquietness, and tumult, and daily sl^nder; or
comforting us with a large fellowship of the Godly. Fourthly, It should teach
us circumspection, seeing the days are evil, both to hold forth our own
light in the midst of their darkness, and to take heed that we trust not every
man, nor believe every thing: a holy reservedness will become this Doctrine.
Fifthly, the zeal of Gods House should the more overcome us to strive to win
men to God, and provoke them, as we have occasion and ability, to the love of
God, and the true Religion. Sixthly, we should cleave the faster to the society
of the Godly, and strive together, and contend for the faith, seeing that we
are always in the midst of our enemies. Lastly, it may be a great comfort to
such as can quiet themselves well toward wicked men, that can keep their way,
and be still upright and undefiled, that can also keep peace, and win love
from their very enemies, that can do valiantly in the winning men to the
liking of Religion for their sakes. To be good among the good, is not
singular; but to be evil among the good, is abominable; and so is it an
admirable praise to be good among the evil.

Doct. 3. That in some cases the conversation of a Christian may extend it
self even to wicked men. Some one will say, We are forbidden conversation with
them, how then can we converse with them? Ans. First, our conversation may
reach unto them by fame or report; so the Christians conuersed among the
Gentiles, in that what they did, In what cases it is lawful to converse with
wicked men.
was discoursed of among the Gentiles: But this is not all; for in some cases
we may go among them lawfully, even into their presence and company; as,
First, in case of negotiation in things of necessity, as trade, public
service, or the like. Secondly, in case of natural or civil obligation to
them; as children, wives, servants, subjects, may not withdraw their attendance
or service from them, but may and must converse with them. Thirdly, in case of
Religion, men that intend to admonish, confute, persuade or win them to the
love of Religion, may for that end converse with them; but then two cautions
must be observed: First, that the party that would so converse with them, must
be able to admonish or confute, etc. Secondly, such an end must not be made a
pretense, only to cover needelesse society with them. Lastly, a difference
must be put between the open enemies of God, and such as give some hope of
inclination to Religion, though yet they be not manifestly Religious. There are
some persons that are inoffensiue, so as they are not guilty of any gross and
open crime, and seem to favor Religion and the exercises thereof, and do
desire the society of the godly, and take no pleasure in evil company; now we
must beware that we judge not rashly of these, to account them as Gentiles, and
such as are without; and with these we may hold more sure society.

Doct. 4. It may be lastly hence observed, that to convince or win the
Gentiles, honesty of conversation is chiefly to be respected; honesty, I say,
not Religion. To show the practice of religious duties before them, is a way to
irritate them: they must be beaten with their own weapons, and overcome in
the things they profess to be good. The way to amaze them that are without,
is to show, that religion forms in us such things as they confess to be good,
yet cannot come to, or not in such a manner or degree: such as are faithfulness,
chastity, meekenes, wisdom, taciturnity, mercy, or the like. The use should
be therefore to teach godly christians, in the places where they live, to
look to this point: not only to live without offense, but to strive to excel
in the virtues that concern outward honesty of life. And to this end it were
excellent, if Christians would mark, in in what things the men of the world
where, they live, do strive to excel; and not rest satisfied, till they can
make all sorts of men discern, that Religion has made them even in those
things to go beyond them: And thus they should not suffer themselves to be
put down by Papists or any carnal persons, in works of mercy, or truth in
their words and promises, or quietness of disposition, or magnanimity, or the
like; and the rather, because their praise is of God: whereas carnal men have
only the praise of men. And besides, the true Christian shall have a
recompense of reward in heaven, Ephesians. 6.8. whereas the Pharise has his reward
only in this life. And further we should be more careful to win praise to
our God and the true Religion, then they are to get applause to themselves, or
a strange god. And we are in the light, they are in darkness: it were a shame
they should do their work better in the dark then we in the light, Romans 13.
Thus of the first reason. The second reason why they should be careful of
their conversation, is, because the Gentiles are apt to speak evil of the
Christians, as evil doers.

That whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil doers.]

From hence three things may be observed.

First, that it has been the lot of godly men to be evil spoken of and
traduced: As we see the Christians Churches in the primitive times were
exposed to the infamous reports of the Gentiles. Two things would be here
explained: First, that it has always been so: And then the causes of it. For
the first, that it has always been so, is clear by instances of all times;
before the Law, under the Law, and in the time of the Gospel.

1. Before the Law:

Ismael scoffs at Isaac: and Joseph's brethren scorn and revile him. Job was
accused as an Hypocrite by his own friends, and scorned by the basest of the
people, Job 30.1. So was it with Moses and the Israelites, Heb. 11.26.

2. Under the Law.

David was slandered by many, Psalm. 31.12. The abiects tear his name, and
ceased not, Psalm. 35.15. The drunkards sang of him, Psa. 69.13. he was a
reproach of men, a by word, a proverb, etc. So in the Prophet Esays time, Esaias
8.18. and 59.16. and 51.8.

Jeremy complains, that they consulted how to devise devices against him, and
to smite him with the tongue.

3. Under the Gospel.

1. Look to the Author and finisher of our faith, Christ Jesus: he was charged
with gluttony, Mat. 11.18. blasphemy, Mat. 26.65. madness, Ioh. 10.20. to be a
deceiuer, Ioh. 7.22. and to have a devil, and work by the prince of devils. 2.
The Apostles were made a spectacle to men and Angels, and accounted as the
off-scowring of all things, 1. Cor. 4.9, 10, 13. 3. Yea it is foretold to be
the case of all Christians, Math. 5.12. Gal. 4.29.

The causes of those reproaches follow.

First, in wicked men: it is their natural hatred of the truth and goodness, 1.
Ioh. 2. and 3.

Secondly, in the devil: it is his policy, here by.

1. To keep men from embracing a religion that is so traduced, Causes why
godly men are evil spoken of.
Acts 28. 2. To discourage and hinder the weak Christian, and to make him
fearful in the way of God. 3. To pull back certain men which were going
toward the Kingdom of God.
Thirdly, in Gods will: hereby to try the constancy of his servants, and to
make them live more watchfully.

Fourthly, in Christians themselves, it is

Sometimes long of hypocrites that break out into scandalous courses, and so
make the way of God evil spoken of.

Sometimes it is the indiscretion and weaknesses of some Christians, which
first set wicked men aworke.

But chiefly it is their goodness, because they will not run with the wicked
into the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 4.5. Psalm. 38. 1 Ioh. 3.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. The second thing may be noted from hence, is, that to speak evil of
the godly, is a property of wicked men, of men not yet visited of God. Such as
dishonor godly Christians, did never endeavor to glorify God himself, 1.
Cor. 6.9, 10. Psalm 15. Romans 1.29, 30. and therefore their tongues that are
given to reuiling of the godly, are said to be set on fire from hell, Iam. 3.

Doct. 3. The third thing is, that to speak evil of the good, is a vice that
all wicked men are guilty of, as here he supposes it to be the sin of all
the Gentiles, so of all men by nature, Romans 3.12, 13.

It follows that I should show the uses may be made of the three doctrines
together; but first a question may be asked; and that is,

Quest. Whether may not evil be spoken of godly men at all, and in no case? I
answer, Evil may not at all be spoken of them in these cases following.

In what cases it is not hurtful to speak evil of godly men.
First, in things that are hidden, thou may not judge them; as, thou may not
meddle with the^ for the thoughts and intents of their hearts, 1. Cor. 4.5.

Secondly, in things doubtful, of which there is no proof for in such cases
all men must speak and judge the best.

Thirdly, in things indifferent they may not be censured, either for their
judgment, or practice, Romans 14.

Fourthly, things secret, though evil, yet may not be carried about or
discovered: for he that reueales a Secret, goes about as a slanderer,
Proverbs.

Fifthly, they must not be evil spoken of for mere frailties and infirmities:
for, love must cover a multitude of those evils: and their nakedness herein
must be covered.

Sixthly, they must not be evil spoken of behind their backs for any evils,
unless it be when they are incorrigible, or may infect others; or otherwise,
that their sins be spoken of for some manifest glory of God: Backbiting is
directly condemned.

Seventhly, not for any faults for which they have truly repented.

Eighthly, not in any case so, as to judge them with a final sentence: to
pronounce absolutely of their estates, that they are hypocrites, or shall be
damned.

Lastly, evil must never be spoken of them for weldoing: no man may dare to
call good, evil.

Otherwise in things that are apparently evil, they may be reproved by
Magistrates, or Ministers, or Parents, or Masters: yea and by any that is able
to admonish, so as their sins be not spoken of with hatred or mere desire
to disgrace them.

The uses of all this are for instruction, and so both to wicked men and godly
men. And so it is needful to be attended, because all of us either do
reproach, or are reproached.

Wicked men should be warned, if it be possible, to repent of this sin and
forbear it, and that for many reasons.

First, Reasons against evil speaking.
if they consider Gods commandment, which forbids all excesses of this
kind, Psalm 33.13. Tit. 3.1.

Secondly, if they consider the causes of their evil speaking; which as was
showed before, is the malice of their own hearts against the truth, and the
especial working of the devil, who is the fire of hell, that settes their
tongues aworke, Iam. 3.

Thirdly, if they consider that this is the devils special sin, to be an
accuser of the brethren, and from thence has his name in other languages: And
will thou make a devil of thy self; or discover such a devilish property in
this nature?

Fourthly, if they consider the effect of this sin of reproaching and
slandering the godly, either to the godly, or to themselves.

First, to the godly: what mischief do they? Evil words are compared to
swords and razours.

It is a kind of murder: it is as hateful as if they did cut or pierce their
bodies: and besides, to what grievous contempts and indignities many times
do thou bring them by thy lies and slanders?

Secondly, to thy self: consider what thou bringst by speaking evil of the
godly.

1. Though thou do it never so secretly behind their backs, yet it is
ouerheard and will come out: how would thou be ashamed, if he, of whom
thou speak, stood behind thee, when thou did slander him? O man, consider,
though the godly man never hear thee, yet God does hear it, and all thou
say, thou must bear thy shame for it. 2. Observe what interpretation God
makes of it: he calls this sin, blasphemy: for so the word is in the
original, Col. 3.8. to note thereby, that he is vexed at this sin of
vilifying his people, as if it were the reproaching of himself. 3. Consider
what a shame it will be to thee: when God shall clear the innocence of his
servants, how will thou be confounded when they are justified? 4. Consider
what hurt it does thy self and others: it is a great means to set you further
off from the Kingdom of God, and to harden your hearts against the cares of
your own reformation and salvation: Evil words corrupt good manners. Thou
losest so much even of natural honesty, as thou admittest of evil in thy
tongue. 5. Consider the punishment from the Lord. This is a sin that God has
grievously threatened, as these places show: Psalm 50.20. and 109.29. Esaias
51.18. Psalm 31.18. Esaias 41.11, 12. 1. Pet. 4.4, 5.
And as it is evil, to speak evil of those that are godly, as it appears by
these reasons: so it is monstrous, to be guilty of speaking evil in any of the
cases following: as, 1. To speak evil of the absent, that cannot defend
themselves. In what cases, in particular, it is odious to speak evil.
2. To speak evil of such as God has humbled and afflicted, and do judge
themselves for their sins. 3. To speak evil of such as have been friendly to
us, and showed their loving respect of us, and done us good. 4. To speak evil
of our superiors; as, godly Magistrates, and good Ministers. 5. To speak evil
of such as are nearly linked unto us; as, of our parents: and so it is
monstrous uncomely, when wives speak evil of their husbands; and contrariwise.
6. To speak evil of any, simply for godliness sake. 7. To speak evil of
others, and yet be guilty of the same offenses themselves. 8. And so it is
monstrous, when men speak evil of such behind their backs, to whom they speak
fair before their faces: this hooding of hatred and cursing with lying lips, is
abominable.


So then, this doctrine against euill-speaking, does in a special manner light
upon such persons, as are guilty of any of those ways of euil-speaking. And
thus of the uses that concern wicked men.

Secondly, godly men be also instructed from hence. For, since this doctrine
tells them, that it has been the lot of godly men in all ages, to be
euill-spoken of in all places where they live, they should thereby be made
careful to order themselves aright, in bearing reproaches in a right manner;
as resolved to prepare for the trial of this affliction, if they be not
scourged with it: for, as the devil, when he gaue-ouer to tempt Christ, is
said to cease but for a season; so, if wicked men hold their tongues, we must
not think they will be quiet always: for, till God turn their hearts, they are
apt to speak evil.

Now, that a godly man may be rightly ordered in respect of reproaches, he
must look to three things.

First, Helps against reproaches, to bear them.
he must be sure he be free from this evil himself, that he help not the
wicked against the righteous, and by his own intemperance, raise evil fames;
by reason of which, Religion is euill-spoken of: for, railing, cursing,
slandering, censuring, and the like, will make the very godly look like wicked
ones, yea, like the devil himself. Shall it be accounted a Paganish offense?
and shall a godly Christian be guilty of it? Especially such Christians should
be extremely abased for their evil natures, that raise evil reports of other
Christians, in cases where wicked men themselves are silent.

Secondly, that he carry himself in a holy manner when he is reproached: and
so he must remember two things.

1. That he render not reuiling for reuiling; but, if he find himself
stirred, with David to go to God, and betake himself to prayer, Psalm 109.4. 1.
Pet. 3.9. 2. That he strive to confute them by real apologies: and so he does,
if he endeavor to put them to silence by his good works, and a careful
course of conversation.
Thirdly, because the godliest men may have their passions, and may be stirred
up with such indignations (as appears, Ier. 8.18, 21.) he must labor to fense
his own heart with store of arguments, that may make him patient and
comfortable under this cross: and thus it should comfort him to consider, 1.
That no reproaches can make him vile in God's sight: how vile soever he seem to
be unto men, yet in God's eyes he is honorable, Esaias 43.4. 2. That thou art
but as an evil doer, not an evil doer. It is not miserable, To be as an evil
doer: but it is miserable, To be an evil doer, 2. Cor. 6.8, 9. 3. This is not
to resist unto blood, Heb. 12.3. This is a far less cross than has been
laid upon many of the best servants of God: they have lost their lives in the
defense of pure Religion. 4. That howsoever it go with thee in this life, yet
in the Day of Jesus Christ thy innocence shall be cleared, and thy faith and
sincerity shall be found unto praise, and honor, and glory: thou shall have
abundant praise in that Day, 1. Pet. 1.7.


Thus of the use that concerns either wicked men, or godly men. There is yet a
use that concerns all men: and that is, To take heed of receiving evil reports
against the godly: for, seeing it is so usual for ill-minded men to devise and
divulge evil reports of them, all men should be wary, and take heed of
receiving the evil speeches that are bruited or spoken of any in the business
of godliness. The receiving of false reports is forbidden in Scripture, as
well as the devising or divulging of them, Exodus 23.1. And it is made a sign
of a wicked disposition, To give heed to false lips: and that man is himself
a liar, that harkneth to a naughty tongue, Pro. 17.4. And therefore GOD will
plague in hell, not only liars, but such as love lies, Reu. 22.8. And a good
man is said to have this property, that he will not receive an ill report
against his neighbor, Psalm. 15. And by receiving evil reports, a man becomes
accessory to the slander, and guilty of it: for, as it is true, that the
receiver of euill-gotten goods is accessory to the theft; so is it in the case
of slander, and somewhat worse: for, there may be thieves, though there be no
receivers; but there can be no slanderers, without some to receive the slander.
Neither is there any great difference between the talebearer and the
tale-hearer: for, the talebearer has the devil in his tongue; and the
tale-hearer has the devil in his ear.

Quest. But what should we do to avoid tale-bearers, or if we do hear
reproaches or slanders of other men?

Ans. As the North-winde drives away the rain; so must thy angry countenance
do the slandering tongue: thou must not any way show any liking of his
discourse, but the contrary: yea, and further, thou must* as far as thou art
able, make apology to the godly man that is euill-spoken of. And the tongue of
a godly wiseman should be in this sense healthful, because it should be ready
to heal that wound which the talebearer has made in the name of his
neighbor, Pro. 12.18. and 25.23.

Thus of the second reason.

The third and fourth reasons are contained in these last words, viz. That they
may by your good works which they shall behold* glorify God in the day of
visitation. The reasons are, because God may visit them: and if he do, they
will glorify God upon the remembrance of your good works.

But here I purpose to handle the words as they lie in the order of reading
them: and so I have four things to consider of. First, of good works;
secondly, of the beholding of good works; thirdly, of the glorifying of God;
fourthly, of the day of visitation.

Good works.]

Diverse observations are implied here:

First, that Religion sets men to work: there is labor in godliness. He must
work, that will be truly godly or religious. God entertains no servants, but
he sets them to work: they are called to labor all the days of their life.
We must work out our salvation: without working we cannot be saved, though our
works be not the cause of salvation. This point proves, that the Gospel is not
a doctrine of liberty: religion does call men to working, not to live as they
list, but as he lists that died for them, and requires their service.

And secondly, this doctrine shows who is a true Christian. For, as the
Scripture is wont to describe a profane man, by saying, that he is a worker of
iniquity: so does it avouch, that he is a godly man, that works truth and
righteousness, Psalm. 5. Pro. 14.23. John 3.21. Psalm. 106.2. To be a worker of
iniquity, imports three things: First, gross known sin; secondly, a daily
custom in the practice of it; and thirdly, an estimation of sin, as the
means of our happy life. The wicked man lives by sin, as the labourer does by
his trade. So here, that man that will labor, and that constantly, about the
works of a holy life, making it his euerydaies care to do God's will, and
accounts it the happiness of his life to do good duties, that man is a godly
man. It is not talking of Religion will serve the turn, nor the shows of it,
but he must work, and endure the labor of godliness, James 1.25. Acts 10.36.
And further, this should teach Christians, often to remember their holy
calling, and examine themselves what works they have done, as such servants as
desire to give a good account to their Master; and the rather, because no
servants can have fairer work: it is all good work: and servants were so
engaged to their masters, nor did owe more service; and because never was there
a master that gave better wages, than God does to his servants. And therefore
let every Christian be daily careful to look to his work, that, when his
Master comes, he may find him so doing. Thus of the first point.

Doct. 2. Secondly, that works do especially commend us to the good opinions of
men: it is our works must justify us before men: by good works we must win
testimony to our sincere Religion from men. Faith iustifies us before God, and
proves us to be true Christians; as works do before men prove us to be so.
And therefore we should strive, by well-dooing, to win as much credit as we
can, to our Religion, among men, Iam. 3.13.

Doct. 3. Thirdly, that the soundest way of confuting our Adversaries, is by
our works: we must make real apologies: we must put them to silence by
well-dooing. Now, in that he calls the good works done by them, their good
works, I might note diverse things.

1. The necessity of good works: they must have works of their own: the good
works done by others, auail not them, nor justify them. 2. The goodness of God,
that vouchsafes to call those works their works, when yet they were wrought by
him, as having had their beginning from his grace and Spirit, Esaias 26.12. 3. It
is true, that they only can do good works; good works are only theirs: a
wicked man cannot do good works, because his person is hateful to God, and
his nature altogether impotent; and though he may do some actions, which for
the matter of them are good, yet he pollutes them with his sins, of which
he has not repented; and cannot bring them forth complete for matter, manner,
and end, Tit. 1. vlt. Mat. 6.
But, it is the goodness of works which I especially intend to entreat of in
this place.

Good works.]

The goodness of men's works may be diversely considered; either according to the
differences of works good, from such as are not so, or according to the forms
of good works, or according to the time of doing works, or according to the
uses works are put to.

For the first. Some men's works are neither good, nor seem to be so; as, are
the apparent sins of men. Some men's works seem good, but are not; as, the
alms, and prayer, and fasting of the Pharisees. Some men's works are good,
Wherein works are good.
but seem not so, at least in the eyes of some men: and so the religious duties
of godly Christians seemed to be vain practices of Sectaries and Innouators,
Acts 28. and so Paul's zeal and knowledge seemed madness to Festus, Acts 26.
Some works seem good, and are so: such are the open good works of the godly, in
the judgment of godly men guided by charity.

For the second. If works be tried by their form, then those works are good
works which are done with correspondency to the revealed will of God in his
Word: they must be commended in the Word, and done according to the directions
of the Word; so that all works, done besides or above the Law of God, are
sinful and naught: and the doing of the works of supererogation, or those
works they call Counsels, fall to the ground. And yet we confess, there were
some works good, which were not commanded in Scripture; as, Phineas his work in
slaying the fornicators; and Mary's work, in anointing Christ unto the burial
(for so it is called, a good work, Mat. 26.10.); and Abraham's work in
sacrificing his son, and the like: these were good works, and had not warrant
from Scripture, but were warranted by extraordinary calling thereto: and so
they differ from the works of superstitious persons, done without warrant
ordinary or extraordinary.

For the third. The time of doing some works, adds much to the consideration
of their goodness; as for instance. The charitable and religious works, done by
men before their conversion, are not to be reckoned good works, because the
person that does them, is not reconciled to God, and lives polluted in his
sins. Likewise, the works of our calling, done in the week-daies, are good
works; but, done on the Sabbath Day, are evil works. So, works done too late,
are not good; as, their prayers that would not answer when God called them,
Proverbs 1.

For the fourth. If the uses of works be respected, the outward works of wicked
men, that for the matter of them are required in the Word, may be said to be
good works, because they are good for men unto whom they are done: as, the
alms of a Pharisee is a good work, in that it is good for the relief of the
poor, though it be not good in the sight of God; as failing of the right end,
which is, God's glory. Thus of the acceptance of the terms. The good works
here mentioned, are such as are good in God's sight, as being done in
obedience to God's will, and by persons that are godly.

Now, concerning those good works, I propound diverse things profitable to be
considered of.

First, the rules of good works; which do tell us what must be had, before a
work can be a good work.

Secondly, the kinds of good works, or what works we may account in the
nature of good works; how many sorts of good works there are.

Thirdly, I would answer a question or two, needful to be considered of about
good works; and, in the last place, the uses of all.

For the first of those. There are many rules to be observed, before we can
do works that God will account good. And those rules are absolutely necessary,
and they are these:

First, Rules to be observed in doing good works.
the person must be reconciled unto God in Jesus Christ, or else all he does,
will be abominable in Gods sight. He must be turned in Jesus Christ, Ephesians.
2.10. He must be pure, or else his work is not right, but polluted, Tit. 1.
vlt. Pro. 21.8. The people that do good works, must be purified unto God,
being redeemed by Jesus Christ, and so made a peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. He
must be purged, and sanctified, and so prepared to good works, 2. Tim. 2.21.

Secondly, his works must be warranted and required and prescribed in the
Word of God: he must walk by rule: his pattern must be found in the
Scripture, Gal. 6.14. he must come to the light of the Word, that his works may
be manifest that they are wrought in God, John 3.21. The Scriptures given by
inspiration of God to this end that the man of God might be perfectly directed
unto every work that is good, 1. Tim. 3.16 17.

Thirdly, he must propound a right end in doing his works: or else though the
matter be good, yet the work is polluted: as was showed before in the instance
of the alms of the Pharisees: and this right end, is not the praise of men
only, or to merit thereby, but the glory of God chiefly, in the discharge of
our obedience to God, and the edification of our neighbor.

Fourthly, The works wust be done in the name of Jesus Christ. We must rely
upon the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus, as that which can cause our
works to be pleasing to God, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever it is we do in word or in
deed, all must be done in the name of Christ, or it is done in vain. Without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Now our works are done in
faith, first, when we believe and know they are warranted by the Word, John
3.21. Secondly, when we believe GOD's promises concerning the reward of
weldoing, Heb. 11.6. Thirdly, when we fly to Jesus Christ to cover the
imperfection of our works from the sight of God, and so in that place, Col.
3.17. and fourthly, when our belief of Gods goodness to us, makes us careful
to do all the good we can.

Fifthly, his works must be done with repentance for his sins, and the judging
of himself for the evil of his best works: by repentance, I mean not the
first work of a sincere turning to God; for that is comprehended in the first
rule: but the preservation of himself in his vprightnes, and the daily judging
of himself for his frailties: for if a godly man after his calling fall into
presumptuous sins, his works done all the time he lives in beloved sins,
without the renewing of his repentance, are polluted, Esaias 1.

Sixthly, his works must be done willingly, not grudgingly, or of constraint,
or only to avoid shame or punishment: God loves a cheerful giver. That alms
that is given with an ill will, or forced from men by the laws or otherwise,
is not accounted a work of mercy in Gods sight: to do mercy, is not enough to
make it a good work pleasing to God, but to love mercy, Mich. 6.8. and to come
into Gods presence to do his service, is not pleasing, unless we humble our
selves to walk with our God.

Seventhly, his works must be finished: to intend it, or promise it, or begin
it, will not serve turn: as in the case of mercy, to promise to contribute, or
to begin for a day or a week, is not sufficient, unless we perform it, 2.
Cor. 8. and 9. So it is in repentance: it is then a good work, when it is
finished, not when a man has had some remorse, or vttred a word or two of
confession, or prayed for a day or two: but when a man having repented, repents
still, till he have soundly humbled himself for his sins, Ier. 31.19, 20.
and reformed his ways* So it is in general in any work God settes us to do,
John 4.3, 4.

Eighthly, his works must be his own fruit, such as belong to him in his place
and calling. As in the calling of the Ministry, his good work is, to preach the
Gospel with all frequency, and diligence and power, etc. So in the Magistrate,
to do the works of justice: so in other callings, every man must look to the
duties of his own place: and so it is in our general callings; as Christians,
we must do those which are meet for repentance, which not only concern a
penitent life, but such as have a due respect unto the performing things we
are called to in our repentance, Luke 4.44. Acts 26.20. Every tree must not
only bear fruit, but his own fruit, proper to his kind: as the proper fruit
of rich men, is mercy, and if they had never so many praises otherwise, that
they were courteous, wise, just, chaste, etc. yet if they be not merciful,
their works are not good works.

Ninthly, his works must be full before God. It was an objection against the
Church of Sardis, that her works were not perfect or full before God; and
therefore she is threatened, if she repent not, to feel the heavy hand of God,
Revel. 3.1.2. Now, as I conceive, a man's works are not full, when he is not
careful of every good work, which he knows concerns him; as for instance: If
a man pray, and yet be not careful of hearing the Word, his prayers are
abomination to God, because his works are not full: there be some duties which
he makes no conscience to obey in, though he know they be required: he
turns away his ears from hearing the law, his prayers are abominable, Pro.
28.9. If a man would be never so careful about Gods service, and yet make not
conscience of the works of mercy required of him, his sacrifice is not
accepted, Hosea. 6.6, 7, etc. Thus the long prayers of the Pharisees will not be
regarded, if they devour widows houses, Matthew. 23. and so on the other
side, if a man were never so merciful a man, if he were not also a religious
man in the things of Gods service, his works would not abide trial before God:
they were not good, because they were not full. And for this reason the works
of ciuil-honest men are not good: such were Paul's works, Phil. 3.6. which he
accounts but dross and dung in comparison, Heb. 9.14. and 12.14.
verse. 8. of such as these.

Thus of the rules of good works: the kinds follow:

The vulgar commonly when they hear of good works, think of nothing but alms
and hospitality, or other, courses of showing mercy. Now, though it be true,
that works of mercy are good works, yet they are but one sort of good works,
whereas the Christian is bound to be ready to every good work, 1 Timothy 3.17.
and therefore it will be profitable to inform our selves of the many ways by
which we may do good works: for, thereby such Christians as are not able to
give alms, may see a way how to enrich themselves in well-doing other ways.
These then are the sorts of good works:

First, Kinds of good works.
to believe, is a good work, yea it is instead of many good works, yea in some
sense it is to us instead of the works of the whole Law; as it is a means to
lay hold on all the good works that ever Christ Jesus did. To put on the Lord
Jesus, is a good work in a high degree: and so every act of faith in all the
passages of a man's life, is a good work: for this is the work of God, to
believe, as our Savior shows, when he gives that for answer for such as asked
what they must do, to do the works of God? Ioh. 6.28. Romans 13, 12, 13.14. This
is clearly acknowledged in these other Scriptures, 1. These. 1.3. 2. These. 1.11.

Secondly, all works of piety are good works; all works of worship, that is,
such works by which a man does service to God, are all in the number of good
works: and so, to pray, to fast, to hear the Word, to receive the Sacraments,
etc. are good works; for, Godliness has the promises of this life, and of the
life to come: and therefore it is profitable to all things, 1. Tim. 4.8. And
these works must needs be accounted good works, for they are dear works: the
blood of Christ was poured out, that we might be cleansed from dead works, to
serve the living God, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, all works of repentance: all that a Christian does about his
humiliation or reformation, are euangelically good works; as, if he confess
his sins, and do execution upon his sins; if he make satisfaction for his
trespasses to men; if he reform himself, or his household, or his charge: these
and the like are all good works, 2. Chron. 19.3.

Fourthly, to suffer for a good cause, is reckoned in the number of good works;
as, to forsake father or mother, house or land, wife or children, liberty or
life, for Christ's sake and the Gospel, it is in the number of those good
things shall have good reward, Mat. 19.29. Ier. 31.16. Ruth 2.11, 12.

Fifthly, works of men's particular callings, whether in the Commonwealth, or
Church, or family, or any vocation or trade of life: so, works of Justice, are
good works; and to obey Magistrates, is called well-doing, verse 14 of this
chapter: so, to preach the Gospel, is a good work, 1. Tim. 3.1. So, in the
family, for parents to bring-vp their Children well, is a good work, 1. Tim.
5.10. yea the labors of servants in the family, are such works as shall have
reward of God, as well as works of piety, Esaias 6. Col. 3.

Sixthly, works of mercy are good works, whether it be spiritual mercy to
instruct, admonish or reprove or comfort, Psalm 140. or whether it be outward
mercy, in giving, lending, visiting, defending the poor, or the like. All
confess these to be good works, Act. 9.16. But that alms may be a good work,
these three rules must be observed: First, that it be given of goods well
gotten, else no good works. Esaias 1^.8.
Secondly, that he that gives it, have a good eye, to distribute where there
is need: for to keep a good house, and to entertain ruffians, and drunkards,
and gamesters, is not a good work nor hospitality, because here is not a good
eye. Thirdly, alms must be given for a good end, not for the praise of men,
or to merit thereby, Mat. 6. Thus of the kinds of good works.

The questions follow.

Quest. 1. How can any works done by any man in this life, be accounted good,
seeing there is none that lives, and sins not? yea al our works, even the
works of the most righteous, are as a menstruous cloth, Esaias 64.6.

For answer heereunto, I say, It is true, that if God look upon the best works
of the most godly in this life, and examine them by the rigor of his covenant,
which he called, His covenant of works, then no flesh living can have comfort
of his works, but all will appear lothsom as a menstruous garment. But the
works of the believing Christians are otherways to be considered of: For,

First, they are tried by the covenant of grace, by the benefit of which
covenant he is delivered from the rigorous perfection of the Law, and his
vprightnes is accepted in stead of perfection: How a godly man may comfort
himself in his works.
he is now no more under the Law but, by God's grace and acceptance, his works
are taken as if they had been perfect.

Secondly, he has the benefit of Christ's intercession, who presents his
works before God, covering the evil of them, and tendering them to God, who
accepts them for the love he bears to his Son: and thus we read in
Scripture, that Christ presents the prayers of the Saints.

Besides, that the Christian may not think too vilely of his works, but be
comforted in the Lord concerning them, let him further consider these things:

First, that his good works have the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is in him
for the Fountain of them, 1. Cor. 12.11. Esaias 26.12.

Secondly, that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed, not only for his
justification, but also for his sanctification, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, that though his works are not good effectu, yet they are good
affectu, they are good in desire: his desire was to have them as good as God
himself did require. And this, God is pleased to accept, as if the work were
perfectly done.

Quest. 2. What are works good for, in that they are called good works?

Answ. I answer, first, affirmatively: they are good, What works are good for.
1. To testify our thankfulness to God for all his benefits, in respect of
which, we are debtors unto God, Romans 8.12. 2. To assure the truth of our
faith, as the fruits of faith, Mat. 7.17. 1. Tim. 1.19. James 2. 3. To witness
our election, and to make our calling sure, 2. Pet. 1.10. 4. To discharge our
duty of obedience, unto which we are bound even in the covenant of grace. 5. To
further the edification of our brethren, whom we help both by example, and by
well-doing to them. 6. To win wicked men to a better estimation of our
Religion, and to stop their mouths, as here, so verse 15. 7. To glorify God,
as is in this place mentioned. 8. They are good to make us capable of rewards
from God in heaven, Heb. 10.36. Romans 2.7, 8. yea, and in this life too, 2. Tim.
4.8.


Secondly, I say, they are not good, 1. To justify us before God, as it is at
large proved by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Romans and Galatians, only
they are good to justify us before men, James 2. 2. Not to merit or deserve
heaven by them: men's evil works do merit punishment; for, the wages of sin
is death: but our good works cannot merit, both because the Scripture denies it
expressly, Ephesians. 2.8. as also (to omit other reasons) because the nature of merit
casts away our works: for, there must be three things in a work that must
merit. First, it must be a free work, that was not due by any debt: whereas
our works are a part of our duty; and we owe more to God, than we can do, Luke
17.9. Romans 11.35. Secondly, the work that should merit, must be profitable to
him of whom we would merit; but no goodness of ours can reach to God to profit
him, Psalm. 16.3. Job 22.2. Thirdly, the work that must merit, must be of
equal value with the thing that is given for it; but neither our sufferings,
nor our deeds in this life can be worthy of the glory that is to be revealed,
Romans 8.18. and therefore is eternal life called, The gift of God, Romans 6.23.


The uses follow, and are especially for Instruction: for this doctrine of good
works should teach us,

First, to take notice of this doctrine, and as we are careful to believe, so
to be careful to maintain good works; and hereby to confute the malicious
Papists, that falsely charge us to deny and disgrace good works, Tit. 3.8, 14.

Secondly, every man should be ready to do good works, yea to every good
work: since they are required of God, and are so many ways good, and serve us
for such excellent uses: Yea, we should be zealous of good works, wonderful
eager and desirous to enrich our selves that way, Tit. 3.1. and 2.14. yea, we
should hereby show that we are indeed wise Christians, and well skilled in the
use of our Religion, Iam. 3.13. and not men only, but women also should be
forward in good works, 1. Tim. 2.10. It is their best apparel: whc should be a
special motive to them that are so careful of their attire: and indeed good
works are to be desired and labored for, as the best apparel of any
Christian; yea, they are his armor too, Romans 13.13. Yea, they are a principal
way for his enriching and preferment, 1. Tim. 2.20. so as it is a great curse
upon a Christian, to have no mind to do good works, to be reprobate to every
good work, Tit. 1. vlt.

Thirdly, since there are so many things necessary to the constitution of a
good work; Christians should (in stead of prying into the lives of others)
every one try his own works, and turn often to the light, that it may be,
indeed, manifest, that his works are wrought in God, Gal. 6.4. for, one day,
every man's works shall be tried in the fire, when times of trial, by great
afflictions, either upon men's Consciences, or otherwise, come; that man's
works, that never seem glorious and praiseworthy, will be rejected, and cast
away even by our selves, as vile and unprofitable. Besides, at the best, in our
prosperity, if the most of our works be tried by the fire of these rules of
God's Word, it is much to be doubted that our works will burn, though, upon
our repentance for the evil that cleaues to our best works, our selves may
be saved in the day of the Lord. Let Christians therefore be careful, that
they lose not the things which they have wrought.

Now a Christian may lose his works diverse ways.

First, How a man may lose his works.
if he be but a Christian in show, he may, nay he shall lose all he does.
The Pharisees lost all their works, because they were done in hypocrisy.

Secondly, the Christian that has some kinds of heavenly gifts, and temporary
grace, by falling away in the time of temptation, loses all that he had
wrought before. God requires patient continuance in well-doing, Romans 2.8.

Thirdly, the true Christian may lose what he wrought, if he do his works
without respect of these Rules: If it be not manifest that his works are
wrought in God, they are lost to him; so many of his works as are so wrought:
Besides, he loses the comfort of all that he has wrought, and the sense of
it, if he fall into gross sin after calling, for so long time as he
continues in sin without Repentance.

Thus of good works.

Which they shall behold.]

It is manifest from hence, that good works may, and ought to be so done, as
that men may see them: It is not true that all good works must be hid from the
view and beholding of other men: this may seem strange, because the Pharisees
were blamed for doing their works to be seen of men; but yet it may be easily
and plentifully proved. I will first prove it, and then explane it: for proof,
our Savior Christ requires, that the light of men's good works should shine,
that men may see their good works, Mat. 5.16. Christians, in respect of their
practice, should be as shining lights in the midst of a froward and crooked
generation, Phil. 2.15, 16. They must maintain good works, Tit. 3.8. They
must show their Faith by their Works, and so they are justified before men, by
the works which they behold, Iam. 2. They are the express words of S. James
also, in the third chapter, verse 13. Let him show, by good conversation, his
works. And the Apostle Paul says, If there be any praise, think on those
things that may get praise, Phil. 4.8. Yea, some Christians are charged to be
paterns of good works, Tit. 2.7.

Now, for explication of this point, I would consider, first, what works may
be showed; and then, secondly, what works may not be showed.

For the first: I will only now instance in the Apostle's catalogue in the
second of Titus.

Old men may safely show sobriety, What works may be showed*
gravity, temperance, soundnes of their faith, love, and patience.

Old women may safely carry themselves in a holy behavior, and be teachers
of good things, especially to the younger women.

Young women must show their sobriety, love, and obedience to their husbands;
discretion, chastity, care of their children and household affairs.

Young men may show, that they be sober-minded.

Ministers offend not, by teaching vncorrupt doctrine with gravity and
sincerity, nor when in conference they speak soundly, and things that cannot be
justly taxed.

Servants offend not, by showing obedience to their masters, and all good
faithfulness, and desire to please them well in all things.

For the second: the show is condemned in diverse sorts of works; What works
ought not to showed.
as, 1. Secret duties, of what kind soever, must not be done to the beholding
of others: thus, to pray or fast, that others may see or hear, is not lawful,
Mat. 6. 2. Such works as are done deceitfully, are justly taxed for the show of
them: as, when Ananias and Saphirah will make a show of bounty, which was not
performed as they pretended, Acts 5. 3. All works that are done with
affectation, when the praise of men is simply and only sought, are
Pharisaicall, and ill done. 4. All the works that are done about the use of the
means of godliness, if practice be not joined with them, are rejected of God,
and the show of them is condemned. Thus, to make a show of hearing Sermons,
reading the Scriptures, frequent and long prayers, strict observing of the rest
of the Sabbath, and the like, when there is not a sound care of a holy life,
are not good works, nor is the show of them commended, Esaias 1. Mic. 6. 5. To
show care of lesser duties, and live in the careless and manifest neglect of
greater and more necessary duties, is likewise Pharisaicall, and condemned,
Mat. 23.


Thus of the beholding of good works.

They may glorify God.]

To glorify GOD, is, in the etymology of the word, to make God glorious. Now,
the glory of God is the excellency of God above all things, as is by way of
exposition added, Esaias 35.2.

The question then is, How can God be made glorious or excellent, seeing his
excellency is as infinite as his nature is; and to that which is infinite,
nothing can be added?

For the resolving of this question, we must understand, that if Gods nature
be considered in it self, it is so excellent, as nothing can be conceived or
done, that should bring glory to it. But when the Scripture speaks of
glorifying of God, it means it of such an excellency, as (to our capacity) by
reflection, and resemblance, some way expresses the similitude of Gods
excellency, which we call his glory.

And so God is glorified by himself or by us.

God has made diverse impressions of his own excellency, How God is glorified
by himself.
and set it out by way of image or similitude: as,

First, in the divine nature of Christ. For Christ as the Son of God, is said
to be the splendour and brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.2.

Secondly, in the humane nature of Christ. For in his humane nature did the
Godhead dwell and shine as the candle in the Lantern: and so the glory of
God appears amongst men: for when Christ was incarnate, and came to dwell
amongst men, they saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of
God, Ioh. 1.14.

Thirdly, in his works: for the invisible things of God (as his power and
wisdom in the excellency of them) are made visible unto our observation, in
the creation and government of the world: in the great book of the creatures
is the glory of God written in great letters, Romans 1. Thus the heavens declare
the glory of God, Psalm 19.1. And in this great book the glory of the Lord is
said to endure for ever, and the Lord will always rejoice in this impression
of his glory in his works, Psalm. 104.31. and as all the works of God are his
glory, in that they do some way set out his excellency; so especially,
miracles are in a high degree resemblances of God's glory, and therefore are
these works of wonder called the glory of God. Thus the power of God in
raising Christ, is called his Glory, Romans 6.4. And so the maruailous works
mentioned, Psalm 97.4, 5.6. so Christ in working the miracle in Canaan of
Galile, is said to show his glory, John 2.11. And as works of miracle are
called the glory of GOD, because GOD has in them stamped some lively
resemblance of his Excellency: so also works of special Justice done upon
Gods enemies, are called his glory also, as these places show, Exodus 14.14.
Number. 14.21. Esaias 13.3. So also Gods mighty working in delivering his servants,
is called his glory also, Psalm. 105.5, 6. and 57.6. and 85.9.

Fourthly, in man God has imprinted his glory, and so in all sorts of mankind:
they are called the glory of God in respect of their resemblance of Gods
sovereignty: man is as it were a visible God in this visible world, and in
respect of his superiority over the creatures, resembles God. And as God has
imprinted his glory upon all men in general, 1. Cor. 11.17.
so in a special manner upon some men, as, 1. Upon such men as shine in the
outward dignity and preeminence of their places in this world above other men;
their glory is said to be Gods glory, 1. Chron. 29.11, 12. 2. Upon such men
as are endued with the grace of God, and the virtues of Jesus Christ: these
bear Gods Image, and are therefore called his glory, Esaias 46.13. 2. Cor.
3.18. Psalm. 90.17. 3. In a more principal manner, upon such as be received up
to glory in heaven. Thus God will be glorified in his Saints at the day of
Judgment, 2. These. 1.10. This is that glory of God, which the godly do hope
for with so much joy, Romans 5.2.


Fifthly, in certain visible signs and testimonies of his presence. Thus the
consuming fire on mount Sinah, is called the glory of God, Exodus 24.6, 16, 17.
So also the cloud that filled the Temple, Exodus 40.34. And the cloud that rose
upon the Tabernacle in the wilderness. And so the signs of Gods presence in
heaven, are in a special respect called his glory. Thus Stephen saw the
glory of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand, Acts 7.55. Thus we are
said to appear before the presence of his glory, Jude 24.

Sixthly, In his Word: and so the Word of God is the glory of God, either in
general, as it describes the excellency of Gods nature in all, in his
properties or attributes, Psalm. 26.8. Or in special, the Gospel is called the
Glory, as it sets out the goodness of God, after a matchless manner, relieuing
forlorn mankind, Esaias 6.1. And thus that part of the Word of God that does
describe Gods mercy, is called his glory, Exodus 33.18, 19, 22. Ephesians. 3.16. Thus
also that way of showing mercy, by bringing in the infinite righteousness of his
own Son, is called the glory of the Lord, Esaias 40.5.

Thus God glorifieth himself.

Secondly, God is said to be glorified by us: Man may make God glorious but:
that he cannot do by adding any glory to God's Nature: and therefore we must
search out to find by the Scripture, what ways man may glorify God; and so
we may be said to glorify God, or to make God glorious three ways.

How God is glorified of us in general.
First, by knowledge, when we conceive of God after a glorious manner; thus we
make him glorious in our own hearts, and this is a chief way of making God
glorious: And this is one way by which the Gentiles glorify God: and this God
stands upon, so as he accounts not himself to be known aright, till we
conceive of him, at least, as more excellent then all things. Seeing we can
add no glory to God's nature, we should strive to make him glorious in our
own minds and hearts. And we may by the way see, what cause we have to be
smitten with shame and horror to think of it, how we have dishonored God by
mean thoughts of him: And hereby we may also see how far man can be said to
have the true knowledge of God in him; yea, there is some comfort in it too to
a Christian, that humbles himself to walk with his God: for, though, at the
best, he come far short of conceiving of God as he is, yet God accounts
himself to be made glorious by us, when we get so far as to conceive of him
above all creatures; and that is, when he comes into our hearts as a king of
glory, far above all that glory can be found in earthly Princes, Psalm 14.7,
9. And thus we make him glorious, not when we barely judge him to be more
excellent then all things, but when our hearts are carried after the
apprehension of him, so as we love him above all, and fear him above all, etc.
And thus we make God glorious in our hearts, by knowing him.

Secondly, by acknowledgment: When in words or works, we do ascribe
excellency unto God; and to glorify him, is to acknowledge his glory; or as
the phrase in Scripture is, To give him glory; and so there be diverse special
ways, by which we are said in Scripture to glorify God, as:

First, when in words we magnify God, and speak of his praises, How God is
glorified of us in particular.
and confess that he is worthy to receive honor, and glory, and might, and
majesty: so Revel. 4.11. Psalm. 29. and 86.9.

Secondly, when men confess that all the glory they have above other men in
gifts or dignity, was given them by God: So David glorifies God, 1. Chron.
29.11, 12. And thus we make God the Father of glory, as he is called, Ephesians.
1.17.

Thirdly, when men that are guilty of sins that cannot be proved against
them, yet feeling themselves to be pursued by God, do confess to Gods glory
and their own shame, their secret offenses: Thus Achan gave glory to God,
Josh. 7.19. And thus the penitent sinner glorifies God, when he cares not to
abase himself in the acknowledgement of his own vileness, that God may be
magnified in any of his attributes or ordinances by it, Ier. 13. 16. Mal. 2.2.

Fourthly, When the praise of God, or the advancement of his Kingdom, is made
the end of all our actions: This is to do all to his glory, 1. Cor. 10.31.

Fifthly, when we believe God's promises, and wait for the performance of them,
though we see no means likely for their accomplishment: Thus Abraham gave
glory to God, Romans 4.

Sixthly, when we publicly acknowledge true Religion, or any special truth of
God, when it is generally opposed by the most men: Thus the Centurion gave
glory to God, Luke 23.47.

Seventhly, when men suffer in the quarrel of Gods truth, and true Religion.
So 1. Pet. 4.16.

Eightthly, when, on the Sabbath, men deuote themselves only to Gods work,
doing it with more joy and care, then they should do their own work on the
week days, refusing to profane the Sabbath of the Lord, by speaking their
own words, or doing their own wills: Thus Esaias 58.13.

Ninthly, when men do in particular give thanks to God for benefits or
deliverances, acknowledging God's special hand therein: Thus the Leper gave
glory to God, Luke 17.18. so Psalm. 113.4.

Tenthly, by loving, praising, admiring, and esteeming of Jesus Christ above
all men: For, when we glorify the Son, we glorify the Father, John 1.14.
and 11.4.

Eleuenthly, when we account of and honor godly men, above all other sorts of
men in the World; and so these Gentiles do glorify God, in that they praise
the Christians above all men, whom before they reviled: This is one way by
which the Gentiles glorified God.

Thus of the second way of glorifying God, which is, by acknowledging his glory.

The third way of glorifying God, is by effect, when men make others to
glorify God, conceiving more gloriously of him, or in praising God and his
ways: Thus the professed subjection of Christians to the Gospel, makes other
men glorify God, 2. Cor. 9.13. So the fruits of Righteousness are to the
glory of God, Phil. 1.10. So here the good works of Christians do make new
Conuerts glorify God: so every Christian that is God's planting, is a tree of
righteousness that God may be glorified, Esaias 61.3. so are all Christians to
the praises of the glory of God's grace, as they are either qualified or
privileged by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.7.

Use. The uses of all should be especially for instruction and humiliation: it
should humble us, if we mark the former doctrine, in that it discovers many
deficiencies in us: for, besides that it shows, that the whole world of
unregenerate men lies in wickedness, and that as they have all sinned, so they
are all deprived of the glory of God, and altogether delinquent in each part of
making God glorious; I say, that besides the discovery of the general and
extreme corruption of wicked men, it does touch to the quick upon diverse
persons, even the godly themselves; to give instance:

In the first way of making God glorious: How meanly and dully do we, for the
most part, conceive of God! How far short are our hearts of those
descriptions of GOD made in his Word! Wha^ strange thoughts come into our
minds at some times! Oh! how have we dishonored the most High in our unworthy
conceptions of his Justice, Power, Eternity, Wisdom, and Mercy!

For the second way of glorifying God: What heart could stand before his holy
presence, if he should examine us in justice!

1. For our language: What man is he that has not cause to mourn for his*
want of language daily, in expressing of the praises of God! When did we make
his praise glorious? have our mouths been filled with his praise all the day
long? 2. For our extreme unthankfulness, when we meet with GOD himself: we
have been healed with the nine Lepers: but which of us have returned to give
glory to God, in the sound acknowledgement of his goodness to us? It is
required, we should in all things give thanks: and yet we have scarce used one
word of praise for a 1000 benefits. 3. Our slight acknowledgements of sin,
our backwardnes to search our ways, our carelessness when we know diverse
grievous faults by our selves, either avoiding God's presence, and making
confession for fashions sake, neither out of true grief for our sins: and in
a special manner do we fail in those cases of trespass or sin, that come
to the knowledge of others. Do we knowledge our sins one to another? Oh how
hard it is to bring us to be easy to give glory to GOD heerin! 4. What man is
he that lives, and has not failed of the glory of GOD about the Sabbath? Do
we delight in God's work? Have we consecrated that Day as glorious to the
Lord? Have not our minds run upon our own ways? After what an unspeakable
manner have we slighted God in his Ordinances?
Lastly, what shall we answer to the Lord for our neglects of Jesus Christ?
Have we glorified the Son? or rather, have we not shameful wants still in
our faith? Which of us can say, that he lives by the faith of the Son of God?
and are not our affections to the Lord Jesus, extremely dull and auerse? Where
is the longing desire after him, and the ^eruent love of his appearing?

And for the last way of glorifying God by effect: How unprofitably and
unfruitfully do the most of us live? Who has praised God in our behalf? Whom
have we won to the love of God and the truth? Where are our witnesses that
might testify, that our good works have caused them to glorify God?

But especially, woe be to scandalous Christians, that have either caused wicked
men to blaspheme, or God's little ones to take offense, and conceive ill of the
good way of God: if they repent not, it had been better for them they had never been born.

And as for wicked men that are openly so (to give a touch of them and their
estate) they have reason to repent in sackcloth and ashes, if their eyes were
but open to see, what terror is implied in this doctrine, and how God will
avenge himself upon them, both for their not glorifying of him, and for
changing his glory, and for the opposing of his glory.

1. In not glorifying God. They have spent their days without GOD: they have
either not conceived of him at all, or in a most mean and vile manner: they
have not honored him in his ordinances, or in his Sabbaths: they never loved
the Lord Jesus in their hearts, etc. 2. In changing the glory of God, they have
done shamefully. Some of them have turned Gods glory into the similitude of an
Ox or a Calf that eats hay. Some of them have given his praise to Images,
and the works of their hands. Some of them have fixed the glory of their
affections upon riches, pleasures, and favor of men. Some of them have made
their belly their god: and some have given their bodies to harlots.
Thirdly, in opposing Gods glory, they have likewise offended grievously; they
have spoken evil of the good way of God; they have abused his servants, and so
despised him; they have set themselves against his Sabbaths, etc. To omit, that
they have opposed Gods glory in their hearts, by setting up Idols there, and by
allowing and striving to maintain Atheistical conceits against God.

The second use should be therefore, to beget in us a care to use all means to
dispose of, and fit our selves, that we might make God glorious, and so amend
and redress our ways herein; and that we may, the more effectually, be
wrought upon herein, I will consider of two things. First, I will briefly show
the reasons should stir us to all possible care and diligence heerin.
Secondly, I would show how we may distinctly attain to the glorifying of God in
all the three ways before mentioned.

For the first. Diverse considerations should move us to the care of magnifying
or glorifying of God by all the ways we can.

First, Motives to the care of glorifying God.
it is a great honor that God does unto us, to account himself to receive
glory any way from our endeauours. Shall the creature be admitted, in any
sense, to that glory, to make his Creator, to make him (I say) in his
excellency or glory? God does account himself to receive a new Being, as it
were, by those inward conceptions of his glory, and by those outward honors
done unto him. Shall the King of glory vouchsafe to dwell in our hearts? and
shall we not be exceedingly desirous to entertain him?

Secondly, Not to glorify God, is to sin grievously: it is not arbitrarie,
but most dangerous to allow our selves, either in inward neglects of God, or in
outward unfruitfulness. Shall we attribute so much every day to the creatures
we deal with? and shall we know or acknowledge so little of the Creator? It
cannot be safe, to slight God.

Thirdly, it is one of the first things that breaks out in the new Conuerts: so
soon as any of the Gentiles are visited of God, in the same day they glorify
him, by conceiving gloriously of him, and by magnifying God in himself; and
his servants and service, etc. And therefore without singular danger of losing
our evidence of our calling, we must attend to this Doctrine, how hard soever
it seem.

Fourthly, we are bought with a price, and are God's, and therefore now both
in soul and body we should be wholly devoted to his glory, 1. Cor. 6. vlt. As
God has glorified us in our creation, and the many treasures he has given us
in Jesus Christ, and we hope the accomplishment of matchless glory in
heaven: and shall we not be zealous for the glory of the Lord? Many glorious
things be spoken of us through his grace: and shall we think or speak
meanly of God?

Fifthly, the Lord our God exceedes all things in glory, and therefore we
should extol his praise above the heavens, and the whole earth should show it
self to be full of his glory.

Sixthly, he is our heavenly Father, and can we think too well of him, or do
too much to win him praise? Mat. 5.16.

Lastly, think with our selves* What make we in Gods Vineyard or Orchard? If
we be trees of his planting, ought we not to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, that the Lord may be glorified? Esaias 61.3.

Thus of some motives. The maine care should be to learn what to do, that
GOD might be made glorious by us: and so we should distinctly consider, how
to make him glorious in our selves or in others.

In our selves we should learn how to make him glorious: first, in our
hearts, by a glorious conception of him in our minds: secondly, in our words
and works, by acknowledgement.

The first question then is, What should we do that we might conceive more
gloriously of God? For answer hereunto, we must look to our hearts in diverse
particulars: for, that we may conceive of God according to his excellency, we
must proceed by these degrees.

1. We must strive to bring God into our minds: Helps to glorify God.
for naturally we live without God: and we may observe, that at the best we
are wonderful prone to forget God: and therefore we must learn how to bring
our hearts to the meditation of God. For not to think of God, or forget him, is
a grievous offense, as well as to think of him after a base manner. 2. It is not
enough to bring God into our thoughts, but we must then be wonderful
careful, that we bring not in an Idol of our own forming in stead of God:
we must learn how to think of God as he is described to us in his Word: for
fearful Idolatry may be committed in the heart of a man, as well as in his
outward adoration; and therefore we must learn soundly to conceive aright of
the nature of God. 3. When we have God there in his own likeness, we must
enlarge his room in our hearts: For the true knowledge of God comes in but by
sparkles; and God will be magnified. We must make him great, and enlarge the
thoughts of God when we conceive of him. This is that, that is so often
required in Scripture, under the term of magnifying God. 4. When we have
attained to this, to think of God, with an ability to make him great in our
hearts, then we must yet proceed to the establishment of this conception of
GOD: for else the thoughts of God, will pass through our heads like lightning,
and be gone: and therefore we must be careful to establish the thoughts of God
in us. 5. We must then labor to cloth the thoughts of God with glory and
majesty: this is that which is here intended; we must not only make him in
our hearts, and nourish the sparkles of his knowledge, but we must make him
glorious also. 6. Yea, yet farther, when God is conceived of according to his
excellency, we must love the Lord thus conceived of, our hearts must cleave
unto him, and esteem him above all things. So that here are six distinct
things to be heeded of such as will conceive of God aright. Now how these
things may be attained to by us, follows to be considered of.
Now for the first, to bring God into our minds, two things are of excellent
use,

By what means God may be brought into our minds.
First, the enforcing of our selves to consider of Gods works, and so to strive
still to read in that great book of the Creatures.

Secondly, the exercising our selves daily in the Word of God: Without these
two helps carefully used, experience shows, that GOD never comes into men's
thoughts. And by the way, here may be framed an answer to that sorrowful
complaint of many Christians, that they cannot meditate. Now if they would be
taught to meditate, or would at any time have their thought set a work, let them
lay before them, either of these books of God, either the great Book of the
creatures, or little book of the Scriptures; and so, praying God to direct
them, take those things that easily offer them selves from thence. The other
way of meditating without book, as I know not whether it be absolutely
required, so can it not be so fruitfully performed, nor so comfortably. But to
return: the viewing of GODs workman-ship in his creatures, and of his wisdom
and rule in his Word, will help us in the first point, which is, to bring God
into our minds.

For the second: that we may not mistake, but conceive of God aright, we must
look to diverse things carefully.

First, Helps to conceive aright of God.
we must resist and subdue, and no way harbor or favor, any atheistical
conceits against the doctrine of Gods nature or providence. If we find our
minds entangled with any such, we must labor to get them cured: for till our
hearts be whole of such diseases, we are disabled from any true conception of
God.

Secondly, we must in thinking of God, then cast out all likenesses: we must
not conceive of him in the likeness of any man or other creature, but get above
all similitudes, and there rest in the adoration of him that is not like any of
those things: we must have no Images of God, neither in our Churches, Deuteronomy. 4.
nor in our heads, Command. 2. Esaias 40.

Thirdly, we must learn distinctly the attributes of God's praises in the
Scripture, and conceive of him as he is there commended to us: I mean, we
should, as we are able, when we think of God, think of him, as he is
omnipotent, most wise, most just, most merciful, etc. It is an excellent
praise of the diligence of a Christian, to accustom himself to conceive of
God, according to descriptions made of him in his attributes in his Word.

Fourthly, it may much help us, if we conceive of God, as dwelling in the
humane nature of Christ; for thereby it may somewhat arise in our minds, if we
be prone to conceive of likenesses: Mark it carefully, we may not set before
our minds Christ-man, and so worship without any more ado: but if we conceive
of the man-Christ, and then worship that Godhead that dwells in him, we do
right; and besides, attain unto a point farther, which is, to conceive of God
in Christ.

Thus of the right conceiving of God's nature.

The third thing which we must labor for, is, to magnify God in our hearts,
to make him great, to conceive largely, with full thoughts of God: and to this
I add also, to conceive gloriously of him, to clothe our thoughts of God, with
a shining excellency above any thing else we think of. Now, that God may be
magnified, and thought on after a glorious manner, these things must be done.

How God is to be magnified in our hearts, and by what means.
We must, with all attendance and reverence, wait upon the presence of God in
his house; for that is the place where his glory dwells, Psalm 27.8. And God
has magnified his Word above all his name, Psalm 138.2. And the use of the
Gospel, is said to be the Gospel of the glory of the blessed God, because it
does, with the liuelyest impressions, make a man's heart to discern Gods
excellency, Mic. 5.4. 1. Tim. 1.11.

Secondly, the meditation of the wonderful works of God, recorded in
Scripture, or observed by experience, is good to breed great and glorious
thoughts of God; for as the sight of the miracles of Christ, wrought this in
the hearts of the people, Math. 15.31. Luke 7.16. so the contemplation of such
great works may work the same effect in us: and the same effect also, may the
thought of the works of God's special Justice or Mercy have, Ezekiel. 38.23.
Esaias. 13.13. especially the consideration of those works of favor or
deliverance, by which God has declared his special goodness unto us, Genesis
19.19. 1. Chron. 17.24. David also clotheth the thoughts of God with glory and
greatness in his heart, by thinking of the monuments of God's wonderful Power
and Wisdom in the heavens and earth, seas, etc. Psalm 104.1, etc. yea, by
thinking of his own forming and making in the womb, Psalm 139.15.

Thirdly, we must pray earnestly to God (with Moses) and beg this of God,
that he would show us his glory. Thus also of the third thing.

The next thing is, to learn how to establish the thoughts of God's glory in
us: and that is done especially two ways. The thoghts of Gods glory is 2 ways
established.
First, by striving to set God always before us, as David did, Psalm 16.8.
Secondly, by remembering God in all our ways, doing all our works unto the
glory of GOD, 1. Cor. 10.31.

Lastly, to make us in love with God, thus conceived of according to his glory,
the through meditation of his mercies to us, are of singular use, to think
either of the variety of them, or of the special respect God has had of us,
above many others, and the frequencie of his mercies, that he shows us
mercy daily; but above all, to consider that his mercies are free; to think
how vile we are, upon whom God looks with such grace and goodness. Thus the
blessed Virgin taught her self to magnify God, and to love his name, Luke
1.46, 48.

Thus of making God glorious in our hearts by knowledge.

Now for the second, which is, to make him glorious by acknowledgement: the
particular ways how that may be done, have been reckoned before in the
explication of the doctrine; only we must labor by prayer to fashion our
selves to that work, that God in any of those particulars does require of us:
and that is the most special help which I know thereunto. But, by the way,
let me warn thee to look to two things: Note.
First, that in any course of glorifying GOD, which is to be done by thy words,
A double caveat in glorifying God.
thou be careful to avoid hypocrisy; and be sure, that thy heart be lifted
up, and affected according to the glory of God: for, the Lord abhorres to be
glorified with thy lip, if thy heart be far from him, Esaias 29.13. And the
next is, that thou presume not, in any case, to make the pretense of God's
glory a covering for any wickedness: as the Pharisees, that would hide their
devouring of widows houses, under the praise of long prayer: or those in the
Prophet Esay's time, that would persecute godly men, and molest them with
Church Censures, and say, Let the Lord be glorified, Esaias 66.5. Thus of making
God glorious in our selves.

Lastly, that we may make God glorious in the hearts of other men, and cause
them to speak of his praises, we must carefully look to four things.

1. Things must be done by us, to make others glorify God.
That when we speak of God or his truth, we do it with all possible reverence
and fear; that we be careful, in all our discourses of Religion,
instructions, admonitions, reproofs, confutations, or the like, to treat of
these things with all meeknes and reverence: God has given us a Commandment
of purpose, to restrain the taking-vp of his Name in vain. 2. That we strive,
by all means, to live unspotted and in offensive in life, that if any perverse
men did seek occasion against us, yet they might find none; and to this end,
striving to avoid those things distinctly, which we perceive, by the miserable
example of others, do vex and provoke men to speak or think evil; such as are,
idleness, frowardnes, deceit, conceitednes, and the like, Philippians 2.15. 3.
That we show forth the virtues of Christ: it is a singular means to stir up
others to glorify God, if they might perceive in us the sound habit of such
Christian virtues, as are not to be found in other sorts of men; such as are,
humility, lowelinesse, contempt of the world, subjection to Gods will, love of
the godly, and the like. The most of us have but the bare names of these: there
is not a real demonstration of them. Christian virtues, set forth to the life,
are amiable, and will compel men to conceive and speak gloriously of God and
his truth. 4. That we be helpful upon all occasions to others, ready to every
good work, and hearty in all works of mercy: it is our good works must make men
speak well of us, and our God, and Religion.
Hitherto of the doctrine of glorifying God.

In the day of Visitation.]

This word Visitation is in Scripture attributed both to men and to God. Men
are said to visit diversely.
To men, in such cases as these: as first, to shepherds; who, when they did
specially suruay their flock, with intent to redress what was amiss, were
said to visit them, Ier. 23.2. As also to such men as had the gathering of
tribute: when they came to exact their tribute, to the great vexation of the
people, they were said to visit them. So the word, rendered exactors, Esaias
60.17. in the Original is Visitors or Visitations. Thirdly, to visit, was a
term given to the Bishops and Apostles in the Primitive Church, that went
about through the Churches, to take notice of the estate of the Churches, and
to reform what was amiss, Acts 15.36. And so the original word here used, is
translated a Bishopric, Acts 1.20. agreeable to the Hebrew word used, Psalm
109.8. Finally, to visit, is reckoned among the works of courtesy or mercy,
James 1.27. The Hebrew word in the old Testament, signifies oftentimes to
muster or number up the people, as 1. Chro. 21.6. But in this place, visitation
is not referred to men, but to God.

God does also visit many ways.
Now, God is said to visit, not only men, but other creatures: so he visited
the earth, graven images, the vessels of the Temple, The creatures.
and Leuiathan. He visits the earth, when he makes it in an especial manner
fruitful, Psalm 65.9. He visited Images, when he brake them to pieces, and
confounded them. He visited the vessels of the Temple, by causing them to be
brought back again into the Temple, Ier. 27.22. He visited Leuiathan the
devil, by restraining his power, and disappointing his malice, Esaias 27.1. But,
most usually, God's visitation is spoken of in Scripture, as it concerns men:
But especially men, and so
and so God holds two sorts of visitations. The one is the visitation of all
men; the other, of some men only.

The visitation, either as he visits all men in general:
called the visitation of all men, concerns either life or death. In respect
of life, God is said to visit all men, in that he does, by his daily
providence, both give and preserve life till the appointed time: so, Job 10.12.
And, in respect of death, God keeps his visitation, when he causes men to die
an ordinary death at the time thereunto appointed: so, Numb. 16.29. But it is
not the common visitation is here meant.

God's special visitation of some men, or some men in special.
is, when in a special providence he takes notice of certain men, and comes
among them to work the redress of sin: and that is here meant. And this
visitation must be considered, either according to the kinds of it, or
according to the time of it, here called The day of visitation.

For the kinds: God visits men two ways especially.
God does visit men either with the visitation of justice, or with the
visitation of mercy; in wrath, or in grace: and the former words of this Text
are true of either of these kinds. For, if God visit wicked men by his special
judgments, they will then give glory to God, and commend godly Christians;
whom before, against their consciences, they spoke evil of: which they will
also do much more, if God visit them with his grace, and convert them.

In justice.
First, then, of the visitation of justice: and so the point to be here
observed, is, that Though God may spare wicked men long, and seem to wink at
their faults, yet he will find a day to visit them for their sins: he will
hold a visitation for their sakes: he will discover their wickedness, and avenge
himself on them, Psalm. 50.20. Eccles. 8. Psalm. 37.13. Job 18.20. As they have
had their days of sinning: so will he have his day of visiting; and that not
only at that Day of the universal visitation in the end of the world, but even
in this life also.

Use. And this doctrine should especially humble wicked men, and awake them out
of their security; and the rather, if they consider seriously of diverse things
about this day of their visitation.

First, that it shall certainly come upon them, Romans 2.5.

Secondly, that, when it does come, it will be a marvelous fearful time with
them: for, 1. God will then discover their sins, and make their wickedness
manifest in the hatefulness of it, Lam. 4.22. 2. GOD will inflict sore
punishments upon them: he will be avenged on them. The day of their
visitation will be the day of their calamity, Ier. 46.21. 3. The punishments
determined, cannot be resisted: there will be no help, Esaias 10.3. and 29.6.
Coh. and 26.14. 4. God will not then respect their strength, but their sin.
He will recompense them according to all that they have done, Ier. 50.29, 31.
5. If they escape one Judgment, another will light upon them, Ier. 48.44. 6.
God will give them repulse in all they do: even in his service he will not
accept them, Jeremy 14.10. 7. It will be a time of great perplexity, and
counsel will perish from the prudent, Mic. 7.3, 4. Jeremy 49.7, 8. 8. God
will declare himself to be in a special manner against them, Ier. 50.29, 31.
Hosea 9.7.


Quest. But what sort of men are in danger of such a fearful visitation?

Ans. All men that live in any gross sin against their knowledge: such as
are the sins of blood, whoredom, deceit, swearing, profanation of the
Sabbath, reproaching of Gods people, and the like, Ier. 5.9.29. and 9.9.
especially where all or any of these things be found in men.

First, What kind of men in particular are in danger of this kind of visitation.
extreme security in sinning: God will surely visit such as are settled in
their lees Zeph. 1.12.

Secondly, such as place their felicity in offending: such as love to wander,
Ier. 14.10. such as do evil with both hands earnestly, as the Prophets phrase
is, Mic. 7.3, 4.

Thirdly, such as continue and persist in wicked courses: such as cast out
wickedness, as a fountain casts out water, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 6.6.

Fourthly, especially when men are shameless and impudent in offending, Ier.
6.15. and 8.12.

Use 2. And therefore men should be instructed, and take notice of their
condition and danger, and foresee this day, and use all means to prevent it:
for if men would turn unto God speedily, and repent with sound sorrows for
their sins, the Lord would perhaps be entreated, and forgive the punishment of
their sins, Ier. 6.6.

Thus of the visitation of justice. The visitation of mercy follows.

God visits in mercy and so either in temporal things, a^ in the case of
blessings: or in case of afflictions.
The visitation of mercy is, when God comes amongst men, to show some special
mercy: and so he visits either about temporal or about spiritual things. In
temporal things he visits either in the case of blessings or afflictions: In
respect of temporal blessings, he visited Sarah, Genesis 21.1. when he gave her
a son. In respect of afflictions, God visites, first, when he sends such
crosses as do try the innocence and sincerity of his servants: so, Psalm.
17.3. Secondly, when he lets his people know that he takes special notice of
their distresses and sorrows: so, Exodus 4.3. Thirdly, when he sends his
servants special deliverances: and so to visit, is to deliver.

Thus of the visitation in temporal things, which is not here meant.

God visits in spiritual things diversely.
The visitation in spiritual things, is the gracious providence of God,
revealing his marvelous and everlasting mercies unto his Elect: and so he
visits man either by Christ, or by the Gospel: He visited his people, when
he sent his Son to redeem them, Luke 1.68.78. and 7.16. And so he does, when
he sends his Gospel by his servants to this end, to reconcile the world to
himself in Christ: and thus God visited the world, when he sent his Apostles
unto all Nations, preaching the Gospel. And thus he does visit a Nation, when
he sends the Gospel thither; or a congregation, when by the preaching of the
Gospel, he gathers a people to himself. There is also a personal and
particular visitation, when God singles out this or that man from the rest, and
conuerts him. And so in this place to visit the Gentiles, is to gather out of
the Gentiles a people to his name, as in the case of this Apostle is said, Acts
15.14. Which place may well expound this: So that the day of visitation, if we
respect whole congregations, is the time when God sends them the powerful
preaching of the Gospel, and does thereby muster and press a people to
himself. And if we respect particular persons, it is the day when God
effectually calls them, and conuerts them.

Six things may be observed here, concerning this visitation of grace.

First, Doct. 1.
that till God do visit wicked men with his grace from heaven, there will be
no sound reformation in them. Their natural conscience, the shame and
punishment of men, with the Laws of Princes or Churches, may restrain
somewhat of the excess of sin, but it is God's visitation only, that can work
a sound and through reformation. There is little hope, these Gentiles, which
speak evil of Christians, will ever cease till the day of this visitation:
and the reason is plain, because the laws and punishments of men cannot give
a new nature to the offenders, which God in his visitation does.

The use is therefore to confirm the patience of the Saints. Use.
They have endured, and must endure the evil words of wicked men: and if any
be weary of their injuries, they must pray earnestly for their conversion.
The Wolf does not always devour, nor the Fox always deceive, nor the Dog
always bark: but yet so long as they keep their natures, they will
occasionally discover themselves. And therefore also Christians should learn
discretion, not to trust worldly men ouer-farre, upon new pretenses.

Doct. 2. Secondly, hence we may note, that God has his time wherein he will
certainly visit his people: He has his day of visitation. All that God has
given unto Jesus Christ, shall be gathered in Gods due time. That which was
believed concerning the gathering of the Israelites out of Egypt into Canaan,
that God would surely visit them, and bring the^ out, Genesis 50.24, 25. is much
more certainly to be believed of the spiritual gathering of the elect out of
this world, into the Canaan of God. And the reason is, because their conversion
depends upon Gods eternal decree: and the foundation of God remains sure,
and he knows who are his, 2. Tim. 2.19. And not one of them shall be
lacking in the season of their calling, Ier. 23.3, 4. The use may be for the
confirmation of our faith, concerning the calling of such Jews, Gentiles or
Christians, as yet sit in darkness and want the means of their Calling. God
has his day, and he will provide for the calling of all his Elect, how unlikely
soever the work seem to us.

Doct. 3. We may hence note, that when God has visited a man with his grace,
he is suddenly become another man, he is wonderfully altered, from that which
he was before.

The use should be for trial: Use.
No Christian can have comfort that they are visited with the grace of God, if
old things be not past with them, and all things become new: for every man
that is visited with true grace,

First, Signs of such as are truly visited in mercy with true grace.
has a new Master: He will no longer serve any strange Lord; For he has
couenanted firmly with God to work righteousness. Ro^. 6.16, 18

Secondly, has new acquaintance: He that was wont to walk only in the way of
the wicked, He has a new Lord.
is now a companion only with them that fear God: New acquaintance.
all his delight is in them, Psalm. 16. and 26.

Thirdly, has a new Language: he speaks not as he was wont to do: A new
language.
For first, his Mother-tou^g he has utterly forgotten: He cannot curse, and
lie, and swear, and rail, and speak bawdily as he was wont to do, which the
coherence shows here. Secondly, in diverse things he is furnished on a sudden
with Language he could never speak before, as in the gift of prayer, he can
now speak to God, and discourse with him, that before was dumb, and opened not
his mouth, Zephany 3.9.

A new heart.
Fourthly, he has a new heart, Zach. 36.27. Which appears in what he has
not, which was wont to be in his heart; and in what he has, which was never
there before. And for the first branch, there is not in him any of these things
following: By the way understand, that these things are not in him as they were
wont to be (that is) they reign not, or they lie adying: and so, Special
signs of a new heart.
1. There is not guile there; his spirit is without guile, Psalm. 32.2. Which he
shows, in that he auoydes lesser sins as well as greater, It has no guile.
is as good in secret as well as in company, and serves God in his spirit
as well as his body, and is more desirous to be good then to seem so. It is
void of malice.
2. There is not malice and passion there, Esaias 11. His outrageous and
boisterous passions are subdued: of a Lion, he is become a Lamb. It is void of
covetousness.
3. There is not covetousness or the love of world there, 1. Ioh. 2.14. Iam. 4.3.
he uses the world, but he admires it not. His taste in earthly things is
lost. He savors them not as he was wont to do, Romans 8.5.


And as in these things he is new, so in the furniture of his heart he is in
many things new: for,

First, he has a new mind, he is renewed in the spirit of his mind: A new
mind.
which appears, first, by his capablenes in spiritual things: He that lately
could not perceive the things of God, 1. Cor. 2.14. now hears as the learned:
he sees in a mirour: he looks and wonders. The veil is taken away, that
before covered him, 2. Cor. 3. Secondly, by the transcendencie of the things
he knows: he can now look upon the very Sun: he knows God, and Jesus
Christ, and the glory to come, and the excellent things given of God, which the
heart of the natural man never perceived, John 17.3. 1. Cor. 2.9, 10. Thirdly,
by the instrument by which he understands, he sees by faith and not by Reason
in many things: he is fully assured in diverse Mysteries, where sense and reason
can giue-in no evidence.

Secondly, he has new affections: I will instance but in two of them; New
affections.
sorrow and love. He is another man in his sorrows: which appears both in the
causes, and in the remedies of his sorrows. For the causes, he was wont never
to be sorry for any thing but his crosses: now he is seldom sorry for any
thing but his sin. And for the remedies, he was wont to drive away his
sorrows with time, sleep, and merry company: but now nothing but good words
from God will ease him: his love may be tried by the objects: and so whom he
can love truly, or whom he does love vehemently. He can love his very
enemies, which he could never do before. And he does love Jesus Christ,
though he never saw him, 1. Pet. 1.9. and so fervently, as he accounts all
things in the world, which he was wont so much to dote upon, but as loss and
dung, in comparison of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9.

Fifthly, A new behavior discovered diverse ways.
he has a new behavior with him: he is wonderfully altered in his
carriages, which appears in diverse things. First, in respect of the rule of
his life: he walks by rule, Gal. 6.16. He comes daily to the light, to see
whether his works be wrought in God, Ioh. 3.21. This is a sign, given by our
Savior Christ in that place. He is careful to order his behavior by the
warrant of the word, Phil. 2.15, 16. Secondly, in respect of the means he
uses for the ordering of his conversation. And so he takes presently hold on
Gods Sabbath: he is careful to keep the Sabbath, honoring that day above
all others, and esteeming, and desiring it for the employment thereof. Thus the
Lord of the Sabbath says, that it is a sign by which he knows the people,
whether they be truly sanctified or not, Exodus 31.13. Esaias 56.2.6. Thirdly, in
respect of the things he imploies himself in, he chooses the things that
please God, Esaias 56.4. his desire is now in all his ways, to do such things as
might be acceptable to God: Whereas before, he was most careful to please
men, or to satisfy his own lusts. Fourthly, in respect of the manner of his
conversation. In which four things especially shine: first, humility: he
shows that the great opinion of himself is taken down in him: he is lowely
and meek, which he has learned of Christ, Math. 11.29. Secondly,
affectionatenes: He loves the name of the Lord, and to be the Lords servant,
Esaias 56.6. He does good duties with good affections. Thirdly, contempt of the
world: he can deny his profit, pleasure, ease, credit, or the like. He is no
more worldly or eaten up with the cares of life: He does not esteem of earthly
things as he was wont to do, and shows it in his carriage. Fourthly,
sincerity: for, now he has respect to all the Commandments of God: he
desires to be sanctified throughout: he is not mended in many things, as Herod
was, but is, in some degree, mended in all things: and, besides, he is
careful of his ways in all places and companies: he will obey absent, as
well as present, Phil. 2.12. and there is no occasion of offense in him, 1.
John 2.8. He is wonderful wary and careful to provide, that he may not be an
offense to any body: and withal, he is not found to strive more for credit,
than for goodness; or more ready to judge others, than to condemn himself, James
3.17.

If this description be thoroughly waighed, it will be found to contain the
most lively and essential things that distinguish true Conuerts from all
othermen. Nor may the force of any of these be weakened, because many, that
seem true Christians, do show the contrary to some of these: for, many that
seem just to men, are an abomination to God; and besides, these things may be
in the weak Christian in some weak measure, though not so exactly.

Thus of the third doctrine.

Doct. 4. We may hence note, that there is a peculiar time for the keeping of
this visitation of grace. All the times of men's lives are not times of
visitation: there is a special day of visitation, called in Scripture, The day
of salvation, the accepted time, the due time, the season of God's grace, 2.
Cor. 6.2. That this point may be opened, first, we may consider of the
acceptance of this word Day. It usually notes a natural day, Many sorts of
days noted in Scripture.
that is, the space of four and twenty hours. Sometimes it notes the
artificial day of twelve hours, from the morning to the evening: so, John
11.9. Sometimes it notes time generally: as, in such Scriptures as say, In
those days, the meaning is, In those times. Sometimes it notes some peculiar
season for the doing or suffering of some notable thing: as, the special time
when God plagues wicked men, is called their day, Psalm 37.13. Job 18.20. So,
the time when Christ declared himself openly to be the Messiah, is called his
day, John 8.46. So it is here taken for that special part of our time of life,
wherein God is pleased to offer and bestow his grace upon us to salvation.
Now, this cannot be the whole space of a man's life: for, it is evident, that
many men, for a long time of their life, Note.
have not at all been visited of God in this visitation of grace: they have
sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death: and this time is called night,
Romans 13.13. Again, others are threatened with the utter loss of God's favor,
if they observe not a season, as Heb. 3.6, etc. Luke 19.41, 42. Yea, some men
have lived beyond this season; and, for not observing it, were cast away, Pro.
1.24, 28. The very term here used, shows it: for, when he says, The day of
visitation, he manifestly, by the Metaphor of visiting, proves a limitation of
the time: for, all the year is not the time of visitation among men; but some
certain season only.

Quest. But how may we know, when this season of grace is?

How the day and season of grace may be known.
Ans. It is then, when God sends the Gospel to us in the powerful preaching
of it: when the light comes, then comes this day: when the doctrine of
salvation is comne, then the day of salvation is comne, and God offers his
grace then to all within the compass of that light. God keeps his visitation
at all times, and in all places, when the Word of the Kingdom is powerfully
preached: the time of the continuance of the means, is the day here meant, in a
general consideration. But, if we look upon particular persons in places where
the means is, then it is very hard, precisely to measure the time when God does
visit, or how long he will offer his grace to them: Note.
only this is certain, that when God strikes the hearts of particular men
with remorse, or some special discerning or affections in matters of Religion,
and so brings them near the Kingdom of God; if they trifle out this time,
and receive this general grace in vain, they may be cast into a reprobate
mind, and into incurable hardness of heart: and so God shuts the kingdom of
God against them, while it is yet open to others, Mat. 3.12. Esaias 6.10.
compared with Mat. 13.14, 15.

Use. The use is for the confutation, especially of the madness of many men,
that so securely procrastinate and put off the time of their repentance, as if
they might repent at any time; never considering, that the means of repentance
may be taken utterly from them, or that they may be cast into a reprobate
sense, or that death may suddenly prevent them, or that the times are only in
GOD's hand: it is he that appoints, and begins, and ends this day of
visitation at his own pleasure; yea, he does not allow to all men, in every
place, the like space of time for the continuance of the means. This day
lasts, in some places, to some men many years: Against such as presume on
late repentance.
whereas, in other places, the Kingdom of God is taken away from them in a
short time; as, when the Apostles in the Acts were driven from some Cities,
after they had been in some places but a year or two; in others, but a month or
two; in others, but a day or two.

First objection answered
If men object, that the thief on the Cross did delay, and yet found the
visitation of grace at his last end; I answer four things. First, that the
thief was by an unexpected death prevented of a great part of that time he
might have lived by the course of nature: and therefore his example cannot
patronize their resolution, that think they may safely put over all till their
last end, and yet suppose they may live the full age of the life of man.
Secondly, what can the example of one only man help them, seeing thousands have
perished at their later end, going away without any repentance or grace? Why
rather do they not fear, seeing so many millions of men are not visited in
their later end? yea, at the very time, the other thief repented not: so that
that example can show no more, than that it is possible that a man should find
grace at the end: it does not show, that it is probable or usual. Thirdly, they
should show the promise of grace, Note.
not such men as wilfully neglect the present means, and put all off to their
later end. What can be concluded from an example, when God's promise cannot be
showed? If any object, that they have a promise: for the Scripture says, that
At what time soever a sinner repents himself from the bottom of his heart, God
will forgive him; I answer, that this sentence does contain no such promise:
Second objection answered
for, it only promises forgiveness to them that repent at any time; but it does
not promise, that men may repent at any time when they will. Besides, the words
in the Prophet Ezechiel are only, In the day that he turns; which import
nothing, to prove that a man may repent in any part of his life, when he will.
Fourthly, the conversion of the thief was without means, miraculously, by the
divinity of Christ, and is recorded among the works of wonder; such as were,
The raising of the dead, the trembling of the earth, the darkning of the Sun,
and the like: and if men dare not be so foolish as to expect, that at their
pleasures these other wonders should be done, then neither may they in that of
so late conversion without means.

If others say, that Men were hired into the vineyard at the eleventh hour,
Third objection confuted
and were allowed and rewarded as well as they that went-in at the third hour;
I answer, that The drift of the parable is only to show, that men that had the
means later than other men, may yet be saved: it cannot be stretched to so
large a sense. Besides, being a parable, it may illustrate, but cannot prove
without some other Scripture, to which it serves as an illustration. But my
special answer is this, that those men were never hired before the eleventh
hour: they went in so soon as any came to hire them. And so it is true, that
if men have lived till extreme old age, Note.
and never had the means till then, they may have as much hope as they that had
the means in their youth: but that will not warrant the presumption of such,
as, being called the third hour, will not go in till the eleventh hour.

Use 2. And therefore the second use should be for instruction, to persuade
all that mind their own good, to walk and work while they have the light,
while it is yet to day, before the shadows of the evening be stretched out, as
our Savior exhorts in the Gospel: we should bestirre our selves to make all
the profit we can of the present means God affords us: for, the night may
many ways come upon us ere we be aware. For, first, who knows how soon the
night of death may come upon any of us? and then if we have no oil in our
lamps, it will be too late to go to seek. Secondly, the night of restraint may
come upon us: the means may be taken away: we are not sure how long the
Candlestick may continue, before it be removed: God may take away good
shepherds, and suffer idle shepherds to succeed in the room of them. Besides,
a mighty storm of cruel persecution may surprise us. Thirdly, the night of
temptation may come, and so, for the time, frustrate the life of the means:
for, either God may hide himself from us, and then the Sun will be set to
us, even at noon day; or God may hide the power of the Word from us, even when
it is of power to others, as David imports, Psalm. 119. when he says, Lord,
hide not thy Commandments from me: or the Lord may restrain the spirits of
his servants that speak unto us; for, the hearts of the Apostles themselves
were not always enlarged in the like manner toward the people, as is
imported, 2. Cor. 6.11.

Thus of the fourth doctrine.

Doct. 5. We may further hence note concerning the time of this visitation;
that not only there is a season, but withal, that it is but a short time in
comparison; therefore here called The day of visitation. Now, a day is one of
the least measures of time: and this arises not only from the breuity of man's
life, and the infinite mutations that befall the outward conditions of men, and
the extreme malice the devil and the world bear to the Gospel, but also from
the will of God, who will offer his grace in so special a manner, but for a
short season: neither is the Lord bound to give account to us of his so doing,
Note.
since we have more reason to admire his mercy that will offer us his grace at
all, than to murmr because it is not offered always: yet this shortness of the
season does the more magnify God's power, that can so quickly conquer, and set
up the Kingdom of Christ, and gather his Elect. And some cause may be taken
from the rebellion of wicked men, who when they despise holy things, and use
them vile; the Lord, to show the accounts he makes of those treasures,
remooues them from them. Thus the Jews lost their glory, Acts 13. When a
people grow obstinate, and will not be wrought upon, that God, that commands
us not to give holy things to dogs, does himself also many times remove his
Word, for the unprofitableness and unworthiness of the people.

Use. The use should be so much the more strongly to enforce the care of speedy
profiting by the means, while it is yet called To day, as the Apostle urges it
at large in the third and fourth chapters to the Hebrews. And withal, it
should teach us to bewail the stupidity and carelesnes of the multitude, that
in these times of peace and spiritual plenty, have no care to make any
provision for their souls: over whom we may lament, as Christ did over
Jerusalem, Luke 19.42, etc. And the shortness of the time should teach Ministers
to labor more diligently: they that are the stewards of the manifold graces of
God, should be instant in season, and out of season, and with all authority
beseech, rebuke, and correct; knowing, that their time is short and uncertain.

Doct. 6. We may here note, that the day when God visits a man with his grace,
is a glorious day: The Apostle speaks of it, as of the most happy time of the
life of man: and so was it ever accounted by the godly, Esaias. 24.22.23. And it
must needs appear to be a day of singular happiness, if we consider what that
day brings forth instantly unto the man or woman visited of God, for,

What glorious things the day of visitation brings forth.
First, in that day God reueales in some measure his love to the visited: which is
the more admirable a benefit, because Gods love is a free love, and it is
everlasting, and is also immense.

Secondly, in that day he gives that particular person unto Christ, and gives
Christ unto him, with all his merits, Job. 10. and 17.

Thirdly, in that he iustifies him, both forgiving him all his sins, and
clothing him with the righteousness of Christ.

Fourthly, in that day he adopts him to be his own child, that was before
the child of wrath, Romans 8.16.

Fifthly, in that day, he gives him a new nature, and creates and fashions in
him the Image of Jesus Christ: and so reueals Christ in him, Colossians 3.10.
Galatians 2.20.

Sixthly, in that day he gives him the holy Ghost, never to depart out of his
heart, Gal. 4.7.

Seventhly, in that day he makes him free: so as he is enrolled amongst the
living, and acknowledged particularly of God amongst the Saints: He is written
in the writing of the house of Israel: and is free from all the misery and
bondage he was in before, or was in danger of: and he is henceforwards free of
the house and presence of God: He may feed at his Table, and eat the food of
life. He has access with boldness at all times into the presence of God with
any suites. He is also free to the Communion of Saints, and is restored to the
free and lawful use of the creatures in general, Psalm. 87.5. Esaias 4.4. Romans
8.1. Gal. 1.6. Esaias 25.8. Mark 11.24. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Mat. 5.5.

Eighthly, he sets a guard of Angels about him, to attend him all the days of
his life, Hebrews 1.14 Psalm. 34.

Ninthly, in that day he is received into Gods protection, in respect of
afflictions: which protection contains in it four things. First, the
withholding of many crosses which do fall upon others. God spares him, as a
man would spare his only son, Mala. 3.17. Secondly, the bounding of the
cross: so as God appoints the measure, which is ever with the respect of the
strength of the party, Esaias 27.7, 8. Thirdly, the sanctification of the
cross: so as all shall work for the best, Romans 8.28. Fourthly, deliverance out
of trouble in due time, Psalm. 34.17.

Tenthly, he assures, and estates upon him, the evidence of an inheritance
that is immortal, undefiled, that withers not, reserved for him in heaven, 1.
Pet. 1.3.

The use should be chiefly to move godly men to the exact study of those
things, Use.
and to all possible thankfulness for Gods visitation: and they should with much
joy remember the very time (if it may be) when God did so visit them: and if
the men of this world keep commemoration yearly of the days of their birth or
marriage; how much more cause has a Christian to preserve in himself, and to
speak of it to the praise of God, the very day and season, when God did first
reueal his grace unto him? Let none mistake me. I mean it not of all
Christians: Note.
for many Christians did never observe or know distinctly the very first
day of their conversion, being not called either by ordinary means, or not
in such a sensible manner as some others were, or stood for a time in temporary
grace: yet unto all, the counsel is profitable, that, taking a day in the
sense as it is here, they should often think of with gladness the season of
their conversion, or at least magnify God for the thing it self, that they are
converted.

And besides, all such as enjoy the means of grace, and yet have not felt this
visitation of God, should be much allured to the care of attending upon the
means, and be made desirous to receive the grace of God, and that effectually:
it should much move them, that God has now sent them the means, and keeps his
public visitation; and that GOD stands not upon desert, nor does he make
exception of them, but offers his grace unto all, and desires not the death of
any sinner, yea, beseeches them to be reconciled; and, to that end, has
committed the Word of reconciliation to his servants, with express
commandment, that they should be instant, and with all patience instruct men,
and call upon them, and persuade them to save their souls.

Doct. 7. We may yet further from hence observe, that before calling, the very
Elect of GOD may be as bad as any other; as here, till God visited those elect
Gentiles, they were railers as well as others: so were the former sins,
mentioned, 1. Cor. 6.9. found in the very Elect, as the eleventh verse shows.
This appears by the example of Manasses, Marie Magdalene, Paul, and the thief
on the Cross: see further, Tit. 3.3. And the reasons may be easily assigned:
for, first, the very Elect, before calling, have the same corruption of nature
that other men have; and so all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God: so as there is not one of them does good, no not one. Secondly, they have
the same occasions to sin from the Devil and the world. Thirdly, and were
their natures somewhat better then other men's, yet they would have been
leauened as they were a part of the lump of infected mankind. Use 1.
This may both inform us and teach us in diverse things. It may inform us in
three things, (viz.) about our election and our justification, and about the
Gospel, as the means of our vocation. For election, this point proves, it must
be free, seeing there was no goodness in the very elect, more then in the
reprobate, in the estate of nature. And for Justification, the Apostle Paul
uses the consideration of this doctrine in the third Chapter to the Romans, to
prove, it cannot be by works. And for the Gospel, we may here see the
mighty power of it: it may well be called the Arm of the Lord, and his power
to salvation, that can thus mightily and suddenly change men.

Use 2.
And it should teach us also diverse things, as it concerns either our selves,
or other men, or God.

1. For our selves; it should teach us to walk both more humbly all our days,
seeing we have been vile as well as others; and also more watchfully, seeing
we carry about us a nature that has been so rebellious against God: and
besides, we should resist the beginnings of sin in us, as having known by
experience whither sin will lead us, if we give way to it, and dally with
it. 2 For others not yet called, it should teach us both compassion of their
misery (it having been our own case) and a care to show all meekness to all
men in waiting for their conversion, and patience in bearing their wrongs. 3
For God: how can we ever sufficiently love him that has showed such love to
us, even when we were his enemies?
Yea wicked men, that are smitten with terrors for the heinousness of their
sins, should hence confirm themselves against despair, seeing they may
hence learn, that as great offenders as they, have been converted and saved.
2. Tim. 1.15.

There is one thing, that from hence men must take heed that they do not
learn; that is, that they abuse not these examples to confirm themselves in
sin: for there is matter to daunt them, and fright them from this
presumption. Note.
For first, not all that have lived licentiously, but some few only have been
saved, the rest perished in their own wickedness. Secondly, of those that
were saved, none were saved without amendment of life and regeneration: and
therefore so long as thou live in thy sin, so long their example fits thee
not.

Doct. 8. The last Doctrine that may from hence be made, is in particular
concerning the sin of speaking evil of the godly, and the point is, That
Gods gracious visitation does cure that disease exactly. He will never rail
any more, that is truly gathered unto God in his day of visitation. It is
possible, Christians may speak evil one of another in particular, and it is
lamentable when they do so; but that is upon supposall of particular faults in
those of whom they speak evil. But that a man should speak evil of godly
men in general, because they are godly, with desire he might find them evil
doers, is a vice not found in such as are truly called: And therefore let such
as are guilty of that sin of speaking evil of good Christians, Note.
because they follow goodness, know, That their day of visitation is not yet
come.

Verse 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake:
whether to the King, as superior:


FRom the 13 Verse of the first Chapter, to the 9 Verse of the third Chapter,
is contained matter of exhortation: and the exhortation is either general or
special. The general exhortation concerns all Christians, and has been set
down from the 13 Verse of the first Chapter, to the end of the 11 Verse of
this second Chapter. Now those words, and those that follow, to the 9 Verse of
the next Chapter, contain special exhortations which concern some Christians
only, namely, subjects, servants, wives, and husbands. Of the duty of subjects
he entreats from Verse 13, to Verse 18: Of the duty of servants, from Verse 18,
to the end of this Chapter: of the duty of wives, in the seven first Verses of
the third Chapter: and of the duty of husbands in the eightth Verse of that
Chapter.

So that the Apostle, having taught all Christians before, how to behave
themselves in their general calling, he now undertakes to teach some sorts of
Christians in particular, how to order themselves in their particular callings;
and so he teaches them in some things that concern the Politickes, and in
some things that concern the Oeconomickes. Unto order in a Common wealth
belongs the duty of Subjects: and unto household government belongs the duty of
Servants, Wives, and Husbands.

From the coherence, and the general consideration of the whole exhortation,
diverse things may be noted before I break open the particulars of the Text.

1 The Word of God must be the warrant of all the actions of our life: it not
only gives order about the businesses of Religion, but it prescribes matter of
obedience in all our conversation; it tells us what to do in our houses, and
in the Common wealth, as well as what to do at Church, which shows us the
perfection of the Scripture. Theology is the Mistress of all Sciences: it
perfects the sound knowledge of the Ethics, Politickes, or Oeconomickes, and
it should teach therefore in our callings, whether general or particular, to
seek warrant from the Word, which warrant we may find either expressed
particularly, or else implied in general directions; and withal we should
take heed, that we make not more sins in any estate of life, then are made
in Scripture, and so not affright or disquiet our selves with vain fears that
way.

2 The Apostle would have Christians in a special manner careful that they
offend not the laws of the Princes of this world; this appears, in that he
enioynes them the duties of Subjects first, and in that they do teach them the
duty of submission, both in this and other Scriptures with great force and
violence (as it were) of arguments: which shows, that they were wonderful
desirous to charge and instruct the Christians so, that if it were possible,
they might not offend that way, and the reasons are diverse and many, why
Christians should be above all men careful to keep the laws of Princes:
first, because by breaking the laws of men, they sin against God. Secondly,
because evil minded men have in all ages watched godly Christians, to see
whether they could find any fault by them in the matters of the kingdom.
Thirdly, because if earthly Princes be provoked, it may cause a general
trouble of the Churches, the offenders many times suffer not alone, but many
others upon displeasure raised by them. Fourthly, because if earthly Princes be
good, the careful obedience of their Subjects may encourage them to be great
helps to religion, even to be Nursing fathers and nursing mothers to the
Churches, 1. Tim. 2.2. Fifthly, because perverseness and contempt, and careless
neglect of the laws of Princes many times proves scandalous, and We must
not offend them that are without, 1. Cor. 10. 2. Col. 4.5. Many that were
somewhat inclined to embrace the sincerity of the Gospel, have been cast
back, and profess, that therefore they abhor such people, because they
observe their disobedience against humane government, either through
indiscretion or nice scruples, or perverse wilfulness.

The use may be to reprove the carelessness of many Christians this way, and
that for diverse offenses: as first, for sluggishnes, in not studying the Laws
of the Countries where they live. Some Christians have a secret jealousy
against the laws of men, and do in heart think meanly of them; and, unless
the equity of the Law stare them in the face, they do, without any further
consideration, securely cast aside the care of it, and rush into the breach of
it. Secondly, diverse Christians do much sin against the holy desire and
direction of the Apostles, in the intemperancie of their words, when in
ordinary discourse they speak with much scorn of the observation of the laws
of men, which they understand not. A Christian, that will not study to be quiet
in respect of the laws of men, is a singular plague to the Church where he
lives.

Doct. 3. We may hence note, that it is necessary for Ministers, often to teach
their hearers their duty to Magistrates, and to show the power that Princes
have to make laws to govern them by. And this is fit to be noted, because of
the strange weakness and perverseness of some Christians, that are much
offended with their Teachers, if they fall upon doctrine of this nature, with
any application to the times: they mistrust them, or censure them to be
temporizers, and to speak out of flattery or wilfulness, or the like
corruption of conscience. I speak not now of such Ministers as plead the rights
of Princes only for their own ends, or in such a manner, as they discover an
apparent hatred of godliness it self (for, these are worthy to be blamed),
but even of such Ministers as prove the rights of Christian Princes with
compassion, and love, and meeknes, without provoking or reuiling terms: even
these, I say, are mistrusted and censured, though we hear and see in other
Scriptures, that they are bound to prove and defend the authority of the
Magistrate in any thing wherein it is unjustly questioned.

Doct. 4. It is necessary, we should first be taught our duty to God, and those
things that concern a religious life; and then, our duty to man, and in
particular, to Magistrates. This the Apostle intimates, in that he first
instructs them as Christians; and then, as Subjects: and there is apparent
reason. First, in respect of God; secondly, in respect of themselves; and
thirdly, in respect of the Magistrate.

First, in respect of God: for, we are first and chiefly bound to God: our
first covenant is made with God; and we are more behoulding to God, than to all
the world besides: and therefore again to respect his glory, and obedience to
him in the first and chief place.

Secondly, in respect of our selves, and our own profit, we must study God's
Laws, as well as the laws of men, yea, with our first and chief cares, and
accordingly yield obedience; because though by keeping the laws of men, we may
live quietly and safely, and with much reputation, yet all this will not
protect us against the breach of GOD's Law: but the hand of God may pursue us
while we live, and we may be damned in hell when we die, for want of a
religious life.

Thirdly, in respect of the Magistrate: he shall have the better subjects by
it: good Christians are the best Subjects: and the knowledge of Religion and
God's Word, makes men obey, not for fear or custom, but for conscience sake,
and for fear of God's displeasure. And besides, it makes men humble and
charitable: humble, not to think themselves too good to obey; and charitable,
in not suspecting the meaning of Princes further than they must needs. And it
restraines the excessive pronenesse of men's natures, that are (without
Religion) apt to speak evil of those that are in authority; and chiefly,
because true Religion will make men pray heartily to God for their Gouerners:
and GOD himself does spare, or bless them the rather, for the prayers of the
righteous.

The use should be to inform and teach all sorts of men to take heed of
separating what God has joined together. It is an extreme folly to give unto
Caesar what is due to Caesar, and not to give unto God what is due to God: and
so it were to give unto God what is due to God (if men could do it) and not to
give to Caesar what is due to Caesar. The respect of God's Laws should make us
more careful to observe man's laws. And contrariwise, it is a fearful case
that many live in, that think they have done enough, if they live in obedience
in respect of the authority that rules them in the places they live in: they
would be much troubled, if the Magistrate should be offended with them; but are
never troubled, though they provoke God to his face: and they are maliciously
foolish, that would have the laws of men obeyed, when they are against the
Laws of God; or would have men so rest in observing the just laws of men, as
not to be so forward and busy about the duties of Religion.

Further, a question may be here asked, Why the duty of Magistrates is not here
set down, as well as the duties of Subjects? I answer, that in those times of
the Apostles, the Magistrates were without; so far from being Christians,
that they did, for the most part, persecute that way: and therefore they do
avoid meddling, or undertaking to teach them that would not learn, but rather
be incensed against such Teachers. Besides, if this, and other Scriptures of
the new Testament, be marked, we shall find, that the duty of Inferiors is
both more often, and more fully taught, than the duty of Superiors: for, in
that new and tender world, great care was to be had, that, under pretense of
Religion, civil obedience, either in the family or Commonwealth, were not
neglected. And it is a truth to be known at all times, that God would not have
inferiors too skillful in the duty of Superiors, that they might first learn
to show duty, before they called for duty from their Superiors. That may be
one reason why the duty of Masters is not here handled, and in other places of
the Epistles but briefly: for, many times the description of the duty of
Superiors, is used but as a glass by the Inferiors to pry into the faults of
those that rule them; and so grow careless, and wilfully stubborn, under
pretense of the faults of their superiors. But some one might say, that by
this means, if the Magistrates did turn Christians, they were left without
rules of direction, and so they should not know what to do.

Answ. That inconvenience was long before prevented, because the duty of
Magistrates is fully taught in the old Testament, which unto a godly mind is
of as great authority as the new. Thus of the coherence and general
consideration of all the words. The duty of Subjects follows to be
particularly considered of.

Submit.]

Concerning Subjects: here are five things to be considered of: First, the
proposition of Doctrine, in these words; Submit your selves to every ordinance
of man for the Lords sake. Secondly, the exposition of it in one case, and that
is, the Persons to whom they were to be subject; to all sorts of Governors, to
Kings, or any other Governors. Thirdly, the confirmation by reason. Ver. 14,
15. Fourthly, the answer of an Objection, Verse. 16. Fifthly, the conclusion,
Verse. 17.


In the Proposition consider, 1. The duty to be done: Submit. 2. The persons
must do it: your selves. 3. The things to which they must be subject:
Ordinances: where is a double extent, ( viz) to every ordinance, and though
they be ordinances of men. 4. The manner, or motive, For the Lords sake.


Submit.]

The duty is to submit unto Magistrates, Romans 13.1, 2. For Explication, two
things are to be considered, Why we must submit? and, How we must submit?

For the first, we must submit; 1. Because God is the Author of magistracy,
Genesis 9.6. Deuteronomy. 16.18. Prou. 8.15. Dan. 2.21. Ioh. 19.11. Romans 13.1, 4, 6.

Object. The Devil is said to be the Prince of this world, and he claims
all the kingdoms of the earth, Ioh. 12.31. Mat. 4.8, 9.

Sol. He is the Prince of this world by malicious usurpation, not by any
right. 2. He is so in relation to wicked men, he is their king, but not of
others. 3. He speaks like himself, that is, like the father of lies, when
he claims all the kingdoms of the earth: for no part of the world is his,
because The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is.

Object. But God was angry with the Israelites, for their asking of a King; and
therefore it seems it was not his ordinance that there should be Kings.

Sol. He was not angry with them for desiring Governors, for they had
Governors before sent of God, and the very king they had afterward, God gave
them him, Hos. 13.8. but he was angry for the cause of their request. Their
faith and hope was in a manner spent, and they conceived more hope in a King,
then in God that had been such a King to them so many years. 2. Men must be
subject, because God has taken men's consciences bound to subjection, Romans 13.
3. Because kings are heads of the people, and therefore as members, it is
agreeable that they should submit, and be ruled and guided. 4. In respect of
the benefit men receive by Magistrates, both in outward things, and in matters
of religion. For outward things, men enjoy public peace and quietness, and
protection by the help of the power of the Magistrate: And for matters of
Religion, earthly Commonwealths are as it were Innes to lodge the Church in,
and Princes power affords protection, so as Christians may more safely follow
their calling; and if they be godly Kings, they are the very nurses of
Religion. And thus of the reasons.

For the second, What submission has in it, viz. six things.
this Submission has in it six things: the first is obedience to their laws
and commandments, Tit. 3.1. The second is honor; Romans 13.7. for they are
principalities and powers: as the Angels shine in heaven, so do Princes on
earth: yea, they are called Gods; and so in two respects: first, as they are
Gods Deputies and Viceroies: God executes a part of his Kingdom by Kings.
Secondly, as they bear the image of God, and his authority and soueraignety.
Now we must perform this honor by reverence, and by fear of them, and by
judging the best of them and their actions, without conceiving suspicious of
them, nor receiving evil reports against them, nor daring to speak evil of
those dignities and Rulers of the people: and by all thankfulness for the
good we receive by them, acknowledging to the full all their praises. The
third is Loyalty, by which we resolve and endeavor to the uttermost of our
powers, to maintain and preserve the persons, rights, prerogatives, crowns and
dignities of Princes. If we must lay down our lives one for another, then
much more for our King and Country. The fourth is Piety: we must pray for
them with all manner of prayer, we must make supplications for Gods blessing
upon them, and deprecations for the removing evils from them: and if they
should sin, and God be wroth with them, we should stand up in the gap, and
make intercession for them, and we should give thanks for all the mercies the
Lord shows unto them, 2. Tim. 2.1. The fifth is Maintenance; tribute must be
paid, Romans 13.7. Christ himself submitted herein. The last is, Subjection to
their punishments, Romans 13.4. yea, to their injuries, as David, Christ, and the
Apostles did submit themselves to the injurious dealing of Saul, Pilate, and
the Tyrants, when perhaps they could have made resistance.

Use 1. The use may be first, for terror to the seditious: great has been
the vengeance of God upon Traitors; the earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram for their rebellion: Absolon was hanged up by the hair between heaven
and earth, as unworthy both of heaven and earth. The words of our Savior
Christ are in an high degree true in this case, He that takes up the sword,
shall perish by the sword. And S. Paul says, They shall be damned that resist
the power.

Secondly, it should much humble the better sort of men, for diverse faults that
are too common; such as are the receiving of evil reports, and speaking evil
with two frequent intemperancy, grudging at the payment of tribute and
taxations, evil surmises of the actions of Princes, and the aptness to favor
themselves in the liberty of doubting, concerning obedience to them in things
indifferent.

Thirdly; all good Christians should be persuaded to make conscience of this
submission, and to that end they should be at the pains to study this
Doctrine, and withal pray to God to direct them and keep them in his fear
and obedience herein: and besides, they should be sure that they meddle not
with the changers, or with the seditious, Pro. 24.22.

Yourselues.]

These words may note either the manner of our submission, or the matter: the
manner, thus, Submit your selves: that is, yield obedience uncompelled, do it
of your selves, stay not till you be forced to do it: and so the Apostle
should thereby import, that our submission even to men should be performed
willingly, and so we should willingly and cheerfully obey their laws, honor
and defend their persons, pray for them to God, yield them tribute; yea, we
should without murmuring submit our selves to their punishments, yea,
cheerfully bear their injuries; and so it remoues grudging and force from our
submission. But I rather understand the words to note the matter to be
submitted, and that is our selves, not our goods only for tribute or custom,
but our persons also must be at the Princes service, our very bodies must be
submitted both to do the labor that belongs to the bearing of any office for
the public good, and to the enduring of any punishment, by the laws to be
inflicted upon the body, and to the employing of the body and life in defense
of the true Religion, and of the Kings person, law, and desire, in war or
otherwise. This is manifest by the frequent wars in the old Testament, both
required and performed: nor may any say, that Christians in the new Testament
are not charged in the business of war; for,

First, it was Christ's main intendment to form a spiritual Kingdom to God:
he left the state of earthly kingdoms to the condition they were in before.

Secondly, when the Apostles do in the general require the submission of
Christians to their Magistrates, without exception of their obedience in war or
otherwise, it is manifest, that they leave them to the laws of nature, and the
Laws of God before.

Thirdly, even in the new Testament this is implied by John Baptist's answer to
the soldiers, Luke 3.14. and the praises of those worthy warriors, Heb.
11.33, 34. (In which place also is a manifest proof for subjection, even in our
bodies, to the Sentences of Magistrates, whether just or unjust.) And the
Magistrate's sword, Romans 13.4. is not only a sword of justice upon malefactors
in his own Land; but of revenge on the enemies of God, or the Church, or
Commonwealth abroad. And for that Saying of our Savior to Peter, He that
takes the sword, shall perish with the sword, Ma. 26.52. it is spoken of him to
whom of the Lord it is not delivered, that is, of him that has not authority
from God, as Magistrates have to command others to take the sword: and it was
spoken to Peter, a Pastor of souls, Put up again thy sword into his place.
That material sword was not for him to use.

Thirdly, note, that it is indefinitely propounded, Your selves; that all, of
all sorts: no man can be exempted from subjection to Princes. Christians must
obey, as well as Pagans; strangers, as well as home-born, while they are within
their gates. All the doubt is, whether Churchmen are to be subject to secular
Princes. The Papists deny it: but we affirm it, and have reason so to do.
First, because the precept is general without exception. Secondly, because the
Apostle says, Romans 13.1. that Every soul must be subject: and therefore if
Churchmen have souls, they must be subject to the higher Powers. Thirdly,
because Princes have executed their authority over Churchmen, whereof we have
manifest examples in the Word: as, David appointed the orders and offices of
the Levites. Solomon put down Abiathar from the Priesthood. Josiah burned the
very bones of the Priests upon their Altars, and also purged the Temple, and
restored the Passover. Christ himself was subject to the authority of Princes:
he gave tribute, and appeared at their Tribunal. Paul was subject, and
appeared before the Magistrates, and used their power when he appeald to
Caesar, 2. These. 2. ^ourthly, there is manifest reason for it: for, if
Churchmen be citizens or members of the Commonwealth, then they must be
subject to the Rulers and Laws of the Commonwealth. Fifthly, the doctrine of
the purest times since the Apostles, is agreeable heerunto: for, Chrysostom,
upon the 13 to the Romans, auouches it, that Priests and Monks, yea, Apostles,
Evangelists, and Prophets, must be subject to secular Powers. And Bernard
reasons out of that place thus: If every soul must be subject, then yours also
that are Churchmen: who has excepted you from this All? Si quis tentat
excipere, conatur decipere. Agnoscit dominum suum and cleri.
If any man go about to except you, he goes about to deceive you. And Pope
Gregory acknowledges the Emperor Maurice as Lord of him and the Clergy.

They object, that the ecclesiastical government is greater than the secular,
iure diuino: and therefore Churchmen ought not to be subject, because the
Superior ought not to be subject to the Inferior.

Ans. The ecclesiastical government is superior to the secular government,
and it is inferior to it: it is superior, in respect of the rule over
themselves in the things of the Kingdom of heaven, by means appointed of
Christ, viz. the Word and Sacraments, etc: but it is inferior, in respect of
civil subjection in the obedience or submission that concerns body and goods.
The Prince must be subject to the Church in matters of faith and godliness;
and the Church, subject to the Prince in matters of this life, and civil
subjection. How far Princes have power in cases ecclesiastical, will be showed
afterward.

They object, that diverse Councels do except the Clergy from the Bar and
Tribunal of Princes; and diverse Popes have discharged the Clergy of such
subjection.

Ans. Councels and Popes cannot decree against the Word of God: besides, they
judge and determine in their own case; for, what were the Popes or Councels,
but Clergymen? Moreover, the Popes assumed a power to themselves, which was
never given them: for, they were so far off from having power to free their
Clergy* that they had no power to free themselves, 2. These. 2.7.

They object again, and say, that it is absurd, the sheep should rule and judge
the shepherd: Princes are but sheep; and Priests are the shepherds.

Answer. Magistrates are not sheep in all things, but in spiritual things, in
matters of faith; and so Ministers are shepherds to feed their souls: but, in
civil things, the Magistrate is the shepherd; and the Clergymen sheep,
because citizens or subjects.

But they say, that Clergymen are freed by privilege from the Emperors, and
by the Laws of the Empire.

Ans. If that be so, then their privilege is, Iure humano, not diuino.
Secondly, they plead a false privilege: for, in things in question they were
never privileged, that is, in matter of obedience to the Law, or in matter of
punishment in things criminal. Thirdly, if it were so, then they are subject
to Princes: for, he that grants a privilege, is greater than he to whom it is
granted. But the last and best answer is, that Princes can grant no such
privilege. Can a father free his son that he shall not honor him? or a
husband free his wife, that she shall not be subject to him? No more can a
Prince free his subjects from obedience or subjection, because the subject is
tied by the Law of nature and by Gods Law, which Princes cannot undo.

Thus of the third point.

Fourthly, when he says, Submit your selves: he does not require them to
submit those things to the pleasure of the Magistrate which are not theirs.
Every godly Christian has some things which are not his own, but Gods, and
those he must not subject to the will of Princes: As his Religion, his faith,
the Word of God, the Sacraments, his prayers: for those are none of Caesar's,
and therefore must not be given to Caesar.

Thus of who, or what must be submitted.

To every ordinance of man.]

There are two senses given of these words: some understand the^ of Magistrates
themselves: some of the Laws of Magistrates. It is not easy to tell how to
restrain the text to either of these; for both are true, and the former
included in the latter, and the latter employed in the former: and therefore I
purpose to handle the words according to the sense in both respects.

First then, we must be subject to every ordinance of man; that is, to all
sorts of Magistrates. And the Apostle seems to expound it when he says,
Whether it be to the King, or to the governors, as importing that they were
the ordinances he spoke of before. Now concerning Magistrates as they are here
entreated of, those things are to be noted.

First, that Magistrates are an ordinance of men; and so they are in diverse
respects; because magistracy is a thing proper to men. Secondly, in respect of
the end, because it is ordained for the good of men. Thirdly, because the
choice of the kind of Magistrates has been for the most part left unto men:
for God has not tied all nations to a kind of government, but left the^ for
the most part free: and therefore some governed by Kings, some by Emperors,
some by Consuls, some by Dukes, some by Princes or Earls or the like. Fourthly,
because in the new Testament Christ did not at al employ himself in settling
any order for the corporal government of his Church in this world, it being
specially his intent for the raising of his spiritual kingdom, and the ordering
of the government that co^cerned the souls of men and their full subjection.
Only we must take heed of one sin here, and that is, that we conceive not,
the Magistrates are man's ordinance, as if man appointed or ordained or invented
them, for that is contrary to express Scripture: that calls all those earthly
powers Gods ordinance: they are by divine Institution, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Pro.
8.15. 2. Chro. 19.6. Dan. 4.14, 22.

Ob. Hos. 8.4. it is said, They made them a King, but not by me.

Sol. God disclaimes not the ordinance: for he himself had appointed Jeroboam
to be King (of whom the Prophet speaks) but he disclaimes the manner or
the choice of him as it was done by the Prophet, which chose him in a mutiny
and without respect to Gods will.

Ob. Nimrod was the first that brought in Magistracy, and he is taxed for it
in Gen* 10.9.

Ans. The words are, Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord. Now these
words have been interpreted either properly thus: He was a hunter of beasts
before the Lord, that is, which beasts he would sacrifice before the Lord, or
metaphorically, that he was the first, Aben-Ezra.
that set up Monarchs of the thraldom, appointing laws and a form of
government: and this he did by instinct from God, for the protection of the
Church and Common wealth, against the injuries of those that dwelt near them.

Secondly, say that he is in these words condemned, as a hunter, that is a
tyrant, as the word is taken, Lament. 3.5. Ierem. 16.16. Ezech. 32.30. etc, and
that it is added, Before the Lord, to note, that he did oppress men by
manifest violence openly, shaking off all fear even of God himself; yet it
follows not, that his power was not of God: the manner of getting it, was
evil, but the power was good.

Thirdly, it will not follow, that Magistracy is evil, or not of God, because it
had an ill beginning, if it were granted, that it did begin in Nimrod: For so
the translation of Joseph into Egypt, and the Kingdom of Saul, and Jeroboam,
etc. should be evil, and not of God: for they had ill beginnings.

But lastly, I answer, that Nimrod was not the first beginner of authority, or
power, or government, though he were of that kind of governors: For there was
a hunter both Ecclesiastical and Civil before: Yea and there were cities in
the world before, therefore there must needs be government and governors:
Cain built a City, yea and God himself ordained Magistracy after the flood,
when he said: By man shall his blood be shed, Genes. 9.6. In short; Nimrod
was the author of the Babylonicall tyrannical Monarchy: Not the author of the
Magistracy, or civil authority over others.

Object. Many Kingdoms and officers are gotten by evil means.

Solut. So many men get goods by usury, or robbery: yet the things are of God.

Object. But we see, that Magistrates are chief, and set up by men.

Solut. So the fruits of the earth are gotten in by the labor and care of men,
are they not therefore of God? Ministers are chosen of men: Is not their
calling therefore of God? Second causes do not exclude the first.

To conclude, the Magistracy is the ordinance of men subiectiuely, Subiectiue.
as it is enjoyed or borne by men, Obiectiue.
and obiectiuely as it is employed amongst men, and in respect of the end, as
it is for the good of men. (...)*
But the true word Creation or Ordinance shows, (...).
it is Gods work, or institution or appointment.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that we are bound to submit our selves to the
ordinances, that is, to the office, or calling, or authority: he does not
mention the persons so much as the calling; because oftentimes there is found
in the persons vices, and some causes of not obeying: but in such again, we
must not consider the person, but the ordinance, or calling it self.

Thirdly, we must submit our selves to their ordinances, that is, to all sorts
of Magistrates. Now all Magistrates may be distinguished, either in respect of
1. Jurisdiction, 2. or Religion, 3. or Objects, 4. or Affairs, 5. or Office,
6. or Adjuncts, 7. or Dignity. First, in respect of Jurisdiction: some are
superior, that they have none above them but God; as Emperor, King, Dictator,
Senate, etc. or inferior, which is appointed by the superior, as are all
inferior Governors, and Officers. Secondly, in respect of Religion; some are
believers, as David: some infidels, and so are either such as persecute
Religion, as Herod, Julian: or tolerate it, as Traiane. Thirdly, in respect of
Objects, some are Togati, Governors: some are Armati, Marshall men. Fourthly,
in respect of Business, some are Counselors, some Senators, some Judges, etc.
Fifthly, in respect of Office, some are (...), Law-giuers: some are (...),
Law-keepers, as Justices, and the like. Sixthly, in respect of Adjuncts, some
are lawful, and just, and good Magistrates, who come by their power by lawful
election or succession, and do exercise it well: others are unlawful, or bad
Magistrates, as having, in respect of the manner, attained their places by
unlawful means, or do exercise their authority with cruelty or partiality,
or the like. Seventhly, in respect of Dignity, some have dignity, and not
authority; as such as enjoy the titles of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights,
Esquires, or Gentlemen: Some have Dignity, and Authority also, as such of any
of the former kind, or the like, as are likewise called to any office of rule
and government, or service: Now we must be subject, not alone to the King or
superior, but to governors under them, as the Text shows: We must be subject
to Princes that are infidels, as well as to Christian Princes; for such were
the Magistrates for the most part, when the Apostles writ: So we must be
subject to unworthy, or vicious, or tyrannous Princes, as well as to godly and
virtuous, and loving Princes, which the word here translated Ordinance,
imports: for it signifies creation, and so Magistracy is a creation in diverse
respects. First, because God was the author of it, as he was of the world.
Secondly, because Magistrates are raised beyond expectation. Thirdly, because
many times God, as a righteous Judge, suffers many men to get into high places
of honor and authority, that have no worthiness, or fitnes, or stuff in
them, more then he would have to rule or furnish it self: even to such
Magistrates also must we submit. Only for the last distinction, there is a
difference for such as excel only for titles of dignity, and have not
authority: we must reverence, and show as civil respect unto them, as belongs
to their places: but we are not bound to submit our selves to them by way of
obedience; for that is due only to such as have authority, as well as dignity.

Thus of subjection to Magistrates: subjection to the Laws of Magistrates
follows.

Concerning the laws and ordinances of Magistrates, two things may hence be
gathered.

First, that we must subject our selves to such laws and ordinances as men
that are in authority do make: we are bound to this subjection, even to men's
laws: that we are bound, the very words of the Text prove: howsoever, or in
what respect we are bound, is to be distinctly considered. For, man's laws do
not bind as God's Laws do: for, God's Laws do bind not only the outward
man, but the inward man also, even the very consciences, more distinctly and
particularly. The laws of men bind only the outward man properly: for, God
reserueth the conscience of man only to his own command. Now, whereas the
Apostle says, Romans 13.5. We must obey Magistrates not only for fear, but for
conscience, it is thus to be understood: First, that men are not only driven
to obedience of Magistrates for fear of punishment, but even by their own
conscience, ever testifying, that they ought to obey them. Secondly, that the
conscience is bound to obey Magistrates by the virtue of God's Commandment,
that requires this obedience of men, not simply in respect of the laws of men.

Secondly, that we are bound to obey every ordinance of man, that is, all sorts
of laws made by men. This needs explication: for, it is evident by diverse
examples in Scripture, of godly men that have refused to obey in some cases:
and the Apostles have left a rule, Acts 5, that in some cases it is better to
obey God, than man. And therefore I would consider of it distinctly, in what
things they have no authority to command, and in what things they have
authority.

For the first. In some cases Magistrates have not authority: and if they do
command, we are not bound to obey. For, every Magistrate stands bound himself
to look to it, In what things the Magistrate is not to be obeyed.
that he transgress not in these cases: He is bound to the law of nature, as he
is a man; and to the Law of God, as he is a Christian; and to the fundamental
Laws of the Kingdom, as he is a Prince or Magistrate: so that he must make
no laws or ordinances against any of these Laws, especially he may command
nothing forbidden in God's Word, nor forbid any thing that is commanded in
God's Word: some instances will be given afterward.

For the second. In what things they are to be obeyed.
In what things they may make laws, there is no question in these cases I now
maintain: as, If they make laws in mere civil things for the good of the
Common wealth, there is no doubt but we must obey: the express words of the
Text require our submission; and so, if they make laws to enjoin their
subjection to do such things as are commanded by God in Scripture, or to forbid
the doing of such things as are expressly condemned in God's Word.

There are other cases that have been by men of diseased minds doubted of: but
yet submission is by the Word of God required in them, as well as in other
cases. For instance: Men ought to submit themselves in these cases following;
as first, in civil things, if men's laws be in some sort injurious, as in
matter of men's goods. A Prince makes laws, to lay too heavy taxations upon the
subject, yet the Subject must submit: and therefore the ten Tribes did sinfully,
to refuse Rehoboam, and rebel against him for that reason. If any object, that
Naboth did not yield to Ahab when he desired his Vineyard; I answer, first,
that some difference must be put between the occasions of Princes, I mean
their desires, and their laws: the inordinate desires of Princes are not
always necessary to be fulfilled. Secondly, Naboth was tied by the Law of
God, to keep his inheritance: for, God had tied every man to keep his ancient
inheritance, and to marry within his Tribe, that so it might be clearly
manifest, of what stock the Messiah should come, Leu. 25.23. Number. 36.7, 9. But
this was an ordinance peculiar to the Jewish government.

Secondly, in Church Matters the Magistrate may command: and the Subjects must
obey. Now, because many questions are moved about the Magistrates authority in
Church Affairs, and about Churchmen, therefore I will here proceed distinctly,
and show first, what they cannot do about Religion; and then, what they may do.

These things they cannot do, that is, they have no power nor authority to
meddle in them: as,

In what matters ecclesiastical, the Magistrate has no power.
First, the civil Magistrate has no power nor authority to execute the office
of the Church-Minister: he may not preach in the Church, or administer the
Sacraments, or execute the censures of the Church, Heb. 5.5. 1. Cor. 7.10. The
presumption of Jeroboam and Vzziah heerin was punished, 1. Kings 13. 2. Chron.
26.

Secondly, he has no power to make laws that shall bind men to believe his
devices, as matters of faith and doctrine: for, these things depend upon the
will of God, not of Princes.

Thirdly, he has not power to bring-in any idolatrous service into the Church,
as a part of God's worship, Esaias 29.13. Mat. 15.19. And therefore Jeroboam was
condemned for the Calves; and Ahab, for Baal; and Ahaz, for the Altar of
Damascus; and all the kings, for the high places.

Fourthly, he has no power to set-vp a Ministry in the Church, that, for the
substance of the calling, was not instituted by Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Heb.
5.5. All Ministers of the Gospel have their mission from Christ.

Thus of what they cannot do: In what things he has power ecclesiastical.
what they can and ought to do, follows. For, it is certain, that in many
things the Magistrates authority may and ought to be extended in spiritual
things for the good of the Subject: and therefore, in respect of Religion, they
are said to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers. The Apostle says, Romans
13.5, of the Magistrate, He is the Minister of God for thy good. Now, the good
of the Subject is not only a civil good, done ciuilly; but done spiritually,
a spiritual good, which is the greatest good of the Subject, and therefore to
be most sought for by the Prince. And as in respect of their civil good he
must provide, that justice may flourish in the Commonwealth: so in respect of
their spiritual good, he must provide, that Religion may flourish in the
Church: and to this end,

First, he may, and ought by his laws to enjoin the profession of the true
Religion, and the confession of faith according to the Word of God.

Secondly, he may, and ought to provide to the uttermost of his power, that the
Churches may be furnished with able Ministers, and that they likewise may have
power to call and ordain other Ministers, and dispose, or depose, as may be
best for the good of the Church.

Thirdly, he may, and ought to provide by his Laws, and order, that the Word
of God may be sincerely and purely taught, and the Sacraments rightly
administered, and the censures of the Church executed according to the Word.

Fourthly, he may, and ought by his Laws to forbid, and accordingly to punish
blasphemies, heresies, Idolatry, Sacrilege, and the like.

Now that the godly Princes have had power in these and the like cases about
Religion, is plain: Moses by the appointment of God gave order to Aaron and
the people, in the business of Religion: Iosuah appointes circumcision, Josh. 5.
proclaims the Law of God, Joshua 8. Renewes the covenant with God, Josh. 24.
David disposes of the officers about the tabernacle, 1. Chron. 23. and brings
home the ark, 2. King. 6. Solomon dedicated the temple: Asa the king made such
a Law as this, that whosoever would not seek the God of Israel, should die:
Ezechias brake down the brazen Serpent, 2. Kings 18. commanded the Priests to
cleanse the Temple, 2. Chro. 29. and to celebrate the Passover, and commanded
the Levites to help the Priests, because the Priests were not then clean, 2.
Chron. 30. Josias destroyed the idols, sent his Princes to see to the restoring
of the House of God, appointed the Priests to their Ministeries in the Temple,
etc. 2. Chron. 34. and 35. And whatsoever power the Princes had in the old
Testament, the same power Christian Princes have in the new Testament. Many
Testimonies might more be added. Solomon deposed Abiathar: Iehosaphat sent his
Princes to see that the Priests and Levites did teach the Law of God in their
cities: But these may suffice.

Quest. But may the Magistrate lawfully make or appoint any orders to bind the
subjects about the worship of God?

Ans. The Magistrate may, and ought to determine the circumstances of Gods
worship, which are not determined in the Word, he may not appoint any more
duties as a worship to God, but as a keeper of the first Table. He may give
order for the circumstances in or about the doing of religious duties in the
church: as, he may appoint the time, place, and outward form of prayer,
administration of the Sacraments, fasting, alms or the like. These things must
not be done tumultuously, or confusedly, but in order, and that order the
Magistrate may prescribe.

All actions about Gods worship are of two sorts: Actions about Gods worship,
of two sorts.
some differ not from the worship it self, but are things, that God especially
looks at in his worship, such as is the purity and sanctity of the heart:
some belong to the worship of God, as helps and instruments for the better
performing, or declaring of that worship. The first sort of actions must be
prescribed only by God: who only can give, what he requires; and of this
sort, whatsoever is not commanded, is forbidden: no man may add, or take away,
or change in these things. The second, sort are not all of a kind neither. For
some are necessary in respect of the being of them; Quoad (...). Quoad (...).
as, that there should be Churches, marriages, or that the Sacraments should
be administered, etc. and these also must be instituted of God only: but some
are contingents, and belong to the manner, how or when, as may best agree to
the condition of each particular Church. Now, these last God has left to the
Church, and so to the Christian Magistrate to dispose of, so as God's truth,
Christian simplicity, or public edification be not hindered or violated.

Quest. But here might some one say, In these things the matter was appointed
of God: the Magistrate meddles only with the manner or the circumstances. But
may Magistrates, by their own authority, bring into the Church things, that
for matter or manner were never appointed by God, and so enioine their own
inventions to be observed by the Subject?

Ans. Inventions of men are of diverse sorts: for,

First, some are impious, and contrary to the Word of God in their own nature;
such as are, The invocation of Saints, selling of Masses and Indulgences, the
forbidding of marriage and meats, Whether any inventions of men ought to be
obeyed.
making of Images, consecration of Altars, the use of holy water, prayer for
the dead, monastical vows, worship of relics, the exalting of one Bishop to
be over all the world, and such like: these may not be commanded: they are the
leaven of Pharisees, and will spoil all, and therefore may not be brought-in by
any authority.

Secondly, other inventions of men there are that concern only things that in
their own nature are indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden of God: in
these the Magistrate has power to command, but yet not an absolute power: for,
he may offend in commanding; and Subjects may offend in obeying. And therefore
I distinguish thus: If the Magistrate command things indifferent in their own
nature to be used, and profess, that he requires them with opinion of
worship, Gal. 5. Mat. 15. Command. 2.
holiness, or merit, or necessity to salvation, then the Magistrate sins in
so commanding, and the Subject sins in obeying: but, if the Magistrate
command things to be used which in their own nature are indifferent, and
profess to disclaim the opinion of holiness, worship, merit, or necessity,
then it is lawful to obey his commandments in such cases. So then, traditions
brought-in with an opinion of necessity, etc. are unlawful: but traditions
brought-in for order and decorum, are lawful, 1. Cor. 14.40. and this is
apparent. For, if God have left the ordering of things indifferent, to men, why
may not Magistrates appoint that order? And if Christians may take-in or bring
up customs in the time of God's worship, why may not the Magistrate do it by
his authority? If Christians may make an order for what garments women should
wear on their heads in the time of God's worship, why may not the Magistrate
make an order, what garments Ministers should wear in the time of God's
worship? If subjects may of their own heads appoint a feast of their own
making, at the time of God's feast, as they did their loue-feasts in the
Primitive Church, and withal appointed the action or gesture of kissing one
another; why may not the Magistrate by his authority bring in an action or
gesture, it being such a gesture as God has neither commanded nor forbidden?
Finally, if in things indifferent, a private man may use things indifferent of
his own head, why may he not use them which the Magistrate commands, and when
he commands him? and if he may refuse to use some things only because of his
own will, why may he not refuse them when the Magistrate forbids him?

But that this point may be more clear, I will set down a Catalogue of
inventions of men used for religious ends, and uses without any commandment
of God, and that both before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel.

First, before the Law we read of these things:

The laying of the hand under the thigh in swearing, Genesis 24, etc.

Jacobs pillar erected, as a religious monument, Genesis 28.18.

Secondly, under the Law we read of these instances:

The Altar of the two Tribes, and a half, Iosuah 22.10. and 27.30.

David's dancing and playing on all sorts of instruments and songs before the
Ark, 1. Chron. 13.8. and 15, 16. and 2. Sam. 6.14.

David's wearing of a linen Ephod, the garment of the Levites, 1. Chron. 15.27.

David's appointing of the offices of the Levites, and his bringing in of the
new order of singing men into the Temple, 1. Chron. 24. and 25.

The use of sackcloth and ashes in fasting.

Solomon built another Altar besides the Altar of the Lord, 2. Chro. 7.7.

Hezekias kept the Passover at a time not appointed by the Law, and the people
kept it seven days longer, 2. Chron. 30.2, 3, 27.

About the celebration of the Passover it is manifest, that the godly Jews
brought in of their own heads, 1. The gesture of sitting, which Christ himself
also used. 2. The solemn use of the cup, of which mention is made also, that
Christ used it, Luke 22.17.


The Rechabites abstinence not only from wine, (according to the Law of the
Nazarites,) but from husbandry, and houses, Ierem. 35.

The Jews had every where Synagogues, which were not commanded by the Law,
Luke 7.5

Mardocheus appointed the feasts of Pur or lots.

Judas Macabeus appointed the feast of Tabernacles, which our Savior graced
with his presence.

Thirdly, under the Gospel,

Our Savior Christ approved the gesture of sitting, and the Cup at the
Passover, the Jewish Synagogues, and the feast of Tabernacles.

The Apostle Paul used the Jewish ceremonies, when they were no more the
ordinances of God; as Circumcision, shauing the head, purifying, vowing,
contributing, yea sacrificing, Acts 21.

Abstayning from meat sacrificed to Idols,

The observation of the Jewish Sabbath,

The women's couerings, 1. Cor. 11.

The Loue-feasts:

The holy kiss.

Quest. But here might some one say: Things indifferent in their own nature,
in the uses of them not inconvenient, may be commanded by the Magistrate, and
subjects must obey: but what if the Magistrate command some things to be
observed, as are very inconvenient and burdensome, though they be not
unlawful?

Ans. Things inconvenient even in matters of Religion may be commanded in some
cases: as when it is to redeem a far worse inconvenience. For of two evils of
punishments, the Magistrate may take the less, Circumcision was a burden,
Acts 5.10. and these burdens called necessary things v. 28. and they were said
to do well, if they observe them, v. 29.
as well as any other private man. And if that subjects, to prevent worse
inconveniences, may use inconvenient ceremonies, then may the Magistrate, to
prevent worse inconveniences, command inconvenient ceremonies. If the Apostles
may use the inconvenient Jewish ceremonies, then the Apostles may inioyne for a
time the use of inconvenient ceremonies: as they did make ordinances about
things which yet they called burdens, Acts 16. And Moses may make an ordinance
about the use of a bill of diuourcement, which yet was a grievous
inconvenience, to redeem a worse inconvenience. But if Magistrates do appoint
inconvenient things, and burden the Church with them, when there would be no
great inconvenience to the Church, if such things were not, then such
Magistrates must give their account to Christ for so doing, but yet the people
are bound to obey still, because we cannot be freed from our subjection laid
upon us by God, except it appear to us, that they command not only an
inconvenience, but a sin, as all sound Divines confess.

But that this point may be distinctly understood, let us survey the
inconveniences amongst us usually pretended, and then enquire, whether such
things may be, viz.

There be five things, Pretended inconveniences by humane Laws suruaied.
are thought each, of them to make the inventions of men very inconvenient and
burdensome, and so not to be used: as, First, If there be no necessary use of
them. Secondly, if they swerve from some pattern may be had in such things in
Scripture. Thirdly, If they be things have been, or are abused to
superstition. Fourthly, if they have signification put upon them by men.
Fifthly, if they be scandalous in the use of them.


For the first: It is manifest, that there was no necessary use of the Jewish
ceremonies: For now the substance and body was come, there was no need of those
shadows, and yet they were used by the Apostles.

For the second; in ceremonial and circumstantiall things, it is not always a
sin to swerve from examples in Scripture. It does not follow, that Christ did
sit at the Lords Supper, and therefore it is unlawful to kneel: For I can
show, that godly men have swarued from the show of paterns, that did serve to
bind stronglier, then that example, or such like can do. As for example: The
godly Jews did sit at the Sacrament, when yet the gesture imported in the Law,
was standing; and this sitting at the passover was manifestly an invention of
man: For it was no where commanded, yea and the Christians that now object the
example of Christ in the gesture, yet do not hold themselves tied to follow
the example of Christ, neither in diverse circumstances about the Sacrament; as
that it was received at night: in a chamber: after supper: in unleavened bread:
only by Ministers, not by women, etc. nor in the matter of gesture in other
things, as that he sat and prayed: and yet none of them pleades, that it is
necessary for our imitation. And further it may clearly be showed, that the
commandment of God about circumstantiall and ceremonial things, might in some
cases be transgressed without sin: which shows, that those precepts did never
in Gods intendement bind the conscience absolutely, as moral precepts in things
substantial did: As, that every man should be circumcised the eightth day,
was Gods commandment: yet the children of Israel were not circumcised for
forty years in the wilderness, Iosuah 5.5, 6, 7, 9. The law was, that None
should eat of the shewbread but the Priests: yet David did eat, and was
blameless, Mat. 12.3. The Priests in the Temple did work, or profane the
Sabbath, as it is translated, Mat. 12.5. and yet were innocent. It was the law,
that None must sacrifice any where, but on the one and only Altar of the Lord:
yet Solomon sacrificed on another altar, for the reason mentioned in that Text,
2. Chron. 7.7. 1. Kings 8.64. In Hezechias his time they kept the Passover
neither at the time, nor in the ceremonial manner, as was required in the Law;
and yet they sinned not, 2. Chron. 30.2, 3, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 27. To abstain
from meats sacrificed to idols, was enjoined by the Apostles, Acts 15. and yet
that did restrain Christian liberty, being a thing indifferent: and
afterward, to eat meat sacrificed to idols, swarued from the pattern of that
ordinance.

For the third. It is also manifest, that things that were abused to
superstition and idolatry, had notwithstanding a lawful use when their abuse
was removed from them. Acts 15.1.
As for instance: The Jewish ceremonies, especially Circumcision, were
notoriously abused by the perverse Jews, who held very corrupt opinions about
them; and yet the Apostle Paul did not make any doubt to use them. Again, the
meat sacrificed to idols, when it comes out of the idols temple, is pronounced
to be clean, and not polluted, by the Apostle Paul. Be^ides, it is manifest,
our Temples, Bells, Chalices, and such like, have been abused by idolaters; and
yet there is not any question made of the lawful use of them by Divines on
either side.

That this point may be a little more understood, we must confess, that in the
time of Moses Law, whatsoever thing had been upon or about the idol, it was
infected and made unclean by the idol: but withal we must understand, that the
idol, even in those times, did never pollute all things that were of that sort
which were before it: it did pollute that very thing in indiuiduo, not all in
specie of the same sort. And further we must now know, that the idol is
nothing, and can infect nothing of it self out of the idolaters use; and so,
that those laws about pollution of idols, are ceased: for, the Apostle Paul
shows, that the very meat that was sacrificed to idols or devils, out of the
idols temple, was not polluted, but was lawful to be used: it was not near an
execrable thing, as was the Babylonish garment in the time of the Law, in
Achan's possession. Jacob erected a Pillar, as a monument that concerned the
true God; and yet it is manifest, that the Gentiles have most idolatrously
abused themselves in that course of erecting Pillars, Leu. 26.1.

For the fourth point. Such ceremonies as had signification put upon them, were
notwithstanding lawful, as is manifest by the consideration of most of those
ceremonies mentioned before; the Altar by Jordan, the Cup used at the
Passover, the Cover on the heads of women, and the loue-feasts with the holy
kiss: and so had all the Jewish ceremonies.

Now for the last thing, which makes things indifferent, with us scandalous: we
are not left without witness from the Scriptures in such cases; but that
ceremonies, known to be scandalous, were notwithstanding used: for, it is
manifest concerning the Jewish ceremonies, that they were scandalous in the
usage, to the Gentiles; and in the omitting, to the Jews, Acts 21.21, 22, 27,
28. Gal. 2.3, 9, 12. But, that this point of scandal may be distinctly
understood, diverse rules are to be considered of.

First, Rules about taking and giving scandal at humane ceremonies.
that the angring or bare displeasing of other men, is not the offense or
scandal condemned in Scripture, as not only the words in the Original show,
but all sound Divines grant. A scandal is a stumbling block, that occasions a
man to fall from grace in the profession of it, into sin or error.

Secondly, that to give offense, by doing any thing which is simply evil in
it self (as David did by his adultery and murder) this is, out of all question,
abominable.

Thirdly, that the offense of Alients is to be regarded, that is, we must not
do any thing, by which men that are not yet converted, may be hardened from the
liking of Religion: and so, offense must not be given either to the Jew* or to
the Grecian, 1. Cor. 10.31.

Fourthly, that when the authority of the Magistrate or Church has determined
concerning the use of things indifferent, we are not now left free, nor are
bound to look at the scandal of particular persons; but must make conscience
of it, that we offend not the Church, by working a greater hurt or loss to
the Church, than the particular hurt of private persons can extend unto. In
such cases as this, the Apostle's rule holds: If any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God, 1. Cor. 11.16. And
we are bound, in this Text of the Apostle Peter, to obey the humane ordinances
of men in authority; from which obligation, other men's offense cannot free us.
And the Apostle charge us to look to it, that we offend not the Church in
prescribed ordinances, and that we be careful not to offend private men in
free ceremonies.

Fifthly, that where ceremonies are left free and indifferent, and have no
commandment to restrain their use, or enjoin it, there are men to redeem the
offense of their brethren with no other price, than the loss of liberty in
things indifferent. The Apostle Paul says, Rather than he will offend his
brother, he will never eat flesh while he lives, 1. Cor. 10.8, 13. He does
not say, He will never preach the Gospel while he lives, or never receive
the Sacraments while he lives: a necessity lay upon him to preach the Gospel,
and to yield to the use of all lawful things to get his liberty, whosoever be
offended.

Sixthly, that where the person that takes offense, is wilfully ignorant, and by
all means auoids instruction, and will not have the patience to be taught,
such offense is not to be regarded. Thus our Savior Christ teaches
confidently his doctrine of eating his flesh, though the Capernaites were
offended: and some of his Disciples turned Apostates about it, being such
persons as would not abide the exposition of his meaning, John 6.52.

Seventhly, the like is to be said of such persons as take offense out of envy
or malice, as the man in the Parable, that envied Christ's bounty; or the
Pharisees, that out of malice were offended at Christ, Mat. 20.15. Mat. 15.14.
1. Pet. 2.8.

Eightthly, that in things that have proved scandalous, yet we are not bound
to lose our liberty, till the weak brother declare his offense. Meat sacrificed
to idols, was offensive to many in all countries: yet the Apostle's rule is,
Eat, and make no question, unless one say, This is meat sacrificed to idols,
1. Cor. 10.25, 28.

Thus of the five things that make things indifferent to become inconvenient,
and yet not unlawful. I might add some other things; as, that a man may
practice and use such ceremonies for the advancing of the substantial part of
God's worship, as he himself has every where preached against, Acts 22.21.
and in some cases has refused to do, Gal. 2.5, 24. Again, that such
inconvenient ceremonies may be imposed upon such persons and Churches as never
received them before, Acts 15.19, 28. and 21.25.

Quest. The last question is, Whether we must submit unto Magistrates, when
they command unlawful things?

Ans. A great difference is to be put between things commanded by Magistrates,
concerning the lawfulnes of which was doubt, and such things concerning which
the Subject is assured, that they are unlawful. It is clear, that if I know
the Magistrate commands a thing unlawful, I must not do it, because in that
case I am bound to obey God, and not men: but, suspicion or doubting of the
lawfulness of things, is no discharge for obedience. It is true, that in
things indifferent, which I may do or not do, I must be fully persuaded; and
whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: but I suppose, that the Inferior is not
discharged from his obedience in any case, but when he knows the Magistrate
commands a sin. Infinite confusion would follow in the family, and
commonwealth, and Churches, if the conjectures and suspicions of the
Inferiors might warrant their refusal of subjection.

Secondly, though I must in things unlawful refuse to obey, yet I must look to
the manner of refusal: I must take heed, that I be not guilty of that sin
of speaking evil of dignities, 2. Pet. 2. Jude. Which prohibition was given
them when the Magistrates were wicked men, and did command unlawful things.

Thus of the doctrine and explication of these things that concern man's
ordinances, and their authority in the extent of them. The uses follow.

Use. The use may be for reproof; and so, both of those that offend in the
excess, and of those that offend in the defect.

First, some men attribute too much to the ordinances of men, and that diverse
ways: as, when they account men's ordinances, in the observation of them, to be
a worship to God, or to be meritorious, or to be necessary to salvation, or
in themselves simply to bind consciences: and also when more care is had for
the keeping of men's ordinances, then of Gods commandments: or when Gods
service is hindered, or transgressed, or neglected for men's traditions.

Secondly, some men offend in the defect: as, 1. Such Christians as deny
obedience to the ordinances of men in the indifferent or only inconvenient
things. 2. Such Christians as in the manner show no scruple, nor fear, nor
trouble of mind for breaking Gods express Law, in requiring obedience to
Magistrates, while they are ignorant, whether it be a sin or no to obey; and
yet on the other side, are extremely fearful, and troubled in themselves, to
vary from the advice or example of such men, as they account godly, or fathers
to them or others in Religion, and so are more fearful to break men's
traditions, then Gods commandments. Tradition is ill, as well when it comes
from good men, as when it comes from bad men. 3. The Jesuits, that maintain
that horrid Doctrine of deposing: or murdering of Princes, so far are they
from obeying them; persons rather to be confuted by strokes, then by
arguments, as men that offend not only against the Laws of God, but the Laws
of nations, and the Law of nature.


Hitherto of the things to which they must submit themselves, viz. to every
ordinance of man. The motive, or manner follows.

For the Lords sake.]

These words do import both the cause, and the manner of submission: they must
submit for the Lords sake, and so

First, there are diverse things in God, which should move Christians to all
possible care of pleasing, and obeying their Magistrates: as, First, Gods and
men's Magistrates were ordained of God, and therefore for his sake, that set
them up, we should obey them. Secondly, Gods commandments: God has required
our submission, and therefore for the respect of the duty we owe to God, we
should obey them. Thirdly, Gods Image: Magistrates are little Gods in the
world, they resemble Gods sovereignty, or Majesty, and therefore because they
are like God, we should obey them even for so much of the similitude of God,
as we may behold in them, or their authority. Fourthly, Gods mercies: we are
infinitely bound unto God, and therefore for his sake, even for the love we
bear to him, we should do this, which he requires. Fifthly, Gods glory, God
shall get much honor, and his religion will be well-spoken of, if Christians
live obediently: and contrariwise, if Christians be not obedient, God may be
much dishonored thereby, and great storms of affliction may be brought upon
the Church by the wrath of Princes. Sixthly, the judgments of God, because they
must give account to God for their behavior toward Magistrates, as well as for
their behavior toward God himself.

Secondly, these words may note the manner of obedience: we must obey Princes
for Gods sake, not only for conscience sake, but even as if we did obey God
himself, and with a due respect unto God: and so it may make also a
limitation: we must so obey man, as we still have respect unto God, so as
nothing be done against the Word, or pleasure of God.

Use. The use should be therefore for instruction, to teach us to look
carefully to our selves in our submission, and so to obey,

First, from the heart, because God is entitled to this service.

Secondly, with fear, because God will be an auenger of disobedience, and
resisting of the powers.

Thirdly, though our subjection should be to our loss, or discredit, or
danger, or hurt any way; yet, for the Lords sake we should do it. There is
motive enough in God, though there were not worthiness in the Magistrate, or
recompense to us.

Again, it serves to show the hatefulnes of the transgressors, that resist the
power, and will not make conscience of it to submit themselves to the
ordinances of Magistrates. For this is to resist God himself, this is (...):
and God will certainly be a revenger of this disobedience, it being his own
cause, as well as the Magistrates.

Besides, it serves to inform us concerning the admirable power and wisdom of
God, in effecting the subjection of man to authority of Magistrates: all men
naturally affect to excel, and like not superiority in other men; and besides
it is needful, that one man should govern and keep in order millions of men,
disposed as before. Now this well points at the cause of this order and
subjection, which is the respect of God. God naturally has planted in the
hearts of men a fear to rebel or disobey, even for fear of God himself, more
then Princes: and besides, God has made man to see by experience, that he
does defend the persons and rights of Kings, by revenging the disobedience of
men: this natural conscience keeps under natural men. Now though the Apostle
would have godly men to obey for the same reason, yet it is upon a higher
ground: for godly men are instructed by the Word of God to obey Princes; yea,
herein differs the obedience of the godly from the wicked, that the godly man
obeyes for the mere love he bears to God; and the wicked, only for fear of
vengeance from God: so both obey for a higher reason then the respect of
Princes themselves, even for the Lords sake: the one for the love of God, and
the care of his glory; the other, for fear of his punishments and judgments.

Lastly, it shows, men must so acknowledge the glory of Princes, as that
especially we have respect unto the glory of God, who is King of Kings: we must
obey Kings in the land, so as God be not disobeyed.

Thus of the Proposition, the Exposition follows.

The Apostle labors to clear this doctrine from diverse scruples might be
conceived by Christians, whether they arise from the diversity of the sorts of
Magistrates, or from their soueraignety. For the sorts; he shows they must obey
Magistrates of all sorts, both superior, and inferior; the highest, and those
which are subordinate to them, both Kings and Governors also for their
soueraignety. He teaches them to observe the supremacy of Kings and Monarchs.

In general, we may learn from the Apostles care, to prevent mistaking
herein; that he accounts it a pernicious thing, to err about the authority of
Princes, and their Governors: and experience shows it to be pernicious
sometimes to the persons of Kings, who are often by treason murdered, upon
wicked and erroneous grounds; and sometimes to the subjects, who draw upon
themselves not only fearful sins, but miserable punishment also, by erring
herein: sometimes it is pernicious to religion it self, and religious causes,
giving not only scandal, but procuring desolation in the Churches through
errors: sometimes on the left hand, and sometimes on the right hand.

Whether to the King.]

It may be questioned, whom the Apostle means, by the word King? Such as
understand the Epistle to be written to the Jews, may perhaps conceive, that
the Kings that ruled by deputation in Judea, should be meant; such as were
Herod and Agrippa. But in as much as the Jews were scattred through the
Provinces, and those provincial Jews were most in quiet: and in as much as
for the reasons before given, it is likely, that the Epistle was written to all
Christians, both Jews and Gentiles; therefore by the King he meant Caesar.
And then a more scruple arises, for the Romans hated the name of a King, and
Caesar was an Emperor: to which diverse things may be answered.

First, that though the present governor was an Emperor; yet the Apostle,
knowing that the most monarchies in the world would rest in the title of King
in all ages, therefore he uses that title that may concern the most of the
Elect in all ages.

Secondly, that though amongst the Romans the title of King was not used; yet
the Grecians, in whose language he writ, did familiarly use the word, (...).
which we translate King.

Thirdly, the Apostle might have respect unto the signification of the word, as
unto a word which was most effectual to note the highest dignity among men:
For it notes him that is the stay or foundation of the people, or the
commonwealth: and though ambitious men sought new titles, as higher; yet the
Apostle knew, that this was most maiesticall and honorable: for the term of
Emperor, in the signification of it, may agree to any subordinate rule, who
gouernes or commands other men.

Fourthly, it may be, that the Apostle, knowing the hypocrisy of those
Emperors (who only disclaimed the name of Kings, to avoid the hatred of the
people; and yet sought the full right of Kings, and so to destroy the liberty
of the people) gives the name they sought in substance, though not in term.
Where by the way we may note, how hateful hypocrisy is to God, Hypocrisy.
and how vain it is. God will unmask even Kings, if they dissemble with him:
He that tries the hearts and reins, judges according to truth, and will not
be deceived with pretenses. Though men durst not charge Caesar to affect the
kingdom, yet God dares, and will require at his hands the ambition of his
heart: And if God will not bear with dissimulation in Kings, much less will
he bear it in meaner men: he hates hypocrisy, and fained pretenses, and
painted shows wheresoever he finds it; which should teach us all to labor
for a plain and upright heart in all things, to direct our words and carriage,
according to the true intent of our hearts. For besides that God will plague
men for their dissimulation, which cannot be hid from him: it falls out usually,
that such as use dissembling, are perpetually suspected (all their fair
pretenses notwithstanding) as those Caesar's were.

Lastly; the Apostle may name Kings, to prevent rebellion in the subjects,
which either should fear such as affected the title, or live under such as
professed themselves to be Kings, and so the meaning is, that he would have
them obey even Kings, how hateful soever naturally that kind of government
did seem unto them.

It may be that the Apostle mentions Kings, as the last kind of government:
a Monarchy being in many respects the most excellent form of government; as
being such a form of government, as comes nearest to the similitude of God, who
is not only one in nature, but in government also, and is most agreeable to
nature, which does affect unity, as well in the body politic, as in the body
natural. But I let this pass as a question belonging rather to the
Politickes, then to Divinity, to be discussed at large.

Thus coniecturally of the reason, why the Apostle uses this term.

Concerning Kings, I propound these things to be considered of.

First, the Original of Kings.

Secondly, the excellency of Kings: both these tend to work in man the care of
obedience to them and their Laws.

Thirdly, the indefinite manner of propounding the term; showing, that this
submission belongs to all Kings.

Fourthly, the uses of all.

Original of Kings.
For the first. It is not unprofitable to consider how men came, by degrees, at
length to subject themselves to this government of Kings.

Homo natura est animal politicum.
First, man, by the instinct of God, and by the nature given him, tends to
society: of all creatures, man is vnaptest to live alone: man's language shows,
that he was made to society: and man's disposition shows, that it likes not any
estate that must be removed from the knowledge and conversation of other men.
He that can live without society, is either better than a man, as is GOD; or
worse than a man, as is a beast.

Diverse kinds of societies.
The first kind of society was oeconomicall, a household society: where was,
first, a society between man and wife; and thence, by propagation, grew the
society to a full household, by the comming-in of children and servants. And
hence was the first form of government; where the father of the family was the
Head and Ruler.

The second kind of society, was a Village or Town, which contained in it the
government of diverse houses or families: and this was occasioned either by
increase of posterity, or for prevention of harms, or out of necessity for
supply of necessaries. At the first, a Village or Town contained (as is
thought) only the several branches of the same family, that is, when men
lived so long, such as were descended of their blood, and were ruled by the
chief and first of their blood. Afterward, strangers of other families, that
were fewer in number, mingled with them, to avoid the danger of wild beasts,
or the injuries of other men: yea, Pagus a (...).
one of the words used for a village, is derived from a word that signifies a
Fountain; and so imports, that necessity drew men to dwell together, that so
they might enjoy the benefit of nature for water, which in the Countries
first-planted, was not universally to be had, but one Well must serve diverse
households: and so the Springs of water was one cause to bring men to this kind
of society, and dwelling together.

The third kind of society, was a City; which consisted of the people of many
Villages: and into this society, men came both for commodity and necessity: For
commodity; as namely, for trades, and the education of children, and the
exercise of Religion, and the administration of justice; for necessity, that so
they might be strengthened against their enemies, and to this end they walled
and ditched-about their Cities; as also to keep-in offenders, that they might
not flee, and to keep out such as were banished, that they might not return:
and in this society, first began the government of Kings. For, from the
beginning, it is thought, that every City had a King, as a Monarch to rule and
defend it, as appears in Genesis. There was a King of Sodom and Gomorrah: and
so every of the other Cities had their different Kings.

Fourthly, when men increased so fast, that one City could not hold the people
which lived in it, then began Countries and Provinces: and at length, the
whole Nation, consisting of many Cities, became subject to one King: and
afterward, by conquest or marriage, diverse Nations yielded obedience to one
King.

Now, the ends why humane societies became subject to Kings and to superior
Powers, were the Commonweal, and the benefit of the people so united: for,
power was given to Kings, that so men might be protected in the practice of
virtue, that peace might be preserved among the Inhabitants, that the common
privileges might be maintained, that courses for raising of riches and trades,
might be held. Each man did look to his own wealth: but the King was to
look-to the Commonwealth.

And thus much of the Original of Kings. Their excellency above other men,
follows.

Secondly, it must needs appear, that Kings are of all men most excellent, The
excellencies of Kings above others.
in respect of their outward condition and calling; 1. Because God himself was
a King, and is delighted to rank himself among men of that degree. 2. Because
their creation is from God: they are a special sort of men, raised in a
peculiar manner to their places by God; who pleads it as his glory, that Kings
reign by him, Pro. 8. Romans 13. 3. Because God has communicated to kings the
Image of his own Majesty, and printed in the natures of men a natural form
of Kings, as the Vicegerents to God himself. 4. Because a divine sentence is
in the mouth of the King, as Solomon says: their judgment is God's judgment:
and God would have the people to believe, that what they say in judgment, God
himself says it. 5. Because they have a power above all other men; of which,
when I come to treat of the word Superior. 6. Because they take accounts of
all other men, but give accounts only to God. 7. Because they have the
treasure of honor: they give all the honor which is possessed by any of their
Subjects, and so do they all offices of honor and government in their
Dominions. 8. Because they are the Basis, or the foundation, or stay of all
their Subjects; who are maintained in Religion, Justice and Peace, by their
means.


And thus of their excellency.

Thirdly, it is to be noted, that the word is set down indefinitely: and so it
shows, that this honor belongs to all Kings in the substance of it, whether
he be a King of one City, or many; whether he be a Jew or Gentile, a Christian
or Pagan, Heretical or Orthodoxall, Caesar or Herod, young or old, virtuous or
vicious.

Use. Fourthly, the use should be therefore from hence, to enforce upon our
hearts an increase of care and conscience, in acknowledging the honor and right
of Kings, and in loyal and sincere observance and obedience to their Laws. It
should not seem grievous to men to be held under the yoke of obedience, and to
be subject to others that are but men as well as themselves.

There are many things may encourage the hearts of Subjects, without grieuance
to bear the superiority of Princes, and not to be discontented: for, First,
Kings have nothing but what they have received. Secondly, if Kings do wrong,
they must give account to God for all the wrongs that they have done. Thirdly,
God has charged Princes to be careful of their Subjects: he has given them
laws, though they be Kings. Fourthly, Princes Subjects are first bound to God:
and therefore they are not tied to Princes in any thing contrary to God's Word.
Fifthly, though the outward man be subjected to the power of Princes, yet their
consciences are free: in spirit they are subject only to the God of spirits.
Sixthly, the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he turns them
as he pleases, Proverbs 21. Seventhly, though God has set up Kings, yet he
has not put down himself: but he rules in all these things: he is King of
heaven, Daniel 4.34. and he is King of all the earth, Psalm 47.8. He is a King
immortal, 1. Tim. 1.12. Eightthly, whereas thousands of subjects cannot
attain to the fight of the King, nor obtain any particular suite from him,
nor can the King provide for them in particular: yet may they go to God and
Jesus Christ, who is King of righteousness and peace, they may get great suites
in heaven, and shall be provided for in all needful things, Psalm 23.1. and
5.3, and 48.15. and 74.12. and 80.2. Esaias 49.10. Mat. 2.6. Revel. 7.17. Lastly,
though they be subjects now in respect of earthly Princes: yet in respect of
God they are anointed to be Kings themselves, and shall receive a Kingdom,
better then all the Kingdoms of the earth: The Princes of this world are but
mortal Kings: but every godly man is a King immortal, he partakes the title
of God himself. 1. Tim. 1.12.
God is a King immortal by nature, and he is a King immortal by adoption and
grace: and besides, the poorest subject, that is a true Christian, intertaineth
the King of glory every day, Psalm. 24.7, 9.


As superior. [(...).]

The word signifies one, that has above the hauings of other men: and so the
King has more then all his subjects, not only in matter of maintenance, but
also in matter of authority and supremacy: this his having in supremacy is
here meant.

That the King is supreme, is so manifest by this text, as it needs no proof:
Princes are called therefore in the Old Testament, Heads of the Tribes, or of
the people: to signify, that they were not only higher in place, but had
sovereign and supreme authority over all the people.

This supremacy of Kings gives them authority in all causes both
ecclesiastical and civil, and over all persons, Churchm-en, as well as
Laymen, as has been proved at large before in the former parts of this verse.

The use is therefore to confute the damnable pleadings of the Popes of Rome,
and their adherents, that claim to have the right of supremacy above the Kings
and Princes of the world. There are diverse manifest arguments to overthrow the
supremacy of the Pope.

First, this express text, that acknowledges the King to be superior, this
was the Doctrine in the Apostles times.

Secondly, it is more to be noted, that Peter himself, who by the opinion of
the Papists had the height of place in the church, that even Peter (I say) is
so far from clayming this to himself, that he directs christians to
acknowledge supremacy only as the right of Kings, yea and flatly forbids
dominion in the Clergy, 1. Pet. 5.5.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ at large beats down this primacy, or supremacy
in his Apostles and all churchmen, showing that they had not authority, as the
Kings of the earth had. It must not be so with them, and much less had they
authority over the Kings of the earth, Matthew 20.25. Luke 22, 25.

Fourthly, every soul must be subject to the higher powers. If every soul,
then Churchmen, if they have souls, must be subject, and therefore may not
rule, Romans 13.1.

Fifthly, Christ and the Apostles never claymed any such supremacy, but showed
the contrary by their Doctrine and practice.

Sixthly, it is made the express mark of that Man of sin, that he lifts up
himself above all that is called God, that is above Magistrates, 2. These. 2.

This has been the constant Doctrine of the ancient Fathers.

Origin Homil. 7. in Isaiah says, He that is called to a Bishopric, is not
called to principality, but to the service of the Church.

Tertullian lib. ad Scapul. says, We reverence the Emperor, as a man second to
God, and the only one that is less then God; and also, Tertullian de Ido.
Capite 18.

Nazianzen orat. ad subdit. et Imperat. All men must be subject to higher
powers.

The express testimonies of Chrysostom, and Bernard, upon Romans 13. have been
quoted before, read Bernard. de consid. lib. 2. Capite 4. Hilar. ad Anx.
Chrysostom. homil. 42. in Joan Ambrose in 2. Tim. 2.4.

Secondly, this should confirm every good subject, to acknowledge and
maintain the Kings supremacy, and willingly to bind himself thereunto by
oath: For the oath of supremacy is the bond of this subjection, and this oath
men must take without equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation, yea
it should bind in them the same resolution was in Saint Barnard: Bernard.
Epist. 170.
who says thus: If all the world would conspire against me, to make me
complot any thing against the Kings Majesty: yet I would fear God, and not
dare to offend the King ordained of God.

Or unto governors.]

By governors, he either means all other sorts of magistracy besides a
Monarchy, or else such Magistrates, as in a Kingdom have commission from the
King to hear and determine causes, or any way to rule and exercise any Laws
of the King: and it is the Apostles meaning, that Christians should be subject
to all sorts of Magistrates, of what form or dignity soever, from the highest
to the lowest, so as it should be no more lawful for them to disobey an
inferior Magistrate* then to disobey the King: so far forth as the inferior
Magistrate has authority, and does proceed according to his commission in
lawful things. This point needs not to be further handled, having been
entreated of in the general doctrine in submission to all Magistrates before.

And thus of the exposition: the confirmation follows.

Verse 14. Or unto governors, as unto them, that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.


THe Apostle in this verse and the next, confirms the exhortation, partly by
reasons, and partly by answering an Objection: the reasons are in this verse
and the next, and the prolepsis, verse 16.

The reasons may be referred to two heads; the one taken from the calling of
Magistrates, verse 14. and the other from the will of God, verse 15. The
calling of Magistrates is considered two ways: First, either in the author of
it, and so they are sent of God. Secondly, or in respect of the end of it,
which is partly the punishment of the wicked, and partly the praise of them
that do well.

As they that are sent of him.]

Of him, either may be referred to the King, or to the Lord: If it be referred
to the King, then it shows, that all inferior Magistrates receive all their
authority from the King; they have no more authority then other subjects, but
as it is bestowed upon them by the King, and withal it shows a secret in all
well governed Monarchies, which is, that the King reserues the giving of
honors and offices to himself, which more obliges the Under-officers and
Magistrates to him; and he is thereby the better acquainted with the State of
the Kingdom: but I am rather of the mind of those Interpreters, that refer it
to the Lord. And so the sense and doctrine is, that both the Kings and the
governors are sent of God: It is God, that prefers them, whatsoever the second
causes be. Though election or succession seem to make a King, and Kings make
governors, yet have we been taught, that none of these come to their places
without the providence of God, Proverbs 8.15. Now, God keeps this business in
his own hands, to see to the calling of Magistrates, because of the service by
them he can execute: For a great part of his Kingdom is managed by their
deputation. By them God scourges the sins of the wicked, yea of the whole
world, either by suffering them to be public miseries, or by guiding the^ to
punish offenders by the sword of Justice: and by them he many times brings
many common blessings upon worlds of people, as the next words show.

Uses. The uses are diverse; some particular, some general: In particular it
should teach us,

First, by prayer to s^eke Magistrates of God: subjects may get great blessings
of this kind, if they would pray hard for them. For GOD it is that sends
Magistrates.

Secondly, with patience to bear the wrongs of evil Magistrates, seeing there
is a hand of God in it.

Thirdly, with thankfulness to give the praise to God for good Magistrates,
seeing it was he that sent them, as a common blessing.

Fourthly, in all suits about the lives, or duties, or successions of
Magistrates, to trust unto God: For though we know not, where to be provided
in earth, yet God can send one from heaven, as it were. The word sent,
importes, that God can raise him up beyond expectation.

In general it should stir us up in all things done by outward means in this
world, to strive for the skill to find out, and acknowledge Gods hand and
providence in it; seeing in these things which are apparently done by means
for the most part, yet Gods providence is in it.

Thus of the Author of their calling: the end follows,

For the punishment of evil doers.]

Diverse things may be noted from hence.

First, that in all Commonwealths in the world, there will be evil doers:
though there be a King and governors, and Gods commandments lie hard upon
men's consciences, yet there will be evil doers. And the point shows the
horrible strength of the poison of natural corruption, which no Laws of God
nor man, nor experience of evil, nor example can restrain, or dry up: and
withal it shows their folly and weakness, that will forsake Christian
assemblies for the wickeds sakes; whereas the Apostle improues, that even in
Christian Commonwealths, there will be this part of a Magistrates virtue to
punish the evil doers, such as are known to be so: and therefore such
curious persons must go out of the world, if they will go from evil doers.
And withal it should breed in men a greater care to look to themselves, that
they be not infected by them: since there is no society of men, in which this
plague sore of sin runs not, we must redeem the time, because the days
are evil. And further, it should breed in us a loathing of this wicked world,
of this present evil world, and a desire of heaven; since we shall never live
in a place where the people will be all righteous, till we come to heaven. And
finally, it confutes their folly, that from the vitiousnes of some men,
conclude the faultiness either of the doctrine, laws, or government.

Secondly, that evil dooers must be punished, Romans 15. and great reason: for,
first, evil dooers in any society, are infectious: many may be defiled by
them. Secondly, they work much disquietnes, and trouble humane societies.
Thirdly, if they escape without punishment, they may bring down the judgments
of God upon the place where they live.

Uses. Which may serve for terror to other offenders. First, the very sight of
Magistrates should affright them; considering, that God sent those very
Magistrates to punish them. It imports, that though they escape the hands of
men, they shall not escape the hands of God. Secondly, it should teach men, if
they would live out of the danger of the Magistrates punishment, to take heed
they be not evil dooers.

Quest. Now if you ask who are evil doers?

Who are branded for evil doers.
Ans. I answer: Such as live in notorious offenses; such as are swearers,
drunkards, whoremongers, railers, thieves, idle persons, murderers,
Sabbath Breakers, sowers of discord, and the like. The original word does point
at some special sort of offenders: For, naming evil doers, such especially
must not escape, as 1. Invent evil where it is not. 2. Or sin not out of
ignorance, but wilfully* 3. Or are leaders of other men to evil. 4. Or make a
trade of offending by custom in sin. 5. Or study how to do mischief,
gathering together, as things might further their evil courses.


All this may be included in the word (...).

3. Thirdly, there are from hence many to be blamed, that speak evil of such
as take any course to reform abuses.

4. Fourthly, Magistrates must look to their calling, and Gods commandment, to
see abuses amended, or else they must account to God for it.

3 The third doctrine, which may be noted from hence, is; That all evil doers
are to be punished without respect of persons; they are to look upon men's
works, and not on their persons: great men must be punished, if they be
evil doers, as well as poor men; many men, as well as one man: yea, if good
men do evil, they must bear the punishment of their sin; Christians, as
well as Pagans.

4. That evil doers are not accounted safe members of any society, and
therefore are distinguished from good subjects, as not fit to be of that order.

5. That such as transgress the laws of men, are accounted by the Apostle
evil dooers, as well as such as transgress the Laws of God: for, he here
speaks especially of such as are evil doers in respect of humane ordinances:
which may be a warning to such as securely live in the transgression of the
commandments of Christian Magistrates: and withal, it may impair the honor
of their condition, that live in the breach of the laws of God without
repentance: For, if it be so hateful a thing to be a breaker of the laws of
men; in what case are they in, that have so grossly broken the Laws of God?

6 That punishment of evil doers is in the power of the Magistrate: private
men cannot reform public abuses; they may pray for reformation, they are not
to execute it, but by authority.

7 That there are diverse evils, which men cannot punish: for the Magistrate can
only punish evil doers, that is, such as offend in word or deed: evil
thinkers they cannot meddle withal. Which may warn Magistrates, to be wary
how they punish men only upon suspicion, or presumption, without proof that
they are evil doers: and withal, it shows, that God has reserved the
judgment of men's works also to himself. For, God hates the sins of the
heart, as well as the sins of life: and therefore, since for these evils, men
answer not to men, they must provide to answer before God.

8. That a Magistrate that punishes sins, does but execute the commission
he received from God; he was sent of God to that end, and therefore may
comfort himself in the Lord, how ill soever his execution of justice be
spoken of among men.

Thus of the punishment of evil doers.

The second end of the sending of Magistrates, is for the praise of them that
do well.

For the praise of them that do well.]

By such as do well, he means such as in public societies live without
offense, and carry themselves honestly in their places; especially such as are
profitable, and do good to others, whether it be to the minds of men, by
instructing or reproouing; or to the bodies or estates of men, by works of
mercy or righteousness: and among these, he means especially such as 1. Are
Inuenters of good, the first Authors of the public good. 2. That do good
daily and frequently. 3. That study how they may do all the good they can, and
do employ all the helps and furtherances of good they can.


Here may many things be noted from hence.

First, that all that are members of public societies, are bound to be
careful to do good to others; and to live so, that the Church and
Commonwealth may be the better for them. Which should much humble such
Christians as live and do little or no good; and should quicken in all sorts
of good Christians, a desire to serve the public: we are not set here to do
good to our selves only, but also to others.

Secondly, that in this world it is not to be expected from men, that all that
do well, or deserve well, should be rewarded by them: he says, For the
praise, not, For the reward; as importing, that many a man may deserve well,
that shall never have recompense from men. And this arises, partly from the
corruption of Magistrates, that are not careful to dispose preferments or
recompense to such as are worthy, and partly from the insufficiency of any
earthly greatness to do it. For, great men can reward all their servants or
friends: but no King can give the honor or preferment that is due to all his
Subjects that deserve well. Which should teach us, partly to do good without
hope of reward from men; and partly, to quicken our hearts to the admiration of
the reward that God gives in heaven: we should provide to be his Subjects, and
then we are sure to have a full reward of well-dooing in heaven.

Thirdly, that to be praised, or to have a good report among men, is a great
blessing of GOD: and therefore, in the old Testament, blessing and praise is
expressed by one word, Pro. 28.20. And this may appear to be so, 1. Because
God himself seeks praise from his creatures, and accounts himself honored by
it, Psalm 50.23. Ephesians. 1.6, 12, 14. 2. Because praise is a part of the glory of
God shining upon a man. 3. Because it is in Scripture preferred before things
of great price; as, great riches, Pro. 22.1. and precious ointment, Eccles. 7,
etc. 4. Because it so much refreshes a man's heart: it makes his bones full,
Pro. 15.35. 5. Because an ill name is noted as an extreme curse, Job 18.17. and
in many other places.


Uses. The use is, first, to comfort godly men, and to make them thankful, if
God give them a good report here: but especially it should comfort them, to
think of the praise they shall have at the last Day. For, if it be a blessing
to be praised of men, what is it to be praised of God? If it be such a comfort
to be praised by a Magistrate before the Country; what is it to be praised of
Christ before all the world, at the greatest and last Assizes? If praises be
good in this world, where there is mutable vaunting, and they may be blemished;
what is it to have praise in that Day, that shall last for ever unstained? If
it be such a comfort to be praised of a Magistrate for some one good deed; what
shall it be to be praised of Christ for all that ever was good in thoughts,
words, or works?

Secondly, it should teach men to seek a good report, and to do all things
that might have a good report, Phil. 4.9. As a man may seek riches: so he may
seek and desire a good name, Pro. 22.1.

But, the praise of men is then unlawful, and unlawfully sought, First, when
men do their things only to be seen of men, Wher^in it is unlawful to
seek the praise of men.
and have no better respects then applause, Mat. 6. 1. These. 2.6. Secondly,
when a man praises himself with his own mouth, Pro. 27.2. Thirdly, when it is
challenged of others, and men will not stay till God give them a good report,
John 8.49, 50. Fourthly, when men seek praise only for the show of goodness,
and are not good in deed. Fifthly, when men seek praise of men, but seek not the
praise of God, or the praise that comes from God only: which is tried in this,
that they will not do duties that God only cares for, or that are disgraced
in the world, Romans 2.28. John 5.44. and 12.42, 43.


Otherwise, it is lawful to seek praise: and there is an infallible sign, to
know whether praise be not ill for us; and that is, if praise make us more
humble, and more careful of sound holiness, and do refine us: then praise is
lawful, and a great blessing, when it is like the refining pot: it melts us,
and makes us better, Pro. 27.21.

Further, if praise be so great a blessing, then an evil name must needs be
a great curse, when it is for euill-doing: and if it be so evil to be
dispraised of men, what shall it be to be dispraised of GOD, not for one, but
many sins; not before a few, but before all the world; when it shall be not
to mend a man (as the Magistrate's reproof may be) but to his eternal
confusion?

Thus of the third doctrine.

Doct. 4. It may hence be noted, that the best men need praise; and therefore
God prouides, that they shall be praised: even such as do well, need to be
commended. 2 Cor. 12.11
And this may appear both by the comfort they take, if they be commended, Pro.
15.30. and by their earnest desires to clear themselves, if they be dispraised;
as we may see in David, Christ himself, and the Apostles, especially the
Apostle Paul.

Use. And therefore the use should be to teach men to acknowledge the good
things done by others, and to give them praises, especially if they be godly
and humble men: it may do them much good, and greatly both comfort them, and
encourage them. This made the Apostle Paul so rejoice in the Philippians, Phil.
3. vlt. It was no flattery. It is flattery in some other men, if they do
commend others for their own ends, or with self praises, or without daring to
reprove their faults, or to get praise to themselves, or for any other corrupt
end, especially when our praises are to such, as are public instruments of
good in Church, or Commonwealth. And it is a course of singular use to be held
in private families, if such as do well, might have praise, as well as such as
do evil, dispraise.

Use 2. Secondly, it may much condemn the corruption of heart, which appears
in many men in this point in sinning against the just praises of others, either
by speaking evil of them, and blemishing their good names (which is to steal
their riches from them) or by withhoulding due praise (which is to withhold the
good from the owner thereof). It should much affright such as are guilty of
this fault, that our Savior Christ measures our love to God, by our readiness
to praise for the Works of God done by another, John 5.41, 42. It is a sign,
that men love not God, when they love not goodness in others, which sure they
do not, if they commend it not.

Doct. 5. Weldoing ought to be esteemed whersoeuer it is found, in a subject,
as well as a Prince, in a servant, as well as a Master: in all estates and
conditions of men: For God does so, as may appear, Ephesians. 6.7, 8. and grace and
goodness is alike precious, wheresoever it is in the like degree: which serves
to rebuke that secret corruption in the natures of men, that are apt to observe
and praise good things in greater persons, but withhold the encouragement is
due to other men, only because they are poor, and because they are worser,
James 2.1, 2, 3. You may now by this doctrine try, whether they be good
themselves: For it is a sign of goodness, to observe and love goodness,
wheresoever he sees it: in a servant, as well as in a friend, and in a poor
Christian, as well as a rich.

Doct. 6. It may be yet further observed, that if men would be praised, they
must do well: praise is only due to weldoing, Romans 2.10. 2. Tim. 2.20, 21 1.
These. 4.4. Romans 13.5. And therefore it is a poor praise, that men raise to
themselves for other things: all that fame, which is raised for any thing, but
weldoing, is external and vain: and therefore they are greatly deceived, that
rest in the report that is raised from their wit, or beauty, or birth, or
preferment, or sumptuous buildings, or the like. Those may cause a great fame,
but only well-doing can cause a good fame. Secondly, it shows that
hypocrites, that have gotten reputation only because they are thought to be
good, have but built in the sands. For when in time it shall appear, that their
own works do not praise them, they shall find, Io^. 5.36, 37
that the praise of men will not last. It is not saying well, that works a
durable good name, but doing well. It is but complementing at the best, to
profess and promise great care of practice and praising, and yet be barren
and unfruitful.

Use. 3. Thirdly, this shows the great corruption of their nature, that so
unquietly seek after praise, and complain how much they be neglected; and yet
their own consciences know, how idle and unprofitable they are, and which is
worse, that they not only do not well, but manifestly do evil, and sin
daily in pride, and envy, in passion, and wilfulnes, or other open
transgressions. This thirst after respect above others, is a sign of a great
strength of hypocrisy, when they are more desirous to be thought good, then
indeed to be so, and more careful of the praise of men, then of God.

Fourthly, they sin shamefully, that praise the wicked, and justify him that
God condemns: but Solomon has set a note upon those persons, that they are
naught themselves: For he says, that they that break the law, praise the
wicked, Prou. 28.4. and 24, 25. Psalm. 10.3.

Fifthly, they are yet worse, that glory in their shame, that seek praise for
the excess of wickedness committed by them, either against God, or men: as they
do, that would be commended for their cost bestowed on Idols, or for their
worshipping of Saints or Angels, or for their reuenges and wrongs done to men,
or for their mightiness to hold out in drinking wine, or for their filthy acts
of any kind, or for their excesses in strange apparel, or for the raising of
themselves by unlawful means, or for their deliciousnes in their fare, or the
like. As those glory in their shame, so their end is damnation, Phil. 3.18.

Lastly, this doctrine should beget in men a great desire to live profitably,
and to do good, and in a special manner to apply themselves to such works, as
are most praiseworthy.

Quest. Here then arises a question, What things in particular do most
advantage a man's just praises?

Ans. The answer is, that there are diverse things will make a man to be much
praised, as,

Helps to get praise from men.
First, to honor God: he has promised to honor those that honor him, Prou.
8.17. Now to honor God, is to seek his Kingdom first, and to confess his name
before men, though it be in evil times.

Secondly, humility and a lowely carriage, with meekenes. For the humble shall
be exalted, and the proud brought low, Luke 1.14, 20.

Thirdly, mercy to the poor. This made the Macedonians famous in the Churches,
especially to show it liberally and readily, 2. Cor. 8.

Fourthly, diligence and exact carefulnes to discharge the labors of our
particular calling with all faithfulness: this made the good woman famous,
mentioned, Prou. 31.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. especially if wisdom and providence
be joined with diligence.

Fifthly, to live in peace, and stand to be quiet, and meddle with our own
business, and to be a peacemaker, winnes a great deal of praise, 1. These. 4.11.
Math. 5.9.

Sixthly, to be exactly just in men's dealings, and true in his words and
contracts, this will make men abound with blessings. The word is praises, as it
is in other places translated, Prou. 28.20.

Seventhly, to be courteous, is to be amiable, so as it be done without
affectation, and not directed for thy own ends, and not done with
dissimulation.

Eightthly, to do good to our enemies, to be not only ready to forgive, but
to pray for them, and forbear to wrong, when it might be executed, and to show
all willingness to overcome their evil with goodness, Romans 12.20, 21.

Ninthly, a care in all things strictly to submit our selves to the just Laws
of men, avoiding transgression for conscience sake, as the coherence in this
place shows.

And thus of the sixth doctrine.

Doct. 7. It may yet further be observed from hence, that God does require
Magistrates in a special manner to look unto it, that they do all they can
to praise and encourage Godly men, and such as do good in the countries, where
they live, Romans 13.5. This is the end of their calling, Job 29.25. This will
prove heavy one day for those profane Magistrates, that in the places of their
abode disgrace men more, then such as are godly, and countenance none more then
such as are most dissolute and lewd of life. The judgments of the Lord will be
terrible against these unrighteous men.

Lastly, the Antithesis is here to be noted. For when he says, that such as
do well, should be praised; he does not say, that such as do evil, should
be dispraised: and this may be considered of, either in the case of private
persons, or in the case of Magistrates. For private persons, they are bound to
the good behavior, in respect of the evil of others many ways. First, till
their evils are known, not to mistrust or condemn others. Secondly, when their
evils are known, if they be secret, they must not be revealed: if they be
open and the persons be good men, they must do what they can to cover them;
and if they be evil men, they must not speak of their dispraises, without a
great respect of glorifying God by it: and besides, they must not venture so
far to judge of the final estate of any man for any evils, till the end come.
In the case of superiors it is true, they may use dispraise, but it must be
as a medicine, which must be applied with many cautions, and the ingredients
must be Gods words, and not their own.

Verse 15. For so is the will of God, that with welldoing you may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men.


IN these words is contained the second argument taken from the will of God.
God is specially desirous, that Christians should do all the good they can,
and in particular should be careful to obey the Magistrates, because by that
means they may confute such ill-minded men, as are apt to speak evil of
religion: so that the words contain a choice rule prescribed unto Christians,
to be carefully observed.

In which rule consider, First, the authority of it, So is the will of God.
Secondly, the matter of it, well-doing. Thirdly, the end, which is, the
silencing of wicked men.


For.]

This word For, seems to give a reason (not of what went next before in the
former verse, but) of the exhortation to Christians, as they are subjects;
showing the happy effect of well-dooing in general, and in particular, of
their submission to Magistrates, and how orderly and profitably their life
should be, as they are good Subjects, and serviceable to the Commonwealth.

For, so is the will of God.]

The will of God is diversely accepted in Scriptures: for, though God's will
indeed be but one, yet for our infirmities sake, it is considered of with
distinction: and so it is either personal, or essential. There is a will of
God that is personal, restrained to some of the persons: so, the Father wills
the obedience and death of the Son, and Christ obeies that will of his
Father, John 6.38, 39* 40. Mat. 26.39, 42. But it is the essential will of God
here meant: the former is the will of God ad intra; and this, the will of God
ad extra, as they say in schools.

The essential will of God is taken sometimes for the faculty of willing;
sometimes, for the act of willing; sometimes, for the thing willed; and
sometimes, for the sign by which that will is declared, as, his Word is his
will. So here, by his essential will, God wills both good and evil. Good is
the object of God's will properly, and of it self: Evil is the object of the
will of God, but only under some respect of good. Evil is either of
pu^nishment, or of sin. Evil of punishment GOD wills, and is the Author of,
Psalm 115.3. as the just Judge of the world: and punishment of it self is a
good thing, as it is a work of justice. Evil of sin God only wills to
permit, Acts 14.16. but it is not God's willing of evil, is here meant.

As the will of GOD concerns us in matter of good, it may be considered either
euangelically or legally. Euangelically, his will gives order what shall be done
with us: and so he wills the salvation of his Elect, Ephesians. 1.11. John 6.40.
Legally, his will gives order what shall be done by us: and so he wills our
sanctification in all the rules of it, and in every part, Col. 1.10.

By the will of God in this place then, he means the Word of God, as it
contains the revelation of what God would have done by his servants in the
cases specified in this Text.

Many things may be observed out of these words.

Doct. 1. First, we may take notice of the two only Springs of all things to
be known in Religion, in these words, viz. God, and his will; GOD, and the
Word of God. God is principium essendi, the Author of their Being: and the Will
or Word of God, is principium cognoscendi, the Fountain of the knowledge of
them.

Doct. 2. God does will all that which is to be done by his servants in any
part of their obedience, or in any case of their lives: as here, the course
they are to take either toward the Magistrate, or toward their enemies, God
wills it; that is, he does in himself approve, or determine, or appoint, and
by his Word he does warrant and require it. And the same is true of all the
well-dooings of godly men, God wills them: which I observe for these uses.

Uses. First, it may be a great comfort to a Christian, when he knows he has
done what GOD would have him to do: for, then he may be sure, God will not
forget his labor, and work of love and obedience, Heb. 6.8. The Hebrew that
signifies will, signifies pleasure and delight: and when it is given to God,
it notes, that what he wills, he takes pleasure in, as in Esaias 62.4.
Hophzibah, My will is in her, or, My delight is in him: God takes great
delight, when we do his will. Every careful Christian is his Hophzibah. And
besides, if God do will, we should do so. God will defend and protect us in
our ways: That may support us against all the crosses or oppositions that may
be like to befall us. And that made the Apostles place in every Epistle, that
They were Apostles by the will of God. And so, such godly Christians as obey
the humane ordinances of men in these times of quarrel and contention, must
comfort themselves with this, that Thus was the will of God, that they should
so obey: and that must support them against the contrary wills of men otherwise
minded, how well soever reputed of; and make them bring their own hearts into
obedience to that which God would have them to do, etc.

Doct. 3. The Word of God, is the willing of God, and so called here: and God's
Word may be said to be his will, in two respects; either because of the form,
or in respect of the matter. In respect of the form, it may be called his will,
because it is digested in form of a Testament; and Christ the Wisdom of God,
has set it in such form, as if it were his last Will and Testament, as in
some respects it is: Or else chiefly, because what God does express or
require in the Scriptures, is agreeable to the very Nature and will of God; he
does in himself will it, as well as in his Word promise or require it; which
shows a great difference between the laws of Princes and the Laws of God:
For, many times the laws of Princes agree not with the natures and hearts of
Princes; whereas God's Word is always agreeable to God's Will: and withal,
this should the more quicken to obedience; because, by conforming our selves to
God's Word, we conform our selves to God's Nature. And further, it may comfort
us in the hope of strength, to be enabled to do God's Will, and what he
requires, because he wills what we should do: For, God's Will causes an
impression upon the creature, it gives assistance, it will see it done, he will
work our works for us; God's Word is a Word of power, it works what it wills,
which men's laws cannot do: When we know God wills such a thing in his Word
to be done, we should conceive, that he does not only show us by that place,
what is to be done, but also what assistance we shall have to do it.

Doct. 4. The Will of God, is the rule of our actions; what he wills, we must
do, and so it is urged here by the Apostle; and therefore it should teach us
to labor to understand what his will is, since all is lost that is not
conformed to this rule, Ephesians. 5.10. We must get us to the Law and to the
testimonies. For, whatsoever is not directed from thence, has no light in it,
Esaias 8.20. Secondly, we must go to God, and pray him to teach us to do his
Will, since he has enrolled it in his Word, Ps. 143.10. Thirdly, if this
doctrine were thoroughly digested, unruly, froward, and wilful Christians would
make more conscience of their passionate and incorrigible courses. Let them
look to it in time: they must give account to him that so has prescribed rules
by his will, that he will not admit of courses carried only by their wills.
Fourthly, Inferiors must look to the warrant of their actions: it is not the
will of man, but the will of God can justify them to do well, 1. Pet. 4.2.
Lastly, if his will rule us, then we must take heed of that fault of making
the laws of our wills, the causes of his will; as they do, that think God must
will to do nothing with wicked men, unless his will be confined to certain
rules, which they conceive in their wills.

Doct. 5. That the bare signification of Gods will should be argument enough to
persuade a godly Christian to do any thing, though it be to deny himself, or
to go a course which is cross to his own desires. The knowledge of God's will
alone does compel a godly mind to obey. It is not the Majesty, or the rewards
of God, but God's will which alone suffices to guide him: which may try the
obedience of man by the motives. For only the sound Christian will obey simply
for the commandment sake, and must teach us to stick to it, the bare will of
God must rule us, though there were never so many men contrary-minded.

Use. The use is for trial of hypocrites: the true Christian lays down all
his own courses, as soon as ever he hears the sound of Gods will.

Doctr. 6. The practice of a Christian must be confirmed just according to the
pattern: so is the will of God, it must be just so, as the will of God is: so
from the manner as well as from the matter, which should teach us three things.

First, to walk circumspectly, seeing we must look so precisely to the manner,
as well as to the matter of Gods will, Ephesians. 5.15.

Secondly, we must therefore increase in the knowledge of his will, Col. 1.10.
for the more things are to be done, or the more exactly God wills us to do,
the more care we must have to increase our knowledge, and study his will;
since all must be just so, as he wills to have it.

Thirdly, we should be stirred up to pray for our selves, and one for
another, seeing it is such a hard thing to live a Christian life, and to please
God. Mark with what force of words the Apostle prayed about this point, Heb.
13.20, 21.

Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

Quest. But can a Christian be so exact, as to answer the pattern, to do just
so as God wills him?

Ans. 1. He may, for the substance of the obedience, though not for all the
degrees, or circumstances.

2. He may do it in desire: he must set his pattern before him, as that he
desires to follow, and strives as well as he can, and is vexed because he
cannot do it: and with God, if we have always done as much as well as we did
desire to do, he accepts the desire for the deed: but it is certain of the
most of us in the most things, that we have neither done the things right, nor
brought the desiring to do them: and therefore it is just with God, if we lose
what we have wrought.

Doct. 7. That in some cases God would have us take notice of his will in more
especial manner: he has certain special wills: there are some things, that
he does as it were more stand upon, then other things, and these special
wills of God we must heedefully take notice of: as for instance, 1. These. 4.
about avoiding fornication, this is the will of God, he means his special
chief will: so about thanksgiving, 1. These. 5.18. Where the Apostle urges the
will of God as a thing that God would above many other things have don. Above
all things give thanks: For this is the will of God, etc. So our Savior Christ
notes, in his own occasions, an especial will of God, John 6.39, 41. So here
God does in a special manner will us to obey Magistrates, and to silence wicked
men by well-doing.

Use. The use should be, to teach us to mark what things God does specially
require of us, and to apply our selves to his will, that the Lord may take
pleasure in us, and say of each of us, as he did of Cyrus, He is the man of my
will: which is here explained, He is the man that executes my counsel, Esaias
46.11. It was David's singular glory, that he would do all Gods will:
whatsoever special service God had to do, David was ready to execute it, Acts
13. For herein lies the trial of a sound Christian, he does the will of his
heavenly Father, and rests not in talking of Religion only, and professing it,
Mat. 7.21. Romans 2.11. 1. John 2.17. And in particular, in this text we see
there be two things, that God would feign have us do to silence wicked men,
and stop their mouths: First, he would have us so to behave our selves, that
we keep out of their danger in respect of the Laws of Magistrates. Secondly,
and then to live such a discreet and profitable life, that they may see, that
we differ from all other sorts of men in the goodness of our conversation. If
we would do, what might be specially pleasing to God, we must be careful
of these two things.

Doct. 8. Lastly, we may here note, that the will of God may be known
effectually, though it be not known distinctly. The Apostle is sure, this is
the will of God; and yet there is no Book, Chapter, nor Verse quoted, nor can
any particular place be alleged, that these precise words do express God's
will: but, inasmuch as the meaning is to be found in the scope of many places
of Scripture, therefore it may be well so called, The will of God.

Thus of the authority of this rule. The matter of it follows, which is,
well-dooing.

With well-dooing. (...).]

The word is not the same with that in the former verse: for, here it is a
Participle of the present time, and notes the continual custom of
well-dooing, and gives us to understand, that if ever we would effectually
silence wicked men, we must be continually exercised in well-dooing. Our good
works (though of great excellency) yet work but a sudden blaze: the effect of
them will be quickly ended, or soon put out, and then will wicked men return to
their old course of reproaching, if they be not daily confuted by the still
fresh and new fruits of a Christian: we must be full of new and good fruits,
James 3.17. and never weary of well-dooing.

The sense of the word then is this, as if it were rendered thus: This is the
will of God, that they that are daily exercised in doing good, should put to
silence foolish men: for, the original word does note the person, as well as
the good done; which affoords another doctrine.

Doct. 2. God would have good men, that are full of good fruits, to enter into
the lists against wicked men, to vanquish and silence them: which implies, that
God would not have formal Christians or hypocrites to meddle with the quarrel
of Religion: for, they will spoil all in the end, when their hollownesse and
hypocrisy is discovered: they will make foolish men rail and blaspheme worse
than before. Such are fit to plead for, and defend Religion, as be manfull, and
full of good works. And therefore the weak Christians should not be ouerbusie
and fiery in meddling with wicked men, or putting themselves forward to defend
sincerity, til their works could plead for them: before we set-on to be great
talkers for Religion, we should provide good store of good works, by which we
might demonstrate the truth and power of godliness in us.

Of well-doing in it self, I have entreated before: only, before I pass from
it, me thinks it is lamentable, that our hearts can be no more fired to the
care of it. Oh that we were once brought but to consent from the heart, with
confirmed purpose, to set up a course by our lives to win glory to our
Religion! We see how fain God would have us do so: and it would plague wicked
men, that would fain rail at us: nothing would more confute them. And besides,
other Scriptures show, no life abounds more with stedfastnes and contentment,
than a life fruitfully spent: especially, how can we be still thus careless,
if we remember the great recompense of reward in another world? Oh this
formality, and outward show, and serving God for fashion! how deeply is it
seated in men's manners! It is likely, the most of you that hear this doctrine,
will say it is good, and perhaps some one or two of you will be a little touched
with a kind of consultation in your selves, which way you might do well. But
alas, alas! out and alas! Oh that I could get words to gore your very Souls
with smarting pain, that this Doctrine might be written in your very flesh;
for a thousand to one, you will go the most of you away, and not redress your
ways: Religion shall not be honored by you more then before: cursed be that
worldly dross or spiritual security, that will thus rob and spoil your
Souls, and keep Religion without her true gloss and beauty, and shining
glory.

I might here also note, that submission to the ordinances of men, is one part
of a Christian man's well doing, and a special ornament of the sincere
profession of Religion, because it is the discharge of the duty enjoined us by
God, and so is a part of the obedience due to God himself; to keep their
ordinances, is to obey God's commandment. Secondly, because such a
conscionable submission to man's Laws, makes the religious works of Christians
to be the more unrebukable in the eyes of wicked men; and therefore they are
to be warned of their rashness, that say; that conformity to men's laws is
evil doing, when God says it is well doing: they say it is a sin, God
says it is a good work. It is nearer to the truth, and safer to say, that not
conforming is a sin, because it is a breach of God's express commandment in
the former verse: and therefore also godly Christians, whether Ministers or
private persons, that obey the laws of men simply out of Conscience of God's
Commandments, and not for corrupt ends, may comfort themselves, that the good
God does like of what they do, because it is his will that so they should do,
and he says they do well; though some good men are co^trary-minded, and out of
weakness, censure them as evil doers. Then it is employed here, that the
conscionable conformity of godly Christians shall be rewarded in Heaven. For
all well-doing shall be rewarded in Heaven; but submission to humane
Ordinances, is well-doing, and therefore shall be rewarded in Heaven. Paul is
crowned in Heaven, for his holding to the Jewish Ceremonies, to win the Jews,
and further the liberty of his Ministry.

Thus of the matter required. The end follows.

That you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.]

The word here rendered, To put to silence, is diversely accepted, or the force
of it is showed by diverse terms in several Scriptures. Sometimes it is
translated, to still a thing that is tumultuous and raging: and so the Sea was
silenced or made still, Mark 4.39. Sometimes it is translated, To make
speechless or dumb: so Math. 22.12. Sometimes, To confute, so as they have not
a word to answer, so Mat. 22.34. Sometimes, To muzzle, or tie up the mouth: so
1. Cor. 9.9. 1. Tim. 5.18. and so it signifies properly: and so well-doing is
intended here as a means to muzzle the mouths of wicked men.

The word here rendered, Foolish-men, signifies properly, men without a mind,
or men that have not use of their understanding; and so are either natural
fools, or mad men.

The Doctrines that may be gathered from hence, are many: For it may be
evidently collected from hence,

Doct. 1. That wicked men do usually in all places speak evil of godly men,
they are prone to it, they do it usually. The holy Ghost here supposes it to
be done, as the usual course in all ages and conditions of the Christian
Church; and no marvel: For it has been, in all ages past, the condition of
godly men, to be evil spoken of, and slandered. God's children were as signs
and wonders, Esaias 8. And whosoever refrayneth himself from evil, makes
himself a prey, Esaias 59.15. The throats of wicked men, are the ordinary
burying places for the names of the Righteous, Romans 3. And this is the more to
be heeded, if we mark in Scriptures, either persons reproaching, or the
persons reproached, or the matter of the reproach, or the manner. For the
persons reproching, we shall read, sometimes that men are reproached by such as
are of the same Religion with them, Psalm 50.16. Esaias 8.18. Cant. 1.6. Yea,
sometimes that godly men are reproached by such as are of their own house and
kindred, as Isaak was by Ismael, and Joseph by his brethren; the parents are
against the children, and the children are against the parents and: a man's
enemies, are those of his own house. And for the persons reproached, we shall
find them to be the most eminent and godly persons; as, Job, Job 30.1. Moses,
Heb. 11.26. David, Psalm 35.15. Jeremiah, 18.18. the Apostles, 1. Cor. 4.9, 10,
13. yea, the Lord Jesus Christ himself, Heb. 12.3. And, for the matter
objected, we shall find, that godly men have been reproached with the most
vile slanders that almost might be. I may spare other testimonies now, seeing
Christ himself was charged with gluttony, blasphemy, sedition, deceit,
diabolical working, and to have a devil in him: and he supposes it to be
the case of Christians, to be spoken against with all manner of euill-saying,
Mat. 5.12. And for the manner, two things may be noted.

First, that many times wicked men set themselves to study and invent, without
all color of occasion, mischievous things to reproach godly men withal: thus
they devised devices against Jeremiah.

Secondly, that when they have evil reports afoot, they pursue them, and
divulge them with all possible forwardnes and malice: thus the Abiects ^are
Dauid's name, and ceased not, Psalm 35.15. and ill-minded men cease not, till
that good men may be every where evil spoken of, Acts 28.

The reason of this strange kind of ill humor in wicked men, is twofold.
First, there is their natural hatred of goodness: it is not because of the sin
of godly men, but simply because they follow goodness. There is a natural
antipathy between a good life, and a bad man, 1. John 3.13, 14. 1. Pet. 4.5.
Psalm 38.20. Secondly, the other is, because it is one of the rules of the
devil, To be an accuser of the brethren, and good livers: and the works of
their father the devil they will do, John 8.44.

The use is diverse: for,

Uses. First, it should inform men, not to think it strange when they see such
things come to pass: for, no other trial, in this point of reproach, befalls
godly men, but what has accompanied the condition of all godly men almost in
all Ages.

Secondly, godly men should be the more stirred up to prepare Apologies, and in
all places where they come, to contend for the truth, and strive together, to
preserve the reputation of one another, Pro. 12.18.

Thirdly, godly men should arm themselves, and prepare for reproaches, and
accordingly stir up their hearts with comforts out of the Word of God,
against the time of evil and trials.

Fourthly, they should be made, for that reason, the more careful of all their
carriage, that they give not occasion to people that are so apt to speak evil
of them, as was urged out of verse 12 of this chapter.

Fifthly, all men should look to their ears, and take heed what and how they
hear reports. It is an ill sign of a vicious nature, To be apt to believe
scandalous reports of godly men, Pro. 17.4. And God will plague men in hell,
not only for making, but for loving lies, though they be made by other men,
Reu. 22.8. And therefore as the North-winde drives away the rain: so should
their angry countenance drive away the showers of reproach, that fall from
backbiting tongues, Proverbs 25. verse 23.

Thus of the first point.

Doct. 2. It may be hence also noted, that reproaches are to be avoided as much
as lies in us: God would have us do all we may to live so, that we might not
be reproached, Psalm 39.8. Phil. 2.15. We must strive to be unrebukable: and
the reasons are, first, because every Christian is not able to bear reproaches,
when he shall find himself to be slandered. David shows himself very unquiet,
when he was slandered, especially in some cases; as diverse Psalms show: and
Jeremy falls into desperate extremities about them. Ier. 8.18, 21
Secondly, because reproaches and slanders have diverse ill effects: for, they
are like swords and raysors; and a man should avoid the wounds of swords and
raysors as much as he can. Thirdly, and besides, some kinds of slanders do
keep many men off from embracing Religion: as, the Jews would not receive
Paul's doctrine, because that way was every where ill-spoken of. And further,
many times in the best minds, that are persuaded the things objected are
untruths, the reproaches leave a kind of stain, and work a kind of suspicion,
and lessen the estimation of the person traduced. Fourthly, it is to be
avoided, because it is so easily diffused: slanders will run strangely. A whole
Country, yea the whole Kingdom will be in a short space filled with the
slanders: which must needs come to many persons that are destitute of all
apology for the innocent. And lastly, the showers of slanders, that are cast
upon godly men, many times are but forerunners of grievous storms of
persecution.

And therefore they do very foolishly, that desire to be reproached, and by
their indiscretions irritate the tongues of wicked men against them. It is a
gross folly in some Christians, that will of purpose do things that be
cross to the course of the world in things indifferent, thereby to proclaim a
wilful opposition to the world.

And therefore also we should be very thankful to God, when he gives us any
breathing times from reproaches and slanders, by all good means to keep
wicked men quiet, if it may be.

Doct. 3. It may here be further noted, that it is a hateful thing to be an
ignorant and foolish man in spiritual things: they are mentioned here with a
kind of grievous scorn; many reasons make this point evident. For first, the
Sacrifices offered for the ignorances of the people, showed them, that it was a
vile thing to be ignorant, Heb. 9.7. Secondly, the very nature of ignorance
shows it to be a vile thing; for, is it not a hateful thing to us to be
blind in our bodies? how much more is it, to have the eyes of our minds out?
Thirdly, because it argues that a man has not the Spirit of God in him; for
God's Spirit is given to men, that they might know the things of God: and
therefore when a man cannot know the things of God, it is a sign that he wants
God's Spirit, 1. Cor. 2.12, 14. Fourthly, because when God would of purpose
plague a man with a special or horrible curse upon his soul, this is it, to
give him up to a sottish spirit, John 12.40. with Esaias 6.10. Fifthly, it may
appear by the effects of this sottishness, when we respect the sins it
breeds, or the punishment it brings upon the ignorant persons for sin. It is
certain, that ignorance is the mother of vice and corruption: an ignorant
person may quickly make himself guilty of a world of sins: yea there is no
sin so grossly absurd or abominable, but this kind of men may commit it,
and without sense or care too. The Prophet Isaiah opens the dotage of
Idolaters, and shows the root of it to be their blockish ignorance, Esaias
44.18, 20. As ignorant persons may be made wilful Idolaters, and that easily:
so may they be whoremongers, Prou. 7.22. drunkards, etc. yea, they would at
sometimes kill Christ himself, if he come in their way, Luke 23.34. We see
into what sins ignorant persons fall, Vide Ephesians. 4 17, 18
into such as whoredom, Sodomitry, buggery, stealing, murder, drunkenness,
swearing, and yet see not their danger, but like brute beasts are senseless;
and for the offenses, in respect of punishment, they are fearful, whether we
respect this life, or another world. In this life their ignorance depriues them
of the sight of all those things that have true glory or comfort in them. To
live in ignorance, is worse for the wicked, then it is for the body to live in
a dungeon; besides, all their best works are lost; all they do is abominable,
Hosh. 6.7. Psalm 14.1, 2. and it is in vain to plead their good minds and
meanings: For without knowledge the mind is not good, Proverbs 19.2. and if
they were never so zealous, yet they lose their labor, Romans 10.2. and further,
this sottishness brings many a curse upon men; yea, when it is general, it
brings fearful public Plagues, Esaias 1.3, etc. and 5.13. Hosh. 4.1, 2. and
which is worst of all, after all the miseries of this life, they must go down
to hell, they are utterly undone for ever; this is the place of all them that
know not God, Job 18. vlt. and Hosh. 4.6.

Uses. The use may be: First, for to show the lamentable estate of multitudes
of Christians, that frequent our assemblies, and yet are still extreme ^ots in
regard of spiritual things: They savor nothing but the things of the flesh,
and relish nothing but what flows from fleshly wisdom: Ask the Labourer of
his work, or the Artificer of matters of trade, or the Husbandman of the
fruits of the ground, or the Gentleman of his pleasures or the news of the
World, or the Scholar of humane learning, and you shall have an answer many
times to admiration: But ask of Heaven and heavenly things, except a few
general sayings, they can say nothing but froth or error, they are as
blockish, as if they had never heard of the Gospel. How many Masters are there
in Israel, and yet know not the things that concern sound regeneration, and a
true sanctified life! David calls himself a beast, in respect of the
remainders of ignorance in some things, being excellently qualified with true
knowledge. Oh how brutish then must these persons account themselves to be!
What heart can stand before the serious thoughts of the damnation of
multitudes, that now sit with us in the House of God, even for this very sin of
ignorance? Hosh. 4.6.

And the more lamentable is it to observe the unspeakable auersenesse that is
in man, that of all sorts, though they be warned, yet some will on still, and die
without wisdom, Job 4.20. and which is yet more, in places where men have the
means plentifully, yet what number does the God of this world keep in
blindness, so as they live and die very sots, even in those places where they
have had line upon line, and precept upon precept, and yet the people no more
instructed then the child new weaned from the breast? Esaias 28.9. Yea the more
fearful is the estate of diverse, that they do not only want knowledge, but
they reject it, and blaspheme it, as if it were not only unnecessary, but
hateful: they love darkness more then light, and therefore their damnation
sleeps not, Ioh. 3.19. Job. 21.14.

But on the other side, so many as have their hearts touched from God, let them
be warned to avoid ignorance, as they would avoid the death of their souls;
let it be hateful to them to be babies in understanding, 1. Cor. 14.20. Ephesians.
5.16. and learn of Solomon, above all things, to get understanding, Prou. 4.7.
and to that end to pray with David; That God would give him understanding that
he might live, Psalm. 119.144. and when men have the light, they should walk in
the light: and when God gives the instructions, they should take heed, that
they be not as the horse or mule, to learn nothing but what they are forced
unto; but rather with all diligence and readiness, to wait daily at the gates
of wisdom, Psalm. 32.8, 9.

But if men be still senseless and wilful, then I say to them, as the
Apostle said, if the hatefulness of their ignorance will not appear; Let him
that is ignorant be ignorant still, 1. Cor. 14.38.

Doct. 4. It may be likewise noted, that in the language of God, unregenerate
men are fools, or rather madmen, men without minds, Romans 1.3. Tit. 3.3.

And that this point may be more clear, I would consider of the signs of a
spiritual madman, or fool: and that this point also may be cleared, you
must remember, there are two sorts of men are said literally to be without
minds: the one is natural fools, and their disease is called moria: the
other is furious madmen, and their disease is called mania: both suffer
alienation of mind; they want their minds, or the right use of them: and so
there are two sorts of men which spiritually want minds: some are resembled by
fools, and some by madmen.

A spiritual fool may be known especially by two signs; Signs of
spiritual Jolly. Prou. 17.16
First, by his mindlesnesse: he has no thoughts nor words about the Kingdom
of heaven; he is altogether careless and senseless, he sits still without
any regard of it, as some children that are mopish and heed nothing; or some
that are sick of a kind of a melancholy, that will neither speak nor eat;
these lose time, and will not buy it, Ephesians. 5.16. Secondly, by his sottishness:
this sort differs from the former; for these will talk and be doing, and many
times very busy, but it is without any spiritual sense, or discerning; their
words and works are all idle, and sottish, and cross to the Word of God: and
these are discovered by diverse signs diversely; as,

First, the Wisdom of God seems foolishness to them: let heavenly things be
spoken of with never so great wisdom and power of words, yet these sots have
one senseless objection or other, in respect of which they reject all they
hear; and being led by their sensuality, or their carnal reason, Pro. 23.9.
1. Cor. 1. and 2. go no further; but in these cases think they are in their
own conceit wiser then any man that can give a better reason and proof.

Secondly, they discover it by senslesnesse and incorrigiblenesse, when they
are pursued by the hand of God many times round about, Ier. 5.3, 4. Though God
should seem to bring all to the first Chaos, yet they understand not: you
cannot beat into their heads the hatred of their sins, or the cares of a
better life, Ier. 22.20, 21, 22. Isaiah 42.27. This Apathy is only in madmen
and fools, Pro. 17.10. and 27.22.

Thirdly, they discover it by their continual intertainment of the innumerable
enormities of their thoughts, which arising from their heart in the dark, they
play withal with as much earnestness and attendance, as if they were some
needful and profitable things. This customary daily intertainment of vain
thoughts, is a sign of a spiritual Sot, Romans 1.21.

Fourthly, they discover it by their continual grasping at shadows, that is,
their doting upon earthly things with strange cares, and pains, and iollity,
without any sound endeavor to provide for their souls, and eternal
salvation, Psalm 49.10. Luke 12.16. to 21. Ier. 17.11.

Fifthly, some of them discover their sottishness, by following the service of
idols, which they worship in stead of the living God: this is called
brutishnes, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 16, 17. Esaias 44.19, 20. O what a number of these sots
are there in the world, if the worshippers of idols, of Romish and Paganish
idols, were summed up!

Sixthly, others discover it, by making clean the outside of the cup and
platter, but never regard the filthiness of the inside: such are they, that
are only careful of the show of their actions before men, while their inside
is full of ravening and wickedness. These our Savior calls fools or sots,
because he that made that which is without, made that which is within also,
Luke 11.39, 40.

Seventhly, some of them discover themselves, by suffering themselves to be
buffetted and abused, and yet are content to be used so still: and such are
they that will suffer themselves to be abused by false teachers, so they be
of their own humor, though they devour them in their estates, and bring them
into bondage in their minds, though they take of them, and exalt themselves
insolently among them, 2. Cor. 11.19, 20.

Eightthly, they discover it, by building the hopes of the salvation of their
souls upon most vain and insufficient grounds: they build on the sands: they
trust upon an universal mercy of God, and the example of the most, and upon
the bare use of God's Ordinances, without any power of faith, or practice in
their hearts or lives: and therefore in time of tribulations, their hope is as
the giving up of the ghost: all is ruined, and their souls are desolate, Mat.
7.26. They will be at no pains to be assured of their salvation and Religion,
but go on, without any particular regard of their own way to heaven, Pro.
14.8.

A spiritual fool then is discovered, first, by his mindlesnesse; secondly, by
his vncapablenesse and contempt of heavenly doctrine; thirdly, by his
incorrigiblenesse; fourthly, by the vanity of his thoughts; fifthly, by his
dotages about earthly things; sixthly, by his idolatry; seventhly, by his
hypocritical tricks; eightthly, by suffering the injuries of false teachers;
and lastly, by the vain grounds of his hope and faith.

The spiritual madman follows to be described: and so these sorts of men
following, are convicted of madness in the Scripture;

Signs of spiritual madness.
First, the Atheist: he is a man void of reason, that denies principles: and
such a one is he that says in his heart, There is no God, as he that denies
the providence of God, Psalm 14.1. and 94.8.

Secondly, the swearer: the fools or madde-men blaspheme God's Name, Psalm
74.18. He were a madman, that would daily rail at the King to his face: and
such are blasphemers.

Thirdly, the persecuter. The Apostle, speaking of men that resist the truth,
as Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, says, that Their madness shall be
manifested to all men: so that he particularly calls resisting of the truth,
madness, 2. Tim. 3.9.

Fourthly, the idle person. He is a madman, that will eat his own flesh: but
such a one is the slothful person, because he brings poverty upon himself
like an armed man, or else destroies the health of his body by his laziness,
or brings misery upon his wife and children, or because his soul is eaten up
with rust, and the canker of his negligence, Eccles. 4.5.

Fifthly, the wilful offender: He is a madman, that when he hears of some
eminent danger, yet will not avoid it; such a one is every gross offender,
that hearing of the judgments God will bring upon him for such sins, or
perceiving that the wrath of God is broken out upon others for the like
offenses, yet will madly go on without fear. The prudent man fears, and
departs from evil; but he is a fool or madman, that rages and is
confident, Prou. 14.16. Ierem. 5.21, 22.

Sixthly, the senseless prater: We discern him to be a madman, that talking
continually, phalters in his words, and vtters sentences that are imperfect,
without sense or coherence: such persons in religion are those prating fools
Solomon speaks of, that are full of words, and void of sound judgment: as the
legs of the lame are not equal, so is a parable in a fools mouth. As you
discern a lame man by this, that his legs are one longer then another; so you
may discover a spiritual madman by his discourse about the high points of
religion; for his words agree not together, his sentences are senseless and
unequal. A fool has no delight to get sound understanding in these things,
and yet is wonderful forward to utter his mind, though he discover nothing
but his ignorance and folly, Pro. 18.2. and 26.7.

Seventhly, the Epicure, or voluptuous person: he is a madman, that is, never
merry but when he has done some mischief: and such are all they that make a
sport of sin, Prou. 10.23. and 14.9. and 15.22.

Eightthly, the railer. He is a madman, that will go up and down a Town or a
City, and set fire on the houses of other men, as he goes: and therefore is the
railer called a fool, because in his lips there is a burning fire: he deuoures
the reputation of good men every where where he comes. The Apostle James calls
it The fire of hell, James 3. Prou. 16.27. Jude 10. And thus he is a mad man,
that hates other men for doing good; as the Pharisees did Christ, for healing
on the Sabbath Day: for which, they were said to be mad, Luke 6.11.

Ninthly, the Apostate or backslider in Religion: thus the Galatians were
bewitched with madness, that had begun in the Spirit, and would end in the
flesh, that had forsaken the glorious ornaments and privileges of the Gospel,
to trust upon beggarly rudiments; that forsook the precious merits of Christ's
righteousness, to trust to the stained clou^s of their own righteousness, Gal.
3.1, 3.

Tenthly, the unthankful and injurious person: he is a mad man, that will
strike his friend that provoke him not: and so are all Nabals: their folly is
with them that use their friends, as Nabal did David, 1. Sam. 25.25.

Eleuenthly, the contentious person. He is a mad man, that lays snares to
catch himself, and will speak things that force strokes upon himself: so is
every unquiet, intemperate busie-body. A fool's lips, says Solomon, enter into
contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. A fool's mouth is his
destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul, Pro. 18.6, 7. Eccles.
10.12. Pro. 14.3.

Twelfthly, the implacable person. Such men as are so furious, there is no
appeasing of them, but they are like a Bear robbed of her whelps, Pro. 17.12.
They are madmen, that will hear no reason. A stone is heavy, and sand is
weighty: but a fool's wrath is heavier than them both, Pro. 27.3.

Thirteenthly, all men that abuse their prosperity, to the greater liberty of
sin and injury. They are madmen, that cannot be ruled, unless they be kept
fasting. A man distracted, if you let him have his belly filled, will trouble
the whole house: so a wicked man, if he enjoy prosperity and success, will
disquiet the whole town where he lives. There are four things, says Solomon,
disquiet the earth, and one of them is a fool with his belly filled, that is, a
wicked man when he prospers, and has what he will, Pro. 30.22.

Uses. The use of all may be, first, to show the misery of all unregenerate
men, that live in a continual phrenzie, or defect of all spiritual
understanding. It is a woeful Judgment, to have our reason taken from us in
natural things; but much more in spiritual: for, upon this ground, it
manifestly follows, 1. That they lose all the benefit of spiritual
instruction: all the Ordinances of God, during the time of this folly or
madness, are merely in vain to them. Their phrenzy makes them not only to want
sense; but withal, to despise all God's counsels, Pro. 1.7. 2. That they shame
themselves in all their dealings: for, when a fool walks by the way, he says
to every one, that he is a fool, Eccles. 10.3. And thus they will undo
themselves, soul and body, if they hold on. A madman, if he govern his
estate, will soon ruin it, Job 5.3. 3. That they live shut up from all the
sound comforts of life, as fools and madmen: they are shut up in darkness,
Eccles. 2.14. God uses them, as we use madmen: for, though he let them go up
and down the world, and so they have a larger room to walk-in, than ordinarily
our madmen have; yet God has chained them (though insensibly): the world is
but a house of darkness to their minds: the saving light, and all the fruits of
it, are withheld from them. 4. That they are in great danger to die of their
phrenzy, and to perish for lack of wisdom, Pro. 22.23. Job. 36.12.


And therefore in the second place, this may serve for instruction unto
unregenerate men, to apply their hearts to wisdom, and embrace the counsel of
God, that offers them knowledge and grace, as is urged in many places; as, Pro.
1.20, 24 and 8.5. and 9.4. and the rather, because if they be wilful, and
reject knowledge, God may be provoked to for sake them for ever, Pro. 1.24.
and 28.31. and 26.10. Job 5.3.

Thirdly, it shows the wonderful mercy of God, in saving sinners: for what
were we all by nature, but a generation of fools and madmen? And therefore it
shows the riches of his mercy, and the freeness of it: the riches, in that
he glorifies such unworthy creatures; and the freeness of it, in that they
are utterly disabled for deserving any thing at his hands. For what can fools
and madmen do, that they should merit any thing at Gods hands?

Fourthly, it should teach godly men, both with patience to bear their wrongs,
seeing they are distracted, and with discretion to avoid them, and to have as
little to do with them as may be: For what should the sons of God do with
the sons of Belial? And if they abuse them in words, to learn not to answer
a fool in his folly, Proverbs 26.4.

Fifthly, all this description of folly and madness, may strike some kind of
amazement and sorrow into the hearts of godly men. For, as they are
unregenerate in part, there are left some dregs of this phrenzy and folly here
in them. And hence it is, that we find in Scripture, folly charged upon them.
It is true, that sometimes they are said to be fools by the world, for things
they do wisely in; and so the Apostles were fools for Christ's sake, 1. Cor.
4.10. and Paul ironically calls himself a fool, 2. Cor. 11.1. Sometimes they
are called fools, not because they are so, but because that they do hate some
kind of likeness to folly, 2. Cor. 11.17. but yet withal it is true, that
seriously godly men are said to be abased in themselves for very folly and
madness, which they see in themselves, and so we shall find every godly man
called beasts by themselves, and sometimes by God himself, and so it is folly
and madness in any.

Wherein godly m^n sometimes show folly.
1. To hate reproof, Pro. 12.1. It is there said to be a brutish thing. 2. To
be censurers of their friends rashly: so Jobs friends are charged with folly,
Job 42.8. 3. To be pertinacious in defending their innocence, striving to make
themselves seem iuster then they are: this was Jobs madness, Job 42.3, and
34.35. 4. To neglect knowledge, and to be careless to use the means for
instruction, and the understanding of holy things Pro. 30.2.3. This made Agur
say, that he was more brutish then any man, and that he had not the
understanding of a man in him. So much of ignorance as is left in us, so much
of folly and madness is in us. 5. To fret and be unadvisedly angry and froward:
for anger rests in the bosom of fools only, Eccles. 7.10. Pro. 24.29. teasty
and hasty persons not only have folly, but exalt it. 6. To be indiscreet in
words, or insufficient to speak with God or men, as becomes the matter, or to
carry our selves indiscreetly: this made David loath himself so, Psalm. 38.5.
7. To be vexed and impatient, and full of fretting in adversity. Godly men
play many mad tricks this way; one while fretting at the prosperity of their
adversaries, and another while murmuring in their hearts at their own
condition, or plotting courses, how to conform themselves to the world, and so
to report of their repentance. This made David call himself a beast, Psalm.
73.3, 13, 14, 15, 21, ^2. 8. After one has had experience of Gods gracious
providence, and protection of God, to fall to trust upon outward things. Thus
it was madness in David, after so many trials of Gods power, for him to stand
about to number the people, and to rest upon the strength and multitude of his
subjects, 2. Sam. 24.10. 9. To be slow of heart to believe, and treasure up the
promises of God, and the proofs of Scripture, that should comfort us, and
warrant the truth of our salvation in Christ, Luke 24.25. 10. To speak proudly
or wickedly, and with provocation to others, especially to wicked men, or if
they themselves be wicked men, Pro. 30.32, 33 11. All dotages about earthly
things, are in a great degree madness. For godly men, that are heirs of the
promises, and of the Kingdom of heaven to yield themselves over to the
inticements and lusts after worldly things, is marvelous folly and madness,
especially in them, who have tasted and known better things, to neglect their
glory, which is their souls (for so David calls his soul) Psalm. 30. vlt.
and to serve the sensual desires of their flesh, is miserable folly. 12. All
sinful courses are foolish courses: and to deal sinfully, is to deal madly,
Psalm. 69.5.
The last use of this doctrine may be, to show the vanity, and insufficiency
of all humane wit and learning, and moral indowments, in comparison of
heavenly and spiritual knowledge, and understanding. For if all unregenerate
men be foolish men, then it will follow, that a man may be a great wise man in
this world, and endued with all the ornaments of humane learning, etc. and yet
at the same time in Gods sight be accounted but as a natural fool or a mad
man, in respect of his want of the true wisdom from above, to discern things
that are excellent, that is, spiritual things.

Thus of the fourth doctrine.

Doct. 5. It is a hard task to overcome and cure ignorance: Ignorant men,
especially those that are bent against godliness, are wonderfully unteachable;
God himself is feign here to devise a strange way to silence them. Solomon
observed, that these men are wiser, then any man that can give a reason: And if
a fool be brayed in a mortar, yet his folly will not depart from him: and a
reproof will enter more into a wise man, then 100. stripes into a fool: yea
it is here to be noted, that it is hard to silence them from their reproaches
and follies.

The reasons are,

Why it is so hard to cure Ignorance, and silence ignorant men.
First, because it is natural to them to be hateful, and hating others, and
it is a hard task to overcome a natural disposition in man, Titus 3.3.

Secondly, because the unregenerate mind of man is full of objections, and the
devil suffers many heads of purpose: he prompts them, and supplies them with
cauils.

Thirdly, because many withold the truth in unrighteousness, they do
willingly misprison the truth, they desire not information, they love darkness
and lies, and therefore are loath to have what might satisfy them, and resist
the power of the truth, and willingly strive to neglect doctrine in public,
and Apologies in private.

Fourthly, because they encourage one another in an evil way, they observe,
that the great men of the world, and many that are in reputation for wisdom
and learning, are scorners, as well as they: yea it mightily confirms them, to
hear many times in the very pulpits showers of reproaches, which ambitious and
malicious temporizers power out to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and
discourage the hearts of the righteous: they think they may revile securely,
because they hear that way euerie-where evil spoken of: that cause and
language, is the cause and language of the multitude.

Fifthly, because many ignorant persons, when they are confuted, yet are so
foolish, that they will wilfully persist in their objections, upon this
pretense, that though they cannot reply against the answer, yet they think, if
such and such were there, that have more experience and learning, they would
confirm and make good what they say.

Sixthly, because malice has no ears, they hate the truth and godly men, and
therefore are utterly unwilling to abate any thing of the disgraces of the
truth, or godly persons. If it be not as they say, yet their malice would feign
have it so; and if it may disgrace the godly, they care not whether it be true
or no.

Seventhly, because many times God gives them over to such a reprobate sense,
that through custom, and evil thoughts, and evil surmizes, they think verily
they do not much amiss to oppose and hate such persons. This was the case of
such as reviled and persecuted the Apostles, they thought they did God good
service, as Christ prophesied of them.

The uses of this doctrine follow.

Uses. First therefore, we should not wonder, if we see this daily come to
pass, that men of all sorts should reproach the good way of God, so unjustly, so
foolishly, so pertinaciously.

Secondly, it shows that godly men had need to be circumspect, and to watch
their words and works with all exactnes, and that they which will confute
ignorant men, must strive to be very able and thoroughly furnished with wisdom
of words, and abundance of good works.

Thirdly, it shows that ignorant persons are in a lamentable case, that are so
in wrapped in the snares and cords of their own folly, that so willingly and
wilfully run toward the gates of death and ruin, that are so hardly cured
of this spiritual blindenes.

Fourthly, it imports, that sturdy, self-willed, perverse Christians, that
cannot be diuerted, or advised, are to be reckoned in the rank of these
fools, what show soever they make of a better estate.

Fifthly, it does comfortably import, that when one is teachable, and hates
reproching, and will do or say nothing against the truth, and is not pleased
with his ignorance, but judges himself for it, and uses the means to get
the knowledge and love of the truth, that such a person is escaped from the
congregation of these fools, and is in some measure enlightened with true
wisdom from above.

Sixthly, it may warn all that love their own souls, hereafter to take heed,
and with care to avoid wilfulnes, and selfe-conceitednes. Let men take heed
they be not wise in themselves, but strive to frame themselves to be true
workers of wisdom, and withal to take heed of a multitude of words: he that
cannot be silent, cannot be wise, or godly.

And thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 6. Sixthly, we may here note, that well-doing, is the best way to
confute wicked and unreasonable men. A sound and fruitful life is the
likeliest and surest way to still them: if any thing will do it, it is the
best way for diverse reasons.

1. Because we see here it is a course of Gods choosing, and he says, it will
even muzzle them, and bind up their mouths, and he will give success to the
obedience of his own commandments. 2. Because by a conversation full of good
works, we do not only confute them our selves, but we make others able to
answer for us in all places. 3. Because if a man undertake to answer them by
words, he is in danger to be provoked to speak unadvisedly, and so may prove
like those fools whom he reproues, Pro. 26.5. 4. Because the natural
conscience of the wicked is as it were feared to take notice of a good
conversation, and will struggle and resist within the wicked man, so as he
cannot so securely vent his reproaches. 5. Because it is a way that brings most
peace and comfort to ones own heart. If he deal with them by words, his heart
may afterward smite him for some absurdity or other he has committed: whereas
he is safe, that fights against them by his good works. 6. Because it is the
surest way of revenge, to overcome their evil with goodness, especially if thou
can get but the advantages to do good to them that reproach thee, Romans
12.18, 19.
Use. The sound consideration of this truth, should subdue in us that
ouer-eager desire of answering such as wrong us by bitter words, or works of
revenge; yea, it should compel upon us a consultation, whether it be best to
deal with them at all by words: God's way is by works; and thou must get a
great deal of temperance and wisdom, if thou think thy self able to confute
them thoroughly by words. It is true also, that in some cases we may resort to
the Magistrate to punish them that abuse us: but yet still this counsel of
God, that bids us silence them by well-dooing, should intimate, that other
courses must be used, with much caution, and without rashness or confidence in
them.

Secondly, this may reprove that unquietness and impatience which is found in
some Christians, when they are reproached and wronged: they are much vexed at
the indignities offered to them, and think it strange, that wicked men should
not cease traducing of their names; whereas perhaps, if they examine
themselves, they may find, that they have not used the means to still them,
they have not muzzled these dogs; and therefore no wonder, if they bark, and
bite too: and muzzled we see here they will not be, but by their good works.
And therefore if they be barren and unfruitful, they must take notice of the
fault in themselves.

There are other things that may be noted out of these words: but I will only
touch them; as,

Doct. 7. That only foolish men do reproach godly men. Such as revile and
censure many, are usually either openly carnal men; as, they were drunkeards
that reproached David, and Abiects, Psalm 35.15. and 69.13. They were either
fools, or the children of fools, but viler they were than the earth, that had
Job in derision, Job 30.1, 8. men that ran into excess of riot, as the
Apostle writes, 1. Pet. 4.5. or else hypocrites, that have nothing in them but
words and empty shows. Or if at any time there be a sin found in godly men,
it is in such as are but babes, and look like carnal men, and have a great
deal of their natural folly and madness unsubdued in them, 1. Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.
But, for the most part, it is a fault found only in wicked men.

Doct. 8. That it is a great pain to a wicked man, to be restrained from
reproaches: he is as much vexed when he cannot or dare not speak evil of
godly men, as a dog or an ox is when he is muzzled.

Doct. 9. That the good life of godly men, may silence wicked men, and yet not
make them leave their wickedness: he does not say, that by welldoing they may
win ignorant and foolish men. It is true, that sometimes a good conversation
may win them, as, 1. Pet. 3.1, 2. and before, verse 12. Yet ordinarily they
will do wickedly, even in the Land of vprightnes, Esaias 26.10.

Verse 16. As free* and not using your liberty for a cloak of malitiousnes, but
as the servants of God.


IN the two former verses, he confirms the exhortation by reasons: in this, he
answers an objection. The objection seems to be, that Christians are made free
by Christ, and therefore are not to be tied with the bonds of humane
ordinances, or subjection to men. The Apostle answers, that it is true, that
Christians are made freemen; but so, as they must not use their freedom as a
cloak of malitiousnes, and the liberty of sinning, either against God or men:
for, they are still God's servants, and bound to do what he would have them to
do; and so consequently to obey Magistrates, since GOD requires them so to do.

So that in this verse he entreats of Christian liberty. And so first, he
grants the use of it, or the right of it, in these words, As free. Secondly, he
remoues the abuse of it, in these words, Not using your liberty as a cloak of
malitiousnes. And thirdly, he gives a reason of his remoueall, Because they are
the servants of God still.

In the first part, you must consider what he grants, viz* that they are
free. Secondly, how far he grants it, viz. that they are as free.

Free.]

Freedom is either civil or spiritual. Civil freedom is, when a servant is
manumitted or made free, that was an apprentise or bond-slaue before: and so
when a stranger is admitted to the right of a City, or a Commonwealth, or the
like. The spiritual freedom is that estate which Christians do enjoy by God's
favor in Christ, after their calling. It is a spiritual manumission or
freedom that is here meant: and this is called Christian liberty, partly
because it is a freedom that we have only by Christ, and partly because it is
a freedom now only enjoyed by Christians, and no other men in the world.

Christian liberty is one of the great gifts or endowments bestowed upon the
Church by Christ. It is not amiss to reckon up all the gifts in order, that
the relation which this gift has to the rest, may appear. The gifts then, that
Christ has bestowed upon Christians, are these:

First, Special gifts of Christ, bestowed on the godly.
their ransom paid unto God for their redemption.

Secondly, their vocation by the Gospel, calling them out of the world, into
the Church.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost, which he sends into their hearts.

Fourthly, their justification, imputing his own righteousness, and procuring
forgiveness of all their sins.

Fifthly, their sanctification, by which he gives them new natures.

Sixthly, their adoption, by which they are made the sons of God.

Seventhly, their Christian liberty; by which they are freed from all former
bondage, and enjoy great privileges: this is a fruit of their adoption.

Eightthly, consolation, refreshing their hearts in all estates, especially by
the comforts of his Word.

Ninthly, the gift of perseverance, by which tey are kept from falling away.

Lastly, an immortal and undefiled inheritance in heaven, after they are dead.

Christian liberty is either the liberty of grace in this life, or the liberty
of glory after this life. The liberty of glory concerns either the soul or the
body. The glory or liberty of the soul, is the freeing of it from all sin
and misery, and the setting of it in the possession of that blessed immortality
in heaven. The liberty of the body, is the freeing of it from the bonds of
death, and bowels of the earth, by enduing it with a glorious resurrection:
part of which freedom they enjoy even in the grave. Quanquam humantur, non
tamen damnantur.
For, though they be buried, yet they are not damned to hell there, but rest in
hope of their final deliverance; and with this liberty of glory, both soul
and body are made heirs of heaven, Romans 8.21.

It is the liberty of grace is here meant: and that this part of the Christian
happiness may the better appear, I will consider, First, what he is freed
from; and secondly, what he is freed to.

For the first, there are diverse things he is freed from: as,

First, From what a Christian is made free.
from the rigor of the moral Law: he is delivered from the most rigid and
severe execution of absolute and perfect obedience; so as being now under
grace, he is not bound to fulfill the law perfectly, but may be accepted of
God, if he obey it in the vprightnes and sincerity of his heart, though he have
many frailties and infirmities. God has now tempred that rigor of exaction,
which he justly stood upon in his first agreement with man in Paradise, and
did with terror again proclaim in giving his Law in Sinai: so as now in
Christ, our yoke is easy, and our burden light, Math. 11.29. Romans 6.14. Christ
our surety has fulfilled that (...), or exact righteousness of the Law for us,
Romans 8.3. Galatians. 4.24.26. Heb. 12.18. Romans 7.6. etc.

Secondly, from the execution and condemnation, into which the Law for our
sins had cast us, our expiation being made in the blood of Christ, who was
made (...), a curse for us, that we might be justified from these things, from
which by the Law of Moses we could never be absolved, Romans 8.1. Galatians 3.13.

Thirdly, from the tyranny and damnation of sin that dwells in us, Electi sunt
liberi a damnaetione legis, et a dominatione regis peccati.
the force of it being mortified by the Spirit of Christ, and so weakened, that
though it may rebel, yet it cannot rage and rule, as it did before, Romans 6.14.
John 8.34. 2 Cor. 3.17. Romans, 6.6, 18.

Fourthly, from bondage under devils: those spiritual wickednesses, that had
their strong holds in the hearts of every man by nature, and ruled effectually
in all the children of disobedience, who had possession in our hearts, and kept
us in their power, as most cruel Iaylers, Ephesians 2.2, 4. by Christ they are
thrown out of possession: they may tempt still, but the gates of hell shall
never prevail again over the godly, Colos. 2.15.

Fifthly, from the Laws of Moses. The ceremonial and judicial Laws, which
laws were a yoke that neither the Jews nor their fathers were ever able to
bear, Acts. 15.10. The ceremonial laws were a very seal of our
condemnation, a handwriting against us, wherein men many ways acknowledge
their guiltines: besides, they were extremely burdensome, in respect of the
rules of them, and the strict observation required from them. Our deliverance
from these laws, these places prove, Acts 15.1. Cor. 9.1, 19. 2. Cor. 3.17.
Heb. 9.10. Colos. 2.17.

There were four respects which the ceremonial Law had, or four uses. First,
these ceremonies, as I said before, did signify our sin-guiltines, and were as
an obligation and handwriting against us, Colos. 2.14. Secondly, they were a
badge to distinguish the Jews from all other nations, Genes. 17.13* 14.
Thirdly, they were shadows and typical adumbrations of Christ and his
benefits, Heb. 9 9, 10. and 10.1.4. Fourthly, they were as a tutor or
Schoolmasters, to instruct and keep them under in the minority of the Church,
Galat. 4.1, 2.

Now all these uses are abolished by Christ: For our condemnation is taken away
by Christ, and so the handwriting is cancelled, Colos. 2.14. and the Gentiles
and Jews are made all one people, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. and Christ the substance
and body is come, and therefore the shadows must vanish, Col. 2.17. and the
heir is, as it were, now at age, and therefore needs not Tutors and Governors*
Gal. 4.1, 2, 3.

As for the freedom of Christians from the Judicial Laws; that must be
understood with a distinction: for so many of the Judicial Laws, as did agree
with the common political law of Nature, are in force: only so much of the
Judicial law, as did only concern the singular and particular policy of the
Jews, is abolished. Where the reason of the Law is Universal, the Law binds
all: where the respect and reason of the Law is fitted only to the condition
of that people, there the law is abolisht.

Sixthly, from servile fear, unto which we are, and were in bondage by Nature,
and so we are freed from the servile fears of the grave, of men, of death:
there was a spirit of bondage in us by nature, we durst not come into Gods
presence, and legal terrors did lie at the door of our hearts, to drive us to
despair of mercy or acceptance. But when Faith came, then the spirit of
bondage went away, and the hearts of Christians are emboldned with spiritual
liberty and firm confidence; taking delight in the Law of God, in the inner
man, Ro^. 8.15. Luke 1.74. And there was likewise in us by Nature, a fear of
the reproach and rage of men, and the oppositions and scorns of the World, from
which God's children are so delivered, that many times they have contemned the
uttermost fury of Tyrants; as Daniel and his companions, and the Martyrs, and
the Patriarchs, and Moses, etc. and from the fear of death. We were all in
bondage to it all our life; but now Christ has delivered us, by destroying him
that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14, 15.

This of the first point, what we are forced from.

Now for the second, what we are free to; and therein are diverse comfortable
considerations.

To what a godly man is made free.
First, we are free to the favor and fellowship of God the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, 1. John 1.3, 7. 1. Cor. 1.9. John 17.21. 2. Pet.
1.4. 1. Ioh. 5.24.

Secondly, we are free to the Communion of Saints, we are fellow Citizens with
the Saints, we are written in the writing of the house of Israel, and
acknowledged as members of the Congregation of the first borne: This is an
Article of our Faith, Ephesians 2.20. and 3.6. and 4.4, 5. Hebrews 12.18, etc.

Thirdly, we are free to all the promises of Grace, those rich and precious
promises; we may safely imply, they are ours, 2. Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 3.6.

Fourthly, we are free of God's chamber of Presence: we may go in when we will,
and ask what we will, and it shall be done unto us, we are free to put up as
many petitions and suits as we will; we are free to the Throne of Grace, Heb.
4.16. Ephesians. 3.12. and so in general, we are free in the whole House of God,
even to the use of all his ordinances, John 6.36.

Fifthly, we are free, in respect of things indifferent: and all things are
indifferent, that are neither commanded nor forbidden in the Word of God; all
the restraints that in the time of the old Testament lay upon any creature, are
now taken off, so as all the creatures of God are good and lawful: All things
are pure to the pure, Titus 1.15. 1. Tim. 4.4. Romans 14. so are days, meats,
garments, etc. So as now, Christians may use them or omit them freely: note
what I say; use, as well as omit: For, some are so singular, or simple, as to
think, Christian liberty does only make reference to omit, but not to use
meats, garments, days, or indifferent ceremonies; whereas they restrain
Christian liberty, that forbid the use of those indifferent things, as well as
they that dislike the omitting; only, in using, men must take heed, as has
been showed before, of the opinion of merit, worship or necessity to holiness
or salvation, which is that which is condemned by the Apostles.

Uses. The use may be, first, for humiliation to wicked men: for, hereby is
employed, that they are in great bondage, and not free; for, howsoever it is
true, that every wicked man in Christian Churches, is freed from that yoke of
Moses laws: yet in all the rest, they are in danger still and bondage. They
stand bound by the covenant of works, to the absolute keeping of the Law,
because none have the benefit of the new covenant, till they be in the same;
and so all their faylings of the perfect fulfilling of the Law, are imputed to
them, and they are under the execration and all the curses of the Law. They are
in bondage to the tyranny of their own sins, and have the devils entrenched
in strong holds in their souls. They would be troubled to know, that the
devil did possess their bodies, and yet do not consider, that the devil does
certainly possess their souls: every wicked man is possessed. Besides they
are in bondage by these servile fears: they dare not set their hearts in Gods
sight. It is a death to them: nor dare they for Religions sake displease men:
and the fear of death is like a continual death to them, and for all this
they are never helped, till their hearts be turned to God.

Secondly, we may hence gather the difference between the liberty of the new
Testament, and that in the old. In the old Testament godly men were free from
the rigor and curse of the Law, and from the dominion of sin, and power of
the devils, and from servile fears: only in the new Testament there are these
three things added.

1. That the doctrine of liberty in the former things is more clear, and more
generally revealed. 2. That we are freed from the Mosaicall Laws. 3. That we
have liberty in things indifferent.
A third use may be for instruction, to teach men to try their interest to this
freedom. For such men only are made free, that believe in Christ, John 1.12.
and resolve to continue in the Word, John 8.31. and are weary and heavy laden,
Mat. 11.29 and are thoroughly turned to God, 2. Cor. 3.16, 17.

Lastly, our Christian liberty may be a great comfort to our hearts, if we
consider seriously the great miseries we are freed from, and the great
privileges we are freed to; and the rather, because our freedom proceeds
from the tender mercy of God, Luke 1.78. and was purchased at a dear rate by
Christ, 1. Pet. 1.18. and the Patent of it is sealed by the holy Ghost, Ephesians.
1.13. and also because it is granted to none, but the sons of God.

As free]

These words restrain the grant of our liberty, and show, that though we be
made truly free by God, yet in diverse respects we are but as free, rather like
freemen, then so indeed: and so we are but as free,

First, in respect of others: for by the judgment of others, In what respects
we are but as free.
no freeman can be known infallibly, but only in the conjecture of charity.

Secondly, in respect of our selves: and so we are but as free, 1. In respect
of the rigor of the Law: For most Christians, through ignorance and unbelief,
live under the bondage of Legal perfection, and so discern not, that
vprightnes in the Gospel is accepted in stead of perfection. 2. In respect of
the malediction of the Law, and so many Christians are but as free, First,
because they doubt of Gods favor. Secondly, because though the curse be
removed, yet the things that are cursed, are not removed: for the matter of
affliction is still the same, in respect of which, our life may be said to be
hid with God, Colo. 3.3. 3. In respect of the power of sin. For though the
dominion of sin be taken off: yet sin rebels in the most godly, and many
times preuailes in a great degree through their security or infirmities, Romans 7.


Fourthly, in respect of things indifferent, whether we respect God or our
selves: God has freed us in respect of right, but restrained us in respect of
use, by a threefold commandment, viz. of faith: of charity, and of obedience
to Magistrates. The commandment of faith binds us not to use our liberty,
unless we be fully persuaded of our right that is in things we may either do,
or omit at our own pleasures, Romans 14.6. The commandment of charity in things
we may either do or omit at our pleasure, binds us not to use our liberty,
when the weak brother will be offended.

The commandment of obedience binds us to submit the use of things
indifferent, to the commandment of the Magistrate; so as if the Magistrate
make ordinances about the use, or restraint of things indifferent, God has bid
us to obey those ordinances: and so, though we be free still in respect of our
right, yet we are not now free in respect of the uses of them.

Again, many Christians bind themselves, where God binds not; sometimes by
thinking things indifferent to be unlawful, and sometimes by thinking
themselves free to leave them, but not to use them.

Lastly, servile fears do much darken the glory of Christian liberty in the
hearts of many Christians, whilst through ignorance, or wilful unbelief, they
trouble themselves with conceits, that God does not accept their service; or
when they admit too much respect and fear of the displeasure of men; or when
they use not the means to bear the fear of death in themselves.

Use. And therefore the use should be, to teach Christians so to study the
doctrine of Christian liberty, and so to attend the informing and reforming of
their own hearts, that they may no longer restrain their own liberty in any
part of it: and withal since in some things we are not fully freed in this
life, they should the more earnestly stire up themselves to hope for, and long
for that glorious and perfect liberty in heaven, purchased by Jesus Christ.

Not using your liberty, as a cloak of maliciousnes]

In these words, the Apostle remoues the abuse of their liberty. The word
re^dred maliciousnes, signifies usually any wickedness generally or in general.
(...).
His drift is to warn them, that they should not any way abuse their liberty,
and make it any way a pretense, cover, color, or means of sin, or malice.

Men may use their liberty, and the doctrine of it, as a cloak of wickedness,
taking the word in the general sense five ways.

Men may use their liberties a^ a cloak of maliciousnes five ways.
First, when men reject their liberty, and spurn at it, and trample it under
feet, as if it were a doctrine of sinning, or made a means of sin. Thus he
that would not eat, did reject those ceremonial meats, as very badges of
wickedness, and did by that sign judge of such as did use them, to be
hypocrites, Romans 14.3. as we see now many Christians do reject and spurn at
the ceremonies imposed, and do judge all that use them, to be but formal
Christians and hypocrites, and such as persuade to the use of them, to use such
persuasions, but as clokes for their ambition, and hope of preferment, how
godly soever they be, or how sure soever they be of their lawful use of
their Christian liberty therein: and so this is one way of abusing our liberty,
when we throw it away, as if it were a very cloak of maliciousnes.

Secondly, when men make a show, that they are freemen, and yet are in bondage
to sin and the world still: and thus do all hypocrites sin, that have a form
of godliness, 2. Pet. 2.19, ^0.
but deny the power of it; that seem as if they were godly, and devout to
Jesus, and yet have never repented of their sins, nor forsaken the world:
such are they, 1. That seem outwardly godly, and yet live in some horrible
secret abomination, as either whoredom, or the sins of deceit, or any vile
affections, Math. 23.27, 28. 2. That do profess Religion, and yet live as
unreformed in the course of their conversation: such are they, Isaiah 1. verses
13.16. 3. That though they are not scandalous or injurious to others, yet they
are in bondage to the world, and are entangled either with the cares or losses
of life; as, the conforming themselves to the vanities, and excesses, and
fashions of the time, make apparent.


Thirdly, when men rest in the outward show of liberty, and think it is enough:
but this will turn to wickedness. It was the manner, when servants were
manumitted and made free, they went with hats; whereas before, while they were
bondmen and prentises, they were bare-headed. Some think, the Apostle alludes
to this: and then the sense were, that he would not have them rest in the bare
show of freemen, as if it were enough to wear a free-man's hat; but they must
fall to their trades, and so set-vp in godliness, as they that did employ all
their labor, and stock, and credit, to grow wealthy in spiritual treasures:
else, if men rested in the outward sign of freemen, and were idle and
unprofitable, this would be occasion of much wickedness: for, 1. To show our
selves in the habit of freemen, is not that which God requires, if we employ
not the portion of gifts he has given us; nay, God will require this
unfruitfulness at our hands, as a great offense: the show without substance,
is painted wickedness. 2. This resting in the outward form of godliness, may
breed a dangerous habit of hypocrisy. 3. Their natural corruptions still hang
upon them: and then this show of liberty, is but a cloak to hide them.


Fourthly, when men take liberty to sin, under pretense of their Christian
liberty. GOD has freed us in Christianity from the ceremonial Law, not from
the moral: for, though he has delivered us from the malediction and reign of
the moral Law, yet he never freed us from the obedience of the same, Romans
6.15. Jude 3. And it is manifest, that Christian liberty can give no toleration
to sin: for, Christ died to free us from sin, and not to let us loose to
sin more freely: we were freed from sin, that we might be servants to
righteousness, Romans 6.18. Besides, God hates sin by nature, and not by
precept only; and therefore God himself can give no liberty to sin: God
himself cannot dispense with the breach of the Laws that be moral in
themselves: and such Laws as be moral in themselves, I account to be all the
ten Commandments, but the fourth. The fourth Commandment is moral by
precept, not by nature; and so the Lord of the Sabbath may dispense with the
literal breach of the Sabbath: but the other nine are simply indispensable.
That Abraham was commanded to kill his son, was but a Commandment of trial.
And when God willed the Israelites to take the jewels of the Egyptians, he
did not will them to steal: for, God himself was chief Lord of all the earth,
and all things therein; the Egyptians were but his stewards.

Fifthly, when men use Religion, and their liberty in Christ, of purpose to hide
and cloak themselves in the practice of known sins; as, when Simeon and Leui
pretended the necessity of circumcision, to hide their murderous intents: and
Herod pretends his coming to Christ to worship him, and yet intends to kill
him: and the Pharisees use and make long prayers, for a pretense to cover their
devouring of widows houses, Luke 20.47. And so under pretense of giving to the
Priest the free children from relieuing their parents, Mat. 15. And so when men
preach Christ, only to get living, 1. These. 2.5. And so also when men enter
into profession of Religion, only to advantage themselves in wicked purposes;
as, to satisfy their lusts, or further their own carnal desires.

Thus, liberty is abused as a cloak of wickedness. Now, more particularly
liberty is abused many times as a cloak of malitiousnes, when Christian
liberty, especially in things indifferent, is pretended, and made a cloak to
cover vile malice, or ill affections toward their brethren.

Now, Christian liberty may be made a cloak of malice in things indifferent,
which lie under the commandment of the Magistrate, and that two ways.

First, How Christian liberty is made a cloak of malice in things indifferent.
when the authority of the Magistrate is pretended, urged, and used as a means
to empty men's malice upon their brethren; when they hate them, not because they
break men's laws, but because they keep God's Laws.

Secondly, and so also on the other hand, Christian liberty is abused as a
cloak of malitiousnes, when, under pretense of liberty by Christ, men refuse to
obey the Christian Magistrate in things indifferent: and this is the main thing
intended by the Apostle, in the words of this verse.

For, having exhorted them to submit themselves to the Ordinances of men, he
brings in these words (as was showed before) to answer their objection, that
might pretend that they were freed by Christ from all Ceremonies, or Ordinances
in things indifferent: The Apostle answers, that that were to make their
liberty in Christ, to be a cloak for their maliciousness, that is, for their
ill-affectednesse toward the Magistrate. Where note by the way, that upon all
pretenses to withdraw obedience from the laws of Magistrates, in things
indifferent, is, in Gods account, a sin of malice; partly, because God
reckons it as hateful as malice, and partly, because it flows usually from a
heart that is not well-affected unto the Magistrate, but some way is wanting in
that hearty respect ought to be borne to the Magistrate.

Secondly, in things indifferent, that are left free to use, or not to use; and
so Christian liberty is abused, when it is urged to defend such things as are
scandalous, or offend such as are weak: and this is that which the Apostles,
in other Scripture, so much urge, when they write of offending the weak brother.

Thirdly, in things indifferent, whether free, or under the Ordinances of men.
There be cases wherein Christian liberty may be vilely abused: As, 1. When
things indifferent are urged as matters of necessity, and with opinion of
holiness and merit, Gal. 5.1, 2. 2. When Christians do bite and devour one
another by quarrelling, censuring, backbiting one another, and make divisions
about these things; this is a reciprocal abuse about these things of Christian
liberty and zeal ill spent, seeing brotherly love is the fulfilling of the
Law, etc. Galat. 5.13, 14, 15. and the Kingdom of God stands not in garments,
gestures, meat and drink; but in righteousness, power, and joy in the holy
Ghost, Romans 14.17.


As the servants of God.]

These words are the reason, why Christians must not neglect their obedience
unto the Magistrate, nor abuse their liberty to licenciousnesse, or
maliciousness: For, though they be free by Jesus Christ, yet they are
entertained by God still in the nature of servants, and so, are bound to do
what he commands, and he does command them to submit themselves to the
Ordinances of the Magistrate.

For matter of Doctrine, two things may be here noted:

Doct. 1. God entertaynes none by Jesus Christ, but he takes them bound to be
his servants. All God's people are God's servants. And thus it is with men, not
only in the new Testament, but was so always before: Thus Abraham, Job,
Moses, and David, are called God's servants.

Use. The use should be for instruction diversely.

First, seeing we are God's servants, we should make Conscience of it to do
his work: he has by the Gospel hired us to that end, to employ our selves in
the works of righteousness, mercy, and piety, Tit. 2.12.

How we must serve God.
Secondly, since we belong to God, who is so great a Master, we should not only
do his work, but do it in such a manner as becomes the servants of the King
of all kings: God's servants should serve him, 1. Reverently, and with fear
and trembling, we must humble our selves to walk with God, Psalm. 2.11. Mic.
6.7. 2. Zealously: we should be zealous about this work, and so we should do
it readily. It is a shame for us to be dull, and careless, and prone to
shifts and excuses; the Centurions servants go, when he bids them, and come,
when he calls for them, and do this when he requires it; and our zeal should
be shown by our cheerefulness, Romans 12.45. Heb. 9.14.
and willingness: God's people should be a willing people, and our hearts
should be full of desires, above all things, to approve our selves to God: we
should make it appear, that we not only are his servants, but love to be his
servants, Isaiah 56.7. and in matters of his worship, or the means, thereof;
the zeal of his House should eat us up. 3. Wisely and discreetely. Kings get
the wisest men they can light upon, to serve before them: and therefore the
King of all kings will not be served with fools. Since we serve GOD, we should
be circumspect, and be sure we understand what the will of God is, Ephesians. 5.15,
16. And therefore we have need to pray with David, that God would give us true
understanding hearts to search his Law, Psalm 119.124. 4. Sincerely, Josh.
24*14. And this sincerity in God's work, we should show five ways. First, in
seeking none but him, Deuteronomy. 6.13. We must not be the servants of men, 1. Cor.
7.23. to satisfy men's humors, or stand-vpon their liking or disliking. We
may not serve Mammon in our own lusts. No man can serve two Masters. God
refuses us for his servants, if we serve riches, Luke 16.13. Secondly, we
should show our sincerity, in obeying him in all things: there is no work he
requires, that we should think our selves too good to do it: we must not dare
to neglect any thing he requires. They are none of God's servants, that will do
only what they list in Religion. Thirdly, we should show it, in doing all
things that may be best for his advantage, seeking his glory in all things, 1.
Cor. 10.31. We must not seek our own praise or profit, but his whom we serve.
Fourthly, by doing his will indeed, without dissimulation, 1. Chron. 28.9.
Fifthly, in newnes of spirit, bringing new hearts to his work, not trusting the
old man to do any work for God, Romans 7.6. 5. We must do his work constantly.
A servant is not he, that does a days work and so is gone; but he that works
all the year: nor has God any servants that he hires not by life. He has
none from year to year, Psalm 119.17. We must finish his work, and never
giue-ouer, till we fulfill the task appointed us, Luke ^.74. Reu. 7.17. 6. We
must serve him with our spirits: God is a Spirit, and will be served in spirit
and truth. If he may not have the service of our hearts, he reiects the
service of our bodies: we must serve him with all our hearts, and all our
souls, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Philip. 3.3. 7. Confidently. Servants to ill or poor
masters, are fain to trust them for diet and wages: how much more should we
rely upon God, and commit our selves wholly to him, taking no care but only
to do his work, leaving all the rest to him? Esaias 43.11. 8. With one shoulder,
or with one consent: they must agree one with another, Zephany 3.9. 9. With all
modesty, Acts 20.19. without pride, or self-conceits, or conceitednes;
acknowledging, that, when we have done all, we are unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. and with sorrow for our failings, Acts 20. Luke 15.29. and the rather,
because God can find faults in his best servants, Job 4.18.


Use 3. Thirdly, since God's people are God's servants, they should learn, in
all places to stand for the honor and glory of their Master, and not suffer
God to be dishonored by the servants of a strange god.

Lastly, since all God's people are his servants, and do his work; it serves
for the discovery of the miserable condition of multitudes in the visible
Church, who are heerby proved not to be God's people, because they are not
God's servants. And so these sorts of men following, are rejected as none of
Gods people, because they are none of his servants.

First, Who are rejected from the number of Gods servants.
all profane persons, that ask what profit it is to serve God, Job 21.15.
Malac. 3.15. and serve their own lusts, Math. 24.49.

Secondly, all worldlings, that work about nothing more then he things of this
life, Luke 16.13.

Thirdly, all unprofitable Christians, that live and do no good, will do no
work, but spend their days in spiritual idleness, and unfruitfulness, making no
conscience of the means, or opportunities of well-doing, Math. 25.26, 28.

Fourthly, all backward and dull Christians, to whom it seems evil to serve
the Lord, that account all religious duties to be tedious and irksome, and
never from their hearts consent to obey: Deuteronomy. 2.847
but do what they do, upon compulsion from the laws of men, or fear of
shame, etc. They are Gods servants no otherwise then the devil is. For the
devil is forced to do God some work sometimes, but it is always against his
will, that God has any glory by it.

Fifthly, all ignorant Christians, that are so far from doing good works,
that they understand not Gods will, nor are careful to redeem the time, that
they might get knowledge.

Sixthly, all hypocrites, that have the form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, promise to do much work, but do it not. These (especially, so many
of them as know their Masters will, and do it not) shall one day feel the
weight of Gods hand.

Seventhly, all quarelsome and contentious Christians, that make division, and
cause offenses contrary to the doctrine of Gods Word. These, the Apostle says,
serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by smooth pretenses deceive
the simple* Romans 16.18.

Use. 4. Lastly, since Gods people are Gods servants, they are to be much
reproved, that take liberty to judge and censure other men for infirmities, or
things doubtful or indifferent: for what have they to do to judge another
servant? They are Gods servants, and must make their reckoning to him, and
therefore stand or fall to their own Master.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, we may hence learn, that it is an excellent freedom to be
Gods servant. They are all freemen that serve God, as the coherence shows. No
freemen can enjoy better privileges then Gods servants do, and never were
there any servants that enjoyed such prerogatives as Gods servants do; and
this may appear many ways: for,

Prerogatives of Gods servants.
First, all sorts of men are Gods servants. All his subjects are his servants,
Psalm. 135.14. yea all his sons are servants: yea Christ himself, Esaias. 42.
all his elect are servants, yea his friends are his servants* so Abraham, that
had the honor to be the friend of God, accounted it no desparagement to be
Gods servant: the Kings of the earth accounted it to be the best part of their
title, to be Gods servants, Psalm. 36.1. All which proves, that it is a most
free and honorable estate to be servant unto God: else those eminent persons
would never have sought them out such a service: and this is the more evident,
because God accepts not of persons, but the poorest Christian may be as well
entertained of God, as any of those States, Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.

Secondly, Gods service may become any freeman in the world, if we consider,
what kind of intertainment God gives his servants. For,

First, all his work is fair work. It is no disgrace for any man to do it,
and he requires no more of the meanest servant he has, then he does of the
greatest Prince on earth, after he has retained him to be his servant.

Secondly, if it fall out, that they endure any hardship, or be put to bear
any inconvenience; it is no more then what the Master himself does, or has
endured, Math. 10.25.

Thirdly, and that the difficulty of this work may not dismay thee, he powers
out his own spirit upon his servants, Joel. 2.29. and guides them so, that in
effect he does all their work for them, Esaiah 26. Psalm. 90.

Fourthly, when they endeavor themselves to do his work in sincerity, he
accepts their service marvelous graciously, he is so well pleased with them,
that his countenance does shine upon them, Psalm. 31.16. yea he boasts of their
service, Job 1.8. and 2.3.

Fifthly, if through ignorance or infirmity they miss it sometimes, and so
mar his work; if they but come to him, and confess it, he is ready and
easy to forgive, and plentious in mercy, Psalm 86.4, 5. Esaias 44.20, 21. Mal.
3.17.

Sixthly, no men are kept and entertained more comfortably than they are: he
does not only find them food, but gives them gladness of heart; where a
thousand of other men, that have means enough, have so many sorrows among,
that they bear their names as a very curse, Esaias 65.13, 14.

Seventhly, if by wilful ignorance or carelesnes they offend him, yet he will
correct in measure, Ier. 30.10, 11. and will quickly repent himself of his
Judgment concerning them, Psalm 135.14. He never puts away any servants, Esaias
41.8, 9. If they should at any time run away, and be lost, he will never
cease seeking them, till he find them, and bring them home again, Psalm 119.
vlt.

Eightthly, he gives great wages, none like him: all his servants have a great
reward, Psalm 19.11. And in the end he bestows upon them great inheritances,
besides what free-holds he bestows upon them in this life, Psalm 126.22. 1.
Pet. 1.3.

Ninthly, he takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm 35.27. It
is a joy to him, when they do well, and thrive.

Tenthly, besides what they get for themselves, they get great suits for others
also: they beg many a pardon, and obtain any of them, yea, great suits, Job
40.5. John 15.15, 16.

Eleuenthly, when any thing ailes them, his merciful kindness is a wonderful
comfort to them, Psalm 119.70. And if they should fall into danger in respect
of the debts of other men, God becomes surety for them, and sees all
discharged, Psalm 119. verse 122.

Twelfthly, no men have such protections. Their adversaries are sure to come to
confusion: the men that strive with them, shall certainly perish, Esaias 41.11,
12, etc. The hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his
indignation toward his and their enemies, Esaias 66.14.

Thirteenthly, they shall not lose what they have wrought, but God will
establish their work: he will never forget them, and their works shall be had
in everlasting remembrance, Esaias 44.20. Psalm 90.16, 17.

Lastly, God does not only thus extraordinarily provide for his servants, but
he takes order, and prouides also for the seed of his servants; which, few or
none of worldly masters do, Psalm 69.37.

Uses. The use should be threefold.

First, it should teach Christians to live with contentation, and in all things
to give thanks, and to say always with David, O Lord, thou have dealt well
with thy servant according to thy Word, Psalm 119.65.

Secondly, it should make them take great delight to do his work: they should
love to be servants to such a Master, Esaias 56.6.

Thirdly, they should every where speak of Gods praises, that entertaines them
so graciously: they should open their mouths all the day long with the praises
of such a Master, Psalm 134.1. and 135.1.

Verse 17. Honor all men: love the brotherhood: fear God: honor the King.


THese words are the conclusion of his exhortation to Subjects. Wherein the
Apostle does not only repeat the substance of a Subiect's duty to his
Sovereign; but withal, does summarily commend unto them the description of an
absolute Subject or Citizen in all his relations, and tells them in a few
words, what would make a Christian, living in humane societies, eminent for
exactnes of his behavior: for he, in these words, forms him in his carriage to
all men, to good men, to God, and to the King. And so his Charge enioins,

First, courtesy to all men.

Secondly, charity to godly men.

Thirdly, piety to God.

Fourthly, loyalty to the King.

Honor all men.]

The first thing that the Apostle would have a Christian that lives in humane
societies look to, is, a right behavior of himself toward all men, that is,
toward the multitude in general; not because that is his greatest care, or the
greatest part of his care and duty, but because the greatest offense many times
arises from the neglect of his outward carriage toward all sorts of men, and
because Christians are usually faulty, in not watching over their ways heerin.

By all men* he means the general body of societies where we live, even all
sorts of men, good and bad; whether religious or profane, friends or enemies,
acquaintance or strangers; nor ought they to be scrupulous of giving honor to
wicked men: for, though many men or women, in the places where we live, may and
ought to be contemned for the wickedness of their lives; yet there are none so
vile, but there are some grounds of honor in them, either in respect of some
remainder of God's Image in them, some gifts worthy praise, or some place of
eminence or authority, or some outward blessings, in which they excel others;
as, riches, birth, strength, valor, or the like.

Now, Christians have diverse ways, by which they may express this general
honor to all sorts of men.

First, By what ways w^e may express our honoring of men.
in their salutation. It is a very comely thing in Christians, to salute
willingly, and in words, and in gesture to show civil respect, even to wicked
men: Abraham's behavior toward the Hittites, may shame the most Christians,
Genesis 23.7, 12, etc. Yea the very Hittites themselves may teach them good
manners in this kind.

Secondly, in their communication: and so it is an excellent rule given by
Solomon, that a man should consider to speak, what is acceptable, and avoid,
what may irritate, Pro. 10.32, 13. and 15.23.

Thirdly, in their conversation: and so they should show a worthy respect of
such among whom they live, if they look to these rules.

1. To avoid those persons, or things may bring trouble, or wrongs, or offense
to the multitude. And this they shall do, if they strive to live without
offense themselves, 1. Cor. 10.30. and do shame the company in respect of
talebearers, Pro. 15.3. and 20.19. Leuit. 19.16. and such as cause divisions,
and offenses amongst men, Romans 16.17. and that they do not vilify any
rashly, either by reproaching them for outward defects; and so they must not
curse the deaf, Leuit. 19.14. or by peremptory judging of the final estate of
the souls of men, especially about doubtful or indifferent actions of men, 1.
Cor. 5.10. Iam. 3.17. 2. To show all meekenes and gentleness to all men,
striving to be soft and amiable in all their occasions of conuersing, Titus
3.1, 2. Iam. 3, 17. studying to be quiet, and to meddle with their own
business, 1. These. 4.12. following peace toward all men, Heb. 12.14. Romans
12.19.
Only in this general respective behavior toward all sorts of men,
Christians must look to two rules.

First, the one is, that they never justify the wicked, nor condemn the
righteous, Prou. 17.15.

Secondly, the other is, that by needless society they make not themselves
companions with open evil doers, Psalm. 1.1.

Love the Brotherhood.]

The second thing requisite to the framing of a complete citizen, or subject,
is the soundnes of his affection or carriage toward such, as be religious in
the Commonweal where he lives. The brotherhood is the society, or company
of so many as are true Christians in the place of a man's aboade or
acquaintance: that which is required, is, that howsoever we should show a
general respect of all sorts of men, to carry our selves fairly toward them:
yet we should in a special manner set our love upon such, as be religious
persons, and should show upon all occasions, that we do honor and affect them
as heartily, and as tenderly, as if they were our very brethren in the flesh, or
rather more stricter, in that they are allied unto us in a far greater, and
better bond, then that natural consanguinity. This is that, which is also
earnestly required, and urged in other Scriptures, as Romans 10.12. Heb. 13.1. 1.
Pet. 1.22. John 13.34. Ephesians. 2.5.

Now, this love to the godly of our acquaintance, we should show diverse ways.

First, How we show our love to the brotherhood.
by making choice of them, as the only companions of our lives, Phil. 1.5. All
our delight should be in them, Psalm. 16.3. And so we should receive them, and
entreat them, as Christ received us to Glory, that is, freely, and with all
hartines of affection, thinking nothing too dear for them, Romans 15.7. 1. Pet.
4.9. This is the noblest kind of hospitality: no fellowship like the brotherly
society of true Christians, so it be without dissimulation, and constant, Romans
12.10. 1. Pet. 4.5.

Secondly, by employing our gifts, the best that we can for their good, 1.
Pet. 4.10. Now our gifts are either spiritual, or outward gifts. First,
spiritual gifts are, knowledge, utterance, prayer, or the like. Now these are
given to profit withal, not our selves only, but others, 1. Cor. 12. Thus
Christians should help others with what they have learned, when they meet
together, Proverbs 15.7. 1. Cor. 14.26. Colos. 3.16. And thus they must help
one another by prayer, whether they be absent, or present, 2. Cor. 1.11.
Secondly, outward gifts are riches, friends, authority, and the like: and these
should be employed especially for the good of the brethren, Psalm. 16.3. Gal.
6.10. Phil. 2.4. And all this we should do with all faithfulness, 3. John 3.5.
and with all compassion, putting-vnder our shoulders to bear their burdens,
Gal. 6.2. Now their burdens are either inward temptations, or outward
afflictions: in both these we should help to bear their burdens: If they be
burdened with infirmities, or temptations, we should bear their burdens, by
laying their griefs to our hearts, and by striving to comfort them; and if
their secrets be for wrongs to us, we should let them see, how easily we can
forgive them. If it be outward afflictions that burden them, we bear their
burdens, when we sorrow with them that sorrow, and are ready to the uttermost
of our power, to advise them, or relieve and help them.

Thirdly, we should show our special love to them, by striving together with
them in the cause and quarrel of Religion, striving by all means to be of one
opinion and affection with them in matters of Religion, and to the uttermost of
our power to defend them by word and deed, according to our callings and
occa^ions, Phil. 1.27. 1. Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.3.

Uses. The use may be first, for the discovery of the notable wickedness of
multitudes of Christians, that are so far from loving godly men in the places
where they live, that of all other men, they most dislike them, and show it by
reproaching them, by traducing them, by avoiding their society, by diverse
hatreds of them, and by many injurious causes against them. And this is the
condition of multitudes of Christians, that embrace any fellowship with other
sorts of men, though never so vile, and stand in direct opposition to the
godly: yea so blind are the most, that they almost think, they do God good
service, if they could rid the country of them, Esaias 65.5. The misery of such
men is manifestly described in diverse Scriptures, and by this sign they are
discouerd to be no Christians indeed, 1. John 2.9. but rather of the race of
Cain, or Ismael, 1. John 3.20. Gal. 4.29. and therefore most hateful to God,
1. John 3.15.

Secondly, we may hence gather a sign of such as are in the state of
salvation actually. For if we love the brotherhood, we shall be saved, as
the Apostle is peremptory, 1. John 3.14. and the more apparent will be the
sign, if we love all the godly, and for godliness sake; both which, the word
brotherhood imports.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, I might hence observe also, that all the godly are
brethren, and so they are in diverse respects.

First, In what respects godly men are brethren.
in respect of profession: they have all one faith, and wear one and the same
livery of Baptism, and serve all one Lord, Ephesians. 4.4.

Secondly, they have all one Father, Mat. 2.10. one God begat them.

Thirdly, they have all one mother, the Church.

Fourthly, they must needs be brethren, they are so like one another: they are
all fashioned in the image of God, and are all like the Father.

Use 1. The use should be, first, for instruction; and so to teach Christians
to take heed of judging and censuring one another, Romans 14.10. of offending and
grieuing one another, Romans 14.13, 21. of contentions and schism one from
another, 1* Cor. 1.10. of going to law one with another, 1. Cor. 6.1, 2, etc.
to verse 8. of coozening and defrauding one another, 1. These. 4.6. of accepting
of persons, to prefer a rich man before a poor believer, James 2.1, 2. of
detracting one from another, or grudging or complaining one of another, James
4.11. so also, Mat. 23.8. of all dissimulation and guilefull courses, Romans 12.9.

All these things ought to be avoided in our carriage toward godly men, because
they are our brethren. Have we not all one Father? why then do we transgress
even more against our brethren? Thus, Mal. 2.10.

And secondly, it should teach us diverse things to be done or sought after; as
for instance: 1. It should teach us unity, to live together with all concord,
because we are brethren: For, how comely a thing is it for brethren to live
together in unity? Psalm 133.1. 2. It should teach us mercy, and that both
spiritual and corporal, as was in part showed before: they are brethren, and
therefore, if thou be converted, strengthen them, Luke 22.32. If they trespass
against thee, and confess it, forgive them, Mat. 18. It they fall, by
temptation, into any sin of infirmity, hate them not, but reprove them
plainly, Leu. 19.17. If they offend more freely, separate from them, but yet
hope the best, as of a brother: reject them not as enemies, 2. These. 3.15. And
if they be in any outward adversity, remember, that a brother was born for the
day of adversity, Pro. 17.17. And therefore if thy brother be impouerished,
let him be relieved to the uttermost of thy power, Leu. 25.35. 3. All just and
faithful dealing should we show one toward another, because we are
brethren: yea, none of us should allow himself liberty, so much as to imagine
evil against his brother, Zach. 7.9, 10.


Thirdly, Superiors also should learn here, not to be tyrannical, or
hard-hearted, or proud, or arrogant in their carriage toward their Inferiors:
for, they rule their brethren, not their slaves, Deuteronomy. 17.19. Phil. 10. Nor yet
should inferiors, for this reason, grow careless or disobedient: for, the
Apostle shows, that that were an abuse of this doctrine, 1. Tim. 6.1, 2.

Use 4. Fourthly, all poor Christians, that are true Christians, have much
cause to reioy^e, Iam. 1.9. for, they have a great kindred. All the Godly are
their brethren, yea, the Apostles, Acts 15.23. yea, the godly Kings, Psalm
122.8. yea, the Angels, Reu. 19.10. yea, Christ himself is not ashamed to call
them brethren, Romans 8.29. Heb. 2.10. Mat. 12.49. I might add, that wicked men
should take heed how they oppose godly men: there are a great kindred of them;
and they never prospered, that wronged them: yea, some great Ones have been
fain to humble themselves, and to lick the very dust of their feet sometimes,
that they might be reconciled to them, Esaias 60.14. Mat. 7.17.

And thus of the second part of the Apostle's Charge. The third part forms the
Christian, in respect of piety to God.

Fear God.]

Piety to God consists either in knowing of him, or in worshipping of him: and
the right knoweledge of God, is conceived in the godly, not for contemplations
sake only, but for practice, 1. John 2.3, 4. And all the use of our knowledge,
in respect of practice toward God, is comprehended in his worship.

This worship is a religious honor we give to God; I say, religious honor,
to distinguish it from that civil honor which in general we give to all men,
or in special, to some men, either for their graces, as to the godly, or for
their authority, as to Kings and Superiors.

This worship of God is either internal, or external. The internal, is the
worship of the heart: the external, is the worship of the body. The internal,
is the very life and soul of the external; without which, the external is
but a dead and contemptible carcass.

The fear of God, here commanded, belongs to the inward worship: and so it is
to be noted, that the Apostle, when he would charge Christians about piety
and devotion to God, does not enioine them to come to Church, to hear the
Word, receive the Sacraments, or pray, though these be elsewhere required;
but especially requires, that they look to the heart within, The Apostle does
especially urge the inward worship of God.
that the true fear of God be preserved in them, and that especially for two
causes. First, because men may do that which belongs externally to the outward
worship, and yet be still but hypocrites and wicked men, as is manifest in the
case of the Jews, Esaias 1. and of the Pharisees, Ma. 23. Secondly, because if
they be rightly formed in the inward devotion of the heart, that will
constrain them to the care of the outward worship: he would have them then be
sure of the fear of God in their hearts.

The fear of God is sometimes taken generally for the whole worship of God:
The fear of God, what it is.
sometimes more especially for one part of the inward worship of God, and so I
think it is to be taken here.

The fear of God is either filial or servile: the one is found only in the
godly; It is twofold.
the other, in the wicked. A servile fear is the terror which wicked men
conceive concerning GOD only, as a Judge; whereby they only fear God, in
respect of his power and will to punish for sin: and it is therefore servile,
because it is in them without any love to God, or trust in God, and would not
be at all, if his punishments be removed. It is the filial fear is here
meant: this fear of God is here perempto^ily required of Christians, as it is
in other Scriptures, Psalm 2.11. and 38.8. Proverbs 3.7. Esaias 8.13.

This filial fear to God, is an affection which God's children bear to God,
whereby they reverence his glorious nature and presence, and withal carefully
honor him in his Word and Works; being afraid of nothing more, than that
they should displease him that has been so wonderful good unto them.

That this definition of the true and filial fear of God may be rightly
understood and formed in us, we must know, that there are six distinct things
we should fear and stand in awe of in God.

Five things in God we are to stand in awe of.
First, his Majesty and glorious Nature: we cannot rightly think of the
transcendent excellency of God's Nature and supreme Majesty, as King of all
kings, but it will make us abase our selves as dust and ashes in his sight,
Genesis 18. If we fear Kings for their Majesty, how should we tremble before
the King of kings! If the glory of Angels have so amazed the best men, how
should we be amazed at the glory of God!

Secondly, his justice, and singular care to punish sin, should make the
hearts of men afraid; and woe to men, if they fear not: for, according to
their fear, is his anger, Psalm 90.

Thirdly, his goodness is to be dreaded of all that love God: and this is the
proper fear of God's Elect. To fear God for his justice, may be after a sort
in wicked men: but to fear God for his goodness, is only found in true
Conuerts, Hosh. 3.5.

Fourthly, his Word is to be feared, because it is so holy, and pure, and
perfect, and mighty in operation: this trembling at God's Word, God does not
only require, but accept very graciously, Esaias 66.3. And so godly men do
tremble as much at God's Word, as at his blows.

Fifthly, his mighty works and marvelous acts are to be exceedingly reverenced,
of what kind soever, Revel. 15.3, 4.

Lastly, if God would never punish sin, nor chide men for it by his Word, yet
the very offense of God ought to be feared, and is in some measure by all
godly Christians.

Uses. The use may be diverse: First, we should be hence incited to seek the
true fear of GOD, and to labor to fashion our hearts to it: it being a
special part of the Apostles charge, we should specially respect it: And it
is not unprofitable, to consider some motives, that might beget in us an
earnest desire after it, and care for this true, pious, and filial fear of
God:

First, Motives to get the fear of God.
if we respect our selves, we should strive to be such as fear God: For if
we were never so good subjects to Princes, or never so courteous, and
fair-dealing men in our carriage toward all sorts: yet if we did not fear
God, we were but vile creatures, that had not the qualities of a man in us. For
to fear God and keep his commandments, is the whole property of a man,
Eccles. 12.13. And the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: He is not a
complete man, that does not fear God: that is all in all, Job 28.28.

Secondly, if we consider what God is: He is our Master: and therefore where
is his fear? Malac. 1.6. he is our praise, our good God, he works
fruitful things and wonderful, and shall we not fear him? Ierem. 5.22.
Deuteronomy. 10.20.

Thirdly, if we consider but the benefits will come unto us, if we be
Religious persons, and truly fear GOD: great is the Lords mercy toward them
that fear him, Psalm. 103.11. whether we respect this life, or a better life,
whether we look for temporal, or spiritual things. For temporal things,
such as fear God, have a promise of great prosperity, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Eccles.
8.13. If any thing be welcome, as prosperity in this world, it is Religion,
and the fear of God: For to him that fears God, is promised wealth, and
riches, Psalm. 112.1, 3. and honor, and long life, Pro. 10.27. and 22.4.
protection from the pride of men, and the strife of tongues, Psa. 31.19. and
strong confidence, Pro. 14.26. and they shall want nothing, Psalm. 34.9. And for
spiritual things, the secrets of the Lord are with them that fear God, and
he will show them his covenant, Psalm. 25.14. and the Sun of Righteousness
shall rise unto them that fear God, and there shall be covering under his
wings, and they shall go forth and grow as fat calves, Mal. 4.2. and the
Angels of the Lord shall pitch their tents round about them that fear him,
Psalm. 34.7.

And for eternal things: there is a book of revelation to such as fear God,
where God keeps the records of them, and all the good they say, or do, Mal.
3.16. and at the day of Judgment they shall have a great reward, Revel. 11.18.
Great are the privileges of such as fear God in this life: but who is able to
express, how great the goodness is (as the Psalmist says) which God has laid
up for them that fear him, Psalm. 31.19. And if it should so fall out, that God
should not see it ^it to give us any great estates in this world: yet a little
is better with the fear of God, then great treasures, and those troubles
therewith, which the sin of man, or the wrath of God will bring in with them.

But if we would have these benefits, we must be sure that we do indeed and
truly fear God. For there are many men in the visible Church, that bear the
name of God's people, which yet God protests against, as such as do not fear
him indeed: as,

First, What kinds of men do not fear God.
they that pity not men in affliction, fear not God, Job 6.14.

Secondly, they that oppress their neighbors by any cavil or unjust dealing,
as by vsu^y, or the like, fear not God, Leuit. 25.17, 36.

Thirdly, they that make no conscience to pay their tithes, or at least, will
not give first fruits, or free will offerings; such as will pay no more for
religious uses, then they are forced unto: these fear not God, Deuteronomy. 14.23.
Mal. 1.

Fourthly, they that account it a burden, and a course of no profit to serve
God, or to be so religious, Mal. 3.14, 15. Ios. 24.14.

Fifthly, they that make no conscience of secret sins, or hypocrisy in God's
worship; these fear not God, because they set not the Lord always before
them, nor fear to omit, or do such things, as the world cannot take notice of.

Sixthly, they that meddle with the seditious, or changers, how forward soever
they seem in religion: yet such as are set to be so inclinable to be led by
changers, have not the true fear of God in them, Prou. 24.21.

Seventhly, they that live in any known sin, and make no conscience to
depart from iniquity, Prou. 3.7. and 14.2. Such are they, that are mentioned in
the Catalogue, Mal. 3.5. sorcerers, adulterers etc. especially the men that
bless themselves in their hearts, when they are guilty of hateful sins,
Psalm. 26.1, 2, 4.

On the other side, such as truly fear God, may be known by these signs:

Signs of Gods fear.
First, they make conscience to obey God in their lives, and keep his
ordinances, Deuteronomy. 6.2. They show that they fear him, by serving of him.

Secondly, they do believe God, and his servants speaking to them in his name.
This was a sign, the Israelites feared God, because they believed God, and his
servant Moses, Exodus 14.31.

Thirdly, they that truly fear God, do depart from evil, and dare not live,
or allow themselves in any known sin, whether it be sin in opinion, or in
life. In opinion: they that fear God, will give him glory, though it be to
change for the opinions not only they, but all the world have held, Revel.
14.7. And so in practice, he that truly fears God, ^ates all sin in some
measure: It is a ^oule sign one does not fear God, when he will not forsake
his errors or faults, though he be convinced of them.

Fourthly, they that make a conscience of it to obey God in all soundnes of
practice in their conve^sation, and so not only in worshipping him with
reverence, Psalm. 5.8. but in striving to do all the good duties God requires,
Psalm. 5.8. and that this sign may be applied effectually, we may try
ourselves by our obedience to God, whether our fear of him be right, or no.

First, if we obey in secret, and dare not leave undone such things as no man
can charge us withal, and do withal strive against and resist the very
hypocrisy of the heart, and stand in fear of God's offense for the evils are
found in our very thoughts: this will prove us to fear God soundly in truth
and uprightness of heart, Josh. 24.14. Col. 3.22. When we set the Lord always
before us, and with desire to approve our selves to him; it is an excellent
sign.

Secondly, When we hear the Word of God, and are told what to avoid or do,
we are then tried whether we fear God soundly or no: For, if we dare not
delay, but make Conscience of it, to practice God's will as fast as we know
it, it is a good sign: but otherwise, it is a foul sign, that many
Christians that make a fair show, are not sound, because they are not afraid
to live in the sins God reproues by his Word, nor to leave still unperformed,
the Precepts, Counsels, and directions are given them from day to day. The
Religion of many that seem to be of the better sort, is a mere formality, as
this very sign proves, Psalm. 86.11. Isaiah 50.10.

Thirdly, a great guess may be had at men's fear of God, by their care and
Conscience they make of their obedience, in their particular calling: A man may
have comfort, that his fear of God, and profession of Religion is right, if
he hate idleness, lying, covetousness, deceit, frowardness, and unjust
dealing in his calling: For, though to deal justly with all men, be no
infallible sign of the true fear of God, yet it is a probable one; and where
it is not, there can be no true fear of God. Thus Magistrates must prove that
they fear God, 2. Chron 19.27. Exodus 18.21. and thus every man, in his place;
yea, if women would have the reputation to be such as fear God, they must let
their works praise them. If they be idle, froward, undutiful, busybodies,
Pro. 31.30.
and careless of their domestical duties, what fear of God can be in them?

Fourthly, it will be manifest, that our obedience flows from the true fear
of God, if we will obey against our profit, or ease, or credit, or our own
carnal reasons or affections. Hereby the Lord said, he knew that Abraham
feared him, because he spared not his own son, etc. Genesis 22.12.

And thus of the fear of God. The last part of the charge concerns our
loyalty to the King.

Honor the King.]

The Apostle intends in these words, but briefly, to urge the practice of
their duty, urged in the exhortation, Verse 13. save that the terms have
something in them of explication of that doctrine, and something for
confirmation: For we must honor the King, 1. In our hearts. 2. In our words.
3. In our works.


First, we must honor him in our hearts, and show it two ways.

1. We must not curse the King, no not in secret; no not in our thoughts: We
must not entertayne impatient and vile thoughts of the King, but, from our
hearts, esteem him for his greatness, authority, and gifts. 2. When the King
commands any thing that seems to others, or to us, harsh, inconvenient, or
doubtful; we must honor the King, by interpreting his Laws in the best sense:
If love must not think evil, but hope all things, of all sorts of men, then
much more of Kings: It were greatly to be longed for, that this note might
enter into the breasts of some men, Note.
they, would then be afraid to charge so much evil of the Kings ordinances,
not only when they might find a fairer sense, but oftentimes expressly against
the intent, and meaning of the ordinance.
Secondly, we must honor the King in our words three ways.

1. By reverent speeches to them, and of them. 2. By a thankful
acknowledgement of the good is in them, and we receive by them. 3. By praying
to God with all manner of prayer for them, 1. Tim. 2.1.
Thirdly, we must honor them in our works.

1. By paying their tributes, and customs. 2. By submitting and yielding to
their ordinances; preferring the obedience to their ordinances, before the
censures or contrary opinions of what men soever: and this is the maine thing
intended, verse the 13. of this Chapter. And therefore I will omit the larger
handling of this point in this place.
Verse 18. Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward.


HItherto of the duties of subjects, and so of the exhortation as it is
political, and concerns the Commonwealth.

Now the Apostle proceeds to give directions oeconomicall, that concern the
family, or household government: Before I consider of the particular
exhortations, something would be said in general concerning a family.

What ae family is.
A family is the society of diverse men dwelling together in one house for
preservation and happiness: Where three things are to be explicated: First,
what are the persons, that take upon them to constitute this society: Secondly,
what is the difference between this society, and their humane societies:
Thirdly, what is the end of this society.

First, the persons, that constitute a family or families society, are to be
considered, either as the family is perfect, or imperfect.

1. A perfect family consists of a triple society, first, the one between man
and wife* secondly* the other between parents and children: thirdly, and the
third between Master and servants. 2. The imperfect is, when any of these
societies are wanting, as when there are not either children, or servants, or
wives, or husbands in it: The Apostels directions here do form only an
imperfect family: For he gives not directions about parents and children.
Secondly, the difference of this society from others is, in those words,
dwelling together in one house: For thereby is imported, that this is the first
society of all others, and the foundation of all the rest. For a City
comprehends many families, a Country many cities, a Monarchy many nations, and
the world many Monarchies.

Thirdly, the end of a fraternity, is preservation and happiness: and so to
speak distinctly, there are three things requisite to make this society happy,
and to preserve it so: Three things required to make a society happy.
namely, first, commodity, secondly, delight, and thirdly, Religion. Unto
commodity is requisite possession of goods, and the mutual lawful labor of
the persons in the family: unto delight is requisite, quietness and love: unto
Religion, is required the constant and right serving of God. If commodity be
wanting, the family cannot be at all: If delight be wanting, it cannot be
well: and if religion be wanting, it cannot be for ever.

Thus of a family in general: and two things may be in general noted from the
Apostles charge about the family. First, that God himself does bind all sorts
of persons, as strictly to the good behavior in their own houses, or toward
one another, as he does toward those in his house. Secondly, that the
conscience is bound immediately from God, to nourish all good duties. And this
is so proved by the fifth Commandment, and Pro. 14.13. with many other places
of Scripture.

There may be diverse reasons assigned, why God gives Commandment to bind us
to domestical duties.

We are bound of God to the care of domestical duties, for diverse reasons.
First, from his own right. For, though there be many Administrators, as, of a
Church, a Commonwealth, a Family, etc. yet there is but one Lord: God is the
Head of this society, as well as of any other, 1. Cor. 12.

Secondly, because this is the first society God brought into the world; and
therefore he would have it honored and carefully preserved to the end of the
world. The first society in Paradise, was this: and Religion was professed for
many hundred years by this society only, even till the people came out of
Egypt.

Thirdly, because the persons we live withal in the family, are the nearest
companions of our lives: and therefore we should live with all due respect one
of another.

Fourthly, because the family is the Seminary both of Church and Commonwealth.

Fifthly, because the family is the most usual place for us to practice our
Religion in: what we learn at Church, is for the most part to be practiced at
home. Many have little occasion of practice abroad.

Sixthly, because the comfort and contentment of man's life lies much in this.
How are the lives of many men made uncomfortable, by disordred servants, wicked
children, idle, froward, vicious wives! God gave the woman, at the first, as a
special help to man; to show, that at home the chief help of his life was to
be had.

Use. The use should be therefore to teach Christians, in their several places
in the family, to make conscience of their dealing; both to know it, and to
do it, as ever they would have God to come to them, and dwell with them, Psalm
101.2. and as they desire to be no hypocrites in Religion: for, such as make
no conscience of doing their duties in the family, whether themselves, wives,
servants, or children, are not sound Christians, they are but hypocrites. They
are not complete Christians, that are not good at home, as well as abroad: they
walk not in a perfect way, Psalm 101.2. And besides, till domestical disorders
be redressed, the family will never be established, Pro. 14.3.

Secondly, Why Inferiors in a family, are first and especially charged with
their duties.
it is to be noted, that Inferiors in the family, are either only, or first,
or with most words charged about their duties; as here, servants, and not
masters; and servants and wives, with many words: and there may be diverse
reasons assigned of it.

1. To preserve order. God has subjected the Inferiors to the Superiors; and
the Superior in a family, is God's Image: the Lord is therefore careful to
preserve his authority. The Superiors receive laws from God, but not from
their Inferiors. The Inferiors are to learn their duty without prescribing
laws to their Superiors. 2. Because the disorders of Inferiors are, for the
most part, most dangerous to the troubling of the family, because the
businesses of the family are done by their hands, the Superior providing for
the common good by common instruments. If the Master of the family be never so
godly-wise, yet oftentimes the family may be destroyed by wicked servants, and
vicious wives, Pro. 14.1. 3. Because faults in the Inferiors are most
scandalous against Religion, especially where the family is unequally yoked;
as, if the Head of the family be an unbeliever, and the Members believers:
disorder in the believers, is most extremely scandalous. 4. Because, if the
Head of the family be disordred, the orderly behavior of the Inferiors may
bring him into order, and win him both to Religion, and good order at home. A
conversation with fear, in wives, may win their husbands, chap. 3.1, 2. of
this Epistle. 5. Because God would heerby show, that the Inferiors must
always do their duties, before they look after the duties of Superiors: they
must be first served. 6. By this course, the Apostles did labor to entice the
Gentiles to Religion, by letting them see how careful they were to breed
goodness and love in their wives, servants, and children: and the Apostles did
wisely in so doing, because it is a greater gain to Religion, to gain one
master, than many servants, because such a master may do more good.
The use should be therefore to interest the obligation upon the consciences of
wives, servants, and children: and even the more they see that God says unto
them, the more they should be careful of their duties, and ever the more
desirous they see the Lord to be to have them live without offense, the more
abominable they should account it to dare to offend still: and if they have not
masters or husbands, they should strive to be good themselves, before they
complain of the faults of their Superiors; and should think with themselves,
If I were a better wife or servant, I should find my husband or servant better
to me. Thus in the general.

The first thing then the Apostle gives in charge, concerns servants, from
verse 18. to the end of this chapter: where observe,

First, the proposition, enioyning servants to be subject to their masters,
verse 18.

Secondly, the exposition, showing both how they should be subject, viz. with
all fear; and to what masters, viz. not only to the good, but to the froward,
verse 18.

Thirdly, the confirmation of it, by three reasons, viz. from the
consideration, 1. Of the acceptance of such subjection with God, verses 19.20.
2. Of their calling, verse 21. 3. Of the example of Christ, which is urged, 1.
For the use of servants, verses 22.23. 2. For the use of all Christians, by
digression, verses 24.25.



First then, of the proposition: where we are to consider, first, the persons
charged, Servants: secondly, the duty imposed, be subject: thirdly, the persons
to whom they owe it, to your Masters.

Servants.]

Two things are to be inquired into about servants.

First, the original of their estate: and secondly, the bond that ties them to
this subjection.

There are servants of God, servants of sin, servants of men: It is the
servants of men, that are here meant: servants of men are not all of one sort
neither.

Servants of men are of diverse sorts.
For first, such as apply themselves to satisfy the unreasonable humors of men,
are said to be servants of men, and condemned, 1. Cor. 7.23.

Secondly, such as make themselves beholding to other men through their pride,
are forced many times to become their servants. Thus the borrower is a servant
to the lender, Prou. 22.7.

Thirdly, such as employ their estates or bodies for the honor, or
preservation of their superiors, are said to be servants: thus subjects serve
Princes, 1. Sam. 8.17.

Fourthly, such as employ their labors, and spend themselves for the common
good, are said to be servants: thus Ministers are the peoples servants, 2.
Cor. 4.5. 1. Cor. 9.19.

But none of these are here meant: Those servants are domestical servants,
such as are under the yoke of particular Masters in a family.

Those servants in the Apostles time were of two sorts: some were bond
servants, such as were bought and sold in the markets, over whom the Masters
had absolute and perpetual power: some were hired servants, that did service
by covenant and contract, as servants do now for the most part with us.

Concerning these, it may be inquired, how it comes to pass, that men, that
by creation have the same nature with other men, should in their condition be
abased to so low and mean an estate, as to serve them, that are in nature
alike to them? This seems to be a grievous inequality; and therefore first to
be searched into for the original and causes of it.

It is out of doubt, that before the Fall, if man had stayed in his Innocence,
there had been no servitude, because all men had been made after the Image of
God, both for holiness and glory; and so had been on earth, as the Saints shall
be in heaven.

The first cause then of subjection and servitude, For what causes servitude
came in.
was the confusion, and sin of our first parents brought upon the world, the
earth being cursed for man's sake: A necessity of toylesome labor lay upon men:
and so from the advantages, or disaduantages of particular men's estates, did
arise the freer, or harder condition of some men: besides, this sin had so
confounded the very dispositions of men, that through the inequality of
natural temper, or care of education, some men are made more fit to govern,
and others to be governed.

Secondly, as a monument of Gods Justice, it is observed, that some whole
nations of men have bin in their very natural inclination only disposed to
bondage, being destitute of all gifts to rule, or govern, as it is noted by
the Muscouites and some other nations, who for the most part at this day are
servants, yea slaves by nature.

Thirdly, in other nations many men become servants, not by nature, but by
necessity, as being taken in mercy: and thus among the Latins came up the name
of servants, being serui, because they were seruati, preserved from slaughter
in war: and mancipia, because they were manu capta, things taken by force of
arms.

Fourthly, the horrible sins sometimes of the Ancestors brings beggary, and
so servitude upon their posterity; as the sin of Came made Canaan a servant of
servants, Genesis 9.25. So does treason, whoredom, riotousnes, and prodigality of
many parents, undo their whole posterity, and leave them in a necessity of
serving.

Fifthly, wicked children, for their disobedience to their parents, are many
times brought not only to be servants, but as was noted before of Came, to be
servant of servants, Prou. 17.2.

Sixthly, many men are brought to a morsel of bread by their own disorder and
wickedness of life; sometimes open sins, sometimes secret sins bringing this
curse of God upon them: For men became servants, only to gain by their
service the knowledge, or state of some science, art, or trade as many
apprentices do.

Seventhly, sometimes God by his hand does abase some men only, as a trial,
if they fall into poverty, and so to the necessity of working for others by no
sinful courses of their own: but by the inevitable hand of God, as by pyracy,
shipwreck, fire, thieves, or the like: and these are so humbled, either to
warn others, and show the power of God, or to bring them to repentance, or
else for trial of God's grace in them.

Eightthly, some men are brought to this misery by the cruelty, and unjust
dealing of other men: and so that power the Masters took over their bondmen to
dispose of their very lives, was not of God or nature, but merely an
oppression. For why should they have power to take away life, that could not
give it? And so, many a man is brought to poverty and servitude, by oppression
and cruel Landlords, or by the fraudulent dealings of other men, that falsify
their trust, or coozen them in bargaining.

Now, the servants brought to this condition by any of these means, must be
subject to their Masters: and this is of divine institution. For God him self
has bound them to it by the first commandment; and so the subjection of
servants is a moral, and perpetual ordinance.

Uses. The use of all this may be diverse: For,

First, it should teach all sorts of men, the more to hate and flee from sin,
which has brought these miseries upon such multitudes of men.

Secondly, it should teach Masters to use their servants respectively: For tho
they be servants, yet they are men made after the Image of God, and they are
the best part of their possession. For other things they possess, are without
life, and servants are the living instruments of their commodities. Thus wise
and godly men in Scripture, Genesis 12.16. and 32.5. Eccles. 2.7.
were wont to account it the best part of their possessions, that they had men
servants, or maid servants.

Thirdly, it should teach servants especially two things; the one is humility:
they should run a race fitted to their condition, they should conquer pride and
aspiring, remembering that God has abased them. The other is, they should keep
themselves in their places and callings, and not shake off the yoke by running
away, etc. seeing God has taken them bound to serve: But the former is most
proper to this place; seeing they are but servants, they should be content with
such diet, apparel, labor, and usage, as is convenient to their condition.

Fourthly, it may serve for great humiliation to such servants, as are wicked
men: These are of three sorts: some of them are brought to this condition by
their own wickedness of life: some of them are wicked servants too, as well as
wicked men: some are tolerable, and sometimes profitable servants, though evil
men: all are in ill case. For this is but the beginning of evil to them, if
they repent not; For if they live in their sins, as they serve men now, they
shall serve devils hereafter; and so their bondage shall be invested upon them
without end.

Quest. But seeing many godly men and women may be servants; how may a godly
Christian comfort himself in this estate of abasement?

Ans. Though it be an outward misery to be a servant: yet there are many
consolations to sweeten the bitterness of this abasement.

First, How a godly servant may comfor. himself in that estate.
because extremities of bondage are removed from servants with us for the most
part, so as their service is but for a time, and voluntary too, to hire
themselves to whom they will, and Masters have not power of their lives.

Secondly, because their calling is acknowledged for a lawful calling by God.

Thirdly, because God has bound Masters by his Word to use them well, and the
Laws of Princes provide punishments for unreasonable Masters.

Fourthly, because Christ has redeemed them from the spiritual bondage of
serving the Law, and the devil, and Gods Justice: so as he is Christ's freeman.

Fifthly, because though his body be subject, yet his soul is free, and not
subject to any mortal creature.

Sixthly, because their Masters are their brethren in Religion.

Seventhly, because God has provided by his unchangeable Law, that one day in
seven they shall rest from their labor.

Eightthly, because before God there is neither bond nor free: but all are one
in Christ, Gal. 3.28. Col. 31.11.

Ninthly, because all the benefits by Religion, whether inward or outward,
belong to servants, as well as Masters, 1. Cor. 12.13.

Tenthly, because the very work that servants do in their particular calling,
is accepted of God, as obedience to him, as well as the performing of the
duties of Religion; God accepts their daily labor, as well as he does praying,
hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, reading the Scriptures, fasting, or
the like, Ephesians. 6.6.

Eleuenthly, because they are freed in that condition from many cares: seeing
they have now nothing to do in effect, but to obey in what is appointed them;
which is a great ease to a mind that desires to see what he has to do to
please God, seeing now only one thing is necessary, which is, to obey in what
he is commanded and directed.

Twelfthly, because he shall not only have wages from men, but from God also,
Ephesians. 6.8.

Lastly, because there shall be no servants in heaven, but in Gods Kingdom they
are as free as their Masters, and therefore should not think much of a little
hardness, or harshnesse in this life.

Thus of the original of servants.

Secondly, we may hence note, that servants are bound by God himself, in his
Word, unto their subjection. The Word of God does belong to the calling of
Servants, as well as to any other calling, God has included them within the
doctrine of Scripture, as well as any other men; partly to show, that they have
right to the Scriptures as well as others; and partly to show, that the power
of binding servants is from God, and God has taken it upon him, by his Word,
to teach Servants as well as other men; and that for two reasons. The one is,
because Servants belong to the Kingdom of Christ and his Church, as well as
other Christians, and therefore must be taught as well as they. Secondly, the
other is, because usually Masters are negligent in teaching them, and therefore
God prouides, that by his Word they shall be taught. Men have some care in
teaching their children, but little of their servants; and therefore God, to
show that he is no respecter of persons, gives order to his Ministers to see
them instructed.

The Use may be diverse.

Uses. First, Masters must learn from hence their duty: For, when they see
that God takes care to teach their servants, they should not be so proud or
careless, as to neglect their instruction: Yea it shows also, that if they
would have them taught, or reproved, or encouraged, they must do it with God's
Word, and with their own: yea, it also shows the folly and wickedness of
diverse Masters, that cannot abide, their servants should hear Sermons, or much
read the Scriptures, when they do not only wickedly, in restrayning their
servants from the means of their Salvation, or comfort, but do foolishly also
hinder them of that means which should especially make them good servants.

Secondly, Servants may hereby be instructed, or informed, and taught.
Informed, that though neither Master nor Minister will teach them, yet they are
not excused, because they are bound to learn from Gods Word, their duties: And
taught from hence they must be, to do their duties to their Masters, not for
fear, or reward, but for Conscience sake, because God has bound them to his
subjection.

Thirdly, Ministers should learn, and from hence be awakened, to take notice
of their charge, both to Catechize in special, and to teach servants in
general, as well as other their hearers. If it be a part of the Commission of
great Apostles, to instruct servants as well as other Christians, then what
accounts can they give to God, if it be found that they have had no care of
instructing the servants of their parishes, and charges?

Doct. 3. Thirdly, the indefinite propounding of the word Servants, shows,
that all sorts of servants are equally bound to subjection; hired servants are
as strictly bound, as bond servants: The servants of Princes, are not free from
the duty of servants, more then other servants: and so likewise poor men's
servants must be subject and obedient to their Masters, with as much reverence
and fear, as servants to great men. Old servants are tied to as much duty, as
such as come new to serve. Religious servants are bound to as much subjection
and obedience as Pagans, or rather their bond is the stronger, because Religion
should rather make them better servants, and so there is no difference of
sexes; men servants are bound as well as women servants, neither does birth,
office, gifts, or means, privilege any servant from the strictness of the
bond of subjection.

Be subject.]

The duty, then, required of servants, is subjection: servants must be
subject. It is not enough to wear their master's Cloth, and to hire themselves
to their masters: they must make conscience of it, to perform constant and
humble subjection to their masters. And so they must be subject to their
masters three ways.

First, Servants must be subject 3 ways.
to their commandments: and so they must obey them, and yield themselves to
them to be ruled and directed by them in all things, Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22.

Secondly, to their rebukes and corrections: for if children need rebukes and
corrections, then do servants also, Pro. 13.1. and 15.5. Servants will not
always be corrected by words, and therefore need blows, Pro. 29.19. Genesis
16.6. yea, they must patiently suffer correction, though it be inflicted
unjustly, as appears in the verses following this Text.

Thirdly, to their restraints. Servants must be subject to the appointment of
their masters, even in the things wherein they restrain them; as for instance,
in their diet. It is a sinful humor in them, Not to be content with such diet
as their masters appoint them, though it be worse than the diet of their
masters, or the diet of the children of the family. So likewise in their
company: they must avoid all company that may be any way offensive to their
masters; and so likewise in their apparel, in such cases where servants are to
be apparelled by their masters; as also in respect of their going out of the
house in the daytime, when they have not leave: but much more abominable it
is, To be out of their masters houses in the night, without their leave.

And as their subjection must be performed in all these cases: so the
indefinite manner of propounding it, shows, both that they must be subject in
all things, and in all the ways of showing subjection, for the manner of it:
they must be subject in all things, so as to bear with their masters: for, it
is a sinful rebellion, to cross, or disobey, or leave undone any thing that
is required of them to do. And besides, it shows, that they must be subject
in their very hearts, and in their words, and in their countenance and gesture,
as well as in the work to be done by them.

Use. The use may concern both servants, and the parents of such servants, and
the masters that rule them.

Servants should hence, from their hearts, learn to yield themselves over to
their masters, with all good conscience to perform the subjection required:
yea, such servants as hear this doctrine, may try their hearts, whether they
be indeed good servants, or no: for, a good servant, that makes conscience of
his duty, when he hears the doctrine, does from his heart consent to it, and
will strive to fashion himself according to it. Now, the servants that desire
to be such as is required, may attain to it, if they observe these rules.

Helps for servants to yield subjection.
First, they must carefully study the doctrine of servants duties. Servants
oftentimes fail through mere ignorance, because they do not lay before their
minds what God requires of them.

Secondly, they must often judge themselves for their faults wherein they have
displeased their masters, or neglected their duties: therefore many servants
mend not, because either they will not see their faults, or do not humble
themselves in secret for it.

Thirdly, they must often meditate on the motives that may persuade them to
subjection. And so there are five things that might bow their hearts, and breed
in them a conscience of their duties. First, the Commandment of God: it is
GOD's will, they should bear themselves thus humbly and obediently toward
their masters. Secondly, the promise annexed to God's Commandment, should move
them: God will reward their work, Ephesians 6.8. Col. 3.24. And, in particular,
inasmuch as their service is required in the fifth Commandment, therefore, if
they be good servants, God will bless them with long life. Thirdly, the
threatening, if they be not good servants, but bear themselves naughtily and
stubbornly; they shall not only receive shame and punishment from men, but God
will plague them for the wrongs they do to their masters, even for all the
grief wherewith they have vexed them, and for all the losses they have brought
to their masters, Col. 3. vlt. Fourthly, the examples of such as have born
themselves full well in Scripture, should much move them; the piety of Abraham's
servant, Genesis 24. and the painfulnesse and faithfulness of Jacob, Genesis 31.38,
etc. and the readiness of the Centurion's servant, Mat. 8. Yea, it should much
move them, that Christ Jesus himself was in the form of a servant, Phil. 2.
Fifthly, the care of the Religion they profess, should much move them: if they
be careless, and proud, and stubborn, the Name of God, and the doctrine of
Religion, may be blasphemed, 1. Tim. 6.1. And if they be humble, and careful,
and faithful, they may adorn the doctrine of the Gospel, as the Apostle
shows, Tit. 2.9, 10.

Use 2. Such parents as put their children forth to service, must take heed,
that they spoil them not by giving care to the complaints of their masters, or
by allowing them any way in stubborn and disobedient courses.

Thirdly, if masters would have their servants to please them by their
subjection, they then must learn how to rule and govern them, not only by
teaching and charging them what to do, but also by ouer-seeing them, whereby
many faults may be prevented; and accordingly by seasonable reproving them,
and correcting of them betimes for the more wilful offenses; so studying to
carry themselves gently toward them, or that they lose not their authority by
too much love of their own ease and quietness: else it is just, that their
servants should prove a continual vexation to them, Pro. 30.22. and 29.19.

To your masters.]

The parties to whom they owe subjection, are their masters: where three things
may be observed.

First, that though servants are under subjection, yet it is not to all men, or
to other men, but only to their masters: which may warn men to take heed that
they abuse not other men's servants, or speak basely of them: for, though in
respect of their masters, they are servants; yet, in respect of them, they are
as free as themselves. And, in particular, it should teach diverse, to meddle
less with other men's servants, by way of complaint to their masters. It was
Salomon's Rule; Accuse not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee, and
thou be found guilty, Pro. 3.10. He gives two reasons of his advice. The one
is, that his complaining may so vex the servants over whom he has no
jurisdiction, that it may cause them in their impatience to vex him with their
reproaches of him; which, an ingenuous mind should strive to avoid. The other
is, that in such complaints most an end there is much mis-taking, when men
meddle with such things as belong to other men's families: and then it is a
foul shame to be found faulty. To conclude this point, we should remember
that of the Apostle; What have thou to do to judge another man's servant? he
stands or falls to his own master, Romans 14.

Secondly, that all masters have authority over their servants: though the
master be a poor man, or an ignorant man, or a cruel man, or a froward man* or
a hard man, yet the servant must be subject to him, and bear himself as
reverently and obediently, as if he were the richest, or wisest, or worthiest
master in the world; and the reason is, because the subjection is due, not to
the masters riches, or gifts, or greatness, but to the authority which God has
given him as a master: and therefore servants must look to this point; and the
rather, because it will be the greater trial of their subjection and
singleness of heart, when neither fear, nor reward, nor any outward respect
does compel or constrain them, but simply the conscience of God's
Commandment, and the masters authority.

Thirdly, we may here inquire, how masters come by this authority over
servants: by nature they have it not, and therefore must have it by law. The
laws of men cannot make one man a servant, and another a master: The original
of masters.
therefore it is by the Law of God. Since it is by the Law of God; if we have
recourse to the ten Commandments, we shall find, that it is the fifth
Commandment which gives masters this authority and honor; the exhortations of
the Apostle being but interpretations of that Law. And, that this point may be
cleared, two things must be searched into: First, what sorts of men are called
fathers and mothers there; and secondly, why they are so called in the
Commandment, seeing the most sorts of them, in the usual life of man, have
other titles.

The name father given to diverse sorts.
For the first. This term Father we shall find in Scripture to be given,
first, to such as begat us, Heb. 12.9. Secondly, to Ancestors, Ioh. 6.18.
Thirdly, to Tutors: so Students are called Children of the Prophets. Fourthly,
to such as beget us in respect of grace, as, to our Ministers, 1. Cor. 4.15.
Gal. 4.19. Fifthly, to Magistrates, Genesis 41.43. 1. Kings 24.12. Ezra 1.5.
Sixthly, to Elders in age, 1. Tim. 5.1. Seventhly, to the Inuentors or Authors
of any science, art, or trade, Genesis 4.20. Lastly, it is given to masters: so
Naaman's servants called him Father, 2. Kings 5.13. And from hence, masters
were wont to be called Patres familias, as Magistrates were called Patres
patriae.

For the second. Magistrates, Tutors, Ministers, Masters, and all Superiors,
are called Fathers, first, because the father was the first degree of
superiority, and the fountain and seminary of all society. Secondly, God of
purpose preserues this title in all superiority, thereby to sweeten subjection
to Inferiors, and to make them think the several dangers, burdens, labors,
and subiections in each condition, to be not only tolerable, but meet to be
born, because they endure them under parents as it were: and so such
superiority, for that reason, should not be resisted or envied. Thirdly, that
thereby Superiors may be put in mind of their duty, to avoid insolency,
cruelty, oppression, and the too much respect of themselves; God charging them
by this title, to remember, that their Inferiors are to them, by God's
Ordinance, as their children.

Thus of the proposition of the duties of servants.

The exposition follows: and so, first, he shows the manner how they must be
subject, viz.

With all fear.]

Servants must subject themselves to their masters in all fear: which, being
put down indefinitely, must be understood both in respect of God, and in
respect of their masters.

Servants must show their fear of God in their places, diverse ways:

How many ways servants show the fear of God in their callings.
First, by avoiding such sins as are contrary to the will and commandment of
God in their general life; such as are, swearing, lying, slandering, hatred of
the godly, drunkenness, whoredom, and the like, Psalm 101.3, 4, 5.

Secondly, by carfulness to do God service, as well as their masters; not
only by spending the Sabbath in the duties of Religion, but in redeeming the
time in the week-daies (as may be without hindrance of their work, or offense
to their masters) to employ themselves in prayer, reading, conference, etc. and
the reason is, because as servants must do their masters work as they are
servants: so they stand bound, in the common obligation, to do God's service as
they are men; and no man but is subject to the Law of God; who has given all
his Commandments to servants, as well as to masters.

Thirdly, by doing their masters work out of conscience, respecting the will
and commandments of God; and therefore serving their masters with all
faithfulness, as if the service were to be done to God himself, or to Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.23.

Fourthly, by praying for their masters, and for the good success of their
labors for their masters commodity: thus Abraham's servant is commended for
his practice of the fear of God, and left for an example to all servants to
do likewise, Genes. 24.

Fifthly, by doing their masters work without eye-seruice, being as careful
and as diligent when their masters are absent, as when they are present; as
remembering, that the Lord sees them, though their masters do not, Col. 3.22.

The fear, then, toward their masters, they may show diverse ways.

First, by avoiding what might displease their Masters; such as is, answering
again, Tit. 2.10. contention with their fellows, and all unquietness, Phil.
2.4. sullenness, Prou. 29.19. and all unfaithfulness, showed either by
purloining in the least things, Tit. 2.10. or carelessness in disappointing the
trust committed to them; as also masterfulnesse, pride, and haughty behavior,
when they will not abide it to be told or directed; or doing what they list,
not what they be appointed.

Secondly, by reverent behavior to be showed by lowlynesse of countenance, by
giving titles of honor and respect, John 13.13. by standing before them when
they sit, Luke 17. by avoiding rude behavior, or saucy familiarity, as
accounting them in heart worthy of all honor, 1. Tim. 6.1. one point of which
reverence is, that servants should not presume to deliver their opinions easily
in their Masters presence, unless it be required, or may be gathered by
argument from the less, Job 32.6, 7.

Thirdly, by their secrecy in all the affairs of their Masters, especially
they should take heed of discovering their Masters infirmities to others
abroad out of the family.

Fourthly, by avoiding inquisitiveness, to meddle only with their own
business; the servant knows not what his Master does, John 15.15.

Fifthly, by doing their work with all faithfulness and diligence, in absence
as well as presence; that when the Master comes, he may find them so doing,
Math. 24. Thus of the manner of the duty; ^he persons to whom they must thus
submit themselves follow: And so they must be subject with all fear, not only
to the good, but also to the froward.

To the good and gentle.]

For the sense: we must enquire who are good Masters, and who gentle.

Good Masters are discerned by diverse signs.

Signs of good masters.
First, they seek not only painful and skillful, but religious servants,
Psalm. 101.1, 6, 7.

Secondly, they not only license, but teach their servants to keep God's
Sabbaths, and to worship him, Commandment 4. Genes. 18.19.

Thirdly, they will not command their servants to do any thing that is
sinful, or to lie as snares, or defraud others for their profit.

Fourthly, that receive their servants, especially such as are Religious, as
their brethren.

Fifthly, that are overseers as well of the manners of their servants, as of
their labors, being as careful, that their servants be no worse to
themselves, than to their Masters.

Sixthly, that use their servants well, not only praising them for well doing,
but always rewarding their service with liberal wages; and when they part
from them, not suffering them to go from them empty, without portion, etc.

Masters show their gentleness also diverse ways: as,

First, when they use their Authority moderately, or are not haughty or
violent toward their servants.

Secondly, when they pass by their infirmities, and take not notice of all the
ill they say or do, Eccles. 7.22.

Thirdly, when their servants offend, they chide them with good words, and not
revile them.

But also to the froward.]

Froward Masters, are such as are bitter to their servants, hard to please,
that are apt to find fault, that use their servants hardly in words, or
deeds, but chiefly such as are choleric, and passionate, and peevish in
their carriage toward their servants.

So that four Doctrines may be noted from these words, and from the coherence.

Doct. 1. First, that God takes notice of the faults of Superiors, as well as
he requires duties of Inferiors: he sees frowardnes in masters, as well as
disobedience in servants; and the reason is, both because God is no respecter
of persons, and also because he gives his Law to all men. And therefore
Superiors must make conscience of their duties: for, though in all things they
are not to give accounts to their Inferiors, yet they must give accounts of
all they do, to God, Col. 3.24.

Doct. 2. That God sees and dislikes such faults, as the laws of man take not
notice of. If a Master should kill his hired servant, men's laws would take
hold of him: but if he be never so froward with him, he may escape men's laws.
But though the laws of men punish not frowardnes, yet God will. So we see in
the exposition of Christ given unto diverse commandments, Mat. 5. man failed in
killing, adultery, purity, etc. not once thinking of anger, lust, filthy
speaking, reuiling, etc. yet God forbids even these things also: which serves
to reprove the folly of such, as justify themselves for very just men, because
they offend not the laws of men; but never consider, that God can find a
world of faults in them, that men's laws cannot; because God sees the heart,
and by his Laws requires obedience of the inward man, and condemns all
sweruing from the right temper of heart and carriage: And therefore we should
all look to our ways, to approve our selves not only to men, but to God, and
so to confess the imperfections of men's laws, as to admire the perfection of
Gods Word.

Doct. 3. That frowardnes is a vice to be avoided of all sorts of men: It is
not only uncomely in servants, but in Masters too, and so consequently in all
sorts of men, and it is to be avoided for many reasons.

Reasons against frowardnes.
First, if we consider the nature of the vice either in it self, or by
comparison. It is of it self a kind of madness: A froward person, during the
fit, is in some degree a mad person: Besides, they are very foolish and absurd.
The month of the righteous, says Salomo^, brings forth wisdom, but the
froward tongue shall be cut out. In which words note the opposition; The
righteous mouth brings forth wisdom, but the froward mouth brings forth
foolish things, and therefore shall be cut out, Pro. 10.31. Could froward and
peevish persons remember and consider, what passes from them in these fits,
they would be wonderfully ashamed of themselves. Again, consider how contrary
frowardnes is to Gods nature. He says of His words, that there is no
frowardnes in them, Prou. 8.8. to note, that frowardnes is a thing altogether
contrary to God; so as the froward persons in their froward fits, are not like
God, but rather like the devil.

Secondly, if we consider the causes of this peeuishnes and frowardnes either
in man or woman, we shall find, that this ill humor is bred of vile causes:
sometimes it comes of drunkenness, as is noted, Proverbs 23.33. always it
proceeds from ignorance, and want of wit and discretion, Prou. 2.11, 12. and
usually it arises of idleness, and want of constant employment, and of pride,
arrogance, and stomach, Pro. 8.13. It sometimes arises from iealousy, and
suspicion, and sometimes it is raised by idle, and vile hypocrisy, while they
strive more for reputation to be thought good, then indeed to be such either as
they would seem to be, or should be.

Thirdly, if we consider the effects of frowardnes. For those are vile,
whether we respect the froward persons themselves, or others, or God. First,
for themselves: It is a vice most unprofitable. For it is like a disease full
of anguish, and unquietness, it eats up their own hearts, troubles their
minds, and robs them of al contentment: besides, it breeds a grievous
indisposition in them to all good duties both to God and men, and brings upon
them many mischiefs* It dares annoy their friends: For they that are wise,
will make no friendship with the froward* and in such as are tied to them, that
they must needs converse with them, it much alienateth their inward love, and
respect of them. And therefore Solomon says well, He that has a froward
heart, finds no good; and he that has a perverse tongue, falls into
mischief, Pro. 17.20. And again, Thorns and snares are in the mouths of the
froward, Pro. 22.5. Secondly, to others, their peeuishnes is a great vexation
and burden: Hence came the proverb* The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable, that is, a godly, patient, discreet man, is exceeding pleasing to
others in his words, and carriage: but the mouth of the wicked speaks
frowardnes, that is, a sinful, peevish, foolish person is in his word and
carriage exceeding troublesome, and unpleasing, for so the Antithesis imports.
Pro. 10.32.
Besides, it breeds discord: a froward mouth sows discord. Pro. 16.28.
Yea, it many times drives such, as converse with such persons, into
perplexities, and amazednes, that they know not what to do to free themselves
from their peruersenes; according to that of Solomon, The way of a man is
perverse, and strange: but as for the pure, his work is right, Prou. 21.8. And
therefore David, when he was to order his family, is specially careful, that
no froward person dwell with him: For where frowardnes is, there is confusion,
and every evil work, I^rem. 3.16. Thirdly, if we respect God: It is a
fearful thing, which Solomon says: Those, which are of a froward heart, are
an abomination to the Lord, but such as are upright in the way, are his
delight, Pro. 11.20.

Fourthly, if we consider the condition of the parties, that are ouer-growne
with this disease of peeuishnes, and frowardnes: It is a terrible censure, that
God himself gives of such for the most part, that they are wicked persons,
Prou. 6.12. He that walks with a froward mouth, is called a naughty person,
and a wicked man; and though in charity we may hope of men, that they are not
altogether destitute of true grace, yet as the Apostle said of envy and
strife, so may we say of frowardnes, that such as are guilty of it usually,
are but as carnal; at the best, but babes in Christ, 1. Cor. 3.1, 2, 3. To
conclude, Better is the poor, that walks in his vprightnes, then he that is
perverse in his lips, though he be rich, Pro. 28.6.

Use. The use should be for admonition, and instruction to such Masters,
husbands, wives, or others that find themselves guilty of this hateful vice,
to labor by all means to get themselves cured of it, remembering the counsel
of the holy Ghost, Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put
far from thee, Pro. 4.14. and to this end they must observe these rules:

First, they must become fools, that they may be wise: Helps against
frowardness.
they must begin the cure at the denial of themselves, and their vain
conceits. For if they trust to their own discretion, and natural gifts, they
will never mend: For natural gifts can never make that which is crooked,
straight, Eccles. 1.15.

Secondly, they must strive to breed in their hearts the sound fear of God,
and his displeasure for their frowardnes. For the fear of God will take down
their pride, and cause them to abhor all peevish and froward ways, Prou. 8.13.

Thirdly, they must constantly judge themselves for their offenses herein, and
that both by daily confessing their frowardnes to God in secret, and also by
acknowledging their faults herein unto such as are guided by them.

Fourthly, they must especially fly to Jesus Christ, whose office is to make
crooked things straight, Esaias 40.5. and 42.16. Luke 3.5.

The last thing to be noted out of this verse, is, that no faults in the
Superiors can free the inferiors from their subjection for matter or manner;
as here servants must be subject, yea with all fear, to froward Masters: so
afterward wives must be subject to their husbands, and with all fear too,
though they be unbelievers, or carnal men.

Thus of the exposition: the confirmation follows.

Verses 19. and 20. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, you shall take
it patiently? but if when ye do, well, and suffer for it, you take it
patiently, this is acceptable with God.


THe Apostle applies the reasons to that part of the exposition which might be
most doubted, and ^o gives three reasons why servants should be subject even to
evil Masters. The first is taken from the acceptance of such subjection with
God, verses 19. and 20. The second is taken from their calling, verse 21. The
third, from the example of Christ afterward.

The argument from acceptance is laid down, verse 19. and avouched, and made
good, verse 20.

In the ninteenth verse then, it is the drift of the Apostle to show, that
though Masters should be so froward, as to beat their servants causelessly,
yet they should be subject, and endure it for conscience sake unto God,
because this is a Christian man's case, and a great praise, when out of
conscience to God he does his duty, and suffers wrongfully. The reason is so
intended, for the particular case of servants so abused, as it holds in all
cases of injury for conscience sake.

In this verse then, the Apostle intreates of suffering: and we may note four
things about suffering. First, what is to be suffered, grief. Secondly, how
it is to be suffered, viz. wrongfully and with enduring. Thirdly, the cause of
suffering it: conscience toward God. Fourthly, the effect, which is praise and
acceptance.

Doct. 1. In this world all sorts of men are liable to suffer grief: For
though the Apostle in the scope intends to speak of servants suffering grief,
yet the Argument with the uses concern all sorts of men: In this world then
we must look for grief: and how can it be otherwise, since first there are
such mines in our own nature made by sin, and so many abominations round
about us to God's dishonor? Secondly, the creatures which we are to use in
this world, are empty, and vain: and so occasion much vexation in the users,
that are disappointed by them. All is vanity and vexation of spirit, says the
wise man. Thirdly, we are liable to so many crosses and losses; every day has
his grief and his cross, which must be taken up, Mat. 6. vlt. Luke 9.14.
Fourthly, how can we be long without grief, that live in a world so full of
sin, and devils, and devilish men? Fifthly, our own bodies often grieve us,
being liable to so many pains and diseases. What should I say? Our own houses
are full of causes of grief, if the disorders of masters, husbands, wives,
servants, children, be considered of; and therefore we should be weary of the
world, and long for heaven: we shall never be long together without grief,
till we come thither.

Doct. 2, We must not only endure grief, but many times suffer it
wrongfully: Besides all the grief befalls men otherwise, the world is full of
wrong, and injury, and the ways of doing wrong are so many, as cannot easily
be reckond. Who can recount what wrongs are done daily by deceit, violence,
oppression, lying, false witness, slanderings, and other base indignities? Which
should teach us not to think it strange, if wrongs befall us: and withal it
imports, that woe shall be to all them that do wrong. That God that discouers
them that do wrong, will repay them according to all the wrong they have done.

Doct. 3. It may be here noted too, That usually they suffer most wrong that
are most careful to do their duties: which arises partly from that fearful
A^axie in men's natures, that are fallen into such distemperature of disposition,
and partly, from that natural malice ungodly men bear to them that are good:
and partly, such as are indeed godly, will not use such means of revenge, as
others will do* and partly, because the Laws of men do not reach to a
sufficient way of correcting, and reforming such indignities: and especially it
proceeds from the pride, and unthankfulness, and discontentments, which reign
in the hearts of froward and corrupt minded persons. And from hence we may
gather the necessity of God's general Judgment, because in this world it is
ill many times with good men, and there is no remedy, seeing their wrongs are
not righted here. It must needs be that there will be a time appointed of
GOD, for the redress and revenge of all wrongs. Secondly, it should the more
encourage such as suffer wrong, to endure it patiently, seeing it is the lot of
the best. Thirdly, wrong should not measure the goodness of men's cases, or the
badnes of it, by the things they suffer. For many times they suffer wrongfully.

Doct. 4. That God takes notice of the wrongs that are done to the meanest,
even the wrongs that Masters do to their servants: and so other Scriptures
show, that if the poorest be oppressed, or defrauded, GOD will require it at
the hands of them that oppress or defraud them, be they never so mighty or rich
in the world. And so, if the weakest Christian be wronged by scandal, or
otherwise, it were better for those that give the scandal, or do the wrong,
that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they cast into the sea. And
for that cause the Scriptures show, that God takes great notice of the wrongs
done to widows and orphans, that have little means to help or protect
themselves; and there is reason for it: for, the meanest Christians are God's
servants, and belong to him, and therefore he must protect them. And besides,
God's Law is so powerful, that it condemns wrongs of all sorts to all men.
And further, there is a cry in oppression or wrong, that goes up to heaven;
which will not cease, till God hear it: which as it may be a comfort to such
as are wronged, that they have so great a Patron as God is; so it should warn
all Superiors, to look to their behavior: for, though man do not punish
them; yet God will.

Doct. 5. That barely to suffer grief, is not a praise, but to suffer it in a
right manner: and for the manner, this likewise tells us of two things. First,
that we suffer not as evil doers, justly; and secondly, that we endure it,
that is, continue with patience to abide it, especially when outward and
lawful redress may not be had in the world. And therefore Papists are no
Martyrs though they lose their lives, when it is for treason. Nor are wives to
be regarded, if they complain of their husbands, that they are bitter to them,
love them not so entirely, when they suffer this for their pride, or wilful
hardiness, or lasciviousness, or frowardness, or contention, or
wastefulnesse, or the like. Nor are those servants to be moned, that suffer
blows justly for their disobedience, or wilful negligence, or unfaithfulness.

Doct. 6. That whereas wrongs cannot be redressed by a lawful means on earth,
they must be endured without using unlawful means, and leave the injuries to
the judgment of GOD. Which condemns servants, that being hardly used, run
away from their masters, as Hagar did from Sarah; or else, with wicked
murmuring and reuiling, backbite their masters: and so it condemns the wicked
practice of our Gentry, in righting their wrongs by their own private
reuenges; which case is abominable. First, because their wrongs may be righted
by the Magistrate. Secondly, because the desired revenge is far above the
injuries: for, they seek satisfaction in blood, for a supposed wrong in
reputation. Thirdly, because it is a course directly against the Laws of God,
and of Kings, and has been condemned in all well-gouern'd States. Fourthly,
because it is never sought but by fools: for, it is a wise-mans honor and
reputation, To passe-by an offense; but every fool will be meddling or
quarrelling, says Solomon. Fifthly, because oftentimes it proves damnable to
one of the parties; who, being slain in the act of malice, must needs be
damned for ever; besides the curse of God brought upon the murderer, making his
life miserable, and oftentimes his end fearful.

Doct. 7. That it is conscience or mere necessity, that makes any man suffer:
men endure no wrong by nature, but either by necessity, because they cannot
right it; or else for conscience sake, because God has so required it. Which
should warn Superiors to take heed, that they do no wrong: for, the persons
wronged, if they want conscience, may so remember the wrong, as sometimes to
find a desperate way of revenge, to the mischief of the wrong-doer, though the
party wronged do evil in so doing, as follows in the next doctrine.

Doct. 8. Inferiors, being wronged even in blows by the Superior, ought not
to resist, but endure it: servants may not resist the correction of their
masters, nor strike again; that is horrible, and egregiously sinful. Which
shows the grievous pride and naughtiness of diverse servants, that boast or
threaten, that they will take no blows: their resolution shows, they are void
of knowledge in the fear or conscience of God's will. And so it is alike
sinful in children, wives, or subjects, to resist, or return blows for
blows, or evil for evil: neither does this embolden masters or other
superiors to do wrong, because (as was heard before) they shall receive of GOD
according to all the wrongs they have done.

Doct. 9. To suffer grief and wrong, is profitable: for, besides that it is all
fruit to them when it makes them more humble, and takes away their sin, it
makes them judge themselves before God for the sins they are guilty of, and
weans them from the world, and breeds a greater desire of heaven, and the like
fruits. Besides all these, this Text tells us of one commodity more, that is
praise or thanks: it is an honorable thing, To suffer wrongfully: it winnes
them a great deal, not only of compassion, but also of reputation among men.
As it makes the evil more hateful: so does it procure love to him that
suffers wrongfully. It is a virtue worthy thanks, yea, the coherence with the
next verse, seems to import, that GOD will give him thanks that suffers
wrong, if he endure it patiently: not that God is bound to do so, or that
such suffering merits any such thanks of God; but God is so good and
compassionate, and he likes this virtue so well, that he is pleased to crown
this patience with that high degree of liking it. It is thank-worthy, not
because it deserves thanks, but because it declares the party to be such and so
worthy in God's gracious acceptance, that he will of his own grace yield him
that encouragement.

Thus of the doctrines that may be particularly gathered out of the words of
this verse.

Before I leave the verse, there are diverse things to be considered of about
Conscience. For, where this verse mentions conscience toward God, it gives us
occasion to think what that conscience should be, and to inform ourselves in
diverse things about it.

Reasons why men ought to be instructed about conscience.
There are many reasons may be assigned, why men should be carefully instructed
about Conscience: it is a necessary doctrine: for first, we see by experience,
that of most things that concern us, men know least about Conscience; many
men knowing little more of it, than the bare use of the word Conscience.
Secondly, men through this ignorance do many notorious injuries and abuses to
their conscience, by resisting the motions of conscience, not knowing what to
make of them, and by smothering the scruples of conscience, and by deading the
conscience, or else by vexing them, and many other ways. Thirdly, God has
given men a great charge about the keeping of their consciences, which he
placed in their souls as a great treasure; and God would have it respected and
looked to with as much care as any thing he has given us, 1. Tim. 1.19.
Fourthly, God does require, that men should get grace and goodness into their
consciences, as well as into their hearts, or words, or lives; which they can
never do, if they be not taught. Fifthly, God's Word, in all the directions and
precepts of it, does bind and oblige men's consciences to see to the obedience
of them: now, what can conscience do, if men know not what belongs to their
consciences, and the natures and works of conscience? But, above all things, it
should awaken men to study the knowledge of conscience, yea, of their own
consciences, if they consider, that the conscience of every man is one of the
principal books shall be opened at the last Day, for evidence, before the
Tribunal Seat of Christ: and therefore men were best to look about them in
this world, to see to it, what is written in this book; for, it is indeleble,
and will stand upon record, either for them or against them, at that Day.

Now concerning conscience, diverse things are to be considered:

First, what conscence is.

Secondly, what the work of conscience is.

Thirdly, what the prerogatives of conscience are.

Fourthly, the kinds or sorts of consciences.

Last of all, what it is, that binds the conscience: which is to be inquired
into, because men are enjoined to suffer wrongs patiently for conscience sake,
even servants from their Masters.

For the first. What Conscience is.
To know, what conscience is, we must look both to the Etymology of the word,
and to the definition of the thing. The word conscience imports a knowledge
with another, Conscientia, quasicum alia scientia: Conscience, that is, science
conjoined: and the reason is, because conscience is a thing in us, that knows
what we have done, and therein ioynes with some other thing, that knows it
too; Some of our actions conscience sees within, Romans 2.15. and 9.1.
and the Angels and men see them without: but for our secret thoughts,
conscience is only joined with God, or with our own minds as they are joined
with God. Conscience is a thing within us, which God has placed there, of
purpose to be his witness or spy to discover all we think, or do: and as it is
joined with the mind of man; it is the knowledge of what we know, or the
thinking of what we think. To think of other things, is the understanding or
mind; but to think what we think, is the conscience of a man. Or else
conscience may be called so, because it is a concluding science; Conscientia,
quasi concludens scientia: and the reason of the term in that sense may be
thus, because, look, what discourse conscience has with God or the mind of
man, it vttreth it by way of a Syllogism, which they call a practical
Syllogism; As for instance, If the conscience speak within to a murderer, it
speaks by Syllogism thus: Every murderer is in a fearful case; but thou
art a murderer, therefore thou art in a fearful case. Now, that that reason,
which concludes thus in him, is his conscience, is most apparent: For, the mind
gives only the first part of the Syllogism, which is, that a murderer is in
a fearful case: or that the mind sees either by the natural principles
planted in it, or by the Scriptures. The other branch the conscience takes out
of the memory, that is, that thou have committed murder: now the concluding of
both and applying them to the murderer, is the proper work of conscience, and
conscience is that within us, that so concludes upon our actions.

Now for the definition of conscience, omitting the diversity of frames given
by diverse men, I express that, which I take to be the cleerer, and fullest to
show us what it is. Conscience is a divine faculty in the soul of all
reasonable creatures, applying the principles or propositions of their mind, in
their particular actions either with them, or against them.

I say, it is a faculty, to note that it is more then the act or the habit of
the mind, judging or determining. For acts and habits may be lost, but
conscience cannot. Besides, the Scriptures show that conscience does act, as it
excuses or accuses, and therefore must be a faculty it self, and not the act
of a faculty. I say, a faculty in the soul, because I dare not assign it or
confine it to any part of the soul, as they do, that make it a part of the
understanding; for the understanding has no parts properly: and to make it a
part Analogically, is not to be borne in a definition, as Logicians know.

I say moreover, it is in all reasonable creatures; to note, that beasts, that
have only a sensitive soul, have no conscience. And whereas God also is no
creature; therefore he has not conscience. For God being holiness it self,
needs no faculties to govern himself by, nor any conscience to witness, or
prompt him. And I say it is in all, that none might imagine, that some men have
a conscience, and some have none: For every man has a conscience either good,
or bad.

Secondly, The proper work of Conscience.
the proper work of conscience is imported in the other words of the
definition, viz. applying the principles of the mind. For the understanding
whereof, we must know, that there are certain notions, These principles in
the mind, show a keeper they call Synteresis.
or frames of truth planted in the minds of all men, being infused by God as a
natural Law in their minds, showing what is good or evil, and those
principles are increased in the minds of such as have the benefit of the
Scripture more or less, according to the degree of their knowledge: Now that
which conscience does, is this: It repaires to these forms of truth or light
in the mind, and takes such of them, as concern the business in hand, and with
the force of them either comforts, or affrights men, according as the occasion
is.

Note, that I say, it is a divine faculty: I wanted a fit term to express my
meaning for that I would utter: I say, that it is a wonderful special faculty
in us: It is a most celestial gift: conscience is so of God, and in man, that
it is a kind of middle thing between God and man: less then God, and yet above
man.

So then, Conscience concludes about a man's own actions: For if Conscience
trouble it self about other men's actions, it is either the weakness, or the
error of conscience, and I add particular actions: because Conscience never
imployes it self properly about generals: and lastly, I add for the success,
or end; It is either with a man, or against him, to note, that Conscience is
such an Arbiter between God and us, that sometimes it speaks for God against
us, and sometimes for us to God.

But that we may be more distinctly informed about Conscience; I therefore
come to the second point, which is, to consider, what Conscience can do, or
how it is employed in us: and Conscience is employed both for GOD and for man,
How Conscience is employed in us.
which work I will consider first apart, and then jointly.

For God then, Conscience works diuersely, and has many offices under God and
for God: for it is Gods special spy set in the heart of man to watch him, and
his Intelligencer, and Notary to set down, Chirographia Dei.
what man has done: It is God's handwriting, the Law of God written in our
hearts, or rather works by the help of that body of the Law written by the
finger of God upon the Tables of men's hearts: It is a co-witnes with God, Rom
9.1. It is also Gods Lieutenant, and a great Commander placed within us, that
severely requires homage and service to be done to God, and especially diuerts
man from ill, directing him in the careful manner of serving of God: For God
will not accept any service that Conscience does not order, 2. Tim. 1.3. It is
a taster for GOD, in point of doctrine of Religion; For all doctrines must be
brought to the Conscience to be tried, whether they be of God, or no, 2. Cor.
4.2. And finally, it makes a man endure grief, and suffer wrong for God and
his glory, as this Text imports. For man, Conscience is many ways employed: as
first, it is employed in viewing and surueying the things of man, especially
the hidden things of man: and here the power of Conscience is wonderful. For
other creatures may see the things without them, but have no power to see the
things within them: only man, he has a knowledge reflexed. The eye of a man
too can see other things, but without a glass it cannot see it self. But now
Conscience can discern it self, and the whole actions of man; and so it differs
from Science, or the knowledge of the mind: for, to know other things, is
science; but, to know our selves, is Conscience. The soul then, by Conscience
knows it self: it views the thoughts, memory, affections of the soul, and can
tell what we think, desire, love, fear, hate, etc. Secondly, in matters of
Religion, Conscience is specially employed; for instance, both in the Word and
the Sacraments. For the Word: the mystery of faith, even all the grounds of
Religion, they are laid up, and are in the keeping of Conscience, 1. Tim. 3.9.
And in Baptism, whereas God makes a covenant with us, and likewise requires a
restipulation or promise on our part, Conscience is heerin employed; and
without Conscience, God will do nothing in the business. It was the form in
the Primitive Times, that the party which was to be baptized, was to be
examined before God, whether he did believe: the question was, Credis? Do
thou believe? And he was to answer, Credo, I do believe.

Now, this answer God would not take, unless the conscience would say, that
he did believe as he said: this is the answer. A good conscience is mentioned,
1. Pet. 3.21. Again, a good conscience serves in all the offices of our life or
affairs, even in all things to be a witness; if we do that which conscience
thinks well, to comfort us; and, if we do that which conscience thinks ill, to
discourage us, Romans 2.15. and 9.1. Yea, conscience is the guide of our lives.
We are here pilgrims and strangers, far from our home, and in journey
continually: now, GOD has set consciences in us to be our guides, that in all
things we are to do, we may be directed and encouraged by conscience, taking
the direction and warrant of conscience as a special ground of our actions; so
as to do contrary to what conscience bids us, is a sin: for, it does not
only witness about what is past, but it directs us about what is to come, as
now to be done.

But, the principal work of Conscience, whether we respect God or man, is, To
keep Court in the heart of man. There is in man Forum Conscientiae, a Court of
Conscience: a secret Tribunal is set up in the heart of man, and therein sits
Conscience, and arraigneth, accuses, brings witness, sentenceth, and does
execution. Now, concerning the judgment of Conscience, keeping an Assise in
the heart of man, two things are to be considered: First, the law by which
Conscience judges; secondly, the manner of the proceeding in judgment.

For the first: Conscience judges of the actions of men, by virtue of certain
principles (as I said before) which it finds in the understanding, gathered
either from the Law of Nature, or from experience of God's providence, or from
the Scriptures.

Now, the manner how it proceeds in judgment, is, in form of reasoning, as I
said before: for, in the mind the Conscience finds, as it were, a Book of Law
written, which is in the keeping of the faculty; they call it in schools,
Synteresis: from hence the Conscience takes the ground of reasoning; and from
the memory it takes evidence of the fact or state of the man that is arraigned;
and then by it self it iudiciously concludes, and passes Sentence: and so it
proceeds, whether it condemn or absolve. In the Judgment of condemnation, it
proceeds thus: First, it cites or calls for the soul to be tried: then it
accuses in this form, out of the body of the law kept in the mind: it takes
the conclusion it means to work upon, and then uses the memory to testify of
the fact; as for instance: Every murderer is an offender; thou art a murderer,
therefore thou art proved to be an offender. Then comes the Sentence in the
same order; He that commits murder without repentance, shall be damned: thou
committest murder without repentance, and therefore art a damned creature. So
likewise it proceeds in absoluing. For evidence, it proceeds thus: He that has
such and such marks, as, godly sorrow, the love or fear of God, etc. he is a
child of God; but thou have these marks, therefore thou art a child of God:
and then it goes to Sentence; He that is the child of God, shall be saved:
but thou art proved to be the child of God, therefore thou shall be saved.
Nor does it rest in the Sentence, but immediately does it self begin the
execution: for, laying hold upon the guilty person, it presently buffets him,
and terrifies him, and pricks him at the very heart, and gnawes him many times
with unspeakable torments and tortures. And so contrariwise, in the Sentence
of absolution, it proceeds with comfort, settleth and quieteth the heart of the
Absolved, and many times makes it able with joy to stand undaunted against all
the powers of hell, and the world; of which more afterward, when I come to
entreat of the sorts of Conscience.

Observe by the way the difference between the Court of Conscience within us,
and men's Courts of Justice without us. For, in men's Courts they proceed
secundum allegata and probata, according to allegation and proofs: but God has
appointed another Judgment in the heart of man; there God judges not
according to allegation and proofs, but according to Conscience, and has
associated to every man a notary of his own, and a witness of his own, which
he produces out of his very bosom: so as man shall be made to confess what
he has done, though all the world excuse him; and shall have comfortable
testimony in himself, though all the world beside accuse him.

The glory of the power of Conscience appears by the third point; and that is,
the prerogatives and properties of Conscience in a man: for, 1. It keeps Court
in the heart of a man, Prerogatives or properties of Conscience
without limitation of time: it will call a man to answer and hear Judgment at
any time: it is not limited to any terms, nor can the Sentence be delaied: it
has power to examine, testify, and give Sentence at any time of the year at
pleasure, nor will it admit any appeal to any creature. 2. It is subject
properly only to God: no earthly Prince can command the Conscience of a man,
as will more appear afterward. 3. It keeps continual residence in the heart
of man: it is always with him, at home and abroad: it observes and watches
him in all places, in the Church, at his table, in his bed, day and night: it
never leaves him. 4. God has subjected man to the obedience of Conscience, if
it command erroneously, if it be in things indifferent; as, in the case of
meats and days, in the Apostles time, if the Conscience doubted, or forbade
the use of them, which yet in themselves might be used, the man was bound to
follow his Conscience, though the Conscience erred, and so sinned in doubting
or forbidding, Romans 14.14* 23. 5. Yea, so much honor does God give unto the
Conscience, that he suffers his own most holy Spirit to bring-in evidence in
the Court of conscience: for, so we read, that the Spirit of Adoption does
bear witness before our spirits, that is, before the Conscience, that we are
the sons of God, Romans 8.15. 6. It is a great prerogative, that GOD has
granted Immortality unto Conscience: Conscience never dies, no not when we die.
Every man's Conscience shall be found a lier at the day of Judgment, and in so
great request with Christ, as that dreadful Judgment shall be guided according
to the evidence and verdict of Conscience, Romans 2.15, 16.


Kinds of Conscience.
For the fourth point. Conscience is not all of a sort in all men: some have
good Consciences, and some have ill Consciences; and both these kinds of
Consciences must be considered of.

Conscience, considered as good, comes to be so either by creation, or by
renouation. By creation, Adam had his Conscience good: but, by the first sin,
Conscience became evil in him and all his posterity; so as all men naturally
have evil Consciences: and no men have their consciences good, but as they are
renewed.

The difference between a good Conscience by creation and renouation, is this;
that by creation, Conscience was perfectly good from the first moment it was
infused, till the Fall, and did discover it self by excusing and comforting
always: for, Adam's Conscience, till his Fall, could accuse him of nothing.
But by renouation, Conscience is good for the time of this life, but
imperfectly, and increases in good men by degrees: and so, because man is
renewed but in part, it is a part of the goodness of the Conscience, to accuse
for sin, especially if it be presumptuous, after Calling, as well as to
excuse from faults, while the man keeps his vprightnes. That a good Conscience
should only excuse, is true (in this world) only of Conscience, as it was
good by creation.

Now, concerning the goodness or badnesse of Conscience, these seven things are
to be considered of.

First, that all men's Consciences by nature are evil.

Secondly, the difference of evil in men's Consciences.

Thirdly, the signs of an evil Conscience.

Fourthly, the hurt of an evil Conscience.

Fifthly, the means, how evil Consciences may be made good.

Sixthly, the signs of a good Conscience.

Seventhly, the great happiness of the man, that has a good Conscience.

For the first, that all men's Consciences are by nature evil, is manifest,
because all have sinned in Adam, and lost their original righteousness in all
the faculties of the soul; and so, every man in his natural condition, is in
every point unclean: and to the impure all things are impure, even their
Consciences are polluted, says the Apostle, Titus 1.15.

Difference of evil in men's consciences.
For the second: evil is not in the same degree in all men's Consciences, but
after a different manner in diverse men, for

First, in most men, we see that Conscience is so feeble, and works so little,
that it seems to be but a small spark, or like a bubble, which rises now and
then, and presently vanishes.

Now the reason why Conscience stirs so little in the most men, is not to be
taken from the nature of Conscience, (for that can work all works mentioned
before) but from diverse things in man. For first, Adams sin, as it deprived all
men's Consciences of original righteousness, which was the life of the
Conscience; so it brought such a deprauation and evil disease upon the
Conscience, that it was never healed, nor cured in the natural man to this
day: but the weakness arising from the infection, holds him down still.
Secondly, the general ignorance and darkness, which is in the world, is one
great cause, why Conscience lies so miserably weak, and neglected. For it
cannot work for want of light. For in the mind it finds only a few natural
principles, or some general truths of religion, which are altogether
insufficient to direct in the particular occasions of men's lives. Thirdly,
besides, the Law of nature is corrupted in man; and so those principles are
very muddy and uncertain, and the generals of Religion are poisoned with
secret Objections gathered from the controversies of so many false religions.
Fourthly, further it is manifest, that the cares and pleasures of life oppress
conscience in many, and in them Conscience stirs not, not because it cannot
stir, but because there is no leisure to hear what it says; men are so
violently carried to the pleasures and business of this world. As a man that
runs in a race, many times runs with such violence, that he cannot hear what
is said unto him by some that he passes by, though it were counsel, that
might direct him in the right way of the race: So is it with men that haste to
be rich: Conscience often calls to them, to take heed of going out of the way,
by deceit, or lying, or oppression, or the like; But they pursue riches so
violently, that they cannot hear the voice of Conscience. And so is it with
the voluptuous person, and with the most men that live in any habitual
gainful sin. Fifthly, yea this weakness comes upon the Conscience of some, by
custom of sins, that are not sins of gain, or pleasure, as the sins of
negligence, slothfulnes, passion, or the like, in which men are wilfully
confirmed, and will not regard the checks of their own conscience. Finally,
one great reason, why the most of us feel so little of Conscience, is, the
evil hearing of the Word of God, for the Word of God powerfully preached,
would awake the Conscience, but that most men set themselves to neglect it, by
a willing and wilful intertaynment of distractions and in voluntary forgetting
of what they have heard; and so hood-winking themselves, it is no wonder they
cannot see.

Secondly, some men's Conscience is stark dead, it stirs not at all. The
Conscience is compared to a part of the body, that is not only without sense
and rotten, but is seared with a hot iron: and this is the case only of some
notorious either Heretics, or malefactors, that have lived a long time
wilfully in some monstrous wickedness, either known, or secret, 1. Timothy
4. verse 2. This seared Conscience is either joined with a greedines to commit
special wickedness, or with a reprobate mind that is so horrible stupid, that
it judges evil to be good, or at the best, not dangerously hurtful, Ephesians.
4.18. Romans 1.28.

Thirdly, in some men the evil of Conscience lies in this, that it is
ouer-busy, and sins too much: and so in two sorts of men, first, the
superstitious; or secondly, the desperate. The superstitious person is many
times disquieted by his Conscience in doing well, or when he does that which
is not unlawful, as the Popish priest is troubled for coming to our Churches;
or the Christian, that is carried with preposterous zeal, is troubled for
obeying the Magistrate in using his liberty in things indifferent: in the
desperate, the evil of Conscience is the horrible tormenting of them, beyond
the bounds of the offense of Conscience, and that in two things. First, in that
it presents the wrath of God to them, without the hope of mercy in Christ, as
did the Conscience of Cain. Secondly, in that it drives them to do that
against themselves, which is desperately wicked, as to make away themselves, as
the desperate Conscience of Judas, and Achitophel did.

Fourthly, in some men there was a temporary goodness in the Conscience, of
which they made shipwreck, and so utterly lost the goodness they had for a time.
And thus many hypocrites do, that for a time get the form of Religion even
into their Consciences, but afterward falling into the immoderate love of the
world, or the lust of some particular sin, fall clean away from Religion,
and so lose the goodness which they had, 1. Tim. Chap. 1. verse 19.

Thus of the differences of evil in the Consciences of diverse men: the signs
of an evil Conscience follow. But before I give the signs, we must take
notice of a distinction, and that is, that the Conscience may have evil in it,
and not be an evil Conscience: Conscience in this life in men regenerate is
renewed and restored but in part; and so may err sometimes, and in some cases,
Note.
and yet be no evil Conscience. As for instance in certain weak Christians
in the Primitive Church (who yet were godly men) the Apostle shows, Romans 14.
that some Christians for Conscience sake did refuse certain meats and days:
the Conscience erred, in judging those meats and days to be unlawful to be
observed and used; and yet he calls them that were so led by an erring
Conscience, he calls them, I say, brethren: But when we speak of an evil
Conscience, we mean Conscience unregenerate. As a man may have sin in him,
and yet be a good man: so may Conscience have blindness in it, and yet be a
good Conscience.

The signs of an unregenerate Conscience may be gathered from the differences
of evil Consciences.

The signs then of an unregenerate still Conscience are these.

The signs of an evil Conscience that is still.
First, when it is quiet in the committing, and after the committing of known
sin, whether open, or secret: For open sins; as for drunkenness, swearing,
lying, profanation of the Sabbath, and the like; the Conscience cannot be
good, when these, or the like open wickednesses are committed: and so when it
is quiet notwithstanding secret whoredom, or filthiness of any kind, or
continual wickedness in the thoughts, or desires, that Conscience that can
abide a foul heart, is a wicked Conscience.

Secondly, when it excuses for doing notorious evils: and so they have evil
Consciences, that could trouble and persecute, even to the death, godly men,
and yet think they did God good service, John 16.2.

The signs of an unregenerate stirring Conscience, are these:

First, Signs of an ill stirring Conscience.
when the Conscience serves only to tell ill news, when it serves to tell a
man only of his loss by Adam, or the Law, but never comfort him by
bringing-in any evidence of God's favor in Christ. That Conscience that
terrifies without Christ, that is without mixing any of the comforts of the
Gospel in Christ, is an evil Conscience: the special property of a good
Conscience, is to excuse and comfort; and therefore that Conscience that does
only accuse, is an evil Conscience.

Secondly, when the Conscience flees from the presence of God, as did Adam's
Conscience after the Fall: and this the Conscience discouers, when it dares not
stand before the discovery of the Law of God, nor dares abide a powerful
Minister, that speaks to the Conscience of the hearers, and ransacks them.

Thirdly, when the Conscience languisheth about questions that tend not to
edification, and raises the strength of zeal, and all the power of it, about
things that are less necessary either unto faith or practice. And this was the
case of the Pharisees Conscience, that spent all their zeal about less
matters, and neglected the waightier things of the Law. And this is the case of
all such Christians that are zealous with a fiery zeal about circumstances, or
the estates and businesses of others, and neglect the main things of substance,
that concern their own sanctification, assurance, or salvation.

Fourthly, when the Conscience is for men, and not for God; when the motive
that raises and incourageth it, is the praise of men, and not the praise of
God. This also was the case of the Consciences of the Pharisees: for, the
Conscience in them was busy, and did require good duties, but the respect was
still the praise of men; whereas a good Conscience is for God above all.

Fifthly, when it will accuse only for gross evils, and those known to
others, and not for less and secret sins to be repented of.

Sixthly, when it will accuse only in the time of adversity; as, in the case of
Ioseph's brethren.

Thus of the signs of an evil Conscience.

The misery that the men have, that have an evil Conscience, Hurt of an evil
conscience.
follows: and they are miserable, whether they have a waking or a sleeping
Conscience. The misery that comes from a waking Conscience, is evil, and may
be two ways discerned: First, by the terms by which it is called and
resembled in Scripture; secondly, by the effects which it works really upon a
man. For the first. An evil Conscience that is awake, is in Scripture compared
to a sting or prick wounding the heart of a man. It is likened also to a dog or
a blood-hound that lies at the door, and, having fresh sent, howleth and
barketh after the malefactor, Genesis 4. It is likened, as some think, by David,
Psalm. 51.4. to an evil contentious wife, that is ever before a man, chiding
and brauling: and as a moth secretly eats the garment; so does an evil
Conscience eat up the heart of a man, when others little see it, Pro. 25. It is
like a dart, strangely shot into a man's body, Psalm 38. And it is compared to
the boiling of a tumultuous sea, Esaias 57. And it is called a worm that dies
not, but lies gnawing and eating upon the heart of a man, Esaias 66. Mark 9. So
that a man that has an evil Conscience, is like a man that is stung by a
serpent, or followed by a blood-hound, or vexed by a continuall-contrarious
wife, or that is hourly shot through with darts, or that has a living worm
ever gnawing at his heart. But, that this may be more distinctly understood,
we must take notice of four effects of an evil Conscience, usually.

The first is shame. Four ill effects of an ill Conscience.
He that has an evil Conscience, is betrayed by his own blushing many
times, when his offense is secret: yea, a man feels an inward shame in his
own heart, disgracing and abusing him, though he make no outward show of it.
For, though sometimes an innocent person, upon the fulness of an aspersion, may
conceive shame, as David did, Psalm 44.15. yet it is usually the effect of an
ill Conscience.

The second is pain and anguish of heart, arising from the gnawing and stings
of Conscience mentioned before; which so continually burdens the heart, that it
takes away all contentment in any thing, and keeps the heart in an habitual
disconsolation: and though the disease of melancholy may breed a sadness like
unto it, yet is here manifest difference betwixt this affliction of spirit, and
melancholy; for the melancholic person usually can assign no certain reason
of that sadness: whereas Conscience, when it stings, assigns the cause of it to
be such and such things, which bring not only the shame of men, but the wrath
of God. Besides, melancholic sadness may be eased by physic: but this sorrow
is not cured by any means, but such as are spiritual.

The third is a strange kind of fear, breaking the heart of a man, and so
subduing his courage, that he is not able to sustain himself against the
impressions of vain causes of fear. A trembling heart is the effect of an ill
conscience, Deuteronomy. 28.65. Thus wicked men are said in Scripture to fear, when
no man pursues them, Pro. 28.1. and to be so faint-hearted, as the sound of a
shaken leaf shall make them fly, as it were from a sword, Leuit. 26.36. and as
it is in Job, The sound of fear is always in his ears: yea the terrors of
conscience sometime so enrage upon the offender, that no torments are like unto
their terrors; which sometimes are so great, that they are hardly able to
sustain themselves, but discover their horrible restlesnes, by the grievous
distempers of the body, or failing of their senses; being for the time, as Job
says, brought under the king of terrors, Job 18.14. What a woeful case
Belshazzar was in, you may read, Daniel 5.9. These terrors are the fancies the
Gentiles so much dreamed of.

The fourth is desperation. An evil Conscience in sin, many times brings
them to hellish despair of all mercy and pardon: thus Cain rages and
blasphemeth like a frantic man. And these effects of an evil Conscience are
so much the more great,

1. Because the Conscience can lash a man without noise: Aggrauations of the
misery of an ill Conscience.
it can secretly inflict torments, when no eyes shall pity him.

2. Because there is no escape from Conscience: a man can neither drive it
away, nor run from it: it cleaues to the offender inseparably. From a tyrant
or ill master, some men run away: but from an ill Conscience there is no
fleeing.

3. Because Conscience it self is as a thousand witnesses to prove the fault,
though never so secret: and the offender is (...), condemned of himself, and
goes up and down with a heavy Sentence upon him in his bosom, though all the
world should account him innocent.

4. Because an evil Conscience is such a damnable disease; and the grief
raised by Conscience, is such and so lasting, that the grieved dies, before the
grief can be removed: yea, so violent is the confusion which despair brings
into the thoughts, that, out of the grievous mistaking, and impatience, many
times the offender makes away himself; as Saul, Achitophel, and Judas did, and
many in our times do.

5. Because death it self does not abate the torments of an evil Conscience:
but the living worm gnawes them even in hell for ever, and with so much
strength and power there, that one said wittily, Hell were not hell, if it were
not for the gnawing of this neuer-dying and neuer-ceasing worm.

6. Because unto the making up of the complete misery of the impenitent sinner,
the Sentence of Conscience, and the testimony of it shall be heard and admitted
at the last day before the Tribunal of Christ. For though an evil conscience
shall never disgrace for some effects, as for that of working despair of
mercy: yet for the maine body of the proceedings of Conscience, it shall be not
only allowed, but justified by the voice of Christ, to the eternal shame and
confusion of the offender.

And though it be true, that the worst of the effects before mentioned, arise
from a stirring Conscience, yet is not the man safe, that has a still
conscience, if it be evil. For first, he is in continual danger of the
awaking of that Conscience of his, that now is asleep. What ease can that man's
heart beat, if he had all pleasures round about him, if he were tied to a
Bear, or Lion, or mad Dog, though he were then asleep? for he may awake every
moment, and then where is he? The stillness of an ill Conscience is but like
the sleep of a frantic man. Secondly, there can be no true peace unto the man
that lies in sin without repentance, Esaias 57. There is no peace to the wicked,
says my God. Though he be friends with himself for a time, yet God is not
friends with him, nor is sin and Satan at peace with him, though there be an
uncertain truice for a time. Thirdly, the danger of a still Conscience is the
greater: for the terrors of a troubled Conscience may prepare a man for
Christ, and compel a man to seek help from Christ, but in the case of a still
conscience, there are these two usual miseries: the one, that men take a still
Conscience to be a good Conscience: and the other is, that a man runs only
blindefolded so long, till death and hell may seize upon him. Thus of the
effects of an evil Conscience: The means, how Conscience may be made good,
follow.

That an evil Conscience may be made good, two things must be looked into:
First, that we get a right medicine to heal it: What must be done to make an
ill Conscience good.
Secondly, that we take a right course in application of the medicine. First,
the medicine for the curing of an ill Conscience, is only the blood of Christ,
the disease of Conscience is of so high a nature, as all the medicines in the
world are insufficient, nothing but sprinkling it with blood, will serve the
turn, and it must be no other blood, then the blood of the immaculate Lamb
of God, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 9.14. The reason of this is, because
Conscience will never be quiet, till it see a way how GODs anger may be
pacified, and sin abolished, which cannot be done any way, but by the blood
of Christ, which was powered out, as a sacrifice for sin.

Now, unto the right application of this medicine, four things are requisite.
First, the light of knowledge. Secondly, the washing of regeneration. Thirdly,
the assurance of Faith. Fourthly, the warmth of love. First, knowledge a man
must have both Legal and Evangelical. For they must know by the Law, what
sins lie upon the Conscience, and trouble it, and they must know by the
Gospel, what a propitiation is made by Christ for sins. And for the second,
an evil Conscience will never be gotten off, unless our hearts be sprinkled,
and washed from the filth and power of the sins, which did lie upon the
Conscience, Heb. 10.22. 1. Tim. 1.5. Now unto such removing of such sins from
the heart, two things are requisite: First, that by particular confession we
do, as it were, scratch off the filth of those sins that foul the heart,
and trouble the Conscience. Secondly, and then that we wash our hearts, and
daily rinse them with the tears of true repentance and humiliation before God
for those sins. Thirdly, assurance of faith is necessary to the cure of an
ill Conscience, because faith is the hand, that lays on the medicine. A man
must apply the sufferings of Christ to himself, and believe that Christ did
satisfy for those sins that lie upon the conscience, and must accordingly all
to besprinkle the conscience with that blood of Christ, and then of an evil
Conscience, it will presently become good: but men must look to one thing, and
that is that their faith be unfeigned. For Conscience will not be satisfied with
the profession of faith: they must believe indeed, and with their hearts, and
with sound application of the promises of the Gospel concerning the blood of
Christ, or else Conscience will not be answered, Heb. 10.22. 1. Tim. 1.5.
Fourthly, the heat of love must be added: a man must so apply the blood of
Christ, as that his own blood be heated in him, with affection both toward
God, and Christ and Christians.

Christian love does put, as it were, natural heat into the Conscience, and
makes it (now receiving life by faith) to bestir it self in all the works
either of service to God, or duty to men, 1. Tim. 1.5. Heb. 9.24. Knowledge
bringing it light, Mortification making it clean, Faith curing it, and putting
life into it, by sprinkling it with the blood of Christ, and love infusing or
rather inflaming it with the heat of life. All these things are requisite,
though I stand not upon the precise order of the working of every one of these.

Thus how conscience may be made good. Now I might add a direction or two,
how Conscience may do her work aright, that is, a good Conscience, and not
do ill offices in the soul. Two things, I say, are of great use for the
guiding of a good Conscience. Two things for the guiding of Conscience.
First, that in all her proceedings she must follow the warrant of Gods word.
Secondly, that she do not mistake in judging of particular actions, she must
be sufficiently informed about our Christian liberty: For unless the
conscience discern, that we are freed from the malediction of the Law, and from
the rigorous perfection of obedience, and have restored unto us a free use of
all things indifferent, and the like; she may be ouer-busy and troublesome,
disquieting the heart, and restrayning the joys should refresh and support a
man.

Thus of the means, how Conscience may be made good: the signs of a good
conscience follow.

Signs of a good Conscience.
First, by the opposition it makes against the remainders of sin in the godly.
It maintains a constant combating against the law of the members, having at
command the law of the mind. It does not only resist gross evils, but even
the most secret corruptions in the heart of man. This, Paul discerned in
himself, Romans 7. of doing God service.

Secondly, by the manner of exacting of obedience: for, a good Conscience,

First, does incline a man to do good duties, not by compulsion; but, a man
shall find, that he does them by force of an internal principle in himself.

Secondly, it cannot abide dead works: a good Conscience abhorres all cold, and
careless, or lukewarm, or counterfeit serving of God: it puts life into all good
duties: Acts 23.1.
it exacteth attendance upon God in doing them, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, it more respects GOD, than all the world, or the man himself; and
therefore will compel a man to obey against profit, and pleasure, and liking of
the world, 2. Cor. 1.12.

Fourthly, it requires an universal obedience: it would have all God's
commandments respected* and therefore Paul says, I desired in all things to
live honestly, Heb. 13.18. The allowing of one sin, shows the deprauation of
the Conscience, if it be a known sin, and still tolerated. As one dead fly
will spoil a box of precious ointment; I say, one dead fly: tho many living
flies may light upon a box of ointment, and do it no great hurt: So a godly
man may have many infirmities, and yet his Conscience be sound: but if there be
one corruption that lives and dies there, that is, such a corruption as is
known and allowed, and does by custom continue there, it will destroy the
soundness of the best Conscience of the World, and does usually argue a
Conscience that is not good.

Fifthly, a good Conscience does require obedience always: Thus Paul pleades, I
have served God till this day. It does not command for God by fits, but
constantly, Act. 23.1.

A third sign is, that a good Conscience is always toward God, it still
desires to be before God, it seeks God's presence, it reckons that day to be
lost, and that it did not live (as it were) when it found not the Lord, or had
no fellowship or conversation with God. A good Conscience is like a good
Angel, it is always looking into the face of God, Act. 23.1.

Thus of the signs.

The benefits of a good Conscience are many and great: for,

First, Benefits of a good Conscience.
it is the best companion a man has all the days of his life: It is ever with
him, and speaks good unto him, and comforts him. A man that has no company,
needs not be alone; for, he may converse, with much delight, with his own
Conscience, and it is the surest friend a man can have: For, it will neither
hurt him by flattery, nor forsake him for any carnal respects, and being an
internal agent, is out of the watch of all outward hindrances, and is always
a messenger of good things to a man, and fits him, and fills him with peace,
that passes all the understanding of all men that want a good Conscience.

Secondly, it gives a man assurance of the best treasures; it makes a man
certain of his salvation: For, a good Conscience will not be quiet, till it
know the love of God, and the promises of grace in Christ; and the assurance
that conscience gives, is a better assurance than any man can have for his
lands, or any estate on Earth, because it is so highly honored, that God's
own Spirit does not disdain at any time to witness with it, and to it, Romans
8.15, 16.

Thirdly, by reason of that new acquaintance and affinity it has with the holy
Ghost, it brings us into a familiar friendship with God, as being an immediate
Agent with the holy Ghost in all things that concern us; for God's Spirit
treates with the Conscience, and the Conscience treates with the Soul.

Fourthly, it is a continual bulwark against the Devil, and all his fiery
darts, whether he tempt us to sin, or to fear and doubting: For, so soon as
the temptation is cast in; a good Conscience, by her reasoning, presently
throws it out, reserving principles both of precept and promise, always in a
readiness to that end: so as, by contrarious reasoning within us, it both
hinders us from yielding to sin, and supports us against all doubts and fears,
Prou. 28.1.

Fifthly, against all afflictions, and disgraces, and reproaches of the World, a
good Conscience still comforts a man, and makes him rejoice by the force of the
testimony thereof, 2. Cor. 1.12. So as it is most true, that A good Conscience
is a continual Feast: he never fares ill, that has a good Conscience, Psalm
7.8. Pro. Acts 24.16. Romans 9.10.

Sixthly, and the greater is the comfort of a good Conscience, because it will
comfort us, and stand by us and for us, when all other comforts fail. It will
never leave us in sickness, or in death; and so is better than a thousand
friends, or wives, or children: yea, it will go with us to the Iudgement-Seat
of Christ, with this assurance, that as a good Conscience speaks to us now, so
will Christ speak to us at that Day, Romans 2.16.

Thus of the sorts or kinds of Consciences.

The last point is about the bond of Conscience, what it is that can bind a
man's Conscience: and the doubt arises from this and other Texts, because here
a servant is bound in Conscience, to submit himself to a froward master, both
to his command, and to his punishments; and other Scriptures speak of his
obedience to Superiors, for Conscience sake. For answer heerunto, we must
know, How far Conscience may be bound.
that God and his Law have power simply and absolutely to bind Conscience,
that is, to urge it to require obedience of a man, or to accuse if he obey not,
or to excuse if he obey. As for the authority of Masters or other Superiors,
it cannot reach to the Conscience properly: for, they have no power to command
or punish Conscience; but that which ties Conscience to submit unto them, is
the commandment of God in his Word, in this and such like places. And
therefore hence we may learn the difference between the power of men's laws,
and the power of GOD's Word; which difference will further appear distinctly
in many things.

First, men may make many laws, either ecclesiastical or civil, which bind
not at all, yea, which we are bound not to keep; as, if they command a thing
contrary to the Word of God: and in that case it is better to obey God than
men, and Conscience is first bound to God, Acts 5. Dan. 3. Now, all God's Laws
bind.

Secondly, if such as are next above us in authority, command us any thing
contrary to the laws of the supreme Magistrate, to whom they and we are
bound; we are not tied to obey.

Thirdly, men's laws can only bind us to outward working or suffering; they
cannot make laws, or inflict punishment upon the hearts or minds of men:
whereas God's Laws enjoin obedience upon the inward man, as well as the
outward; and eternal punishment, as well as temporary.

Fourthly, the best laws of men, where they bind most, bind not by any
immediate power of their own, but by fear of God's Word, that enioyns us to
obey their lawful authority.

Fifthly, men's laws ever bind with limitation, that is, with respect of the
end of the law, and the person of the lawmakers, and the offense of others: and
heerupon Divines say, If men's laws be omitted, so as the end of the laws be
not hindered, that is, that the Commonwealth be not damnified, or other
particular ends crossed; or offense be not given, as much as in us lies; or
the Lawgiver be not despised or contemned; the Conscience may not accuse a
man of sin.

Sixthly, some Laws of men are merely penal; note, that I say, merely
penal, that is, they are made about matters of less importance, and not
uttered precisely in commanding terms, or so uttered, that the Commonwealth
is accounted by the Lawgiuer to be sufficiently provided for, if the penalty
be inflicted. Now, he that is ready to pay the fine, or the penalty, and does
not transgress, but in some case of necessary respect, he is not to be
charged with sin before God.

And thus of Conscience, and of the laying down of the first reason.

The auouching of it follows in verse 20.

Verse 20. For what glory is it, if when you be buffeted for your faults, you
shall take it patiently? But if when you do well, and suffer for it, you take
it patiently, this is acceptable with God.


WHere the Apostle makes it good, that the best praise is, to suffer
wrongfully. First, by affirming that it is no true glory for a man to suffer
for his faults, and endure it. Secondly, by showing that to suffer patiently
for well doing, is a thing very acceptable to God: That it is no true glory
for a man to suffer for his faults, that he endure it patiently, he expresses
in these words: What glory is it, if, when ye be buffeted for your faults,
you take it patiently?

Out of which words diverse doctrines may be briefly noted.

Doct. 1. First, that men of all sorts do naturally affect glory, or praise,
or reputation, and are guided by it in their actions or sufferings, even the
meanest sort of men set before themselves something, which they glory in, and
according to which they order themselves, as here servants, even of the worst
sort too, yea, such as are faulty, and so disliked, and corrected, yet will not
be without something to glory in: and that is, as is here supposed to be, their
patience in abiding blows. And this arises in man, partly out of corruption
of nature and pride, that seeks to cover their faults with some thing they
account to be of praise, and partly out of the force of some remainder of
goodness in their natures, that are not destitute of all desire of virtuous
actions. Use.
Which may serve for use to all men in their carriage one toward another, to
avoid, as much as may be, the dishonouring and disgracing one of another: for
no person is so mean, but he finds himself stung by disgrace. And it may
teach superiors to use praise and glory, as a means to provoke and excite
inferiors to obedience and care, as being a motive, that will work universally
upon all natures.

Doct. 2. Usually men account that to be glory, which is not: vainglory is
taken for true glory by most men: thus men mistake that place, Their glory.

In Idols and pictures, Wherein vain glory is seen.
Hosh. 10.5.

In Epicurisme and shameful lusts, Phil. 3.19.

In the increase of means and power to sin, Hosh. 4.6, 7.

In the gifts, and power of other men, 1. Cor. 3.21.

In Ruffian like pride, or vain and strange apparel, 1. Cor. 11.14. 1. Pet.
3.5. 1. Tim. 2.9, 10.

In mischief and malicious practices against the godly, Psalm. 52.1. and 94.4.

In fraudulent bargains, Pro. 20.23.

In a man's own gifts of nature, as wit, strength, memory, etc. Ierem. 9.23.

In the common graces of Religion, as knowledge, zeal, etc. Romans 2.27. 1. Cor.
4.7.

In the praise sought and given by himself, John 7.10. and 8.54. 2. Cor. 10.18.

In the merit of his own works, Romans 4.2.

In the praise of men more then of God. 1. These. 2.6.


In strife, contention, and provocation of others, Iam. 3.14. Gal. 5.26. Phil.
2.3.

In the falls of other men, that are divided from them in judgment, 1. Cor.
5.6.

In earthly things, as houses, riches, beauty, honor, pleasures, etc. 1. Pet.
1.24. Esaias. 48.16.

So here some men account it their glory to suffer patiently, though they be
guilty and have deserved all they suffer.

And therefore we should be warned, and directed in studying that which is
true glory, and if any ask what were indeed glorious: I answer, that
spiritual riches are the best glory, and therefore our souls are called our
glory by an excellency, Psalm. 3.4. The best glory is within, Psalm. 45.14.

And in particular, it is true glory,

Wherein true glory consists
To be righteous and merciful, Prou. 21.21.

To be humble and fear God, Pro. 22.4.

To know God, Ierem. 9.23.

To live so sincerely, as we may have the testimony of a good conscience, 2.
Cor. 1.12.

To be exalted of God to the privileges, and hope of his children, Iam. 1.9.

To have interest in the cross of CHRIST, Gal. 6.14.

To be abased, and truly humbled for our sins, James 1. verse 9.

To abound in labors, and sufferings for the Gospel, 2. Cor. 11. and 22.12.

To defer, anger and pass by a trespass, Proverbs Chap. 19. verse 11.

To suffer without fainting for Religion, Ephesians. Chap. 3. verse 13.

So here, to do well, and suffer for it, and endure it patiently, this is a
glory with God.

(...). Sinning.]

Doct. 3. The words may be rendered (...): What glory is it, if sinning and
buffeted, ye^ ^^ke it patiently? The word rendered Sinning, signifies properly
to err from the way, or miss the mark: and so it shows us the nature of sin,
which swarueth from the direction of Gods Word, that agrees not to the way
there appointed. Where God has appointed a way, not to walk in it, or to go
besides it, is sin: and in what things GOD has not in his Word appointed a
way, there men have liberty, and they are to be reckoned indifferent, and there
are a world of such things.

Doct. 4. We may further note from the word sinning, that where servants
displease, disobey, and vex their Masters, and will not do as they are bidden,
they sin: The holy Ghost uses the same word, to censure the fault of a
servant toward his Master, which is used to censure the fault of any man
toward God.

Doct. 5. Servants, that will not be corrected by words, may be corrected by
blows, they may be buffeted, Pro. 29.17, 19.

Doct. 6. Men many times inflict shameful and sudden punishments for
trespasses against them: as here; they buffet their servants. And therefore
how just is it, if God for sins against him power out exquisite shame and
confusion upon wicked men that are impenitent?

Doct. 7. To suffer for our faults, and not take it patiently, is a detestable
and hateful vice in the judgment of all sorts of men.

Doct. 8. It is no true glory to be patient, when a man suffers for his
faults; not but that patience is a duty, and praiseworthy in all sufferings:
but it is no glory comparatively with theirs, that suffer and are not faulty:
and besides, it is no glory at all, so long as the fault is not repented of,
while it remains a fault: And so it does, whilst men do not judge themselves
for it, and reform it, it is no true praise to endure punishments. For
patience arises either out of a natural defect of sense or judgment, or else
it is forced by fear of men, or is directed to vain ends, as the applauses of
men, or the extenuating or hiding of their faults, or the like.

Thus of the first part of the verse: out of the latter part diverse things may
be also observed, etc.

Doct. 1. Such is this evil world, that a man may suffer evil for doing well.

Doct. 2. We must not be weary of well doing, though we suffer for it.

Doct. 3. To suffer for weldoing, may befall any sort of men, as here it is
supposed to be the case of servants.

Doct. 4. It is by accident, and not from the nature of weldoing, or any
necessity that is absolute, that men suffer for weldoing: It does not
necessarily follow, that men must suffer always, or all sorts of men, for
goodness: It may befall them; it does not follow, that it must befall them: and
therefore the Apostle faith, If you suffer.

Doct. 5. To suffer for weldoing patiently, is wonderful glorious, and
acceptable before God.

Doct. 6. Many things may be gracious with men, that are no whit regarded with
God.

Doct. 7. To suffer for weldoing, when it is not patiently taken, is not
thank-worthy with GOD: though the cause men suffer for, be good, yet they lose
their praise, when they use ill means to be delivered, or carry themselves
impatiently.

Doct. 8. To know that God favors us, or accepts of what we do, will make a
man endure strange things; as here servants, that were used many times little
better then beasts, yet endure it, because it is at all times acceptable to God.

Doct. 9. Lastly, it would here be noted, that to suffer for any kind of
well-doing, is acceptable before God: though a man do not suffer for Religion,
but for the duties of his particular Calling (as the case washeer) yet every
such suffering is gracious before God.

Verse 21. For, heerunto ye are called: for, Christ also suffered for us,
leaving us an example, that ye also should follow his steps.


THus of the first reason taken from God's acceptance: the same reason
follows in the beginning of this Verse, and that is taken from their calling:
and for these words, For thereunto were ye called, the sense is, that unto
patient suffering for well-dooing, they were tied by their calling, if need did
require. Now, God calls men to suffering, God calls men to suffer diverse ways.
diverse ways. First, by his decree: for, he has here destinated men to be
made like to his Son, in suffering unjustly; they were ordained to
afflictions, Romans 8.29. 1. These. 3.3. Secondly, by his Word or Law we are
called to it, because the Word of God does require, that we should take up our
cross, and suffer for the truth, as many Scriptures show. Thirdly, by the work
of God's grace, when he makes us again new men in Jesus Christ: for, by the
same calling that he calls us to be Saints, he calls us to suffer for sanctity;
and this seems to be intended specially here. Fourthly, God calls us to suffer
by his special gift: for, as he has given us to believe, so has he given us
to suffer for his sake. Now, God by every gift does really call us to the
execution and use of it, when there is occasion. Fifthly, Servants and other
Inferiors are called to suffer correction, though it should be unjust, even by
their particular Calling. Sixthly, the coherence shows, that the example of
Christ, suffering unjustly, is a pattern that calls us also to suffer, and so
to walk in his steps. This last, and the third way of Calling, are especially
meant in this place: and so from thence, diverse things may be briefly noted by
way of doctrine. For, of our effectual Calling I have at large entreated both
in the former chapter, and the tenth verse of this chapter.

First, all God's people or servants become His by Calling: it is the way by
which God hires servants, and makes a people to himself: for, by nature even
the Elect are not a people, but live in darkness, dead in sin, sensual and
carnal as other men; and re-creation is such a link in the chain of salvation,
as cannot be wanting, Romans 8.30. And therefore men should labor to make their
Calling sure, as ever they would have comfort, that they are God's servants or
people.

Secondly, God works great things many times without any great toil, or power
of instruments; as here, To convert a man, is but to call him; To make him
live, is but to bid him live. Thus God can call up generations of men out of
the heap of dead and forlorn mankind. Thus the dead shall be raised at the
last Day, by the voice of the Son of God: which should teach us to live by
faith in all estates, and rest upon Gods power, by which we are kept to
salvation.

Thirdly, God's Calling accepts not the persons of men, it puts no difference:
all are called alike, as to honor, so to labor and danger. The Apostle
puts-in all Christians, by this Calling, to suffer, if need require, as well as
servants. So with God there is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, Jew nor
Gentile, bond nor free: but all are one in Christ, Col. 3.11. Which should be
a marvelous comfort to Christians that are meaner than others in the world, to
think on it, that God requires as hard work of the richest, as he does of
them; and makes as great account of a poor Christian, as of the mightiest
Monarch. And it should teach Christians humility, and not to strive so much for
precedence; but rather, if men will excel others, it should be in service and
sufferings.

Fourthly, all men are not called: he says here, Ye are called; as
importing, that it was a special honor done to them. Many have not the means
of Calling; and many refuse their Calling, when they have the means. Which
shows the woeful estates of worlds of men, or to whom the voice of God by his
Word in the Spirit comes not.

Fifthly, the Calling of God does propound conditions, upon which his election
in time does depend: for, many are called, but few chosen upon that Calling;
and the reason is, because they yielded not to the Conditions of their Calling.
God calls men to a new Covenant, and requires, first, ^he belief of all things
promised on his part. Secondly, sanctify and holiness of life: thus they are
said to be Saints by Calling, 1. Cor. 1.1. Thirdly, to suffer for well-doing,
if there be occasion: so here. Now, upon the conscience and consent of the
heart unto these conditions, does God make his choice, or acknowledge men: and
therefore heerby men's hearts must be tried, or men must try their hearts and
estates, whether they be effectually called or no.

Sixthly, men are bound to take notice of, and to learn and obey the will of GOD
revealed in his Word, though it be hard to find out: as here the Apostle
says, They were called to suffer; which is a thing that is not easy to prove
by express Scripture, but must be found out, as it lies enwrapped in
consequences in diverse places of Scripture. For, if the laws of men bind and
oblige us to punishment, though we know them not, because we ought to take
notice of them; much more must we study the Laws of God, though they be many
in number, and hard to find out without much labor and many helps.

Seventhly, our general Calling does bind us to a careful observation of our
particular Calling: as here, their Calling in Religion to be God's servants,
did bind them to look to their duty as men's servants, yea, and to be subject to
their corrections, though unjust. And therefore those Christians are far out
of the way, that neglect their particular Calling, and the charge God has
delivered them, upon sentence of religion and their general calling.

Eightthly, the main doctrine in them, or in the scope of them, is, that God
calls his servants, all of them, to suffer for the truth. He shows them
heaven, and the salvation of their souls, and bestows rich treasure upon
their hearts; but withal tells them, he looks they should arm themselves
with a resolution to suffer what may befall them for well-doing. Our Savior
Christ told his Disciples plainly, that they must think of taking up the Cross
daily, before they come to wearing of the Crown. And therefore they do
foolishly, that undertake the profession of Religion, before they have set down
to cast what it will cost them.

Thus of the second reason.

The third reason is taken from the example of Christ, who suffered greater
wrongs than can befall servants, or any other sort of men: and this doctrine of
Christ's suffering, he handles at large from verse 21. to the end of the
chapter. Which doctrine of Christ's suffering is fitted partly to the case of
servants, and partly to the use of all Christians.

Concerning the Passion, five things are in all these verses noted.

First, who suffered: Christ suffered, verse 21.

Secondly, the end of his suffering, viz. to leave us an example, etc. verse 21.

Thirdly, the manner how he suffered, set out, 1. Negatiuely: and so he suffered,
first, without sin, verse 22. secondly, without reuiling, verse 23. 2.
Affirmatively: and so he commits himself to him that judges righteously.


Fourthly, the matter what he suffered, viz. our sins in his own body on the
tree, verse 24.

Fifthly, the effect of his sufferings; 1. In respect of us: and so his
sufferings serve To kill our sins. Verse 24. To make us alive to righteousness.
Verse 24. To heal our natures. Verse 24.
2. In respect of himself: and so they procured his exaltation, to be Shepherd
and Bishop of our souls, verse 25.


Thus of the order.

Even Christ suffered.]

The first thing to be considered in the Apostles description of the Passion of
the person who suffered, is, that it is named here with special Emphasis, Even
Christ, or Christ also. Christ is the surname of our Savior, as Jesus was his
proper name. Jesus is a name only given him in the new Testament: but Christ
was his name in both Testaments, and signifies Anointed, being a Greek word, as
Messiah does in the Hebrew. And so it is a name importing his office of
Mediator; as being thereby proclaimed to be the substance of the ceremonial
types, even the supreme Doctor, or Prophet, Priest, and King of the Church:
for, these three sorts of men were anointed in the old Testament, and were
types of Christ's anointing.

It is true, that we do not read, that our Savior was himself anointed with
oil, because his anointing consisted in the substance of that shadow. For, the
shadow signifies two things: First, ordination to the office; secondly, the
pouring out of gifts by the holy Ghost, for the exornation of the office.

Now, whereas Christ is Mediator in both natures, his anointing must be
distinguished according to his natures. The whole person was anointed, but yet
differently in respect of his natures: for, gifts could not be poured out upon
his divine nature; yet, as the Son of God, the second person in Trinity, he
was anointed, in respect of ordination to the office of Mediator: and as the
Son of man, he was anointed, in respect of the pouring out of the gifts of
the holy Ghost upon that nature in measure, as the Psalmist says, above his
fellows, Psalm 45.

The first doctrine about the Passion, is here briefly contained in these
three words of the Apostle, Even Christ suffered; which is a doctrine full of
excellent uses: for thence,

First, we may see how vile the error was of those Heretics they called
Patri-passianus; who taught, that God the Father suffered: whereas in this and
other Scriptures we are taught, that it was only Christ, the second Person in
Trinity, that suffered. The ground of their error was, that there was but one
Person in the Deity: which in heaven was called the Father; in earth, the
Son; in the powers of the creatures, the holy Ghost: and thence they affirm
the same things of the Father, they did of the Son, that he was visible,
mortal and immortal, passible and impassible, passible on earth, and
impassible in heaven. But we have learned from the Prophets and Apostles, to
believe three Persons, and so to acknowledge, that the second Person suffered
only, and that in his humane nature.

Secondly, we may hence learn, that Christ was subject to the Law after a
peculiar manner, so, as no other man was subject: For he did not only fulfill
the Law by a most perfect obedience, but he suffered the malediction and curse
of the Law also. Some men are subject to the malediction of the Law only: and
so are all the wicked reprobates, that obey it not. Some men are subject to the
Commandments of the Law, and not to the malediction: and so our first parents
were while they continued in their innocence, because God did not require them
to suffer, so long as they obeyed the Law: and so all godly men, in Christ, are
under the Law, in respect of obedience, but not in respect of malediction:
only Christ is subject to the malediction, and obedience of the Law, as our
surety.

Thirdly, hence we learn a plain demonstration of the truth of the humane
nature of Christ: He had not a fantastical body, but a true body, because he
did verily suffer in the flesh, as follows afterward.

Fourthly, Hence we may be informed of the excessiuely vile disposition of
the world, in that it is so set on wickedness, that the very Savior of the
world, if he come into the world, shall suffer from the world.

Fifthly, we may hence learn, that Christ suffered willingly and of his own
accord. For in that he that is God suffered, it shows he had power to
preserve himself so, as all the world could not have forced him to suffer: and
therefore we have cause so much the more to admire his love to us, that
suffered for our sakes, as the next point will show.

Sixthly, we may hence learn to know, how abominable sin is, that makes the
Son of God suffer miserable things, if he become a surety for sin.

Seventhly, we may hence learn to know the inevitable destruction, and
fearful perdition of impenitent sinners. For if God spared not his own Son,
that was but a surety for sin, and did none himself: will he ever spare
them, that are principals and monstrous offenders?

Eighthly, did even Christ suffer? then we should evermore arm our selves with
the same mind, and provide to suffer in the flesh, 1. Pet. 4.1. It is a shame
for us to expect, or desire a life of ease and prosperity, seeing the Prince of
our salvation was consecrated through afflictions, Heb. 2.10. and 12.3. And the
more should we be confirmed to suffer in willingness in this life, because God
has predestined us to be conformed to the image of his Son in sufferings,
Romans 8.29.

Lastly, in that it was Christ that suffered, we may hence gather comfort to
our selves in his passion, all the days of our life, because his sufferings
must needs be of infinite merit, being the sufferings of him that is God as
well as man.

Thus of the Person suffering.

The persons for whom he suffered, follow.

For us.]

The sufferings of Christ were not casual, such as befell him for no use: nor
were they deserved by himself. For he never offended God, nor did he seek
his own peculiar good in them, but he suffered all he did, for our sakes,
Esaias 53*5. He was wounded for our transgressions: the chasticement of our
peace was laid upon him: and verse 8. He was plagued for the transgression of
God's people: and as the Apostle says, he was delivered to death for our
sins, and rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. He was sacrificed
for us, 1. Cor. 5.7. He gave himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.

Now he suffered for us in diverse respects, as,

Christ suffered for us in diverse respects.
First, to make satisfaction unto the Justice of God for our sins, and to
appease the wrath of God toward us, as the former places show: His sufferings
were a sacrifice for sin: He bare the curses of the Law, which were due to
us, Gal. 3.10. And thus he paid our ransom, and pacified God, especially in
his death and burial: He nailed the handwriting that was against us, to his
cross, Col. 2.15. And as Jonas was cast into the bowels of the sea, to still
the raging of it, so was Christ cast into the bowels of the earth, to make the
seas of Gods wrath quiet for us.

Secondly, he suffered, as to make satisfaction for our sins, so, together
with that satisfaction, to remove from us the many miseries might have fallen
upon us for our sins. Thus he was judged and condemned at the bar of
Pilate, that we might be acquitted at the bar of God: He endured all sorts
of pains and torments in soul and body, that we might be delivered from
eternal torments in hell: He died, that he might deliver us from death and
the fear of it, and from him, which had the power of death, which is the
devil, Romans 6.10. Heb. 2.13. He was crucified, that he might abolish the
power of sin in us, Romans 6.10.

Thirdly, He suffered for us, that so by his sufferings He might merit the
supply of our wants, and the possession of happiness: He suffered, to make us
blessed. Thus he died, to ratify the eternal counsel, Heb. 9.15, 16, 17.
He was poor, to make us rich, 2. Cor. 8.9. He was bound, to make us free:
He was unclothed, to cover our nakedness: He was forsaken of God for a time,
that we might be received to everlasting mercy: He was crowned with a crown
of thorns, that He might merit for us a crown of glory: He found no mercy
from the Priests and Jews, that we might find sure mercy with God; He was
cast out of the earthly Jerusalem* and suffered without the gates, that He
might provide a place for us in the heavenly Jerusalem.

Fourthly, He suffered for us in this, that he suffered, that so he might have
a sympathy of our sufferings, and have a feeling of our miseries: He suffered
being tempted* that he might be able to secure us being tempted, Heb. 2.17,
18. and 4.15.

The consideration heerof may serve for diverse uses.

Uses. First, it should breed in us an admiration of the love of Christ to us,
that could ever be willing to become surety for us, and suffer for us,
especially considering what we were, viz. unjust men, 1. Pet. 3.18. wicked
men, Romans 5.6. enemies to him, Romans Chap. 5.8, 10. That one should dye for a
good or righteous man, or for one that is a common good for, or to other men,
is very rare: But it might be, Jonathan might die for David, or a subject be
willing to die for a good Prince: but no man would die for his enemies, as
CHRIST died for us.

Secondly, it should work in us sorrow and hearty grief for our sins: we
should now mourn as heartily for piercing Christ by our sins, as if we had
lost an only child, etc. We complain of the Jews, and Judas, and Pilate for
abusing him: But the truth is, it was thy sins, and my sins, that brought
him to suffer for them, our debt was laid upon him: We that are principals, are
escaped; and he that was our surety, has paid for it, even to the uttermost
farthing. And if there were no other reason to show, how little reason Christ
had to suffer for us; even this were sufficient, that our hearts are so hard,
as we cannot be grieved to remember his sorrows for our sins.

Thirdly, it should especially work in us a hatred of our sins, and a full
and final resolution to sin no more, but to consecrate our whole life unto
him, and to his service, that has suffered for us, and by suffering, paid so
dear a price. Shall we not live to him that died for us? Or do we so little
care for his sorrow, as by new sins we would, as much as in us lies,
crucify again the Son of God? Take heed of despising the blood of Christ,
lest you sin so long, till there be no more Sacrifice for sin, 2. Cor.
5.15. Heb. 6.

Fourthly, we should strive to be disposed, as the Apostle Paul was, to glory
in the cross and sufferings of Christ above all things, seeing his sufferings
were for us, to satisfy and merit for us. It must needs be an estate of
wonderful safety and felicity, that is purchased by such variety of sufferings
of the Son of God. As the world despises us: so we should with singular and
secret rejoicing despise and contemn the world, having such interest in the
cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

Lastly, it should work in us a most hearty willingness to suffer any thing for
Christ and the Gospel, that has suffered such extreme things for us: it should
not be grievous to us to forsake father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
house, or lands, or our own lives for his sake, or for the Gospel, Mark 10.29.

Thus of the second thing in the doctrine of the passion of Christ.

The third thing is the use of it, and that is, to be an example unto us, that
we might walk in his steps.

Leaving us an example.]

The end then of the sufferings of Christ, is to be an example to us to learn
by. The word rendered an example, is a metaphor taken from Scriueners, or
Painters, and signifies properly a copy or pattern, or portraiture of a thing
exactly drawn out: we are then set to school to learn by example: Christ's
sufferings are as a Writing-schoole, where the Copies are most exactly drawn.

Before I come to the particulars we should bear for Christ in his suffering,
diverse things may be briefly noted out of the words, especially about
examples.

Doct. 1. God would have us learn by examples, as well as by precept: and
thence it is, the Scripture is so stored with all sorts of examples.

Doct. 2. Such as give good example of well-doing, are as a common treasure;
many may learn good by them. Good examples are like common schools, and the
better, because they are Free-schooles, we may learn from example without
cost. Though thou could not show all the means thou desire, yet to give a
good example of sound life and holiness, is a great treasure in the Church: It
does not only make Religion well spoken of, but it profits many, to teach their
well-doing: And therefore such as shine by the light of good example, should be
much made of in every place: and they sin fearfully, that wrong them, etc.

Doct. 3. It requires a special goodness, to be fit to be an example to others,
which the metaphor imports: For every man that can write, yet cannot set Copies
for other men to write by: so every good Christian is not able to teach by
example to the life, but with great imperfection: some had more need to be
learners, then to be teachers, and therefore should not be ouer-hasty to show
their gifts.

Doct. 4. Good examples are very scarce in the world, and therefore Christ is
feign to leave us one of his own: the skillful practice of Gods Word is so
rare, that it is very hard to find a man whom we would set before us, as a
pattern to imitate.

Doct. 5. There was very great need of Christ's example to teach us by. The
world is so generally fallen away from the care of obedience, and the doctrine
of well-doing is intertayned so dully, as a very matter of form and for
outward show, and the examples of the godly are so imperfect, that it was
necessary, after so many hundreds of years, in which sound practice was
neglected, that the Christian world should be fired with the incitations of so
exquisite a pattern of obedience, as Christ's was.

Doct. 6. Christ's example is to be imitated by degrees. God does not look we
should follow the copy exactly at the first: which similitude imports a great
deal of encouragement to the weak, but willing Christian, and withal shows
the doubtful estate of such Christians, as in a short time and with little
labor think they have learned the substance of all Christianity.

Doct. 7. In that he says, Leaving us an example, it imports, that many good
works tarry behind the godly in the world. For though it be true, that their
works follow them to heaven, yet it is true also, they are left behind. They
follow them to heaven, in respect of GODs remembrance and acknowledgement of
them, and they tarry behind them, in respect of the example of them, and the
praisefull memory of them amongst men. Weldoing cannot be lost, which withal
imports, that it is a great honor and comfort, when a man goes out of the
world, to leave the memory and pattern of good works behind him: and it is a
fearful thing for such men as go out of the world, to leave an ill report
behind them, and die an example of evil doers: though those could leave a
great estate in worldly things, yet are they most accursed, because they leave
behind them such an ill sent and savor, by reason of their filthy, or vain,
or worldly kind of living.

Doct. 8. It is more then a step to heaven; we are here required to follow
Christ's steps, importing, it is a long journey, and we are to make many steps.

Doct. 9. The more good any does, the nearer they come to heaven: every good
work is, as it were, a step nearer to heaven: and therefore as we desire to be
with the Lord, so should we hasten and finish our work; nothing will bring us
sooner to heaven: whereas if we be barren and unfruitful, either we shall
never come there, or it will be a great while first.

Doct. 10. The way to heaven is a very hard way to hit: it is marked out by
steps: If we step awry, we are in great danger, either of fouling our selves,
or losing our way. It is like to his way, that is to pass over a brook, or
through thorns, or through miery ways, where are placed steps, or a print of
some footing before, which is hard to hit, and dangerous to miss. And
therefore men must look to themselves, after they have undertaken profession
of the care of a better life: for, the similitude imports, that men must
never look off their way, and they must not go over rashly or hastily, nor must
they listen to strange noises, nor must they look to go that way with much
company, nor is it safe for them to have distractions or cares in their heads;
all which parts of the similitude, let men apply to themselves.

Doct. 11. He that lives so, as he has the commandment of God, and the
example of Christ, for a warrant of his actions, is in a sure way, and is safe,
and in the right way to heaven. They that walk by rule, and are careful to
tread right in the steps marked out in the way, shall have peace, and much
comfort and assurance, Gal. 6.16.

Doct. 12. If we be not skillful enough to teach others by our example; yet,
if we be willing to learn goodness from such as give us good example, we may
be happy. Some Christians are examples to others; as, 1. Tim. 4.12. Tit. 2.7.
1. These. 1.7, 8. Other Christians learn, both in matters of faith and life,
from them, as those places show: and this Text imports, that, if we but follow
example, we please God.

Thus of the doctrines out of these words.

It remains, that we consider more specially of the copy or example here left
us to follow. God teaches us many things by examples: and to that end, he
has given us diverse sorts of examples to learn by.

And so God is pleased to raise up in the world examples, sometimes of his
Power; sometimes, of his Justice; sometimes, of his Holiness. Examples or
monuments of God's Power, are those strange works of wonder, which God does at
some times, to show his Almightinesse and Sovereignty: such was that, John 9.1.
To make a man, blind from the birth, to see. Examples of his Justice he has
given us in all Ages: so, Numb. 5.21. Ezech. 5.15. Heb. 4.11. Jude 7. 1. Cor.
10. Examples and patterns of his Holiness he has given us, partly in his
adopted sons, and partly in his natural Son, and his Son by the grace of
personal union: thus he gave us Job and the Prophets for examples of patience
in suffering, James 5.10. Thus Timothy and Titus are charged to be paterns of
good works, 1. Timothy 4.12. Titus 2.7. But it is the example of Christ which
is here urged as the best pattern of all others.

Quest. Now, the special question is, What must we distinctly learn from the
sufferings of Christ?

Ans. There are many things wherein Christ has set us an example in his
sufferings, which we may and ought to learn from him; as,

Ten things for us to follow in the example of Christ's sufferings.
First, his sufferings should make us willing to resolve to suffer, if God call
us to it: it should teach us to stand upon our guard, and look for war; as
resolved, It is meet we suffer with him, if we mean to reign with him, 2. Tim.
2.11.

Secondly, when he was tempted, or troubled in Spirit, he left us an example
for the manner of the fight, and which way we should make resistance and
overcome; and that is, by the Word of God and prayer: for, he beat the devil
away by Scripture, Mat. 4. And in all his special agonies, we still hear him
praying and making his moan to his Father.

Thirdly, he left us a pattern of matchless humility, and told us, if ever
we would learn any thing of him, we should learn of him to be lowly and
meek; who, being the Son of God, was abased to take upon him the form of a
servant, and in worlds of occasions to deny himself, and his own greatness and
reputation, Mat. 11.29. Phil. 2.6, 7.

Fourthly, we may learn from his suffering condition, the contempt of the
world. Why should we seek great things for our selves, when our Lord and
Savior was in some cases worse provided for than the birds of the air, and
foxes of the field, as not having a place where to lay his head. And therefore
he suffered without the City, to teach us, that we also have here no abiding
City, but should cast all our cares upon providing for our eternal habitation
in heaven, Heb. 13.11, 12.

Fifthly, we should learn obedience from him toward our heavenly Father. Christ
obeyes his Father even in hard commandments, against his credit, ease,
liberty, yea, life it self: and therefore we should learn to desire to go and
do likewise.

Sixthly, he left us an example of loving one another, and gave a special
charge, we should prove our selves to be his, and to be like him indeed, as
his true Disciples, by loving one another, John 13. Ephesians. 5.2.

Seventhly, we should learn patience of him when we do suffer, though strange
things should befall us. What though we should be betrayed or forsaken of our
friends in our just cause, or suffer injuries, or be falsely accused even of
heinous crimes, or most basely used, even to be buffetted, derided, spetted
on, or to see vile wretches, and gross offenders preferred before us, or lose
all we have, to our very garments, etc. yet none of these things should be
grievous to us, because all these things befell our Lord and Master in a worse
measure and manner, than they can befall us: yea, we should be patient, though
it were to lose our lives, as he did.

Eightthly, he left us also an example of hope in suffering: for, when he
suffered shame and misery in this life, he looked upon the joy and crown in
another world; thereby teaching us, with whole arguments to fense our selves
against all the scorns and miseries of this world, Heb. 12.3.

Ninthly, he left us a pattern of mercy; who made himself poor, to make us
rich: and therefore how much more should we, out of our abundance, yield some
supply to others wants? 2. Cor. 8, etc.

Lastly, the mortification and crucifying of the old man, is to be learned
from the Passion of Christ, Romans 6. For, look how Christ was used, so should we
use our sins: he was crucified; and so should we crucify our sins,
piercing the heart of them by confession and godly sorrow, and so hanging them
up upon the Cross, till they be dead.

Thus we see, that Christ has set us a large copy, and that many things are to
be learned from his example.

Quest. But does Christ's example bind us to imitation in all things?

Answ. In many things it does bind, but in all things it does not bind. There
are diverse things that Christ did, which to leave undone by us, is no sin: In
what things Christ's example binds not.
as, the works of his Power and Omnipotency are not imitable; and so also the
works of his Office, as Mediator, are peculiar to himself, and cannot be done
by us. Besides, a world of indifferent actions of his, diverse of which are
recorded; yet all men grant, they do not bind us to exact imitation, though
they be things we have power to do. He sat and preached: he received the
Sacrament in a private chamber at night, and gave it only to Clergymen, and
used unleavened bread, etc.

Quest. But what rules are then left to ground our practice upon* and how far
are our consciences bound by examples, and so by the example of Christ?

Ans. Examples, How far examples bind conscience.
and so the example of Christ, bind us in the things he did, which were
required by the moral Law, or the Word of God. For, an example is but the
illustration of a precept: it is but like the seal to a blank, if there be no
precept. Secondly, in other things which Christ did, not required by the Law,
we are so far forth tied to follow his practice, as he has for those
specialties given himself a precept: as here we are bound to suffer from
others, and for others, if need require, by the force of Christ's example; but
so, as it is specified, that his example binds in this and other things. But
where the Scripture does not make use of his example, there we are not bound,
in things indifferent in their own nature, to follow any example out of
necessity.

Verses 22, 23. Who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth:

Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again: when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed it to him that judges righteously.


HItherto of the end of Christ's suffering: the manner follows, set down both
negatiuely and affirmatively. Negatiuely, He suffered without sin, in this
verse; and without reuiling, in the next verse. Affirmatively, He committed
himself and his cause to him that judges righteously.

He did no sin: (...).]

The words of this verse do commend the innocence of this our Savior: which
does much increase the price and value of his sufferings. He suffered for the
sins of others, that never committed any sin himself, in thought, word, or
deed: and as he was innocent in all the course of his life; so did he bear
his sufferings without fault, and carried himself so, as no man could find any
just occasion against him.

The first thing affirmed of Christ, to show his innocence, is, that he did no
sin. In the Original, it is expressed by a word of great force, which
signifies to make, or frame, or fashion with art, or to make sin; and it may
be rendered (as I conceive) more fitly, He made no sin.

To make sin, being a phrase somewhat unusual, the sense is to be inquired
into. Now, a man may be said to make sin many ways:

First, A man is said to make sin many ways.
when a man inuents and commits a sin never heard of before. Thus Onan made
that sin of filthiness. Thus the Sodomites and Gentilish men and women made
sins of lust. Thus drunkards make strange kinds of drinkings. Thus the
fantastical monsters of our times make the sins of strange apparel. And
thus the Papists make that horrible sin of murdering of Princes, and
damnable equivocations. And thus swearers now make their monstrous oaths.

Secondly, when a man sins, having not so much as temptation to sin in
himself, or pronenesse of nature to sin: and so he sins, that sins
wilfully, and not by infirmities, or weakness of nature. Thus Adam made the
first sin: for, he had no corruption of nature to entice him, or incline
him, nor could any temptation from without compel him; but he sinned
wilfully. Thus those men of blood, make sin, that kill their brethren in
cold blood. And so, many whoremongers and drunkards make sin, when they are
not enticed, but entice themselves, and strive by all means to fire and force
themselves to wickedness. And thus swearers, and usurers, and such like, make
sin.

Thirdly, when a man commits such a sin as other men condemn by the very
light of nature, though he do it by corrupt inclination, or though it be
sin, which others commit: so to make sin, is to be a malefactor, or one that
is guilty of any gross sin.

Fourthly, when a man studies mischief, and sins not suddenly, but imagins,
and deuiseth, and forecasts and plots, how to compass his sin; and thus all
wicked men make sin, because they sin not suddenly, or by mere frailty,
but do study iniquity: every wicked man is a great student, Psalm. 36.4.

Fifthly, when a man causes others to sin by evil counsel or example, or
compulsion: Thus Tyrants made sin, that forced men to deny the faith, and
thus they make sin, that make their neighbors drunk, and thus Stage-plaiers
and Minstrels make sin, that call and provoke others to licentiousnes and
wantonness: and thus superiors make sin, when by their evil example, or
negligence in not punishing offenses, they tempt others to sin.

Sixthly, when a man makes a trade of sinning: and thus men are said in
Scripture to be workers of iniquity, which is a Periphrasis of wicked men. Now
he that is said to make a trade of sin, or to be a worker of iniquity;
first, is one that makes it his daily custom to follow his sinful course of
life, or that follows sin, as the tradesman does his trade. Secondly that
cannot live without his sin, that accounts his sin the life of his life,
that had as liefe be dead, as restrained of his sin: as the tradesman
accounts himself undone, if his trade be destroyed.

Seventhly, when a man calls good evil, and evil good; when a man makes that
to be a sin, which is no sin. Thus they make sin, that call those things
sin, which GOD by his Law never called sin. And thus men make sin, both
out of superstition on the left hand, and out of rash zeal on the right hand.
Thus also profane persons make godliness and a holy conversation to be
Schisms, and truth to be Heresy: Thus the Jews called Paul's religious
course, Heresy: when he by that way, which they called Heresy, worshipped the
God of his fathers: and the Professors of Christian Religion they called a
sect, Acts 28. Esaias 5.20. Thus Lawyers many times make sins, when they make a
good cause bad, and a bad cause good.

Eighthly, when a man by slander casts foul aspersions upon other men that are
innocent, speaking evil with any manner of evil report of such, as live
religiously. And this art of making sin, the slanderer learned of the devil,
that accuser of the brethren. Thus many godly persons are many times by wicked
reports made gross offenders in the common acceptance of the world, and in
the rumors spread abroad of them in many places. Thus they made Christ and the
Apostles grievous sinners, and a spectacle to men and Angels.

Ninthly, when a man in adversity deuiseth unlawful shifts and courses to get
out of trouble, or deliver himself from the cross is laid upon him. And this
sense may in some sort be applied to the case of our Savior, who never used
ill means to deliver himself, though he suffered extreme things.

Lastly, in a general sense: Every man that is guilty of sin, may be said
to make sin. And so it is commonly by way of remouall said of Christ, that
he made no sin, that is, that he was never guilty of any offense against
God, or man.

Thus of the sense of the words.

Diverse doctrines may be gathered out of these words: but because one is
principal, I will but touch the rest.

Doct. 1. Men's sins are of men's making: man made sin, God made none.

Doct. 2. It is a hateful thing to be a maker of sin. Ast was most glorious
for God to make a world of creatures: so it is most ignominious for man to make
a world of sins.

Doct. 3. Christ made no sin. This is the chief doctrine, and plain in the
text: He was not only free from the first, and worst kinds of making of sin
mentioned before, but he was free from all sin in all estates of his life,
he knew no sin, he did none iniquity: He was that just One by an excellency.

Quest. But how came it to pass, that the man Jesus had no sin, seeing all
other men bring sin with them into the world, and daily sin?

Ans. He was sanctified from the womb, being conceived by the holy Ghost, How
Christ had no sin.
which no other are: so as both original sin was stopped from flowing in
upon him in his co^ception; and besides, he was qualified with perfect holiness
from the womb: and therefore is called that holy thing borne of the Virgin,
Luke 1.35.

And it was necessary, his humane nature should be so holy, and that he
should do no sin, because his humane nature was to be a tabernacle for the
Deity to dwell in, Colos. 2.9. and besides, from his very humane nature, as
well as from his Deity, must flow unto us life, and all good things; and
therefore he must needs be undefiled: The manhood of Christ is as the
conduit, and the Godhead as the spring of grace unto us. Besides, his
sufferings could not be auayleable, if he were not innocent himself.

The uses follow: and so,

Uses. First, we see the difference between the two Adams: the first made
sin, and infected all the world with it: The other made no sin, but
redeemed all the world from it. The first Adam, as he had power not to sin, so
he had power to sin: but the second Adam had not only a power not to sin,
but also no power to sin; not only, as they say in Schools, posse non
peccare; but also non posse peccare.

Secondly, we may hence see, in what a woeful damnity against goodness the
world stands; when this most innocent Man, that never did any sin, that never
offended God or man in all his life; when he, I say, comes into the world, how
is he despised, and rejected of men! Who looked after him, unless it were for
his miracles? Few honored him for his holiness. How is the world set on
wickedness, that it should account him without form or hand-somnes, that shone
before God and Angels in such a spotless innocence? Oh what wit had the rulers
of this world, that condemned him as a malefactor, that had no spot in him from
the crown of the head to the soale of the foot, that never did man wrong, or
sinned against God, Esaias 49.7. and 53.2, 3, 4.

Thirdly, we may hence see cause to wonder at the love of Christ to us. Oh how
is it, that he bare the imputation of such a world of sins, that yet
himself never knew sin? What heart of man can sufficiently admire his love
unto us, that can abase himself to be made sin for us, that never did sin
himself?

Fourthly, is it not hence also most manifest, that impenitent sinners shall
not be spared, or pitied of God? Did not God spare his own Son that never
offended in all his life? and shall he spare them, that never left offending
of him? Oh what madness has besotted men so, as with stubborn wilfulness still
to trust upon an unknown mercy in God, yea such a mercy, as God could never
conceive in the case of his Son, that was not to him, as they are, in any
respect! Were these men but thoroughly beaten from this sinful plea of mercy in
God, they would repent of their sins in time, and seek true mercy from God,
which never is withheld from penitent sinners.

Lastly, Did our Savior Christ suffer so patiently such extreme things, that
never deserved any evil in himself? What a shame is it for us to be so
unquiet, and dejected, or so froward, or so unsettled, when any crosses or
affliction fall upon us, who yet have deserved at Gods hands to suffer a
thousand times more, and worse things then those that do befall us?

In his mouth was found no guile.]

We read in the Scripture, of guile in the spirit, when we have false hearts,
and guile in the hands by false weights and balances, and guile in the mouth
in deceitful words.

Guile in words is committed many ways. Guile in words many ways.


First, by lying, when men speak what they think not.

Secondly, by flattering, when men praise others after a corrupt manner, or for
corrupt ends.

Thirdly, by backbiting, when men censure others behind their backs, of malice,
or whisper evil against others, Psalm. 41.7.

Fourthly, by wresting the words of others to their hurt, Psalm. 56.11. and
52.1, 2.

Fifthly, by withholding the just praises of others, or Apology.

Sixthly, by fearfulnes in evil times, when men will not stand for the truth,
or speak against their consciences.

Seventhly, by disgraceful jests, Ephesians. 5.4.

Eightthly, by telling the truth, of malice, 1. Sam. 22.9, 10.

Ninthly, by boasting of a false gift, Pro. 27.1.

Tenthly, by hypocrisy and dissimulation, and that diverse ways, as 1. When men
speak fair to men's faces, but reproach them behind their backs, Guile in
Hypocrisy many ways.
or flatter them merely, to catch them, and entangle them in their talk, as
the Pharisees often tempted Christ. 2. That reproves sin in others, and yet
commits it himself, Romans 2.19. 3. That colors sin, under pretense of
Religion, Mark 12.40. 4. That professes Religion in words, and yet denies it
in his heart. 5. That hides his sin by denial, or excuses, to avoid shame
and punishment. 6. That gives good words to men in affliction, but relieues
them not, 1 Ioh. 3.17, 18.


None of these, nor any other ways of guile were found in Christ, though they
called him a deceiuer, and sought all occasions against him.

Thus of the sense: the doctrines follow.

Doct. 1. Guile in words is a vice, that wonderfully dishonours a man: It was a
fault would give great advantage to the enemies of the truth. As it is a sin,
which is in a special manner hateful to God, Psalm. 5.7. so it is shameful
amongst men: and therefore as any man would enjoy good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips, that they speak no guile, Psalm. 34.13.

Doct. 2. When he says, that They found no guile in his mouth; it importes,
that they sought it. And so we learn, that the godly are so hated of the
wicked, that they seek occasion against them: when they see not, or hear not
of any faults in them, they search, and inquire, and lie in wait to see, if
they can catch their foot-slippings at any time: yea they mark their words, to
see whether they can find any falsehood, or hurt in them. And therefore
Christians should watch themselves, and their words the more carefully, and
strive so much the more to show themselves plain men in their words and
dealing, that they may speak what they think at all times.

Doct. 3. The third doctrine, which falls in this text, is, that in Christ was
found no guile: he could never be taken in the sin of flattering, lying,
coozening, backbiting, or any dissimulation, or hypocritical, or deceitful
speeches; and therefore the use may be,

Use 1. First, to show the fearful estate of such as use lying and deceit,
and hypocritical courses in the dealings with men in their trades, or other
occasions of life. There was no guile in Christ; and therefore it is probable,
they are not true Christians, because they are not herein made like unto
Christ: yea deceit and guile is made a sign of a wicked man, Psalm. 36.1, 3.
And therefore such as are given to the sins of deceit, and hypocritical
dealing, are in a miserable case, especially such as cover their deceit with
smooth words, Ier. 9.8. Pro. 26.24, etc. 2. And such as make a trade of it,
give their tongues to evil, and frame deceit, and bind their tongues to lies,
and teach their tongues to speak evil lies, Iere. 9.5. 3. And such as will
deceive their neighbors, their brethren, or such as are harmless, Ierem.
9.5. Psalm. 35.20.

Use 2. Again, this pattern in Christ may comfort the plaine-dealing, and
plaine-meaning man, and plaine-speaking Christian, that has no tricks and
methods, and subtilty in his words, or carriage, but is a plain man like
Jacob: this is made a sign of a godly man, Zeph. 3.13. of a happy man, Psalm.
15.2. of a true Israelite, John 1.47.

Being reviled.]

Hitherto has been showed, that Christ suffered without sin: now the
Apostle shows, that he suffered without reuiling, or threatening, which praise
is increased in this, that he reviled not when he was reviled; nor threatened
at the very time, when he suffered extreme injuries.

What reuiling is.
Reuiling is a sin condemned in the sixth commandment, and is committed by
bitter and disgraceful words against any other without desire of doing good:
And so men revile, when they disgrace others by false accusations, as when they
called Christ a deceiuer, and said he had a devil, or was a glutton, or an
enemy to Caesar, or a blasphemer, or the like. Again: It is reuiling, when the
very terms used, are base and ignominious, if they be used only out of
passion: as to call men, made after the image of God, by the names of beasts,
or the like. Again, when we vpbraid others with such deformities, or
infirmities as God has laid upon them; as to mock a man for his deafenes, or
lameness or ill sight, or the like, Leu. 19.14. Besides, when men reproach
others with such words for any thing they fail in, as express more disgrace,
then the fault deserves; as for some mistaking to call a man, fool, Math. 5.
yea it is reuiling, when the faults of others are charged upon them without a
calling, or desire of their amendment: And so it is reuiling, to vpbraid any
with the sins they have repented of.

And thus what reuiling is.

Doct. 1. Reuiling is a hateful sin: That appears from hence, that it is
accounted a great suffering to suffer reuiling. And our Savior accounts it
murder in his exposition upon the sixth Commandment, Mat. 5. and therefore
bitter words are compared to arrows, and swords, which are instruments of
murder: and reuiling godly men, is termed blasphemy in sundry Scriptures in
the original: It grows out of a bitter root, and is the very froth or scum
of a naughty disposition or maliciousnes, Heb. 12.14, 15. Iam. 1.21. It is a
vice altogether contrary to the Spirit of God, which is a Spirit of meekenes.
And if a godly man suddenly fall into bitter words, it makes the holy Ghost
stir within him, Ephesians. 4.30. and evil words corrupt good manners, 1. Cor. 15.
Thou losest so much of thy honesty, as thou use of reuiling.

Use. The use is therefore, First, to persuade all that are godly, to avoid
this sin, and at home and abroad to revile no man upon any occasion, Titus
3.2. and the rather, because they are heirs of blessing, 1. Pet. 3.9. and have
the example not only of the godly in Scripture, but of Christ himself, as it
is here urged.

Secondly, it serves to reprove, and shame all such as are guilty of so
hateful a sin, especially, 1. Such as have a mouth full of cursing, Who are
guilty of reuiling.
and bitterness such as are many Masters, and Mistresses, or Dames, that cannot
speak to their servants, but it is with reuiling terms; their usual speech
to them, is to find fault with reproach, and so in any sort of men, that are
thus bitter-tongued, Romans 3.14. Iam. 3.9. It is the sign of an unregenerate
heart. 2. Such as are given to it to complain of their neighbors in all
places, euill-minded men, that know little other discourse, but by way of
finding fault, or reproaching this or that man: and they cease not, till they
have filled town and country with reproaches and slanders, Iam. 5.9. 3. Such
as revile innocent men, and speak evil of the just and godly, whom they ought
to praise and honor. 4. Such as revile men for this very reason, because they
are good. It is monstrous ill to revile a good man, but abominable vile to
revile goodness and Religion it self, to scoff and reproach preaching, and
hearing of Sermons, and praying, etc. Woe is to them that thus call good,
evil: and the worst is, when they set up, in stead of those things, the
praises of drunkenness, good fellowship, and lascivious meetings, and riotous
disorders, and so call bitter, Esaias 5.20.
sweet; and evil, good. 5. Such as rail at such as are in authority, and
speak evil of dignities, Jude 2. Pet. 2. 6. Such as revile their very parents,
and speak evil of such as God and nature have so nearly bound them to. And so
is it monstrous vile for wives to traduce their husbands, and by backbiting to
destroy their reputations, as it is monstrous for the people to revile their
teachers, that are godly and painful men. 7. Such as revile Christ, as the
Jews did (of which afterward) and such are they, that revile God, as
swearers, murmurers, and blasphemers do in their kind, as well as Pagans and
Atheists, that speak reproachfully of the doctrine of the duties, or treaty of
persons.


Thus of the sin of reuiling.

Doct. 2. Christ himself was reviled: He that was so just and innocent: He
that did so much good in every place: He that had power to be revenged on
such as did revile him. This is the more remarkable, if we also consider, by
whom he was reviled, even by such as had their birth, breath, and being, and
all from him: yea he was reviled of all sorts of men: Jews, Gentiles, Rulers,
the People, learned Men, and unlearned. And this was the more to be wondered at
too, if we consider with what kind of reuiling he was reviled, and that was
with most hateful aspersions, as deceiving, working by the devil, blasphemy,
sedition, treason, etc. The use follows.

Use. Was Christ reviled? Then it is most manifest, that the world hates
goodness incurably: If that Just one cannot escape reproach and slanders, then
may not any godly persons promise to themselves peace that ways. Therefore
carnal friends of such as suffer reproach for Religion, many times say, It
must needs be, they are faulty some way, or at least are not discreet: whereas
this instance of our Savior shows, that worldly-minded men will reproach such
as are godly, though they were never so discreet, or innocent. Besides, this
should teach us patience under such indignities and wrongs: CHRIST was reviled:
and shall we be so troubled and disquieted?

Christ did not revile again.]

And the reason was, partly, because Reuiling is a sin; and partly, because
he suffered as our surety, though he had deserved no such shame, and we had; and
therefore holds his peace, not only from reuiling, but many times from just
apology, confessing our guiltiness by his silence. The practice of our
Savior is here reported for our learning, that all Christians might hence be
warned, not to render reuiling for reuiling, 1. Pet. 3.9.

There are many reasons to persuade us to patience, and not to render reuiling
for reuiling. Motives ^o patience.
First, the reproaches of unreasonable men cannot take away thy innocence.
Secondly, better men than we, have been as vilely abused. Thirdly, as David
said, God may bless thee for their cursing, and honor thee for their
disgracing of thee. Fourthly, because we are heirs of blessing; and therefore
such foul language as cursing and reuiling, should not be found in our
mouths. Fifthly, though thou deserve not those reproaches from men, yet thou
art not innocent before God. Sixthly, heerin thou shall be conformed to the
Pattern and Image of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, not only in suffering wrongfully,
but in forbearing reuiling for conscience sake.

He threatened not.]

To threaten those that wrong us, is usually a blemish and a fault: First,
because usually it arises of passion, and desire of revenge. Secondly, because
oftentimes it is joined with lying, when such things are threatened, as for
matter or degree cannot be done, or are not intended to be done. Thirdly,
because, by threatening so passionately, we do injury to God, to whom vengeance
belongs. This condemns the usual practice of all sorts of men, that sin
fearfully in the customary practice of thwarting, upon all occasions of
discontent and displeasure. Who is he that suffers now, and in his heart or
words threatens not? Especially, how exceeding common is this sin in the most
families? where parents and masters can hardly tell how to speak of the faults
of servants and children, but it is with foolish and passionate threatening,
contrary to the express prohibition, Ephesians. 6.9. Masters, use not threatenings.
But, all such as would have the comfort of a sound conversation, and desire to
carry themselves as Christ has left them a pattern, must strive to break off
this wretched habit of threatening: and if they be oppressed by Superiors, or
wronged by the incurable faults of Inferiors, they must learn of Christ, to
commit all to him that judges righteously; which is the affirmative part of
the manner of Christ's suffering.

But committed himself to him that judges righteously.]

From these words diverse things may be observed.

Doct. 1. First, that in case of wrongs from other men, it is not always
needful or convenient to complain to the Magistrate for redress. Christ here
commits his cause to God, but complains not: nay, though he were wronged
almost continually, and with grievous wrongs, yet we read not, that ever he
complained against them that did him wrong.

Here two things are to be enquired after.

First, in what cases it is not fit to complain to men.

Secondly, in what cases it may be lawful and fit.

In these cases following, it is not fit to complain to the Magistrate.

In what cases it is not fit to complain unto the Magistrate.
First, where redress of the wrongs may be had by private and peaceful
courses, 1. Cor. 6.

Secondly, where the laws of men do not provide punishment: some wrongs are
offenses, and yet not punishable by men's laws.

Thirdly, where the offense is committed of mere frailty or ignorance.

Fourthly, where the offense is grounded upon mere surmises, which in the
judgment of charity ought not to be conceived,.1 Cor. 13.

Fifthly, where the injury is less, and the party trespassing does acknowledge
the wrong: in this case the rule of Christ holds; If thy brother say, It
repents me, thou must forgive him, Luke 17.4.

Sixthly, where, by the suite, Religion will receive greater damage by the
scandal, then the party suffers by the wrong; as in the case of the
Corinthians, where a brother went to law with a brother before Judges that were
Infidels.

Seventhly, where the Magistrates have declared themselves to be enemies to
justice and just men; as here in the case of Christ, it was bootlesse to
complain, because all the Rulers were his professed enemies.

Contrariwise, in these and such like cases following, men may lawfully seek
justice from men in authority.

First, In what cases men may lawfully seek redress from the Magistrate.
where the offense is grievous, and against the Laws of God and men.

Secondly, where the offender persists in euill-doing, without repentance.

Thirdly, where the offense is against God and Religion, as well as against the
party wronged.

Fourthly, where such wrongs are usually punishable.

Fifthly, where the party complaining is bound to complain by his office, either
by charge or oath; provided, that the party complaining, first, love his
enemies; and secondly, prosecute with continual respect to God's glory; and
thirdly, use the benefit of the Law with charity and mercy, without cruelty or
extremity.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. The malice of wicked men against the godly, is so great, that when
they begin to oppose them, though it be but in their name, they will never
cease opposition, if they have power, till they have their lives too. Thus I
gather from hence, that our Savior, being reviled, does not only commit his
cause to God, but commits himself to God, as expecting the increase of their
oppositions, till they have put him to death. This is the reason, why God
indites every man that hates his brother, of murder, 1. John 3.15. And David so
often complains of his enemies that slandred him, that they also sought his
life, yea his soul; as if they were desirous not only to kill his body, but
damn his soul also.

Doct. 3. We may here also note, that God is to be conceived of according to
the occasion: seeing we cannot comprehend God wholly as he is, we ought to
raise up such conceptions in our hearts of the glory of God, as may with honor
answer the occasion that presently concerns us: as here, in the case of
wrongs, God is conceived as a righteous Judge. In the case of death, he is
called The God of the spirits of all flesh. In the case of prayer, he is called
a God that delights to hear prayer; in the case of infirmities, a God that
takes away iniquity, and passes by transgression: and in cases of great
difficulty, he is conceived of as Almighty, and so forth.

Doct. 4. It is evident from hence, that God is a Judge: That God is a Judge,
is terrible to wicked men, and that in many respects.
and this point is both terrible to the wicked, and comfortable to the godly.
It is terrible to the wicked many ways: First, because he is Judge of all the
world; all must be judged by him, Genesis 18.25. Heb. 12.23. 1. Sam. 2.10. He is
not a Judge of some one circuit, as Judges amongst men are. Secondly, because
he is a Judge that needs no evidence be brought-in: for, he knows all
causes, and is witness himself, Ier. 29.23. and so Judges among men are not.
Thirdly, because he judges for all offenses: he tries the hearts and the
reins, as well as the words and works of men, Psalm 7.9, 11. Earthly Judges
try malefactors but in one or some few cases. Fourthly, because he has Armies
of Executioners: he can call to the heavens, or speak to the earth, and have
hosts of servants to do his will, and execute his judgments, Daniel 7.9, 10.
Psalm 50.4, 22. so as none can deliver out of his hands. Fifthly, because he is
Judge himself, Psa. 50.6. and 75.8. He does not do justice by Deputies, but
will hear all cases himself. Sixthly, because his judgment is the last and
highest judgment; and therefore there lies no appeal from it. Seventhly,
because he can bring men to judgment without any warning: he stands before
the door, and often seizes upon the offender, without serving any Writ, or
giving him any summons, James 5.9. And therefore wicked men do very foolishly,
that ruffle here in the world, and lift up their horns so high, and speak with
such a stiff neck, and walk on in their sins and injuries so securely, Psalm
75.5, 6, 7, 8.

Again, if God be Judge, it is comfortable to penitent sinners: But
comfortable to godly men.
First, because repentance will alter the judgment, if it be after the fact,
and before the Sentence, even in such offenses as deserve everlasting death, as
appears in the case of David and the Ninevites, and is notified to the world,
Acts 17.31. Whereas earthly Judges must proceed in their judgment, whether the
parties be penitent or no. Again, it is the more comfortable, that God is
Judge, because all parties wronged or grieved may have access to God, and put
up their supplications at any time; he is ready to be found, and willing to
hear: which is seldom true of earthly Judges. Thirdly, because godly men know
their sentence already, God has acquitted them by his Word, and by his Son and
by his Spirit, and therefore they need not fear his last judgment.

Doct. 5. God will judge righteously: God's judgment is a most righteous
judgment, Psalm. 9.8. Romans 2.5. 2. Tim. 4.8. He is the righteous Judge by an
excellency, because there is no Judge, but misseth it some way: only God's
judgment is always righteous, and it must needs be so for many reasons.

How God judges righteously.
First, because he judges the high as well as the low, Job 21.22.

Secondly, because his judgment extends to every offender in the world, Jude
15. Earthly Judges may punish some malefactors, but they leave thousands of men
that are as great as they, I mean as great offenders as they: as for other
reasons, it is because they cannot apprehend them.

Thirdly, because he judges for the breach of most righteous Laws.

Fourthly, because he will take no gifts, Job 36.18, 19.

Fifthly, because he hates heartily, what he condemns severely: so the day
of Judgment is called, A day of wrath, Romans 2.5. whereas man may censure other
men for such faults as they themselves commit, or at least are not moved to the
sentence simply out of the disliking of the fault.

Sixthly, because he is not deceived with shows and outward appearances, but
his Judgment is according to truth, Romans 2.2.

Seventhly, because it is general according to men's works, 2. Cor 5.10.

Eightthly, because in the day of his Judgment, he will specially honor the
righteous, Romans 2.7, etc.

Ninthly, because when a man can have no justice from men, he shall be sure
to have justice from God: and this is especially here intended.

Tenthly, because he does not judge rashly: but, as we see, after wonderful
patience, and the many days men have had of sinning, he appoints his day of
judging.

Uses. The uses may be diverse: for,

First, it shows the woeful case of wicked men that forget God, and in the
hardness of their hearts run on in sin, and so heap up wrath against the day
of wrath, Romans 2.4, 5.

Secondly, it should teach all men that have any care of themselves, to deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live godly, and righteously, and
soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.12, 13.

Thirdly, it should be a singular comfort to all such as suffer wrongs and
injuries in this world, whether in their names, or bodies, or states, or any
way; let them but be patient, God will do them Justice, as these places show,
2. These. 1.5. Psalm. 4.5. Iam. 5.6.7, 8. Jude 15.

Doct. 6. It is the duty of Gods servants, in all distresses to commit
themselves and their causes, to God and to his righteous providence and
judgment. This the example of Christ here shows us, and there is reason for
it. First, because God requiers we should do so, as these places show, Psalm.
37.5, 6. Pro. 16.3. 1. Pet. 4. vlt. Secondly, because it is not in man to
direct his own way, Ierem. 10.23. Thirdly, because God never disappointed the
trust of them that committed themselves to him, Nahum 1.7. Pro. 16.3.

Use.
The use should be to teach us: As we would show our selves to bear the image
of Christ, and to be true Christians, to practice this duty, and in all cases
of wrong, danger, affliction, or temptation; but then withal, when we have
committed our cause to GOD, we must remember these rules:

Rules in committing our cause to God.
First, Never to use ill means to get out of distress, Esaias. 28.16.

Secondly, not to limit God, but to let him do whatsoever pleases him.

Thirdly, not to be impatient, or troubled, but quiet our selves in God, and
wait and trust in him, and if we find any difficulties, we must then roll our
way upon the Lord, as the Psalmist says, Psalm 37.5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, we must acknowledge him in all our ways, and give him glory, when
he does us justice, Proverbs 3.6.

Verse 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree; that we
being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness, by whose stripes you
were healed.


HItherto of the manner of the suffering of Christ. Now follows in the fifth
place, the matter he suffered, viz. He bare our sins, amplified by showing
how, and that three ways: first, his own self: secondly, in his body:
thirdly, on the tree.

He bare our sins.]

Christ may be said to bear our sins in two respects chiefly. In what
respects Christ bare our sins.
First, because he did undergo the imputation of all our sins; our faults
were charged upon him, as our surety: He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21.
He stood before God's Justice in our room. Secondly, because he suffered the
malediction due to our sins by the Law: He bare our sins, in being made a
sacrifice for sin: He became indebted unto the Justice of God, as our
surety, to bear the curses of the Law, which our sins deserved, Esaias. 53.5,
8. Gal. 3.10. And as this is true in general of all the wrath of God, and the
fearful things due to our sins: so if we mark the story of Christ's
sufferings, we may observe, how the sins of our first parents, and our own,
light heavily upon his back, God suffering our sins to be charged upon him
in a special fi^nes of the judgment to our sins: and that we may note,
both in the circumstances of our sinning, and in the sorts of sins.

Christ's sufferings fitted to the circumstances of sin.
For the circumstances: The first Adam sins in a garden. The second Adam
suffers fearfully for sin in a garden: The second Adam suffers on a tree,
and so bears the sin of the first Adam, eating the forbidden fruit of a tree.
For the sorts of sin: Why was Christ betrayed by Judas, denied by Peter,
forsaken by all his Disciples, refused by the Priests and people, but because
we had betrayed, denied, forsaken, and refused God in Paradise? And many of us
are now guilty of the same, or the like sins in the course of our lives. He
was charged to be a seducer, to satisfy for our being seduced: For our evil
words, and sinful excuses, he was silent; because we and our first Parents
have preferred the devil before God, therefore was a malefactor preferred
before him. Why was he mocked, buffeted, and spit upon, but to bear the shame
was due unto us for our filthiness, and vile conversation? Why drank he gall,
but to pay for our sinful pleasures? Why suffered he reuiling and scoffing,
but to satisfy for our sinful words? Many other things might be observed.

The consideration whereof should serve for many uses, and so it should teach
us diverse duties; as,

Uses. First, since he has borne our sins in the imputation of them, and the
malediction due unto them, we should be most ready and willing to bear his
cross, as accounting it a great shame to be unwilling to suffer a little, and
for a little while for his sake, that has borne such strange things for us:
we should be content to forsake all for his sake.

Secondly, it should grieve us at the heart for our sins, considering the
fearful imputation of our faults charged upon him, and the bitter things he
suffered, to make amends to Gods Justice for our wickedness, Zach. 12.10.

Thirdly, has Christ borne our sins? and can we find in our hearts to
sin any more? shall he again be charged with our faults? shall we again
crucify him? Romans 6.6. Heb. 10.24, etc. and as follows in the next words of
this text.

Fourthly, Oh how should we love the Lord Jesus: that Holy One, that bare the
imputation of such base crimes, and endured such grievous things for us, before
we ever knew him, or cared for him; even for us, that were enemies to him!
Deserve they not to be accursed, that love not the Lord Jesus? 1. Pet. 1.9. 2.
Cor. 16.22.

Fifthly, we should therefore ear the Passover with sour herbs; we should
remember his grievous sufferings with hearty affection, and melting of soul
before the Lord, when we come before him to celebrate the memory of his
Passion in the Sacrament.

Sixthly, we should no more stagger, or waver in faith, but with all peace and
joy in believing, rest upon the propitiation made by Christ for our sins: we
should therefore confidently believe the pardon of all our sins, because he
has borne our iniquities. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. 1.
John 2.1. Romans 3.26.


Seventhly, we should never more be afraid of death and hell: for our debt
being paid by the surety, the handwriting that was against us, is now
cancelled Col. 2.15. and there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. Heb. 2.14.

Eightthly, we should not be so much troubled to be unjustly traduced, seeing
Christ, beyond all example, suffered most unspeakable ignominy, bearing the
imputation of the sins of all the Elect.

Ninthly, seeing he has been made in the similitude of sinful flesh, and
suffered for sin in the flesh, we should strive to be made the righteousness
of God in him, and as he has borne our sins, so should we strive to bear
his virtues.

Who his own self.]

It is emphaticall, that the Apostle says, He bare our sins his own self:
For there be two things which are here imported. First, that he had no
partners: there were none with him: He bare all himself, Esaias 59.16. He trod
the winepresse alone, Esaias 63.3, 5. And therefore it is a vile dishonor to
Christ, to ascribe any part of satisfaction to our selves, or to any Saint, or
Angel. Secondly, it imports, that therefore his suffering is of infinite value,
in that he bare all, his own self in person, who was God and man. Then it
will follow, that he has made a sufficient propitiation for all the world, 2.
Ioh. 2.1, 2.

In his body.]

Quest. Why? did he not suffer in his soul?

Ans. Yes: for so says the Scripture, He made his soul a sacrifice for
sin, Esaias 53.10. and the Son of man came to give his soul a ransom for
many, Math. 20.28. Mark 10.45. This was shadowed out by the Holocaust, or
whole burnt-offering: for it noted, that the whole man should suffer. So in the
Sacrament, the breaking of the bread is not referred so properly to his body:
for there was not a bone broken of him, says the holy text: but fitly to his
soul, which was broken with sorrows and heaviness for our sakes: So that by
the body, he means synechdochically whole Christ, but yet the body is named,
because That was the outward sacrifice, that was offered for our sins on the
tree.

Christ then bare our sins in his body. What may we learn from thence?

First, we see a manifest difference betwixt Christ's Priesthood: and theirs in
the Law. For they offered the bodies of beasts or fowls: but Christ offered
his own body.

Secondly, we may take comfort in the assurance, that he is the Savior of
our bodies, as well as our souls.

Thirdly, Seeing such grievous things befell the body of Christ, why seek we
so much ease for our bodies? why pamper we our flesh so? and why are we so
impatient in the pains of our bodies, and remember not what Christ suffered in
his body?

Fourthly, we should therefore esteem his body to be a precious body, above
all bodies, ^^eing it was laid down as a price for our sins; yea we should
long to see that glorious body of his, that we might admire it, and adore it,
and embrace it, and in the mean time love and delight in the Lords Supper,
that exhibiteth the body of Christ spiritually unto us, rejoicing in such
meetings, above the joy of all carnal people, before any other things.

Fifthly, we should therefore take heed of sinning against our bodies, but make
conscience to serve God both in body and Spirit, and say with David and Christ,
Lord, a body thou have given me: for I come to do thy will.

Sixthly, what cursed monsters are swearers, that tear the body of our Lord
with their cursed oaths, and rake their nails in his wounds with their
blasphemies?

On the tree.]

The original word signifies sometimes a staff, Mat. 26.47. sometimes a pair
of stocks, Acts 16.24 sometimes a tree growing, Revel. 2.11. usually wood, 1.
Corinthians 3.12. Here, a Gallows made of wood.

Christ bare our sins on the tree, because he did in a special manner
suffer bitter extremities on the tree, which he suffered as our Surety, and
for our sins, for,

Reasons why Christ suffered on a tree.
First, to die on a tree, was, by a special Law of God, made a curse, and so is
every one that hangs on a tree, Gal. 3.13.

Secondly, he was debarred of the benefit of ordinary natural comforts. For he
lived in pain 3* hours in the dark, and had not the light of the sun.

Thirdly, in that darkness he was put to the most fearful conflict with the
devils, which at that time did with their utmost fury assault him, and fight
against him; Colos. 3.25.

Fourthly, he endured most grievous pains, and to^ments of body, and the
effusion of his most precious blood.

Fifthly, he was reckoned amongst the wicked in his death, and therefore hanged
between two malefactors, Esaias 53.9.

Sixthly, he was reviled by the base multitude, and mocked, and derided by the
chief Priests and Scribes, Math. 27.39. to 45.

Seventhly, God his father powered out upon him the fearful viols of his
wrath, in withdrawing for a time the sense of his favor, Math. 27.46.

Eightthly, his whole body was offered up on the tree, as a Sacrifice for the
sins of the world, and the substance of all the sacrifices in the Law.

Uses. We have therefore cause to rejoice in the cross of Christ above all
things: For on the tree, he freed us from the curses of the Law, and purchased
for us the blessings promised to Abraham, as the father of the faithful, Gal.
3.13, 14. and besides, by suffering so shameful a death, he has sanctified
all sorts of ways of inflicting death upon the godly, so as now they may with
comfort in a good cause, or after repentance for their faults, even suffer that
death on a tree with joy. And we should the more praise God for his favor, if
he suffer any of us to die of any other more easy, or more honorable death.
And then we may again see the hatefulness of sin, in that God, punishing
our sins in the person of his own Son, does not omit the very
circumstances of abasement; his justice exacting not only death, but that
painful and ignominious death on the tree. Lastly, hence we may see, how
little cause there is for Christians to plead merit, if they think how
fearfully sin has angered God; and withal, how senseless the best of us
are, when we hear, read, or think of these sufferings of Christ: they may
rather see cause, for ever to abhor the doctrine of merit, seeing heerby we
proclaim our selves to be worthy of the very merits of Christ, that can be so
little affected with the thought of his sufferings.

Thus of the matter of Christ's sufferings.

The effects follow: and the effects, in respect of us, are named to be three.
First, the death of sin; secondly, the life of grace; thirdly, the healing of
our natures.

That we being dead to sin.]

Men die diverse ways.
Men may be said to die diverse ways:

First, in respect of nature, when the Frame of nature is dissolved, by the
parting of the soul from the body.

Secondly, in respect of God, when God is departed from men with his grace, and
righteousness, and favor: thus wicked men are spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2.1. and
4.17. 1. Tim. 5.6.

Thirdly, in respect of the world: when a man is overwhelmed with crosses,
especially such as are joined with disgrace in his reputation; he is said to
be dead, and his life to be hid under those afflictions, being despised and
forgotten as a dead man out of mind, Col. 3.3. Esaias 26.19.

Fourthly, in respect of sin: and so men either are dead for sin, as
malefactors; or dead in sin, as all wicked men; or dead to sin, as the
godly here. To take the soul from the body, is the death of all men. To take
GOD from the soul, is the death of all wicked men. To take sin from the
soul, is the death of all godly men. To be dead to sin then, is to be
mortified in respect of sin.

Sin is said to be dead, either in appearance or in deed. In appearance
only, it is dead in such as have their sins only restrained for a time,
either by God's own strong hand, or else by themselves kept down for certain
hypocritical ends, or else for want of occasion or temptation to stir the sin:
thus sin was dead in Paul, when he was unregenerate, and revived when the
Law came, Romans 7.9. Sin is dead in deed in godly men, but with a difference:
for, though in this life they be wholly rid of many sins, yet some
corruptions are not wholly removed; yet are they dead to them in the inchoation
of it, their sins lie a-dying: but in the life to-come they shall be wholly and
fully delivered from all sin.

Thus of the sense.

There be many doctrines may be hence observed* as,

Doct. 1. First, it is evidently here implied, that all men by nature, and out
of Christ, are alive to sin, or live to sin: and in sinning they may be said
to live, or be alive, or live to it, in diverse respects.

Natural men are said to be alive to sin in diverse respects.
1. Because all the parts of their life are full of sin: sin infecteth their
persons and their works.

2. Because they are in bondage to sin; so as all their life they are at the
command of sin: they are servants of sin, Romans 6.

3. Because they account sin to be the life of their lives: they could not
esteem life, but for the hope of liberty and power of sinning. It were a death
to them to live restrained of sin, as appears, when either by punishment, or
for other ends, they are found to cease sinning.

4. Because they do not destroy sin, in letting it live: they are guilty of
the life of sin in them, because they will not use the means to subdue and
mortify sin that dwells in them, but let it alone unresisted.

5. Because they have most life, or are most lively, when they have most
liberty to sin.

6. Because they continue in sin: they spend not an hour, but it is in sin:
yea, they so sin now, that they desire to spend everlasting life in sin.

Use. And so from hence, by way of use, men may discern whether they live in
sin or not: for, he that is a servant to his corruptions, and esteems them
as the happiness of his life, and resists them not, and has a desire to sin
ever, is (without doubt) alive in sin, and dead to righteousness. And so
contrariwise, where these things cannot be found, there the person is not alive
to sin.

Doct. 2. Hence is implied also, that to live in sin, is but miserable living:
and therefore those whom God loves, he changes from that condition, and
makes them die to sin. Now, this may be showed out of other Scriptures
briefly: for,

1. Sin infects a man, Great is the misery of such as live in sin.
and all he goes about: it stains his very conscience; and, like the leprosy,
will pollute his clothes, his flesh, his house, and whatsoever he touches
almost, Titus 1.15. It makes all things impure.

2. To harbor sin, is to harbor the devil too, who always takes
possession of the soul that is given over to sin: so as the heart of the
sinner is the Fortress of the devil, Ephesians. 2.2. 2. Tim. 2.26. 2. Cor. 10.5.
Ephesians. 4.26.

3. While a man lives in sin, he is in danger to be crossed and cursed of God
in every thing he does: he shall have no portion from God, nor inheritance from
the Almighty, Job 31. ver. 2. Good things will be restrained from him, Esaias
59.2. And he may find himself cursed in every thing he sets his hand to, Deuteronomy.
28.16, 17, 18, etc. His very blessings may be cursed, Mal. 2.2. His very table
may be a snare. For, certainly God will be revenged of the sinful man, that
is alive in sin, Nah. 1.2, 3, 6.

4. His soul is dead within him while he is alive, Ephesians. 2.2. 1. Tim. 5.6. And
how can it be otherwise, when God, which is his life, is departed from him?
and with God, all spiritual blessings are gone from his soul too.

5. The end of this life, is to die miserably, Romans 8.10. and 6.23. Gal. 6. and
to perish forever with the devil and his angels, Reu. 21.8. Mat. 25.45.

And in a special manner it is a miserable living, to be lively and iouiall
(as they call it) in sin: such men are worse than the general sort of sinners;
for, these wretched men, that are so lively in sin, have a most miserable heart
in them, a heart like an Adamant, like a very stone within them, are senseless
and brutish like the very beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. vlt. Besides, in many
of these God scourges sin with sin, and gives them up to such a reprobate
mind, that their wickedness oftentimes exceeds the wickedness of the wicked,
Ier. 5. Romans 1.26, 28. And further, many times strange punishments light upon
those workers of iniquity, Job 31.3. To which may be added, that oftentimes
such wretched creatures conclude in most woeful and hellish terrors; so as they
howl for vexation of heart, while God's servants sing for joy of heart, Esaias
65.13, 14. Reu. 6.15, 16.

But, in general of all that live in sin, it is manifestly here implied,
that they have no part in Christ: Christ, in respect of them, and as they are
in their present condition, died in vain.

Use. The consideration whereof should awaken men from that heavy sleep in
sin, unto an earnest care to live righteously: it should warn men every where
to repent, Ephesians. 5.14. and the rather, because this very patience of God, in
bearing thus long with them, and the mercy offered them in the Gospel, will
increase to greater wrath and condemnation, if men will not be warned, Romans
2.4, 5. 2. These. 1.8, 9.

Doct. 3. Hence also it is clear, that God's Elect, before their Calling, have
lived in sin as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. Col. 3.6. Which is fit to
be noted for diverse uses. For, first, it sets out the rich mercy of God, and
his free grace in election; and manifestly shows, that we merit not the
blessing, Ephesians. 2.3, 4, etc. And secondly, it should teach the godly diverse
duties: as first, not to be proud or high-minded, but rather, remembering what
they were, to make them the more humble all their days. Secondly, to despair
of no man, but rather to show all meeknes toward all men, 2. Tim. 2.25. Titus
3.2, 3. Thirdly, to cleave fast unto Christ, in whose only propitiation they
can be saved from their sins, 1. John 2.1, 2. God forbid, we should rejoice
in any thing more than in Christ, and him crucified, Gal. 6.16. Lastly, we
should think it more than enough, that we have heertofore lived in sin: we
should henceforth resolve to spend that little time that remains, in a
careful obedience unto God's will, ceasing from sin, 1. Peter 4.1, 2, 3.

Thus of the doctrines implied in the Text. The doctrines that may be gathered
more expressly, follow.

Doct. 1. None but mortified Christians are true Christians. It is manifest,
that none have part in Christ, but such as are dead to sin; such men only does
Christ acknowledge: for, he is a Redeemer to none but such as turn from
transgression in Jacob, Esaias 59.20. All that are in Christ, are new creatures:
their old things are past, and all things new, 2. Cor. 5.17. None are Christ's,
but such as bear the similitude of his death in their dying to sin, Romans 6.
Men lose their Baptism, if they be not baptized into the death of Christ. Such
men as place their happiness in worldly things, are not the right seed; but
such only as are born by promise, that is, that received life by the promises
of grace and a better life, Romans 9.8. Christ was sent to preach glad tidings to
such as mourn in Sion, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. The mourners in Jerusalem were the
only men that were marked for God, Ezechiel 9. Christ will have no Disciples,
but such as will deny themselves, Luke 9. and are not fashioned according to
this world, Romans 12.2. And this should teach men to have mortified Christians
in greater honor, and to esteem highly of such as will not be corrupted with
the excess of the times, and do show by a sound conversation, that they are
weaned from the lust after earthly things, and are consecrated to God and his
service. We should honor and acknowledge such above all other men in the
world, yea, in the Church. It should also compel upon us a care of a mortified
life, and a daily resisting of sin and the devil, and striving to be made like
to Christ.

Finally, if the count must be made by mortification, there will then be but a
short count upon earth: for, look into Christian Churches, and cast out, first,
all open profane persons, such as are drunkards, fornicators, swearers,
murderers, railers against goodness, such as serve vanity, and show it by
strange apparel, and such like men; secondly, all open idolaters, and
superstitious persons, and such as hold damnable opinions; Thirdly, all
ciuill-honest men, such as have only the praise of men for a harmless
conversation in the world, but have no taste of Religion, or conscience of
zeal for Gods glory; Fourthly, all open worldlings, that mind not heavenly
things, and savor nothing but the things of this world; and lastly, all
hypocrites, that make a show of mortification, and yet are not mortified: and
then suppose, how small a number will be left in every place, to be reckned in
this list of true Christians.

Doct. 2. Mortification is the very first step of grace, and the entrance into
all power of godliness. Till our sins be foundly crucified and dead. no work
of Religion, that is acceptable to God, can be done: and therefore John Baptist,
and Christ, and the Apostles call for repentance, as the first thing, that
opens a way into the Kingdom of heaven; because else sin unrepented, like a
prison, will infect all we do, Esaias 1.13. to 16. Besides, the heart of man
being naturally like a stone or iron, til it be softened, no impression of
grace can be fastened upon it: and if the ground of our hearts be not well
plowed up, the ^eed of the Word cannot but be lost, Ierem. 4.4. The seed cast
upon the high way, will be picked up by the fowls of the air, and not grow:
or if any seed, or plant of grace did grow for a while in the heart: yet the
weeds of sin would ouergrowe, and choke all, as is evident in seed sown in
thorny ground, or plants set in ground that is not dug and weeded. And
further, while the person is evil, the work will be vile and abominable. An
evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit.

And therefore this shows, that such Christians as leap into the profession
of Religion so easily, and think it is no more, but to giue-ouer ill courses,
and fall to the practice of good duties, are deceived: For if by sound
mortification, their sins past be not bewailed, and they soundly humbled;
either their sins will after a while grow and revive again, or else the
conscience of these sins will secretly throughout their lives torment them;
or else the devil on a sudden may seize upon them with despair, having so
manifest a reason against them, that they did never practice mortification for
their sins. Besides, lamentable experience shows in those places, where
Christians are not soundly formed at first in the exercise of mortification,
they lead their lives in a dull course of profession, and have not the
experience of the life and power of Religion in themselves for the joys of it,
or toward others in the practice of it. The mourners in Sion, and such as are
brokenharted, are the most glorious, and the most fruitful Christians, Esaias
61.1, 2, 3, 4. and continue in the greatest power of religion. And further it
may be noted in the best of those, that their separation from the love of the
world, is most really performed, as has appeared, when in any special works
of men, or for the help of the Church of GOD, they are called upon to show
their zeal by their bounty: in such cases one poor Macedonian would shame a
hundred of those rich Corinthians. 2. Cor. 8.


Doct. 3. True repentance for sin, does in diverse respects kill a man, it
strikes him dead: to repent, is to be a dead man; not only in respect of the
world which casts off a man, that will not run in the excesses of the time, as
a dead man indeed, Col. 3.3. but in respect of themselves. For first, by the
assise a man must keep upon himself, he will be found dead by sentence, when
he judges himself before the Lord: he stands as a man condemned in the flesh:
He sentenceth himself to eternal death for his deserts, by confessing what
he meriteth, 1. Pet. 4.6. Now, a condemned man is reckoned for a dead man in
Law. Secondly, Repentance destroies the senses, and affections, and conceits,
and reason, that were wont to be alive in men. It dissolues the very frame of
the old conversation. The word rendered, (...).
dead, signifies to undo what was done about the life of men, to unmake him,
as I may say; so as all the old things pass away and all becomes new, 2. Cor.
5.17. Romans 6.6. 1. John 3.8. In the new Convert there is not left the savor,
sent, lust, or affections after sin, and the sinful profits and pleasures of
the world: He does not find that inflammation, or inticement he was wont to
feel from evil example, or the glory of the world, or evil company, or the
things before he most esteemed, and delighted in. Thus he is dead to
himself, because he denies himself: and could be well contented to forget,
that ever he had been such as he was before. Thirdly, in some of Gods
children, their repentance is performed with such grief and sorrow, as brings
their life almost to the buriers, as is noted, Job 33.19, 20, 21. Fourthly,
they may be said to be dead in repenting, because repentance is never fully
finished, till their natural death, sin sticks so fast, as they have daily
cause of mortification in some degree, and it will never be gotten wholly out,
till they be in deed dead men, though in the mean time God accepts of their
first repentance, as if it were perfect.

This doctrine serves effectually to discover the estate of multitudes of
Christians not to be right; as they,

That do nothing at all about their sins:

That excuse their sins, and hide them, and favor them, and cast the fault
upon others, Pro. 28.13. Genesis 3. Job 20.11, 12, 13.

That bless themselves in their hearts, when their iniquity is found worthy to
be hated, Ps. 36.2.

That haunt with such persons as may make them sin more:

That say, It is no profit to walk humbly before the Lord, Mal. 3.14. and
rather bless the proud:

That hate and revile such as are mortified:

That are dead rather in faith and good works, and find a deadly savor in the
Word:

That have sense and savor only in the things of the flesh.

Secondly, this should teach all, that mind their own salvation, to look
carefully to the truth of their mortification, and not to think it is such a
slight and easy work; but to consider, that in repenting for sin, they must
never cease, till they be like Christ dying for sin; and that is in the
sense before given. So our bearing of the similitude of Christ's death in our
repentance, notes diverse particular things in our repentance, as, 1. That our
sorrows be voluntary, Diverse things in Christ's death that ought to be in our
repentance.
not enforced: he gave his life, it was not taken from him: we must not
tarry, till the devil fire us with the terrors of despair. 2. That we be
payned at the very heart for our sins; so was Christ: it must be a hearty
grief. 3 That we show forth the fruits of our repentance: so he suffered
openly. 4. That he suffered by degrees and ceased not, till he died: so must
we by degrees resist sin, and never cease, until it be quite abolished.


Hence also we may know, whether we have truly repented: It is a sign of
true mortification, when 1. Signs of true mortification
A man has seriously condemned himself before God for his sin. 2. When he
feels the wonted violence of affections after sin, and the world to be
deaded, and his heart grown dull, and out of taste in matters of sin and the
world: He is crucified, that has his lusts and affections crucified, Gal.
5.24. 3. That he is aweary of life it self, by reason of the remainders of
sin in his flesh, Romans 7. 4. That has felt as sensible sorrows for his
sins, as he was wont to do for his crosses: sorrows, I say, that are
voluntary, and for sin as it is sin.


Doct. 4. The Passion of Christ is the best medicine to kill sin in us: He
died, that we might die to sin: There is a virtue in the death of Christ to
kill sin, Romans 6. Now the death of Christ may be said to kill sin,

First, in respect of the guilt of it: Christ in his death paid all that was
needful for satisfaction, and so destroyed the imputation of it, and stilled
the clamor of it: It cannot cry against us in heaven, because God is fully
satisfied, and the bond discharged, and cancelled: the plea of our sins died
in the passion of Christ.

Secondly, in respect of the hatefulnes of it, or the demonstration of the
hatefulnes of it: The passion of Christ gives all men occasion to see, how
unworthy sin is to live, that made him die, when it was only imputed to him,
and not done by him.

Thirdly, in respect of the power of it in us actually. There is a secret
virtue in the wounds of Christ to wound sin, and in the death of Christ to kill
sin: and therefore the Scripture speaks not only of the merit, but of the
virtue of his death, Romans 6. Phil. 3. which virtue is secretly derived unto the
penitent sinner, by the ordinances of Christ, his Word, Prayer, and Sacraments.

Use. The use should be for trial: men may know whether as yet they have any
part in the death of Christ, by inquiring whether they be dead in their sins.
First, they have no interest in the merit of his death, that have not
experience of the virtue of his death in killing their corruptions. Secondly,
for instruction: When godly men find any corruption begin to be too strong for
them, they must fly to Christ for this medicine; and then there is no sin so
strong in them, but by constant prayer to Christ for the virtue of his death,
will be subdued, if they pray in faith. Prayer gets the medicine, and faith
applies it to the disease.

Doct. 5. True mortification does not encounter one sin only, but sins in
the plural number and indefinitely. It notes, that in true repentance there is
a respect had to amendment of all sins. To mend only one or two faults, is
not true repentance: For he that is truly dead, is dead to sins: there is no
sin, but the true Convert desires and endeavors to be rid of it, so far as
he knows it to be a sin. Herod did mend in some things, but yet was not
sound, because in one sin he minded no repentance. And this point does give an
infallible rule of trial of men's estates in Christ: for no wicked man in earth
does so much as in true desire forsake all sin. There be some corruptions,
he knows, that he would upon no conditions part with. To desire and endeavor
to be rid of all sins, is an infallible mark of a child of God.

Doct. 6. Mortification makes a man dead only to sins: it does not make him
of a dead and lumpish disposition in doing good duties, Heb 9.14. nor does it
require that it should destroy his nature or natural temper, or the parts of
his body, but his sin only: nor does it kill his contentment in the
creatures of God, and the use of lawful things, nor does it destroy his
liberty in lawful delights and recreations: it kills his sin only.

Might live unto righteousness.]

These words contain the second effect of Christ's death and passion, viz. the
raising of us unto a righteous life: His death makes us live, and live
righteously.

Diverse doctrines may be hence observed:

Doct. 1. First, that men truly mortified, shall live happily: These dead men
will live, there is no danger in great sorrow, and the other works of
mortification: The happiness of such as live spiritually.
It kills sin, but the soul lives by that means. He is sure to live, that
is dead to his sins, Ro^ 8.13. Esaias 26.19. 1. Pet. 4.6. Eze. 18. Ho. 14.2. The
reasons are; First, because God has promised comfort to such as mourn for
sin, Math. 5.4. Pro. 14.10. Secondly, Christ has a special charge given him
to look to those mourners, that they miscarry not, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. Thirdly,
they are freed from eternal death, they cannot be condemned, 1. Cor. 11.31,
32. Job 33.27, 28. Fourthly, because the fruit of the lips is peace to these,
they are ever after interessed in the comforts of the Word, Esaias 57.15, 18.
Fifthly, the nature of godly sorrow is only to tend to repentance. It is
worldly sorrow that tends to death, 2. Cor. 7.10. Sixthly, they that are
conformed to the similitude of Christ's death by mortification, shall be
conformed to Christ's life by the resurrection from the dead. Romans 6.5, 8, 11.


Uses.
The use may be, first, for confutation of such as think, that mortification is
a way full of danger and makes many men come to great extremities; whereas they
may here see, there is no danger, in it: Hellish terrors, and despair, and
some kind of diseases may make strange effects in some men: but never was any
hurt by godly sorrow for sin, if we will believe the Scriptures: and
therefore it should encourage men to fall to work soundly about searching their
ways, and confessing their sins, and judging themselves in secret for their
sins, James 4. chapter 7.2. Cor. chap. 7.10, 11. But here men must look to
some few rules. First, that they see the warrant of the course in the Word;
and know the places that require these duties: that they lay up such promises
made to the duties of mortification, as may uphold their hearts in the practice
of them. Thirdly, that they refuse not consolation; but when they have found
true humiliation for their sins, and comfort from God in his ordinances, that
they turn their sorrow into joy, and their prayers into thanksgiving, and
spend their days always rejoicing in the Lord.

Doct. 2. It is not enough to die to sin, unless we also live to
righteousness: It is not enough to forsake our sins, but we must spend our
days in good works: we are so charged to cease to do evil, as withal we
are charged to learn to do well, Esaias 1.16. we must bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life, as well as confess our sins, Math. 3.8. A man will cut
down his fig tree for want of good fruit, though it bear no ill fruit, Luke
13.6. It will not please any husbandman, that his Land bear no thorns, nor
briers, nor weeds, if it bear him not good grain. It is not enough for a
servant, that he do his Master no hurt, but he must see to it, that he do
his Masters work.

For first, obedience and good fruits are required at our hands in the Law of
God, besides the prohibition of sin. Secondly, Christ died to this end, that
we might live righteously, as well as die to sin. Thirdly, because all the
gifts of the Spirit bestowed on us in our regeneration, are given to profit
withal, not to lay them up in a napkin, 1. Cor. 12. Fourthly, because we
shall be judged at the last day according to our works, Romans 2.6.

Use. And therefore this shows the dangerous folly of such carnal people, as
think, if they come to Church, and live ciuilly, and do no body no wrong, they
are out of al question in a right course.

And besides, it should awake careless and sluggish Christians, to look to
their gifts, and remember, what accounts they will give to God for their
unprofitableness, and unfruitfulness, 2. Pet. 1.8.

Doct. 3. It is from hence evident, that the only living, is to live
righteously: He is worthy to be said to live, that lives to righteousness: a
religious life is the best life: And these are the reasons,

A religious life is the best life, for 6. reasons.
First, because it is the most honorable life: For to live to righteousness,
makes a man highly in the favor of God, Psalm. 11.7. Prou. 15.9. and it shows,
that a man is borne of God, 1. Ioh. 2.29. and besides it helps a man to the
best, and most blessed memorial, Prou. 10.7. and the fruits of righteousness
are the best means of glorifying God, Phil. 1.11. And therefore Solomon said
well, that The righteous is more excellent than his neighbor, Proverbs 12.26.
And David says, They are the only excellent Ones, Psalm. 16. whereas every
wicked man is loathsome; and a sinful life is a shameful life, Prou. 13.5.
and 14.34.

Secondly, because it is the most profitable life, and the most gainful: for,
blessings are upon the head of the righteous, Pro. 10.6. The wicked works a
deceitful work: but to him that sows righteousness, shall be a sure reward,
Pro. 11.18. And righteousness is both the best riches, and the most durable,
Pro. 8.18, 19, 20. And it has the promise of this life, as well as the life to
come, 1. Tim. 6. Job 8.6. And the profit of righteousness will help a man when
he is to die; when the treasures of the wicked will profit nothing, Pro. 10.2.
Yea, a good man lacks not an inheritance for his childrens children: and the
wealth of the sinner is many times laid up for the just.

Thirdly, because it is the safest and quietest life: He that walks
uprightly, walks surely, Prouer. 10.19. and the fruit of righteousness, is
peace, Iam. 3.18. For, God's promise is, that No evil shall happen to the
just; whereas the wicked shall be filled with mischief, Pro. 12.21. And God's
blessing makes them rich, and he mingles no sorrow with it, Pro. 10.21. and
15.6. And righteousness is reckoned as an impenetrable armor, 2. Cor. 6.7. And
God does mark every one that does righteousness, and solaceth his heart, Esaias
64.5. And the very doing of good, is sweetness to the soul, Prouer. 13.19. And,
whereas there is no peace to the wicked, the righteous is at peace with God,
with Angels, with the creatures, and with all godly men.

Fourthly, because it is the most durable life: for, the fear of the Lord
prolongeth the days; but the years of the wicked shall be shortened, Pro.
10.27, 30. The way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof is no
death, Proverbs 12.28. As a whirl-winde, so is the wicked seen no more: but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation, Prouer. 10.25.

Fifthly, because it is a life that ends the best of all men's lives: for, the
wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous has hope in his
death, and great hope too, having the promises of a better life, and so much
glory, as the eye of mortal man never saw, nor ear of man heard, nor came into
the heart of a natural man, Pro. 14.32. 1. Tim. 6. 1. Cor. 2.9.

Sixthly, because righteousness is more proper to the soul. What is riches, or
honor, or any outward thing to the soul of a man? or what shall it profit a
man to provide for the whole world to be his estate, if he provide not grace
for his soul? Riches profit but the outward estates of a man: whereas
righteousness profits the man himself. And therefore Adam's loss was greater
in losing his innocence, than in losing of Paradise. What can it profit a man
to have all other things good about him, if he be not good himself?

Use. The use should be, first, for trial. Men should thoroughly search
themselves, whether they be indeed righteous men: and the more carefully should
they search, because the most righteous on earth have their many ignorances and
frailties. There is no man but sins daily, and in many things: and besides,
a man may attain to some kind of righteousness, and yet not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; as; there is a generation that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not cleansed from their sins. And the Pharisees had a righteousness
that had many praises: they gave alms, and fasted, and prayed long prayers, and
did that which was warrantable, in respect of the Law outwardly; and yet, if
our righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Quest. But how may a man know all his infirmities, notwithstanding he be
truly righteous, and have such a righteousness as does exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees?

Ans. For answer heerunto, I will cast the signs of a righteous man into two
ranks. First, such as describe him in himself; secondly, such as describe him
in the difference from Pharisaicall righteousness.

The signs that describe him in himself, Signs that describe a righteous man
in himself.
either appear upon him in his infancy, or in his ripe age.

In the very infancy of the just man, even when God first changes his heart,
and cleanses him, and raises him up to live righteously, there be diverse
things by which he may discern the truth of his sanctification* as,

First, by the dissoluing of the stoninesse of his heart. When God comes
effectually to cleanse a man, he takes away the stony heart out of the body,
and gives him a heart of flesh: he may feel his heart melt within him,
especially when he stands before the Lord, when the Lord is fashioning of him
for himself, by his Ordinances, Ezech. 36.25, 26. He has a new heart, that
has not a stony heart.

Secondly, by the rising of the day star in his heart. The Father of lights,
when he renews the heart of a man, causes a sudden and heavenly light, as it
were a star, to shine in the understanding; by virtue of which, men see more
into the mysteries of Religion in that first moment, than they did all the
days of their life before. This is that new spirit the Prophet speaks of: He
that sat in darkness before, now sees a great light; he sees and wonders at
divine things in Religion: whereas before, he was a sot, and understood
nothing with any power or life; and by the comforts of this light, he can hear
as the Learned; understands doctrine in a moment, which before was altogether
harsh and dark unto him, 2. Peter 1.19. Ezechiel 36.28. Psalm 119.130. Matthew
4.16. Esaias 50.4.

Thirdly, by his vehement desire to righteousness, or after righteousness, Matthew
5.5. Which he shows many ways; as, by the loathing of himself for his want
of righteousness, and for all his ways that were not good, Ezech. 36.35. and by
his estimation of righteousness above riches and all worldly things, Psalm 3.8,
9. and by his affectionate enquiry after directions for righteousness; Men and
brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.37. and by his longing after
the Word of truth, by which he may learn righteousness.

Fourthly, by his estimation of righteousness in others: he honors them that
fear the Lord, as the only Noble Ones: all his delight is in them, and he
loves them, and longs after them for righteousness sake.

Fifthly, by the covenant he makes in his heart about righteousness: he not only
consents to obey, Esaias 1.19. but hires himself as a servant to righteousness;
resolving to live to righteousness, and spend not an hour in a day, but a life
in the service of righteousness, Romans 6.13, 18.

And as the righteous man grows more strong, and better acquainted with God
and his Ordinances, and the works of righteousness, other signs break-out upon
him, which do infallibly prove the happiness of his condition; such as are,

First, Six other signs of righteousness, as it grows.
vexation in his soul at the wickedness and unrighteousness of others, 2. Pet.
2.8.

Secondly, rejoicing with joy unspeakable and glorious, when he feels the
comforts of GOD's presence, and begins to see some evidence of Gods love to him
in Christ, 1. Pet. 1.9.

Thirdly, the personal and passionate love of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Fountain of righteousness, though he never saw him in the flesh, esteeming him
above all persons and things, 1. Peter 1.9. Phil. 3.8, 9. longing after his
coming, with great striuings of affections, 2. Cor. 5. 2. Tim. 4.8, etc.

Fourthly, flourishing like a Palm Tree, when he is planted in the House of the
Lord, and enioyes powerful means in the House of his God, growing like the
Willowes by the watercourse, Psalm 92.12, 13. and 1.3.

Fifthly, resolution to suffer any thing for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.12. so as
he will forsake father or mother, house or lands, yea, life it self, rather
than forsake the truth, and the good way of God, Mat. 16.23. Mark 10.29.

Sixthly, he lives by faith: The just lives by faith. In all estates of life he
casts his cares and himself upon God, trusting on the merits of Jesus Christ;
and is in nothing careful, but patiently waits upon God, Gal. 2.2. Heb. 10.38.
Gal. 3.11.

And thus he is described in himself.

Now, his righteousness is distinguished from the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, by diverse signs and marks; as,

How the righteousness of a godly man differs from that of the Scribes and
Pharisees.
First, in the ends of it. His righteousness is not intended for the praises of
men: for, his praise is of God, Romans 2.26. He does not his work, to be seen
of men, Mat. 6.1, etc. He had rather be righteous, than seem so.

Secondly, in the parts of it. The Pharisees righteousness is outward: his is
inward also. The very thoughts of the righteous are right, Pro. 12.5. He
strives to get a clean heart, as well as clean hands; and is as well grieved
for evil thoughts, and lusts, and desires within, as for evil words or works:
whereas the Pharise is but like a painted sepulcher, all full of rottenness and
filth within: his soul desires evil, when he dares not practice it in his
life, Pro. 21.10. Again, the Pharise makes conscience of great commandments,
but not of the least. He refrains whoredom, murder, perjury, swearing by
God, sacrilege, etc. but makes no conscience of filthy-speaking, anger,
swearing by that which is not God, or by lesser oaths, deceit, covetousness, or
the like: whereas a righteous man indeed, makes conscience even of the least
commandments, Mat. 5.19, 20. Again, a Pharise may be good abroad, but is not
usually so at home: but he that is truly righteous, is so at home, as well as
abroad: he becomes a good husband, master, father, friend, etc. as well as a
good man. Finally, the righteous man has respect to all God's Commandments:
whereas the Pharise, in some one or other of the Commandments, lives in the
breach of it wilfully, and without desire of reformation; some, in covetousness
and extortion; some, in lust and filthiness.

Thirdly, in the degrees or measure of righteousness. The Pharise is careful of
some few works, of which he seeks glory: but the righteousness of the just man,
is as the waves of the sea: he is industrious to increase in all well-doing,
and to be filled with the fruits of righteousness every day, Esaias 48.18.

Fourthly, in the continuance of righteousness. The just man does righteousness
at all times, Psalm 106.2. Luke 1.75. His desire is for ever to be employed in
good works: whereas the Pharisees righteousness is but by fits, and as the
morning deaw, and if trouble come for righteousness, he falls away, and forsakes
his righteousness, etc.

And thus of the use for trial.

Use 2. Secondly, the excellent living of such as live righteously, may greatly
reprove such as cannot be stirred with these things to a conscionable care of
forsaking their sins, and of living righteously.

Quest. What should be the cause, that such men as hear so much of the
excellent estate of righteous men, are not persuaded to convert, and embrace
that kind of life?

Ans. The cause is diverse in diverse men: as,

Why so many do not embrace a righteous life.
First, in some it is long of certain corruptions, that discover themselves
about the hearing of the doctrine of righteousness: for, either men's hearts are
like a beaten path in the highway, that the sound of doctrine cannot enter
into their understanding Mat. 13. Or else they understand not with application
to themselves, but think only how the doctrine may fit others, Luke 13.1, 2.
Or else they meet with some hard condition that they are not willing to
observe, as the rich young Pharise did; or some other harsh doctrine, as they
account it: which does so vex and offend them, that they fall clean off from
the respect of Christ and holiness; as, John 6.59, 66. Or else they have some
vile opinions, that let them in the time of hearing; as, to think, that one is
not bound to do as the rules of Scripture do require; or that, if one be not
a gross offender, God will not impute less faults; contrary to our Sauiour's
doctrine, Mat. 5.18, 19, 20. Or else their hearts break, that is, they let the
doctrine run out, and never think of it when they are gotten out of the Church,
Heb. 2.1. Or else they have resisted the light of the truth so long, that God
has now delivered them over to a spirit of slumber, lest they should convert,
and he should heal them, Math. 13.15, 16. Esaias 6.10.

Secondly, in some the world is the cause of it: For either they are entangled
with the examples of the multitude, especially of the wise Ones and great Ones
of the world, 1. Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. Or else they are affrighted with the evil
reports, with which the good way of God is disgraced in the world, Acts 28.22.
Or else they are ensnared with respect of their carnal friends: they are loath
to displease father, or mother, or sisters, or brothers, or any they have great
hopes from, or dependence upon, Math. 10.35, 37. 1. Pet. 4.2. Or else they have
so much business to do, and so many cares about their worldly affairs, they
cannot be at leisure so long as to think, they cannot bring their lives into
order, Mat. 13.22. Luke 17. Or else they live at hearts-ease, and prosper in
their estate, and so desire not to alter their course of life: and so their
prosperity destroies them, Prou. 1.32.

Thirdly, in some men the cause is, the lust after some particular wickedness of
life, in which they live either secretly, or openly, which sin is the very
Idol of their hearts, and hinders a good resolution.

Fourthly, in some the cause is conceitednes; they are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not cleansed: they rest in the outward profession of religion, and
the fear of godliness, and regard not the sound power of it in their lives.

Lastly, in all unregenerate men there are three causes, why they are not
persuaded to a religious life: First, the one is the forgetfulness of their
death: therefore their filthiness is still in their skirts, because they remember
not their latter end, Lament. 1.9. Secondly, the other is, that they are dead
in sin: What should hinder the conversion of multitudes at once, but that we
preach to congregations of dead men? Thirdly, the devil works effectually in
all the children of disobedience, striving to hide the Gospel from them, and
the glory of a righteous life, that so they might perish, 1. Cor. 4.4. And thus
of the second use.

Use. 3. Thirdly, such as consent to obey, and feel themselves raised from
death to life, and are now desirous to spend their days in a religious, and
righteous course of life, must observe all such rules, as may further them, and
establish them in an orderly and fruitful conversation. He that would live in
righteousness, must think on these directions following, as the very gates of
righteousness.

Helps unto a righteous life.
First, he must give over al needless conversation with vain persons and
profane men: he must shun their company, as he would such as have the plague
running upon them: he must not come near them, as is urged, Prou. 14.15. For
what fellowship can be between righteousness and unrighteousness? 2. Cor. 6.14.
Depart from me, ye evil doers, says David: for I will keep the commandments
of my God; Psalm. 119.115.

Secondly, He must redeem time: He must buy time from his worldly occasions,
and settle such an order in his worldly estate, or outward estate, that he may
provide to serve the Lord without distraction, abstayning from all things, that
may entangle him, or interrupt him, Ephesians. 5.16. 1. Cor. 7.29, 35. and 9.28. 2.
Tim. 2.4. He must provide to him time for God's service, and for commerce and
fellowship with the godly, and for works of mercy.

Thirdly, he must be wise for himself: that is, he must in all the means
he uses for or in religion, especially apply, what he can, for his own use
and study himself, and to understand his own way, and provide, whatsoever he
do, for his justification, and sanctification, and final salvation, Pro.
9.12. and 14.8. And to this end he must meddle with his own business, and take
heed of being a busie-body in other men's matters, so much as in his thoughts,
1. These. 4.11, 12. And he must also avoid vain ianglings, and doubtful
disputations in religion, and quarrels that tend not to his edification, but to
show wit, or science, Tit. 3.9. 1. Tim. 6.20. 2. Tim. 2.23. And he must keep
his eye straight upon the mark, to proceed directly and distinctly, in building
himself up in knowledge and grace, not losing his time, or going about, but
keeping a straight path to supply what he wants, and grow in what he has,
Prou. 4.25. Ierem. 31.32. He must take heed of uncertain running, but be
sure to take accounts of himself for all his courses, to see that he go very
straight toward the mark: and finally, he must not respect company, to go the
pase of other men, but run as if he alone were to obtain, striving to
excel, 1. Cor. 9.24. and 14.12.

Fourthly, he must esteem the Word above all treasures, Psalm. 119.72. Math.
13. and take hold of the instruction thereof, as that must be the very life of
his life, Pr. 4.13. (For by the word does God sanctify us, and make us
righteous, John 17.) And he must order his whole course of life so, as that he
may see the means of all his actions from the Word: he must live by the rules
of Scripture, that will live righteously, Gal. 6.16. Now that he may do thus,
he must look to diverse things. First, that he place no confidence in the
flesh, neither trusting upon his own wit, nor carnal reason, nor gifts, nor yet
yielding himself to be a servant to any man's humor, Phil. 3.3. 1. Cor. 7.23.
or opinions, or example, or commandment. Secondly, he must provide to live
so, as he suffer not a famine of the powerful preaching of the Word: he must
labor for the meat that perishes not, John 6.27. and so exercise himself in
the Word morning and evening, that the Word may dwell plenteously in him, Psalm.
1.2. Col. 3.16. Thirdly, he must take heed of adding any more sins, or
duties, then are discovered in the Word, and of detracting from any thing that
is forbidden, or required there, Psalm. 30.6. detesting conceitednes and
singularity, having his conversation in all meeknes of wisdom, Iam. 3.13.

Fifthly, he must daily lift up his heart to God, to seek a way of him, whose
glory it is to teach to profit, and who gives his Spirit to lead men in the
paths of Righteousness, Psalm. 23. Esaias 48.17.

Sixthly, he must remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: For this will be
both the means and the signs of his Sanctification, and true righteousness: It
is the market day for the soul, Esaias 58.13, 14. Exodus 31.13, etc.

Seventhly, he must haste to the coming of Christ, he must dispatch his work
as fast as he can, and to this end he must cast about to find out ways of
well-doing, and when he has any proiects or opportunities of well-doing, he
must not delay, but with heart and readiness finish his work. This is to seek
righteousness, and to haste to it, Esaias 16.5. Amos 5.14. Thus he must observe to
do, as the phrase was, Deuteronomy. 5.22.

Eightthly, it will be a great help unto him, if he get into the way of good
men, and walk with the wise, sorting himself with discreet, and sincere
Christians, Pro. 2.20.

Ninthly, he must keep his heart with all diligence: For thereout comes
life: He must carefully resist the beginnings of sin within, and avoid those
secret and spiritual dalliances of the soul with inward corruptions and
temptations, and withal take heed of secret hypocrisy, in suffering his heart
to be absent, when God is to be served, Pro. 4.23. For thereby he may lose
what he works, if his spirit be not without that guile.

Tenthly, all that know the happiness of a righteous life, should strive to
amend those defects, which are found even in the better sort of people, that so
their life at length may answer to the end of Christ's death: and therefore we
should examine our selves thoroughly.

Defects of a righteous life of two sorts.
The defects and faylings found in the lives of righteous men, may be referred
to two heads. First, for either they fail in the parts of righteousness.
Secondly, or in the manner of well-doing.

First in the parts of it.
In the parts of righteousness there are great failings, whether we respect the
first, or second table. I will briefly touch the principal defects, which are
observed and complained of in Christians in both tables.

And so either in respect of the first table:
In the first table, men fail either in the knowledge of God, or in the
affections to God, or in the service to God.

First, for knowledge: how little do many men know of Gods praises and glory,
that might be known? and how far are many from a right conceit of God, when
they come to think of him, or to worship him?

Secondly, in the most there is a great want in the exercise both of the fear
of God, and trust in God: men have not such awful thoughts of God, as they
should have, nor do they tremble so, as they should, at his judgments that are
in the world, Psalm. 4.4. Heb. 2. vlt. Dan. 6.26. And for the trust in God: men
are specially faulty, that they do not commit their ways daily to GOD for
assistance and success in all estates, Psalm. 37.3, 5 Pro. 26.3. Psalm. 55.22.
resting upon him alone, as they ought to do.

Thirdly, ioying and delighting our selves in GOD, is hardly found in any: and
yet no wife should take such continual delight in her husband, to solace her
self with him, as a Christian ought to do with God, Psalm. 37.4. and 68.3, 4.
Phil. 4.4.

Fourthly, in the service of God there are diverse defects, as,

1. Some neglect the private reading of the Scriptures, who ought to exercise
themselves therein day and night, Psalm. 1.2.

1. In prayer: some have not the gift of prayer, nor seek it: and prayer for
others is extremely neglected, contrary to Gods express commandment, that
enioynes us to pray one for another in many Scriptures.

3. Praising of God in our discourses, as becomes his great glory in his
works, where is this found, and yet required at our hands, and at the hands of
all people; and that which we should do with an whole heart, and while we
live? Psalm. 96.6. 7, 8. and 63.4. and 9.1. and 67.2.

5. Where is that walking with God, required in Scripture? Who does always
set the Lord before him? Where are those soliloquies between the soul and
God? Psalm. 16.8.
Are not many content to go weekly and monthly without speaking to God?

And thus of the defects concerning the first table. Or else in respect of the
second table.


In the second table diverse things may be noted, as were defective in the parts
of righteousness, as,

First, there is a general defect of mercy: men do exceedingly fail in that
liberality to the distressed, and poor servants: The bowels of mercy are
euery-where shut up, either altogether, or in the neglect of many degrees and
duties of mercy.

Secondly, in many Christians there is a fearful want of meeknes, they being
guilty of daily sins, of passions, and worldly vexations, and that many times
with a kind of wilfulnes against knowledge, and conscience.

Thirdly, The cares of life and worldlines do strive, and blemish the
conversation of many, and discover a strange defect of that contempt of the
world should be in them.

Fourthly, domestical disorders do even cry to heaven against many husbands
for want of love, and of most wives for want of obedience, and of servants for
want of diligence and faithfulness in their places.

And thus men fail in the parts of righteousness.

In the manner of weldoing many things are wanting, Defects in the manner of
doing righteously and so,
first, both in the general weldoing of good duties: secondly, and in special
affection to God; thirdly, and in the manner of Gods service.

In General,

In general, 5. ways.
First, zeal of good works is exceeding defective in the most, Tit. 3.14. Men
show not that willingness and feruency of affection should be showed in all
parts of righteousness: men do not lift up their hearts in Gods ways: Gods
commandments are usually grievous and tedious.

Secondly, there ought to be a holy fear in the practice of their good
duties, 1. Pet. 3.2. which is usually wanting: men do so much trust upon
themselves, and do duties with such boldness and neglect of their ways,
whereas they should fear always, Pro. 28.14. Oh that meeknes of wisdom
(required, James 3.9.) where is it to be found?

Thirdly, men are not circumspect to make conscience, even of the least duties
as they ought, and to observe to do them, even to watch for the opportunity of
well-doing, and to look to the means of the performance of every duty, and to
abstain from the very appearance of evil, and to be discreet in looking to
the circumstances of time, place, persons, etc. Ephesians. 5.15. Deuteronomy. 5.32.

Fourthly, there is great want of moderation in Christians: for, either they
are just overmuch, in conceiving too highly of themselves for what they do;
or else they are wicked overmuch, in thinking too vilely of their works,
Eccles. 7.

Fifthly, men are strangely negligent in the growth of grace and knowledge: men
stand still, and do not prosper, and strive to increase in every good gift, as
they ought, 2. Peter 3.18. Many graces are not strengthened, and many works are
not finished.

Secondly, in men's affections to God, how are men defective! Where is he that
loves the Lord with all his heart, and all his might, and all his soul? Deuteronomy.
30.6. and 6.3.

Thirdly, in God's worship, these things are in many wanting.

1. Reverence, and that holy fear which should be showed when we appear
before the Lord, Many defects in Gods worship.
Heb. 12.28. 2. Men usually forget to do all worship in the Name of Christ,
Col. 3.17. 3. The care of praising of God, that is, of looking to God's
acceptance in all service, is much forgotten, Heb. 12.28. 4. The desire of
unity and consent in judgment among our selves when we worship God, is
miserably neglected and rejected by diverse wilful Christians, Zeph. 3.9. Phil.
2.2, 3. 5. Men miserably neglect thankfulness to GOD for the good they receive
daily from his mercies, Col. 3.17. 6. Many fail publicly and shamefully in
want of care to come time enough to God's service, Zach. 8.21. Esaias 60.8.
In these things, Christians should be admonished to mind their ways and
their works, and to strive to walk as becomes the Gospel, and the death of
Christ; that they may hold fast the light of the truth, and show out better the
glory of a Christian life.

And thus of living to righteousness.

Now follows the third form of speech;

By whose stripes we are healed.]

The healing of our sicknesses, is reckoned as another fruit of the Passion of
Christ; or else it is the same with the former, expressed in other words. These
words then are borrowed from the Prophet Esaias, chap. 53.5. who does chiefly
understand the spiritual healing of our souls, of our sins, as the
coherence shows in the Prophet: but yet the Evangelist says, Mat. 8.17. and
understands of the healing of our bodies also. And therefore I consider of the
death of Christ, both in respect of soul and body.

And first, as this healing is referred to the soul, diverse doctrines may be
observed.

Doct. 1. The souls of all men are diseased by nature; even the very souls of
the Elect are so, till they be healed by Christ. The soul is diseased diverse
ways, especially by sorrows and sins: it is the disease by sin, is here meant.

Quest. It would be inquired, how the soul comes to be sick of these
diseases, and why sin is called sickness in the soul.

Ans. This spiritual sickness comes into the soul by propagation. How the soul
comes to be diseased.
Adam has inflicted all his posterity: and every man has increased the
diseases of his nature, by his own wilful transgressions. Now, sin is
called sickness, because it does work that upon the soul, which sickness does
upon the body: for, sin has weakened the strength of the soul in all the
faculties of it; which all men may discern and observe in themselves by nature.
Besides, it causes spottednes and deformity in the soul, as sickness does in
the body: and therefore sin was likened to the leprosy in the Law. Further,
it often causes pain and torment in the soul, as wounds and diseases do in
the body: for, there is no peace to the wicked, especially when God fights
against them with his terrors. Besides, it will cause the death of the soul,
as sickness will of the body, if it be not helped: and so men are said to be
dead in sins.

Use. The use may be, to show the fearful negligence of worlds of people,
that are exceeding careful to help their bodies to health, but never think of
the poor soul, that lies lamentably full of diseases. And withal it shows,
that all wicked men are men of ill natures, because their dispositions are all
diseased, though there be degrees of ill nature, or of this evil in men's
natures, as there is difference of sicknesses in men's bodies. And godly men
should be compassionat, when they see the grievous diseases in the natures and
lives of other men; remembering, that they also were by nature subject to the
same diseases as well as they.

Doct. 2. The diseases in the souls of men, by nature are very grievous; which
is here also implied, in that God was fain to send his own Son to help and
heal us. Now, that the diseases of men's souls are so grievous, may appear
many ways. The diseases of the soul are grievous many ways.
First, because such a multitude of men are infected, not some one person in
the whole world; in the body of mankind, not on some part, but from the crown
of the head to the sole of the foot, all full of sores and diseases. There is
no man that sins not; and so, no man that is not sick: and that is the
reason why men fear the pestilence, because it makes so many sick. Secondly,
because the soul of man by nature is sick of a multitude of diseases at once;
for, even sin is a sickness: and so our sicknesses are innumerable, because
our sins are so. And hence it is, that in Scripture so many metaphors are
used to express the sickness of the soul; as, leprosy, wounds, plagues,
poison, gall, etc. Thirdly, because the disease lies in the soul it self. Of
diseases, those are most mortal, that get into the spirits, and do most
enfeeble man: how much more when it is in the soul? Fourthly, because, in
respect of our selves, our sins or our diseases are incurable: we can give
our selves no remedy that can help us, Ier. 30. Fifthly, because, in the
College of spiritual Physicians, there is scarce one of a thousand that can
help the poor soul out of these diseases, Job 33. Sixthly, because there be
but certain seasons only, in which men can be healed; as it was with the lame
man at the poole of Bethesda: and if men miss these seasons, they are in
danger to dye of these sicknesses. There be seasons of grace, and days of
salvation: and men must not harden their hearts, while it is called To day.

Use. The use should be to awaken wicked men to a serious consideration of
their danger, and at length to think of help for their souls, being thus
diseased; as they would do for their bodies, if they were desperately sick.

Ob. We feel no such diseases in our souls.

Sol. Why many feel not the diseases of their souls.
First, wicked men have a kind of spiritual lethargy upon them, and so are in
grievous danger: but, by reason of their spiritual sleepiness, they feel it
not. Secondly, though they feel not their diseases now, they shall do
hereafter: and then think, what a pain it will be unto them, when God awakens
them whether they will or no. It may be, it will be in this life, as it was with
Cain and Judas: and then a wounded spirit will ache so, who can bear it?
Thirdly, the matter is not altogether so easy with wicked men, as they
pretend: for, they do feel so much as may show they are very sick. Sometimes
they feel their consciences galling and paining them at the heart for the very
time: and what are the passions and perturbations of their (...) may heal us:
If we become not new creatures, the mending of particular faults, is to little
purpose, Esaias 6.10. as we see in Herod.

Sixthly, we must make conscience of it to receive the medicines of the Word of
GOD: For now we are healed by means, not by miracle: Peace and healing are
the fruit of his lips, Esaias 57.18, 19. We must obey them that have the
oversight of it: and suffer their words of exhortation patiently, Pro. 12.18.
He sent his Word, and healed them, Psalm. 107.20. There is no disease in the
soul, but remedies may be found in the Word: Gods words are life to those that
find them, and health to all their flesh: That is good for all diseases, Prou.
4.22. And to this end we must take heed of tampering with our own medicines,
or contesting with our Physicians: we must not be wise in our own eyes: no man
is Physician good enough to heal himself, Prou. 3.7, 8. and we must take
heed of superstitious medicines: In vain shall the daughter of Egypt use
many medicines; for she shall not be cured, Iere. 46.11. Indulgences,
Pilgrimages, Penances, Whipping of the body, or the like, are vain medicines,
and being not appointed by Christ, they will never profit to heal the soul of
sin. And further, such as would be soundly healed, must take heed of secret
flattering teachers, that do all their cures with preaching mercy, and cry
Peace, Peace, and never teach men sound courses to be rid of their sins:
Those are they, that heal the hurt of the daughter of Gods people slightly,
Ierem. 8.11.

Seventhly, look to the beginning of sin: when we first feel lameness in
the ways of righteousness, we must speedily seek help, lest we be turned
clean out of the way. Sins of infirmities nourished or neglected, may prove
grievous diseases at length, Heb. 12.13.

Eightthly, men that have some good evidence, that they are healed by Christ,
that their comfort may be established, they shall do well to show themselves
to the Priest, that he may try and testify, that they are whole from their
Leprosy, Leuit. 14.

Ninthly, if Christ heal us, we must be sure to remember to make him our
praise; we must acknowledge his great mercy in healing our natures, Ierem.
17.14. He stands upon the credit of the cure. Christians fail exceedingly,
that they are not more thankful for deliverance from faults and temptations:
they do less for the cure of their souls, then they do for the cure of
their bodies: we must bless the Lord, and call upon our souls to do it, as
David did, Psalm. 103.1, 3. and 14.13. and the rather should we with all
thankfulness praise God for such cures: First, because no outward medicines can
do any good, God cures only by his Word. Secondly, because God only can cure
us, Ierem. 33.6. Deuter. 32.39. Thirdly, because God accounts it the greatest
honor we can do him, to offer him praise, Psalm. 50.14. Fourthly, because God
never does those cures upon the soul of a man, but he loves him wonderfully
ever after, and forgiues him all his sins, Hosh. 14. Psalm 103. verse 2, 3,
4. Ierem. 33. verse 68.

Tenthly, we must be patient, and endure the medicines, whether they be hard
sayings, or afflictions. David prays to God to wash him, and to purge him with
hysope, and not spare, Psalm. 51.

Eleuenthly, it is a great help to get our souls healed, to show mercy to the
bodies of other men: God will not heal our souls, if we oppress other men's
bodies; as we see in the case of oppressors in our times, Esaias. 58.6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, since in Christ men may be healed, it gives us occasion to bewail
the fearful carelesnes of the most men, that will not seek cure, yea in
places where the means is offered to cure them. All sorts of people are like
Babylon for this confusion: she would not be cured, Ierem 51. Men refuse
cure, and all comfort and advice, yea when they are warned of their diseases,
they break out into more wilfulnes and offending, as God said of Ephraim, When
I would have healed Ephraim, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, Hos.
7.1.

Doct. 4. The fourth doctrine is, that we are cured by Christ's stripes. His
sufferings heal our sorrows: His wounds make us whole: His sickness offers us
health: and his stripes heal us; partly by satisfying for our sins, and so
removing the cause of our diseases both spiritual and corporal; and partly,
by an unspeakable virtue of his Passion, which being applied to our souls,
makes our sins dye. And this point may serve for use many ways:

Uses. First, for information; and so it may show us the wonder of Gods
working, that can do great things by means, in respect of us altogether
unlikely. We hold it a thing almost beyond belief, that the applying of
medicines to the sword that wounded a man, shall make the wounds heal in a
man. But this here is a mystery, that only the Christian Religion can tell
of, of which there never was president in nature: that The wounding of one Man
should heal another, or that the stripes of the Captain should cure all his
diseased soldiers: and yet thus it is, even thus is the Lord pleased to
glorify the power of his working. Secondly, we may hence be informed of the
precious use of every part of Christ's sufferings; not his dying only does us
good, but every thing he did endure: His stripes cure our wounds: his shame
wrought our honor: His temptations drove the devils from us: not any thing was
done to him by his adversaries, but GOD made it work for our good. Shall we
then dare to take offense at the cross of Christ? Have we not reason to glory
in it above all things? Gal. 6.14.
Thirdly, do we not here see, how hateful sin is in Gods sight, and how
foul our diseases are, when nothing can cure us, but Christ's blood, and that
must be fetched out of him with the best stripes, which the hands of the
wicked inflicted upon him. Oh the hardness of our hearts, that can see Christ
thus used for our sins, and yet are not persuaded, that sin is hateful to
God! Oh how should we be sorry for our Savior, and mourn to think of it, as
we would for our only sons! Would it not grieve us at the heart, if we
should see the young Prince, the Kings son basely whipped by our adversaries,
only for our affairs? Oh what hearts have we, that (as bad as they are) would
be melted to see this done to a Kings son, and yet are not troubled to know,
it was done to Gods Son? Fourthly, we may see, what wicked malice will do,
if it be not restrained: to disgrace our Savior, to get a sentence against
him, to bind him hand and foot, yea to kill him, will not serve their turns,
unless they may most basely scourge him before he dies. That malicious men
now do not always so, is not, because their malice does not tend to it, but
because either God, or man restraines them. It is a most devilish humor, and
therefore to be avoided and detested of all those that love the Lord Jesus.

Use 2. Secondly, how many ways should this instruct us, what care the Lord
Jesus requires of us? what should not this make us willing to do? Oh how
should we love him with all our hearts, above all the world, that could endure
to be thus abased, even unto stripes for our sakes, when he could have
prevented it, if he had pleased? what a shame should it be to us to be
impatient, or to think much of our crosses; who though we had suffered many
things, yet not so grievous as those things befell our Savior? Yea further, it
should encourage us to suffer any thing for Christ, and the rather, because we
have not resisted to stripes, or blood, nor cannot now suffer the thousandth
part for him, of that he has suffered for us.

Thus of the healing of our souls.

These words also may be expounded of the healing of our bodies, as we showed
before, and so the like doctrines may be observed, as,

Doct. 1. That the bodies of all men by nature need healing. For sin has
brought upon man the sentence of deformities, and infirmities, and diseases;
and we see, God does inflict diseases upon many, and that of diverse sorts; and
many men, that for the present are free from the pains of diseases, yet have
their enemies in their bodies, in diverse parts of them, laid as it were in
garrison, which may and will break out upon them at a time they know not: or if
they were not there, the Lord from without can send diseases upon them. The
world is every where full of occasions of sickness: or if there were not outward
means to work them, yet God can strike men from heaven.

Use. The use should be to warn such as are in health, to walk humbly: For
they know not, how soon sickness may seize upon them. Secondly, such as have
their friends taken away by sickness, or are yet afflicted, should submit to
Gods will: For this is the case of all men, even the greatest, yea and Gods
elect are liable to such a condition by nature.

Doct. 2. The diseases of the body are grievous; and therefore Christ takes
notice of that kind of distress to provide for the healing of our bodies. We
see by experience, that of many sorts of crosses, it is most grievous to bear
the pains that arise from the wounds or sickness of the body; and it is the
more grievous, partly, because no men are privileged from diseases, but either
have them, or are in danger of them, as was said before, and partly, because
God has armed such a multitude of sorts of diseases, to which the body of man
is liable.

Use. Therefore the use should be, to take warning from these pains of the
body, to prevent eternal pains in hell, by reconciling our selves to that
God, that can so fearfully afflict both body and soul; and as we feel the
outward man to decay, the more to labor for the health of the inward man,
especially by those harbingers of death to provide for the time, when our
change shall come.

Doct. 3 Christ is a Physician for the body of man, as well as for the soul:
In Christ our bodies may be healed. Christ provided healing for man's body, as
well as for his soul, and men's bodies he heales either in this life, or in the
general Resurrection: First, in this life some he has healed by miracle, as
he did multitudes in the days of his flesh, while he was here in this
world; which he did in execution of his office, as having charge of men's
bodies: and some he healed by means, giving his blessing unto the medicines
provided in nature, and applied by the skillful, to the diseased: yea he
undertakes the healing of all Gods Elect in their bodies, as this place
imports, which he does promise, and will perform, if it be good for them.
Many times to heal the body, would hurt the soul, or keep the leper from
heaven, and then Christ will not heal them: else he undertakes, and is bound to
heal the body as well as the soul. But the especial healing is at the
resurrection, when all the bodies of the Saints shall be healed perfectly of
all diseases, and freed from the very disposition, yea the very possibility to
have any diseases.

Use 1. The use should be for great comfort to the godly, when they are
distressed, they may and ought to look up to Christ and say, If it be good
for me, my Savior will heal me; and the rather, because Christ is such a
compassionate Physician, and has had the feeling of our infirmities and pains
that way: and besides, he is such a Physician, as can do two things, that
never Physician could do: For first, he can take away the first causes of
diseases, which is sin, which no Physic can do, Math. 9. Secondly, he can
cure our bodies, when they are stark dead, which never any Physician could
do: they may help some living bodies, but they could never help one dead
body: Yea such as find not cure for the pains of the body, should be of good
comfort, because they should have had cure of it, if it had been good for
them; and they must consider, it is the Lord that does it, Psalm 39. and that
all shall work together for the best, Romans 8. and that nothing can separate
them from the love of Christ; and that they are delivered from eternal pain;
and that Gods dear children have suffered as great torments or weaknesses.

Use 2. Secondly, all men should be taught to seek to Christ for cure, since
it is his office to heal; and to this end men are bound to look to diverse
rules, if they would have CHRIST to heal them.

Rules for such as desire Christ to heal or help their bodily grie^es.
First, they must seek to him for cure, they must pray him to heal them; we
do not read that ever Christ healed any sick person, unless he were brought
to him, or he entreated to heal him: we must pray for our bodies, as well as
our souls: Thus did David, Psalm 6. and 31. and Hezekiah, etc.

Secondly, we must use the lawful means we can get for our healing: our
Savior shows that, when he said, The whole needed not the physicia^, but the
sick; the sick then do need, and must with conscience and care use all lawful
and outward helps that they can attain to, that are fit for them, Matthew 9.

Thirdly, they must take heed of trusting upon the Physician, or Physic given
them: that was Asa his great sin: For if we be cured, it is not Physic,
but Christ that healed us.

Fourthly, we must bring faith to be healed for our bodies also: This our
Savior often asks after, when he is about to cure men's bodies, as the
Evangelists show.

Fifthly, we must be careful to seek the removing of the cause of our
diseases, which is sin especially if we find, that God has a quarrel with
us for any special fault we are fallen into: Thus David got the punishment of
his sin remitted, by judging himself for his sin, Psalm. 32.4, 5.

Sixthly, we must submit our selves to Gods will, and in the case of our bodies,
must resign our selves into his hands, to let him do with us what it shall
please him, since he knows what is best for us: and if Christ will not heal
us now, yet to comfort our selves, as Job did in the hope of that time, when
our Redeemer will be seen of us in the body, when it shall be utterly and
for ever freed from all pains and infirmities whatsoever, Job 19.

Doct. 4. It is further to be noted, that we are not only healed by Christ,
but it is by his stripes: The wounds made in his body, do heal our bodies:
which should make us so much the more to love the Lord Jesus, and the more
patiently to bear it, if we be not presently healed, because he did bear more
grievous pains even in the body, and because if it were good for us, he would
heal us, in that he paid so dear for our healing.

Verse 25. For you were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.


HItherto of the effects of Christ's sufferings in respect of us: In respect of
himself, the effect was his exaltation to become the Shepherd and Bishop of
our souls, even of the souls of all the Elect: which is so implied in the
words of this verse, as withal in a passage is expressed both our misery
without Christ, and our happiness under his government.

The words of this verse in themselves contain three things. First, our misery
by nature: in our selves we are as sheep deceived, or going astray. Secondly,
the means of our recovery out of that estate, and that is, the causing of us
to return. Thirdly, our happiness under the government of Jesus Christ, to
whose charge we are committed when we return.

The first words, expressing our misery, are words borrowed out of the Prophet
Esaias, chapter 53.6, 7. and in the words, unregenerate men, even God's Elect
among them, are likened to sheep. A sheep is a certain image to resemble a man
by. And so we find in Scripture, that a sheep is the image or resemblance,
first, of Christ-man: He is likened to a sheep dumb before his shearer, for his
silence and patience at his arraignment, Esaias 53.7. Secondly, of men that are
true believers, for the harmlessenes, tractablenesse, and profitablenesse, Mat.
25.33. Thirdly, of men that err and wander out of the way of godliness: and
so wicked men, before their calling, are likened to wandering sheep; yea, godly
men after their calling, in respect of their falls or failings, are likened to
sheep going astray; as David says of himself, Psalm 119. vlt. But here it is
understood of the Elect of GOD, before their calling.

The word, here rendered Going astray, properly signifies deceived, and is so
used in diverse places of the new Testament: but the metaphor to the which it is
joined, requires it should be expressed, Going astray, or wandering, or erring;
but so, as it does import two things. First, the evil condition of the
unregenerate: they are like wandering sheep. Secondly, the curse of it; and that
is, they are deceived, they are as sheep deceived.

Now, that this point may be distinctly understood I propound five things to
be considered of. First, what faults in men are meant by the term of going
astray. Secondly, what the misery of their condition is, that do go astray.
Thirdly, what the cause is of their going astray. Fourthly, by what signs a
lost sheep may be known, especially such as are within the Church, which
seems to be the Fold. And lastly, the doctrines that may be briefly noted out
of all the words of that part of the verse.

For the first. Under the term of erring or going astray, What is meant by
going astray.
are construed in Scripture, errors in opinion, James 1.16. Mat. 22.29. called
erring from the faith, 1. Tim. 6.10. whoredom, Numbers 5.12. idolatry, Deuteronomy.
13.5, drunkenness, Esaias 28.1, 7. bribery, and all ways of unrighteousness, 2.
Peter 2.15. all devising of evil, Pro. 14.12. yea, the Prophet Esaias expounds
it of every turning after our own ways, for which we have no warrant in the
Word of God, and in which men persist without repentance, Esaias 53.6. It is
implied, Psalm. 119.110.

For the second. The misery of such as go astray, appears in diverse respects.
The misery of men living in their sins without repentance, is very great. I
am tied to the consideration of it, only so far forth, as the similitude of a
sheep going astray, will import. Every wicked man then, is like a lost sheep,
and that in diverse respects.

1. Because he is not within the compass of God's special providence: GOD
does not tend him, nor look to him: he is no part of his flock: he is without
God in the world, and without Christ; as the lost sheep is without the
protection and keeping of the shepherd. Wicked men have no keeper: they are
left to the way of their own hearts; which is a fearful curse, Esaias 53.6. The
wicked shall be as a sheep that no man takes up, Esaias 13.14. 2. Because he
has no certain pasture. The provision for his life, for soul and body, is
altogether uncertain. He is, like Cain, a vagabond upon the earth. He is here
to day: he knows not where he shall be tomorrow. God has not given him any
assurance of the keeping or getting of any thing he has or desires. He is like
the stray sheep, that has all the world before him, but knows not where to
settle, Mat. 9.36. 3. Because in the midst of all the best possessions of this
life, they have no peace, Esaias 57. vlt. The sound of fear is always in their
ears. If a stray sheep get into a good pasture, yet he is still in fear, apt
to be frighted with every sound, ready to run away upon every occasion: so
is it with them that are rich in the world, and not rich with God, 1. Tim.
6.10. 4. Because he is shut out from all comfortable society with the godly:
he enioyes not the sound fruit of communion with Saints. The stray sheep may
sort with hogs or wild beasts, but from the sheep it is gone away. Evil
company is a miserable plague of a man's life, to sort with such all a man's
days, from whom he may have a world of vanity and filthiness, but not any
thing scarce worthy of the nature of men, in an age. Every wicked man is an
alien, a stranger and forainer from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12. 5.
A sheep going astray, is easily taken by a strange Lord: it is driven any
whither by any body, it is so silly. And such is the fearful estate of a man
living in sin: strange Lords may easily surprise him: false teachers may
easily seduce him: evil company may carry him to any wickedness: a Prince may
turn him to any religion: a very Atheist or devil incarnate may easily lead
him captive. 6. A sheep is apt to be worried with dogs, or devoured with wolves
or wild beasts, when there is no shepherd to tend him. So is it with wicked
men: their souls, their bodies, their estates, are all in danger to be seized
upon by devils, by unjust and unreasonable men; especially as any of them are
more simple, so they are more liable to become a prey to the mighty Ones of the
earth. 7. Men that wander out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead, Psalm 49.15. Pro. 21.16. And therefore he that
conuerts a man from the error of his way, is said to save a soul from death,
James 5. vlt.
And this going astray of unregenerate men is the more grievous, because they
are liable to many aggrauations: for,

First, Aggrauations of their misery.
they go astray from the womb: they were never yet in the right way, Psalm 58.3.

Secondly, because they wander in every work they do, as was said of Egypt,
Esaias 19.14. All their works are abominable, Psalm 14. All things are impure.

Thirdly, because this is the curse of all unregenerate men: we are turned
every one to his own way, Esaias 53.6.

Fourthly, because they delight to wander, place their felicity in their
sins, and will not be reclaimed or advised.

Fifthly, because they may provoke God so long, that he may swear, they shall
never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.10, 11.

The third point is, the cause of their going astray; and that is noted in the
original word, They were deceived. Causes of men's going astray.
Now then it is to be considered distinctly, who are the great deceivers of
the world, that cause millions of souls to go astray.

First, the devil is the Arch-deceiuer, he has been a lier, and a murderer
from the beginning, he deceived our first Parents, and made them and all their
posterity go astray, John 8.44. 1. Tim. 2.14. and by him are all wicked men
drawn out of the way, and led captive at his will, 2. Tim. 2.26.

Secondly, Antichrist is the next great deceiuer, who by his sorceries made all
nations in the time of the Gospel go astray, Eccles. 18.23. with his devilish
doctrine, and by wicked sorceries he deceived the Christian world.

Thirdly, a swarm of wicked ministers have deceived whole towns and
countries, and made the sheep go astray, even their whole flocks in many
places, some of them, because they take the fleece, and never feed the flock,
Ezech. 34.2, etc. John 10.12. Some of them by preaching lies, and flattering
the people with devices of men, and say, Peace, when there is no peace, Ierem.
23.17, 19, 20, 32.

Fourthly, the world is a mischievous deceiuer, and it deceives by evil
example, and evil company, and evil report raised against the godly, and the
good way, and the inticements of profits and pleasures, and vanities of all
sorts, and honors, and the like.

Fifthly, man's own heart deceives him, yea the heart of man is deceitful
above all things, Ierem. 17.9. It will use such carnal reasons, pretend such
vain excuses, intertaine such deceiuable hopes, and join it self to such
swarms of temptations and lusts, as it cannot avoid wandering, if there were no
other deceivers to go withal: The way of our own hearts is always to go
out of the way.

Sixthly, ignorance of the Scripture is a chief cause of erring and going
astray, both in opinion and life, Math. 22.29.

Seventhly, the love of some particular sin, does utterly undo many a man,
that will not be warned of the deceitfulnes of sin, Heb. 3.12. Thus
covetousness made many a man to err from the faith, 1. Tim. 6.20.

Eightthly, God himself in a fearful kind of Justice many times not only
consents, but permits a very spirit of perverseness and error to seize up on
some men, that refused to be guided, or kept by God: so as they are given over
to eternal perdition and destruction by reason of it. Esaias 16.14. Job 12.28.


Fourthly, the signs of a lost sheep follow, and they are:

First, Signs of a lost sheep.
he that refuses reproof, is out of the way. Men that cannot abide to be
told of their faults, are not healed, Prou. 10.17. as he is in the way of
life, that keeps instruction.

Secondly, he that lives in any known sin without repentance, is a lost
sheep.

Thirdly, he that fouleth with his feet, that which the good sheep should
eat or drink, and he that thrusts with the side, and pusheth the diseased
with his horns, is no good sheep, Ezech. 34.17, 19, 21. They are so far
from feeding upon the good Word and Ordinances of God, that by wicked
reproaches they soul it as much as they can: and they, that if they find a
poor Christian that is diseased with some infirmities will push at him, to
dis-harte^ him utterly from a religious course, these are wicked beasts, they
are no good sheep.

Fourthly, he that lives without God and Christ, that can spend whole days and
nights without any communion with God, yea that when he is present before God,
finds his heart continually carried with wandering distractions, that constantly
draw him away from all inward attendance upon God, Ephesians. 2.12. Esaias 29.13. he
erres in his heart, Psalm 95.10.

Fifthly, he that has no other companions of his life, but swine and wild
beasts, that is, wicked men of all sorts, especially when it is joined with
willing neglect and sh^^^ing of the society of the godly, Psalm 5. 2. Cor. 6.

Sixthly, he that tastes nothing but earthly things, and finds no savor in
spiritual things, it is a sign that he is out of the pasture, and feeds in
the wilderness, Romans 8.1. John 2.18.

Seventhly, he that when he is told, he is out of the way blesses himself
in his heart, when it is plainly found, that he openly wandereth, Psalm. 36.1,
2. Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Eightthly, he that lives in any of the gross sins expressly mentioned in the
Catalogue in Scripture, without repentance, as swearing, Cor. 3. adultery,
covetousness, drunkenness, railing, extortion, 1. Cor. 6.9. or the known sins
of deceit, Micah 6.10.

Ninthly, he that does his works of purpose to be seen of men, resting only
in the praises of men, not seeking the praise of God, Math. 6. Romans 2.26.

Tenthly, he that knows not Gods ways, especially if he desire not knowledge,
or intertain wilful Objections against the means of knowledge, Psalm 95.10.

Eleuenthly, they that spend their zeal in meeting with other men's infirmities,
neglecting sound reformation in themselves. It is the wisdom of the prudent
to understand his own ways, but to be a busibody in other men's matters, is
erring, and the folly only of fools, Pro. 14.8. Every busibody is out of the
way.

The doctrines follow: and so diverse things may be observed out of these words.

Doct. 1. Even godly men before their calling, were out of the way, as lost
sheep, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.2. Tit. 3.3. Which should serve, First, to
set out the riches of Gods free grace, as the only first cause of the happiness
and salvation of the Elect: Secondly, it should teach the godly diverse duties
both toward God, other men, and themselves. As for God, they should live to his
praise, and spend their days in magnifying his great compassions in their
deliverance, that deserved so ill at his hands. And withal, it should teach
them to put all their trust in God, seeing they carry about them a nature that
has been apt to wandering, and therefore have cause to mistrust themselves. And
for other men that are out of the way, they should pity them, and carry
themselves with all meeknes and charity, remembering what themselves have been,
Tit. 3.1, 2, 3. And for themselves, they should be the more humble and abased,
hating all pride and conceitednes, and contempt of others.

Doct. 2. A man may be a sheep, and yet lost. Not only Dogs, Goats, Swine,
Lions, etc. may be out of the way, but even sheep may wander, and be clean
lost: men of harmless natures, and such as are profitable members of humane
societies, and such as are of a gentle disposition, and free from gross
offenses, yet may be utterly lost, and clean out of the way of happiness;
and, if they return not by repentance, may perish for ever. And this is a point
which should maruellously affect ciuil-honest men* and move them at length to
see the weak vanity of their confidence, in their praises for ciuility of
nature or life.

This is a doctrine very hardly entertained by this sort of men, and the
rather, because they think they want nothing unto the praise of a good life;
never considering, that they are not religious, tho they be civil; and that
they have a world of inward impurities, though they are free from outward
gross uncleanness of life; and that they never felt the ioies of the holy
Ghost to approve of them, though they have been tickled with the praises of
men; and that they have not sought or desired the assurance of God's favor, or
a better life, but spent their time in a still dream, without providing for
what is most necessary; and that they never serve God, nor have had any
sociable fellowship with him in any of his Ordinances, in respect of the inward
power of them.

Doct. 3. To break out from the means of Religion, and from the society of
godly Christians, is the very way to undo many a soul. A sheep is lost when it
is gotten from sheep, and is out of the pasture, and has no discreet shepherd
to take the care of it.

Thus of the first part, that is, man's misery by nature.

The means of recovery out of that misery, follows; and that is noted in the
word Return. Where first may be observed, that wicked men may return. It is
not impossible for men that have spent a great part of their lives in sin and
vanity, at the length to be saved. And it is the first part of a man's work that
would return, to inform himself seriously of the arguments that may prove,
that he may be helped out of his misery. The first thing a diseased man
inquires after, is, whether his disease be curable or no.

Now, there are diverse things that give hope of curing and salvation, even to
men that are as yet clean out of the way; as,

Diverse things that give hope of curing to such as bre out of the way.
First, the disposition of God toward sinners which appears, first, because he
swears he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should return
and live, Ezech. 18.21. Secondly, he is patient, and has been with thee all
this while; and he is therefore patient, that men might repent, and be saved,
Romans 2.4. 2. Pet. 3.9. Thirdly, he has declared himself to be willing to
forgive all sins, but only the sin against the holy Ghost. One sin only
is unpardonable: all other sins may be forgiven.

Secondly, the sufficiency of the sacrifice of Christ: He is the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. Romans 3.25.

Thirdly, the work of God's grace already showed unto them. For, first, God
has placed them in the visible Church, where repentance and salvation may be
had. Secondly, he has bestowed upon them many temporal blessings, to allure
them to seek to him for mercy. Thirdly, he causes the Gospel to be preached
to all sorts of men without exception. And so grace is offered to them: and
there is no other let, but their refusal of grace offered.

Fourthly, the example of all sorts of sinners, that have returned. As great
sinners as they, have been received to mercy; and they are set out as examples
to encourage other men to seek mercy; as, Manasses, Mary Magdalene, David,
Peter, Paul, and others. Many among the Corinthians have been notorious
offenders, but were justified and sanctified.

The explication of the doctrine of returning, follows; where these things are
to be considered of, etc.

First, the motives to persuade men to return.

Secondly, the persons that need returning.

Thirdly, the time when men must return.

Fourthly, the false ways men must avoid in returning.

Fifthly, what a number of lost sheep do usually return.

Sixthly, the aggrauations against certain persons for not returning.

Seventhly, the means of returning.

Eightthly, the manner how we must return; or, the rules to be observed in
returning.

Ninthly, the signs of a lost sheep returned.

Lastly, the lets of returning.

For the first. Motives to return.
I mean not to insist upon all sorts of motives, but to follow the word Return,
as it is used in Scripture, and take a few of the fittest motives, as it is
used in this place. And so, diverse things should make a man to return; as,

First, the consideration of God's marvelous goodness, and amiablenesse of
nature to all such as turn unto him: he is wonderful gracious to them, and
merciful, and will repent him of the evil, Joel 2.12, 13. Ier. 31.19, 20. The
parable of the lost sheep shows this fully.

Secondly, the great danger that men are in, if they return not. GOD is angry
with the wicked every day, Psalm 7.12. And his fury may break forth suddenly
upon them like fire, Ier. 4.4. For, the words of his servants will certainly
take hold upon them, Zach. 1.4, 6. and iniquity will be their ruin, Ezech. 18.
verse 30. Except they repent, they must perish Luke 13.5. And therefore if we
warn men of their sins, and they will not return, we are delivered, and
their blood will be upon themselves, Ezech. 3.19.

Thirdly, if a man consider but the happiness of such as do return, GOD will
forgive them all their sins, he will abundantly provide for them, Esaias 55.7.
If they return, they shall live and not die, Ezech. 18.23. and 33.11. and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and mourning shall flee
away, Esaias 51.11. and in this verse the Apostle shows their happiness. For they
shall always live under Jesus Christ, as the Shepherd and Bishop of their
souls. For these and many other reasons, it is the only wise course to
return, Luke 1.16. And there is not one wise man amongst all them that return
not, Job 17.

And thus of the motives.

Persons that need returning.
The second point is, the persons that need returning. It is certain, that those
that live out of the visible Church, or in false churches, need returning: As
Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, Schismatics, and all Heretics: Yea Judah and
Jerusalem need repentance, Ierem. 4.4. and 26.2, 3. Men that live in the
visible Church, and are baptized, need to return, or else they will perish,
Luke 13.5. John 3.3.

The time of returning.
The third point is, the time of returning: and in short, the best time to
return, is the present time, while it is yet called to day, while we have the
means of returning, when God calls upon us by the ministry of his servants,
especially when he knocks at the door of our hearts, and lays the axe to the
root of the tree, it is wonderful dangerous to defer repentance: for even the
longer thou live in sin, the more hard will thy heart be, Heb. 3.13. and
the means of grace, even the Kingdom of God may be taken away: or God may cut
thee down even by sudden death, or may cast thee into a reprobate sense, and
give thee up to a heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.4, 5.

The fourth point is, False ways to be avoided in returning.
the false ways to be auoidid in returning, and these are, First, to return
with despair, or to go back without the guide faith in Gods mercy, or to go
the way that despair leads. In this way Cain and Judas perished. Secondly, to
return fainedly, and not with a man's whole heart; to make a show of returning,
when men do not return indeed, Ierem. 3.10. Thirdly, to return but part of
the way, and to repent by halues, as Ahab, and Herod did. Fourthly, to return,
when it is too late, even when the door is shut: to repent, when it is too
late, Job 27.9.

The fifth point is, Aggrauations against diverse that return not.
the aggrauations, that lie against diverse persons about their not returning.
For if it be evil in it self for any, not to return: then how fearful is
their case? First, that are proud of their skill in going out of the way; that
are wise to do evil, Ierem. 4.22. Secondly, that are deeply revolted, that
is, that are such as live in horrible and fearful sins, Esaias 31.6. Thirdly,
that will not return, though their transgressions be upon them, and they pine
away in them, Ezech. 33.10. They will not give over, though they have no peace,
and are daily buffeted for their evil doing, and their consciences bear the
shame and trouble of their offending. Fourthly, that will not return, though
the servants of God openly testify against them, Neh. 9.29. 2. King. 17.13, 14.
Fifthly, that will not return, though the hand of God be upon them, even to
consume them, Ierem. 5.3. Sixthly, that are turned back by a perpetual
backsliding, Ierem. 8.4. that hold fast their sins, and refuse to return,
Ierem. 8.5.

What number of lost sheep do usually return.
The sixth point may be this, viz. what number of lost sheep do usually
return, not all that go astray: Our Savior tells us of a parable of one lost
sheep returning: and the Prophet Jeremy tells us of one of a Tribe, and two of
a Tribe, Ierem. 3.14. Multitudes of men perish, and never return.

The means of returning.
The seventh point is the means, or cause of our returning, and these are
either Principal, or Isntrumental: The principal causes are GOD, and Christ
that good Shepherd: It is God, that turns back the captivity of his people,
Psalm. 14. vlt. and three times in one Psalm the people pray God to turn them
again Psalm 80.3, 7, 19. This is Ephraims suit, Turn thou me, O Lord, and I
shall be turned, Ierem 31.18. So the Church says, Lamen. 5.21. And Christ is
that good Shepherd, that seeks that which is lost, yea lays down his life
for his sheep, John 10. The isntrumental causes of returning, are either
external or internal. The external means of returning, is the Word
preached, and so both the reproves of Gods servants testifying against the
wicked, to make them turn from their sins, Nehem. 9.26, 29. as also the
promises of the Gospel, by which the sinner in the name of Christ, is as it
were wooed and entreated to return with assurance of salvation. The internal
means, is Faith: For that is it, which turns a man clean about, and causes
him to set his face upon God, and Jesus Christ, and to leave all his old
courses, and by-waies, Acts 15.9.

The eightth point is, The manner of returning.
the manner how we must return: and so we shall find in Scripture diverse
things urged upon us.

First, that we, in returning make a through search and trial of our ways, to
find out distinctly in what particulars we have gone astray, Lamen. 3.40.
they must remember and bethink themselves and turn, Psalm 23.28.

Secondly, we must with true sorrow bewail our former wanderings, and judge
our selves for them; going and rejoicing, we must go with our faces toward
Zion, Ierem. 51.4, 5. Hosh. 14.2, 3. 2. Chron. 6.24, 37. Ierem. 3.13. Joel 2.12.

Thirdly, we must order our ways to a general reformation. The Prophet
complains, that they would not frame their doings to turn to the Lord:
importing, there can be no returning to GOD, unless men cast their courses
into a frame of reformation, Hosh. 5.4. Men must amend their doings and their
works, Ierem. 35.15.

Fourthly, we must return in sincerity, and that has diverse things
considerable: for,

1. We must return with our whole hearts, not fainedly, Ierem. 3.7. 2. Chro.
6.38. our very faces must be turned from so much as looking after our
abominations, Ezech. 14.6.

2. We must return from our own evil ways, every man from his way: note
it, from his way, that is, from those courses, in which he has specially
offended, James 3.8. Esaias 55.7. the wicked must forsake his way.

3. We must forsake not only outward sins, but inward sins also: we must
reform the wandering of our hearts, as well as our lives: the unrighteous must
forsake his very thoughts, Esaias 55.7. and put down the very Idols of his
heart, Ezech. 14.7.

4. We must turn from all our transgressions: It is not enough to forsake
sin, as some outward, or inward sins: but we must forsake all sorts of
sins, Ezech. 18.30.

5. We must return with resolution never to start back: we must not be like
a deceitful bow, Hos. 7.16.

Fifthly, we must so return, as we must consecrate our selves to God, to
wait upon him continually, Hos. 12.6. and to serve the true and living God, 1.
These. 1.9. and to do works meet for repentance, Acts 26.20.

The ninth point is, the signs of returning, or how we may try whether we be
effectually returned; and that may be partly gathered by some of the points
before, and partly, by some other things may be added: He that is truly
turned, may know it,

First, Signs to know who are truly returned.
by the cause of his returning. It was somewhat above his own power or
disposition. It was God, that turned him by his Word: neither did he turn out
of despair, as Judas did: but faith in God, and persuasion of Gods goodness in
Christ, made him return: He fears God, and his goodness.

Secondly, by the manner of his returning: For if he return in the manner
before mentioned, he needs not doubt the truth of his repentance: especially
if he be sure to have no hypocritical or carnal ends of his reformation,
and that he do desire to return from all his transgressions, making
conscience of the least commandment of God, as well as the greatest, and of
secret sins, as well as open, and of the evil that cleaues to his best
works, Esaias 1.16.

Thirdly, by the fruits of repentance, or returning; and so he may comfort
himself,

1. If he esteem Christ's pasture above all worldly things, finding the
sweetest savor in the Word, of all things in this life, Psalm. 19. and 119. 2.
Cor. 2.

2. If he have a mind to know God, that he find, that out of habitual
disposition he have an ernest desire to know God, and to be known of him,
Hos. 6.3.
Ier. 24.7. he will follow on to know the Lord.

3. If he do distinguish between the precious, and the vile, Ierem. 15.19.
and discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves
God, and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.18. esteeming godly men to be the
only wise men, Luke 1.17.

4. If he be careful to put iniquity far from his Tabernacle: If he be
careful to reform his house, and cannot abide to dwell where sin dwells
unreformed, Job 22.23.

5 If he become as a little child for humility, and trust upon God for all
things necessary, as the little child trusts upon his father for diet,
clothes, inheritance, preferment, etc. without any doubting or carking care.

6. If he be earnest with God to heal his nature, and to perfect his work,
Esaias 19.22. Ierem. 31.18, 19. He prays, and that earnestly for the mending of
his disposition to wander.

7. If he be profitable according to his bigness and pasture, if he be
full of mercy and good fruit, if he be zealous of good works.

These be things meet for repentance, that is, things that be of equal
weight with it in the scales: they, each of them, weigh just as much as
repentance.

The last point is, what should be the reason, that men have so little mind to
return: They will not be driven home again, though they know that they live
sinfully, and hear of Gods wrath, and discern vanity in all their pleasures,
and that sin has usually proved it self to be a lie, and that they are in
danger of strange punishments, and of eternal torment. Quest.
What (I say) should be the lets of returning, or rather the causes, that they
mind not to return?

Answer. The causes are:

First, Lets of returning.
the devil is the cause, he has blinded their eyes, and works effectually in
them, and leads them wandering, and captive at his will, 2. Cor. 4.3. Ephesians. 2.2.
2. Tim. 2.26.

Secondly, impotency of consideration is the cause they neither can, nor do
think of the arguments should make them to return, or move them: they cannot
spend an hour in the consultations upon it, whether they do well, not to
return.

Thirdly, ignorance of the glory of Religion, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
Col. 1.26. there is a veil upon their hearts, 2. Cor. 3.

Fourthly, opinion that it is a dishonor and shame to return: this makes
diverse continue in erroneous and humorous conceits, or in fantastical
conformity to the wicked: yea in the very excuses of sinning, because they
fear they shall be vilified, laughed at, and censured for it.

Fifthly, expectation to have their particular courses to be proved to be
sins. Thus do almost all men in their times persist in their sins, under
the couerture of this question, Who can prove them to be sinners? Thus scapes
usury, excess, and vanity of apparel; excess likewise in drinking of
healths, til the wine inflame them, swearing profanation of the Sabbath, etc.
being willingly ignorant of this, that God has condemned sin in the general
in Scripture, and lays it to men to look unto it, that they fall not into his
hands for transgressing; and if they doubt, they must be ruled by their
teachers.

Sixthly, forgetfulness of their latter end: Therefore is their iniquity in their
skirts still, because they remember not their last end: for both the terror of
that day, and the shortness of their life, and the judgments they would meet
with of those things, if they were to dye, would fright them out of those
courses. But they will not apply their hearts to wisdom, because they cannot
remember their days, Lament. 1.9. Psalm. 90.12.

Seventhly, evil teachers are a great hindrance: For they strengthen the hands
of the wicked, and by preaching peace, persuade them they are in no danger,
Ierem. 23.14. Ezech. 13.22.

Eightthly, in some there is a very spirit of fornication in the midst of them,
they are so excessiuely delighted with an influence after the courses they
take, that no arguments can enter into their hearts, though they have never so
good means used, Hosh. 5.4.

Ninthly, there is in some men a senseless spirit, a fat heart, a reprobate
mind, so as the things they do see, yet they cannot lay them to their hearts,
nor be stirred by them; and so for the most part they see little or nothing at
all, but are utterly vnteacheable: There are of these sorts of men almost in
all assemblies and conditions of Christians, where they have had the means
with much power, Esaias 6.10. Acts 28.27.

Tenthly, there is in some a perverse spirit, wilfully to reject the Word of
GOD, and all good counsel, though they know they are not right, and so follow
vanity and become vain, 2. King. 17.14, 15. and by following foolish vanities,
forsake their own mercies.

Eleuenthly, the custom of the world has overcome many, and that makes their
hearts dead and senseless, and careless of returning: the examples of the
most, and of the wise men, and great ones of the world, has confirmed them in
their wanderings, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

Twelfthly, despair is the cause in some, they say there is no hope, Ierem.
18.12.

Use. The use of all should be especially, to awaken the careless, and to
persuade men, all shifts and excuses laid apart, to set their hearts upon this
work of repentance, and returning: men should not be like horses or mules, but
receive instruction, and turn unto the Lord: else iniquity will be their
ruin: If they repent not, they must perish: and they do nothing by their
delays, but heap up wrath against the day of wrath. They live foolishly: for
while they reject God's Word, what wisdom can be in them? and they must die
miserably. Are they not as the clay in the hands of the potter, and will they
still provoke God to his face? Yea if they frustrate the power of all the
means they enjoy, so as it may not be of effect to turn them: it shall be
easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for them: yea the
very dust of their feet, whose ministry they have despised, will rise up in
judgment against them.

Unto the Shepherd.]

The happiness of the penitent consists in this, that they live ever after
under a Shepherd and Bishop for their souls.

First then, they have a shepherd to tend them. Here diverse things are to be
inquired.

First, who this Shepherd is, seeing the Text mentions him not expressly. The
Prophet Ezechiel says, It is God's servant David, Ezech. 34.23. and in Heb.
13.20. the Lord Jesus, raised from the dead, is said to be the great Shepherd
of the sheep; who is therefore called David, because he came out of the loins
of David.

Secondly, who the sheep are: and they are not cattle, but men, Ezech. 34.
vlt. yet not all men, but God's Elect, even those his Father gave him, John
10.29. and those chiefly when they are returned, as the coherence shows.

What attributes are given to Christ as a shepherd
Thirdly, the attributes given to this Shepherd in other Scriptures. Here he is
named barely, The Shepherd: but, it is profitable for us to know what kind of
Shepherd he is; and so, four things are said of him.

Christ is one Shepherd.
1. That he is one Shepherd, that is, that it is he only to whom immediately
the charge of these men is given, Ezech. 34.23.

He is the true shepherd
2. That he is the true Shepherd, and that in diverse respects. First, in
respect of his calling: he came not in by the window, as the thief and robber
does, but was called of God to this work, even from the womb, Esaias 49.1. John
10.2. Secondly, he is a true Shepherd, because he has all the imploiments
that belong to a shepherd: he goes out to his flocks with a rod, and a
staff, and his shepherds crook: he has a rod to driue-on his sheep, both a
rod of instruction and correction: and he has a crook to catch them and pull
them back: and he has a staff to drive away evil beasts, Psalm 23. Thirdly,
he is the true Shepherd, because never shepherd did his work, or discharged
the trust and care laid upon him, so faithfully. The best Pastors, and their
actions done by those that be men, and after their own hearts, yet have many
frailties, and fail many ways, both in the skill, attendance and power.

3. That he is the good Shepherd by an excellency, He is the good shepherd
John 10.11. and so he is in diverse respects. First, because other shepherds
have their flocks delivered to their hands: but he seeks his sheep, and has
none but such as he was fain to find out in the woods, and deserts, and
solitary places of the world; yea, he left (as it were) his own glory, to come
down from heaven to look these lost sheep, Ezech. 34* 11, 12. Secondly,
because he laid down his own life to redeem his sheep, and to get power to
bring them back, John 10.15. yea, put his neck under the sword of his Fellow,
his Father: he was contented, that his own Father should kill him, Zach. 13.7.
Thirdly, because he keeps such sheep as have no fleeces on them, but what he
gives them: all his were naked sheep, that no other shepherd would have taken
up: he clothes them all with the fleeces of his own righteousness, and so
becomes the Lord their righteousness, 1 Timothy 1.13, 16 1 Cor. 9.10 11
Ier. 23.4 6. Fourthly, because he is compassionately moved with the wants and
distresses of his sheep; not for himself, but for their sake: and this he
shows, not only by pitying them when they have no subordinate shepherds to
tend them, but by loathing those evil shepherds, that lead them to evil
pastures, or any way hurt them, Zachary 11.8.

And he is the great Shepherd, and that in diverse respects.
4. That he is the great Shepherd, Heb. 13.20. and so he is in diverse respects:
First, because his sheep are his own. Other shepherds, for the most part, tend
the sheep of other men: but all his sheep are his own, John 10.12. Secondly,
because he marks all his sheep: he did not only seek them when they were
lost, but made them when they were not, Psalm 100.3. They are not only the
people of his pasture, but the sheep of his hands. Thirdly, because he has
more flocks than any shepherd ever had: for, he has flocks in all parts of
the world, to the very ends of the earth, Micah 5.4. For, he was not only to
raise up the Tribes of Israel, but to be a light to the Gentiles, and gives
salvation to the ends of the earth, Esaias 49.6. Fourthly, because he is great in
skill and power: in skill, because though he have such great flocks, yet he
knows all his sheep particularly, and calls them all by their names, John
10.3. And so he knows all their wants and diseases too, and all the ways to
help and cure them. In power, because he has a mighty Arm, Esaias 40.10, 11.
And he stands and friends them in the strength of Iehoua, and in the Majesty
of the Name of the Lord his God, Micah 5.4. And besides, he shows it in his
ability to drive away from his flocks, even those hurtful beasts that other
shepherds cannot resist. If a Lion, or the hungry Lion, roar after his prey,
he will not care for the voice of a multitude of shepherds called out against
him, says the Prophet, Esaias 31.4. yet this Shepherd, alone with his voice,
can make the fiercest Lion leave his prey, and run away: He can make the
Devils flee, and restrain the rage of cruel Tyrants.

Fifthly, because he is a Prince, as well as a Shepherd. Other shepherds are
usually no more than ordinary men: but he is a great Prince, and therefore must
needs be a great Shepherd, Ezech. 34.23.

Sixthly, because he is the Arch-Shepheard, the Prince of shepherds; He, under
whose authority all other shepherds are, and to whom they must give accounts,
1. Pet. 5.4.

Thus of the attributes given to this Shepherd.

The happiness of those that live under the government of such a Shepherd,
follows.

First, The happiness of such as live under this Shepherd, appears in ten
particular privileges.
he will feed them, as a shepherd does his flock: they that wait upon the
Lord, shall be fed, Psalm 37.3. And thus chiefly he will feed their souls:
they shall grow, and eat, and find pasture, John 10.9. He will feed them with
knowledge and understanding, Ier. 3.15. and with such food as will breed life,
and life in more abundance, John 10.10. They shall neither hunger nor thirst.
He that has mercy on them, shall lead them by the Springs of water; he shall
guide them: those Springs of water, are his Ordinances, Esaias 49.10. and their
pasture is fat pasture, Ezech. 34.14. The chief feeding-place is his holy Hill,
the Temple, and Sanctuary: and that shall be a blessing to his flo^^: there
shall be showers of blessings in their seasons, Ezech. 34.26. He does not
feed in the fields and Deserts: but, with a more excellent feeding, he feeds
them in his garden, in the very beds of spices, every doctrine being as a
several spice; and the whole sum together, as a bed of spices, Cant. 6.2, 3.
The Prophet David seems to resemble powerful and flourishing doctrine, to
green pastures; and the secret and sweet comforts of the Sacraments, to still
waters, Psalm 23.2.

Secondly, he will tend and keep them so, as,

1. The wild beasts shall not tear them: Tyrants, Heretics, di^^ls shall not
make a pray of them, Ezec^. 34.25. so as they should dwell safe, though they
were in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, Ezech. 34.25, 28. Though they
walk through the valley of death, they need not fear, Psalm 23.4.

2. He will judge the Ramms and the Goats that push at them, that is, he will
revenge the wrongs are done unto them by such as live in the same churches with
them, that reproach or oppose them, Ezech. 34.17. etc.

3. The Sun shall not smite them, Esaias 49.10. that is, the wrath and anger of
God shall not afflict their spirits, but they shall lie down in great rest and
tranquillity of conscience, Ezech. 34.13.

4. If they fall into diseases, he will give them such medicines, as shall
refresh their souls, Psalm. 23.3.

5. They shall want nothing, Psalm. 23.1.

6. None of them shall be lacking, he will keep all that are given to him,
no man shall take them out of his hands, John 10.29. Ierem. ^3.4.

7. He will order them, not by force and cruelty, but by judgments, Ezech.
34.16. showing a due respect of the several ages and condition^ of his sheep,
Esaias 40.11.

8. He will go in and out before them himself, and they shall follow him,
and he will lead them in the paths of righteousness, John 10.4. Psalm. 23.3.

9. He will do more for them, then any Shepherd did for his flock: he will
make them live ever, he will give them eternal life, Ioh. 10.29.

10. Lastly, all this is the more comfortable, because he has tied himself
by covenant for his sheep, to do all this for them, Ezech. 34.25.

Use. The use should be for instruction, and so both to Ministers, and to the
people.

First, to Ministers: They should here learn to be wonderful careful of the
finding and feeding of the flocks committed to their charge, seeing Christ
ordinarily and externally does administer this work by their service: If they
be not careful, they dishonor (as much as lies in them) the office of
Christ: The feeding, which under Christ, on Gods holy hill, they should provide
for the people, is the chief blessing of the life of a penitent sinner, John
21. 1. Pet. 5.2.

Secondly, to the people: The people that are good, should hence learn

1. To pray to CHRIST to show them where he feeds, that they may be
directed to the fertile pastures of some powerful Ministry. Cant. 1.7.


2. To trust upon Christ for all things necessary for their souls: Since God
has appointed him as the Shepherd of our souls, we should glorify his
office, by believing in him, and relying upon him: never sheep had a better
shepherd; and therefore we need not fear any more, nor be dismayed, Psalm
37.3. Ierem. 23.4.

3. Our hearts should be set upon the house of Christ, and upon his Word, as
the food of our souls: we should run to Church with great willingness and
appetite, as the sheep do to their foddering places.

4. When we find good pasture, and safe feeding, we should be wonderful
thankful, and seek all his praise with joyful hearts, Psalm. 79. vlt. and 100.

5. We should submit our selves to the Ministers of the assemblies, whose
words are like goades, and like nails fastened, because they are given by this
our Shepherd, Eccles. 12.11.

6. If the spiritual Assyrian break into the Church of Christ, we should
remember, that if seven Shepherds, and eight principal men be raised up
against him, he shall be driven away, Mich. 5.5.

But withal we must take heed, and look to it, that we be right sheep of
his pasture: For there are multitudes in the flocks of Christ, that he will
not feed, he takes no care of them, but says of them, Zach. 11.9, 10.
That that will die, let it dye. And as a shepherd separateth the goats from
the sheep: so will Christ separate a world of wicked ungodly men from the
good, though they now be often folded together in one assembly. It is the poor
of the flock only, that are his sheep, Zach. 11.7. such as hear his voice,
and depend only upon it, and will follow Christ, John 10.3, 4, 5, 27.

Lastly, we may hence gather, how woeful the estate of such people is, as
either have no shepherds, or evil shepherds set over them, Zach. 11.4, 5.
Ezech. 34.4.

And Bishop of your souls.]

The godly have Christ to be the Bishop of their souls. That this point may
be more distinctly and profitably conceived of, I would consider of four
things in the explication of it.

First, Explanation of the term Bishop.
the use of the term Bishop here given to Christ: It was before the Apostles
time a foren word, much used in profane writers: For the original word here
rendered a Bishop, was a term given to watchmen, and spies, and ouer-seers of
works, and sometimes to any sort of Rulers. In the Apostles time, it seems,
the term was impropriated, and given only to Ministers, that had charge of
souls. For the Apostles appointing certain men to look to the bodies of
Christians, which they termed Deacons, they appointed other eminent men to
look to the souls of Christians, whom they termed Bishops, as appears, Phi.
1.1. Acts 20.28. In the time of the Apostles the term suffered yet a more
strict impropriation, and was given to some especial Ministers, that had
Charge not only of the people, but also of the Clergy: and in time in some
Churches unto these choice men of the Ministry were added the titles of
Barons, jurisdiction and power of censures, sole power of ordination, and the
like. In this place the Apostle gives the term of Bishop to Christ, as the
first and principal Ouerseer of our souls, to whom the charge of their
original does belong.

Secondly, we must note, that Christ is not said to be a Bishop of our souls:
but The Bishop of our souls: which imports, that he is such a Bishop, as
there is no other like unto him: That charge that Christ has of our souls,
he has it alone; There is no Bishop like to Christ our Bishop: for,

Christ excels all other Bishops in 10. respects.
1. There is no good Bishop but he: For he died for the souls he has charge
of, and so do not other Bishops: and whereas other Bishops may be
unrebukable in respect of men sometimes, he is unrebukable in respect of God
and men too: never any Bishop lived so well, or did so much good, or loved good
men, and promoted Gods cause so much as He.

2. No other Bishop can instruct the flock, as he does. For he can make his
people profit, because he teaches inwardly, whereas they can teach only
outwardly: and he instructs all his flock, and makes them all to know God,
from the greatest to the lowest of them, which no other Bishop can do.

3. He is the only Bishop, because all other Bishops must give accounts to
him, 1. Pet. 5.3.

4. He is the universal Bishop of all souls: other Bishops have their
particular Charges, or Churches: but he has the charge of all the flocks under
heaven: All Parishes are within his Charge.

5. All other Bishops have their ordination from him: they have no authority
but what they receive from him, Acts 20.28.

6. Because no other Bishop can take the absolute charge of our souls; they
are not able to keep us, our souls have many diseases which they cannot cure,
and are assaulted with many adversaries, which they cannot resist, etc.

7. Because he is a heavenly Bishop, they are but earthly, and diverse parts of
his office he executes in heaven; whereas other Bishops can do nothing for
us, but on earth.

8. Because he is the only Lawmakers, the only Lawgiver to our souls:
other Bishops can make no laws, but by his authority, Iam. 4.11.

9. Because the other Bishops may require goodness in their flocks, but cannot
make them good: he can make all his people righteous, he is the Lord and
their very righteousness, Iere. 23.6.

10. Other Bishops die, and leave their flocks unprovided: but he lives ever,
and never forsakes his Church, Mat. 28. vlt.
but is with them to the end of the world.

Thirdly, who are the charge of Christ? Not all that are found in the Charges
of other Bishops, he will not stand to our division of Parishes: he counts by
Election and righteousness: All that the Father has given him, are his Charge,
and none else: The coherence shows, they are only penitent sinners.

Fourthly, the happiness of such as are under his charge; Such are happy, that
live under the Charge of this Bishop.
which must needs be great. O! it is a great comfort to a poor sinner, to know
that Christ has a Charge of his soul: for, he shall be sure, that Christ will
feed his soul, and nourish it up by his Ordinances, and will keep him to
eternal life, and use him with all tenderness and compassion. A bruized Reed
he will not break; and the smoking Flax he will not quench. The particulars
are metaphorically handled before, in the consideration of the benefits we
receive from Christ as a Shepherd.

Uses. The uses follow, and so,

First, for information: and so, first, we may here take occasion to think of
the preciousnesse of our souls: for, as they are made of better stuff than
all this visible world, being spirits; and were redeemed with a greater price
than would have been laid down to redeem this whole world; so it here
appears, because God sets his own Son to tend our souls; which should
make us make more reckoning of them, and not be so careless of them. It were
an ill bargain To win the whole world, and lose our own souls. Secondly, in
that he takes Charge of our souls, it imports, that his Kingdom is not of
this world, and that he leaves our bodies and outward estates to the charge of
the Kings and Rulers of the earth: he claims himself chiefly the Charge of
our souls. Thirdly, in spiritual things it is imported, that we are to be
subjected to such as have the ouer-sight of us, only so far forth as they
command us in the Lord, and not otherwise. Other Bishops have their power
subordinate to Christ, and must in all things see to it, that they do nothing
against Christ. We are subject, first and originally, to Christ: the Charge of
our souls properly belongs unto him. Fourthly, we may here see, what need our
souls have of looking to: if they were not in great danger, and subject to
many diseases and necessities, Christ had never taken such a peculiar Charge of
them. Fifthly, it imports the abject estate of all gross offenders: for, if
Christ be the Bishop of souls, they cannot belong to his charge. For, wise
and godly men, as much as lies in them, cast out notorious offenders, and
protest against them: and therefore will Christ much more cast off and refuse
all such servants of the devil, and the world, and Antichrist, as will not
bear his yoke. Sixthly, it imports, that all Bishops must have ordination from
him: and therefore such as cannot show their calling from Jesus Christ, are
plants which he will root out.

Secondly, Use 2.
for consolation to all the godly. All that have committed their souls to him,
may rest upon it, that He is able to keep them till the Day of his coming, 1.
Tim. 1.2. They shall never be lost: none can take them out of his hand, John
10.29. It is the will of God, that none of them should be lacking, John 6. And
therefore they may comfort themselves with those words of the Apostle, Nothing
shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God, Romans 8. vlt.

Thirdly, Use 3.
for instruction; and so it should teach us to take chief care of our souls.
For from his office we may learn, that he accounts our souls to be the
chief thing he would have kept safe. Secondly, seeing he is the Bishop of
our souls, we should learn not to give to any man above what is written seeing
they are but stewards of his graces, and servants under him. Thirdly, we
should especially strive to be such, as Christ may take the charge of us, and
may prove that we belong to his charge: Duties of such as be under the charge
of this Bishop.
If we be of Christ's charge, then First, we must hear his voice all our:
days with great attention, and affection: His sheep hear his voice, and the
voice of a stranger they will not hear, John 16. Secondly, we must be sure
we have returned, and repented us of our former wanderings; else he is not the
Bishop of our souls. Thirdly, we must resolve all our days to obey him, that
is thus declared to have the oversight of us, and be ruled by such messengers,
as he sends unto us in his name.

Bishops also and Ministers should here learn to know, what a good work it
is to have the charge of souls under Christ, and accordingly carry themselves
with all faithfulness, and diligence and justice, and humlity, not Lording it
over Gods heritage, but as such as give account unto the chief Bishop at his
coming, 1. Pet. 5.2, 3.1. Tim. 4.1, 2, 3. and 3.1. They are but Christ's
Curates.

Lastly, woe to such as are complained of to this Bishop; there will be no
escaping; he will not be corrupted: they may escape the punishment of earthly
Bishops, but they shall never escape the punishment of this heavenly Bishop,
Math. 3.5.

FINIS.
An Alphabeticall Index of the most principal things handled throughout the
whole book.
A
Acceptablenes with God. page 170 How works made acceptable. 171 Apostasy
inward, and outward. 89 Application of word. 217 Astray, of going astray. 889
B
Babes: how taken. 65 Why most Babes in religion. 67 Duties of newborn Babes.
69 Wherein Babes to be imitated. 70 Behold: how this word is used. 180 Belief,
see faith. 201 Brethren all godly. 699 Building spiritual, see Edify. 146 God
the chief builder. 182 Wicked men builders. 238
C
Calling: the sorts thereof. pa. 336 4. Things in the order of working it. 338
8. Signs of effectual calling. 340 Walk worthy of calling. 340 Misery of
them that refuse their calling. 343 Calling of Gentiles. 363 Ceremonies how to
be yielded to. 595 Children, see Babes. 65 Christ a Bishop and Shepherd. 9^0
Christ described. 115 How Christ excels al lords. 118 Christ a stone, and
how. 120 Christ disallowed, and how. 123 Christ how chosen of God. 127 Christ
precious many ways. 132 How to come to Christ 136 Why we should com to Christ.
139 Christ a fiue-fold tabernacle. 149 Christ a foundation, what it imports.
185 An esteem of Christ how gotten. 199 Christ many ways refused. 242 Christ's
exaltation. 246 Christ's sufferings. 796 Christ's example. 807 Christ had no
sin. 812 How Christ bore our sins. 831 Why Christ suffered on a tree. 836
How Christ's sufferings heal us. 880 Christ, how like Sion. 187 Marks of the
members of it. 189 Their prerogatives. 193 Civil honesty. 308 Compassion to
enemies. 328 Conscience why to be instructed in it. 750 What conscience is.
751 Consciences proper work. 753 How conscience is employed. 755 Prerogatives
of conscience. 759 Kinds of conscience. 760 Confusion spiritual* 209 How kept
from it. ibid. How far Saints may be confounded. 211 Conversation honest. 472
Six things appertaining thereto. 474 Why Saints converse with wicked. 481 In
what cases Saints may converse with the wicked. 483
D
Day, diversely taken 546 Day of grace. 547 Darkness: acceptance thereof. 346
Degrees of darkness. 347 Signs of spiritual darkness. 351 Difference of
darkness. 353 Deceit: see Guile 12, etc. Diseases of soul. 873 Why diseases of
soul not felt. 875 How diseases of soul healed. 876 Desire of the Word of
God: see Word. 50 Despair of wicked. 264 Preservatives against despair. 268
Difference of despair. 271 Men die diverse ways. 838 Disobedience. 232 Doers
well. 62^ Evil doers. 618 Doing well puts the wicked to silence. 665
E
Ecclesiastical men and matters subject to Magistrates: see Magistrates. 562
Edify: means to edify. 146 Why many little edify. 147 Election to life. 280
Signs of election. 283 To live as assured of election. 287 Envy: hatefulnes
of it. 33 Signs of one free from envy. 35 Evil doers. 618 Equivocation. 820
Example of Christ. 807 Example: how it binds. 807 Exaltation of Christ. 246
F
Father: diverse acceptance. 732 Faith in Christ. 201 Signs of true faith, and
of weak faith. 223 A family, what it is. 712 Family Duties. 714 Fear of God.
703 What causes us to fear God. 704 Motives to fear God. 705 Who fear not
God. 707 Signs of Gods fear. 708 Flesh, see lust. Evil properties of flesh.
413 Flesh wars against the Soul five ways. 463 Folly spiritual. 651 Folly in
godly men. 660 Free: from what Christians freed. 671 To what they are made
free. 674 How but as free. 677 Frowardnes. 738 Helps against it. 741
G
Gifts bestowed on the godly. 669 Glory, vain and good. 784 God a terrible
Judge. 826 God first to be served. 562 God the chief Master builder. 182 God,
how glorified in himself. 515 God, how glorified in us. 519 Much failing in
glorifying God. 521 Motives to glorify God. 525 Helps to glorify God. 527 How
God glorified in heart. 530 How others made to glorify God 533 Grace temporary.
344 Graciousnes or goodness of God. 93 How to taste of it. 95 It is felt
especially in the Word. 96 Growth spiritual: kinds of it. 78 In what
christians ought to grow. 79 Rules for growth. 84 Impediments of growth. 85
Signs of growth. 86 Guile why to be avoided. 12, 13 Misery of guilefull
persons. 14, 16 Sundry ways of guile. 15 Secret guile, guilefull servants. 17
Signs of a man without guile. 20 Guile in words many ways. 815
H
Healing soul. See diseases. 876 Rules for healing the soul. 886 Hearing, one
of the best senses. 451 Heart made new. 542 Holiness of Christians. 303 Holy
conversation. 307 Honesty what it is. 473 Honesty conuinceth the wicked 484
Honoring men. 695 Humility. 324 Hypocrisy: How many ways committed. 2 Motives
against it. Effects of it. 24 Preservatives against it. 29 How it is discerned.
30, 32 What makes an hypocrite. 31 Hypocrites holy conversation. 309
I
Ignorance. 647 Ignorance hardly cured. 662 Imitation of Christ. 320
Inferiors, why first charged. 715 Inoffensiuenesse. 329 Inventions of men, how
to be obeyed, how not. See Magistrates. 587 Judgments how far extended. 249
Judgments spiritual the worst. 251
K
Kindred spiritual the best. 290 Kings earthly and spiritual: difference
betwixt them. 295 Kings meant by Saint Peter. 604 Original of Kings. 606
Excellency of Kings. 609 Supremacy of Kings. 612
L
Laws of land not to be transgressed. 561 Laws of land to be studied. 562
Learned men often oppose the Word. 238 Liberty of Christians. 670 Liberty abused.
680 Liveliness spiritual. 143 Living spiritually, how happy. 852 Light
acceptance thereof. 354 Light of godly marvelous. 358 Lost sheep who be. 893
How they that as sheep may be lost. 896 Love to the Godly. 329 Saints only
loved of God. 402 How that Love prescribed. 404 Lusts to be avoided. 406
Diffrence of lusts in the godly. 408 Helps to avoid lust. 409 Lusts how
fleshly. 413 How lusts hurt the soul. 416 How victory over lusts. 469 When
overcome of lusts. 470
M
Madness spiritual. 654 Magistrates: our duty to them to be learned. 561
Submit to Magistrates: and why. 566 All to be subject to magistrates. 571 How
Magistrates an ordinance of men. 575 Magistrates distinguished. 578 Magistrates
in what to be obeyed. 581 In what not to be obeyed. ibid. Magistrates power in
matters ecclesiastical. 582 Obedience to Magistrates for the Lords sake. 600
Magistrates of God. 615 Magistrates to encourage godly men. 629 When not fit to
complain to Magistrates. 824 When redress may be sought of Magistrates. 825
Masters: their original. 732 Signs of good Masters. 736 Malice: signs of it.
6 Remedies against it. 10 Maliciousnes. 680 Meditation, rules for it. 219
Meekness. 323 Melancholy: rules about it. 64 Mercy in man. 327 Men not under
mercy. 380 Why many obtain not mercy. 388 4. Properties of Gods mercy. 390 6.
Effects of Gods mercy. 394 Helps to obtain mercy. 399 Ministers must apply
the word. 220 Mortification, signs of it. 849
N
The godly nation. 311
O
Obedience, see Magistrates. Obstinacy of sinners. 478 Offense, see scandal.
255 Offense by outward shows. 332
P
Patience. 327 Motives to patience. 822 The peculiar people of God. 314 Wicked
no people. 366 Who are not Gods people. 369 Gods people 3. ways. 371 Gods
people excel all other. 372 Gods people only beloved ones. 402 The phantasy.
452 The work of it in sleep. 454 Priests: how the godly are Priests. 155 What
uses to be made thereof. ibid. Priesthood of Christians. 300 Praise of men how
to be sought. 623 The best need praise. 624 For what praise due. 626 Helps to
get praise from men. 628
R
The faculty of reason. 457 Refusing Christ. 242 Remembrance of misery past,
profitable. 345 Repentance put off, dangerous. 548 Repentance conformable to
Christ's death in many things. 849 Reprobation. 851 Reports when not to be
received 494 Reproaches: see evil speaking. 37 Helps to bear reproaches. 493
Reproaches to be avoided. 646 Reuiling. 818 Royal estate of godly. 293
Righteous life the best life. 854 Righteous men's signs. 857 Righteousness
distinguished. 860 Righteousness rejected and why. 862 Helps unto Righteousness.
864 Defects of Righteousness. 868
S
Sacrifices for Christians. 161 Laws for offering those sacrifices. 165
Scandal defined and distinguished. 255 How wicked take scandal at Christ. 257
Wherein not to regard scandal of wicked. 261 How guilty of giving scandal. 262
Rules to prevent scandal. 263 How scandal taken at word. 273 Rules about
giving or taking scandal at ceremonies. 595 Serving God. 686 Who serve not
God. 689 Prerogatives of Gods servants. 690 Servants of men. 718 Servitude how
it came in. 719 Servants comfort. 723 Servants subjection. 727 Helps to
servants to obey. 728 How servants show a fear to God. 734 Scripture: why Word
so called. 176 Wherein it exceeds other writings. 176 Sense by the soul. 449
Of the five senses. 449 Sight and hearing, the best senses. 450 The inward
sense. 452 Sheep in allusion to men. 888 Signs of lost sheep. 893 How they
that are as sheep, may be lost. 896 Shame spiritual. 209 Sickness of soul, see
diseases. 873 Sin against holy Ghost. 106 Sin done many ways. 809 Who alive to
sin. 140 Sincere Word, see Word. 74 Sion spiritual. 187 Society how made
happy. 713 Societies: diverse kinds of the^: 606 Soul: diverse acceptance of
it. 418 Description of the Soul. ibid. What it is not. 420 The soul is a
substance. 421 The soul is immortal. 423 The original of the soul. 429 It
comes by generation. 431 The soul created of God. 434 Soul and body how
united. 441 The souls faculties. 446 The souls working motion. 455 Why the
soul was made. 460 War against the soul. 463 Speaking evil. 37 Motives
against it. 39 How to keep men from speaking evil of us. 45 Saints ever evil
spoken of. 486 The causes why it is so. 487 Reasons against evil speaking. 489
Evil speaking when odious. 491 Stone: how Christ a stone. 120 How the godly
are stones. 141 Why lively stones. 143 Godly strangers and pilgrims. 410
Submission: see Magistrates. 566 Suffering for Christ: marks of it. 284
Sufferings of Christ. 796, 787
T
Tabernacle: how Christ one. 149 How godly a tabernacle. 150 Taste of Word: see
Word. 100
V
Vain glory. 783 Vegetation by the soul. 447 Virtue of God what it is. 317
Nine virtues of Christ to be showed forth. 321 Virtues in us: virtues in
Christ. 334 Unbelievers are disobedient. 231 Visitation attributed to God. 534
How God visits. 535 Time of Gods visitation. 540 Signs of being visited in
mercy. 541 Glorious effects thereof. 552
W
War lawful. 570. Will of God. 631 ^^ds will a strong motive. 630 Well doing:
see Doing well. 5* Things to profit by the Word. 3 Hindrances of the Word. 5
Desire of the Word. 50 How desire of the Word discerned. 53 Impediments to the
desire of the Word. 56 Means to get true desire of the Word. 61 How to
preserve a true desire of the Word. 62 How wicked men may desire the Word. 72
The Word resembled to milk. 73 How the Word is sincere. 74 The Word sweetened
with Gods goodness. 96 How the sweetenes of the Word is tasted. 101 Difference
betwixt godly and wicked in tasting the Word. 102 Why many have no taste of the
Word. 109 Word of God, our Warrant. 559 How Gods word is Gods will. 634 World,
contempt thereof. 326 Worthy walking. 340.378 Works, note of Religion. 496
Works justify before men. 497 Works wherein good. 498 Rules for good works.
501 Kinds of good works. 505 How works comfort the Saints. 508 For what ends
good works. 509 How works may be lost. 511 What works may be showed. 513 What
may not be showed. 514
FINIS.

