DAVID'S Thanksgiving for the Arraignement of the Man of Earth, set forth in two
Sermons by W. B.

The first Sermon shows the manner of David's thanksgiving, and contains
many comfortable points necessary for afflicted consciences.

The second Sermon sets forth the matter it self, for which David gives
thanks and that is, The arraignement of the Man of Earth, VVherin is entreated
of these points follovving. ver. 2.

1 Of the parties between whom the controversy depends. 2 Of the parties
before whom it is tried. 3 Of the persons by whom it is tried. 4 Of the action
it self that is tried. 5 Of the verdict of the Jury. 6 Of the court of
conscience, with a description of the same. 7 Of the verdict of the court of
conscience. 8 Of the sentence of the Judge. 9 Of the execution of the sentence.
Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke, for I. B. and are to be sold at her
shop at the great North door of S. Paul's, at the sign of the Bible. 1598.

To the Right Honorable Sir William Periam Knight, Lord chief Baron of her
Majesty's Exchequer, grace, mercy and peace.
RIght Honorable, the importunate desire of diverse well affected Christians
which heard these sermons in London, and chiefelie of some that have been
humbled with affliction of conscience, has prevailed with me for the penning
and publishing of the same, which through the blessing of God may bring comfort
and profit to more then to those that heard them. In regard of many honorable
favors and good encouragements received from your Lordship in the work of my
ministry where I dwell. I have presumed to offer this my mite unto you as a
poor testimony of a mind willing to be thankful if it were in my power,
which both for the matter that is handled therein, as also for the manner of
handling, I deemed of right to belong chiefelie unto your Lordship which
(together with my good meaning herein) if it shall please you (which I humbly
crave) to construe and accept in good part, I shall be not a little encouraged to
take more pains in greater matters then these come to. Thus craving pardon for
my boldness. I humbly take my leave, commending you to the abundant and
gracious blessing of God. 1598. November. 8.

Your Lordships to command, William Burton.
David's thankfulness for the arrainement of the man of Earth.
PSALM. 10. 17. 18. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor, Text.
thou preparest their heart, thou bendest thine ear unto them. To judge the
fatherless, and poor, that the man of earth cause to fear no more.
THis tenth Psalm does most lively describe unto us a corrupt and perverse
state of a miserable commo^wealth groaning and fainting under the intolerable
burdens of manifold oppressions, and extreme injuries heaped upon her by the
mighty and proud Nimrods of that time, by cruel and crafty worldlings, by
godless and blasphemous Athists, by secure, and carnal Epicures, by loose and
lawless Belials, which in David's time like Bees swarmed in every Country and
City, in every Town and Village, and came about the poor servants of God,
daily and howerlie as thick as hailestones in Egypt, even a right picture of
that wherein we now live, which made that princely Prophet and prophetical
prince David (as a man amazed at such a forelorne sight, and pitiful
complaining that was on every side) to speak far otherwise of the Lord then
he is indeed, and in a kind of quarrelling manner to expostulate the matter
with the Lord after the manner of man, saying: Why stand thou far of O
Lord, and hidest thy self in due time, eue^ in affliction? even while the
wicked with pride does persecute the poor? Greatly (no doubt) did iniquity
prevail, and strong was the temptation; yea to great boldness, and courage were
the wicked grown when it seemed to David, as if the Lord were careless in
governing the world, and had forgotten to relieve his poor distressed people,
or call the wicked to account, but seemed either to let the^ do even what they
listed without controlment, which God forbid we should once imagine, but yet in
the time of affliction and temptation such is the weakness of faith eue^ in the
very regenerate, that they conceive sometime of God and his works, otherwise
then becomes the^, or then beseems the majesty of God, the reason hereof
is, because they be for the time as men that are buffeted and astonished with
blows, to whose sense the ground seems to turn round, when indeed there is
no such matter, but the turning and alteration is in themselves, and therefore
the temptations of the regenerate are called by Paul the buffetings of Satan.
2. Cor. 12. 7. And yet notwithstanding (though at a blush they may seem to
iumpe with the wicked, who do always harbor within them most base and
unworthy conceits of the most high, who fills Heaven and earth with his all
seeing, and incomprehensible presence, and with whom is neither change nor show
of change, yet between the godly and the wicked there is always this double
difference. First, in the greatest afflictions, and weakness of faith wherewith
the godly are exercised, there is yet some evidence of Gods sanctifying spirit
in them, supporting them from final and desperate falling away from the grace
of God, though it be more then they always feel in themselves, for though
David complains in the beginning of this Psalm of Gods long absence, yet he
is certainly persuaded of his presence to him, or else he had prayed in vain.
And as earthly Fathers have a secret affection to their children more then
their children do always perceive, so God has a secret hand in his children
to uphold them from falling away, more then they always do feel, which
feeling they want sometime to humble them, and to make them more earnest in
prayer, and more careful to keep the favor of God when they have it. And
sometime the Lord bestows secret favors upon his children more then they know
of, as Joseph's brethren had every man his money in his sack by the way, which
was more the^ they knew, til they came their Inn. Genesis 42. 27. But with the
wicked it is not so, for God has left them to themselves, Romans 1. 24 2. Tim.
3. 13.
giving them over to a reprobate sense that they may wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived, there is no secret hand of Gods grace in them,
that can be perceived either of themselves or of others for them. Another
difference is this: when the heat of affliction and strength of temptation is
allaied in the godly, and they come to themselves again, as men do that have
been beaten and buffeted, they recall their error, and correct their former
crazed opinions, giving to God afterward that honor that is due unto him, but
the wicked after they be a little eased, and released of their pain, do turn
again to their former vomit, never once dreaming that they either thought or
spoke, or did any thing amiss, or against the glory of God, but praise their
own wit, doing sacrifice to the works of their own fingers.

After David had complained to the Lord of the pride and cruelty of the wicked
and very substantiallie proved those articles which he exhibited against them,
in the 12. verse he does humbly sue unto the Lord by prayer, that he would
arise and show by some gracious effects that he has the poor in remembrance,
which do commit themselves unto him, and namely by breaking the arm, that is,
the power of the wicked which they abused to mischief and wrong. And at
length as one having obtained his request, he concludes this Psalm with a
holy gratulation or thanksgiving unto the Lord, for that by his spirit he did
assure him of some remedy, by taking a judicial hearing of the matter on both
sides, whereby we are taught to pray for Gods poor distressed people as for
our selves, as also to be as thankful to God for his mercies toward them as if
they had been bestowed upon our selves, and in so doing shall we try whether
we be fellow and feeling members of the body of Christ, or dead and rotten
members, such as are cut of from the body, and live not by the life of God
that is in Jesus Christ.

Lord thou have heard etc. Here David acknowledges the goodness of God toward
his poor helpless servants two ways, first generally in the 17 verse,
saying. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor, then particularly
amplifying this goodness of God, first by setting down the efficient cause of
the poor man's desire, in these words. Thou preparest their heart, then by
noting the formal cause of that readiness, and willingness which is in God to
hear their desire in these words, Thou bendest thine ear unto them, and then
by the final cause of this goodness, in verse. 18. and that is double, first in
respect of the poor, and oppressed, that they may have justice and right,
secondly in respect of their oppressors (who are called in contempt the man of
earth) that they may be no more cause of terror to the godly.

The first thing here to be noted, is how David changes his note, for before
he said, Lord thou have hid thy self, but now he says Lord thou have heard
the desire of the poor, that is, thou have showed thy self in the robes of
Justice and judgment, David here was like one that during the battle could
not tell what to make of the matter, but after the encounter is past, like a
valiant conqueror he strikes up, and makes forward in triumph saying: The
Lord is King for ever and ever, the heathen are destroyed out of thy sight,
Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor, thou preparest their heart, thou
bendest thine ear. To judge the fatherless and the poor, that the man of
earth cause to fear no more.

And here we see that verified which is in Psalm. 126. 5. 6. They that sow in
tears, shall reap in joy: And that which is in our proverb, A hard
beginning makes a good ending: for one would have thought by the beginning of
this Psalm that he should never have obtained so happy an end, for thus he be
ginneth: Why do thou stand far off O Lord, and hidest thy self in time of
affliction: that is, why have we not Justice executed; but he ends as you
hear: Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor, etc. which is as much as
can be desired. Such a blessed and joyful end will God send unto all his
poor afflicted servants, when he has well humbled them, and thoroughly
exercised them with the buffetings of Satan, and stung them to the very heart
with the sense and feeling of their sins, and affrighted them with a terrible
show of an angry and wrathful countenance, all which the Lord will do against
his dear children. First to let the^ feel and know what they have, and are of
themselves, secondly, to make them acquainted with satan's malice, that they
take heed how they either obey him or believe him again, thirdly, to make the
greatness of his love, and gracious mercy more known in delivering them at the
last; for by the want of a benefit we know what a benefit is worth, and
therefore joy restored, is more acceptable then joy continued. Psalm. 51. 12.
And lastly to make them fit instruments for the conversion and strengthening of
those that are or shall be in the like case, as Christ said to Peter: Satan has
desired to sift you, Luke 22. 31. 32.
as wheat is sifted, but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith may not fail.
Therefore when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. But in the mean
time it goes hard for any feeling that the afflicted soul has of any comfort
in himself, Oh I cannot feel the love of God in my heart, I cannot find Gods
spirit in my heart, my heart is not grieved for my sin, I cannot pray, I take no
delight in the word, etc. Oh that I could pray that I could believe, that I
could feel Gods mercy in assuring my heart of the forgiveness of my sins, but I
have abused his mercy, and offended his Majesty, and therefore I am cast out
of his sight, there is no mercy for me, I am damned, and shall go to hell,
etc. And thus the poor soul etaketh on during the winter time of afflictions,
and temptations, but soft a while, who tells thee that thou art cast out of
Gods sight, that thou art a reprobate etc. Again who told thee that thou
want faith and repentance, and other graces of the spirit? Again who is it,
or what is it that does so earnestly thirst after those excellent graces of
faith, of repentance, of the forgiveness of sins, etc. Surely in this Tragedy
be three actors, and every one does his part, and here is wisdom to discern
on from the other, here is thy own conscience accusing, Satan accusing, and
Gods law accusing. Thy conscience shows thee thy wants; Gods spirit shows
thee thy wants, and Satan shows thee thy wants; but that which God does in
love Satan does in malice, that which God does to humble thee satan does to
destroy thee; thou say thou can not repent, thou can not believe, thou
can not pray: Oh sweet mercy of God, that for the wicked do not so much as
know their wantes, thou art sorry that thou can not repent, that thou can
not believe, etc. Oh what better repentance then to bewail thy impenitencie?
what greater grief then that which arises for no grief for sin? What is
this but sorrow it self for sin? thou would pray, thou would believe
steadfastly, who wrought that hunger and thirst in thee? not flesh and blood,
not Satan, therefore it must needs be Gods spirit, content thy self thou
shall be satisfied, and take that desire of grace for grace it self, and a
pledge of further grace to be received hereafter. Thou say thou feel not
Gods love in thee, and therefore he loves thee not, but do the Lord no
injury, measure not his grace by thy feeling, he that took a rib out of man's
side, while he slept in such sort that he felt it not, can also put a secret
hand of grace into thee, to uphold thee while his spirit does sleep in thee,
and thou not feel it, and for the proof of that I say consider with me, how
often have many been tempted to mischief themselves and others, yea and
practiced their own destruction which yet are living, and well? from whence
came this, but from a secret hand of God within them that still plucked them as
a pray out of the hands of their enenemie. Some again (that I know) have been
afraid that they should speak blasphemy against God and treason against the
Queen, and have been so tempted the runto, that they have held their mouths
with their hands least it should out, and yet when they have been willed to
utter it, they could not, but clean contrary, in stead of treason and
blasphemy have spoken all good in most hearty and holy manner that might be
both of God and of the Queen, by which they have perceived and confessed in
the end to Gods great glory, that these were illusions of satan, and that Gods
spirit is stronger in them then the temptation, when they had suposed that God
had clean forsaken them. Oh I am damned, I am damned thou criest: who told
thee so? Surely it is the voice of Satan that would have it so, believe him
not, for he that is compounded all of lying and falsehood cannot possibly
suggest any truth unto thee. Oh if I could feel some comfort in my soul, I
were well: if I could pray from a feeling heart and believe effectually etc.
then I were well. Then I should hope that God would be merciful unto me: but
content thy self: there is a time for all things says Solomon, a time to
weep, and a time to rejoice, so there is a time of affliction, and a time of
deliverance out of temptation, if that time were come that thou speak of,
then were thy affliction at an end, and the te^mptation of no force not effect,
but now is the time of casting down and of the te^pters forcible working but
wait on God, he is thy present help and thy God, with patience possess thy
soul until the time be come for thy deliverance, and verily when Gods rods
have had their working, to frame thee unto God, the time will come that thou
shall have diluerance, though now thou say with David, Lord why stand
thou far off? and hidest thy face, even in the time of affliction? yet after
the conflict is ended (which must be when God will, and not when thou will)
thou shall sing joyfully and triumphantly, Lord thou have heard the desire of
thy poor servant, thou preparest thine heart, thou bendest thine ear, to
help thy poor comfortless servant that thy hellish enemy be no more cause
of fear.

Again, that in time of thy spiritual conflict, thy soul may hope for some
more comfort and strength in the end then for the present thou feel, it
shall not be amiss for thee to call to mind the former experience that thou
have had of Gods goodness toward thee in time past, whereby thou may assure
thy self that he will be good unto thee again, as David said, The Lord that
has delivered me from the Bear and the Lion, 1. Sam. 17. 37.
will also deliver me from this uncircumcised philistime: so say thou, That God
which delivered me from such a peril, and gave me strength against such and
such temptations, will one day deliver me from this* that God which once let me
feel peace and joy, and comfort in Christ, will surely give me comfort again
when he sees fit time: For whom the lord loves, Ioh. 13. 1.
he loves for ever. And the gifts and calling of God are without repentance
says the Romans 11. 29.
Apostle. Thy treasure is laid up surely in Heaven says Christ, where neither
mothes can eat it, nor rust can corrupt it, Mat. 6. 20.
nor thieves can digg through and steal it away, God does not keep it from
moths and from thieves to let the devil deceive thee of it, no, it is sure for
ever, where neither man, nor Angel, nor all the devils in hell shall take it
from thee, no nor God himself, for though we be unfaithful, yet he is
faithful, 2. Tim. 2. 23.
and cannot deny himself. And where as thou criest out for it now, saying
thou can not feel it in thy heart etc. it is for that perhaps thou did
not use it as thou should, when thou had it before, thou were
peradventure a lazy professor of the Gospel, or a proud hearer of the word, or
negligent in the worship of God, both with thy self and thy family, or it may
be thou did wax proud of Gods graces, and did not give him his due
honor, or it may be thou did make some rash promise (presuming upon thy
own strength) that thou would do this or that, or that thou would never
commit such and such a sin again. And therefore the Lord (to let thee know
thy self) like a most wise father has for a time taken away his graces from
thee, and the feeling of all spiritual comfort, and yet for all that loves
thee as his child. And herein the Lord deals with thee, but as thou
would deal with thy own child if thou have any; when the child abuses
any thing that he delights in it is taken from him, and laid up till
another time, and he made believe that it is quite taken from him, the child
would have it always in his sight, but that may not be for diverse causes: and
in like manner deals the Lord with his children, it sufficed Jacob to hear
that his son Joseph was alive, though he saw him not, so it should suffice
the afflicted conscience to know that Christ lives in him, though his
spiritual eye be so dazeled, that as yet he cannot see him, yea there is a
holy desire to see and feel Christ in thee, as an earnest-penny, though it be
as in a bag sealed up, and in time it shall be delivered thee, yea though thou
go as a malefactor that is condemned goes to execution, out of all hope for
life, yet (as some friend of his sueth out his pardon for him, and delivers
it him even when he is on the ladder ready to be turned of, to his greater joy
more then he expected, even to Christ Jesus has sued out thy pardon, and when
thou think there is no way but one with thee, and that is to hell, even
when thou seem to thy self to be past all hope of recovery, then shall the
spirit of Christ step up in thy heart, which now seems to be gone, or to lie
a sleep, and shall deliver it unto thee, with this message of comfort, Son
be of good cheer thy sins are forgiven thee. And in the mean time know that
Christ is not gone from thee but sleeps in thee, as he did in the ship, and
that was but only during the tempest, but when they in the ship were afraid of
sinking, they cried, Save us Master we perish else, and then he awaked and
rebuked the winds: so Christ may seem to sleep in thee during the time of
tempestuous temptations, but whenever thou art in any danger, he is awake to
save thee, and in the end will rebuke Satan and tread him under thy feet;
that Christ's spirit is in thee thou may perceive by the voice of the Church
that is in thy case: In my bed by night (says the Church) I sought him whom my
soul loves, Can. 5. 1.
but could not find him, so thou seeekest him whom thy soul loves, but can
not find him, that is, thou seek him whom thou have with thee, for there is
in thee the love of Christ, which cannot come, but from Christ himself, now
the very love of Christ in thy heart though it be but weak, yet is a certain
argument of Christ's sanctifying spirit in thee, for though the reprobate may in
some sort slauishly tremble at the judgments of God, and for some carnal
respect, joy in the things of God for a time, yet there is not in them a love
of God in Christ Jesus: but with their servile fear is joined also a deadly
hatred of the Lord as of their mortal enemy.

Again if thou feel not as yet the gracious presence of Gods spirit in thee
as thou would, Psa. 43. 5.
yet use the holy means that God has appointed for the conversion and
confirmation of his children; frequent the word preached, read in the
scriptures, and labors of the godly learned, use prayer, and conference, and
meditation, and so wait on God, who is thy present help and thy God, but thou
say thou can not hear with delight, thou can take no pleasure in reading
of good books, nor hearing of them redd unto thee, thou can not brook
conference and prayer, thou do distaste them all, yet I say use them still,
as a good man takes meat and drink, and physic though it be against the
stomach, and cast up all again, yet he desires to digest it, and so by often
taking, at last does gather strength, and take that willingly with hope, which
before he received against his will with a kind of loathing. So thy sick
soul by often using the holy means that God has appointed, at last through
his blessing will strengthen thee, and make thee to use them of love and
desire, which now thou do but vnchearfully and with a certain kind of
loathing. There is a defect in the stomach or some other part of the body
which will not suffer wholesome meat to be digested; So in the inward man, the
defect may be in the understanding which may be dark, or in the memory which
may be brittle, or in the utterance which may be slow, or in thy faith which
may be weak, or in thy repentance which may be imperfect, or in thy love which
may be small, or in thy zeal which may be bitter or cold, or in thy mind
which may be earthly, or in thy affections which may be unruly, or in thy
whole man which may be lumpish, heavy, and untoward to good things: yet in all
these remain a double comfort. First these graces are not counterfeit, but in
truth are such as they seem to be, thou understand aright, thou vtterest
the truth though but slowly, thou remembrest the best things, and beleeuest
the word, and repentest in truth, with hatred of thy sins, and thou love God
and his word for themselves sake: again so much as thou understand and
know, and remembrest, and beleeuest, and love, thou also affectest and
embracest in heart, and desire to grow in them, and to practice them to the
praise of God, and therefore still hope and wait on God, for though God seem
now to thy soul as if he had no care of thee, yet he does care for thee, and
thou shall one day joyfully sing as David does here: Lord, thou have heard the
desire of the poor, etc.

Lord, thou have heard, etc.) The Lord does hear all men's desires, and knows
all their thoughts long before, but he is said to hear the desires of his
children after a more special, and gracious manner, because he does in mercy
both favor their suits, and grant their requests, and so this word of hearing
is to be understood sometime in the scripture, as where David says: If I regard
wickedness in my heart the Lord will not hear me: that is, the Lord will not
grant me my desire. And so is it taken also sometime amongst us in our common
manner of speaking, as when we do not favor a man's suite, we use to say, I
hear you not. This is that which the children of God do most groan and long
for in prayer, namely to pray so, that the Lord may hear them, that is, may
afford them a gracions hearing, which if they may be assured of, then are their
hearts filled with joy whatsoever happens to them in the world. And al their
fear is, least their sins and sinful prayers should stop the ears not of the
Lord simply, but of his grace and favor against them. To that end do they
come before the Lord in all humility, fear, and reverence, striving, sighing,
and groaning and troubled in spirit. And to this end the Lord oftentimes
seems unto his children as one that is deaf, he makes them no answer, but
takes away from them for the time all feeling of comfort in prayer, to that
end that when he does speak peace unto their hearts, they may know what a
mercy they have received from his Majesty.

But wicked hypocrites regard not so much whether the Lord does hear the^ or
no, but whether men do hear them, that is all their care: they pray to be
seen of men, and to be heard of men, only laboring with their lips, but
without any strife of the heart. They pomp it, they chant it, they howl it,
and throat it to please themselves and others, but whether all that pains of
theirs be accepted with God, they never so much as once think: So that when
they have done their stint and task, they may say as the harlot said, of whom
Solomon speaks, Pro. 7. 14.
To day I had peace offerings, I have paid my vows, and so leave for that
matter, it is no matter whether they be received or no, she has paid them, so
says the Hipocrit, I have said all my prayers to day, I have done al my
devotion, and there leave for that matter; but the poor child of God whose
soul groaneth under the buthen of his sins, does not so much boast of the
saying of his prayers, as he does of Gods mercy in hearing his prayers, Lord I
thank thee says (the Pharisie) that I fast and pray so often in a week, but
Lord be merciful to me says the Publican, Lord I prayed in thy temple says
the one, as the wicked in the Gospel, Lord we have heard thee preach in our
streets; but the other says, Lord, thou have heard the desire of thy poor
servants, Doctr. 3.
, blessed be thy name for that favor: the desire. He does not say their
cryings, or their sententious and eloquent prayers, or the voice of their lips,
although the desires of the heart be counted cryings with the Lord, but he
says: That the Lord has heard the desire of the poor: Which are the cries
and prayers, and voices of the inward man, though not always uttered by the
tongue, to show that the Lord of his goodness is so ready to hear the
afflicted, that he does not always expect the cryings, and voices of the
outward man, or the orderly and set prayers of the lips, for before they cry,
he hears them according to the testimony of the Prophet Esaias, who (speaking
in the person of God) says thus: Before they call I will answer, Eisai. 65.
24
and while they speak I will hear. And Saint Paul says. The spirit it
self likewise helps our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we
ought: but the spirit makes request for us with groaninges, Romans 8. 20
which cannot be expressed: that is, the spirit helps our weak prayers
which want strength to come forth, and accepts the very sighs and groans
of the hearts of Gods children in stead of prayers, as the tender nurse does
the monefull looks of the babe that lies in the cradle full of pain, and
cannot speak.

And these inward desires, and groans of GODS children, are to the children
of God as an earnest-pennie of the spirit, and as the first fruits of the
spiritituall harvest, now an earnest-pennie is but a pledge or assurance of a
thousand pound to be paid in time, and the first fruits of the corn are but
a sheafe or handful as it were of the whole harvest which afterward is to be
reaped. And this may serve to comfort the afflicted conisciences which cannot
pray as they would sometime and therefore think they are not regarded of God,
it serves only to comfort the afflicted soul I say, but no way to confirm
us in our sluggish, slothful, drousie, and sleepie prayers.

Of the poor.) The state of Gods children in this life is not always of the
best, Doctr 4.
neither in outward account with the world, nor yet in their own feeling. And
therefore they are called sometime: The afflicted ones, Pro. 15. 15
as in Pro. 15. 15. All the days of the afflicted are evil: Sometime the
hungry and thirsty, as in Mat. 5. Blessed are those that hunger and thirst
after righteousness. Sometime little worms as in Esaias, Little worm Jacob: And
in the Psalms, I am a worm and no man, says David: And sometime, 2. Tim. 3.
12.
The little flock, 1. Cor. 1.
As in Luke 12. And in this place they are called, Psa. 41. 8.
The poor: For whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer
affliction. And they do still hunger and thirst after Christ their
righteousness:

As the Heart does after the rivers of water, Like little worms they are
contemned and trodden upon by every one: And like poor and miserable persons
they are always in need of Gods grace and help. And yet they in that account
with God that he hears their desires: The afficted have a continualfeast, The
hungry shall be filled with good things, when the rich shall be sent empty away.
The little worm Jacob is written upon the palms of the Lords hands, and is
ever in his sight. The little flock need not fear for their littlenes, for
they have the kingdom. And the poor servants of God which are always in need
and want of Gods grace and favor, and always bewailing their own poverty
and want, are heard of the Lord, and therefore are both rich and happy.

This may teach us to judge wisely of the poor children of GOD that are in
contempt, and tribulation in the world; and lovingly to embrace them as
members of our body though in show underlings to all; like the feet, or
rather like the footstooles of the wicked, and not to despise them: For the
Lord hears the desires even of the poor. Yea and they may pleasure us more
with their prayers, then we can hurt them with our persecutions. There is not
the best, nor learnedest Doctor in the Church, nor the greatest or wealthiest
man in the commonwealth but may, and does receive help and benefit by the
prayers of the poorest man that lives, if he be a godly man.

Thou preparest, etc. Here David acknowledges a double grace or favor of
God, First, that he vpholdeth his children, that they fainte not under their
burdens, for he armeth them with courage, and patience, putting upon their
heads the helmet of good hope, and stirring them up, thereby to dispatch their
prayers as speedy posts and messengers unto the hills from whence comes
their help. A singular benefit surely to have our senses and thoughts
settled in Gods providence, and not carried away to worldly devises, and
desperate attempts. Secondly, God having thus prepared and settled their hearts
for prayer, he does also prepare and settle himself to hear their prayers,
yea, because their prayers be but weak and feeble, that scarce have any
perfect voice, but make a soft and still noise, in the secret corners of their
hearts, the Lord does bend his ear unto them, and lay it close unto their
mouth, in most fatherly, friendly, and tender sort, that so he might know what
it is that they whisper so inwardly, and so faintly. from hence we learn.

First, Doctr. 5.
that to direct our desires to God in affliction is a special work, and
favor of God in our hearts, for otherwise, affliction of it self does breed
rather impatience, and despair, then any comfortable hope, and heart to
prayer. And therefore let us be admonished when (in any kind of affliction,
cross, and temptation) we feel any comfort in God, or desire to go unto his
Majesty, by prayer to give him the whole glory, and take it as a token of his
love unto us. Let us also acknowledge our own weakness, and inabilitie to
prepare our hearts, our selves to Godward. And most false, and insolent is that
popish assertion of freewill in man to pray when he will, and to believe when
he will, and repent when he will, for it is God (says the Apostle) that
works both the will and the deed. Lastly, Phil. 2. 13.
let us hereby be encouraged to go to God although it be with broken prayers,
and fainting desires, we shall not loose our labor, no the godly do not in
vain direct their desires to God, nor in hope and patience want upon him
because the ears of the Lord are open and bent, ready in most gracious manner
to hear the groans of his poor afflicted servants. And thus much of the
manner and matter in general of David's thanksgiving.

The second Sermon.
Wherein is handled in particular the matter it self, for which David gives
thanks and that is the arraignement of the man of earth.
PSALM. 10. 18. To judge the fatherless and the poor, that the man of earth
cause to fear no more.
IN the former verse, David praises God for hearing the desires of his poor
servants, but now he shows more particularly what was their desire, and
wherein God has heard them at the last, namely, they desire that GOD would
judge and determine between them and their oppressors, and this is the thing
that God has granted them, from whence the faithful may learn this
comfortable general doctrine, that when they shall be unjustly oppressed, God at
length will be revenged of their adversaries, and deliver his children; which may
serve to admonish us to endure the cross manfully, because God will not many
times help his poor children before they be brought to extreme danger. A
hard thing this is to flesh and blood, because every one desires to be free
from trouble, and therefore except God does quickly help, he seems to be slow
in helping or forgetful of his promises (which God forbid we should imagine)
but if we desire his help, we must wait his leisure, our affections must be
tamed, our impatience must be beaten down, our griefs must be mitigated,
until our extreme miseries may provoke the favor of God, and to this purpose
is that parable of the poor Widow and the wicked Judge propounded by our
Savior Christ in the Gospel and in this sort applied to God and his children:
that if a wicked Judge fearing neither God nor man, Luke. 18. 7
will notwithstanding be overcome with importunate suitors at last to do them
justice, how much more will God that is a most righteous Judge, and all
righteousness it self, hear at length his poor children which call and cry
day and night unto him for Justice.

That earthly man, etc.) The wicked lift up their heads above the clouds and
yet are but mortal, and subject to many miseries, and therefore are they called
men of earth, to shame them and to humble them: for this is their insolent
madness, and mad insolency, while they forget their estate, and condition they
breath out threateninges as Saul did against the Church of God, as if God
himself were not sufficient to repress their rage. And yet they are but men,
and men of earth too, and come against God as if worms should come out of the
ground to fight against their maker, or as if an earthen pitcher should
encounter with a mountain of Brass; they are made of earth, yea and of the
baseft earth to; even of the dust of the earth. Clay is good for something, Sand
is good for something, Marle is good for something, Dung is good for something,
Grauel is good for something and earth is good for something, but Dust is good
for nothing, except it be to put out men's eyes, and of that is man made, which
consideration may greatly humble the hiest, the stoutest, the brauest, and the
proudest, but the wicked according to their making do savor nothing else but
earth, and the most vile things of the earth, and therefore are fitly called
earthly, because they live like earth worms.

And though there be legions, and miltitudes of them, yet are they here called
by a word of the singular number, Man of earth, not men. And that may be either
in regard of their wicked unity, or else in regard of their great inability to
effect that which they purpose when God shall cross the^. Pro. 1.24.
In wickedness they join altogether as one man. Cast in thy lot amongst us (say
thieves and murderers) we will have all one purse. And in like manner the
wicked in all evil join as one man. And yet they shall do no more then one
man alone, and that of earth too, and that is little, or nothing, except it be
to their own overthrow as the Egytia^s did when they all followed the poor
Israelites into the sea. For man of earth what is he? what can he do? what is
his beginning? what is his bringing up? and what is his ending? Is he not
begotten of wickedness, conceived of wretchedness, and borne of weakness, worse
then a dunghill? Is he not brought up in ignorance and blindness, in folly and
vanity? Is not he against God, and God against him? His life is death, and his
death is double, temporal, and eternal, for the second has no end: what can
he do? Does he live, move, and breath? it is by God. Pilates power was from
above. And while God does give him leave to breath, and to possess the world,
he is cruel, carnal proud, and obstinate, Act. 17. 28
He is like the image in the second of Daniel, whose head was of Gold, his
breast and arms were of Silver, his belly and his thighs of Brass, but his
legs were of Iron, and his feet of Iron and Clay, Dan. 2. 32
And in like sort is the state of great earthly worldlings compounded with
their golden heads and stately buildings, with their silver breasts and arms,
and costly apparel, with their brazen thighs and mighty friends, with their
Iron legs and strong supporting livings, they make a terrible show, but with
their Iron earthly feet, with their hard hearts, and earthly affections they
are carried up and down in the world, which hitting against one little stone,
cut without hands, that is Christ Jesus and his Gospel that lie in their
ways, as a stone of offense to stumble upon, they crumble and fall down to
their utter spoil and everlasting overthrow.

But the heavenly man shall be able through God to stand, and to do valiantly,
and therefore they are called the man of God, a. Tim. 3. 17
because the faithful are as one man, also united by the communion of Saints,
and having God amongst them are able to do great matters. Princes,
Magistrates, Preachers are made of earth too, yet having but a spark of Gods
Majesty in them, or rather but the reflection of a spark of Gods power and
Majesty upon them, are mighty and terrible through Gods spirit, and ought to
be terrible to all Gods enemies, and wicked men, but not to the innocent, and
godly: if they use or abuse their power which God has put in them, to the
cooling of any good man's courage, or to the quenching of the spirit, or to the
disgracing or oppressing of poor Christians as many do, as though they were
Gods, and not of earth, surely God will judge them, and make the^ that they
shall no more terrify his children then Pharao that proud hearted King, and the
Egyptians his subjects which lay drowned in the bottom of the sea: and so
much be the meaning of the words. Now to the matter of David's thanksgiving.

David praises God for judging between his poor servants, and their
oppressors. This is that for want whereof he complains in the first verse.
This is it for want whereof the wicked were so lusty to contemn God. By this
he will break the arms, that is, the power of the wicked and search out their
wickedness. This is the poor Churches desire, namely a judicial hearing. And
to this end has God prepared their hearts, and to this end does the Lord
incline his ear unto them, namely, To sit in judgment upon the poor man's
case, So that, when God does proceed against the wicked it is in judgment.
And though the poor commit his cause unto God, yet it shall be judged, and
without a judicial proceeding shall nothing be done: for God is no acaccepter
of persons as men be, though he loves the godly, yet they shall stand to their
trial, and though he hates the wicked, yet they shall have their trial, all
shall be judged, and all wrongs shall be righted by judgment: therefore it is
said in the Psalm, The Lord shall judge the people righteously: Psa. 67. 4.
This makes the godly so willingly to appeal unto God, saying as Sarai said
to Abraham, Genesis 16. 5.
The Lord be Judge between me and thee.

God has erected judgment feats on earth upon whom he has set Princes and
rulers, and graced them with his own name, and sittes amongst them, to make
them to be honored and regarded; Psalm. 82. I.
And their judgments are, or should be Gods judgments, but oftentimes through
corruption good matters are borne down, and bad matters are borne up, we see
the complaint of Amos prove too true.

They turn judgment to wormwood (says he) and leave of righteousness. And
that also of Esaias. By conceiving and uttering out of the heart false matters,
Amos. 5. 7^
judgment is turned back, Esai. 59. 13. 14 15 16
and justice stands far of: for truth is fallen in the street, and
iniquity cannot enter, yea truth fails (says the Prophet) and he that
refraineth from evil makes himself a pray: But what? was there no remedy?
how did the Lotd take this gear? mark what follows, when the Lord saw it,
it displeased him that there was no judgment. And when he saw that there was
no man, 16
he wondered that none would offer himself. But is that all? verily no.
Therefore his arm did save it, that is his power did rescue the pray, and his
righteousness it self did sustain it, that is he himself took the matter in
hand: For he put on righteousness as an habergeon, 17
and an helmet of salvation upon his head: as if he were to go amongst his
enemies: He put on the garments of vengeance for a clothing, 18
and was clad with zeal as with a cloak, as to recompense, and to requite the
fury of the adversaries, he will fully repaie the Islands. So shall they fear
the name of the Lord from the West, 19
and his glory from the rising of the sun, for the enemy shall come like a
floode, but the spirit of the Lord shall chase him away, And this is the godly
poor man's comfort.

Therefore says the Psalmist: Let the people be glad and rejoice, for thou
shall judge the folk righteously, and Psalm. 67. 4
govern the nations of the world. And Paul says: The. 4. 6. 7.
It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble you: And to you which are troubled rest with us, when the Lord Shall
show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels. And in his first Epistle
speaking of the same matter in other words, he concludes thus: The. 4. 18.
Comfort your selves one another with these words. And here David rejoices,
and praises God for that he will judge the poor and fatherless. Justice and
equity in the world, and from the world are two of the hardest, the dearest,
the rarest jewels that ca^ be gotten: the poor do desire the^, God has
granted their desire to judge the fatherles and the poor that the man of earth
cause to fear no more.

And here now we see that verified which is in Psalm. 126. 5. Psalm. 126. 5.
They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy: And that which we have in a
proverb. A hard beginning makes a good ending, for one would have thought by
David's beginning of this Psalm, that he should not have made so good an end,
for thus he begins: Why do thou hide thy self aad stand a far off O
Lord in time of affliction? That is, Why have we not justice? but he ends as
you hear: Lord thou have heard the desire of the poor, to judge, and. which
is as much as can be desired. But let us reason a little with David abou this
matter. How is it that thou beginning so rudely do speed so well in the end?
If the God of heaven should have dealt with thee David, as the Gods of the
earth do with their suitors, it were a wonder that ever thou should find so
much favor, for though thy matter were good, yet thou might have marred it
in the handling, thou did utter one speech that was enough to have spilled
all: Why do thou hide thy self, etc. What an vnreuerent, rash, and
unadvised speech was this to utter to the Lord of Heaven and Earth? would the
Gods of the earth have taken such a speech at thy hand, or at any poor man's
hand? No David no, many have sustained great wrong by wicked men, and have had
good causes, that for such a word, yea for a less offense then thine have been
very hardly dealt withal, when they have but craved justice etc. Now thy fault
is greater, and God is a severe God, it is to be maruailed then how thou
did escape, and speed so well as thou did

It is true indeed (says David) I confess my frailty, and my fault to be
great, and so must they also that speak rashly before Gods Magistrates, but if
the Lord should narrowly mark every word that is spoken or every thing that is
done amiss as men do, who could stand before him? No, the Lord knows
whereof we be made, and considers in mercy that through extreme heat of
passionate affections, and weakness of faith his children be carried many times
beyond themselves, but upon their humble submission, and unfeigned repentance he
freely forgiueth the^ though men will not. Yea the Lord in mercy does put a
difference between his servants, and his enemies though men many times will
not, I recanted my opinion and said, The Lord is king for ever and ever, and
for all my rude beginning have through Gods mercy obtained a good ending:
Praised be the Lord which has heard the desire of the poor, to judge the
fatherless, and the poor, that the man of earth cause to fear no more. A
notable example for earthen Gods, magistrates I mean, to follow, and not with
bitterness, and rigor to censure, and in extremity to prosecute every slip,
and advantage of poor ministers, and other honest men when they come to
complain before them, but with love and words of grave and gracious counsel
to heal, or at least to cover the sore, least the uncircumcised do rejoice
and triumph over their fathers and brethren, as cursed Cham did at his fathers
nakedness. And so much for the bringing of the beginning, and ending of David's
petition together. Now let us hear a little more of the thing it self that
the Lord has granted, and that is this, that it will please his Majesty to
hear and determine between his poor people on the one side, and their cruel
oppressors on the other side. In all respects it may be resembled unto a
purchased Assizes, wherein we are to consider, First the parties between whom
the controversy depends, Secondly, before whom it is to be tried. Thirdly,
by whom it must be tried. Fourthly, the action that is to be tried. Fifthly, the
verdict of the Jury. Sixthly the sentence of the Judge. And lastly the
execution of the sentence. And this course we may safely take, both because
Gods spirit has in like sort set forth the judgment seat of God, and every
thing to be tried before the same, Reu. 20. 11. 12
after the manner of earthly Judges: for our greater capacity and
understanding, as also because this kind of teaching does nearest suit with the
teaching of our Savior Christ, who still used such familiar similitudes to
explain his doctrine by, as were most familiarly known unto men. Then first
of the parties between whom the pleading is. The plaintiues Plaintiues
are poor and fatherless: such as for want of worldly ability are feign to
sue for their right In forma pauperum, as commonly all good causes do, yea,
whosoever will speed in Gods Court must come, In forma pauperis, for the Lord
takes no fees, and stands for the poor as well as for any other. The
defendants Defenda^ts
or parties arraigned are all oppressors of the poor, all Athistes, proud, and
cruel tyrants, crafty, and subtle hunters of the poor. There sit in
Commission Commisioners.
with the King, his own son, the son of God the Lord Jesus Christ whom God
has appointed to judge the world. And with him sit as it were assistants, Act.
17. 13.
24. elders clothed with white rayments of Christ's righteousness, Revel. 4. 4.
and crowned with golden crowns of heavenly glory and authority. The
ministers or messengers that atte^d on this Court are the heauely Angels of
God, Mat. 24. 31.
Psa. 68. 17.
who for their swiftnes in executing their charge are said to have many wings,
and for their great power are called principalities, thrones, and dominations.
Mat. 3. 3.
The criers of this court are the preachers of the word, Esai. 40.
whose voices must be lifted up like trumpets to summon men before the judgment
seat of God. The books of the court be of two sorts, books of statutes, and
books of record. But where is the prisoner? Apo. 20. 12
He stands taken with his own iniquity, Pro. 5. 22
and bound with the cords of his own sin. Now the^ the arrainment. Crier lift
up thy voice like a trumpet, and call forth the man of earth, Sargants strip
him out of al his glorious titles and dignities, seize upon all that he has,
and let him hear his enditement, Man of earth hold up thy hand, thou art
endited here by the name of ( Man of Earth) not Gentleman, Nobleman, nor
yeoman, but plain man of earth borne of earth, and brought up like an
earth-worme, etc. For that thou on such a day, and of such a month in such a
year, having received an arm, that is to say, power, wealth, and authority,
have abused the same, and by force and fraud did set upon thy poor brother,
and fatherles neighbor, living and traveling in gods peace: and meaning thee
no harm, did put the^ in fear, so that of their credit, life, and goods
they did despair, what say thou to this fellonie art thou guilty or not
guilty? Not guilty my Lord. How will thou be tried? By my honest neighbors,
(he says) yea sir, I can bring the hands and seals of all the parish where I
dwell for my good behavior. Yea, but that is not enough man of earth, thou
must be tried by God and his Church. Call a Jury. The Jury that must go upon
thee is impannelled of Prophets, and Apostles, Their names are set down in the
old and new Testament, what can thou say against them? Oh my Lord, I have to
except against them all, They are not my friends, they and I could never agree,
they speak of malice, because I would not hear them, nor be ruled by them,
nor give them their demand, well that is no matter, they are holy men and such
as were led by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 22. Therefore man of earth hold up thy
hand again, and hear thy second enditement. 2. Enditement.
Thou art endited by the name of the man of earth, for Athisme and contempt of
God. verse. 3. 4. Also, thou art endited for abusing and oppressing the poor by
cruel and crafty practices, 3. Enditement.
verse. 7. 8. 9. 10. Also for speaking blasphemy and treason against God and
his truth, verse. 11. Also for taking part with the wicked, and standing
against the cause of the innocent. Also thou art endited for obstinate
profaning and violating of the Lords saboaths, as also for abusing thy
stewardship, and excessive spending thy substance, vain and unprofitable
exercises, whereby thou made thy self unfit to do the works of thy
calling, to provide for thy family* to relieve the poor, or to benefit the
Church, or to maintain religious exercises for thy vain sportes and delights,
lighter then vanity it self. What say thou to all and every of these, art
thou guilty or not guilty? Not guilty. How will thou be tried? by my honest
neighbors I would be tried? but if there be no remedy, then I must be tried
by God and his Church: Call forth the plantife. Poor man, and fatherless,
come forth, and fear not, you shall be heard, what can you say against this
man of earth, and how do you prove these articles you have here objected
against him? My Lord then this we say, They have most proudly and cruelly
persecuted us with inquisitio^s, Verse. 2.
slanders, and fines, with taxes, and vexations, and have almost beggared us,
again, they have boasted of their own hearts desire, they have blessed
themselves, and contemned thy servants. Verse. 3
The more thou have done for them, Verse. 5. 7*
the less have they feared thy judgments. His mouth is full of cursing, and
deceit, he has lien in wait in the villages. As 8
a Lion in his den so lurketh he in wait secretly, for his prey, by his
crouching, 9
and bowing he makes the poor to fall by heaps into his nets, 10
thus he has used us. And as for his blasphemies they are most outrageous. He
has said in his heart, That the Lord sees not, nor regards. All this we
could prove by many which are afraid to speak the truth, for fear of
their displeasure, for that some of them are their landlords, some are their
masters, some are Justices of peace, some are their patro^s, some find them
work, etc. But Lord thou have seen it thy self, for thou beholdest mischief
and wrong: Verse. 14.
That thou may take it into thy hands, therefore to thee we appeal. You of
the grand Jury, you have heard your evidence, and it is all very true that
the poor and fatherless have informed, for I have seen it my self (faith
the Lord) therefore now give in your verdict, who shall speak for you? David
because he is a princely prophet, and therefore deserves to be foreman, he
shall speak for us. What say you then, is the man of earth guilty of all and
singular those matters where of he has been endited or no? yea Lord (says
David) he is guilty.

Well then, Man of earth, thou see that thou art co^uicted by the verdict of
the great inquest of the Prophets and Apostles, my self being witness. What
say thou to the records of thy own Court? Court of conscience described
For I have given thee that privilege more then all creatures besides, to
keep Court in thy own house, to that end I have given thee will and
affections, to move and to debate thy matters, judgment and understanding to
descerne of causes, and memory as a register to record thy causes, and
conscience as a Judge, and a thousand witnesses to determine of all thy
proceedings. And this Court is called the Court of Conscience, thou shall also
be tried by that. In that Court be many examinations, many witnesses, and many
records. The hall is common equity, there are many sentences in tables
fayrely engraven, as in one place love God above all, in another, Love thy
neighbor as thy self, in another, do as thou would be done unto, in
another, do no wrong: Suum cuique tribuito, etc. Perhaps thou will say, they
that belong to that Court have troubled thee and disquieted thee, and therefore
they are not thy friends, I know it well, and therefore thou would not hear
them: Thou have also disquieted and vexed them, and therefore would be loath
to be tried by them, I know also thy corrupt dealing with that Court, how with
false persuasions thou have blinded reason, and perverted judgment, how thou
have fed understanding with false informations and blinded her eyes with false
love, how thou have put the two Judges out of commission the love of God, and
the love of thy neighbor, and in steed of them have advanced selfeloue, and
partiality. How ignorance and wilfulnes have pleaded thy matters, and malice
has ever been one of the Jury, how cruelty, and pride have been thy
assistantes, and weakness, and discretion have been put out of doors; how
falsehood and briberie have informed the Jury, and truth and honesty have
stood at the bar, how Barrabas the murderer was released, and Christ the
Lord of life was crucified, how thou have seared that Court with hot iron for
offending thee, and Conscience her self thou thoughtest thou had hanged
long ago. All this I Know, and a great deal more, but now I have raised up
Conscience again, and set all her attendantes in commission again. The
records are finer written, and extant, Lo, where they stand all before me;
here selfeloue and malice have nothing to do, what say thou to all this,
wherefore have thou done thus and thus, why does the wicked contemn God? why
have thou said in thy heart, the Lord does not regard? why speak thou not?
what? art thou dumb? have thou nothing to say?

Besides all this, here comes in now a petty Jury of life and death
against thee, chosen out from among my dumb and unreasonable creatures, all
which cry for vengeance against thee, as thy brothers blood for one, the earth
that drew in his blood for another, the beam in thy house for another, and
then the stone in the wall, Genesis 4. 10
the beast thou rodest upon, Haba. 2. 11
thy money that thou tookest for a bribe, Number. 22. 28.
then thy cruel and crafty Bands and Obligations, Mat. 27. 3.
then thy merciles pledges and forfaitures that thou swallowedst up, then they
pettifoggers the^ thy crafty counselors, and then thine own servants and
children, and thy table that thou toldest thy money upon, the very Pen and
Ink that thou wrotest withal, thy bed that thou laiest upon, and thy chamber
door that thou did keep fast shut while thou committest thy filthiness,
and by and by thy own tongue shall find thee guilty, all these my creatures
and subjects are come in to testify their humble allegiance and loyal
duty to me their maker, against thee that have abused them, what say thou
now? speak, art thou guilty or not? Judas being convicted by the Court of
conscience, said he was guilty in betraying of innocent blood, and so went and
hanged himself, Cain being convicted by the Court of Conscience, said also he
was guilty in shedding of his brothers blood, and so became a desperate
runnagate. In like sort was Achitophel convicted of treason against King David,
and he went home and hanged himself. All these were condemned by the Court of
Conscience, and think thou to escape? Conscience bring in thy verdict, what
say thou Conscience to the man of earth (who thought that thou had dest been
hanged long ago) is he guilty of those several enditements, which have been
preferred against him by the poor and fatherless, and found against him by
the grand Jury of my servants the Prophets and Apostles or no? we find says
the Court of Conscience, The verdict of conscience
that such a one man of earth, by Gods providence sometime Prince, of such a
Nation, and such a one sometime Bishop of such a Province, and such a one
Mayor of such a town, and such a one Justice of such a Division, and such a
one Minister of such a congregation, and such a one Lawyer in such a Court, and
such a one Landlorde of such tennantes, And such a one Corn badger in such a
Country, and every one of them, and many more, whose names and bills of
enditementes are severally recorded in the book of Gods everlasting
knowledge; and all and every of them, but men of earth forgetting themselves,
abusing their place that GOD gave them, and having not the fear of GOD before
their eyes are guilty of all, and every several enditement that has been
commenced against them. Very well. What? Did they fly for the same? Yea Lord
they did fly, for as the light of thy word did follow them, so they did in a
deadly hatred of the same seek darkness, when they were reproved by the
preacher, they would come no more at the sermon. When they have been looked
for at the Church, then they have been at the bowls, or at the cards, or at
the tables, or at the alehouses, or at their worldly business, or about some
other horrible wickedness, to verify the saying: Qui male agit odit lucem: He
that does evil, hates the light. We Will. What goods, lands, or tenements had
they at the time of their apprehension? They had none of their own, for they
were all tenants at will, yet we find that they were very welthy many of them,
and great in worldly substance. For first, Thou have filled their bellies with
thine hidden treasures, so that they have enough for themselves, and leave
enough for their children after the^. Secondly, That wealth which thou gave
them, O Lord, has increased: neither are they in penury as others are.
Thirdly the spoils of the poor are in their houses, Job. 21.
and as great fishes devour many small fishes, Psalm. 73.
so they have gotten many livings into their hands, and many men's trades and
offices into their hands. And this is the verdict of the Court of conscience,
which does find him guilty also of much more, as namely of hypocrisy, of
vaineglorie, of contempt of Gods word, of contempt of man, and of diverse
villainous practices done in secret, which are known only to God, for Saint
John says. If our heart condemn us, 1. Ioh. 3. 20
God is greater then our heart and knows all things. And thus much for the
trial of the man of earth. Now let us hear the sentence of the Judge.

Man of earth (says the Judge) thou have been endited of diverse and sundry
enditements, to the which thou have pleaded not guilty, and yet notwithwanding
being tried by the grand Jury of the holy Prophets, and men of God, as also by
the verdict of the Court of thy own conscience, have been convicted, and
found guilty of them all. Therefore now what can thou say for thy self,
why sentence of eternal death should not be pronounced against thee according
to the law? In earthly judgments, this question is put to two sorts of
persons, First, such as are quitt by book, Secondly to such as cannot have
that benefit. So likewise in this heavenly judgment. This question is
propounded both to the elect, as also to the reprobate. To the elect it is
said, what can thou say for thy self? They staight way condemn themselves
as David did of bloudguiltinesse. Psalm. 51. as Job did his children for
blaspheming GOD in their mirth and feastinges, as Peter did his fall from
Christ, even with bitter tears, and as Paul did, who said, he was a chief
sinner, crying out, O wretched man that I am etc. and as the prodigal child
did: Father I have sinned against Heaven, and against thee, and am no more
worthy to be called thy son, but yet for them (thus condemning and humbling
themselves) there is some comfort: What, can thou believe in me, (says the
Judge) and repent from the bottom of thy heart, can thou read thy name in
the book of life? To which question every one does answer as he is prompted
by the spirit of God, I believe and repent but not of my self, it is the gift
of God, I believe, Lord help my unbelief. And with Zaccheus they promise
restitution of goods ill gotten. Luke. 19. 8
And with David they pray: Oh that my ways were so directed, Psa. 119.
that I might keep thy statutes always: Well (says the Judge) then hear
your sentence. The Court does award you this punishment, The sentence of the
godly
you shall be crossed and afflicted in this world sometime in your bodies.
Sometimes in your goods, sometimes in your children, you shall also be stung
with the hot iron of an afflicted and wounded conscience, you shall be whip ped
and scourged with venomous, and slanderous tongues of wicked me^, and a great
deal more the^ this shall happen unto you here, that you may not be damned
with the wicked world, and so go your way, and sin no more, least a worse thing
happen unto you, 1. Cor. 11. 32.
but before you can be quite discharged, you must remember to put in Death as a
common bail for your forth coming whersoeuer you shall be called for, John 8
11
and my own son Jesus Christ as a special suertie for your debt, and good
behavior, and so paying your fees of obedience, and newnes of life, and
carrying about you the remnants of sin as shackles upon the feet of your
soul to humble you withal so long as you live in this world, performing these
duties, you are discharged from the sentence of eternal condemnation, for the
law of the Gospel is that there shall be no condemnation to them that are in
Christ, Romans 8. 1.
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. To which the godly do
answer as the Apostle did in the very same case, Romans 7. 25
I thank my God through Jesus Christ my Lord. And thus much for the sentence
of the elect, now let us hear the sentence of the reprobate. The sentence of
the reprobate.


Call forth the reprobate man of earth (says the Lord.) Man of earth what
can thou say for thy self why sentence of eternal death should not be
pronounced against thee? What, can thou believe in Christ, and repent for thy
sins? Yea Lord I believe that Christ died for sinners, and for my part I am
sorry that I must be damned* Nay thou reprobate, can thou believe effectually
that Christ died for thy sins, and do thou abhor thy sins which were
the cause of Christ's death, or have thou any hearty desire so to do? for
otherwise thou say no more then the Devils do, who believe and tremble. No
Lord: I know not what that means. It is true in deed, for when thou were
admonished to repent, thou hardenest thine heart, abusing my patience, and
making a custom of sin, which has bred full hardness of heart, and
impenitencie in thee, and so have heaped up unto thy self wrath against this
day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.
and revealing of my righteous judgment: thou thoughtest also that thou
had faith and repentance at commandment, persuading thy self and others
that all men may repent and believe if they will, and when they will, but now
thou see that thou were deceived.

Oh, a Psalm of mercy Lord, one Psalm of mercy, I can read all the Psalms of
David, and say all the penitential Psalms by heart, I will go to Church, and
say over the Lords prayer, and my Pater noster too, Lord I will go a
pilgrimage, and punish my body with whipping, and fasting, I have heard thee
preach in our parish Church, and will do again when I can intend it. Oh Lord
I will do any thing rather then go to hell. Ah thou reprobate (says the Lord)
who required all this at thy hands? do thou think to please me with thy
will worship, and spiritual whoredoms? all that will not serve thy turn thy name
is not written in the book of life, therefore thou can not repent, nor believe
aright: have thou no more to say? Yes Lord, Others have done as much as I* And
I hope to be saved as well as others* And I have heard some say, that thou art
full of mercy, and would that all men should be saved. Yea* (says the Lord)
so have thou and many more abused my mercy, and bereaved me of justice as much
as in you lie, and like ignorant, and unstable men perverting my holy
scriptures to your own destruction, 2. Pet. 3. 16
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy and I will execute judgment
merciles upon thee which shewedst no mercy to the poor and fatherles, Iam. 2.
13.
and do thee no wrong. Therefore now hear thy final sentence, because thou
have abused thy arm, that is, the power, wealth, and authority that I gave
thee, and have not at any time loved me for my mercy, nor feared me for my
judgment, lo, therefore thy arm shall be broken, thou shall be deprived of all
means whereby thou have bin encouraged to do mischief, and then thou shall be
no more cause of fear: my people shall go and live without fear of thee.
Also thou shall go from hence to the place from whence thou came, Genesis 3. 19.
and that is to the earth: For out of the Dust were thou taken, and to the dust
shall thou return again. And from thence to the place of execution in hell,
and there shall thou hang in torments intolerable, and perpetual, prepared
for the Devil and his Angels, where shall be weeping and wailing, and gnashing
of teeth for ever. Thou shall have black fame for thy herault, and everlasting
shame for thy hearse, fear and terror shall be dealt for thy doale, and the
curses of the poor shall follow thee to thy grave. And this is briefly the
substance of the sentence of the reprobate man of earth, which is yet but a
shadow of that which it is indeed, for indeed it will be more grievous and
terrible when it comes, then is possible for all the tongues of men and
Angels to express. Now a little of the execution of this sentence.

In earthly judgments, execution does not always presently follow the
sentence of the judge* for some are repriued upon further consideration, Of the
execution.
some are after a while committed to the galleys, and perpetual slavery, some
are suddenly hanged up, not knowing of the time when, nor the place where until
the very instant. And some have knowledge both of the time and place before
hand, that they may be prepared for death. So is it also in this heavenly
judgment. Some are repriued, and live long, yet still in the prison of sin
and slavery of the Devil, which is to increase their torment, some are
suddenly taken, and speedily destroyed, without recovery being brought by the
righteous hand of God into evil in the midst of the Congregation as apeareth
in Pro. 6. 15. Some are longer in languishing pains and torments then some,
even in this world for one and the same fault.

There be three causes for which the Lord does defer the full execution of
judgment upon the wicked, the first is, to keep the^ in continual misery,
for all good things turn to their evil, the second is to plague them with
their own sin, for there cannot be a greater mischief then to be a wicked
man, and to live long in wickedness, for when he has served the devil, the
devil shall pay him his wages, and that sin whereunto he has been most
inclined, and whereof he looked for the greatest pleasure and profit, shall
work him the greatest plague and woe. The third cause is, that they may live
and punish us which are the children of GOD, who have been already crossed
and whipped by them, and are never the better, but when he has worn them as
rods to the stumpes upon the backs of his stubburne children, and well humbled
us by them, he will then cast his rods into the fire. God punishes not as
earthly judges do, to content them that have received the wrong, or to
satisfy the world, but because he hates sin, and loves righteousness,
and draw thereout great glory to himself, and singular good to his
children. The use of this Doctrine may serve to terrify the wicked, who use to
make but a jest of the judgments of God, saying, what? so long yet? till
doomes day? etc. but it is not so long as they dream, for the sentence of God
is begun many times to be executed upon the wicked, even when they least
feel it, for it is a judgment of it self to be past feeling of Gods
judgment when they sin: It serves also to comfort the godly, who think the
time long till the Lord take the wicked in hand which do oppress and vex
them. Lastly let it serve to admonish all of us to look unto our ways, and to
live so, as that when God shall get up unto his judgment seat, we may be
found, in Christ our great suertie unblameable, and so escape the fearful and
irrecouerable sentence of the wicked and reprobate, and on the other side may
receive our quietus est, and discharge with Gods elect in Christ Jesus. To whom
with the Father and the holy Spirit, be all honor, power, and dominion for
evermore.

Now let us praise God.

Amen.
Errata.
In page 16. line 13. that for, read for that. pa* 20. li. 17. for thine, read
mine, in line 20. for thy, r. the. pa. 37. li. 16. for they in, r. they are in.
and lin. 18. afficted. re. afflicted. pa. 41. lin. 24. want, re. wait. pa. 51.
li. 8. be, re* for. pa 52 lin. 3. case, r. cause. pa. 63. li. 1. then the,
read, then to the.


