ALGIERS VOYAGE IN A IOVRNALL OR BRIEF Reportary of all occurrents happening in
the fleet of ships sent out by the King his most excellent Majesty, as well
against the Pirates of Algiers, as others: the whole body of the Fleet
consisting of 18. Sail.

VIZ. Six of his Majesty's Ships. Ten Merchants Ships. Two Pinnaces.


Under the command of Sir Robert Mansel knight, Vice Admiral of England, and
Admiral of that Fleet: and a Council of War appointed by his Majesty.

The Accidents of every particular Month (since the first setting forth) being
in this discovery, expressed by one that went along in the Voyage.

Imprinted MDCXXI.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THou shall here receive a faithful report (by way of a Iournall) of all such
occurrents as fell out in the Voyage to Algiers. Those only that were
remarkable are in this short discourse to be found, the slight ones are not
worth, nor worthy of any publicatio^. Dissigns of this nature managed by the
directions of so many noble Gentlemen, a number of valiant Captains and well
experienced Nauigators, seconding the courages of the other, do for the most
part fill the itching ears of the world, with more then a common expectation
of strange things to be done, beyond the possibility of man. But if he that is
so curious in his inquisition, had been but a personal aduenturer in some of
the dangers which we ran through, I make no doubt but he would confess he
had seen enough, and undergone more then willingly he could wish himself to
be acquainted with again. How our ships were furnished for men or munition;
what several Captains and Commanders were in every one of them are here
truly set down: the burden also of every ship, then the days and months are
named in which any memorable act was performed, the towns likewise within in
the Straights of Gibraltar, before which our men of War did any service.

And to make this Discourse the more pleasing to thee, such Spanish ships and
gallyes, besides Turkish Pirates, as we encountered with at Sea, shall appear
sailing, in all their gallantry before thee. Imagine (as thou read) that
thou hear the Canon playing, and Turks by hundreds tumbling into the Seas,
our own stretching out hands to save a miserable number of poor Christians
made slaves to the barbarous Turk and crafty Moore, but delivered from that
servitude by us, God assisting our labors.

Such men of quality as either dyed or miscarryed in this Voyage, have here the
names written down.

But least the citing of particulars in this place, should alter the property
of an Epistle, which (like the first day of a Term amongst Lawyers) should be
spent only in complement, and bidding thee welcome to this feast of news* I
will no longer detayne thine eye from longing for that, which my pains and
observation have diligently collected to give thee content, which if here thou
find, it shall be to me some part of a recompense, for those stormy days
and nights in which I have been in the voyage. So farewell.

The Author to his Boooke.
ANd since thou art not limbed with trees nor flowers
Of Eloquence, but clad in white and black;
Thou must prepare thy self to abide the showers,
Of them that of dislike occasion take,
And when thou likeliest art to go to wrack,
Seem not against them thine error to defend;
But rather yield a little and give back,
And pray them, that they will thy faults amend.
The Preface to the Reader.
MY true subject tending to entreat
Of new don wars, and acts of chiualry,
Whereby renowned Captains much honor get:
And with eternal praises now
(Their names and fames) is forced to require
Thee mighty Mars with art him to inspire.
Whose fiery nature bent to wrath and thrall,
As being of complexion hot and dry,
Melancholicke, and furious with all,
(For in thy bones choler hid does lie)
Which rightly cause all Poets sound thy fame,
And thee the God of wars in stories name.
Since then thou art of warlicke influence,
And that my style of battle must indite:
Assist me with some marshall eloquence,
That I may frame my hand and pen aright.
With words of art and artificial phrase,
Of valiant men to speak the eternal praise.
And if at my request thou daignest to list
Or grant the thing which I of thee do crave,
Yet for her sake that lovingly thee kissed,
(Black Vulcans wife) and further favor gave;
Vouchsafe thy aid my lines so to infuse,
That I therein fit terms and phrase may use.
Else truth to say so barren is my wit,
And void of aureat liquord eloquence.
That I confess my self to be unfit,
Or able to accomplish my pretense.
But praying all that sect, with heart and mind,
Not spare to speak, if any fault they find.
And with good will I shall amend the same,
(For many eyes may see much more then one.)
Correct then freely where you find the blame,
But find not fault whereas deserves none,
And so in hope I shall your favors win,
With your support this story I Will begin.
Yours or not his own I. B.

THE NAMES OF THE COUNCEL of War.
SIr Robert Mauncell Knight. Sir Richard Hawkins Knight. Sir Thomas Button
Knight. Sir Henry Palmer Knight. Captain Arthur Manwaring Esquire. Captain
Thomas Love Esquire. Captain Samuel Argall Esquire. Edward Clarke Esquire,
and Secretary to the Council of War.
The names of the Captains, the Ships, their burdens, number of men and
Ordnance in his Majesty's six Ships.
1 SIr Robert Mauncell Admiral in the Lion, burden 600. Tuns, men 250. pieces
of brass Ordnance 40. 2 Sir Richard Hawkins Vice Admiral in the Vantguard,
burden 660. tuns, men 250. Brass Ordnance 40. 3 Sir Thomas Button Rere
Admiral in the Rainbow, burden 660. tuns, men 250. Brass Ordnance 40. 4
Captain Arthur Manwaring in the Constant reformation, burden 660. tuns, men
250. Brass Ordnance 40. 5 Sir Henry Palmer in the Anthelope, burden 400. tun
men 160. Brass Ordnance 34. 6 Captain Thomas Love in the Conuertine, burden
500. tun, men 220. Brass Ordnance 36.
In the Merchants Ships.
1 Captain Samuel Argall in the Golden Phoenix, burden 300. tuns, men 120. Iron
Ordnance 24 2 Captain Christopher Harries in the Samuel, burden 300. tuns, men
120. Iron Ordnance 22. 3 Sir John Fearne in the Mary gold, burden 260 tun, men
100. Iron Ordnance 21. 4 Captain John Penington in the Zouch Phoenix, burden
280 tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 26. 5 Captain Thomas Porter in the Barbery,
burden 200. tuns, men 80. Iron Ordnance 18. 6 Sir Francis Tanfield in the
Centurion, burden 200. tun, men 100. Iron ordnance 22, 7 Sir John Hamden in the
Primro, burden 180. tuns, men 80. Iron Ordnance 18. 8 Captain Eusabey Cave in
the Hercules, burden 300. tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 24. 9 Captain Robert
Haughton in the Neptune, burden 280 tuns, men 120. Iron Ordnance 21. 10
Captain John Chidley in the Merchant Bonauenture, burden 260. tuns, men 110.
Iron Ordnance 23. 11 Captain George Raymonnd in the Restoure, burden 130.
tuns, men 50. Iron Ordnance 12. 12 Captain Thomas Harbert in the Marmaduke,
burden 100. tuns, men 50. Iron Ordnance 12.
The Fleet thus furnished set sail in the sound of Plimmouth the 12. of
October in the morning, in the year 1620. the wind being variable we turned
and towed into the Channel, the weather being very fair in the evening we
steered along the Shore.

October.
THe 12. at noone we had the Lizard West, North West 4. leagues off, this day
and the next night we had little wind.

The 13. at noone having a fresh gale at North, North West, we making a South
West way, the Lizard at noone bare North West and by North some 15. Leagues,
the wind continuing as before we steered away South West and by South.

The 17, in the morning we made Cape finister bearing of us East, South East
some 13. leagues of.

The 24. we had sight of the Burlings in the morning, the bearing of us South,
South East 5. leagues the wind being then at South and by West, we stood of
West and by South, having much wind and rain.

The 28. we had sight of Mountchego, the body of it bearing East.

The 29. we fell with the Cape of Spain, and haling near the shore saluted
the Castle with our Ordnance, and they us: here our Admiral sent a shore to
enquire for letters of advice which he exspected, but found none: at night we
set sail the wind being at North, North West, and the 30. at night we entered
the straights.

The 31. in the morning we turned into the road of Gibralter, where were
riding at anchor two of the king of Spaines ships of war, the Vice Admiral
of a squadron with the kings arms in his fore-top and another, who so soon as
they perceived us weighed their Anchors, set sail, and coming Leeward of our
Admiral, struck his flag, saluting him with there small shot and great
Ordnance, after haled him with voices; our Admiral striking his flag, answered
them with voices, gave them his orduce and small shot, all the fleet following
in order: this done, we saluted the town with our Ordnance, the town doing
the like by answering us. Our Admiral being at an Anchor, the Spanish Captain
accompanied with other Gentlemen, came aboard our Admiral, who told us that
there were great store of Pirates abroad, and that two of the Pirates ships had
fought with seven Spanish Gallyes, and had slain them 400. men, and that they
had been at Steria a small town with thirty sail of ships and ten gallyes,
and had taken it, and carried away diverse prisoners, and that they had
threatened to take Gibraltar; there the Admiral sent his sick men a shore,
having houses and lodgings prouiuided for them, amongst whom was Captain John
Fenner who here dyed.

November.
November the second about seven in the morning having a fresh gale at North
West, the Admiral with the rest of the fleet weighed Anchor and standing off,
met North the rear Admiral of the Spanish fleet, who saluting us North his
Ordnance and we stood on our course North East and by East, being bound for
Malhaga.

The third about two in the morning we came to an Anchor in Malhaga road, and
about eight of the clock we saluted the town with our Ordnance and diverse
volleyes of small shot; here diverse Spaniards of account came aboard our ships
whom we kindly entertained, here we likewise exspected letters but hard not of
any.

The sixth our Admiral dispatched a Gentleman one Master John Duppa with
letters to the English Ambassador at the Court of Spain, to let him know of our
arrival and proceedings. This day about 11 of the clock, the fleet weighed
Anchor and set sail the wind at North West. But before we weighed, our
Admiral gave order to the fleet to divide themselves into three squadrons,
the Admiral squadron was kept six leagues from the shore, with pendants in
the maine tops for their signs; the Vice-Admirals squadron three leagues
without him, on his bow with pendants on his foretops; the Reare-Admirall
three leagues within him on his quarter with pendants on their Mysen tops, who
dividing themselves according to their order steered away East and by South
along the shore, being bound for Allicant.

The seventh, about six in the morning it being calm, and all the fleet
together, the Admiral took in all her sails and lay a hull, all the fleet
doing the like, the Admiral put out his flag of general Council which was
Saint George. Whereupon all the Captains and Masters repaired aboard him,
where it was concluded, and thought meet that two ships of least draught of
water, and one Pinnace should hale the shore close aboard to see if any Pirates
were at an Anchor, either in Bays or Coues, and to free the shore; here
likewise was given a word whereby to know our own fleet from others, if any
strangers should chance to fall amongst us in the night, the word was Greenwich
Tower. The Council ended, and every man repaired aboard his own ship, in the
evening the whole fleet in their order sailed along toward Cap Degat.

The eight and ninth days having but little wind we gained not much way.

The tenth in the morning falling with the point of Muttrill, and having the
wind Southerly, the whole fleet put into the road and there Anchored.

The 13. about ten in the morning our Admiral shot of a warning piece, that
all such that were of the fleet might repair aboard, and about four in the
afternoon having afaire gale at west, set sail and steered away East and by
South.

Th 14. at nine in the morning we were thwart of Cap Degatt, the wind
continuing Westerly we shaped our course North East and by East along the
shore.

The 19. in the morning we came to Anchor in Allicant road, where the whole
fleet saluted the town with their Ordnance, and the town us: here our
Admiral having provided houses for his sick men, as before he had done at
Gibraltar, sent 37. sick men of his own ships company a shore, here likewise
he dispatched a Gentleman one Master Walter Long to Carthagena with letters of
advice, but all this while could receive no such letters as we expected.

The 25. being fitted with Wine, Water, and other such necessaryes as we
wanted, the wind being Northerly, the whole fleet set sail, leaving behind
the Good Will out of whom our Admiral had taken most of her men to supply his
wants for those sick he left a shore, and being under sail we shaped our
course South West for Algiere.

The 27. about ten in the morning we came to an Anchor in Algier road in 27.
fadome water out of command of the town or Castle, the Admiral and
Rere-Admirall wearing white ancients on their poopes, the rest of the fleet
wearing no ancients at all, going in the whole fleet slatuted the town with
their Ordnance, but the town gave us none again: this day it blew much wind,
our Admiral could send no Boats a shore where we rode, we had the Cape some
six miles of West, North West, the 3. miles of West, and Mount Defourt East,
North East about seven or eight mi^^s of.

The 28. our Admiral sent a Gentleman a shore one Captain Squibe with a white
flag of truce in his boat to give the Viceroy to understand the cause of our
coming; hereupon the Viceroy sent a boat aboard our Admiral with a white
flag and four men in her, one principal man in the town who delivered our
Admiral, signifying the Viceroy had received command from the grand Seignour
to use us with all respect, and that our men might have the free liberty of the
shore to buy fresh victuals or whatsoever they wanted; they promised our
Admiral if on the morrow he would send any Gentleman of quality a shore with
the kings Majesty's letters, that upon the shooting off a piece of Ordnance
according to our Admirals dema^d he should receive sufficient hostages aboard
for his safety: this night the Pirates brought in three prizes, one Flemming,
the other two Englishmen, the one a Plimmouth man, and the other of North
Yarmouth.

The 29. in the morning our Admiral sent Captain Squibe a shore again with
letters, importing as well a speedy dispatch, as also to give them notice what
pledges he demanded for such Gentlemen as were then ready to go a shore with
his Majesty's letters: about four in the afternoon, our Admiral shooting off
a piece of Ordnance according to promise sent Captain John Roper in his Barge,
accompanied with diverse other Gentlemen of quality to carry the Kings letters
to the Bashaw and Duana, but before they got a shore word was brought them that
the Principal of the Duana were gone into the Country, and that the pledges
were not ready, but the next morning they should not fail, whereupon they
returned a board again, this day toward the evening there came in 3. sail of
ships, the winds blowing fresh at South West.

The 30. the Admiral called a general Council of all the Captains and
Masters in the fleet where it was debated, whether the fleet might ride in
safety or not, till we had concluded our business here, it was generally
concluded that by Gods providence we might ride without hazard.

December.
DEcember the first, in the morning the wind at South West fair weather, came
in eight sail of ships, and one sail, whereof some were Turks Pirates, other
Pirates, this day the Admiral sent a shore one Master James Friswell to expect
our business, for whose safety we received four Turks for hostage: this day
in the afternoon came in two ships.

The second in the morning went out four sail of Turkish Pirates, the wind at
South west a fresh gale, this day the Admiral sent Captain John Roper a shore
with his Majesty's letters, and two principal men of the town were sent a
board in hostage for him.

The third came six of the king of Spains ships into the road, the Admiral
striking his flag saluted our Admiral with small shot and Ordnance, this done,
he came aboard our Admiral in his boat, and told him he came in pursuit of
certain Pirates who had taken diverse of their men, who being in a ship of 700.
tuns near Carthagena in fight with a Turkish Pirate, had boorded her, entered
her men and taken her, had not there own ship unfortunately fallen on fire
with a mischance happening, they were forced to forsake the Turks ship to save
their own, and so lost both for being not able to quench the fury of the fire
were forced to yield themselves to the slavery of the Turks to save their
lives, being in all 300. men, whereof 30. perished in the fire. This Spanish
Admiral sailing near the town the Turks 74. great shot at him, and he gave
the^ some 16. back in exchange, but the distance between them was so far,
that the shot falling short, no harm was done on either side.

The fourth, our Admiral received from the town an answer of the Kings
letters.

The sixth, after long debating, finding the Turks perfidious and fickle, as
well in detaining our messenger who delivered his Majesty's letters,
notwithstanding we had sufficient hostages for him, as in breaking all other
promises: in the end it was agreed thus, upon leaving a Consul with them, they
would let our messenger come aboard again; whereupon the Admiral sent a
common man well clothed by the name of a Consul, whom they received with good
respect and sending our messenger aboard, received their own pledges, and
delivered us some 40. poor captives, which they pretended was all they had in
the town, this was all we could draw from them.

The seventh in the morning our Admiral sent a letter with instruction to our
Council, with another letter to the Bashawe, to let him know how ill we took
his perfidious dealing.

The eight in the morning our Admiral and all the rest of the fleet weighed
Anchor and set sail the wind being West, we steered away North till noone,
and then bearing up, shaped our course North East and by East, being bound for
Calerie.

The 10. day at night the wind shifted to the South and East, and so to the
East.

The 11, in the morning the wind Easterly the Admiral altered his course, and
steered for May lorka.

The 13. at night having the wind West we came to an Anchor in the Bay of
Port Columbra, a Bay on the South side of May lorka.

The 14. in the morning we weighed, and the same night came to Anchor in the
Rode of Alacotha on the North side of the said Island, we found this to be a
very good place, yielding us wood, water and ballast, whereof we had great
need, the people very kind and courteous bringing us great store of all manner
of provisions which we bought at easy rates, whereby we supplied our wants,
and relieved our sick men whereof we had great store in our fleet.

The 24. in the morning the fleet weighed Anchor and set sail the wind at
West, South West, the weather thick and rainy till noone, and then clearing
up, the wind shifted to the South, South East we sailed out by the North East
end of the Island.

The 25. about nine at night came eight or nine sail of Turks into our fleet,
whom so soon as we discovered, we chased them and made diverse shot at them,
but by reason it was a dark night, and that they sailed better then our ships,
they escaped us.

The 26. about three in the after noone we put into Alicant Rode, hoping there
to receive letters of advice, else some news of a supply of victuals out of
England, but missed both. The 27. at night the Reare-Admirals squadron went out
to Sea in pursuit of two Turks Pirates, who had not taken above three hours
before two Flemish ships, the Flemmings quiting there their ships, saved
themselves in their boats.

The 29. the Reare-Admirall returned but saw no Turk.

The 31. there was great joys, triumphs, and solemn processions in the city
of Alacant for joy of a great overthrow which was given to the king of Bohemia.

January.
January the first, the Reare-Admirall put to Sea again with his squadron
upon the discovery of some ships in the Offine who proved to be English and
French bound in for the Rode of Alicant.

The second the Reare-Admirall with his squadron returned into the Road.

The fourth at night the Constant Reformation and the Golden Phoenix had order
to go to Sea to seek two Pirates ships which we heard were on the Christian
shore.

The fifth at night the Constant and the Phoenix returned into the Rode again,
but met not with any.

The sixth the Vice Admiral with his squadron set sail for Malhaga to see if
they could here of any news of a supply of victuals or whether the two Princes
which were long expected were come thither.

The 12. Master John Duppae came from Carthagena, bringing with him a packet of
letters of advice sent out of England bearing date the 14. of December, he
signified that there was six months victuals sent out of England for a supply
of his Majesty's ships, and that they were at Malhaga with the two Pinnaces,
this night the Rere-Admirall with his squadron was sent to Sea to see if he
could meet with certain Pirates which we had entelligence of.

The 13. the Reformation the Samuel and the Restore put to Sea, to see if they
could meet with any Pirates.

The 18. the Reformation with the other ships returned into the Rode, where we
found the reare-Admirall with his squadron likewise returned but met no Pirates.

The 21. there came a flemish boat with 15. Flemmings in her aboard our
Admiral, who being chased by the Turkish Pirates off, of Cap Martine, left
their ship and saved themselves by their boat, this night was the Anthelope
with other ships sent out to see if they could meet with them.

The 24. the Anthelope with the other ships returned into the Rode, but met
with none.

The 25. our Admiral being invited to the English Consuls house, went a shore,
where at his arrival he was entertained with small shot and Ordnance both from
the town and Castle, and at night with fireworkes, running of horses, shooting
of Ordnance and other sports, this day Captain John Roper was dispatched with
letters for England.

The 26. our Admiral returned aboard the town giving him a friendly farewell
with their Ordnance.

The 27. the Admiral with the rest of the fleet set sail, leaving the
Marmaduke behind, whose Captain and Master were both sick a shore.

The 28. at midnight we met with seven sail of Flemmings ships of war near
Cape Paul under the command of Captain Haughton Admiral of Zealand, who the
next morning after he had saluted our Admiral with Ordnance, came aboard in
his boat, he told our Admiral he had 22. ships of war under his charge,
whom he had divided into squadrons, employing them some without the straights,
and some within.

The 30. we had very much wind at South West, but the weather being cleared
we turned to windward till four in the after noone, and then it blew so hard
that we were forced to bear up the Helm and put room for Alicant rode.

31 We came to an Anchor again in Alicant road.

February.
FEbruary the first the Rere-Admirall put to Sea with 4. ships, to see if he
could meet with any Pirates, and this day dyed Captain Eusabey Cave Captain
of the Hercules, and the Admiral disposed the command of the same ship to
Captain Alexander Bret.

The 5. the Rere-Admirall returned with the other 4. ships but had met none.

The 6. the wind being Easterly, the fleet weighed Anchor about midnight,
shaping our course for Malhaga, during the time of our staying here we
refreshed our sick men a shore, having convenient houses provided for them in
the feelds Gardens with careful people to attend them, providing them such
necessaries as they should need. The Constant for her part sent a shore 92.
persons, who as they recovered their strength were sent for a board, yet
notwithstanding all their care at their departure they were forced to leave
behind them 42. desperately ill, the Admiral taking order both for them and
others, that they should be carefully provided for until the fleets return.

The 9. in the evening being a thwart Malhaga we were in the morning put to
lee ward of our port, the wind blowing hard at East.

The 10. we kept it up windward what we could but the storm increasing, all
the kings ships lost their long boats.

The 11. we were forced to bear up for Gibraltar where the same day we came to
an Anchor in the Rode all, the Golden Phoenix and the Restore who recovered
Malhaga.

The 12. our Admiral dispatched letters to Malhaga to the Vice Admiral to let
him know that he and the rest of the fleet were put into Gibraltar, willing
him to repair thither with the rest of the ships with him if the wind should
continue Easterly, but if it came Westerly, then the Admiral purposed to go to
Malhaga.

The 16. came into the Rode the Vice Admiral and his squadron with the two
Pinnaces which we so long expected out of England, the one the Mercury of the
burden 240. tuns, 65. men, and 20. pieces of Brass Ordnance, under the command
of Captain Phinice Pet; the other the Spy, of the burden of 160. tuns 55.
men, and 18. pieces of Brass Ordnance, under the command of Captain Edward
Gyles: there came also two Merchants ships with a supply of victuals for his
Majesty's ships.

The 18. the Zouch Phoenix, the Hercules, the Neptune and the Spy put to Sea,
with order to ply between Gibraltar and Shut point.

The 19. the Anthelope put to Sea, and with those ships which went out the day
before, had order to ride in Shutie-Rode, to see if they could descry any
Pirates come into the straights.

The 23. the Rere-Admirall put to Sea with 5. other ships, the Golden Phoenix,
the Samuel, the Centurion, the Marigold, and the Restore, with order to ride in
Tansey Bay, where they were to attend the coming in of diverse Pirates whom we
hear to be without the straights mouth: this day came in a Brigandine from
Shutie, who brought our Admiral word, that those ships which had put out the
18. had taken a prize.

The 24. the Anthelope with the rest of the ships returned bringing with them a
prize being a small Frenchman which had 50. buts of Oil in her, and diverse
Moors and Jews, men, women and children, passengers bound from Tituon to
Algiere, all the Turks saving themselves in their boat: this day also came
into the Rode Captain Gyles Pen in a ship of Bristoll from Tituon Rode,
bringing a letter from the Mogoden to our Admiral, and two Moors who treated
with him concerning the redemption of their people whom our ships had taken,
offering for so many Moors, so many English, whom they held in town as slaves,
having bought them of the Turks Pirates.

The 27. the Samuel and the Centurion returned into the Rode from Tansey, the^
also went out the Anthelope, the Zouch Phoenix, the Barbery, the Neptune and the
Restore, with order to ride at Shutey to see if they could discover any Pirates
coming into the straights, the wind being Westerly.

The 28. the wind likewise Westerly, the Reformation having taken in some of
the captives, had order to weigh and set sail for Tituon to treat with the
Moors, and to take in her company the Samuel, the Bonauenture, and the ship
of Bristoll, where the same day about noone they came to an Anchor in the Rode
of Tituon in 12. fadome water, the wind at West.

March.
THe first, there came into the Road to us our Admiral, the Mercury, the
Spy, the Wind at West.

The second in the afternoon came certain Moors aboard our Admiral,
delivering him a letter from the Mogoden, importing that on the morrow they
would bring down all the English slaves, whom they would exchange for their
own people.

The third at twelve of the clock came two Moors, men of quality, a board
our Admiral, to let him know the Mogoden was at the water side; whereupon the
Admiral sent Master Edward Clarke Secretary of the Council of war to treat
with him, who returned the same night without effecting any thing to purpose.

The fourth, Master Ashfield, Minister of the Reformation dyed, much lamented
of the whole company, of whom in the extreme of their sicknesses they had
received much comfort.

The fifth, having a fair gale at South East, our Admiral with the rest of
the fleet weighed Anchor and set sail for Gibraltar having concluded nothing
with the Mogoden.

The sixth we came to an Anchor in Gibraltar Rode, where we found our
Vice Admiral with his squadron.

The 8. the wind Westerly the Anthelope, the Samuel and the Spy set sail
for Tituon.

The 9. in the morning the Admiral, the Reformation, the Mercury, and the
Barbery set sail for Tituon, leaving the Vice Admiral with his squadron
behind in the Rode, who had the wind at West, South West, but bringing the
straights mouth open found it all Southerly, a hard gale with a stiff current
setting to the Eastward, the Reformation got that night into Tituon Rode, where
they found the Anthelope with the other ships.

The 10. about ten in the morning the Mercury came into the Rode, but the
Admiral and the Barbary being put to lee ward, and not able to turn it up,
bore up to the helm for Malhaga, this day also in the morning Captain Pen
being over confident of the Moors faith and promises, with whom he had along
time traded, went a shore without cautions, whom the Mores made stay of, hoping
thereby the better to recover their own people whom we held captives.

The 11. the wind being Easterly, we all set sail to Malhaga, the Bristol ship
only staying behind to see if they would send down their Captain, who had
done them many kind offices to our Admiral, in coming twice with his ship
from Tituon to Gibraltar, only to treat with our Admiral on their behalf,
and at their request; being out of the Road we met with the Primrose, whom the
Vice Admiral had sent unto us to let us know that he was gone for Malhaga.

The 13. we came to an Anchor in Malhaga Road, where we found our Admiral
with the rest of our fleet all but the Good Will, who coming out of Gibraltar
with the Vice-Admirals squadron had lost their companies in the night, I in the
time we spent here, the fleet took in some Beereage, Wine, some Wood and
Water.

The 28. about eight in the morning the Admiral, and Rere-Admirall set sail
for Alicant, leaving behind the Vice Admiral with five other ships, the
Reformation, the Samuel, the Centurion, the Bonauenture, and the Restore, for
to attend the conquest of a remainder of a supply of victuals which was to come
out of England.

Aprill^
THe 2. my Captain, Captain Arthur Mannering died, a gentleman of an excellent
temper, not easily moved to passion, though many times occasion has been
purposely offered, he mastred his affections with that discretion that he
gained love even from his enemies; in his private command he could so well
mix clemency with severity together, that he was both feared and loved, so
seriously searching into the mystery of his new profession, that he would soon
have equalled the best Captain, both for judgment and command: and his death
bred a general lament in the whole fleet, and some alteration in the sway of
most curious business, the wheel ever since turning with the violent motion
of a self willed mouer.

The 10. hearing no news of our supply of victuals, the Vice Admiral with the
other five ships set sail for Alicant the wind West ward.

The 14. about three in the afternoon we came to an Anchor in Alicant Rode,
where we found our Admiral with the rest of the fleet: here our Admiral had
hired a Pollacre about the burden of 120. tun, for that she was reported to
be an excellent sayler, and likewise bought three Brigandines which rowed with
nine oars on a side: he also hired a house wherein he made diverse works for
the firing of the ships within the Mould of Algiere.

The 18. Sir Henry Palmer and our Admiralls order removed out of the
Anthelope into the Reformation, and Captain Alexander Bret into the Anthelope,
and Sir Thomas Wilsad was made Captain over the Hercules: this day also, my
self for some respects removed into the Centurion, notwithstanding I received
many good persuasions from Sir Henry Palmer to continue where I was.

The 21, we received letters out of England by a post sent from Malhaga,
signifying a remainder of victuals which we expected was arrived at Malhaga.

The 25. about nine in the morning the whole fleet sail for Alicant Rode,
being bound for Firma terra to supply our wants for wood.

The 28. in the evening having fitted our selves with wood, we set sail for
Mayorke to take in water.

The 29. in the afternoon we came to an Anchor in Mayorke Rode. The town of
Maiorke is large and well fortified, the people industrious both men, women and
children given to labor, loving and courteous to strangers: here we found all
manner of victuals in plenty and at easy rates. Their chief Merchandise are
Oil, Wood, and Cheese, whereof the country affoordeth plenty.

May.
Having taken water at three in the morning upon shooting off a warning piece,
the whole fleet weighed Anchor and set sail for Algiere, the wind Easterly a
small breath.

The 21. at 6. in the afternoon we came to an-Anchor in Algiere Road, order
being first given by our Admiral how every ship should berth her self: the
manner follows; first the Kings ships and the Golden Phoenix came to an anchor
at their place upon a South and Northline, the Admiral riding in the midst
of them, East of the South end of the Mould. Next to the Admiral on the North
side came to an anchor the Reformation, the Golden Phoenix on the South, the
Conuertine on the Southside, the Phenixe and Anthelope on the Northside the
Reformation, the Vice Admiral innermost on the Southside, the Rere-admirall
uttermost on the North side.

The kings ships having berthed themselves, the rest of the fleet who this
time plied up and down under sail, came to a Stern to the Admirals of their
squadrons, giving good berthes one to another, the wind being then Westerly:
but if the wind had been Easterly, then were they to have been anchored a
head between the Kings ships and the Eastern shore, keeping the Kings ships
and the Phoenix between them and the town, where the force of the Pirates
remained.

The ships being come to an anchor in their orders, our Admiral caused six of
the Merchants ships presently to weigh, with directions to ply off and on of
the Westermost part, keeping as near the shore as conveniently they might, to
prevent the coming in of any Pirates between the fleet and the shore. In the
beginning of this night the Boats and Brigandines appointed for the assistance
of two ships which our Admiral resolved should that night go into the Mould,
and there to set themselves on fire, being chained and linked to the Pirates
ships, repaired aboard our Admiral there to receive their directions. The
manner and preparations for firing of the ships was thus.

First, there were two small ships which we had taken from the Turks, the one
of the burden of an hundred tons, the other of sixty, with great store of
fire-workes in them. There was laid in them plenty of dry wood, wood of Ocham,
Pitch Rozen, Tar, Brimstone and other materials fit to take fire: they had
likewise in them Chains and Grapnels of iron to fasten themselves to the ships
which they were to fire: they had also boats to bring off their men when they
had fired the ships: then were there three Brigandines fitted with fire-bals,
buckets of wilde-fire, and fire pikes to make their fire-workes fast unto the
ships: there was also a Gundlod fitted with fire-workes, Chains and Grapnels
of iron; she was to go into the midst of the ships in the Mould, where
fastening her to some ship, was to be set on fire. She had likewise with her a
boat to bring off her men. Likewise there were seven boats which we called
boats of rescue, well filled with armed men, who were to rescue and relieve
the boats of execution if they should chance to be pursued by other boats or
gallyes at their coming off. These had also fire-workes in them to fire the
ships which rode without the Mould: these boats being all aboard, the Admiral
sent for most of the Captains and Masters in the fleet to advise whether it
were fit to attempt it with boats and Brigandines, in regard it was little
wind, and that Westerly, so that it was impossible for the ships to get in.
After some deliberation, it was concluded that it was not fit for that the
surest and most certain means of firing was by the ships which were to be
made fast to the ships in the Mould, and to burn with them. Whereupon it was
deferred for that time till a fitter opportunity was offered.

The 22. at night there were like preparations made, but deferred for like
reasons.

The 23. in the beginning of the night we had a fresh gale of wind at South by
South west continuing the space of two hours or more, with thunder, lightning,
and some drops of rain: the two ships weighed, and with the Brigandines and
Boats set forwards toward the Mould, but the wind shifting before they came
near, they were forced also to give over for that night.

The 24. at night after a great shower of rain, we had the wind out of the Bay
at Sourh, South West, the weather then clearing up, both the ships and boats
advanced themselves toward Mould as before they had done: but coming within
less then Musket shot of the Moulds head it fell calm, so that the ships
could by no means get in, the Boats and Brigandines finding that they were
discovered by reason of the brightness of the Moon which was then at full,
and hearing it reported by a Christian captive which did swim from the town
the night before to the ships, that the Turks had left their ships without
guard saving one or two in a ship, as fearing no such attempt from us. And
moreover hearing the Alarm given to the town by those which ktpt watch on the
walls, with good resolution went on, but wanting wind to nourish and disperse
the fire, the fire-workes took no effect at all. In this service were only
six men slain out right, four or five dangerously hurt (which not long after
dyed) and some thirteen slightly hurt, yet notwithstanding the attempt was
given under the walls of the town, where both small shot and Ordnance played
continually upon them: the hurt done our men was their coming off, for that
they were got into the Mould before the town was risen, and being in, the
ships in the Mould defended them both from small shot and ordnance of the
town, our boats still keeping the ships between them and the town.

The 25. there came in four sail of Pirates by the Wester most point of land
notwithstanding 6. ships were appointed to lie off at that place, for the wind
being Westward and a great current setting to the Eastward, our ships were put
so far to leeward that they could not prevent the pirates coming in between
the shore and them, but yet the Bonauenture loosed so near that there passed
some shot between her and the Pirates ships, but no hurt done: this night our
Admiral and the whole fleet weighed Anchor and stood off to the Sea.

The 26. the fore part of the day the wind was shifting to and fro, from the
South-east to the South-west; in the afternoon at South, and South South-east
hard gale and rainy weather; and at night having the wind shifting at South
and South-west, we played off and on all night by a wind.

The 27. we had a fresh gale at West, and west North-west, and this evening we
saw two ships to wind-ward of us, but what they were I know not.

The 28. We had fair weather the wind Westerly, this night the Bonauenture and
the Hercules put a Pyrate a shore, he having a hundred and thirty Turks in
her, and twelve poor Christians captives, they were al drowned but twelve
Turks who got the shore by swimming.

The 30. we got into the Bay and Anchored three miles off the town, and in
turning in, the town and castle made 15. great shot at the vantguard, the
Rainbow, and two other, Merchants ships, but did no hurt.

The 31. in the morning our boats took up two Genoways captives, who
adventured to swim from the town to the ships. They told that the same night
our ships stood off to Sea, there came into the Mould seven of the best ships
belonging to Algiere, and that if we had stayed they had fallen into our laps.
They likewise told us that the Turks had Boomed up the Mould, so that it was
not possible for either ship or boat to get in to fire the ships, which were
now filled with armed men, besides three gallyes and 15. boats which lay
continually well fitted without the Mould before the Boome for a Guard.

June.
THe second our ships that were appointed to ply it too and again before the
Rode, took a ship off of the Eastern point of the Bay, which came from
Legorne and was bound for Algiere for trade with diverse Merchants Jews in her,
and a Flemming who had diverse letters from the Prince of Orange and the States,
both to the Bashaw and Duana: she was laden with Venice cloth, Legorne dishes,
and diverse other commodities: there was also found in her two or three thousand
pound in ready money: this morning the weather calm, three gallyes rowed out
of the Mould by our ships, at whom we made diverse shot, but few or none did
reach them they were so far off. At night they returned to the Mould a gain.
During the time of our ships riding before the town we sent every night
certain boats which kept watch between the town and the fleet, as well to
give the fleet Alarums upon all occasions, as to take up and save such poor
Christian captives as should adventure to save themselves by swimming from the
slavery of the Turks: which boats saved diverse both Spanish, French and
Dutch, by whom we were certainly informed as well of the Booming up of the
Mould, as of the drowning of an hundred and thirty Turks.

The fourth, finding those relations to be true, and that there was no
possibility of doing any more service upon the Pirates at that time, upon the
shooting off a warning piece from the Admiral, the whole fleet set sail for
Alicant.

The eight in the morning we came to anchor in Alicant Rode, where we found
Captain John Roper who was returned out of England with letters from my Lord
Admiral, and order for the present discharging and sending home of four of
the Kings ships, that is to say, the Vantguard, the Rainebow, the
Reformation, and the Anthelope.

Here we stayed till the thirteenth day in which time we refreshed our selves
with water and fresh victuals, and sold away the priczes which we had taken,
paid our debts which we owed at our former being there, for provisions for the
fleet; here our Admiral discharged the Pollacre which he hired: here also he
delivered seven and twenty Turks a shore for their ransomes to Seigniour
Imperial Consul for the English.

The thirteenth about ten at midnight the Admiral shot off a warning piece,
whereupon all the fleet weighed Anchor and set sail for Malhaga.

The sixteenth, we met with twelve sail of Flemmings of Cape Legate, whereof
five were Holland men of war under the command of Captain Quashe, the rest
Merchants ships.

The 21. the whole fleet met at Anchor in Malhaga Rode.

July.
THe third in the morning it was signified to the Admiral and the Council of
War under the Masters and Officers hands of the Lion, that she was so
defective that she could not any longer be continued out, without eminent peril
of perishing, whereupon it was thought fit and resolved, that notwithstanding my
Lord Admirals order was to send home the Vanguard she should be continued out
till the next supply of shipping, and that the Lion should be sent home:
whereupon our Admiral with his provisions presently removed into the Vanguard,
and Sir Richard Hawkins into the Lion. Here we also dismissed by our Admirals
order Zouch Phoenix, the Marigold, the Primrose and the Restore, sufficient
reasons by the Masters being given, that they were unfit for longer service.

The fifth, I removed my self into the Reformation, having got passage for
England.

The sixth having taken in our remainder of of victuals, some Beuerage, Wine,
Water, and Oil, the whole fleet set sail having a small breath off the shore
North West, got no further then the Molena point.

The seventh, having little wind that while, and current against us, we
gained little or nothing.

The eight, the Reformation and three or four other ships got at
Virgerow-Rode, where they came to an Anchor, the Admiral and the rest of the
fleet not gayning any thing, were feign to Anchor at Malhaga point, the wind
at West South West fair weather.

The tenth, about eight in the morning a fair gale springing all North East,
the fleet set sail our Admiral bound for Cales.

The twelfth, the whole fleet being come within three or four miles of the
town of Cales, the Vice Admiral, Rere-Admirall, and the rest of the ships
bound for England, took their leaves of the Admiral and the rest of the
fleet, four or five hundred pieces of Ordnance being discharged on both sides
for a farewell, the Admiral with his company stood in for Cales, the
Vice Admiral and the rest of the ships stood off to Sea, the wind at South
West, and by the West.

The fifteenth and sixteenth we had little wind and that variable, but so
thick a fogge both days, we could hardly see two ships length from us.

The seventeenth in the morning the weather reasonable clear, we had lost
sight of all our fleet, but the Anthelope and the Marigold, and having Cape
Saker North, North East some four leagues of, and the wind Northerly a hard
gale we came to an Anchor in the Bay, here we Rode until the three and
twentieth, all this time the wind blowinng at North, North West very stormy.

The five and twentieth the wind arsed against the Sun to the West, South
West, the Cape bearing East thirty leagues off. The eight and twentieth we
lost sight of the Anthelope and Marigold in the Latittude of 41.32. leagues off
the shore.

August.
AVgust the second we heaued the Lead and had ground at 94. fadome vshant
East, N. East 26. leagues off.

The third at four in the afternoon we fell with the Bolt.

The number of the ships Brigandines and boats which were appointed to go
into the Mould to fire the ships with the names of the Captains that Commanded
them.
Captain Walsingham, and Captain Stokes, Captains of the two ships to be
fired in the Mould.

Captain Hughes, Captain Tall, Captain Pepwell, Captains of the three
Brigandines.

THE CAPTAINS OF the Boats.
Captain Frampton, Liefetenant to Sir Richard Hawkins. Captain Winker
Liefetenant to Sir Henry Palmer. Captain Turner out of the Admiral. Captain
Dodge, Liefetenant to Sir Francis Tanfield. Captain Boys in Captain Argels
boat. Captain Frewen, Lieftenant to Captain Haughton. Captain Button,
Liefetenant to Sir Thomas Button.
FINIS.

