THE Woeful and Lamentable wast and spoil done by a sudden Fire in S.
Edmonds-bury in Suffolk, on Monday the tenth of April. 1608

houses on fire

LONDON Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold in Pater- nosterrowe, at
the Sign of the Sun. 1608

THE Woeful and lamentable waste and spoil done by sudden Fire in S.
Edmons-burie in Suffolk, on Monday the tenth of April. 1608
THere is no impositio^ of afliction laid upon ma^-kind by ye powerful hand of
God, but it is either to draw us unto him, and to teach us to bend all our
intendme^ts to celestial happiness, or to with draw us from the world, and to
forewarn us not to rely our hopes upon her slippery terms: For what shall we
get by being willing customers unto her, but false ware suitable to the shop of
such a Merchant? her traffic is but toil, her wealth trash, and her game
mischief: If we consider where we are, what state we stand in, The dangers
that hang over us, and our ordinary wantes, and amisses: We shall find our
whole life so necessarily joined with sorrow, that we ought rather delight (and
take pleasure) in Gods loving chastisements, and admonitions, then any way
murmr and grudge at our crosses, or tribulations: Consider (says Saint
Bernarde) From whom thou come, and blush whether thou go, and fear where
thou live, and lament. We are begotten in uncleanness, nourished in
darkness, and brought forth with throbbes, and throws. Our Infancy is but a
dream, our youth but madness, our manhood a combat, our age a sickness, our
whole life misery, and our death horror.

If we have any thing that does delight us, it is in so many hazards, that the
fear of loosing it, is more then the joy of enjoying it. If we have any thing
that does annoy us, the agreeuance thereof increases, with the doubt of as
evil, or worse, that may straight ensue after it: which way can we cast our
eyes, but that we shall find cause of complaint and heaviness? These are
forcible motives to persuade us to suffer our afflictions with patience.

If we look up toward heaven, from thence we are banished: If we look
toward earth, That is our prison: On the right hand we have Virtue, whose
steps we have not followed: On the left hand we have Vice, whose course we have
pursued: Before us we have our death, ready to denoure us: behind us, our
wicked life, ready to accuse us: And on every side, daily and deadly
adversaries, ready to entrap us.

Oh how much then are worldlings deceived, that walk in magnis and mirabilibus
superse? in great things and meruailes above them selves? that rejoice in the
time of weeping, that make this life their happiness, and their palace of
pleasure: that e^eme afflictions to be dishonorable, that think to go to
heaven, by the wide way, yt only leads to perdition. Afflictions are loving
and fatherly corrections to win us to heaven, The path that goes thither is
narrow, rough, and fully wearisome, and tyring ascents their way therefore is
wrong, their error gross, and their ruin is assured, yt after the steps of
many that have patiently trod the way to heaven by crosses and tribulations,
will not learn to settle their footing.

The contentions of this life, have nothing certain, but true misery, rough
storms, solace full of sadness, and hopes full of hazard: they are like fair
weather in winter, nothing durable, like a calm in the Sea, always
uncertain: like the steadiness of the Moon, yt is ever in changing: they
resemble the Cockatrices egg, fair without and foul within: Nabuchodonozors
Image, that had the face and head of gold, but earthen and brittle feet: Or
the sweet River that runs into the salt Sea.

Seeing therefore that crosses and afflictions or any external calamities, are
but means to remember us of our place, state, and danger, and but seeds of
comfort, to such as enjoy them, how soever they seeame here covered and
corrupted in earth, and tedious to man's undergoing, let us solace our selves in
hepe of a joyful conclusion.

We are here but Pilgrims, we have no City of aboade, but hope for a future
place of rest. If our way should be altogether beset with pleasures and
delights, we should easily be hindered in our journey toward heaven, being
drawn and withhelde, with the view and desire of those allurements. Therefore
God has laid in the way of throughfare, some tedious and distersfull
oppositions to put us in mind of our heavenly repose, and to teach us to run
over the cares of this life with patience. God has his secret love to
mankind, and his several punishements for sin, which he often times does
easily inflict upon us to draw us to amendment.

Those creatures which in the first parliament of our creation, were appointed
to be our comforts, are many times sent forth with sundry rods to scourge us,
to correct us, nay to draw blood of us for our sins. There is yet a means
to be made for our reconcilement: Son and heir apparent to the King of
heaven, mediats between his Father and us, to make our peace with him: it may
easily be effected, if we shake off and abandon those vise enormities, and base
company of sins, that attainte every one of us. If we do not, he will
assuredly turn his threatenings into blows, and his loving mercy into severe
Justice: and those consuming flames, which he has of late but scattered in
diverse parts of this Kingdom: he will at one time, and in one place, cast
all together, and make of the world one geernall bone-fier and that on a
sudden, for not making right use of his diverse fatherly and gentle admonitions.

Amongst which, this affliction of Fire, that befell to the Town of S.
Edmons-burie in Suffolk, deserves with all pity to be pitied, and to be
reckoned (in the remembrance of many other) as an imposition of calamity laid
upon that place by the hand and power of God for their secret sins and
offenses. The beginning of which fire, as it was by the remiss and sleepie
negligence of a Servant, So did it prove to be of very dismal, and disaster
consequence. It was such as none could behold it without trembling, neither
can any hear it, and not shed tears in abundance, to see the miseries that
were, kindled by it.

IT happened on Monday the tenth of April, between eight and nine of the clock
in the morning, without the east gate of the same Town, in a place called
Eastgate street, in the house of one Randall a Maltster. And notwithstanding
that at first it began half a mile from the Market place, yet was it carried
thither by the violence of the wind, where it did those several hurts, as
will not be made good in long time, nor without great sums of money. In
describing which sad report, you shall behold the names of some that are fallne
into misery by the same: As also the places where the chief hurts and
overthrows have been, with several hot encounters, and some part of the
spoils.

The very Market place, that was the beauty and ornament of the whole town,
was the principal and chiefest part yt felt the fury of this fiery assault.
That place yt before was had in such admiration for ye goodly houses and ye
manner of their stately buildings, was by this untimely accident utterly
defaced, and made a rude continent of heaps of stones and pieces, of Timber,
that but newly fell from those late burnt houses. The Warehouses and Sellars
about the Market place, wherein were great store of Fish, salt, Sugar, Spices,
and many other commodities of great value, were by this fire all turned into
Ashes, and now serve for nothing but reffuse.

This fire brought to the Market place by the tempest of wind, has blown a
great number upon the Rocks, of such poverty and Misery, that the loss that
the town has received by the same, is thought not able to be made good
again, unless the eye of compassion extend it self to the largest compass
and limits of this Land in her behalf. The walls, Fences, and hedges within
the town, are all laid level to the ground, by this furious inuader, who no
sooner entered, but he was inflamed with Pride, and got into the highest and
chiefest places, where he encountered with the stoutest and tallest of them,
and never ceased till he brought them as low as earth.

The lamentable shriekes of women, the cries of poor children, the
astonishment, and wild looks of all men at this sudden and untimely accident,
no man can truly express: the danger that this terrible tempest brought with
it, wrought unspeakable fear in the hearts of all that were near unto it;
but the sudden and strange cruelty of the same, bred the greater terror and
amazement: men severally employed, and going about their ordinary occasions of
business, were compelled (seeing so dreadful an enemy approaching) to fly back
to their houses, yet before they could enter, death stood at the doors ready
to receive them.

Whole Corne-mowes and Hay-mowes, (the one reserved for man's food, the other
for sustenance of cattle) were all quite consumed by this merciles adversary.
The losses whereof were to great, and innumerable, as none knows the grief
thereof, for the present, but the owners of them.

But to descend from the general spoil (which was great) to some particular
losses (which were as grievous.) Let us behold the lamentation of M. Pinner a
Grocer, dwelling in S. Edmonds-bury aforesaid, and in the market place, in the
parish of Saint James, (where the most hurt was done) with the complaints and
bewailings, which himself, his wife, and children power out for that misery
which the cruelty of this fire has excercised upon them: whereby he lost not
only all that substance that was his own, but also those wares which he had
of other men's; so that he is doubly undone: this fire showed his glistering
triumphs in devouring his goods, plate, and money, and in swallowing and eating
up a new built house to the ground; that but lately before cost him four or
flue hundred pounds the erecting.

He that the day before was esteemed a man (at the least) worth two or three
thousand pounds, was by this untimely accident utterly undone, his goods being
quite destroyed and consumed, himself (in his estate) was made less worth
then nothing. They that before were wont to comfort the distressed, and to feed
their neighbors, and other inhabitants with bread, are by this in danger to
perish for want of relief, being now ready to beg bread themselves.

Many people that lost their goods, and got from the peril of the fire;
escaping with their lives, are since fallen sick with the very fear, and
sudden fright of it, and remain in great danger and doubt of recovery: the
fire having destroyed all means that should comfort them in this their
distress.

The lead of the market-crosse and the cross it self was utterly ruinate and
consumed to the ground by the violent blow of this hot encounter. Here might
you see men, women, and children in great multitudes, come crying out for
safety, and ready to run out of their wits: seeing that which maintained
their lives spoiled before their faices; and yet glad to forsake all that they
have in the world, and to shift for their poor lives: many were sharers in
this one ill bargain, yet in the end all losers. So furious and fiery was this
sharp assault, that even that which many men had brought into the streets out
of their houses, in hope to be saved, was lost and consumed in the flames. Many
of the inhabitants, before this unhappy accident fell upon them, were of good
ability; and with that substance which God (through their honest endeavors)
had bestowed upon them, they were charitable relieuers of their poor
neighbors within the town; but now even those to whom they have formerly
given bread, are ready to be solicited in the like extremity of want by them
(if they had it) for relief: and now their cases being made all alike by this
tyrannous enmy of the world, and unmerciful destroyer of all things, being all
deprived of means, they are all in like danger to starve, unless the hands of
Gods people be opened in their comfort.

But to digress a little, to pass from Preambles to the thing indeed, from
gentle warnings to the penalty it self. This scourg of sin; this forementioned
misery is but a very small rese^blance in respect of ye which is to come: if we
neglect to make right use thereof to the behoof of our souls: Initium autem
dolorum haec: These are but a beginning of griefs. These strange events are
but prognostications of worse to come, as a smoke in respect of a more terrible
ensuing fire, and like a mustering of soldiers before the sad battle. Let
therefore these afflictions and some other late crosses and calamities (the
seeling whereof is yet fresh in our memories) prevail with us, not to slumber
out our time in careless security, but to win grace and favor at Gods hands by
amendme^t of our lives. For if there be a neglect of this, what will the pains
be that these beginnings portend? How rigorrous will that sentence be, that
has so fearful remonstrances before the judgment?

But not to enlarge my self in this. Let us look back to the misery and
calamity that has also befallen to M. Cox a Draper, dwelling both in the same
town and parish, whose house the flame of this fire swallowed with insatiable
jaws, and consumed into ashes: burning al his goods and housholdstuffe, and
leaving nothing to put bread into the mouths of him, his wife, and children,
save only a little yarne, of small account or value, which he had, and was
preserved by great chance in a warehouse he had in Rotten-row, a place not
far from the market place aforesaid.

All hands laid about them in this fiery conflict (as if that enemies had been
marching to besiege the Town) to save and trusse up what they could, and be
gone: but behold how swift is mischief, when God drives it before him to the
punishment of our sins: all were laboring to bear away some of their goods,
but before their burdens could be taken up, they were compelled to forsake
them, and to look about for the safeguard of their lives, leaving the rest to
the mercy of the fire.

The desolate effects that this cruel Element wrought in Saint Edmonds-bury
aforesaid, is able to thawe the most frozen heart, and to work a relenting in
the most obdurate spirit that is. Whose fury was so vehement, that from the
Monday it began, till the Wednesday after, the rage thereof could not be fully
extinguished, nor could it be thoroughly quenched, albeit all the wells and
pondes about the town, were drawn dry to that purpose. This heat as it
consumed two hundred dwelling houses, and vpwardes in the same town, with
their household stuff, and barnes with much Corn vnthreshed in them, with many
thousand quarters of wheat, barley, and rye, threshed and laid up in
Chambers, Horses in the the stable, Kine, Swine, and other Cattle: so did the
rage thereof continue to add grief and sorrow to a place that of it self
ministers nothing but matter of sorrow, namely the Prison of the same town,
which in short space (the prisoners for the time being removed) by the merciles
judgment of fire was condemned to be burned, and quite consumed into ashes.
Many inhabitants are impouerished by it, and most of them undone for ever: many
thousands of pounds cannot make good the losses and spoils that this town
has received hereby. The misery of this place is matchles, the losses of the
people numberles, and their cares, cureles: for what a strange alteration may
it be thought to them, ye were wont to succor and harbor others in distress,
to be now left succourles, and made destitute of harbor themselves, by the
violent blow of this storm? and even in a moment of time to be deiect and
thrown done from the top of riches and welfare, to the most low degrees
and conditions of poverty, and sorrow? and in stead of choice and delicate
diet; of fair dwellings, and of soft lodging, to have now no food at all; no
certain dwelling, but the miery frame of this wild world to walk in: and no
better lodging then the bare ground? This Town so famous before for beauty
and for statelines of building, is now untimely defaced, and overthrown by
this sudden misfortune, and deserves no less to be pitied and relieved, then
that affliction did, which the city of Cannas, and the adjoining places
thereof felt so grievously, that all the houses of the same being covered and
oppressed with heaps of burning ashes, the Romans (in very pity of their
estates) were contented to release them ten years tribute, to repair the
inestimable damages of one such irruption. I pray God that the inhabitants of
this distressed place may but find (amongst us) part of the like comfort and
feeling compassion in this so sad extremity.

To this cruel wild fire storm that so reigned in the houses, and wrougt such
lamentable spoils to this poor Town, may be added another casualtie and
calamity that did lay hold upon a carte, coming laden to the Market with
Corn, and increased the sorrow of her owner, by the rage of the flames, which
were no sooner carried to her by the violence of the wind, but she was quite
consumed, and the Corn burned, and two or three of her horses turned into
ashes, to the great sorrow of such as saw it, and could not help it, and the
ineffable discomfort of many, that might have been relieved by it.

The diligent and industrious care of the Justices of the peace, that were
there at that time assembled at the quarter Sessions, and of many others met
there together by those occasions, deserves not to pass unremembered: who by
their examples stirred up many (as much as in them lay) to use their best
means to appease this heat; which notwithstanding continued so strong in the
assault, that it consumed, as is aforesaid, two hundred and odd dwelling
houses: and for all that was or could be done, it is thought and reported from
the mouths of very sufficient and judicious persons, that an hundred thousand
pounds will not make good the losses that this town of S. Edmonds-bury has
received by this fire, nor recover it to the former estate: which besides the
wrack of houses that by this calamity of fire were laid level with the
ground, lost also her substance and riches of corn, money, gold, plate, wares,
etc. of infinite value and measure, wherewith the same was formerly stored, to
the unrecoverable undoing of the owners thereof, and of their wives and
children, who by this means are left quite destitute of means even to
maintain their wretched bodies with food.

And now because the consideration of that which our sins have deserved, is a
forcible motive to digest with patience, these or any crosses or miseries that
befall unto us: let us call to mind what God might further have laid upon us,
besides this, or our late afflictions of plague, fires, waters, frost, etc. and
yet not only not exceeded the bound of his justice, but have still showed
himself of infinite mercy: for it is a general Axiom, and an approved
verity, ratified by the common consent of all Divines: That as God does reward
above our deserts, and in his eternal recompense, far exceeds the value of
any works we can do; soon the other side does he chastise far underneath
the rate of our misdeedes: and (his infinite justice considered) his greatest
punishment amounts not to the exceeding heynousnes of the least of our
sins. And seeing the injuries that we daily offer to so infinite a Majesty,
in so opprobrious and despightfull manner, (being so far inferior, and so
highly beholding unto him) are so many in number, so grievous in quality, and
so ordinary in experience with all men, though God should double and treble all
punishments of sin, and lay them on sinners backs for their several
offenses, yet might he justly double them a new, and as often as he thought
good, without doing any injury to the offenders, yea, and punishing far less
then their deserts.

Let us not then think much, if we, whose offenses are most grievous, suffer
a few scourges and afflictions, but rather account them as easy messengers to
call us homewards, and as motives to draw us to amendment: that every man
particularly descending into himself, may learn to strike sail to his
sins, and put his soul into the safe harbor of Penitence, lest remaining
still in the scope of wicked winds and weather, some inexpected gulf and
sudden storm dash him upon the rock of eternal ruin. God grant there
ensue not a second affliction worse then this, by forgetfulness and careless
security.

FINIS.

