

THE FIRST PART OF Youths Errors.

Written by THOMAS BVSHEL, the Superlatiue Prodigal.

Luke 15.18. I will arise and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father, I
have sinned against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called
thy son, etc.

Imprinted at London. 1628.

To the Honorable and right virtuous, THOMAS, Lord Windsor, my very good Lord.
Excellent Peer,
LIttle did I imagine, or your Lorship expect, to see my name come under the
Press; which as yet is to me a wonder, so likewise it must needs be to your
Honor a miracle, that knows both my life and breeding, to have neither
language, Latin tongue, nor, upon my salvation, the help of any co-adiutor;
but as it is written those things which appear impossible to man's apprehension,
Mar 10.27.
are nothing to God unsearchable wisdom. Otherwise your Lordshi^ might
suspect the Author for I mistrusted my self, until I had read the saying,
that God is able to make the dumb to speak, Luke 7.22.
the blind to see, and the lame to go; wherein he has showed the splendour of
his divine providence on me base and unworthy creature, to see more clearly
through my matchless offenses; for that now I constantly believe, there is no
forgiveness without true repentance, nor no true repentance without
confession, contrition, satisfaction, and amendment; which made me presume to
patronize the first fruits of my retiredness under your Lordships name; as a
legasie of my loyal duty to your honor, prevention of others, and in my
obedience to that good God, (...). 5.16.
who requires an open confession, for a public transgression. Wherein if I
shall verify our Saviors words to give Caesar his due, ^at. 22.21.
I must acknowledge under God your noble relation of a monasticke life, was the
greatest inducement I received from mortalist toward my regeneration. So that
if I have mounted too high in sheltring my weak ^aboures under your Lordships
virtues; let me beg a favorable censure, and attribute rather forgetfulness
to ^ngratitude, than my forwardness to presumption: for believe me (honored
Lord) had I not fortunately ^ist your fair hand before departure, my zealous
fide^itie was so mixed with the ^regs of mortality; that certainly upon my
companion revolt, Pro. 26.11.
I had fallen like a do^ to his vomit and ruinated my own soul. But thanks b^
to the divine providence, by a shorter cut I have met with contentment, ended
my travels, discarded my pleasures and circled the earth. For Christ knows my
ambition was never higher then (...) poor remote Cave or desert Cell, where if
these illitterate-deiected lines should reflect a likeing in you Lordships
judicious reading; I am confident by Gods assistance, future en^eauours might
edify o^^ers: especially when my ^eregrination shall vnder^tand of your
religious ap^robation, whose honoura^le opinion I esteem more ^en mortal
creature; not for ^^at your noble apprehensi^n exceedes all men; but by ^eason
your internal fidelity ^quals the best of men; which according to my simple
judgment carries a greater ^enediction and clearer revelation of Gods fauou^
then all other virtues: how soever if the tributary praie^ of a sinful
Beadsman ca^^ increase your Lordships immortal glory. I am confident God
multiplies you honors daily.

Your obliged and devoted servant THO. BVSHEL

To my Christian Brethren.
GEntle Reader somewhat I would gladly say in way of admonition as altogether
example, for that the holy ^postle assures me I was not borne (...) my self,
but for others; though ^u may perceive I have confin'de my ^rson from society
of man; yet be^ue that I bar not the visitation of (...) man, but willing to
edify all men, far as God shall enable my weke ability, and their patience;
hum^ entreating that the spectacle of y^^ sinful brothers misery, may mort^
your fleshly desires, and take so m^^ compassion of your selves, as to p^uent
future perils. I have my rewa^ you your glory: otherwise the d^ger's desperate,
as mine is damna^ without Gods unspeakable mer^ which my fairest hopes cannot
as (...) believe he will so much remember (...) to forget his justice. O then
ge^ Sirs, if your own consciences acc^^ you, resolve to follow the one, and
(...) the other; for assure your selves, (...) president of my fatal
afflictions (...) be an occasion to condemn you at (...) day of judgment, if
you obstinat^ neglect the same. But why shou^^ expect you will either read or
m^^ ^^e of them knowing the writings of ^^r Savior, the labors of Apostles,
^^d whole lives of ancient Fathers, ^^e cast aside as superfluous garments;
^hen a play book is admitted to ^sse away the time: which, with in^ard grief
I confess, were my libra^es; and, I fear, continue too much ^^ur studies: yet
for that my invisible ^rments living upon earth as Dives (...) hell, and can at
any time resolve ^ose which doubts in the same, may (...) an occasion to
extenuate your licen^ous appetites, that Gods name may (...) glorified, your
souls saved, and I ^nsatisfied.

THO. BVSHEL.

The Contents of this Book being the first part.
THe Prodigal Sinners Confession

The Prodigalls Petition

The Prodigalls Affliction

The Prodigalls Contemplation

The Prodigalls Prayer

The occasion of the Prodigalls revolt from (...) world

The difference of a public and private liui^^ together with his resolution

The conference he had with a grave Diu^ before his departure to a monasticke
life.

His woeful experience of insinuating fl^terers.

The confession of his disobedience, with a tr^ relation of his Lord and Master.

The Prodigalls advertisement concerning The hopeful branches of Vni^sities
The rights and profits belong the Church The contents of Marriage The crying
sin of murder The crying sin of Pride The crying sin of adultery


To his loving Brother Edward Bushel Esquire.
^lomon says, He that covers his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them shall have mercy. Prou. 28.13.
IT is not unknown to your self nor the world, that I continued a prentiship
the superlatiue Prodigal, either I am ashamed to diuulge, ^hen God himself
commands upon ^enalty of eternal damnation, Iam. 5.16.
yet it griues my very soul that ever I ga^^ occasion to be recorded. But I
ho^^ this my irrecouerable folly will p^uent future ages for falling into
fearful a danger; otherwise as the birth was miserable, so their dea^ will be
lamentable: which to me w^^ rather aggrauate my sorrow, then (...) tenuate my
torment, though in te^porall affairs many bearers less^ the weight, and ease
the surcharg^ sufferer, but in spiritual none ref^sheth the oppressed;
especially yo^^ dissolute brother, who has in a m^ner searched the records of
heaven for a President to make his title (...) hell unquestionable: Exodus 20.
as you may t^ more perspicuously perceive by the dreadful following lines. O
(...) dearest Microcosme in nature, wi^^ what unwillingness do I lay open my
disobedience against the first Commandment, knowing my own conscience pleads
guilty in the highest manner, for debasing his name, Essence, and Glory, below
the degree of a temporal Lord, a mechanicke Magistrate, or pesant Justice, in
honoring them more with cap and knee, then his omnipotent person that created
me. But when I cast my eye upon the second, there find I a distraction of
madness, though I have not worshipped the molten calfe of brass, iron, stone
and the like; yet have I done sacrifice to the image of living clay, with that
adoration as I made the female sex my godesses on earth, and left the refuse
of my time for the service of him that made me: howsoever touching the third I
so much profaned the Deity of his name, that I made it my familiar discourse,
for which in justice I am culpable of death. But as for the fourth I
continually mixed my weak douotions with so many erroneous pleasures, that to
my knowledge, I kept not one whole Sabbath for his gory: whereby I am debarred
of claiming either love, favor, or mercy: but the course of perdition, which
for surer violating the first, I was so sparing in showing either reverence or
duty to my parents, that I seldom paid any tribute as I ought, whereby I
have deserved not only the shortness of days, but the loss of their
fatherly blessings. As for the first thanks be to God, I have not ^ctually shed
the blood of any man, and whether it were not more for ^eare of punishment by
the decree of ^nan, then the law of God, I neither ^an say nor justify my
self; but to any remembrance am free from that ^rying sin: howsoever for the
sea^enth, if I should deny the acknowedgment of that deadly sin, the ^ynt
actors in my lustful recreation will cry out vengance on my con^emnation: for
we ever held it as a ^port of pleasure brought into the world by nature, and at
the most va^ued in the rank of venial sins: ^ut now it speaks death unto
me, and I fear, no comfort unto them, which for the eight you know in my
^hildhood was guilty: so that I can ^eit her acquit nor accuse my self of any
mortal fact: and as for the ninth, I cannot plead ignorance, but t^ my
knowledge was never brough^ to the test before a seat of impartia^ justice. Yet
as I was, it is ten to on^ that I should have proved more fles^ than spirit,
more false than honest but certainly for the tenth I mu^^ confess my self
guilty to all, either b^ thought, or act, with delectation (...) affection.
Thus you see the ma^row and sinnewes of the whole la^^ have I broken, which
makes m^^ liable to eternal torture, death, an^ damnation; God forgive them
tha^ were the occasion. Yet if the mult^tude of these crying sins were
^^period of my transgressions, I might have hope by the death and passion of my
Savior. But when I pond^ ^^on the barbarous and inhumane ^rriage used toward
his mercies; it ^^tinguisheth the light of comfort, ^^our, or pardon, for God
knows ^^am more worthy of death by his ^ath, then for violating he whole ^^w
of Moses, in that I have committed ^ortall sins against him that died ^r my
sins; Heb. 12.25.
by making the ^oanes and sorrows in his passion ^e robe of shelter to my base
wicked ^^d detestable pleasures: for that I ^^ar'd not prosecuting the life of
my ^^rsed offenses upon presumption of ^s mercies, not searing his justice; ^or
pitying his sufferings: whereby have exceeded the fact of Judas or ^^e Senate
of Jews, for the one be^ayed him but once, I a thousand ^^es: the other
crucified him out of ignorance, I a million out of wilfulnesse^ What assurement
(dear brother) ca^ be expected by me that am worse the those whom I have
named, but the dreadful ruin of permanent perdit^on. ^zek. 18. ^ccle 5.
Yet you will say God is mercifu^ upon repentance at the last gasp^^ which
cannot be denied: so likewi^^ my conscience tells me he is iu^^ which will not
be contradicted. Mat. 5.17.18.
For certainly without my repentance ^^quall my transgressions, the Church may
absolve me, ^eue. 18.
but not assure m^ And I should vainly expect remission by any gho^tly fathers
absolution, (...) I continue in any one sin whi^^ lies in my power to
prevent: Ioh. 3.^.6.
(...) the greatest comfort of continuan^ in all my calamity was the swe^^
saying of our Savior, that himself ^^d his Angels ioyed more at the ^^nuersion
of one sinner which ^^ely repents then ninty nine righ^ous. O with what an
vnspeake^ble happiness was this cordial ^erse to my afflicted soul; wherein
ministered the application daily to ^^fresh my sad heart and wearisome ^nses;
but at last it proved bitter as all in operation and digesting. For ^hen I
searched into the mystery of ^^id sense, there I found it was ninety ^ine to
one, that a wilful sinner never truly repented; otherwise you ^ould make God
joy more in a sin^^ll wicked man's life then a religious godly liver: which
brought me into ^o fearful a danger of desperation, that had you or any other
been ^n eyewitness in the agony of my perditious soul, it would hau^ made
the flintiest heart soon choose to wrestle with a Lion then commit a mortal
sin against the immortal God which created him. Yet after a long debat^^
betwixt hope and despair, the president of Saul otherwise called Paul,
d^stilled into me the happiness of hope by reason his palpable crimes reflected
some equality to my offenses (...) but at last his pattern left me in (...)
dark Ecclips, for that they were errors executed out of ignorance, Tim. 1.^.
no^ wilfully, and therefore obtained remission upon his contrition. I the^
ministered to my dejected soul the mercies conferred on Mary Magdalene: ^uke
7.^.
yet notwithstanding small wa^ my relief, for that her conflict o^ ^^pentance
did in a manner exceed others, and her transgressions but ^^e of the seven
deadly sins. ^hereupon I applied the thief on ^^e Cross as my last refuge:
but ^ere I saw apparent less shelter: for (...) the raising of Lazarus from
the ^aue was only a miracle to show ^^at he was Christ the Messiah; Luke 23.
Ioh. 11.
even (...) my conscience tells me, that the ^n paralleld mercy upon the
thief, Mat. 26.38.
(...) as preordained only for that hour (...) be as a witness of his
wrongful ^^nominious suffering, and not any ^ssurement of safety for us to
build ^^n. Thus being deprived (as you ^ay perceive) from all hope in the ^^ue
of God by my disobedience, from all mercy by my matchless ^resumption, and
from all comforts in malefactors by my superlati^ transgressions, together
with inwa^^ griefs of the joys I had lost: a^^ the woeful exchange of heaven
f^ hell, brought me into that despera^ ecstasy, as I fell suddenly on the
ground in a trance, where diue judgments of God reiterated to (...) memory,
that were executed alrea^^ upon his dearest servants for less ^^fences: which
closed all the facu^ties of my body and soul into an o^^ scure darkness: but
thanks be (...) the divine providence, that restore me soon after to my
former tra^quility: and having recovered a se^sible feeling, my oppressed heart
d^sired to know whether his judgments were so severe as my apprehension led
me. I suddenly ma^^ to my poor cave, God knows ^th troubled thoughts; for my
co^^tions were either drowning or ^^cuting my self: yet those assalts ^asily
repulsed by Gods assisting ^^mission, with the president of Iu^^^ and the like:
but then opening (...) book of the old and new Testa^ent, there I found our
first parent ^^am, whom God gave dominion the whole world, Genesis 3.17.
yet for eating ^^e apple forbidden though it was the intisement of another,
he and ^^s posterity were extinguished for ^^er. Number. 20.27.33.
Likewise Moses and Aaron notwithstanding they could obtain ^^y thing at Gods
hands; yet for that ^^ey somewhat doubted of the mira^e promised by God, they
were de^tred for ever going into the land of promise. 1. Sam. 15.17.18.23.
Again Saul whom (...) chose to be the first King of his p^ple, was degraded
of his dignity, (...) given over to the hands of an e^spirit, for that he did
but reserve so certain spoils of war, being commanded to the contrary.
Leuit. 10.2.
Besides sudden killing of Nadah and Ab^^ sons of Aaron for once offering
there fire then was appointed th^^ The striking dead of Ananias (...) Sapphira
for only retaining so^^ part of their own goods by dece^ from the Apostles,
Acts. 5.10.
Likewise the iection of Cain and his lineage fo^^uer straight upon his murder.
Genesis 7.10.
^^sides Benjamin the only son of ^^cob whom God loved so dearly, Genesis 4.2.
Judge. 20.
(...) for one sin that was committed Gibeah upon the wife of a Leu^ ^od
destroyed almost the whole ^^be of men, women, and children; ^ith many other
examples, which ^aring to claim any alliance of Iues I surceased with
repentance that I ^ad them. O my dear brother, that (...) presumptuous sinners
had felt the ^^ck of my torture at the same instant ^^ey would have confessed
in their earts, that God is severe and just as ^e is infinitely merciful: yet
my con^ience always assured me he never ^ft a sinner that desired truly to
re^ent, without a sinner forsook him, which was some ease to my surchar^ed
sufferings. But the arch-enemy ^f man continued his Rhetorickes and
applications of despair, reuea^ng always to my memory these and the like
herse-like sounding presidents of holy writ: if the righteo^ shall scarcely be
saved, where shall ^ ungodly and sinner appear? 1. Pet. 4.17.18.
and judgment begin at the house of Go^ what shall the expectation or end
wicked men be? howsoever I douted not in the mercy of my Sauio^ but in my own
base and vnworth^ demerits; for that he is certaine^ faithful: Heb. 10.23.
if I hold fast the profession of my faith according to the measu^ which he
has given me; yet wh^ with Satan's assaulting, my sinn^ afflicting, and fear
of not obta^ning Gods favor, it transformed (...) from what I was, to the
portrai^u^ of an Anatomy; as the Inhab^tants near adjoining to the say^ Isle
can witness. For those tha^ came to visit me, out of charity pitied me, and I
in Christianity grie^ed as much for their ignorance, which being by his sacred
pleasure brought to deaths door, and ready to yield up the ghost in a
^amentable spectacle between hope and despair; at last there appeared
spirituall-wise an apparition of my own picture, the prodigal son, Luke 15.
without intermission to my soul and senses, which did reflect so much
internal comfort, as a woman in the agony of her pains, ioies to see a
manchilde borne into the world, John 16.21.
and forgets her past sufferings; even so the daily contemplation of this
cordial parable restored me to that height of happiness, as it did more
auert the dolor of grief, sorrow, and despair, then all the felicity I
received by presidents in the ol^ and new Testament: but when my conscience
assured me the first part of his life I had acted to my eternal destruction,
and that of necessity I must follow the second to obtain my redemption,
otherwise it would prove unfortunate and fatal, which having pondered upon
the imbecillitie of my own nature, the allurements of the world, and
continual assaults of Satan, I feared it would prove too strict a captivity
for me to pass through: whereupon I pleaded, our Savior died for all sinners,
yet my conscience answered, it was for none but those which truly believed
him in their lives, and unfeignedly repented in their hearts, which made me
remem^er the dreadful saying of Christ himself, Romans 9.27.
Few are the number that should be saved. O affectionated Brother, that all my
prodigal expenses had been transformed into pious charities, my former
pleasures into penitent prayers, and my vain discourses into true confessions:
then had I not lived a diligent slave to Satan, Iam. 5.16.
but a dutiful servant to my Savior: which, God knows, now the neglect of
either so much sounds reprobate as makes me descend with a doleful heart and
allege my birthright by baptism. But like a soft air it answered not
elected by adoption; reiterating to my perplexed thoughts the president ^
unfortunate Esau, who found n^ place of repentance, Heb. 12.17.
though he sought it carefully with tears But when at last I read the fear
full saying of our Savior, Mani^ were called, Mat. 20.10.
but few were chosen O what an immortal wound ^ gave me; for my decrepit hop^
enforced me to curse conception birth, and life, wishing the plague of Egypt
had been my copartners, rather than those deceitful^ pleasures my companions,
which made me so incapable of creation, redemption, and election. I thus
continued in this woeful spectacle for the space of two days, not caring to
minister either rest, or nourishment to my wearisome body, but did wholly
contemplate on my forlornd estate, say^ng to my self, How should I know
whether I be elected or not? The spirit answered, either by a good life or
true repentance, which upon examination was small comfort to me, having neither
performed the one, nor endeavored the other. Whereupon finding my self by the
allurements of Satan, vanities of the world, and frailties of nature, brought
into so desperate, wretched, and dangerous case, that if I did not forsake my
self, there was no salvation, but damnation: notwithstanding his death and
passion, which coniured me by Gods permission, faithfully to resolve to
discard all pleasures, doubts, scruples, or fears, and wholly depend upon the
sweet saying of our Savior, Esaias. 1.18.
Though my sins were as red as scarlet, yet he would make them as white as
snow; if so be my repentance proceed from contrition of heart during life;
otherwise I might fear, mistrust, despair, for I should much rob^ God of his
justice in depending^ upon his mercy, Ioh. 15.22. Psalm. 85.10.
and damn my^ soul with presuming on his favor, when himself protests
they both kiss each other; especially his preservation from so many dangers
in the world, and the assaults in this my conflict, has made me resolutely to
set my rest upon the anchor of this hope, that if neither inward griefs nor
penitent prayers by the mercies of our Savior cannot attain unto the joys of
heaven; I will strive to mitigate my torments in hell; but certainly I am
resolved rather to suffer death, then commit any grievous or wilful sin: for
I should account my self more accursed then either Heathen, Pagan, Turk or
Infidel, by how much my knowledge exceedes their ignorance, and his providence
my baseness, in exhaling me out of Sodom to Zoar, from an evil bewitching
Court, into a delightful solitary Cave, where no fraud, pride, nor deceit
inhabits. O my beloved Brother, if you or any other did but know the
inestimable happiness, which retiredness bequeathes those that depend upon
Gods providence, and are resolved to encounter temptation by reformation. I am
confident the man lives not that desires preservation of his soul, but would
rather affect the solitary continent life, then all the pleasures of Solomon.
Though I must confess the first two months were both fearful, dangerous and
desperate: but after repulsing the vi^lent allusions of Satan by these
general pleas to all his assaulting accusations, alleging, I both confirmed
and acknowledged his words to be true, that the wickedness of my life neither
had, nor could deserve any hope, favor ^ pardon; and that I confidently
^eleeued as he said, it were impos^ble so many sins should escape ^npunished,
having the same God ^ be judge, which not only crea^ed, redeemed, and
preserved, but ^nowes how opprobrious and ^ontemptible I have been to all ^s
Laws, Statutes, and Iudge^ents, giving credence to his ^ords from my heart,
that every ^ilfull sin should be afflicted ^ith contrary particular
torment, ^onfessing that Gods sacred justice ^espected no persons, but rewar^ed
every man according to his ^eserts; and therefore he might ^est assured of me
when ever my Savior was pleased to pronounce ^is sentence: for that I knew my
past life deserved none other, a^ as for future, himself warrant^ could merit
no other. Yet in rega^ Gods unsearchable prouiden^ gave me life after so many
inh^mane transgressions, and bele^uing the comfortable sayings (...) Christ's
own words: those thing which are impossible to man, we^ no whit impossible to
God, Mar. 10.27.
f^ that he desired not the death of (...) sinner, but joys more at the
conversion of one offender, then nin^tie nine righteous. Besides himself had
made me more capab^ of apprehending Gods hatred t^ sin, severity in
punishment, an^ his blessings presumptuously abused by my baseness. So that
(...) were a monster in nature, if eue^ ^ did more offend the Deietie of ^is
sacred name. Heb. 10.26. Ioh. 15.22.
For in commit^ng wilful sin, I should be ^onfident it would trench against
^e Holy Ghost, attributing, he ^artly rewarded the prentiship of any service
in revealing the naked ^uth of my wretched estate; pro^esting upon the faith of
my salua^ion, let him say what he would, ^ttempt what he could, yet nothing
should allure me (by Gods ^ssistance) neither to despair, nor ^ffend my
Creator more, but lea^ing soul, body, life and death, at his will and
pleasure; acknowledging my self, that if he had made me one of his number, I
had justly deserved it; and if his infinite ^mercy saved me, I must confess
it were a miracle. Howsoever (...) would be no longer disobedient^ for that
might prove ingratitud^ upon ingratitude; I knowing what favors God has
bestowed, and now he telling me wha^ offenses I have committed, assuring him,
if he were permitted to punish me with bodily affliction and temporal
crosses the more I were certain of spiritual comfort. Thus is, and ever shall
continue my resolution by the help of him that made me; for before I had fixed
my heart, soul and senses upon this entire affection, never to be violated by
any stratagemes whatsoever. I was perpetually troubled with uncharitable
thoughts, unquiet fears, and desperate despaires: but now I ^nde they are
either lessened, or ^se I am careless of them: Inso^uch, that my inward
faculties ^re mollified with a sensible humi^ty, to offer up my morning and
^uening sacrifice, as a daily trib^^^ ^f contrition, that ever I did (...) end,
and a trembling fear for to ^ffend; wherein one night above ^ll the rest I
cannot choose but im^art the rapture of so much joy, that me thought my
apprehension was transformed into another ^emisphere, yet durst not presume ^n
his mercy for fear of robbing ^is justice, by reason I could never attain to
so high a pitch of ^elestiall happiness, but in a lo^er orb of tears and
sorrows, to which I ascribe God the glo^^ For when I my self was a companion
of others, those discipli^ posternes were as heathen gree^ to me, which now
they proo^ my daily delights of recreation, y^ shall never be at quiet until I
ha^ obtained the period of that form^ felicity, which if nightly watc^ing,
daily fasting, continual praying, or corporal affliction, ca^ extract this
unparalleled comfor^ I will remain constant, by the permission of God during
life: only reserving so much time f^ nourishing the faculties of natu^^ that I
may continue the longe^ But peradventure some of yo^ lukewarm divines will not
admit of this life, though I am min^ own taskemaster: yet I hope you ^ill not
build upon the Theory (...) another opinion, more than ^e practice of your
Brother, that ^inioyned to love you as his own ^ule; howsoever for my
particu^r, may I never prosper in this my ^terprize, if all deuines should ^ake
it not lawful by thetorick, ^eech, or traditions from Adam, ^ey would not
reflect the least ^ought of revolt: for that I have ^yned more knowledge, hope,
and comfort to my oppressed ^ule in this one year of retired^esse, than four
prentiships be^^re; yet I take God to witness, ^ere is no man breathing that
weth a more great reverence (...) their function and doctrine, then my self.
But if his diui^ permission amplifies a blessing my second edition (as my hope
depending) I will give such an (...) sured satisfaction, that your hea^ soul,
and senses shall say, God the author, and man subject (...) palpable erroneous
errors. (...) the mean time following (...) president of holy David, my tru^
is in God, and therefore I fear (...) what flesh can do unto me.

Your Brother, though a desert Beadsman^ Thomas Bushel

To the high and mighty merciful Savior, God of Heaven, and only Judge of
Earth.
The humble petition of thy distressed and dejected creature, the superlatiue
Prodigal.
WIth trembling fear shows, That a poor Suppliant has offended the Deity
of thy pious Majesty, in what not, that's ill, with delectation of affection;
whereby I have lost the birthright of creation, preservation, and redemption
which my fairest hopes cannon presume thou will break the whole course of thy
justice, in o^ mitting so many crying sins t^ escape unpunished. For that
(...) must acknowledge with soul heart and conscience, if thou saue^ me it is
a miracle: and if thou re^ fusest, it were but just justice; a^suring my self
in forbearing thy chastising affection, I shall eue^ despair of thy mercy, and
be confident of permanent punishment^ for that the pensill of holy Wri^ which
will not be violated, Heb. 12.5. Apoc. 3.19.
has plainly expressed, those whom thou receiuest, thou chastenest, and that
their long laughing must be turned into bitter mourning, Joel. 2.12. Luke 6.25.
before they have any true hope of thy grace, favor or pardon. O then dear
Mediator! I beseech thee minister daily on me thy discipline correction: Pro.
3. Job 5.
and when thou think it meet, let my inward grief be my joy, the agony of
death my comfort: but if those will not penetrate my flintie nature, to make
me glorify thy unspeakable blessings, and apprehend my base ingratitude;
Grant me sweet Savior a feeling inspiration of torments due unto the damned,
that if then I may not without robbing thy Justice obtain by thy Mercy a
share in thy sufferings; Yet I humbly pray thee, let me be a second Dives upon
earth; for admonishing my poor Christian brethren to prevent the like fall of
so fatal a danger, and the rather, for that thou perceiuest offenders be not
so much terrified by thy judgments pronounced in holy Writ; as they are
mollified at the sight of mortal creatures miseries. Wherein it makes me fear
Satan by thy permission has a more predominate power, then thou that createst
them. All which I leave to thy divine Sacred will, and unsearchable mercy;
begging pardon for my bold presumption, or if thou please to make intercession,
Mat. 8.8.
and say Amen to my petition.

The affliction of a Prodigal.
O Dear and Immortal God! I thy abiects creature have so highly offended thy
Deity, Essence, and Glory, in profaning thy Name, abusing thy Blessings, and
slighting thy Sufferings, that I dare claim no privilege by thy death, no
comfort in thy promises, nor no favor from thy mercies: but the rigor of
punishment, the wrath of justice, and reward of the damned. O misery of all
miseries what have I lost! thy Glory that made me, thy Son that dyed for
me, and thy Spirit that sanctified me. Is there a creature from Adam so
wretched? was there a child conceived from Euab more miserable? then I that
have lost the joys of heaven, and purchased the fire of hell. O my birth life
and death, I am wrapped in sorrow, having small hope but in dispairing, no
comfort but in grieuing, nor any joy but in lamenting. O thou false heart and
cursed senses, why were ye made to bring my soul in torture, and your selves
in torment, to deny them will not avail you, to expect pardon is impossible,
to confess them will hardly mitigate them. O then dear Savior, seeing I have
brought my self by sinful presumption, to perma^ent perdition: yet let me
beg at thy hands the agony of individual sorrow, which thou ordainest for the
damned; that if then the spectacle of my deserved malady cannot dissolve thy
justice into mercy, yet may mitigate my endless misery, and not die like a
stupid dog void of sense, knowing thou made me the image of thy Creature.

The Contemplation of a Prodigal.
MY God, Creator and Savior of the world, was not I made thy image to serve
and glorify none other but thy self? How falls it out (dear Father) that I
have been more contemptible against all thy Laws, Sap. 5.
Statutes and Blessings, Ioh. 3.5.
then a savage beast? I cannot believe it proceeded from original sin, in
that thy sacred self suffered for sin; nor from my conception, Ezekiel. 33.
for that thou desire my preservation; but altogether by Satan's assaulting,
the worlds provoking, natures betraying, and my own stiffenecked
transgression. What reason then can my self or mortal man conceive, that thou will save me, when I never truly served, nor honored thee? Art not thou a
just Judge, Ier. 25.
as thou have been a merciful Savior? To plead weakness auailes not,
wilfulness I dare not, nor wanting thy assistance I cannot. Wherefore then
do thou give me longer sustentation, when thou know I have deserved
damnation? Fxod. 9.16. Act. 4.27.
Is it for that thou will exceed in thy mercies to increase my miseries? Or
else are not my sins fully complete for thy determined sufferings? Why, thou
know Satan offended thee but once, I have ever, they both obey and fear
thee, I have never. What madness then would it be in me to presume that thou will break the whole course of thy justice for my sake? knowing in mine own
conscience I have lost the benefit of thy redemption by my wilful presumption:
otherwise I might be confident through unfeigned repentance to have assurance
of salvation by thy death and passion: which now grieves the intralles of my
soul, in that I was such a cursed reprobate to crucify thee who sufferedst on
the Cross to save me: Mar. 10.^7.
so that according to humane judgment my talent is eternal torment. Howsoever
I bequeath the disposure of my dejected soul to thee, Romans 9.15.
which shedst thy innocent blood on the behalf of me. But why should I being
so base a creature reason with thee that art my maker, knowing the clay ought
not contest with the potter. For it is in thy power and not in mine, to make
me a vessel of honor or dishonor. Therefore in obedience to thy
unsearchable Deity, I will surcease all disputations, and endeavor to prevent
worldly perturbations; that I may have so much hope to be thy creature, as my
belief assures me thou art my Creator.

The Agony of a Prodigal.
MY sacred Creator, and celestial Father, did not thou make me of running
water and ruddie earth? Do thou not see how Satan assaults me? how the
world insnates me? and how my own nature betraies me? O my God how then can
thou but in pity take compassion upon me? knowing I have no power to prevent
any of these precedent conspiracies, but by thy divine providence. Will thou
then leave me to my self, that I might appear worse miserable than the beast
which perishes? O be more charitable, for that thou made me thy image; cast
but thine eye upon me, and turn not thy face from me; then try whether thou will deny thy mercy unto me: were not, sweet Savior, my first parents
sinners? Did not thy self suffer for sinners? and protestedst thou desire
not the death of sinners. Shall then the iniquities of my only offenses blot
out the remembrance of thy immortal mercies? When thou art my advocate, I the
offender; thou my redeemer, I the debtor. Let me not then perish for want of
thy protection, when it is not riches, nor honor, I would have; O my Father,
no! or releasement of my miseries I seek; O my Father, no! or heaven I beg; O
my Father, I dare not presume, no! nor any thing I crave; but the increase of
penitent tears fit for transgressors, and sorrows due to sinners; O my
Savior, no! How then can thou deny me? when I sue for no more, but what thy
self has assured me? O my Christ! are these the eyes that have displeased
thee; let them receive no light through thee: is this the heart, which has
dishonored thee; let it bleed to death for thee Is this the flesh which has
offended thee? let fire be her fuel by thee. Are these the bones which have
brought me woe? let them be burnt, and borne no more. Or are these the senses
which have sinned against thee? let them be a living sacrifice to thee. O my
God, I am rackt with grief, that I cannot grieve; and perplexed in repentance,
that I know not how to repent. For to proceed after the worlds weakness, I
suspect thou see their wilful ignorance. And if I follow thy Gospels
professors, I fear thou findst them full of scandal, distraction, and
worldly perturbation. What then (sweet Savior) will become of me forlorn
creature, that have no relief? but sins to succor me, Satan to assist me,
and a guilty conscience to comfort me: without thy sacred sufferings make
intercession for me, and accept thy Saints oblations for sinners to thee; I
shall be forced to curse my conception, and wish my mothers womb, had been my
tomb, to have formed me a lump of flesh without life, or any creature but thy
image; for then had I lived according to creation, and not liable to eternal
damnation. Yet, most merciful and immortal father, should my agonied soul
suspect to suffer shipwreck, when thou guidest the stern? or despair and
die, when thou art living? or curse her birth when thou art in being? O my God,
rather let her taste the tortures of hell, then be deprived of life, and lose
her hopes in the joys of heaven, let then Satan assay his best, and the
wicked world her worst, my dejected soul has set up her rest in thee that
made her to save her; Lord I beseech thee to say Amen.

The Supplication of a Prodigal.
MY God, my refuge, my mercy, how dare I remember thy greatness, when the
billows of my crying sins have raisd the wrath of thy Omnipotent person; who
out of mere divine love to pious charity, createdst me after thine own
image, redeemed me being lost, and in a word gave me all I ever had; yet have
I so much dishonored the Deity of thy glory, that I made the pleasures of
this life, my Gods on earth, and now they are turn'de my tormenting accusers of
Death; O Sacred Father, bequeath the plagues of Egypt for my talent, rather
then this deceitful world to my portion, which has not only bred me
disobedient toward thee that made me, a traitor to thy Son that dyed for
me; but sacrific'de my own soul to be the fuel of hell fire. O deadly life
of immortal death, what shall I term thee? the shape of a Christian, which
without thy Sacred intercession for thy never dying mercies, I shall remain
quickened with the fiend of hell, to future ages for ever. O do not thou sweet
Savior forget the pity of thy goodness, though I have lost the duty of my
obedience; but grant the same favor to me, thou gave the thief upon the
Cross, look upon the tears of my miseries with the passions of thy mercies,
and if neither griefs, groans, sighs, nor sorrows can appease thy just
wrath: why did thou make me? wherefore was thy death? whom will thou save?
or art thou another God now, then when thou were merciful to the oppressed, a
Father of the godly, and an advocate for the damned if they repented. O then
enrich my soul with a divine sorrow for my joy, the agony of death for my
comfort, that I may neither presume of thy favor, nor despair of thy mercy;
but have thy great Name glorified, thy Sacred death satisfied, and thy poor
forlorn sinner saved, Lord I beseech thee, say Amen.

The Prodigalles Prayer.
O Dear and omnipotent God, I here stand guilty of all the barbarous and
inhumane sins which Satan can object against the cursedst creature living.
For I have presumptuouslie committed more riots and offenses, then either
Heathen, Pagan, Turk or Infidel, besides treacherously made thy name a
cloak for my own villainy. Thus, dear Savior, have I lived a smooth factour
for Satan, to the utter subversion and deprivation of eternal felicity, and
purchased the reward of condemnation with endless misery. Break, O my big
swollen heart, lest a thunderbolt from heaven prevent thee. Gush forth into a
flood of tears, thou Crocodile by nature, in being such a cursed reprobate to
forget thy maker, a Devil incarnate for crucifying thy Redeemer. Ah savage
beast, could neither creation, redemption, nor daily blessings mollify my
flintie heart to honor thee as a father, fear thee as a God, or love thee as
a Savior, but must so Iudas-like, sacrifice thy image to the enemy, thy
courtesies to cruelty, and thy redemption to my dreadful destruction. O
indignation of the Almighty, fall not upon me, though I have sowed the
ungrateful seed of Plutarchs air for Scorpions to bite my flesh, and snakes
to suck my blood. Yet, most merciful Father, should my miserable soul
despair, when thy omnipoten^ person died for dejected sinners? Or can I
presume to hope, seeing thou have punished thy dearest servants for less
offenses? Never (O Lord) in my wretched self, but by the unspeakable death and
passion which is able to relieve the sick, heal the lame, restore the blind,
and help the distressed to thee, I submissiue come; whose sacred wisdom
knows that man is rottenness, his desires vanity, and life misery. Will thou therefore show thy strength against so poor a worm as man, that has
neither creation, preservation, nor habitation, but by thy divine providence? O
then, dearest Father, remit the execution of thy justice; enlarge the
liberality of thy mercy, and extend thy holy spirit on me thy lost s^ruant,
that I may neither curse my birth nor being, thou repent of thy creation or
redeeming; to the end I might live in thy fear, die in thy favor, rest in thy
peace, rise in thy power, and remain in thy glory. Lord I beseech thee say
Amen.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM, Earl of Derby.
MY honored Lord I do not know how far this my solitary life may trench into
the displeasure of your Lordships grave censure. Therefore I thought best to
recommend those general reasons which were the occasions of my revolt from the
world: assuring your Lordship it was not the foolish fantasy of my wandering
thoughts, Gal. 6. Pro. 18.13.
but a serious consideration of my former transgressions, with an inward
meditation of the small time that God will stay for man's conversion or
euersion, made me bequeath the remainder of my days to this private Cell, by
your Lordships assisting permission. Yet peradventure some will allege to
your Honor, that this course of retiredness is neither commanded nor
commended; what others out of ignorance may object, fat be it from your
Lordship so to judge. Phil. 3.6. Socra. scho. cap. 18.
For it has been practiced by the best sort of Christians ever since Christ's
time, with such precise and strict severity, as they did not only resist all
external acts of sin, but chastised their bodies with corporal affliction,
2 Cor. 6.5.
which is manifest in the lives of the Apostles, by their much fasting,
watching and praying Likewise Saint Augustines conversion, and Saint Ieromes
approbation of Paul and Antony the Heremites, besides the discipline he used
upon his own body; with many other ancient Fathers, which for fear of being
tedious, I omit. So that if these holy men were fain to undertake such strait
captivity for gaining of heaven, what punishment should I endure for
preventing of hell, 1 Pet. 4.17.
whose whole course of life has been a race of errors: especially when the
spirit of God daily knockes at my heart to prosecute the same austeritie:
which gives me a more clear revelation of Gods favors, where now I find the
theorie so much to be true by practice, that I call God to witness I am no more
able to express the felicities I enioie, then remember the catologue of my
past offenses, let therefore other men think as they please of this
alteration, 1 Cor. 4.3.4.
it sufficiently contents me that the Saints in heaven rejoice at my
conversion. For God has spoken peace to my soul, my soul preaches peace to
my conscience, my conscience sings a comfortable sweet All-haile to my sad
heart: and should the world, the flesh, or the Devil sound all their most
powerful instruments to pluck from this my resolution, they may sacrifice my
flesh upon the worlds Altar, but my faith shall be so sure found hanging upon
the horns of this Sanctum Sanctorum as my heart is confident that your
Lordships former favor conferd on me was preordaind to be a means of sealing
your redemption by the death and passion of our Savior, were your past
transgression red as scarlet; for that I am bound to acknowledge under God
your Honors affable courtesy established my regeneration, 1 Pet 4.8.
and what the reward is in gaining a soul, Ioh. 5.20.
believe not me but the promise of Christ expressed in holy writ. Humbly
entreating your Lordship so far to continue your respect, as when any shall
question my fidelity, advise them to suspend their censure till the fortunate,
fatal, tribunal day of judgment; which will decide the question without
malice. The rather for that each of us were baptized with the sign of the
Cross, and both endeavoring to hit the same mark though with several shafts.
But if it should fall out to be known, that they themselves continue in any
one wilful sin, your Lordship may boldly give no more credence to their
language in points of Religion, then to a perjured man in case of a trial. For
as the Law will not admit of the one, certainly God will not allow of the
other; when the pensill of holy Writ confirms that the Devil holds them as we
by one sin as by a thousand. 1 Ioh. 3.
A^ which I leave to your Honor grave judicial judgment, an^ rest,

Your everliving Beadsman, Thomas Bushel.

To the only son and blood of my own body.
Beloved: the Lord thy God has commanded me to instruct thee; thee to obey me
upon penalty of eternal punishment, that wilfully breaks the covenant; if
my advertisement agree with the pensill of the holy Ghost, otherwise thou art
free, I only bound; which to avoid the danger of my part, I have, as God has
enabled my illiterate and humane apprehension, bequeathed unto thee by my
woeful experience, a brief divine, and moral way, how to prostrate thy loving
obedience toward God and man, for the surer preventing Natures frailty, the
safety of thy own soul, Gods glory, and the discharge of a fathers duty;
that thou might not curse thy birth, I thy being, nor divine providence
repent of thy making; hoping the president of my late erroneous life, will
cause thine to be religious; otherwise my iniquities will be added to thy
transgressions, though no ease to each of our sufferings. Let therefore thy
internal faculties of body and soul be zealous toward thy Creator in keeping
his Commandments with a trembling fear of violating the least, and a willing
desire to perform them all; in so doing, thy mortality is sure to be
ratified with immortal glory. Let his just justice ever go before thee, and
his infinite mercy will not fail to follow thee. Let thy meditations be
always upon our Saviors sufferings; then thou can not be so ingrate as to
forget his blessings, nor neglect thy duties. Give thanks to thy maker for thy
nights sleeping, and morn waking, with humble desire of his continual
providence for the day following; and at night call thy self to a strict
account of what good deeds thou have omitted; and what offenses thou have
committed; who were the occasions of the one, and neglect of the other, from
such refrain, unless thou can command thy self, not they thee: but if they
proceed from thine own stiffenecked nature, condole thy infirmity, chastize
thy iniquity with continual abstinency, until thou findst reason and
religion to master thy passion and affection; by this means thou will ever
after sleep in peace, continue obedient, and remain in safety: but on the
contrary, as thy conception was wretched, so thy life will be lamentable, thy
death miserable, and thy torments inevitable. Let therefore thy believing faith
be grounded upon the rock Christ Jesus; for that is the true Religion; the
others are tossed upon the waves of time, proceeding rather from men's frailty,
then any settled verity. Yet lest thy conscience should be eclipsed, and thy
continuance reuerted into the dreadful danger of a lukewarm Christian, by
beholding so many grave Senators of several Religious opinions; I have held
it expedient upon my death bed, and according to my engagement, as the soul of
me must answer the same at the tribunal day of judgment, to present unto thy
internal spirits these recited precepts. Let thy heart and conscience be
incorporate to the body of Christ's universal Catholic Church, performing so
far as in thee lies, all these prescriptions, which he has enioined thee to
observe, obey and keep in holy writ; and when thy conscience, together with
thy ghostly Father, approoues of thy inabilitie, to be capable of the
Sacramental mercy, make a true confession of thy life past, with an inward
repentant contrition, that ever thou did offend, and a constant resolution by
Gods permission never more willing to offend: but suffer death rather then
violate thy condition; as afterward to commit a heinous sin, or wilfully
continue in any other. This being zealoushe kept, God warrants thee salvation,
who then will accuse thee? thy conscience cannot, and Christ has protested he
will not, if thou do thy utmost endeavor to perform thy covenant: and as
for man's accusation thou know he is arraind at the bar with thee, how can
he judge or condemn thee, when all his hope is upon our Saviors mercy to
redeem himself. But if afterward thou should wilfully continue repleat in
any one sin, thy conscience reiterating daily the same, and yet wilt
obstinately persevere in hope of his mercy, I might justly suspect Judas
receiving, and fear thy damnation; when the pensill of the holy Ghost has
expressed, He that sins wilfully after receiving the knowledge of truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for
judgment. O then flesh of my flesh, let my present tortures prevent thy future
torments; for I call God to witness I now wish one of my limbs had perished
when I consented to wilful sin, or received martyrdom when I committed
mortal sin; do not then persevere in offending, nor delay thy conversion,
for I should sooner curse thy begetting, than joy in thy being, or hope of thy
atchiuing to Gods Kingdom. Trouble not thy self with purgatory, for fear of
falling into the perpetual punishment, but spend the remainder of thy days in
almsdeeds, fasting, praying and the like, for the surer preventing of both, and
gaining of heaven. Trust always in Gods providence, then thy own conscience
will be sure to direct thee better then men's counsels; yet in spiritual
negotiations, and how far thou may trench into temporal affairs, without
prejudice to soul or body. Be vigilant to join always thy ghostly father in
commission with thy conscience, but let thy conscience be of the coram; for he
cannot save thee, the other may condemn thee, though he must answer it if he
either neglect or direct thee wrongfully; howsoever his torture will be no
mitigation to thy torment. Obey the King to the loss of life, fortune, wife or
family, but let thy conscience receive no impression contrary to its own
direction: for if thy sovereign be virtuously given, he will never press
thee; if otherwise follow thy Saviors words, fear not those that destroy the
body, but love and fear him which can destroy both soul and body. Fight not
against any Nation that does baptize with sign of the Cross and believes the
invisible Trinity, without thou art commanded by thy Sovereign or invaded by
themselves; so shall thy hands be freed from the guilt of christian blood;
stand not so much upon the title or theorie of religion, as the practice in
religion; for what is a crown without a Kingdom, honor without virtue, or
learning without perseuering; neither hunt after the divine and hidden
mysteries of predestination, election, destiny and the like; for in my
conscience they are left eclipsed, and as stumbling blocks for seeming-wise men
to stagger at. Therefore rest thy soul upon this resolution, that although the
causes be not known to thee, yet undoubtedly they cannot be unjust, being
preordaind by the sacred Judge of all Judges. Show always a reverent obedience
to the supreme head of the Church under Christ Jesus, and give credence to
their canon laws, but not as canonical scripture, though they were debated by
the consistory of counsels, and established to be^ real in the strength of
man's capacity, yet they received an impression of mortal frailty ever since
the fall of our first parents; howsoever owe duty to them all as labors of
holy fathers, but fail not to follow those which thou find plainly quoted
in scripture, or recorded in thy conscience: so shall thou offend none, but
practice all that God will require at thy hands. And if the controversy in
supremacy startle thy fidelity, chose rather the explanation of scripture to
decide the question, than man's disputation; so shall thy heart not only have
the rock of Christ thy leader, but his divine inspiration upon Peter the
Apostle for thy supporter, and unless thou findst it recald by re^elation I
would not advise thee ^o believe tradition. Do homage ^o God in all sanctified
holy pla^es, and give due glory to all ^aints and Angels, as invisible
^reatures, already consummated ^y Christ Jesus. But think not ^f meriting
heaven, for then I am ^ertaine to behold thee in hell; though thou had
fulfilled the whole law, yet thy original sin would accuse thee, thy
presump^ion condemn thee, and Christ's ^eath a witness against thee, who then
will save thee? none; ^ut the sentence of Lord have mercy upon thee: only
thus far ^hou may go according to humane judgment, and not derogate from
the diadem of his sacred Deity, believing through hi^ assisting provident
compassion thou stand in a more sure certainty of salvation then when thou
liuedst in worldly perturbation, owe an obseruant obedienc^ to those that are
elected in the place of Gods ministers, yet converse with none but those who^
lives are answerable to their profession. In so doing thou will pr^uent the
ones vice and reap the others virtue: for thou can n^ expect to find all
true Leuit^ when Christ himself found o^ in twelve a traitor. Give place t^
thy betters, respect thy elders, e^pecially those that are in author^ty; and
go to law with no man but in thy own defense; yet if ^hou can not play thy
part without passion, acquit the stage, for thou had better to lose thy
reputation and revenue than hazard thy soul and body. Be courteous to all men,
hate no man, do good to any man, especially to those that cannot requite thee.
Honor old age, reverence thy ghostly father, and if it be possible remain ^hy
self single, but above all of ^is part; so shall thou be freed from suspecting
a third person, though the sacred integrity of the others fatherly friendship
may be ^quall, yet nature will be jealous, and make thee always suspicious,
which in time might prove pernicious. Deuote a daily duty to the sect of
women, and when thou beholdest any whose ornaments are decent, commend them, if
courteous, requite them; if charitable, extol them; if virtuous, adore them;
but if vicious, loath them; if ambitious, scorn them; and if malicious, shun
them: so shall thou be freed from the ones iniquity, and share in the others
virtue: for there is no such companion, as a discreet, religious woman which to
my great comfort have known the one, and to my ouercharged grief the other.
But i^ thou appear so unfortunate, a^ to forsake the celestial rites of a
single life, to obtain the society of a temporal wife; let her virtues be the
foundation of thy affection, and thy conscience debate upon confirmation before
thou conclude a resolution, that God may honor the union, and your selves joy
in the conjunction, which if divine providence bless the fruit of her womb,
let thy inward love be equally descended to thy eldest as scripture has
commanded, and thy gentle correction as occasion shall be required: so may
thou redeem thy virginity in raising a posterity to glorify God by a
fraternity. But above all be sure to let charity be thy gentry, and humility
thy honor; let love be thy laurel, and loyalty thy lover; let adversity be
thy fortitude, and fortune thy flatterer; let virtue by thy verity, and
patience thy pattern; let wisdom be thy wealth, and reason thy ruler; let
sin be thy enemy, and thy self her sister; let truth be thy tongue, and
temperance thy taster; let justice be thy judge, and conscience thy Iuror; let
faith be thy father, and obedience thy brother, let children be thy blessing,
and education their portion; let mercy be thy matron, and meekness thy
minion; let courtesy be thy kinsman, and chastity thy cosen-german; let
virginity be thy affection, and utility thy afliction; let repentance be thy
profession, and prayers thy peregrination; let confession be thy contemplation,
and contrition thy regeneration. Let life be thy lamentation, and death thy
preparation. Let thy speech be plausible, and thy protestations irreuocable.
Let thy studies be celestial, and thy sorrows supernatural. Let thy sighs
be Sacramental, and thy groans coeternall. Let thy diet be debility, and thy
attire decency. Let want be thy infirmity, and Will thy integrity. Let thy
hope be heavenly, and fear thy frailty. Let grace be thy guide, and God thy
glory. Thus, in a word, thou pledge of my posterity, think, speak, and deal
with God, as if all the world did behold thee, and live, and converse with man
as if God saw thee. So shall thou appear the lively image of thy maker, the
crown of thy mother, the honor of thy name, and the repairing of the Angels.
God lead thee by the hand, and a fathers blessing go with thee, as thou
perseuerst in the practice of these precedent precepts.

To his loving brother Edward Bushel Esquire.
BEst beloved, to annihilate your least suspicion of my fidelity or selfe-wild
imbecilitie in this my retirde pleasing life, I ingenuously acknowledge that
mutual fraternity joined with inward spiration to glorify God is best
pleasing, most accepted, and greatest rewarded. So that I am confident a
public religious life is better than any monasticke private living, by how
much virginity is esteemed above marriage; yet the leaw warranted to be
honorable, according to the Apostles words. If thou do marry thou do
well, but if thou can abstain, it is better. So likewise if tho^ can live
private without wilful sin, it is well, but if thou can public, it were
better. And where he says, better to marry then to burn; 1 Cor. 7.9.
even so my conscience assures me that it is better to live privately without
sin, than burn publicly in sin; for you know in the one there is hope of
salvation, but in the other certainty of damnation. Which reduc'de me to
apply for experiment this soli^ary course to prohibit me from former follies,
and prevent futur^ perils. For you know from min^ infancy I so much naturally
delighted in a male-contented life, a^ our parents disciplinde gentle
correction to withdraw me, fearing (...) was bewitched. Likewise in the height
of my prodigallity, both your self and others were witnesses how I then made
trial at a poor fishers habitation, which God knows would have long
continued had not my popula^ name been known; yet in those days such was my
childishness, that more feared the prejudice of my base reputation then the
displeasure of my Savior: like jesting Pilate which believed the innocence of
Christ, howsoever to satisfy the Jews, crucified him. Luke 23.14.
Besides, for almost three years, you know, I was tossed upon the waves of time
in expectation of a familiar companion, who at last to my great grief
unfriendly left me, for no other reason I could imagine, but that he would
verify our Saviors speech; Mat. 20.16.
Many that are first shall be last, and the last first. So that it is no new
fantasy, but hatching from my cradle as God knows and some particular friends
that my determination was long ago bent to leave the world, deny my self,
regaine the time, and follow him, were it within the caves of the earth, if his
Divine pleasure allotted me; But what through the rawnesse of years, natures
frailty, and instigation of others, I remained so long with taking leave of my
household, and striving to satisfy the humors of mortal friends, that almost
my vital hope was turned into despair of immortal glory. But thanks be to
the Divine providence, my own conscience is enlightened by the Gospel of Christ
to warrant me his mercies, will hear my supplications from a poor Cell, as
he did Jonas in the Whales belly. Ion. 2.1.
So that, if now I should revolt, having had a year of unparalleled experience,
for either temporal fortune or fear of corporal affliction, I must account the
offense unpardonable; when the pensill of holy Ghost has dictated the same by
these irremarkeable fatal words; If we sin wilfully, Heb. 10.26.
after the receiving the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more
sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for judgment. Therefore I hope by
Gods permission, your belief of my fidelity will expel all doubts, scruples,
or fears, knowing that I have bequeathed these lines to ensuing memory as a
recorded witness on the contrary against me at the Day of Judgment. 2 Pet.
2.21.
In the mean time let him that is tied to love you as his own soul, persuade
your diligent search into the world without partiality, and then I dare boldly
say, you will find naught worth loving, no fortune worth valuing, nor no
pleasure worth following but he that first made you: in conscience then, he
ought only to be loved, valued, and served. For my own part, I by woeful
experience have found it; you by tradition from a brother may shun it. Let not
then others ends, set a^ end to your own happiness, no natures frailty bar
the fruition of your future felicity; but be sur^ to curb the one, and scorn
the other; in so doing your conscience shall say, I was your friend, no^ your
flatterer, as mine must always acknowledge you a father more then a brother.
Yet give me leave lovingly to chide your wilfulness; since by Divine
providence I have rebuked my ignorance. Your causes of discontents its known
rise early; will you therefore keep them in perpetual waking? Those crosses
that stand betwixt you and happiness, are mortal; must you then make your
sorrows perpetual and immortal? The way to shorten them is to slight them,
and the best means to mitigate them is not to mind them. I by experience do
sensibly feel it, you by practice may be sure to find it. O then, gentle
brother, let not grief for a wilderness, Mar. 8.36.
prevent your birthright in Paradise; for under correction (dearest Sir) if you
cannot brook a temporal misfortune, in my conscience you will never attain
to a spiritual blessing: when our Savior and all his Elect are witnesses
against you; Mar. 10.24.
yet I must confess your afflictions are greater then mine, though my sins
are a thousand for one of yours. Howsoever not equal in demerites, nor
disasters to the Apostles, therefore joy as they did in calamities, that you
may be found a Cosin-germane to Job, showing always true Faith by your
Works, otherwise were you my Father, as you are my Brother, I should forget
nature, and greatly fear you have no share in Christ's death. Pardon, dearest
heart, if I have soared too high, it is in your power to clip the wings: but
God knows I esteem your souls safety, more then man or mortal felicity.
All which I leave to his Divine providence and your perseuering goodness.

To the Religious and Virtuous Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Willoughby.
YOur Beadsman fearing the distance of place, and dispensation of wedlock,
might cause a revolt from your Ladyships former welwishes induced me to
recommend these weak lines, as an Antidote to preserve me from the shipwreck
of your displeasure; whose virtuous society, I ever honored more then
temporal felicity; for that I was daily an eye witness of your pious charity;
religious discourse, and noble hospitality, which makes me presume the
goodness of your chaste disposition, will rather condole my misfortunes of
inward grief then attribute discontinuance to the weakness of nature or want
of matrimonial affection; especially having so much conference with a grave
Divine before my departure, as your Ladyship may more perspicuously perceive by
these following lines; wherein I spared not the revealing of my woeful
tragical life to his judicial contemplation; humbly entreating him, that as I
had opened the bowels of my miseries, so he would impart the truth of his
knowledge. Whereupon with a modest and solemn countenance desired my age, who
replied about six and twenty, he then began to express his sorrows, that so
young a man should have trenched into such loud offenses, yet questionless if
contrition did proceed from my heart, there was no doubt but upon true
repentance God would forgive me. Citing the parable of the Prodigal; Luke 15.
the president of Mary Magdalen, an^ diverse others, for confirming Hope, and
preventing Despair He thus having ended, I gave him much thanks for his
fatherly counsel, assuring his reward was celestial not temporal; wishing it
might stand with his occasions, leave, and liking to hear me a word, who
seemed to be more willing then I was ready; at last imparted unto him that I
presumed a retired strickt Monasticke life, would be the safest and surest hope
to depend on; for by such means I fhould not only avoid sin, the occasion,
but discipline my self, and the rather for that I had affection to the life
from my infancy. Besides the often dreaming what joy I found in it; intimating
my conscience daily reiterated the same; and that if I did continue wilfully in
any one sin, ^here was no foundation for Divine mercy to build on; Heb. 10
which the world, custom, and frailty of nature had prohibited me from the
one, and induced me to the other, as by my confession he knew too true. Yet by
no means he would not give way, alleging the life was neither lawful,
requisite, nor honest, for that it was not allowed by the Laws of God to
cloister up my self: nor admitted by our Church, expressing Scripture, that I
was not borne for my self, but for others; and that my prayers could not be
so much available as when two or three were gathered together. But if these
reasons might not dissuade me from my intended resolution, yet the vow of
marriage prohibited me, though it was solemnized in the rawnesse of my youth; by
reason I had promised before God to forsake father, mother, and cleave unto my
wife, assuring me I should never have his consent, nor hardly the Church of
Rome: notwithstanding they allotted such bugbeares to fright the poor Laity.
Whereupon I rose up (God knows) as a man going to the gallows, or like Judas
that betrayed our Savior, and thus according to my weak apprehension replied:
Where he expressed cloistering, and that man was not borne to himself, but for
others, I believed it; assuring him, my self never meant it, but only to
turn those purple robes of prodigality into an Hermites weed; denying none to
visit, 1 Timothy 4.8.
but willing to instruct any so far as God would enable me; promising future
life should be answerable to my speech, and where he said, prayers are not of
that force, as when two or three were gathered together, I confessed it; if so
be they were all joined with inward spiration to glorify God, otherwise they
rather hindered then furthered, citing the first chapter of Jonas for my
president. But touching the lawfulness; I alleged that our Savior praye^
alone: the Apostles wandered i^ sheepskins alone, Tim. 8.2.
whose lives we ought to follow, intimating the^ advice, My Son come out of
evil company. Besides, the word^ of our Savior, Mat. 5.29.
If thy eye offend pu^ it out; much more (in my opinion cast off the world. And
for marriage, where he said I must leave father, mother, and cleave unto my
wife, I could not deny it, replying unto him, that if I was to leave father and
mother for a wife, certainly I was to leave father, Luke 9.23.
mother and wife for Christ: especially himself expressing, and confirmed by
three Evangelists; Mat. 10.37.
that (...) were not worthy of him, if I would not: as it did more trans^arent
appear by the severity of ^ur Savior, who would not ad^it one of his
Apostles to per^orme the dutiful rites of a son, Luk 9.62.
(...) bearing his own father, when ^e called him: much less the rites ^f
marriage. Yet he suddenly an^vered, that both Saint Paul and ^^e Church has
forbid the same without it were by consent, and that but for a time; which made
me break into a kind of passion, with these words uttering; Had our Savior
said to the man, he should not taste of his Supper though invited, Luke
14.20.24.
for that his excuse was the marriage of a wife. Again, where he said, No man
having put his hand to the plough, an^ looking back, was fit for the king dome
of God: Notwithstandin^ he entreated but so much time a^ to take leave of his
household. Besides, had God said, Man was the glory of his Maker; the woman the
glory of the man, the man the head of the woman, and yet ha^^ not the head
privilege to serve h^ Creator, without consent of the feet; intimating unto
him, that miserable was the bondage to soul and body, if they were not called
both at one time. But seeing the holy Apostle had not allowed it, I assured him
I would do my endeavor to gain her consent; howsoever I resolved him I
should rather depend upon the mercy of my Savior for that offense, 1 Cor.
7.17.
then continue more in offending; and follow the president of holy Saint
^eromes Confession, where he ^aith, If his father stood weeping ^n his knees
before him, and his mother hanging on his neck be^inde him, and all his
brethren, ^^sters, children, howling on eue^de to detain him in sinful life
with them; he would fling off his mother to the ground, despise all his kindred,
run over his father, and tread him under foot, thereby to go to Christ when
he calls him; and thus we parted, protesting unto me, though himself
would be as neuter, yet his prayers should be always permanent for my good
success, hoping the like favor from your Ladyship, the rather for that I
receive so much inward comfort, and your virtues no prejudice. But when I had
imparted to my wife, the dolourous griefs my heart sustained, alleging that
neither her estate, person, nor any temporal thing lining could ease my
surchar'd sufferings, for that they were immortal and invisible; Eccles. 5.
which if she pleased, having disclosed my sorrows to her secrecy, as either
dispense with my person, or else be content to lead the same Monasticke life
and leave the world; In so doing our souls should be surer saved, my heart
better contented, God more glorified, no man injured, if she were satisfied.
And to avoid suspicion of disloyalty, the holy Sacrament should testify my
integrity. Yet nothing would prevail, alleging her marriage was for love, not
for wealth; for person, not for picture; which I knowing her words to be true,
my heart pleaded ingratitude if I left her, and my soul whispered ruin if I
continued. But in the end, considering with my self, I was bound to obey the
Creator more then the creature, Tim. ^.12.
and she to obey me, rather then I her, especially when it tends to the
glorifiing of God; but (honored Lady) that were too great a blessing for
mortal creature, to have two hearts contracted, and both united in one
disposition; which revolution reduced me to lessen my former respect, Ephesians.
5.30.32.
and observing whether those allusions would extenuate her fond affection;
which in process of time wrought such an impression, as she grew tractable to
my disposition; wherein I secretly ioyed more then a General that gains a
conquest by stratageme. Assuring your Ladyship, if the prayers and admonitions
of the one, can make the other immortal, her joys are perpetual, and our
nuptial eternal; which spirituall-wise proves the greater affection
according to the first institution, as will hereafter more at large appear, if
God give a blessing to my second Edition. In the mean time I prostrate my
self under the chastity of your pious virtue and favorable censure, resting
constantly your servant, faithfully your lover, and eternally

Your Beadsman, THO: BVSHEL.

To the Right Worshipful, his indeered Friend, Sir Matthew Gary.
WOrthy Sir, knowing you to be of a Noble, free, affable disposition, makes me
to fear some Parasite might work an impression upon the goodness of your
nature, wherein I have presumed to bequeath these experimental lines, as an
Antidote to preserve you from the assault of familiar Flatterers; For when my
self was entering into affectation of popular applause, I chose me an old
stagger of the times, as a bosom friend to disclose my secret thoughts,
according to the course of the world; but having made known my fantastical
humor, he seemed to be so much delighted in my vain glorious speech, as
persuaded me they were but tricks of youth, and suitable to others, which soon
kindled the fire of my affection into the flame of Prodigality: for of my
self I was prone by nature, but being backed proved a mastiue curre; yet after
the period of one years experience, I assured him I much doubted, that my
soul and body must answer for my continual pr^de, bribing, drinking, and
wenching; desiring his opinion, whether it were not better to leave off
service, by reason custom had wrought such a privilege that I should hardly
be recal'd, living among so many that were addicted to the same follies; and
that my self spent more idly, then I got lewdly; but his reply to me was
like some insinuating Statesman, that applaudes his Sovereign whatsoever he
says, be it right or wrong; not for that their Judgments are weak, but by
reason their hopes, fortunes, and greatness depends upon the frown or favor
of them. Even so, this Sycophant, in expectation of petty courtesies, gave way
to what my fantastic humor desired; guilding over the foulness of my
vices, with those pleasing delights; that my pride was but fit for the place,
and equal to my fellows; For drinking, it was but according to my betters,
and expected from others; for my bribing they were but gratuities practiced by
my predecessors, and as for my wenching, they were only errors of youth bred
by nature, and subject to all men. But touching my revolt from service, by no
means he would not consent, alleging I might profit my self, pleasure my
friends, and help the distressed. Thus did this cockatrising Matchauill sooth
me up in all my loathsome pleasures, till at last I told him I was credibly
informed that the world laugh't at me; who presently replied, It was but the
livery she gave to all men, intimating, if I would but continue one year
more, my self should so much go beyond the spungie brain of common
knowledge, that humanity would dissolve their cruelty into courtesy,
alleging it were Roman like to spurn at the frown of fortune, and in
sleighting the calumnious tongues of men, I was more then heroical: Which
elevated my weather-cocke disposition into laughter and action, until, I had
both equaled the dog to his vomit, and ruinated mine own soul. Wherein,
Christ knows, I now daily wish the plagues of Egypt had been my delights,
rather then he my associate, or those my co^mpanions. For I call God to witness,
I would cancel the debt I owe to nature, but to call in the errors of my
former follies. O then, sweet Sir! let the unfortunate spectacle of your
friend, prevent the danger in your self, and beware of these smooth factors
for the Devil, whose enchanting words I fear does hazard more young men's
souls, then the original sin of nature: Hoping my late repentance will
extract a timely reformation, if you find cause by the faithful friend your
own conscience.

To his approved beloved Mr. John Eliot Esquire.
THe ample testimony of your true affection to wards my Lord Verulam Viscount
Saint Albans, has obliged me your servant. Yet least the calumnious tongues of
men might extenuate the good opinion you had of his worth and merit: I must
ingenuously confess that my self and others of his servants were the occasion
of exhaling his virtues into a dark eclipse; which God knows would have long
endured both for the honor of his King, and good of the commonal^ie; had not
we whom his bounty ^ursed, laid on his guiltless shoulders our base and
execrable deeds to be scand and censur'de by the whole Senate of a state, where
no sooner sentence was given, but most of us forsook him, which makes us bear
the badge of Jews to this day. Yet I am confident, there were some Godly
Daniels amongst us; howsoever I will not mention any for fear of attributing
more then their due, and offending others; but leave the sequel to their own
consciences, who ^an best judge of innocence. As for my self with shame I
must acquit the title, and plead guilty; which grieves my very soul, that so
matchless a Peer should be lost by such insinuating caterpillars, who in his
own nature scorn'de the least thought of any base, unworthy, or ignoble act,
though subject to infirmiries, as ordain'de to the wisest: for so much I must
assure you was his hatred to bribery, corruption, or symmonie, that hearing I
had receiu'de the profits of first fruits for a Benefice, which his pious
charity freely gave, presently sent to me, and being asked of his Lordship, I
suddenly confessed, whereupon he fell into so great a passion, that repli'de,
I was cursed in my conception, and nursed with a Tiger for deceiving the
Church, threatening I should be no longer his servant; for that one scab'de
Sheep might infect the whole flock. Yet notwithstanding, upon my submssion,
the noblenesle of his disposition forgave me the fact and receiu'de me into
favor; but never could obtain a spiritual living afterward: which makes me
certainly believe they that minister'd those hellish pills of bribery, gilded
them over, not only at first with a show of gratuity, or in the love of
courtesy, but waited the opportunity of his necessity: otherwise it had
been impossible to have wrought an impression. So that by such stratagems the
wisest men may prove weakest amongst all officers; for those whose consciences
are innocent of mitigating justice, either by bribery, gratuity, friendship,
favor or courtesy, let him cast the first stone and be canonized for a Saint
upon earth. But the report goes, that it is the policy of other States, when
once the subject groans under oppression, to select some man of worth for
allaying clamor of the vulgar, and congratulate the giddy multitude: which if
his misfortune were such, he was not the first, nor, I am confident, will be the
last. So that in time it may reflect some comfort to you and others that
honored him in their hearts, but not with their lips.

To my Christian Brethren the Ofsprings that proceeds from Universities.
Beloved Brethren if you have past the exercises, Ceremonies, and degrees with
approved allowance by the common laws of man to take the orders of Priesthood,
Minister, Teacher, Pastor and Shepherd, which is the most worthy, honorable and
blessed title confirmed on man. Let not then (Dear brethren) my affectionate
advice be displeasing, in persuading your diligent resolutions to search the
laws, statutes, and commands, which God both requires and expects at your
hands; for if any of you undertake the tuition o^ souls, and then by the
neglect o^ your duties, there should perish either man, woman, or child, you
are to answer for their sufferings, Ezekiel. 23.
though no ease to the parties grieved: So that as the dignity of your
profession does excel the power and authority of Kings, Emperors, or
Monarchs; even likewise their perils, hazards, and dangers are equal to their
greatness by how much the one commands; but the body temporal and the other
Charge of the soul eternal. O then, gentle Sirs, let me entreat you for my
poor brethrens sake, Gods glory, and the safeguard of your own souls, search
narrowly into the frail dispositions and conditions of your own natures, and
then ponder whether your abilities are of that efficacy and power to discharge
so noble a calling, without degradation of the title, peril to your souls,
and loss of our poor brethren, setting aside the president of others, which I
pity some, fear diverse, suspect the best. Yet I hope there will be found
many righteous Abraham's, chaste Lots, godly Daniels, and patient Jobs.
Otherwise, we of the Laity are in great danger, if the Clergy should be
lost: for how can the body live when the head is dead. First, then dear
brethren, let me persuade you to follow the old Proverb, Look before you
leap, read and consider upon the oath required by man; next, examine your
hearts if you can keep the same which is expected by God; then, whether you
are in love and charity, whether more flesh then spirit, more addicted to
pleasures then devotions, more delighted in worldly trifles, then heavenly
treasures, or whether more for revenue of the place, then Gods glory, and
profit of your brethren. For if any of those temporalties have gained the upper
hand, yet it were weakness to attempt, but madness to undertake, unless you
can command them, not they you. Otherwise, your souls are in danger, and they
unfortunate that are planted under your jurisdiction. For believe it (hopeful
Sirs) you cannot serve God and Mammon, 2 Cor. 11.13.
which those vainly expects remission, whose lives be not answerable to their
profession: for if the Devils should omit their accusations, yet the poor
souls, which perish under their tuition, will cry out vengeance for their
condemnations, and God is just, as he is merciful; So that I fear their
language, Do as I say, and not as I do, will not protect them. Yet, worthy
Sirs, you perceive the calling was honorable from the institution, and the
reward is glorious above any, if you live answerable. But on the contrary,
miserable, wretched, damnable to your selves and others that never injured you;
so that it is better to be an open wicked man, then a lukewarm Christian
Divine; for the one ruins but himself, the other hazards many, yet I had
rather be no man then either of them. Wherefore, dear brethren, if upon mature
deliberation, you find your selves able to encounter those enemies, which
original nature and custom has claimed a privilege, go on boldly in the
celestial enterprise, and take these precepts along with you, as a help to
your pious endeavors. Let the sensible faculties of your hearts be holy,
religious, and zealous toward God, with an inward affection to edify your
charge, according to the directions of Christ's Catholic Church expressed in holy
Writ, not making any difference or respect of persons. Instruct them publicly,
admonish them privately, rebuke them sharply, Iam. 2.9.
and if those will not recall them, proclaim it openly, without fearing the
displeasure of any humane creature. For they are not worthy to be Commanders,
that either distrusts in their General, or fears their Soldiers. But above
all let me entreat you to be mindful of Baptism, The Sacrament, and visiting
the sick: For the first eases your professions; the second testifies your
integrities; and the third discharges your duties. For as it confirms their
salvation or damnation; so likewise it remains the highest pinnacle of your
profession: and if it be possible (adopted Sirs) entertain no wedlock, but
rather strive to curb nature with sparenesse of diet, 1 Cor. 9.27
then satisfy the flesh to use such helpers. For your selves had need be well
grounded with inward spirations, nay in a manner gods on earth that undertake
such bosom friends, and performs the weighty charge which will be required
at your hands; hoping your own innocencies will never be tempted to appear
in any spiritual preferment by the way of Sinon Magus, Act. 8.18.
or help of his coadiutors: for surely those are never consecrated by God, nor
allowed by Laws. How then (gentle Sirs) in your own consciences can they
absolve, baptize, instruct, or minister the Sacrament, but with a trembling
fear of murdering the soul, like a tyrants conscience that is imbrued in
blood. O then you anointed branches, be not persuaded by a mould of clay to
trench in so great a crime, knowing your selves as yet unspotted. In so doing,
Matt. 12.50.
Gods Name will be glorified, your brethren edified, and your own duties
discharged; which will remain presidents to others, joy to your parents,
comfort to your friends, and happiness to your Souls.

To my wel-wished Christian Brethren, the Laity.
IF any of you are so unfortunate, as to detain the Rights and Profits, which
was ordained by God for the maintenance of the Church and members thereof; Let
me beg upon my knees, as with tears I write it, that you make restitution,
contrition to God and man. For if your consciences preiudicate they are
wrongfully kept back, and yet wilfully continues, can it be denied but that
you rob God of his Justice, if you expect salvation by the death and passion of
our Savior; though admit you will plead prescription by Act of Parliament, and
that it was and is lawful for you to receive, continuing so long in descent
from your ancestors. Yet, my dear Brethren, I pity your weak, Right, Title,
and Interest; for that it was not warranted from Heaven, but by Gods permission
confirmed in Hell. So likewise you may plead damnation from your forefathers
for four thousand years together, which is the more ancienter title, and surer
to descend, if from your hearts proceed not repentance. Howsoever, fearing you
should suspect spleen or imbecillitie: Let me entreat you to fearch the
records of holy Writ, and if there your selves find God pardon any one man that
robs the church, without it were in ignorance, or satisfaction by unfeigned
amendment, remain as you are. But on the contrary, look upon the dreadful
death of Ananias and Saphira, Acts 5.5.
for detaining some part of their own goods by deceit from the Apostles: much
more you, that not only take your own, but other men's; when Christ himself
says, Mat. 22.21.
Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's. And if God would not spare his own
Tribe for one offense, certainly (dear Brethren) he will not omit you which
obstinately persist in the same: Romans 11.21.
for that he is a just Judge; as he is a merciful Savior; but peradventure
you will object, the inducted party is more vicious then virtuous, more wicked
then religious; howsoever it is the sustentation of his birthright, and ought
not to be diminished. But assuredly himself and those are accursed that
instituted him, by how many souls perish with his careless neglect. O,
beloved Brethren, if you would but ponder with your selves of the strickt
account which will be required from you and them at the day of Judgment; I
durst engage my life, there is not one true Christian, but would rather choose
to be fed himself, wife, and family, with the alms of charity, then live
wrongfully on the tithes of Laity; for questionless, as they nourish the
body, they starve the soul. All which I leave to your own consciences,
praying daily for reformation.

To my unmarried Christian Brethren.
BEst beloved Sirs, if you be not so fortunate as to perform your chaste
single lives, 1 Cor. 7.^.
according to the Apostles words, which places your selves next unto God, but
must of necessity have the union of second helpers. Let me, your wel-wishing
Brother, advise each of you to entertain divine religious thoughts in the
daily contemplation of your choice, before you attempt so weighty, and great a
charge, which will be demanded at your hands, otherwise it may seem a hard and
ouer-strict captivity in being bound and thrall with the cares and humors of
another: for if it should fall out that any of you do meet with more bone
then flesh, more flesh then spirit, your lives will always be most miserable
and wretched, 1 Cor. 7.28.
as by woeful experience diverse of your predecessors can inform you; that
for one hour of their folly, being a fault committed without malice, and by
mere ouer-sight; yea many times to obey the advice of Parents, they brough^
themselves into a perpetual bondage: Which accustomed misery (dear Brethren)
proceeds from a frail imbecillitie of nature, and want of spiritual
discipline; they having not grounded themselves upon the fundamental points of
marriage. For believe me (gentle Sirs) if that your chiefest and only end be
not to avoid fornication, and a desire of procreation to glorify God by a
mutual society, your Nuptials were never solemnized by him, nor allowed by
his laws. For it were impossible, if God had a hand in the conjunction, that
ever there should proceed either jealousy, malice, rage, or any other
miserable condition. But it may be, some will reply, that the Scripture
confirms all marriages are made in heaven: So li^^wise you know Christ died
for all sinners, yet few are the number that shall be saved, (...). 20.16
by reason the one wants, either belief, a good life, or true repentance, and
the other omits performance according to the first institution, which makes
both dangerous, fearful, and unfortunate, for that humane creature rather
virtue. Likewise, dear Brethren, there is another charge imposed, greater then
the former; whereof you must have an especial care to edify your wife,
children, and family in the commands and service of God. For if any of them
perish by your neglect, the soul of you must be sure to answer for it, which
grieves my very heart to behold so many of our predecessors run the hazard of
eternal perdition, by this one transgression in parents. For most commonly
they never think so much of the mutual love in glorifying God, as the revenue
of wordly profit, and temporal honor. Nay, I have known some parents will
marry the wise to the fool, which makes themselves prove tyrants to the
of-springs of their loins, for a little wealth to bind the living to the
dead; but assuredly, howsoever it is carried in the sight of men, (...). 5.13
they are accursed before God, and those unfortunate that must suffer the
bondage, who at last will cry out vengeance on the parents that begot them:
covetous dispositions, until years and experience have endued you with reason
and religion to apprehend your fathers counsel without repentance. Ezekiel. 1 20.
By this means the iniquity of your fathers will not light upon your selves,
nor yours upon your fathers, but each of you shall receive joy, the other
comfort, all pleased, and God glorified.

To his Christian Brethren Universal.
IF any of your hands have been wilfully guilty in sheding the blood of your
Christian brother; let me humbly crave for appeasing Gods just wrath, and
safeguard of your own souls, that forthwith you abdicate all scru^les,
doubts, or fears; and retire your selves unto some wast de^art, or religious
Monastery: there ^editate on the crying sins you have committed, what a
great God you have offended, and what torments you have deserved; applying
dailye to your deadly wounds the salve of sighing, groans, sobbing, tears, and
inward sorrows, accounting each of your selves not worthy to live, 2 Cor. 4.17.
nor inhabit amongst Gods creatures. Otherwise, dearly beloved, I should
sooner believe there was no hell, then such a transcenden^ sin will be
admitted into heaven; for you should much rob^ God of his sacred Justice, in
expecting salvation by his death and passion, without your hearts and vital
parts penetrate a proportion of bleeding sorrow in lieu o^ contrition; which to
make the truth more perspicuous, let me ^treat you to search the pensill of
^oly Writ, and if there you find God ^ardon any one man (though they were his
anointed) without so ^ue and unfeigned repentance, as ^euer afterward to commit
a hei^ous sin, nor wilfully any other, ^ut remained to their dying days (...)
the mournful melody of fa^ing, watching, and praying; yet ^uld not all these
submissions, ^ontritions, nor petitions, extin^uish the hatred he bare to so
in^umane a sin; but would pu^sh them temporally, though in ^e multitude of
his mercies saved ^em eternally. O then, vnfortuate brethren, seeing the case
is so ^euitable wretched, betake your selves to the same true repentan^^ for
preventing the danger of (...) dreadful a ruin; and I am condent you will be
restored, Ezekiel. 33. John 20. Sap. 21.
thoug^ the fact is fatal, yet it is finite, at Gods mercy infinite. But on
t^^ contrary I lament your miserie^ pity your calamities, and fea^ your
destinies; for certainly h^ that would not spare the root, b^ upon such
austere contritions, it much to be doubted he will neu^ forgive the branches
upon les^ submissions. Romans 11.21.
And those Diuin^ which shall advise you to a mo^ short and easier way of
humilia^ on, I am assured in the end, y^^ will find them not your friend but
your flatterers, for they da^ not warrant you: Yet by leadi^ ^e remainder of
your lives sin^rely, according to this prescrip^on, God himself protects you,
^oth in the Old and New Testa^ent, with these words, which ^ill not be
violated; That all sins upon true repentance were pardo^able; Luke 12.10.
but the offense against the ^oly Ghost: and which is more, ^otesteth he never
forsook a sin^er, Ezekiel. 18 23.
without first a sinner forsook ^m. O then (distressed Sirs) can ^u believe
but God is merciful, if ^e does condemn you, when ^ou may be saved if you
are truly ^rrowfull: why should you then ^tertaine a thought of desperati^^,
or be persuaded by mortalist (...) stay your conversion; though ^ey should
allege sustentation, yet the bloody sin cries for ^^tisfaction, and God
expects tru^ contrition, or else no remission* But peradventure some will
object that the Jury has acquit them, or a Kings favor pardo^ned. Admit
they have; the one power is but temporal, the o^fence eternal, Luke 12.5
and for the other they may discharge the person, (...) conceal the crime, but
not from the King of Kings, nor your own consciences, which I appeal (...) for
your future comforts, God glory, and discharge of my Chr^stian duty. O then,
forelorn^ Sirs, break through the viole^ temptations of earthly creature
accounting those friends traitor^ those wives Iesabels, and those ch^^dren
bastards, that shall desire to detain you one hour from the fruition of your
apparent redemption. Reu. 8.3, 4, 5. Luke 5.52. Iam. 2.13 Mat. 9.13
In so doing the Angels are constant to make intercession for your restitution,
and God will never deny absolution, seeing his greatest glory is magnified by
your inward recantation.

To my Christian Brethren Universal.
IF any of you, my beloved, has engendered with the root of that original
sin, 1 Ioh. 3.8.
called Pride; let me, the fatal vassal of the Christian world, persuade a
survey in the whole fabric of your Microcosmos; for that now the prodigal
pleasing pride of my youth sounds the doleful tune of deadly damnation, as I
fear your selves continuing will equal my malady, if not exceed my misery;
which to me will rather aggrauate sorrow, then extenuate my dolor. Wherefore,
I beseech you for Gods cause, and safety of your own souls, be no longer
stiff-necked, nor selfe-will-conceited in so high an offense, as not only
depriues you from all eternity, but bequeaths you to endless misery; which
if the spectacle of my irrecouerable calamity, cannot mollify your detestable
iniquity: Search but the pensill o^ holy Writ and there you will fin^ legions
of Angels abdicated o^ their dignities for the same offense Besides; Judge.
1.6.
millions of your progen^tors. Nay more, my adopted brethren, I dare boldly say
not one man that sprang from the loins of our first Parents, was ever admitted
into Gods kingdom, without his humility verified our Sa^iours words, to
become so inno^tent of pride as a little child. Mat. 18.4, 7.
How ^hen, dearest Sirs, can we that are ^he branches expect more mercy ^hen
our forefathers, Romans 11.21.
when Christ ^ot only confirmed the contrary ^n his life of humanity, but
re^eal'd the same by his sacred Word to all his Apostles, as an as^red mark of
those that shall be ^ected his servants. O then, hope^^ beloved, let not
frail nature de^de, intising world bewitch, nor ^nishing honor seduce you;
^hen your tortured brother forewarnes, warnes, humane reason prohibites, and
God himself forbids upon penalty of eternal damnation. Who then will save
you, when Christ's death, your own consciences, and all his Elect are Judge,
Iuror, and witness against you; None (my beloved) but Lord have mercy upon
you I by woeful experience groan^ under the burden, though God knows my
outward ornament always exceeded my inward faculties; yet so much consenting,
a I fear daily repenting will hard^^ extinguish hellish tormenting. (...)
then, you (clayie tabernacles) mak^ my miseries your timely pres^dents, and be
not so in love wit^ a Wilderness, Mark. 8.36.
as to lose a Paradis^ nor so much dishonor your Maker, as any longer to
crucify your Redeemer. But let innocent Humility raise you, pious Prayers
restore you, that Christ's death may be effectual for you. In so doing my
afflictions may be mitigated, your dangers prevented, and all our shipwrackt
souls saved.

To his Christian Brethren Universal.
IF any of you have permitted betraying nature to inact so deadly a sin as
detestable Adultery, let my present calamities prevent your future miseries;
otherwise I shall be certain to condole your deaths, as I am confident you
will curse your births: for when you commit that loathsome sin of lust, you
waken the indignation of Gods just justice; witness your own consciences.
Will ye then persisist in offending, upon hope of his merciful suffering? O
my dear Brethren, I might sooner believe the Devil should be called, then
any of you chosen without so true a reformation, as your contrition shall
manifest the detestation before God and man. Otherwise, according to my poor
judgment, your conversion has no foundation for Christ to consecrate his
pious absolution. What your Genius may out of Rhetoric policy, or
selfe-wil'd fidelity incorporate a more easy way of sustentation by his death
and passion; Yet I fear those that depend upon such Divinity, trenches too
near the Diadem of his Sacred Majesty, for ever receiving remission by his
misery, Iam. 2.13 Psalm. 85.10.
in regard God himself assures us his Mercy and Justice kisseth each other.
But peradventure, some of you will not deny to reply, the words of my
wickedness; That which is bred in ^he bone, will never out of the flesh.
Howsoever I now find the Apostles saying to be true, He that ^ues in the flesh
dies in the spirit; For it speaks death unto ^ee, and I am persuaded (upon
^ontinuance) damnation to each ^f you. O then, copartners, let ^^y too late
vicious affection ^use a timely deprivation; for when I beheld (by divine
providence) the naked truth, there I found his fatherly commiseration had
endued man with the faculty of reason to bridle stiffeneckt nature. Besides,
upon extreamitie ordained him matrimonial unity for avoiding inconstancy.
But searching into the chastity of savage beast, I loath'^ my self, and hated
the inchanters; which so sure as there is a^ God, each of you must do the like
either in this life, or be for^ ced in the other to your condemnation without
redemption. O then, I beseech you, that an^ the imaginary creatures of you^
Maker, be a little more mode^ then the brutish beast, that Go^ may joy in your
creation, and reward your souls with salvation; Otherwise, as your conceptions
were wretched in the wombes; Prou. 1.24.
so I fear preiudicate torments will follow your tombs. Wherefore then,
baptized Christians, will ye be any longer deluded with wicked Iesabels, or
betraying Abimelechs? Ezekiel. 18.23.25.
When GOD himself protests you may yet be saved, if you do but truly
repent. Luke 5.32
What father could have said more? Matt. 9.13.
What Savior would have demanded less without defying his Essence to satisfy
your baseness? I appeal to your own consciences, whether any of you that
knows the danger, and yet will persevere in so heinous a sin, can expect
remission by his death and passion: Howsoever, God forbid, that I should
foretell your palace to be in hell. But if spirations will not penetrate,
courtesies nihilate, chastisements mollify, nor future torments terrify; give
me leave to mistrust, despair in your atchieuing to the Paradise of Heaven.
O, unfortunate Sirs, if your greatness pleads protection, Act. 10.33, 34.
remember God respects no persons, if your customary presidence pleads
prescription; Judge. 7.
remember the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah; and if his mercies conferred on
Mary Magdalene allures your prouocations; remember his Justice punished legions
of your progenitors. O my beloved brethren, it grieves my very soul, that our
Saviors compassion toward one offendour, Rome. 2.
shall be made a shelter for millions to continue in offending, when his just
Justice executed upon thousands for such transgressions, will hardly bring any
to a true cessation, till the vice have left them, not they it. Therefore I
must conclude with Gods own words, Apoc. 22.12.
I will exercise Judgment in weight, and Justice in measure.

FJNJS.

