A CAVEAT FOR SVERTIES.

Two Sermons of Suertiship, made in Bristoll, by VV. Burton.



LONDON Printed by Richard Field, for Tobie Cook dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Tygers-head. 1593.

ACAVEAT FOR SVERTIES.
Prou. 6. 1. My son, if thou be Suerty for thy neighbor, and have stricken
hands with the stranger. 2. Thou art snared with the words of thy mouth:
thou art even taken with the words of thy own mouth. 3. Do this now, my
son, and deliver thy self: seeing thou art come into the hand of thy
neighbor, go and humble thy self and solicit thy friends. 4. Give no sleep
to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy eye liddes. 5. Deliver thy self as a Do, from
the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
THis text is a school, wherein Suerties are taught to fly such discommodities
and annoyaunces as commonly come to Suerties by vndiscretenesse and rashness.
And it may be called the Suerties text, because it provides for the security
of Suerties, as Suerties provide for the security of others, wherein almighty
God gives counsel unto Suerties as unto his children, which if they follow:
then are they sure to stand when other are like to fall. Therefore as S. Paul
says to Timothy in an other case. Take heed to thy self and to learning, and
continue therein, for in so 1. Tim. 4. 16.
doing thou shall save thy self and them that hear thee. So, I say, to
Suerties, take heed to your selves and to your heavenly Fathers counsel, and
continue therein, for in so doing you shall save, both your selves and others.
The candle that is carried in a la^terne, shall light many ca^dels, and yet
loose no part of his own light, be the wind never so boisterous, but that
candle that is open to the weather, a little puff of wind, or one drop of
rain shall put it out, that it can neither give light to others nor to it
self. So, he to whom the word of God is a lantern, and a light, shall help
himself and others, when he Psalm. 119.
that ventureth without it, shall put out his own light, and the light of
others also.

Here therefore the Lord does teach me^ to avoid such discommodities, and
annoyances, as many through rashness, and for want of discretion do fall into,
for the Lords people must be a wise people. And God would not have thee to
help thy neighbor without any care to save thy self: for although he has
said. Love thy neighbor as thy self, Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
yet he never said love thy neighbor better the^ thy self, or love thy self
less then thy neighbor, but love him as thy self, that is, help him and
save thy self too, or else thou should love him and hate thy self, which
in the same words is condemned. For this end and purpose it has pleased the
Lord that dwells in the heavens, to stoop down so low, as to take order for
our business here upon earth, that we following his orders, it might go well
with us, and our children for ever.

And this counsel concerning Suerties: though it be an oeconomicall thing, yet
it is not a base thing as some have thought the spirit of God to occupy
himself in base matters. But by this we may perceive, how careful the spirit
of God is for us, in all things, he is become our ouerseer, and would keep us
even in the smallest things, that we are to take in hand. He has given us this
warning, as if he were an ouerseer of our money, and our losses: but yet he
does not so much provide for the benefit of the body as of the soul. God has
set down a perfect rule for all things, which is able to make the man of God
perfect: yea, he has vouchsafed to stoop so low, as to come home into every
man's family, and to have a care of our domestical affairs, that though we
care not how we go to work, yet our heavenly Father has a care, that we
should walk according to his word, which he has set up, to be a lantern to
our feet, and a light unto our paths.

This being true, as it is most true, we Three co^clusions.
may be bold to lay down these three conclusions following. First, that the
word of God contains a perfect rule for the ordering of all our affairs: And
whatsoever is requisite either to be believed 1. Whatsoever is necessary to
salvation.
in matters of doctrine, or to be practiced in matters of manners, either
toward God or man, is from that fountain to be drawn, and in that school
most exactly, and perfectly taught.

It teaches the King to reign, the Judge to give judgment, the Magistrate to
bear rule, and the subject to obey. The Minister from hence may learn how to
preach, and the people may learn how to hear. Here the Captain may learn
how to pitch his battle, and the common Math. 3.
soldier is taught his duty. If thou be a husband, here thou may learn how
to rule thy wife, and the wife may see in this glass how to obey, and to
please her husband. The word of God has laid down most absolute instructions
for fathers and children, for masters and servant, for superiors, and
inferiors, and for all estates. In prosperity and adversity, in sickness
and in health, in war and in peace, in youth and in old age, in the field and
at home, at bed and at board, in all places and at all times, thou may here
learn how to behave thy self. Here is order taken for our eating and
drinking, for feasting and fasting, for sportes and pastimes, how to recreat
the body and how to solace the mind, for the apparel we put on, and for the
very hair of our head, for the gestures Esaias. 3. 1. Cor. 11. Prou. 6.
of our body, and the whole behavior of our life. It has taken order for
buying and selling, for borrowing and le^ding, for giving and taking, for
finding and loosing, there is a rule laid down in the word of God how to
become Suertie, and how to escape the danger of Suertiship, here may the man
of God be instructed, in a word whatsoever belongs to policy, to civility,
or to Christianity, for this life or for the life to come, it is most
exquisitly, most plentifully, and most plainly laid down in the book of God.
If thou delightest to read Histories or Chronicles, read Gods book. If thou
would see the creation of the world, and how the same is preserved, and the
nature of the creatures, read Gods book. If thou love to tell, and to hear
of famous Kings and Captains, of wonderful battles and victories, of
excellent Judges, and Magistrates, of renowned Preachers, and Prophets, of
constant professors and martyrs, peruse the book of God. If thou would see
co^mon-wealthes? flourishing, and going to ruin with the causes of both, be
acquainted with the book of God. If thou would see the Church of God in her
infancy, and in her riper age, in her rags and in her robes, cleansed and
polluted, increasing and decreasing, with her enemies, and her friends, be not
strange to the word of God. Would any see the noble acts of God, the
wonderful deliverances of Gods people, and the horrible confusion of wicked
men? let him hearken to the word of God. If thou would know thy maker thy
redeemer, thy sa^ctifier: if thou would know the vanity, the misery, and
the wickedness of the world, with the subtilties and sleightes of Satan: if
thou would know the happiness, the joys, and felicities of heaven and
find the way thither: if thou would know the pains and torments of hell,
and how to escape them, enquire of Moses and the Prophets and they will tell
thee. What shall I say? for one thing ouer-taketh another in such sort, that
confusion will ouerwhelme us, before we can tell what riches are contained in
the storehouse of Gods book, for who can sound the depth of a bottomless sea?
but in a word: if a man desire to know himself thoroughly within and without in
all his affairs between God and man, let him behold himself in the glass of
Gods book, and when we have so done, we will say as the woman of Samaria said,
when she had reasoned with the Lord Jesus. Be hold one that has told me all
that ever I did, and more, Ioh. 4.
eue^ all that ever I should do. Therefore let no man marvel, what we mean
(being the Ministers of God) to speak of such and such matters, or to meddle in
the business and dealings of me^, for the word of God does take order for all
our affairs, neither wonder who told tales of thee, as the king of Aram did,
for the word does rifle the hidden corners of the heart. But how are our
adversaries the Papists deceived, which hold that the word of God does not
contain all things necessary to the salvation of the elect? but o Lord, what
spirit of Atheism and blasphemy does possess those men, which durst compare
Plimes Philosophy with the books of Moses, Aristotle's Ethickes and
Politiques, with the Proverbs of Salomo^? Marcus Aurelius with Mark the
Evangelist? Marlins Prophesies, with the Prophesies of Esaias, and the rest? the
eloquence of Cicero, or Demostenes with the eloquence of the holy ghost in the
mouths of the Prophets and Apostles, and in all the Scriptures? or any doctors
or fathers before the Doctors and Fathers of the Bible? For what is lead to
gold? what is water to wine? what is ignorance to learning? what is darkness
to light? what is the chafe to the wheat? what is falsehood to truth? what is
earth to heaven? and what comparison can there be between God and man? and so
much for that point.

Secondly, we may learn here that except God does teach us, and direct us, as
it were by line and by level, by precept upon precept, by little and by little
(as the Prophet speaks) we know not how to order rightly our common
business, and daily affairs of this life, but we shall be snared, and entangled
with our own 2. By nature we know not what to do.
words, or ouertake^ one way or other, to our own hinderance, so foolish and
ignorant is man by nature. And again when we are snared, and brought into
danger, we know not how to help our selves, except the Lord do teach us, but
if he should let us alone, to shift for our selves, we would never leave until
we had wrapped our selves in ten times more danger the^ we were in before. Adam
having transgressed, will think to hide Genesis 3.
himself from God in the trees of the garden, and to cover his nakedness with
fig leaves. His fault he will excuse by the fault of another, and rather (then
fail) he will not stick to lay it upon God him self, so foolish was Adam,
and so are all his posterity. Cain will incur the vengeance Genesis 4.
of God by killing of his brother, and when he has done, he thinks to save
himself by outfacing of the matter: but it will not be, and so do all Cains
brood, Saul will disobey Gods commandment, 1. Sam. 15.
like an hypocrite, and then (like a fool) he will say he meant no harm, he
did it of a good intent, and such fools are we all by nature. We are become
like foolish mariners which will run upon the rocks to avoid the sands.
We are become like Sisera, who flying for his life, Judge. 4. 20. 21.
will run into Iaells tent for succor, where the nail and the hammer is
prepared for his head, and when he thinks to take up his rest, and sleep
most sou^dly then is he nearest his destruction. We are like children and sick
folks, which do desire nothing so much, as those things which may hurt them.
We are become like the Philistines, which were most merry when the house was
ready Judge. 16. 25.
to fall upon their heads. We are secure like the men of Laish which
mistrusted nothing, until the children of Dan did Judge. 18. 27.
smite them with the edge of the sword, and burnt their City with fire. Now,
if we be so foolish for this life, how foolish are we for the life to come? we
see that except our heavenly father does direct us by his counsel, as he led
Israel by the cloud, and warn us by his messengers; as he warned the wiseme^
by his Angel, we know not how to order our common business, and the affairs
of this life: much less do we know by nature how to serve the Lord our God,
and how to worship him aright. If by all our cunning which we have by nature we
cannot avoid the Note.
snares of men, how shall we think by our natural wit and cunning to avoid
the snares of the devil? if we know not how to get out of bodily danger
without Gods direction, how shall we think to get out of spiritual danger
without Gods direction? for there is no craftiness like spiritual craftiness,
as there was no beast so subtle as the serpent. Again, if we ca^ Genesis 3.
not of our selves get out of trouble when we are in trouble, how do we think
of our selves to wind out of the temptations of Satan except God do teach us.
For all the ways of sin, are like the ways of a harlot, which are moveable
(says Salomo^) and thou can not know the^, Prou. 5.
that is, there is such variety and store of them to bewitch men, that we can
never know which is which, so in the crooked ways of the devil there be so
many windings and turnings, that when a man is once in, he cannot find the way
out again, until the Lord do bring him out again. And yet every one thinks
that he may adventure upon any temptation, and he shall easily get out again
when he list by his mother wit, etc. and no marvel, for it is the easiest
thing in the word for a man to deceive his own soul, and so much for the 2.
point.

Thirdly, we may learn here, that almighty God does not leave his children 3.
God does not leave his children to themselves.
to themselves, but (considering how simple they are by nature) he does take
pains to teach them, how and which way to help themselves in every action,
and for this cause has he set down rules, and instructions for all their
affairs in his word. Our heavenly Father (I say) does not adopt any in Christ
Jesus to be his sons and daughters, and then leave the^ to themselves to be
guided (or rather beguiled) by the counsel of their own hearts, nor by
custom, nor by worldly reason, nor by the examples of their forefathers in any
thing, whether it concerns this life, or the life to come, for then there
were no difference between the elect, and the reprobate, whom God has
delivered up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things that are not
convenient, because they regarded not Romans 1. 28.
to know God. But the Lord will instruct his children in the way, which he has
Psalm. 32. 8.
appointed for them, and will guide them with his eye. Yea, with his counsel he
will guide them, and afterward receive them to glory, and therefore will he
Psalm. 73. 24
guide them with his counsel, that he may receive them into glory: because
(ordinarily) no man is glorified in heaven, that is not first sanctified by the
word of God upon earth. Therefore does Ioh. 17. 17.
the Prophet David call the word of God a lantern to his feet, and a light
unto his Psalm. 119.
paths, as if the Lord should go before his children with a candle and a
lantern to guide their feet into the ways of peace, to teach us, that if we
were as wise, and as holy as David was: yet without the discretion of Gods
word, we do but grope in the dark like the men of Sodom, Genesis 9.
and go we cannot tell whither, like the me^ of Samaria. In another place, he
calls the statutes of the Lord his Psalm. 119.
cou^sellers, as if he knew not what to do without the^. And surely so it was,
for in another place (when he was ruled by his own heart and affection) he
says, that he played both the fool and the beast, until he went to school
in the house of God, where he learned that holy wisdom, which he had not
before: so that this point is manifest and plain, that God does not leave his
children to themselves in any thing, but (as a most merciful father) does
teach and instruct them by his word and spirit. And therefore who soever shall
either refuse to be ordered by the same, or shall prefer his own wisdom, or
any man's works before it, or compare them with it, may justly suspect himself
to be none of Gods children until he repent: for the children of God knowing
their own ignorance and weakness every manner of way, are glad to be
counseled by their heavenly father.

But what? has the lord taken order for Suertiship, and all other of our
worldly business? and has he not likewise taken order for his own business?
will he not leave us to our selves in the lesser things, and will he leave us to
our selves in greater matters? will he not let us serve one another otherwise
then himself has appointed, and will he be content that we shall serve his
majesty, otherwise then he has appointed himself? Would he give a pattern
and direction to his people for making of the Tabernacle, and building of the
Temple, to that end that they might do every thing or any thing thereunto
belonging as they listed? no surely, and therefore he himself set down an order
for the very vessels, for the ashe-pannes, the beesomes, the fleshhookes, yea
and every pin about the work, beyond which pattern they might not go: much
less has he left his worship under the Gospel unto our discretion, and he
that is so careful as that he would not leave men to themselves, and to their
own devises in matters of Suertiship, and affairs of the world, surely he
would never be so careless as to leave men to themselves, in the ordering and
governing of his Church. To conclude, he that has in his word set down orders
for oeconomical matters, no doubt, but he has also in his word set down
orders for Ecclesiastical matters, for seeing as he will not allow men to have
more care for the ordering of other men's houses then their own, far be it
from us, that we should think so of the Lord, that he would have greater care
for the ordering of our houses, then for the government of his own house
which is his Church, but as we find certain rules and perpetual directions
for the one* so shall we find in the same book, most certain rules, and
perpetual instructions for the other: if we do not put some thing before our
eyes, and say, we cannot see. And so much for this 3. point. Now we will come
to the matter of Suertiship it self. My son, if thou be Suertie for thy
neighbor, etc.


Concerning Suertiship we will consider upon this text of VI points.

1. What Suertiship is. 2. How many sorts of Suerties there be. 3. Whether it
be lawful for Christians to become Suerties one for another. 4. How men in
Salomons time became Suerties. 5. How men are hindered by Suertiship. 6. We will
see what counsel God gives unto Suerties for their safety.

As touching the first point. To become What it is to be a Suertie.
a Suertie, is nothing else but by word or writing or by pledge to make another
sure (so far as man can) of that which before he was not sure of: or to put a
man out of doubt so far as law and equity will require) for the receiving,
or enjoying, or recovering of some thing, whereof he stood in doubt before, and
therefore it is called security. I reckon pledges amongst Suerties, because a
pledge is a kind of Suertie, for if the principal do fail, the Suertie must
answer the debt, but when Suerties cannot be gotten, then men lay somewhat to
pledge, that is better or as good as the debt comes unto. And if the party
fails, the pledge must answer the debt, sometime a pledge is laid, because
the thing is so small that one would be loath to have his friend come in bands,
or give his word for the same, and yet that which is but a small matter amongst
rich men, may be a great matter amongst poor men. And sometimes pledges are
used in things unlawful and dishonest, and that is when me^ do promise a thing
upon such conditions as they are ashamed to make known unto any, as Judah
promised his daughter in law Thamar a kid of the goats upon co^ditio^ that he
might lie with her, but he knew her not, well (says Thamar) if thou vvilt give
me a pledge till Genesis 38. 17. 18.
thou send it, that is, if thou will put me in good security, and that must be
by some pledge at this time, so he gave her his signet, his cloak, and his
stasse for a pledge, that if the kid came not, they must answer the matter.
And this was such a matter, that when she was gone, Judah was ashamed to send
after her for his pledge, he had rather loose it, then to recover it with so
much infamy, as he was sure would ensue. The end of Suertiship and pledges,
etc. is that all men might have their own, without which no trade, nor
traffic, nor Suertie, nor peace could be preserved amongst me^, 2. How many
sorts of Suerties there be.
and so much for the first point.

Now as touching the second point, in a word. There be diverse kinds of
Suerties, for some are Suerties for men's persons, that they shall be forth
coming by a day, either to answer such matters as shall be objected against
them before some Judge, or to receive such punishment as is already awarded for
his misdemeanour. In such cases commonly the prison is the best Suerty. Some
are Suerties for men's debtes and bargains, that they shall be paid, and
performed accordingly as they be made and promised. Some are Suerties for men's
behavior, that it shall be good, honest, and peaceable toward all men in
general, or toward some one especial party, and toward his goods and
family: and this is commonly required, of notorious offe^ders, in cases of
slandering, and quarrelling against a man's person, or deprauing of a ma^s good
name, lest a man's good name should be more impeached, and his credit more
hindered then it was before. Men in such cases, become Suerties for their
friends, in hope of their amendment. And Suertiship in such cases, do more
bind a man's tongue, then the prison can, because most men (if there be but
common civility in them) will forbear many times, for their friends sake
lest they should be endamaged to who^ they are so much beholding, then for all
the extremity that can be used.

There is no man so wicked, but he shall find some body ready to promise for
him, as one thief for another, or one bankerupt for another, or one beastly
person for the honesty of another, or one rakehel for another: now this it but
a mockery, as if one should say: Ask my fellow if I be thief, or if I be
dishonest, or if I be not a man of my word, etc. And therefore have Christian
laws well provided that every man's word or bond is not to be admitted, neither
shall all persons and causes pass and repasse under Suerties, for though some
might fly to the horns of the alter, and have the benefit of a privileged
place: yet Ioab the man of blood shall be smitten before the 1. King. 2. 30.
alter, neither shall the sanctuary save his life when he flies unto it, much
less shall any Suerties give their word for him. We are all bound, to do what
we can to win men to God, and to persuade all men unto holy obedience, but to
answer unto God whatsoever his law can charge us withal, is a thing which
belongs only and properly to the Lord Jesus Christ that great Suertie of
mankind, and so much for the 2. point.

Now, for the lawfulness of Suertiship, The lawfulness of Suertiship.
we are to know, that it is a duty both Christian and necessary, and therefore
it cannot be unlawful.

That it is a duty of Christianity, may appear two ways, first, by the rule
of charity, secondly by the examples of godly men, which have practiced the
same. The rule of charity we know: and that is to do for others as we would be
done Mat.
unto our selves. If therefore Christians would be glad of a Suertie when they
are in necessity, then Christians must also (when need requires) do so much
for others.

To become Suertie for men's persons, is no doubt a work of charity, for what
if me^ be arrested of malice, and evil will as many be? or what if such
extreme actions be laid by unreasonable men upon thy neighbor, as shall make a
man afraid to speak for him, as many do? or what if such practices be used of
purpose to discredit thy neighbor in a strange place where he is not known?
shall it not be then lawful to relieve thy neighbor by thy word until his
cause may be known? verily, if thou will not rescue him, and shrowde him under
the shadow of thy wings, but let the prison consume his body and wicked men
make a pray of his goods, thou thy self may one day come into the like
predicament, and then thou will confess that Suertiship in such a case is a
work of charity.

But further, what if thy Christian brother be arrested upon suspicion of
evil? when notwithstanding he is innocent? if he go to prison his good name is
called into question, if he lie in prison his goods go to wrack, his health is
in hazard, his life is in danger, both he and his are like to smart for it. Now
if any man think it unlawful to give his neighbor leave to refresh himself,
and to save his life, his goods, and his good name, under the shadow of his
credit and protection of his promise, let him imagine himself to be the man
that is so handled, and then he will confess that Suertiship for men's persons
is a work of charity, and therefore lawful. But yet further, what if thy
Christian brother be falsely accused, and wrongfully imprisoned (as Joseph was)
and it is yet unknown? is it not lawful, nay, are we not Genesis
bound in such a case to redeem the liberty of our brother, with our word or
bonds, if it may be? or what if a man had been Suertie, for Joseph's appearance
if his liberty might have been obtained, shall we say that such a man had
sinned? God forbid, if any think so, let him know that Joseph's case may one
day Joseph.
prove his case, and then he will confess that Suertiship for men's persons, is
a work of charity and therefore lawful.

But what if my brother be in debt, and must either go to prison or find
Suerties, for the payment of the debt by a day? Surely if he be a Christian, he
is thy brother, and how can thou see thy Christian brother by languishing in
prison, where he does only spend, but not get? when if he were abroad to work
in his calling he might both help himself, and pay his debtes. Imagine that
rich Job were the man, when all was gone from Job.
him, and he left as naked in the world, as he was when he came into the world,
what if his creditors should then take him by the throat, and say, pay that
thou owe, or else put me in sufficient Suerties, lest thou go to prison (as
the manner of many is, when they see their debtors fall in decay:) shall we say
that he should have sinned against the law of charity (which is the rule of
Christianity) that should have given his word with Job for the payment of his
debt by such a time and in such a reasonable manner as might be agreed upon? If
this be not sufficient to persuade thee, remember that no man is so high, but
may be brought low, as there is no full sea, but has his ebbing, and Jobs case
may prove thy case, and then thou will hold that Suertiship is a duty both
necessary and Christian, and therefore very lawful. But put case that my
brother has offended some body by word or deed, and must either find
Suerties for his good behavior, or else go to prison: Surely, if he be sorry
for his offense, and if he shall crave the help of thy word for his
enlargement, brotherly kindness will persuade thee to succor him, and the law
of love will forbid thee to deny him. And if this be not sufficient to move
thee, then remember that he which thinks that he stands may fall, and when
his case shall prove thy case, thou will then plead for thy self, and say that
except thou may be at liberty, there can be no trial of thy amendment, and
except thou may be bailed by Suerties, thou can not be enlarged, and then
thou will think that Suertiship is a duty both Christian and necessary in
every common wealth, and therefore lawful, and thus we see that Suertiship is
proved lawful by the rule of charity.

As this point is sufficiently proved by the rule of charity: so it is no
less confirmed by sundry examples of holy men which feared God. When Jacob was
loath to part from his son Benjamin: Genesis 42. 37.
first Reuben entreats him, and offreth himself to become Suertie for his
safe rerurne, and for his greater security, he leaves his own sons as a
pledge instead of Benjamin, if his offer would have been accepted. Afterward
comes Judah to entreat Jacob, I will be Suertie Gen 43. 9.
for him (says he): of mine hand shall thou require him, if I bring him not to
thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. Again,
Paul, persuading Philemon to receive his old servant Onesimus, does offer
himself to become Suertie for him, If he has hurt thee (says Phile. ver. 18.
the Apostle) or owes thee ought, that put on mine accountes. What is that but
thus much, if he be not able to pay thee, I will pay thee for him.

Last of all, our Savior Christ does not only approve it, but he seems also
Luke. 10. 35.
to command the same, in the parable of the Samaritane and the man that fell
amongst thieves. For the Samaritane (seeing the man wounded by thieves) came
unto him, powered wine and oil into his wounds, he set him on his beast, he
brought him to his Inn, and made provision for him, he gave his host some
money in hand, and bad him see that he lacked nothing that was needful for
him, and (says he) look what thou prouidest for him, take my word for it, I
will see thee recompensed for it. This man did the part indeed of a neighbor
(says the Lawyer that came to tempt the Lord Jesus) then said the Lord Jesus,
go, and do thou likewise.

By these reasons and examples the lawfulness of Suertiship is sufficiently
established. By which we may easily perceive what sin they commit against
God, and how much those me^ do offend against the rule of charity, which do
hold it as a thing unlawful. Such are those men which utterly refuse it being
required thereunto, because (forsooth) they have made a vow to the contrary; or
they have forsworn it, or they have bound themselves to such a friend of
theirs, and he again is bound again to him, that neither of them both shall
ever become Suerties for any man while they live, so that if their own father
or mother require this duty at their hands, they have but a cold suit of it,
for their child has bound himself to the contrary. But let us see: is it
lawful for a Christian to bind himself by vow, or by oath, or by bond from a
duty so necessary, so charitable, and so Christian? many good men have bound
themselves from sin, as Job took bond of his eyes that Job.
they should not wantonly behold a maid: and David vowed to serve the Lord his
God. And David and Daniell both did as it were bind themselves to pray so many
times a day to God, but we shall never read of any man fearing God, which did
ever bind themselves from serving of God. Men count it a shame, and so it is,
to be bound to the good behavior, but what a shame is it for a Christian to
bind himself from performing the duties of a Christian? But because many are
decayed by Suertiship Object.
(they say) therefore have they bound themselves from being Suerties for any
man. By the same reason, why do they not also Answer.
bind themselves from eating and dringing, because many men by eating and
drinking do surfeit themselves? Or why do they not bind themselves never to
come near any water, because some me^ have desperately drowned themselves,
etc. but what slavery, do these men endure, which have bound themselves from
relieuing of others, and themselves like the Jews which vowed neither to eat
nor drink, until they had killed Paul. For how can they with common honesty
Act.
deny their brother so Christian a duty, so on the other side, with what
faces can they crave any relief of any man in their need, seeing as they have
bound them selves from helping of every man what need soever he has?

But as the devil had Scripture for that he said, so have these me^ too, for,
A man destitute of understanding touches the hand, and becomes Suertie for
his Prou. 17. 18.
neighbor, says Solomon. Therefore Suertiship is unlawful (said they) for
every Object.
one that becomes Suertie for his neighbor is a foolish man, and void of
understanding. But the reason halteth Answer.
right down, and if we shall make such a conclusion in other matters, we shall
show our selves to be destitute of understanding indeed, for a man void of
understanding, pulls off his clothes, and goes into the water, to swim
before he be taught, and perhaps is drowned: is every one therefore a fool
that goes into the water to swim? The devil confessed Christ to be the
son of God: is every one therefore a devil that confesses Christ to be the
son of God? A riotous person borrows money of his neighbor, and is in
debt: is every one therefore a riotous person that borrows and owes? Or, a
mad man walks up and down with a sword: is every one therefore which walks
with a sword become a mad man? Or, a scholar of Cambridge goes in black:
therefore is every one that goes in black a scholar of Cambridge? and many
more Fallacia accide^tis.
such absurd co^clusions might be made like unto that: but how feeble they are
who does not see? But indeed Salomons meaning is nothing less then to
condemn Suertiship, but rather to show that it must be done with advise, and
good deliberation, and not rashly we care not for whom, nor for what. And if
any man think that there belongs no more to the matter then to touch the
hand and to become Suertie, that man is a man destitute of understanding, but
yet every one is not destitute of understanding that becomes Suertie, for
wise men are well advised in that they do. So again on the other side, some man
that has no love to God, nor his neighbor refuses to become Suertie for any
man, shall we now conclude that he which refuses to become Suertie for every
one, has no love to God nor his neighbor? this conclusion is but of a bad
co^stitutio^, and looks with a wry mouth.

But yet they do object, and say, that Object.
by the rule of charity, one man ought to believe another upon his word, and
charity is not suspicious, and the Apostle 1. Cor. 13. 5. 7.
says, that love thinks no evil, but judges the best, and hops the best,
therefore if one promise payment, or if one promise appearance by a day, or if
one promise amendment of his fault, we ought to believe him without any
further bo^ds, or Suerties: And if we do not, it is a sign that we suspect his
credit, or his honesty, or that he will not do as he said, but will break
promise and so deceive us, and if we think so of him, then we judge
uncharitably of him, for charity is not suspicious. Now for an answer, this I
say: First, as charity is not suspicious Answer.
without cause, so charity is not blockish, and foolish, when there is cause,
but does and may learn to judge of one thing by another. Our Savior Christ
would not commit himself unto the Jews, because he knew what was in man: Ioh.
2. 24.
shall we therefore say that our Savior Christ brake the rule of charity? so
when we know what is in men, we shall not break the rule of charity, though
we do not commit our selves to the courtesy of all men, without the use of some
honest means for our safety. Now that which he knew, was by his divine
knowledge without any sign or token, for he was God, and knew the hearts of
all men, and therefore it is said, he needed not that any man should testify
of Verse. 25.
man, for he knew what was in man: but he has taught us to judge the tree by
the fruits, that is, to know what is in man, by his words and his deeds.
Secondly: I answer, that charity is not suspicious, 2. Answer.
but yet charity works by ordinary means, and judges according to the
working of means, and when one sees a smoke, he suspecteth presently that
there is fire, but what says the Lord? Can the Ierem. 13. 23.
black more change his skin? and the Leopard his spots? the^ may ye also do
good, that are accustomed to do evil, as if he should say it is impossible.
Therefore if we see a man that has accustomed to do evil, or that is a common
liar, a common cosoner and deceiuer, a common barriter, a common beast, etc.
Charity is not suspicious, but by the Lords own rule, we may doubt of his
goodness, and we may suspect his credit and his bonesty, etc. because he is
accustomed to do evil. And because the Prophet says that all men are liars,
therefore there is cause of suspision in all, yea and in our selves too.
Thirdly, I answer, that this rule of the Apostle may be returned upon
themselves, thus: Charity is not suspicious, and love thinks no evil, but
judges and hops the best. Therefore if their brother 3. Answer.
shall require their word, or bond in time of need, and shall promise them
that it shall no way be a hinderance unto them, they ought not to deny them for
fear that they shall be driven to answer the debt: for if they think of
their Christian, that he will either run away, or suffer the matter to fall
upon the head of his friend, then he judges evil, and therefore uncharitably
of his neighbor, and does not (according to the rule of love) judge the best,
and hope the best. Last of all to this it may be answered, that there ought to
be (indeed) such 4. Answer.
faithfulness, such constancy, and such upright* and simple hearted dealing
amongst men, that every man's word should be as sure as his bond, and the
bonds of Suerties with him. But it is not so, and therefore were bonds, and
Suerties appointed. There ought to be such trustiness in servants, and
children, and in all comers and goers to men's houses, that nothing should
need to stand under lock and key, but there is not, therefore locks and keys
were ordained. There ought to be such peace and unity amongst men, that there
should need no bearing of weapons, but there is not, therefore weapons are
ordained, and for this cause were walled Cities, strong holds, and all
provision of war appointed. If there were no coveting of other men's goods,
and hatred of other men's persons, what need we have doors and bars to our
houses? if there were that peace and love, which ought to be, what needed so
many laws, and so many lawyers amongst men. If Adam had kept his first
innocence, and purity, shame had not entered with his transgression, and if
shame had not come with sin, he might still have been naked and never have
blushed at his nakedness: but he did not keep his Genesis 3.
first innoce^cie therefore shame came upon him and so apparel was ordained to
cover his shame withal. So that all these means which are now appointed for
man's honesty, for man's safety, and security, what are they else but badges,
and tokens of man's shame and dishonestie, of Suertiship is a badge of treche
rye and deceit.
man's cruelty and treachery? so we see how, sin and deceit brought in
Suertiship and Suertiship is a badge of sin and deceit, when man kept not
touch with God, God would never have had any thing to do with him again,
neither would he trust him with any of his creatures except his own son Jesus
Christ had become Suertie for man. And therefore, when me^ became treacherous
against God, no marvel though they be so unfaithful and full of treachery one
against an other: therefore there is no cause why we should be proud of our
suerties, but rather take occasion thereby to bewail that horrible corruption
of Adam, and all Adams posterity, the very name of a Suertie should humble us,
howsoever the Lord does in mercy incline men's It should humble us.
hearts unto men. In a word, as the thief has no cause to be proud of his
prison and fetters, so has no man cause to be proud of suertiship, but yet
that is lawful to be used, which must also serve to humble us, and so much for
the lawfulness of Suertiship.

THE SECOND SERMON.
WE have heard already what Suertiship is, how many sorts of Suerties there be
and the lawfulness of Suertiship, as* also how self-love does play her part
in those men, which do bind themselves from so necessary, and so Christian a
duty, we will now consider how it comes to pass that so many men are hindered
by it, yea and beggered by it, as by daily experience we see in the world, then
we will see how men in ancient time became Suerties, and lastly Gods counsel
unto Suerties for their safety.

As touching the first point of these three: we are to know, that the God of
all wisdom, and Lord of mercy has not commanded any thing for the undoing
and destroying of men, but whatsoever he has ordained, is for the singular
benefit and comfort of man: but such is our corruption, that we abuse all the
ordinances of our most gracious God to our own hinderance and destruction.
Meats and drinks were appointed to sustain nature, but not to surfeit nature,
yet many do surfeit of their excessive eating and drinking, and immoderat
dieting of themselves. Water is appointed for me^ to wash themselves in, not to
drown themselves: yet many foole-hardie men by venturing too far have been
drowned, when by taking heed they might have been saved. The horse is made to
carry, but if he be ouerladen he will sink down under the burden. And so is
suertiship a burden which has made many to lie down, but that was when the
burden was too heavy, and themselves were too weak. Suertiship is like a
deep water and a mighty stream, that has drowned some, and carried other
some away (God knows whither) that they could never recover themselves again,
therefore, when a man sees his neighbor in this deep, let him do what he can
to help him out, but so as he may save himself: let him not run in at all
adventures, but first feel the bottom as he goes, lest he be drowned
together with his neighbor. Zacheus (because he is a Luke 19.
little man, and of a low stature) must run up into a tree to see Christ as
he passed by, when tall men may go upon the plain ground and see him. And
the child must be carried in his fathers arms amidst the prease if he will see
as much as his father: but if he will presume to go upon the ground as well as
his father, a thousand to one but the throng of people will bear him down,
and tread upon him.

Some men will by suertiship take upon them to bear other men, when they had
more need to be borne themselves like children: Some are as little, and as low
in credit, and wealth, and ability every way, as Zacheus was in bodily
stature, and yet they will presume to go amongst the highest and strongest,
when they had more need clime up into a tree to save themselves: and hereof
comes all their ruin and decay: And to speak more plainly, the cause why
many men are impouerished by suertiship is, because they are not so careful
and circumspect in giving their word as they should be: Therefore (says
Solomon) A ma^void of understanding* touches the hand, and is suertie for his
neighbor, Pro. 17. 18.
to show that such matters must not rashly be taken in hand, but every man
must understand what he does, and not promise rashly, and vaingloriouslie we
care neither what, nor yet for whom. Therefore in another place he says, Take
his garment that is suertie for a Pro. 20. 16.
stranger, and take a pledge of him for the stranger, as if he were not to be
trusted without a pledge that will promise he care not for whom. And he names
[his garment:] to show, that if a man promise, he must perform his promise,
though it be to his own hinderance, even to the loss of the garment from his
back, which can worst be spared. And therefore it stands Christians in hand
(which make a conscience of their word) to take great heed both what they
promise and for whom they give their word. In all these places the Lords
meaning is, that we must not so unadvisedly (as many do) give our words, or
pass our promise, for such deceivers as care not whether ever or never their
debtes be paid, and having once unburdened themselves upon other men's
shoulders, would never travel or labor to get any thing to pay their debt.
Therefore when Christians are about to become Suerties for other men, they must
first sit down and wisely consider with themselves of these three points.
First, thine own ability, if thou be a single 3. things to be considered in
suertiship.
man. Secondly, the estate and condition of thine own family, if thou have
one to look unto. Thirdly, the estate and condition of that party for whom
thou art to give thy word.

Thy own ability is to be considered, for what wise man will undertake to
bear more the^ he is able to carry? As in vows to God, me^ must consider
whether it be in their power or no, to perform that which they vow, so in
making of promises to men, thou must consider Our own ability.
whether thou be able to perform that which thou have promised, if it be
required at thy hands: for when thou do promise, thou must think that it
may fall upon thee by one means or other. Further, in regard of thy own
credit, it will stand thee in hand to look to thy own estate, as he that is
about to build a house, must first sit down and cast his account, whether he
be able to finish it or no, lest when it is begun, it stand still Luke 14. 28
at a stay, and so turn to the reproach of the builder.

Thy own estate is further to be considered in respect of thy person, and in
regard of thy profession: for if thou be not able to perform that which thou
have promised for an other man, then thy person must answer the matter in
prison, or if the fairest come, thou art driven for fear to keep thy house,
or with shame to fly thy country: which way so ever thou go, be sure that
fear, care, and shame, will attend upon thee. And if thou be a young man,
discredit will hunt thee, but if thou be an old man, sorrow and grief will
surprise thy soul: heaviness will lodge in thy heart, vexation of spirit will
be sauce to thy meat, and many troublesome thoughts will busy thy head (if
grace do not prevent them) and all these will gnaw upon thee Pro. 17. 22.
as a dog upon a bone, until thy bones be dried up, and thy health be decayed,
and thy body be consumed, and thy strength be wasted, and thy heart be broken,
and thy life ended, and thy old age carried with dishonor to the grave, and
therefore in regard of thy person, take heed what thou do promise, lest
thou become a murderer of thy self.

Again, thou must remember that when thy person is arrested, thy profession is
also arested therewithal. Therefore, for thy profession sake thou should
look unto thy self, lest the name of God be evil spoken of by thy fall, as it
2. Sam. 12. 11.
was by David's. For what will the enemy of the Gospel say? or rather, what will
he not say to make the profession thereof to become odious? Is this the man that
was so strict and precise in all his ways? Is this the wisdom of the Gospel?
and is this the life of a professor? does it become a Christian to be so
unadvised? or does rashness and vain glory beseem the sons of God?

And surely it is no marvel, though religion thrive no better in many which
are accounted good men: for through their rashness and foolish kindness, they
are so over reached and entangled, that afterward their heads are wholly
possessed with care, partly how to keep credit, and partly how to recover
themselves again: like the unjust steward in the Gospel Luke 16. 3.
that could not tell what to do when he had wasted his masters goods: to labor
some cannot, and some will not, and to beg some are ashamed. And, ifthere be no
remedy, but either some protection must be procured, or some collection must
be made for one that is decayed by suertiship (works of charity no doubt) but
what infamy and slander do fall unto the Gospel thereby, besides the
wounding of many a weak conscience, who does not see by daily and woeful
experience? Thus we see how our profession as well as our person, does earnestly
crave this at our hands, that we will take, heed, how, and what, we do promise.

The 2. thing that a christian is to consider of before he become suertie, is
the state of his own family, over which Our family.
the lord has made him an ouerseer. He is worse then an infidel says the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 5. 8.
and has denied the faith which will not provide for his family, that is, for
his wife, for his children and for his servants. Then what account shall be made
of the^ that do wholly defeat their families of their right, or shall willingly
and carelessly put that in hazard, which is already provided for their
maintenance? Therefore as S. Paul says, Do good to all men, but especially to
the household of faith. Gal. 6. 10.
So again, he restraneth that doing of good, more especially to thy own
household, because he that does not good especially to his own household, has
denied the faith. Therefore as Joseph sent meat to all his brethren, so we must
help (to our power) all our brethren, both according to the flesh, and
according to the faith: but as Beniamins mess had five times so much as the
rest of his brethren, Genesis 43. 34
because he loved him best. So our care must be for our family, five times
greater then for any body else, or else we cannot say that we love our family
best. And whom should a man love better then his own wife and children? When
the famine was in Samaria, the women went to the king with their children in
their arms, crying most pitifully, Help O king, we perish else: Some 2. King.
6. 26.
bread, O king we die else. Now every man in his own family is as a king,
whose office is not only to make laws for his family, but to provide also all
necessaries for the same. And when want shall come, to who^ shall the wife go
but to her husband, to whom shall the children go but to their father? to who^
shall the servant go, but to his master? And will not all of them call and cry
unto thee? Husband give us bread, or else we perish, shall thy wife say: father
give us meat or else we die, shall thy children say, Master give me my meat
and drink, and give me my wages, or else I starve, or else I must beg, shall
thy servant say. What a lamentable hearing will this be? but what answer will thou give unto them? when the woman of Samaria cried unto the king, his answer
was: Seeing the Lord does not succor thee, how should I help thee 2. King. 6.
27.
with the barn, or with the wine press? That is, seeing God does deny thee
meat and drink, how should I give it thee? but thou can not say so, for God
gave thee things necessary for thy family, but through thy folly and
rashness, strangers have seized upon them, therefore thou may say to thy
own shame, and to their little comfort) O my wife and children, seeing as
suertiship has eaten up me, how should I succor you? And (when that day
comes) thou will say, that the man which is brought into the fools
paradise, by the allurements of a harlot, is in as happy a case as thou art,
and thou art at as good a stay as he, and all one: For the lips of a strange
woman (says Solomon) Prou. 5. 3.
drop as an honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then oil, but the foolish
man does not consider, that the end of her is bitter 4.
as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword. So the lips of a strange man may
drop words upon thee as sweet as honey, and his mouth may be more soft then
oil: but remember and be well advised, for if thou have a family, and thou be
not able, the end will be as bitter as wormwood, and sharp as a two edged
sword. Therefore take now that counsel which is there given to that man, and
that is this: If rashness and vainglory do entise thee, Verse 8
9.
to be suertie for a stranger, or for any 10.
body else to thy own undoing: Keep 11.
thy way far from them, and come not 12.
near the door of their house, lest thou give thy honor unto others, and thy
years unto the cruel: lest the stranger should be filled with thy strength,
and thy labors be in the house of a stranger: and thou mourn at thy end,
even when all is gone, and say: How have I wanted [I say not hated]
instruction, and my heart despised correction. And thus we see, how our family
does also request this at our hands: namely, that we take great heed, both how,
and for whom we pass our promise.

The third thing that Christians are 3.
to consider of, in becoming suerties, is The party for whom.
the condition and disposition of the party for whom he does promise, for else
thou may be soon ouerreached with counterfeit companions, as Joshua was with
Josh. 9. 6.
the Gibeonites, who made him believe that they had traveled from a far, when
indeed they dwelt fast by, so some in the world perhaps may make thee believe
that they are in more need the^ they be, of purpose to deceive thee. As S. Paul
said to Timothy in another case: Lay not hands Tim.
rashly upon every one: so I say to thee, give not thy hand rashly to every
one, but know him well. In the party for whom In him consider three things.
thou would be suerty, consider 3. things. 1. His cause. 2. His ability. 3.
His religion. As touching his cause, so it be lawful before God and man, or
else, the filthiness thereof will cleave unto thee, as the leprosy of Naama^
did cleave to Gehezi. And 2. Kin. 5. 27
he that undertakes for a bad man in a bad matter, shall be suspected to be but
little better the^ an accessory unto it: as for example: what if two be
consenting in evil, and agreed upon the price? as Judah and Thamar his daughter
in law were: Judah Genesis 38. 17. 18.
promises Thamar akid of the goats, for the unlawful use of her body: who
shall be suerty for Judah to Thamar, for the payment of the goat at the day
appointed: or what if Judah would give ready money, that Thamar shall meet him
in such a place at such a time, for such a purpose? who shall (without suspision
of a common bawd) make promise for such a harlot? Again: what if a broker
bring a ge^tlema^ and the usurer together for the love of money, or the price of
any fained commodity? ye ge^tlema^ and the usurer be agreed for the usury, if
he ca^ find suerties for M. vserer. And what if thou be required to come in
bonds for thy friend to the usurer? May thou (knowing the case) without
check of conscience, uphold them in sin? And he that is suertie for his
neighbor in such a case, what does he but hold his brother fast, that the
usurer like some wild beast may pray upon. Therefore if thou become suertie for
any, see whether his cause be good or no. Next, if the cause begood, see
whether he be able to discharge thee or no, for who will give his word yt a
beggar which goes from door to door, shall give a 1000. pound for a purchase,
except he means to pay it himself? If the party be welthy, consider whether
that abu^da^ce of wealth which he possesses, be his own or no, or whether he
came unto it with a good conscience, lest the spoils of the poor come into
thy possession, while thou become Suertie (perhaps) for a thief, or for a vile
person. And then fear lest the cry of the poor prevail against both him and
thee too. And know for a certain, that the vengeance of the Almighty does
hang over thy house, while thou keep in possession the goods of other me^,
although thou take them to be his goods. As the plague of God hanged over the
house of Abimelech the king of Gerar, for keeping of Abraham's Genesis 20. 6. 7.
wife, though he took her but for Abraham's sister, and therefore thought it
lawful enough for him to keep her. And consider again, that some are like the
devil in promising, for, as he showed Christ the kingdoms of the world and
said: All these will I give thee, if thou will Mat. 4. 9.
fall down and worship me: when indeed he had no right to any part or parcel
thereof. So it may be some may come to thee, or have thee home, and show thee a
great deal more then is his own, and say: All this will I pledge to thee, if
thou will be my Suertie for so much, etc. when So some cosoners come by their
wives
in truth it is not his to pledge, and then thou art in the briers. Therefore
when thou would enter into Suertiship without any hurt to thy self and thy
family, know thy friend well, and how able he is in truth to discharge thee.

Last of all, if his cause be good, and his wealth his own before God and man,
then consider of his religion, that is, whether he be a man fearing God or no,
and one that in truth without hypocrisy, worshippeth God: for he that is a
stranger, or a professor of a strange religion, is the greatest stranger in the
world, and he that is false to God, will hardly be true to men, especially to
those that are of a contrary religion, no more then Hagar Genesis 21.
and Sarah could dwell quietly in one house together. And yet I deny not out an
idolater, as Papists, etc. may, and many of them do keep their word, and so do
many of the Turks, etc. keep promise better then many others do. And this is
but Satan's policy to credit a bad religion, with the show of a good life,
as also to discredit the truth with some show of evil in the professors of
the same, and so much for thy friends cause, ability, and religion. Many men
complain and sorrow for their goods, because they are gone from them, as
Rachel mourned Mat. 2. 18.
for her children because they were not, but they have more cause to weep then
Rachel had, because she lost her children when she could not keep them, but
they through their own folly have lost their goods when they might have kept
them still, for they were in their own power (as Peter said to Ananias) and
they were no Act. 5. 4.
more constrained to give their word, the^ Ananias was compelled to lie unto
God.

Amongst men which complain of their losses by sueriship, commonly the burden
of their doleful song is this: I will take heed while I live how and for whom
I give my word again: which in effect is but this much, if they had been well
advised at the first, they had done well enough. And so it is indeed, that for
want of consulting with the word of God, it comes to pass that many in a
vain vain, to be counted kind hearted (and I cannot tell what) do feed others
till they starve themselves, they cloth others and go naked themselves, they
save others from drowning, and sink themselves, they discharge others and
charge themselves, they also release others and lie by it themselves: what
shall I say? they do for others and undo themselves: like the builders of
Noah's Ark which prepared for others, Genesis 7.
and perished themselves.

On the other side it comes to pass, that they which listen to Gods counsel
and follow that, they lend, and borrow not, they give and take not, they feast
and fast not, they redeem others, and come in no bondage themselves: yea, they
do for others, and never undo themselves, but the more they help, the more
they may help, like the blessed widow of Sarepta, whose oil and meal 1.
King. 17. 14.
were no whit diminished, but rather increased, and yet were daily spent of for
2. Kin. 4. 7.
the nourishing of Elias and herself, all her debts discharged. The reason
hereof was this: if she had bestowed her meal and her oil upon every one
that had come, without respect of persons, to have been counted a good fellow,
or a kind hearted woman (as the manner of some is) no doubt but all had been
consumed long before: but she kept her liberality for Elias the Lords Prophet,
who was in great distress, and could no where else be relieved but at her
hands: and then she succored him according to her poor ability, of love and
conscience for the Lords sake, and therefore the Lord blessed her. So let us
do, and God will likewise bless us: would thou then give to others and not
want thy self? would thou redeem others and be at liberty thy self?
would thou feed others, and not starve thy self? would thou rejoice
others, and not mourn thy self? In a word (because the duties of love are
infinite) would thou do for others and not undo thy self? then give not to
al, lend not to all, provide not for all, promise not for all, lest in the end
thou be driven to pay for all, and then be constrained to beg of all, not only
thy goods but thy self too, when thou shall be shut up, and thrust out from
the company of all: but give to those to whom God has appointed thee to give,
and God will give it thee again: help those whom God has sent unto thee to be
relieved, and that according to thy ability, and God will help thee again.
To conclude this point, be thou advised by thy heavenly father, and take
counsel of his word: and in so doing thou shall both save thy self, and help
others.

The sins which Gods spirit reproves Two things to be avoided by Suerties.
in suerties are especially two: the one is amibition, the other is rashness,
the one begets the other, when a ma^s friend comes unto him, he gives his
word, because he would seem to be 1. Ambition.
courtous and kind hearted, to bepraised 2. Rashness
of men, not considering whether he be able to discharge it or no, nor his
family, nor the dsposition of the party: this is ambitious and vaineglorious
vanity which poisoneth all, even our best ^^^ons. And herein they are not like
the builders of Babel, who ^^^ld make a tower whose top should reach to heaven,
Genesis 11.
and only (...) get a name: but because they undertake that (in the pride of
their heart) which is above their reach: therefore they must look that Babel
(that is to say, confusion) shall fall upon their heads.

But this is our comfort, that God has given to his children such grace as
they will never let it reign in them, but will always beat it down, and
keep it under, that they may say as David said, By this I know (O Lord) that
thou love Psalm. 41.
me, because my enemy does not triumph against me. So by this Gods children do
know, that God does love them, not because vainglorie does never trouble them,
but because this enemy of ambition does not triumph against them.

The Philosophers are wo^t to say, Gloria calcar habet, that is, they account
vainglorie a spur, and a prick to help forward a sharp wit: and so do our
profane professors think it a good thing too* that it be done wisely and
handsomely (as (...) manner of some men is to dispraise the g^^d gifts and
graces of Note that
God in themselue^ (...) purpose only to hear other men praise ^^^m, and
commend them: and this is a pretty kind of seeking after ambition and vanity.

It is a good thing (I confess) for men to see soberly and modestly, what
gifts God has bestowed upon them: but to give the glory to God, and see that
we seeing the mercies of God in us, may with sobriety and modesty be stirred
up to use the gifts, and graces of God in us to the glory of God.

The 2. sin (with which Suerties are overtaken) is rashness, that is, when we
Rashness
promise for him that we know not: and rashness comes of ambition, for
ambition is the root of rashness: therefore when we have done any thing
rashly, let us suspect that ambition went before. Therefore to escape this
rock of mischief Salomons counsel is to be followed, Prou. 4. 26.
Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways he ordered aright: for a
good man is merciful and lends (says David) but therewith he adds, that
he orders al Psalm. 112. 5
his affairs, judgment and deliberation to teach us, that all things done
rashly and vaingloriously are ever out of order, because discretion is wanting,
which should marshall them, and set them in order: and where there is no order
in our dealinges, what can we look for but confusion in the end.

Now let us see briefly how men in ancient time became Suerties one for an
other. It appears in the words of the Text, that they did but strike hands
together, and give their word one to another, whereby they were so snared, that
they could not break their bonds.

Such was the simplicity of ancient times, in making of bargains: which
practice bewraieth the notable treachery of our time, which is such, that no
bond or writing is so sure for most men now, as the touching of the hand, or
speaking the word was then. Men think that fraud does so ouerflow, that the
cannot use too many words in their bonds, and bargains. And on the contrary
side they think that fraud lies and lurketh in multitude of words: and that
they be fit matter for wrangling heads to work upon. And yet as men do swear
much because one man will not trust another, so in bargaining men do use many
words, because one man does use to deceive another. Whatsoever is added in
communication (says the Lord Jesus) more then yea and nay, is of the Devil.
So in bargaining, whatsoever Matthew. 5.
is urged more then a man's promise, it does show, that there is falsehood and
deceit in the world.

It was most for the Centurions credit, when he said to Christ: Lord trouble
not thy self to come home unto me, only Luke. 7.
speak the word, and my servant shall be whole. So likewise this would make
most for the credit of Christians, if we could say one to another, trouble not
your self for bonds making, etc. Only speak the word, and I do believe you:
But deceit delights in multitude of words, and starting holes, when truth
seeks no corners like Balaam (whose false heart sought for a bribe and
therefore he must have seven alters built here, and Number. 24. 1
seven more built there, and upon every alter must be offered forsooth a
bullock, and a ram, and partly to cover his own hypocrisy, and partly to
deliver the king of Moab (as Monks and Friars deluded men in popery) whereas
indeed he knew before how the matter stood.

Furthermore in the Text it is said, that the Suertie was taken and snared with
the words of his mouth. Now words are counted but wind: and men will ask,
what have you to show for it? etc. but words are bonds and snares that men
cannot untie: and Solomon notes that a man is taken with the words of his
mouth as sure as with an obligation, that he cannot break it without
treachery, by which we may perceive that God sees all our words, and will
call us to reckoning for them.

Again, some will say, it is no howling among Wolves, he is a cosoner, etc. he
beguiled me with deceit, and therefore I will meet with him, let him get it how
he can, etc. so because (fraud is driven out with fraud) they think themselves
discharged. But here Gods spirit meets with such fellows: for because thou
were ambitious or rash, and not so circumspect as thou should have been. And
forasmuch as the folly of thine own mouth has entangled thee: therefore thou
must stand to it. If he had lied unto thee, and so deceived thee, the law would
have helped thee. In other sins, we are ready to lay the fault upon others
as Adam did, but now it will not be, thou art holden with the cords of thine
own sin: for howsoever others did entice thee, thou have lurking sins in
thine own heart, Psalm. 19.
which David called his secret sins.

If we were so precise and strict as we ought to be in all our ways, none
could deceive us, for no man is hurt but of himself, and (as Saint Paul says)
every man is tempted, when he is drawn away and entised by his own
concupiscence. It is impossible that the secret thoughts of another should
hurt us, as we think: no man makes a snare for him self, and whatsoever
evil is in us, it comes from our own heart. Therefore it is in vain for men
to tra^sferre their sins unto others, and say this and that, etc. but know
that thine own sin has brought thee to that that thou art come unto: Thou
art snared with the words of thine own mouth: and so much briefly of the
simplicity which was used in ancient time in bargenning and becoming of
Suertie one for another, as also the treachery of our time, because no man will
trust another. Now let us see what counsel God gives unto such men as are
snared with suertiship, which follows in the 3. verse in these words. Do
this now my son, and deliver thy self, seeing thou Text. verse. 3
art come into the hand of thy neighbor, go and humble thy self, and
solicit thy friends etc.

In this third verse, we see the fatherly love of God and of Solomon to the
son. He first checketh him with the words of his own mouth: Thou see how
thou art taken with thine own words, and snared in thine own folly: thou
must take it to thy self. Then having thus checked him for his fault he does
not here leave him to himself, but gives him a remedy.

By this practice of the holy Ghost in Solomon are many reprehended which
will say when men are in trouble, thou through thine own folly have brought
thy self into trouble, get out as thou can for all me.

They will lay out the folly of their brethren and set their sins before
the^, but they will not help to bind up their wounds, like the good
Samaritane. They can point and laugh at the nakedness of their bretheron, as
Ham that cursed Luke.
child of Noah did at his fathers nakedness, but they will not take any pains
Gen 9. 22. 23.
to cover their nakedness, as blessed Sem and Iapheth did.

But on the contrary the godly will help up their brethren which are fallen
through Gal. 6. 1.
occasion, and that with the spirit of meekness considering themselves (as the
Apostle says) lest they also be tempted. And here is a holy difference
between charitable vpbraiding, and uncharitable conde^ning. For Satan can tell
me^ of their folly* and when they are down he can lay loads upon them: yea it
is his joy to see the chidren of God under feet: and surely it is a deuillish
imitation when men see their brethren down, they will check them, but they will
not put their little finger to help them up again. And this (I say) is a
very deuillish imitation indeed. It is far otherwise with the children of
God, they imitate their merciful God and Father in heaven, for God indeed
will not spare his people, but he will also tell them how to rise again, as
in Esaias the 1. When the Lord had told Esaias. 1.
the Jews of their hypocrisy, and with what bloody hands and hearts they
kept his sabboths, his new Moons and other days appinted, all which his soul
did abhor, because of their wickedness, yet in the end he says: Wash you and
be clean, and then let us reason together, and then though your sins were as
red as scarlet, yet I will make them as white as snow. So the children of God
will tell their brethre^of their sins, and raise the^ up again to their
power, and comfort the^ with the blood of Jesus Christ: For if there be
charity in us, we will not choke them with their sins but admonish them of
their sins. And in any case we must take heed that we do not so press them
down, as that there be no room for our hands to go under to lift them up
again.

And we must not rebuke them slenderly neither, but lay out thy brothers
sins to the most, that when he shall see them uncased and unfolded he may
see the hidden mischiefs that were wrapped up in them before, and so take
better heed of them another time, but still take pity of him.

Now men will charge the preacher with railing and malice, and I know not what,
if he be earnest in rebuking men's sins, and in telling thee what the Lord
says as to ring the larum bell, when he sees the enemy coming upon thee: but
how can this be? Is Paul become your enemy because he tells you the truth?
what? does the Preacher reprove thy faults? he does so: but does he not also
give thee a remedy for thy sin, as he rebukes thy sin? why do thou say
then, he has a delight to check and and taunt, and to be girding at thee
when thy conscience is bitten a little?

And this also shows how man ought to deal with man, and thou ought to
make a profit of thy very enemies, as men make physic of poisons. For thine
enemies will tell thee of that which thy worldly friends will not tell thee for
fear they should displease thee, and although he speak in envy and malice
unto thee (which is his fault) yet see whether it be so and then know, that God
has opened his eyes for thy welfare, as he opened the mouth of Balams Number. 23.
Ass for the good of his master.

Now to the counsel it self, wherein we have to observe two things. First,
what be the particular points thereof. Gods counsel to Suerties.
Secondly, what be the reasons for the same. As touching the particular Verse. 3.
points of the counsel which God gives Verse. 4.
unto Suerties they are three. 1. Go humble thy self. 2. Solicit thy friends.
3. Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eye lids.

First he faith, Go humble thy felfer his meaning is, that he must go to his
creditor, and in good words submit himself to his courtesy, craving some
respite to pay the debt, or the thing that was promised. This is hard counsel,
if we consider to whom it is given, namely to ambitious minded man, that
stands upon his credit, such a one as will not hear commonly of any such matter
for stomach, but indeed (says God by Solomon) this is the way, to go and
humble thy self, and to beat down that ambitious humor, yea, if thou go in
silks and veluets, or if thou wearest gold and silver, this is the counsel
that God gives thee: Go and humble thy self. But the world can Of shifting
debtors. The 1. sort
shift it many ways better then this: shall I go and humble my self says one?
not I, I ca^ co^uey away my goods under a col lution, and a false title, and
then let him do what he ca^, and this is a cunning shift: when search is made,
there is nothing to be found but a blocks end and a pillow stuffed with goats
hair. Shall I go humble my self, says another? not I, I will go to prison and
lie 2. sort.
there while I live, rather the^ I will pay the debt: I will hold him tack with
his own. So there they will lie and spend their creditors A spiteful shifte of
ba^ckrupts.
money. And surely this is a spiteful shift, and a common shift of all
banckrupts, will they go humble themselves and seek for favor? no: then will they
build and go bravely in their extreme poverty. And when they owe a thousand
pound more then they are worth, they will defy their creditors to their face,
and set all at six and seven, thinking that they can but go to prison. These
men seek to overthrow all laws, they will do what they list, they will spend
other men's money at dice and cards, they ca^ delude the laws, and mock
magistrates in despite of their teeth.

Therefore these men would be hamperd by the godly magistrate: for the prison
ought not to be a place of pleasure for bankerupts and cosoners to live in as
the list in spending of their own goods and their creditors also.

Others will humble themselves before they need, and all to defraude other men
of their right. They can cunningly agree for iiij. s. in the pound, or such a
trifle, paying a little for a great deal, truly A third sort.
these are intolerable in a common-welth, for these men when they owe a
hundred, or a thousand, can handle, the matter so handsomely that their
creditors shall be driven to say, take thy bil and write but fifty, or twenty,
or ten, not like the unjust steward who had wasted his masters goods, but like
unjust debtors which can pay, but will not. And when they have agreed with men
for little or nothing, they can set up their sail again, and live as merrily as
can be, but then the wise Magistrate, and other men may see their hypocrisy,
and constrain them to pay to every byrd his own feather again. These
fellows are like the counterfeit and cosoning Gibeonites, who made Joshua
believe that they came Josh. 9. 21.
from a far country, when they dwelt hard by, and by their old bottles,
molded bread, and ragged clothes, seemed to him poorer by many degrees, then
they were indeed: but when they were once known, Joshua set them to draw
water, and to hew wood for all the congregation of Israel, and if these men
were served so too, Joshua should do well. For that which the Gibeonites did,
was for verse. 4.
exceeding fear of their lives, but that which these fellows do, is of a
covetous affection to save their goods, and of a malicious intent to deceive
their creditors, which is a cursed thing in the sight of God and man.

But the poor debtor can take no better course, then to go and humble
himself. And if we stand so much upon our selves, that we will not stoop, we
are unworthy to be helped. And surely, he that will not stoop to help
himself, has no charity in him to help another: for now he is constrained
to help himself, and if he will not yield, when he is thus bitten, he will not
yield, nor stoop, nor yet once cast his eyes upon his poor neighbor to
help him at his need, or to lift him out of the dust. And there is no child
of God, but if he has any bowels of mercy in him, will be good to his poor
debtor, when he does thus humble himself unto him. And he that will not show
him mercy when he does humble himself and entreat for mercy, surely that hard
hearted man must look for no mercy himself, either of God or man. For seeing
as the Lord has pity on us to forgive us all, ought not we also to have pity
on our fellows and brethren, if not to forgive them all, yet at the leastwise
to forbear them, till they may be able to pay? But he that will take his
poor debtor by the throat, and say pay Mat. 18. 32 33. 34
that thou owe, or else thou shall lie in prison till thou rottest, and I
will make dice of thy bones except thou do pay me. Now verily God shall shut
up the hearts of other men against him likewise, when he is in distress, and
God himself shall take him by the throat, as it were, and deliver him up to
the iayler of hell (if he repent not) neither shall he come forth until he
has paid the uttermost farthing. For this is a principle never to be altered:
There shall be judgment merciless, Iam. 2. 13.
to him that shows no mercy.

Go and humble thy self: Humility is contrary to pride, and to be humbled, is
contrary to being exalted. And he that exalts himself shall be brought low,
says the scripture, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Now
therefore here let us note again, that Solomon deals with such a one as
cares not how far he rusheth. And therefore he rebukes him, because he
seeks for nothing but for credit: this was because he was not humbled, a
proud folly. But mark how low God brings him, he would be aloft: now God
bids [Him] come down, and humble himself, who before thought to set
himself aloft by a vain kindness. Now are the words of Solomon found true:
When pride comes, then comes shame: but with the lowly is Pro. 11. 3.
wisdom, to show that all proud men are but fools. Again, in another place
he says: The pride of a man shall bring him lovv, but the humble in spirit
shall enjoy glory. Pro. 29. 23.
So here, his pride was so great, that he cared not what danger he did incur,
so he might be counted kind and liberal, and I know not what. And thus does
God deal with his children, and though he were thus ouershot, yet he calls
him his son, that is appliable to doctrine, and given to serve God. Whereby
we may note, that ambition waits upon Gods children, as the shadow does upon
the body: yea, they have a continual battle with it, for the force thereof is
not so soon abated, but therefore God does as it were, prick the bladder, and
let out their windiness. This humor waited Mat. 26. 69
on Peter, when he boasted to dye with Christ, for not long after, this vain
man was brought to shame, his courage was cooled, and his bladder pricked, that
his proud wind went out at the voice of a silly damsel. Thus we see how
pride and shame go together foot by foot: for shame was not long after this
vain brag which Peter made in the fond conceit of his own strength. Now, if
this did so grow up in a green tree full of the sap of Gods spirit, what is in
the dry and sear trees, which have nothing of the spirit of God? truly though
they see it not now, yet their pride shall be their confusion, and shame shall
fall upon them, when credit and estimation (which they so much hunt after,)
shall fly away from them.

But now, some will say: shall I be humble? Object.
why then all men will tread upon me, and no man will esteem me. Indeed the
wicked will like of none but such as Answer.
join with them in the purchase of folly and shame, and they speak evil of
all that will not run with them to the same excess of riot, and therefore they
speak evil of them says the Apostle Peter. But 1. Pet. 4. 4.
if we join with the proud, and will not come under the yoke of humility, it
is the next way to bring shame upon our heads, for God himself does make war
with the proud, and will bend their own bows against their faces: so yt the
next way to get glory is, to go by the way of humility, for as Solomon says,
That pride brings shame, so if thou be humble, thou shall say, I am lifted up
(says Job) when others Job 22. 29.
are cast down, for god shall save the humble person: as if he should say the
humble man indeed is under every bodies feet, that none would think he should
escape, but yet he shall be lifted up, for God himself will save him. We use to
say, it is good beating a proud man: for indeed pride is odious, that it is
abominable in all sorts of men. The children of God cannot abide him, nor the
wicked cannot abide a proud man, and in the end God will set a greater judgment
upon him, for Absoloms hair shall be Absoloms halter, and the proud shall be
trodden down under the feet of God, to the bottom of hell, which is without
bottom, therefore (My son) go and humble thy self.

The second part of Gods counsel is this: Solicit thy friends. Some think
this The 2. part of Gods counsel.
to be read in the plural number, but it is not so, though it may be so.
Solicit thy friend of thy neighbor (as Tremelius says) that is, stir him up
(for whom thou have given thy word) and never leave him until he has paid his
debt and discharged thee.

This point notes out, how careless the world is, when they have unburdened
themselves upon other men's shoulders, for then they sleep sincerely upon both
elbowes, not caring how their debt be paid, nor how their friend may be
discharged. There is the^ no respect of Christianity, no respect of their own
profit, and as little regard of their brothers profit. They care not, sincke he
or swim he, many are at a point: therefore we must have a care whom we take to
be our friends.

Again, some will say, I had rather loose it, then ask it so often. This may
seem at the first sight a good affection, and indeed it may be so, in some
children of god, for it is not good to be too churlish like Naball: but for the
most part, it is a sign of ambition in many men, for they are so ambitious yt
they will not, because they would be counted patient and kind hearted, etc. But
indeed here is a fault in neglecting and loosing of that which God has sent
thee for thy self, and for thy family. And here God teaches us, that it is no
shame to ask our own, but that we may ask it, yea and that we ought to be
even urgent in the cause.

The third part of Gods counsel is in The third part of Gods counsel.
the fourth verse. Give no sleep to thy eyes, nor slumber to thy eye lids,
etc. Some think they may rest, if they have spoken once Verse 4.
to him, for whom they have promised: no, no, it is not enough, thou must not
leave, till he have found some remedy to pay his debts, and that is the
meaning of this point. For the burden of a promise is so great, that we ought
not to sleep, till we have found out some remedy to perform that promise, for
David says, he is a just man that seeks to keep his promise, though it be to
his own hinderance. But he sets the contrary, as a brande upon a wicked man's
forehead, and makes it a note to know a wicked Psalm. 15.
man by. The wicked borrows, and paieth Psalm. 37. 21
not again, but the good man is merciful and lends* to show that how soever
there is mercy and goodness in lending to our brother in time of need, yet he
that borrows must have a care to restore again at the day: but if he shall
think all fish that comes to his net (as the manner of some is) the holy
Ghost has branded that man for a cruel and a wicked man. And therefore, as
holy soever as we pseeme to be, if this bein us, there is no fear of God
before our eyes. And therefore we must not only pay, but strive to pay at
the day for God will have mercy, and not sacrifice, mercy I mean, in paying to
others that which is their own. If thou can not, (being prevented in the
mean time, as thou may by sickness, or losses unlooked for, etc.) then
signify so much unto thy Creditor, go and humble thy self unto him at the
least. And so much shortly, for the third point of Gods counsel unto
Suerties, and not only to Suerties, but to all debtors, and whosoever else
makes any promise unto his neighbor.

The reason of the former counsel, follows in the next verse: Deliver thy
Verse. 5.
self as a Do from the hand of the hunter, and as a bird from the hand of the
fowler. The effect of the reason is this, If we do The reason of the counsel.
follow Gods counsel, deliverance will come unto us, but if we do not follow
it, destruction will come upon us. And it stands thee in hand to look obout
thee, if thou be in suertiship: For as easily shall the Do escape out of the
hunters hands, and a bird out of the hand of the fowler, as thou shall get out
of some men's bonds, when thou art once in them. And therefore follow Gods
counsel, and afterward be as wary of their wiles and snares, as the Do is of
the hunter, or the bird of the fowler. And therefore thou ought to be wary
and very circumspect, because the world is full of fowlers and hunters, which
are not without their snares, their ginnes, their trappes, and their huntsmen.
But by the way, we may observe here, that the best way to escape them is the
way of God, or else no way: therefore he which walks according to the word of
God, does walk most safely: neither is there any man so entangled, but by
using of Gods means in his word, and relying upon Gods promises, he may
escape and get at liberty again: for God blesses his own means, when all
ways else shall be accursed.

In this verse he compares covetous men, crafty heads, and cruel persons, to
hunters and fowlers, because they go about to pray upon simple men. There be
of hunters, as there be of fishers, some are hunters of beasts, and some of
men, as Peter was a fisher of men, but there is great difference. Some are
called mighty hunters, as Nimrod was, some are called Genesis 10. 9.
cunning hunters, as Esaw was. So, of Genesis 25. 27
these hunters whereof Solomon speaks, some be mighty hunters as Nimrod was.
Whereof some hunt for the goods, some for the offices, some for the livings,
and some for the lives of men: Of which the Prophet Michah complains in his
time. 7. Chapter. Verse 2. The good man Mich. 7. 2.
is perished out of the earth, there is none righteous among men: they all lie
in vvait for blood, every man hunteth his brother with a net. These are full of
craft and cruelty, crafty, because they hunt with nets, that is, with devises
hidden and covered as nets be: cruel, because they lie in wait for blood. And
therefore in Jeremy, the enemies of Gods people (with whom there is no mercy)
are called hunters. I vvil send out many hunters says the Lord, and they shall
hunt them from every mountain; Ier. 16. 16.
and from every hill, and out of the caves of the rocks. Now if we hunt our
brethren with nets as they did in Micha his days, let us fear lest the Lord
send out many hunters to hunt us, as he did threaten his people in Jeremy his
days.

The fowler also laith nets for the foul, and to these are flatterers compared
in Prou. 29. 5. Ama^ that flattereth his neighbor spreads a net for his
steps. Sometime men are called not only fowlers which lay nets, but the very
nets and snares themselves as though the Devil were the fowler, and men were
his nets, and snares to catch souls withal: such were the wicked governors,
the flattering teachers, and the deceitful people of Israel, against whom the
Prophet Hose denounces the judgment of God; Hose. 5. ^
because they had been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.

When a simple man walks in the streets, and hears how men call chapmen,
and offreth them good peniworths, let him take heed, because a net is spread.
Of these fowlers the Prophet Jeremy complains thus: As a cage is full of
Birds, so are their houses full of deceit: thereby they are become great, and
waxen rich.

The foul is in danger many ways, for if he fly from one, he is in danger of
another, either of the net which is covered, or of the limetwigs, or of the
piece which comes creeping unto him as though he did him great obeisance.

Some are like sparrow catchers that sit under the hedge with their call
counterfeiting in such sort the sparrows note, that the poor birds resort
unto him, thinking it to be one of their own company. So, many can so
cunningly bemone the wants of others, as if they had but one heart, and one
voice between them both, which deceives many a simple man.

Some by extreme covenants and bargains do seize upon goods, lands, bodies
and lives too if they might be suffered, like the Scribes and Pharisees which
under pretense of long prayer, devour widows howses. Such are the Pro. 1. 19.
ways of every one that is greedy of gain (says Solomon) he would take
away the life of the owners thereof. In Esaias these persons are compared to
milstones* which grind the corn to powder: What have ye to do, that ye beat
my people to pieces, Esa. 3. 15.
and grind the faces of the poor, says the Lord, even the Lord of hosts.

In Micah these people are compared to wolves, or to some other ravenous beast:
They pluck off their skins from them, and their flesh from their bones. And
Mic. 3. 3.
they eat also the flesh of my people, and flay off their skin from them, and
they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as to the pot, and as flesh
within the Caldron.

They are worse then beasts, yea worse then wild and any sauadge beast: for
though beasts do raven being hungry, yet they give over when they are full:
but covetousness is never satisfied.

Deliver thy self as a Do from the hand of the hunter, etc.

The practices that are now used in the world, do make this property of
hunters and fowlers to fit covetous men very well: for first, how do they hunt
to entrap unadvised men in bonds for houses and lands? Secondly, how do
creditors persuade their debtors, and make the^ get some to pay their desperate
debt?

And this is a subtle policy, David does notably paint out these men in the
10. Psalm verse. 8. 9. 10. He lies in wait in the villages: in the secret
places does he Psa. 10. 8. 9. 10.
murder the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poor. 9. He lies in
wait secretly, even as a Lion in his den, he lies in wait to spoil the
poor, he does spoil the poor, when he does draw him into his net. 10. He
croucheth and boweth: therefore heaps of poor do fall by his might. So play
these covetous usurers, which live upon extortion, and feed upon the people,
eating them as if they were bread. And in their dronken matches, how do they
wrap men in their bonds?

How are young gentlemen and unthrifts taken in the usurers nets, and the broker
is his bawd and the huntsman too. The broker can feed a young gentleman, and
empty his purse as fast as he can fill it, and all at the brothell howses: he
shall want none: but surely he shall buy his gold too dear: therefore take
heed of these fowlers and hunters.

It is a sin to venture rashly into their hands. God has forewarned you to
flee from the covetous, and yet you will venture, therefore are you not justly
served, if you be devoured of them?

Some say they must needs deal with the usurer, they cannot live else, and
usury is counted no sin: but thou must be then justly plagued and devoured,
all that thou have, because thou will not follow Gods counsel.

Again, on the other side: If it be a sin to be wittingly deceived, how
much greater sin is it to deceive wittingly and willingly?

Therefore consider thus with thy self, if I would have no man lay snares and
nets for me, then I must lay none for others. He that deceives a simple
man, does not him so much mischief, as he has himself. The simple man is
deceived, but the hunter, and the fowler is more deceived: for while he hunteth
after the poor silly man, the devil hunteth after his soul. And if his soul
be caught in the snares of the devil, had he not better loose all the world?
For what shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and Mat. 16. 26
loose his own soul?

Last of all, here we may learn to be very careful for our souls. For if the
spirit of God be so careful to make us take heed of him that hu^teth after our
goods: how much more would he have us to take heed of him that hunteth after
our souls? They are foolish and blockish, that can seek to escape the snares
of me^, and yet never seek to escape the snares of the devil. If we must take
heed of the earthly fowler, much more of the hellish fowler. This makes the
children of God so sad, and to be so troubled in spirit as they are many
times, because they see that they are taken in the snares of Satan. For can
the prisoner sleep so quic^ with his boltes upon him, as when (...) at
liberty? The wicked are taken (...) it not, but go on as though they were a^
liberty, as some fish being taken of the fisher goes on at his scope, with
the hook in his belly: and at last he is taken^ We are all taken in his snares
eueri^ day, but through the blood of Jesus Christ we are set at liberty
again, if w^ have faith in his name: blessed be Go^ for ever. And thus much of
the reason of that counsel which God gives to Suerties: and thus much be
spoken of Suertiship if self.

FINIS.

