GROUNDS OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION. Laid down briefly and plainly by way of
Question and Answer.

By H. B.

1. Pet. 3. 13. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, and be ready always to
give an Answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope that is in
you, with meekness and fear.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for Robert Bird, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Bible in Saint Laurence-Iane.

GROUNDS OF Christian Religion.
Quest. WHo made the world, Heaven and Earth?

Answ. God, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons and one God,
Eternal, Omnipotent, invisible, allsufficient, infinite in his most blessed
Essence.

Q. How prove you God to be three Persons, and those to be one God in Essence?

A. 1. Ioh. 5. 7. There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one.

Q. Whereof did God make or create the World?

A. Of Nothing.

Q. How know you this?

A. By faith grounded on the Word Heb. 11. 3
of God.

Q. Wherefore did God create all things?

A. For his own glory, Psalm. 19. 1. and Pro. 16. 4.

Q. What was the chief creature on earth that God made?

A. Man.

Q. Whereof did God make man?

A. Of the dust of the earth, breathing into him a living reasonable soul
immortal.

Q. In what state was man made?

A. In the image of God, in righteousness without sin, and in a state of
blessedness.

Q. Whereof was the woman made?

A. Of the man's rib, that they might be as one, inseparable, and that Act 17.
26.
all men might come of one blood.

Q. What covenant made he with them?

A. A covenant of works, which while they kept, they should live happily in an
earthly paradise.

Q. How did God try their obedience?

A. By forbidding them the eating of a tree, Genesis 2. 17.

Q. Did they observe it?

A. No.

Q. How so?

A. Satan in the serpent told them a lie, which they believing fell from God,

Q. What became of them then?

A. By sin they lost God, and happiness, and became the children of death,
corporal, spiritual, eternal, and subject to all kind of misery in this
world, and in hell fire.

Q. What is this to us?

A. It concerns us nearly: for hereby we are all made guilty of their sin
and punishment.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Romans 5. 12. For both when our first parents received the Commandment, and
when they brake it, we were all in their loins, so that we sinned and fell in
and with them. Secondly, we are conceived and borne in original sin, being
of the corrupt seed of Adam.

Q. What example have ye to show this?

A. A fathers treason against his Prince cuts off all his posterity from the
inheritance by man's law. And secondly, a bondslaues children are all Exo. 21. 4
borne slaves by Gods law. Such are we by nature.

Q. But are we not able to recover our selves from our fall?

A. There is no means left in us to do it, for neither have we will, nor 2
Cor. 3. 5 Phil. 2. 13. Ps. 49. 7.
power to do any good at all; nor can we satisfy Gods justice for the least
sin.

Q. Had not Adam free will before his fall, and has not man the same still?

A. Adam before his fall had free will, but now he has quite lost his freedom
of will to any good, and is become the servant of sin, Genesis 6.
the imaginations of his heart only evil continually, being dead in
trespasses and Ephesians. 5. 2.
sins.

Q. Then our case is most miserable. But is there no help for us?

A. None in the world, but in God alone.

Q. What means has God given to recover us from this unspeakable misery?

A. His unspeakable mercy and free Ioh. 3. 16. Romans 5. 8.
love has found out the only all sufficient means, even his own Son whom
he has sent.

Q. How is the Son of God a means for us?

A. By taking our nature of Adam into the unity of his divine person, and so
Jesus Christ God-man became a perfect Savior, in dying for our sins, and
rising again for our Justification.

Q. What be the benefits which Christ has procured unto us by his life and
death?

A. Twofold; 1. a freedom from all Gal. 4. 5. Romans 8. 32
curse spiritual, temporal, and eternal. 2. A full interest in all good
things, spiritual, temporal and eternal.

Q. Are not all still subject to death, diseases, and manifold miseries in this
life?

A. Yes; but all that are redeemed by Christ, are freed from the curse of
death, of diseases and miseries, not to be hurt or overcome by them.

Q. How did Christ free us from the curse?

A. By being made a curse for us, undergoing the curse in our steads. Gal. 3.

Q. But who are they for whom Christ underwent this curse?

A. The elect of God over the world in all ages, whom Christ according to his
Fathers appointment redeemed. Ioh. 6. 39.
[Reuel. 5. 9. Ioh. 17. 2. and 10. 15. Luke 1. 68. Act. 20. 28. Ephesians. 5. 23. 25,
26. Psalm. 130. 8. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.

Q. What mean you by the elect of God?

A. A certain number of men, whom God out of his free love, favor and grace
did from all eternity choose out of Rom 911 Romans 8. 28 Romans 8. 29.
mankind, predestinating them by an unchangeable purpose and decree to eternal
life and glory.

Q. Did not God choose men out of a foresight of their willingness to receive
grace, and of their faith and perseverance therein?

A. No, in no wise: but he chose us merely because he loved us, and that Deuteronomy.
7. 7, 8.
for his own sake, to show the glorious riches of his grace, and he chose us
Romans 8 30 Ephesians 1. 4.
that we might line, and so be holy in bringing forth fruit, and that our
fruit Ioh. 15. 16
might remain.

Q. Is Gods election then the foundation and first cause of all our happiness
and salvation.

A. Yes surely; for electing us freely out of his mere love, for this very
cause he gives us his Son to redeem us, to be the author and finisher of
our faith, and salvation.

Q. But how may we come to know whether we be elected or no?

A. By our being in Christ, and laboring to make our calling and election sure
by faith, and a holy life. 2. Pet. 1. 10,

Q. But how come we to be in Christ?

A. By believing in him alone for salvation.

Q. But are we not to believe in God the Father also, and in God the holy
Ghost?

A. Yes surely, we believe in God ye Father in and by Christ, in God the Son
by the holy Ghost, all the three persons being joint authors and workers of
our salvation, wherein they are distinguished only, not divided.

Q. What is that faith whereby we believe in Christ alone, as sent of the
Father, and anointed by the holy Ghost, for our salvation.

A. It is a saving, living, justifying faith, being a special work of the
Spirit of Christ, and gift of grace, whereby the heart steadfastly believes in
Christ's righteousness imputed unto the believer, by which righteousness of
Christ imputed he stands perfectly justified in Gods sight from all his sins,
and so has an interest to eternal life in and with Christ, as fellow-heirs
Romans 8.
with him.

Q. Why do you call faith in Christ a saving faith?

A. To distinguish it from common historical faith, mentioned Iam. 2. 19. and
to show it to be an instrument of salvation by Christ.

Q. Why do you call it a living faith?

A. Because uniting the heart and soul to Christ, there is a communion of
spiritual life: as Gal. 2. 20. this faith also working by love, whereby it is
known from a dead faith, as Iam. 2. 17.

Q. Why call ye it a justifying faith?

A. Not that it does justify us as an act or work, but only as an instrument,
applying Christ's righteousness to our justification.

Q. How is this faith wrought in the heart?

A. By the Spirit of Christ, and that ordinarily by hearing the word preached.

Q. Why call you this faith a gift of grace?

A. Because it is not of our selves, but it is the free gift of God: as Ephesians. 2.
8. Phil. 1. 29.

Q. How is this faith steadfast?

A. In a twofold regard: first of sure evidence: secondly, of perseverance.

Q. May a believer then be sure of his salvation by faith?

A. Yea he is, and ought to be so: [2. Cor. 13. 5.

Q. Does not a believer often doubt of his salvation?

A. Yes he may, during some strong fit of temptation: yet as the sun under a
cloud shines all the while, though we see it not: so faith under the cloud of
temptation believes truly though we feel it not.

Q. But may not this faith be quite extinguished and lost for ever*

A. No, not possibly.

Q. How so?

A. First, because it is a free gift of grace, for the gifts and calling of God
Romans 11. 29. Ioh.
are without repentance. Secondly, because he that truly believes has
eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death
unto life. Thirdly, because Christ prays that our faith fail not, whose
prayer must needs be effectual. Fourthly, because we are kept by the power of
God through faith unto salvation. Fifthly, from the nature of saving grace,
Ier. 32. 40. and 1. Ioh. 3. 9.

Q. Is not this a doctrine of presumption?

A. Nothinglesse; it being a doctrine of singular comfort to Gods child, to
encourage and strengthen him against Satan's temptations, and own infirmities,
as knowing that his faith shall not fail; nor stands it with the nature of a
true believer to be careless of his salvation, because he is sure of it, since
he knows that salvation is not attained, but by the means appointed of God,
he has in him an inward principle of grace holding him on toward 1 Ioh. 3. ^.
and 3. 27.
perfection.

Q. But does faith only justify? Do not works also justify?

A. Faith only justifies as an instrument, and that perfectly in Gods sight:
works are said to justify before men, but not before God: as Romans 4. 2. Iam.
2. 18.

Q. But are not good works necessary to salvation?

A. Yes, but not as meritorious causes of salvation, but only as fruits of
faith and duties of love, and they appointed us to walk in to the kingdom;
being created in Christ Jesus unto good works, that we should walk in them,
that according to them, not for them, we may freely receive the recompense of
reward.

Q. But are not believers altogether freed from the moral Law by Christ, it
being that covenant of works made with Adam in Paradise before the fall, do
this, and live?

A. Christ the second Adam, by his exact fulfilling of the Law, and suffering
the penalty of our transgressions, has freed us from the rigor and curse of
it: but yet he has left it as a rule of direction for a holy life.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the very manner of giving the Law in mount Sina, where before the
decalogue or ten commandments, the Lord says, I am the Lord thy God, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage: and
thereupon infers, Thou shall have no other Gods before me, etc.

Q. Why? what is the meaning of those words, I am the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage?

Q. They are not only a history, but a mystery, containing a clear type and
figure of our redemption by Christ from our spiritual bondage under Satan and
sin. So that that covenant in Sina being rightly and spiritually vnderstodd,
was not the first covenant of works given to the first Adam, but it was the
very evangelical, the second Covenant of grace and faith given in Christ the
second Adam.

Q. But the Apostle says, Gal. 2. 1^.
The Law is not of faith: how then comes the law to be given under faith?

A. The law in that place is taken for the first covenant, to wit, of works,
which has no communion with faith belonging to the second covenant. But the
Law as it is given in mount Sina, the literal veil being removed, is not
delivered as the first covenant, but as a rule of conversation to the faithful
under the second covenant.

Q. But the Apostle calls the giving of the Law in mount Sina the first
covenant, standing in opposition to the second, as Agar to Sara, the bondwoman
to the free, Sina to Sion and Jerusalem?

A. The Apostle compares it so only in regard of the literal killing sense, to
which the carnal Jew was captinated, and thereby slain, while not looking
unto Christ the redeemer, that brought them out of the spiritual Egypt and
bondage, they sought to be justified by the works of the Law, which Saint Paul
beats down in that epistle to the Galatians. But to the believing Jew, the
Law was no other, but the sweet yoke, and light Mat. 11. 30.
burden of Christ.

Q. Show me then the proper differences between the first Covenant and the
second?

A. The opposite differences between the two covenants are these?

First: the first covenant was of man's works: the second of Gods grace; and
these two are unreconcilable. Romans 11. 6.

The second: The first covenant was made with Adam, and all his posterity Genesis
17. 7. Romans 9. 8.
universally: the second only with Abraham's seed, called the woman's seed, Genesis
3. 15. to wit, Christ and all the elect.

The third: The first covenant stood upon man's own righteousness: the second
stands upon another righteousness, to wit, Christ's righteousness: made ours by
imputation.

The fourth: The first covenant stood upon the mutability of man's will, and
therefore was quickly broken: but the second stands firm upon the sure
foundation of Gods immutable unchangeable will, good pleasure, and purpose in
himself, and so can never be broken, called an everlasting covenant.

The fifth: The first was acouenant of justice without mercy: the second was a
covenant of mere mercy. Psalm. 89. 28. yet in Christ justice and mercy met
together. Psalm. 85. 10.

The sixth: The first covenant had no other reward revealed to the first Adam
Es. 27. 9. Romans 11. 27.
(from the earth earthy) but what was confined to the earthly Paradise: but the
second has the kingdom of heaven revealed in Christ (the second Adam the Lord
from heaven) and by him purchased and prepared unto all the elect. So that
natural moralists are here rewarded with outward blessings: so Gods children
are here afflicted, but their reward is in heaven.

Q. It should seem then, that the estate we have in and by Christ, is
infinitely better then that which we lost in Adam?

A. Yes certainly, and that in regard of many more privileges and
prerogatives, then have vet been mentioned: for by this we are partakers of the
divine nature, made one mystical body of Christ, united to him our head, made
the adopted Sons of God, coheires with Christ, having the holy angels
appointed for our guardians, which Adam had not, till after the fall he
believed in Christ. Psalm. 91. 11. Heb. 1. 6. 14. Again we have in Christ such
a kind of sanctification and holiness, as Adam never had; for Adams
righteousness was a created righteousness, connaturall unto him: but ours is
a righteousness and holiness that fioweth from Christ our head, as beams
from that sun, and as streams from that fountain, into all his mystical
members; yea they are the graces of Christ glorified, so as they are of a
glorified nature; as 2. Cor. 3. 18. Romans 6. 4, 5. 1. Cor. 15. 45, 46, 47, 48,
49.

Q. How is the covenant of grace sealed unto us?

A. By four seals: first by the seal of the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 1. 20, 21,
22. and Ephesians. 1. 13. and 4. 30. Secondly, by the seal of faith. Ioh. 3. 33. and
1. Ioh. 5. 10. Thirdly, by the two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

Q. How prove you the Sacraments to be seals?

A. Romans 4. 11. Circumcision was a seal of Abraham's faith, and of the Covenant
of grace, which God made with him.

Q. But do not the Sacraments of the new Testament differ from those of the
old?

A. They differ not in regard of their divine institution, end and use, all of
them pointing out Christ unto us in his death, whereby the Covenant of grace
was ratified: only circumcision, and the Paschall Lamb poynted out Christ to
come, and Baptism and the Lords Supper point him out already come, as the
Lamb slain.

Q. What other argument have you to prove all the Sacraments, as well those of
the Old Testament, as those of the New, to be seals of the Covenant of grace?

A. This: that all of them as types or signs point unto Christ's death, wherein
the Covenant is ratified.

Q. How may a Sacrament be defined, or what is a Sacrament?

A. A Sacrament is a sacred action of Christ's institution, wherein the visible
elements sanctisied by the Word, do not only signify and represent to the
outward senses, but also instrumentally conney and seal to the faith of the
receiver that holy invisible grace whereof it is a sign and seal.

Q. How prove you this definition of a Sacrament? And first how prove you a
Sacrament to be an action?

A. By these reasons. 1. Because it is no longer a sacrament, then it is in the
action. 2. Because the force and efficacy of the sacrament consists in the
action rightly performed.

Q. How prove you this in the Sacraments?

A. Thus circumcision is an action, the cutting off the foreskin: The slaying
and eating of the Passover is all in action; so baptizing an action so of the
Lords Supper, the whole celebration of it is action, as consecrating, giving,
receiving, eating, drinking, al is action. Do this in remembrance of me.

Q. What use make you hereof?

A. Hereby I learn, that that is no sacrament, which is idly gazed upon, or
reserved in a box, or carried about in solemn pomp, to be adored for Christ,
but is very Idol.

Q. Why call you the Sacrament an action sacred?

A. In regard of the parties conversant about the sacrament, who are all sacred.

Q. Who are they?

A. The minister of the Gospel: the communicants, and the holy Ghost working in
and by them.

Q. What is the action of the minister about the sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. To sanctify or consecrate the elements by the Word of God and prayer to a
sacramental or holy use. 2. He is to eat and drink the Lords Supper. 3. He
is to distribute the consecrated bread and wine unto the people the
communicants.

Q. What does the Ministers action in consecrating the elements, and
distributing of them to the people, signify?

A. His consecrating of the elements signifies Christ's consecrating of
himself for us; his distributing of them to every Communicant signifies,
Christ gives himself to every true believer.

Q. What is the action of the holy Ghost about the Sacrament?

A. To seal inwardly to the believing soul of the communicant, the merits and
virtue of Christ's death.

Q. What is the action of the Communicants in the Lords Supper?

A. Twofold: 1. Outward, with the hand of the body, to take eat, drink: 2.
Inward, with the hand of the soul, to wit faith, to receive, and spiritually
to faed upon the body and blood of Christ. And with these two is joined the
action of prayer and thanksgiving in the very act of receiving.

Q. How is the minister sacred or holy?

A. By his ministerial calling, as he ought also to be holy in his
conversation.

Q. What if he be profane in his life?

A. Yet that hinders not, but tha the may administer the Sacrament, since his
calling is holy.

Q. How is the Communicant sacred or holy?

A. Not only by his common calling, as he is a Christian, whereby he has a
right to the outward ordinance: but specially by his holy faith and life, being
a living member of Christ, by which he has an interest to Christ himself in
the ordinances.

Q. May none of these three agents, the holy Ghost, the Minister, the
Communicants 1 Cor 11. 2, 3.
be wanting to make up the full Sacrament?

A. No sir, The minister may not communicate alone, without the people
communicating with him; and the element is of no efficacy, without the holy
Ghost do apply the inward grace, which he does to every believer.

Q. You say a Sacrament is instituted of Christ: why so? may not the Church
instiuute a Sacrament?

A. No: only Christ is the author of a Sacrament: for these reasons: 1.
because he is the author of salvation, and therefore he only may appoint the
means, as the Word and Sacraments: secondly, because Christ only can make the
Sacraments effectual by his spirit: thirdly, because his heavenly wisdom
knew best how and whereof to institute the sacramental signs, or elements.

Q. But may not the Church dispense with the Sacraments, as by altering of
them, by adding or taking away?

A. No, in no case, for it brings that curse, Revel. 22. 18. 19. Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
and 12. 32. Pro. 30. 6.

Q. May not the cup be taken away in the Lords Supper?

A. No: for it is the communion of the blood of Christ.

Q. Is not the blood of Christ contained in his body, which is represented
under the forms of bread? and is not the cup then superfluous?

A. Neither is Christ's body carnally under the forms of bread: nor is the
bread sufficient alone to represent Christ's death, without the cup, which
powered out does represent the shedding of Christ's blood for us, as the bread
broken does the breaking of his body. And Christ's ordinance must in no sort be
broken.

Q. But does not the bread and wine, after the words of consecration, cease to
be bread and wine, their substance being changed or transubstantiated into the
very body and blood of Christ, nothing but the color, and savor of the
elements remaining?

A. The bread and wine being consecrated by the word and prayer, receive a
change indeed in regard of their use, being now sacred, which before were
common: but not in regard of their substance, which remains one and the same
still.

Q. But is it not said of the bread, This is my body? and of the wine, This is
my blood? And are not Christ's words true?

A. Yes, Christ's words are true, and because they are true, therefore the
substance of the bread is not changed into the substance of Christ's body; and
so of the wine.

Q. But is not God omnipotent? Cannot he change the substance of bread into the
substance of Christ's body?

A. God is omnipotent, and therefore he cannot lie. But such a change must
needs import and imply a lie: for 1. Christ's body is in heaven, and therefore
cannot be in earth, and in many places at the same instant. 2. Christ's body was
made of the substance of the Uirgin, and therefore not of the substance of a
piece of bread.

Q. Why does Christ say then, This is my body?

A. He says no otherwise of this Sacrament, then he does of all the rest, both
of the old Testament, and of the New. For so circumcision is called the
Covenant, being but a sign and seal of it: as Genesis 17. 10, 11. The Paschall
Lamb is called the Passover. Exodus 12. 11. though it were but the sacrifice
and memorial of the Passover, v. 27. So baptism is called regeneration. Tit.
3. 5. though it be but a sign and seal of it. And thus the Sacramental bread
is called Christ's body: so that this is the constant language of the holy Ghost
in all the sacraments both of the old and new Testament to call the signs by
the name of the thing signified, that we might not be deceived in the meaning
of the holy Ghosts words.

Q. But are the Sacramentalll elements bare signs? Do they not work grace
effectually of themselves?

A. They neither work grace effectually of themselves, nor are they bare
signs: but these signs are called by the name of the thing signified, to
signify that they are means ordained of Christ to confirm to the faithful
receiver the thing signified, not of themselves, but by virtue of Christ's
institution, where the conditions of faith and repentance be observed.

Q. What then is every man to do, before he come to the Lords Table?

A. He must examine himself: 1. Cor. 11. 28.

Q. Wherein is a man to examine himself?

A. In two things: 1. touching his knowledge of the Sacrament: 2. touching his
knowledge of himself.

Q. What is a man to know touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?

A. He must be able to discern the Lords body. 1 Cor. 11. 29.

Q. How is that Lords body discerned?

A. By two things: 1. by the outward elements of bread and wine as they are
consecrated to an ^oly use, which must not be received as ^ ^^^mon bread and
wine: secondly, by the analogy or proportion which they bear to Christ's body.

Q. What analogy or proportion do the consecrated bread and wine hold with
Christ's body and blood being received by the faith of the Communicant?

A. A twofold proportion; one, in respect of the benefits of Christ's body and
blood to every faithful receiver, signified by the benefits which the body
receives by the bread and wine, the other proportion in respect of the
communion of Christ's mystical body signified by the nature of the bread and
wine.

Q. What be the benefits which the body receives by the bread and wine?

A. These: Nourishment, strength, and comfort, bread strengthening, and Psalm,
10. 4. 15.
wine comforting man's heart, and so becoming one with our body.

Q. What do these signify?

A. That Christ's death received and applied by faith in the Sacrament, does
strengthen our faith, and comfort our consciences in the pardon of our sins,
and so nourishes us to eternal life, Christ becoming one mystical body with
us by faith, living in us. Gal. 2* 20.

Q. What is the other proportion, which the bread and wine do bear of Christ's
body?

A. They bear a proportion of the communion of his mystical body.

Q. What call you Christ's mystical body?

A. The whole company of the faithful elect united in one mystical body 1
Cor. 16, 17.
of Christ.

Q. Wherein stands their communion?

A. In two things: in the union of every true believer to Christ the head: 2.
In a communion with the members among themselves, all joined to that one Head.

Q. How is every member united to Christ the Head?

A. By the holy Ghost, and by a holy faith. 1. Cor. 12. 12, 13. and Gal. 2. 20.

Q. How are all the mystical members of Christ united in a communion together,
as of one body?

A. By charity, and by the unity of the spirit. Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

Q. How does the Sacramental bread and wine signify or represent this
communion of Christ's mystical members in one body?

A. As one and the same bread is made of many grains, and one and the same
mystical body of Christ is made up of many members, even all the faithful,
whereof consists the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

Q. What use make you of this knowledge concerning the sacramental signs?

A. It leads me to the examination of a second knowledge, namely, concerning
my self, before I come to communicate at the Lords Table?

Q. What are you chiefly to examine concerning your self before you come to
the Communion?

A. Two things especially: my faith, and my charity.

Q. Why these two especially?

A. Because by having faith and charity I come to discern the Lords body,
while by faith I am united to Christ my Head, and by charity to the mystical
body of Christ, the communion of Saints.

Q. How is your faith to be examined?

A. By the nature of saving faith, and by the fruits of it.

Q. You showed me before the nature of saving and justifying faith, which you
must examine in your self, whether it be truly in you or no, according to
that of the Apostle. 2. Cor. 13. 5. Tell me therefore what be the special
fruits and signs of saving faith?

A. They are especially two; to wit, repentance and charity.

Q. What is true repentance?

A. It is a godly sorrow: causing repentance unto salvation not to be repented
of. 2. Cor. 7. 10.

Q. Why is it called a godly sorrow?

A. Because it is a sorrow for sin wrought in the heart by Gods Spirit, it
being a gift of God. 2. Because this sorrow mourns more for Gods dishonor,
then our own by-sins, and more for Gods Law broken, then for the punishment
deserved. 3. While we give God the whole glory in the seeking pardon of sin,
taking to our selves the whole shame. 4. While in a sincere Psalm. 51. 4.
purpose and endeavor for amendment we rather choose to suffer the torments of
hell, then afresh to sin against God.

Q. How does godly sorrow differ from worldly?

A. Both in the kind, and in the end of it.

Q. How differ they in kind?

A. Worldly sorrow is a carnal and legal re pentance, looking mainely at the
punishment of sin, such was Ahabs and Judas his repentance, but godly sorrow
is evangelical, looking through the spectacles of faith upon a father offended
by our sin, but appeased in Christ.

Q. How do godly and worldly sorrow differ in their end?

A. Godly sorrow causes repentance to salvation, never to be repented of: but
worldly sorrow causes death.

Q. How is this godly sorrow a fruit of saving faith?

A. Because a man can never sorrow godly, till he believe in Christ the
redeemer, so as looking on Christ the Savior with the eye of faith he
therewithal reflects upon himself, as the sinner saved by Christ.

Q. What is the second special fruit and sign of saving faith?

A. Charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned. 1. Tim. 1. 5.

Q. What be the chief objects of true charity? that is, whom does true charity
chiefly respect?

A. In the first place, our charity respects God in Christ, loving him above
all, for the manifestation of the riches of his glory and grace in electing and
redeeming us: 1. Ioh. 4. 19. 2. Our charity looks upon our brethren and
fellow members in Christ, who hear his image, for which sake we love them as
truly and entirely as our own souls. This charity being the badge of a true
believer. 1. Ioh. 2. 14. 16, 17, 19. 3. Our charity reaches to strangers, yea
to our very enemies, to help them in extremity, and to pray for their
conversion. And 4. we must have an entire love to Godward, and to his
ministers, accounting their feet beautiful, that bring us the glad tidings of
salvation.

Q. But many profess love to God and to the brethren, wherein stands the
proof of our love?

A. Not in a bare profession: but we must prove it first by our inward seruent
affection, as also by the many real 1 Ioh ^ 17, 18,
fruits of love, loving not in word only, but in deed and in truth.

Q. What else are you to examine in your self before you come to the Lords
Supper?

A. I must stir up my heart to a spiritual hunger and thirst after Christ
Mat. 5.
in the Sacrament, because according to this hunger I shall be satisfied with
his sweetness, and shall feelingly find him a Savior of life unto my soul.

Q. How may your spiritual appetite be stirred up to hunger after Christ in
the Sacrament?

A. By finding mine own emptines, and how wretched I am without Christ, and
how blessed in him: this must be by sound repentance and humiliation.

Q. What conclusion do you draw from this duty of examination before the
Sacrament?

A. First, hence I learn, that the sacrament is a high mystery, and strong
meat, for men of ripe years having their wits exercised to discern good and
evil. 2. That no ignorant persons, such as cannot give a reason of their
faith, nor of the nature and use of the Sacrament, may be admitted to the Lords
Table.

Well, coming thus duly prepared, what are you to do in the time of
Administration?

A. I am to meditate of Christ's death, by the things I see and hear: of the
wonderful love of God toward me a poor wretched sinner, in that he spared
not his Son, but gave him up to death for me, that I by believing in him might
live for ever, that as by my body I receive, eat, and drink the bread and
wine, so by faith I receive and feed upon Christ, tasting how sweet the Lord is
to my soul: and that I stir up my heart to be exceeding thankful for so
precious benefits, as Ps. 103. 1. etc

Q. What are you to do after you have received the Sacrament?

A. I must endeavor to walk in the strength of that spiritual meat, as Elias
did, until I come to the mount of God, the kingdom of heaven,

Q. Will receiving the Lords Supper once in the year, or so, sufficiently
strengthen a man for his whole life, as baptism is but once administered?

A. No, the comparison holds not. A science is but once grafted, as we into
Christ by baptism, but must be often nourished as in often hearing of the
Word, and often communicating at the Lords Table, for (says the Apostle) as
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death till he
come: whereby he teaches us to frequent the Lords Table upon all occasions,
and constantly to continue the remembrance of his death, that so we may be kept
watching, and waiting for that appearing looking for and hasting unto the
coming of the day of God, that we may be found of him in peace, without spot
and blameless.

Q. What other duty is requisite for a Christian to practice, that he may grow
in grace?

A. To call upon God in all occasions.

Q. When must we pray especially?

A. Though we are to pray continunually, yet especially we are to keep
constant times morning and evening, as Psalm. 55. 17. and 92. 2.

Q. To whom must we pray?

A. To God alone in the name of Christ: for Christ taught us to pray, Our
Father, etc.

Q. May we not also pray to Saints departed, and to the Angels in heaven?

A. No, in no wise.

Q. Why?

A. Because prayer is a divine worship of God alone. For whom we call upon by
prayer, we believe also in him. Romans 10. 14. But we may not believe in Saints
and Angels.

Q. But may we not make Saints and Angels our Mediators of intercession to God
for us, in the Court of heaven?

A. No: for there is but one Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ. 2.
Tim. 2. 5. In his name whatsoever we ask the Father, he will give it us. And
Christ alone is our intercessour in heaven. Romans 8. 24. He is our only high
priest, who has entered into heaven, now to appear in the presence of God for
us. Heb. 9. 24. So that none can be our Mediator or Intercessour in heaven,
but only our High Priest, which is Christ. Heb. 9. 11, 12.

Q. But may we not be stirred by pictures and images of God, and of Christ, and
the like, and so before them pray unto God?

A. No, in no sort, for this is flatly against the second commandment: Thou
shall not make to thy self any graven image, etc.

Q. But may we not pray before them, though we pray not unto them, but unto God
represented by them?

A. No* for we are forbidden to make any image or picture of God at all; much
less are we to worship God in or by it. Deuteronomy. 4. 15, 16.

Q. True, God forbad them to make no similitude of him, because they saw no
form of God in the mount? But may we not make the picture of Christ, and so
pray before it, or a crucifixe?

A. No, in no wise; for to make such a picture, were to make a lie, because a
false representation: for first no man now for 16. hundred years almost, ever
saw Christ's body as he was before his death. And secondly no mortal eye can
behold his face in heaven, which passes the brightness of the sun. And thirdly,
though we had the true picture of his body yet it is not lawful to pray before
it, as having no warrant in Scripture for it but against it, as in the second
commandment.

Q. But may we not pray for our friends departed?

A. No, it is vain, because all that die go immediately either to heaven, or
to hell. When David's child was dead, he ceased praying for it, saying,
Wherefore should I fast or pray any longer. And there is no example nor rule in
Scripture for praying for men departed, so as it is against our faith in Gods
word.

Q. But is there not a third and middle place, namely Purgatory, where souls
must be purged before they come into heaven, into which no unclean thing can
enter.

A. Purgatory is a mere device of man's brain to pick fools purses, who must
pay sweetly for so many masses for their friends souls. And it is a
blasphemous doctrine, destroying the blood of Christ, which alone does purge
every true believer from all his sins. 1 Ioh. 1. 7. It leaves neither spot, nor
wrinkle, nor any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 27. And for Purgatory it is not so much as
once named in all the Scripture, as heaven and hell are. And if purgatory or
any material fire could purge away sin, as it never can: then Christ's blood
was spilt needlessly and in vain. And it is against nature for a material fire
to work upon a spiritual substance, as man's soul is.

Q. Is faith in Christ then sufficient to carry a man straight to heaven?

A. Yes surely; for so Christ says, Ioh. 5. 24.

Q. But no man is saved out of the Church: which is then the true Church of
Christ visible?

A. That Church whose faith is guided by the only rule of Gods Word, and has
the due administration of the Sacraments.

Q. Cannot that be a true Church of of Christ visible, which denies the
Scriptures to be the only rule of faith?

A. It cannot. Because the only rule to know the true Church by, is the
Scripture. Secondly, because humane Traditions being against the Word of God,
and yet added to it, as an equal rule of faith, and of equal authority, quite
razeth the foundation of faith. Because such Traditions destroy the Scriptures;
and in vain do such worship to God; teaching for doctrines the commandments
of men, Mar. 7. 7. And will worship separates from Christ. Col. 2. 19, 23.

Q. But is not that a true, yea and the only true Church of Christ on earth
visible, which has one visible head as the Pope?

A. No. Such is neither the only true Church, no nor yet a true member of the
true Church of Christ visible on earth.

Q. Why so?

A. Because such a visible Head must needs be the great Antichrist, who usurps
that title and office which is proper to Christ alone: for such a one, as the
Pope, says in effect, Mat. ^4. 5*
I am Christ, because he takes upon him all the offices and prerogatives of
Christ over his Church. He usurps Christ's Kingly office, challenging
subjection of all men, great and small under pain of damnation. Secondly, he
usurps Christ's prophetical office challenging a freedom from, and an
impossibility of erring and a power to determine all matters of faith. Thirdly,
the Pope usurps Christ's Priestly office, in challe^ging a plenary power to
pardon sins, and in setting up a breaden Christ in the mass to be a
propitiatory sacrifice for quick and dead. And thus be is that Antichrist
spoken of, 2. These. 2. who shows himself that he is God.

Q. What becomes then of that body, which cleaues to such a head?

A. He is so powerful in all deceiueablenes of unrighteousness, and hypocrisy,
that those do perish who trust unto him, such as are possessed with a strong
delusion, to believe lies, that they all might be damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2.

Q. But is not that the only true Church of Christ visible which only can show
a visible and uninterrupted succession of Bishops sitting in Peter's chair,
ever since the Apostles times? Is not this visibility of succession an
infallible mark of the true Church of Christ visible?

A. No surely: for first, for Peter's chair, that's but made of cunning net
work, to enclose and catch the silly fish. And if ever Peter had been Bishop
of Rome, what is Peter's chair without Peter's faith and doctrine? They have
quite destroyed Peter's doctrine, 2 Pet. 5. 2. who said, feed the flock of God,
etc. taking the over sight of it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, neither as being Lords over Gods heritage,
but being ensamples to the flock. But the Pope and his Clergy do quite
contrary.

Secondly, visible succession of Bishops is no true mark of a true Church of
Christ, unless it can show a true succession of doctrine from the Apostles
writings. For may not errors and heresies creep upon the same particular
visible Church, and so in time insensibly like a gangrene, eat into the very
heart of it, and so leave it nothing but the very carcass of a Church, as it
has: done with the Church of Rome?

Thirdly, the succession of Romish Bishops has had many interruptions, so as
the chair has been empty for many years together, the body wanting a head,
or else having sometimes two, sometimes three heads at once, while three Popes
were at once. Once a woman Pope made the interruption. And so many heretical
Popes, so many Simoniacall, so many exercising diabolical arts, have made a
fearful interruption, never to be made up again.

Q. But how can the Protestant Churches prove themselves true Churches, while
they cannot show an uninterrupted line of succession of such and such Doctors,
as have from age to age conveyed the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles
down to our very times?

A. This is as frivolous, as it would be a tedious task. It suffices us, that
we can show our faith to be evidently grounded upon doctrine of the Apostles,
and so we are sure we succeed them in their doctrine and faith, though
perhaps we cannot punctually and particularly number up all those Doctors, by
whom we have received it from hand to hand. It suffices we have our evidences
to show out title and right to our inheritance. Let those that want the
evidences of Scripture, which we have, prove their pretended title by a long
beadrow of personal succession. Blessed be God we have the Scriptures to
prove our faith and religion by, and we need seek no further, though we
could show how our faith has been professed in all ages from the Apostles
days.

Q. If it be so; how comes it, that the Romish Priests and Jesuits do so
stand upon succession, and put us to prove our religion by naming all those
Doctors in all ages, who from one to another have brought our religion home to
our doors?

A. This is a mere shift, whereby they gull and beguile silly souls, and so
they gain time in exacting that, which they themselves are never able to show
on their part. For they cannot exactly tell the punctual time, wherein all
their errors, and numberless ceremonies entered into their Church, nor can
they tell the authors of them perfectly, It suffices that the envious man,
Satan did sow so many tares in that field, while the husbandmen, drowned in
sensuality, were fast asleep. Yet all that while, God had his Church, though
persecuted here and there by Antichrist and his followers: which Church blessed
be God we Protestants in England now a long time have iniored, and pray and
trust we shall enjoy to the coming of Jesus Christ. Even so come Lord Jesus.
Amen.

FINIS.
To my loving and beloved Friends and Neighbors, the Parishioners of S.
Matthews Friday street, increase of Grace in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.
MOst loving neighbors, though late, yet now at length I present you with a
Dedication, small in bulk, but for the substance weighty, being the sum of
those doctrines which you have heard me deliver in the course of my
ministerial charge; so as both you may more properly challenge an interest
herein then others: and my self may more boldly presume of an acceptance at
your hands, of whose patience and love toward my poor ministry I have had so
plentiful proof. The Preacher says, The words of the wise are as goads, and
as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies, which are given by one
shepherd. I therefore have collected these short notes to be as nails to
fasten the maine doctrines (which you have heard, and here may see) upon your
believing hearts, and as goades, to quicken up your willing (...) affections to
the perfecting of holiness in the fear of God. And because it is the duty of
faithful parents to propagate and convey the knowledge of Christ unto their
children and families, as Abraham did: I therefore commend these grounds to
your Christian care, to the end you may the more easily instruct your families
in them, that you with yours being built upon the rock of truth, may be
established in the belief and love of the same against the winds of error,
and waves of heresy, till you arrive on the haven of eternal rest, which is in
Jesus Christ: which that you may do, it shall be the daily prayer, and
dutiful endeavor of

your unworthy, but faithful and loving Pastor, Henry Burton.


