An EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER, made in diverse Lectures, and now drawn
into Questions and Answers for the greater benefit of the simpler sort:
Whereunto is prefixed a brief treatise of prayer for all men.

Published at the request of diverse godly and well disposed: By W. B. Minister
of the Word at Reading in Barkshire.

AT LONDON, Printed by the Widow Orwin for Thomas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster row at the sign of the Talbot. 1594.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND HIS SINgular good Lord, Robert Earl of Essex and
Ewe, Vicount Hereford, and Bourghchier, Lord Ferrers and Chartly, Lord
Bourchier, and Louaine, Knight of the noble Order of the Garter, Master of her
Majesty's Horse, and one of her Majesty's most honorable privy Council: W. B.
wishes increase of al true honor in this life, and eternal felicity in the
life to come.
SOme are desirous (right Honorable) to store up those things to their further
benefit, which before they have heard to their present comfort, like the good
men of Athens which said to Paul, We will hear thee again of this matter,
Act. 17. At the request of such men I have yielded to the publishing of those
Lectures which I made upon the Lords Prayer: notwithstanding the labors of
other reverend and excellent men, which have both travailed far, and waded
deep in this argument. And if any man look for any new matter at my hand, he
does but loose his labor: for I must confess that I have walked by their
lights, and trod their steps for the greatest part of my journey: neither have
I taken upon me to perform any thing by my self more then others have done,
but to join with others in the building of the spiritual temple, whereunto I
have brought such as I had. And for my own part, I think my self most highly
bound to praise his heavenly Majesty, that has vouchsafed me (the most
unprofitable of al) a place amongst his builders, though I bring but lime and
mortar to the building, and a place amongst his soldiers, though I do but now
and then strike a stroke, or carry their armor after them, and a place
amongst his skilful Archers, though my self do but give aim at the mark as
it were in respect of them that have pierced it, and gotten the victory: they
are gone before with the vintage, I come after with the gleanings, which may
be as acceptable to some as the harvest is to others. And seeing as the Lord
blesses whom he will, and by whom he will, I know no cause of disconte^tednes
to remain unto any, seeing it is lawful for every one to do what good he
can, both by speaking and writing, especially in these days wherein Satan
bears such sway, and by his servants labors by all means possible to
hinder the growth and thriuing of Gods church, to destroy the faith of Gods
children, to hold al men in miserable blindness and ignorance: yea, and if it
were possible, to bring to pass that God should have no true worship, yea no
worship at all done unto him amongst the sons of men. I am bold my good Lord
to offer this small treatise unto your Honor, both in respect of my bounden
duty, as also for the worthiness of the matter handled therein, which shows
both the matter of prayer, and also the right order and manner of calling upon
the name of God, amongst all estates, at all times, in all places, and for all
wants, which is such a point of Gods worship, as who so has attained unto the
true knowledge, and right practice of the same, has obtained a great matter,
if not the greatest of al in this life. For such a one may have free access to
the throne of grace, and stand in the presence of the almighty, when another
shall fly from his presence: such a one may batter and beat down the walls,
the cities, and the holds of mighty enemies, when other shall not dare to
come near them: he shall break the prison doors, and make iron gates to open
of their own accord, when others shall lie by it: he shall do as much with
one man, as others shall do with a hundred, and more too: for he shall be able
not only to prevail against men, yea though they be many, and mighty, and
crafty, but he shall prevail with God himself like Jacob, until he has
prevailed against Satan, and all the power of hell, and gotten the masterie
over himself, even to the denial of himself, for the trueths sake, which is
the greatest victory that can be gotten: he shall have power and skill to
tame his own affections, which is more then the taming of wild beasts: he
shall find patience in adversity, and thankfulness in prosperity, and
contentation in every trial: he shall see the mountains covered with heavenly
soldiers for the defense of Gods people, as Elisha did: he shall raise ^he
dead, and water the earth with abundance of rain, as Elias did: he shall stop
the mouths of the hungry lions without any violence, as Daniel did, and
quench the flames of fire without any water, as Shedrach and his fellows did.
In a word, the effects of prayer are wonderful and infinite: for what may not
he have and effect, that shall but ask and have?

Who were ever more honored of men, then they that have given most honor unto
God? And who do more honor the Lord, then they that do truly call upon his
name by prayer? who more renowned, and beloved then the godly, and zealous in
true religion? And what godliness or religon can there be without the true
knowledge and right practice of prayer? who were ever more valiant in war,
more mild in peace, more cherefull in prison, more sober in liberty, more
painful in health, more comfortable in sickness, more godly in their life, or
more happy in their death, then the faithful? And who were ever faithful
without prayer, which is the chiefest fruit of faith, and borne with faith,
both borne together like twins? To whom does the Lord give his grace and
favor, but to the humble and lowly? And who were ever truly humbled, but those
which by prayer unto God in the bitter feeling of sin, have most confessed,
and acknowledged their wantes, their weaknesses, their imperfections, and al
their iniquities?

Where did ever the manifold graces of God meet and dwell, but in the soul
of the faithful, which have still been conversant in calling upon the name of
Jehovah? For he that has the spirit of prayer, has a speedy messenger
continually in a readiness, at all needs, to travel for him between heaven
and earth, and sometime brings with him lively faith, and true repentance,
sometime joy in the holy Ghost, sometime patience in affliction, sometime
assurance of Gods eternal favor, sometime deliverance out of danger, sometime
wisdom and discretion, sometime zeal of Gods glory, and love to the brethren,
sometime one grace, and sometime another, and sometime it causes all these
graces of God to meet together in one man, where they do rejoice one in
another, and one embrace another, like friends met at a feast, but the
party that does entertain them is ever the greatest gainer. The heavenly art
of prayer (if I may so call it) is an art of all arts. He is counted the best
Orator that can best persuade, and most move the affections of men, but he
that has learned to pray well, shall persuade not men perhaps, but GOD
himself, and move him that is the mouer and perswader of all men's hearts and
affections. Philosophy searches out much by arguments and demonstrations,
but all grounded upon natural reason: but prayer seeks out those things that
reason doubts, yea and despaireth of, because it is grounded not upon reason
but upon faith, which is far above all natural reason, and is then most
busy, and lively in working when natural reason is at her wits end. Grammar
teaches to speak well, but not the language of Canaan, that is, the holy
language of God, as prayer does. Arithmeticke helps a man to number many
things: but by the art of prayer we may learn to number our days as David
desired, which is to apply our hearts to true wisdom, and that is the best
numbering. The best Arithmetician cannot number that which is infinite, not by
all his wit and skill compass all to himself that he has always numbered:
but he that has learned the art of prayer may comprehend by faith (which does
accompany his prayer) the infinite mercies of God, and appropriat^ the^ to
himself. Geometry measures out lands and Lordshippes, countries, and
kingdoms, and the whole earth: but what is that to prayer? which measures out
heaven and earth and the land of the living, but yet no more then faith
persuades her to be her own. Astronomy looks aloft, and yet no hyer then
the stars, measuring out the causes and effects of things by the course of
nature: but the faithful which have the spirit of true prayer, look up to
God himself which is exalted far above the stars, and judges not of
things by the course of nature, but by the grace, and gracious promises of
God, which do over rule all nature. As for Music, though it be excellent,
and delights the mind, yet is it not to be compared with the hea^^^^^ art
of praying, which helpe^ (...) faithful soul to true comfort in (...) midst
of the greatest distresses and agonies that can be. The study of the
scriptures and the knowledge of God, and of al other heavenly things, of all
knowledge is the most excellent (I speak of illumi^ation, which is without
sanctification) for that it causes the mind to mount up above the earth unto
the contemplation of divine things, which other arts and sciences do not,
whose matter and subject is altogether of the earth, and earthly, and leads
but to the earth: but he that has the true knowledge, and the right practice
of prayer (joined with the former) shall enjoy God, and in him all true
happiness, which is more then to know it, or to see it. In a word, a man may
be a good Grammarian and speak well, a good Philosopher and dispute well, a
good Rhetorician and persuade well, a good Arithmetician and number well, a good
Astronomer and conjecture well, a good Musician and play well, a good
Politician and live well, a good Linguist and interpret well, and a good
Divine and preach well, and in all these excel, and yet go to hell when all
is done: but they that have these, and the spirit of sanctification and grace
to teach them the right practice of prayer, are most happy: for they have the
key that opens the door of Gods liberality, which will bring them to the
full possession of happiness. Therefore my good Lord, since prayer is an exercise
of the soul, so princely, so honorable, so heavenly, so mighty, and every way
so excellent, and renowned as it is, what could I commend unto your Honor that
might better testify a discharge of duty in me, or better fit your Honors
religious disposition, whose heart the Lord has sanctified to the zealous
embracing of his sacred word and Gospel, and the advancement of his glory,
in furthering the building up of his Church. And now (hoping for your Honors
favorable acceptance hereof) I commend your Honor unto the most gracious
blessing and protection of the Almighty.

Your Honors most humbly to be commanded, William Burton.

A BRIEF TREATISE OF PRAYER: WHEREIN IS declared how far it is lawful to
pray for all men: and whether it be lawful to pray for the salvation of a
reprobate or no:
By W. B. for the satisfying of his congregation, and clearing of himself.
Of all the spiritual exercises of a Christian (wherein stands the
principal part of Gods divine worship,) what one more holy, more heavenly, or
more necessary then true prayer? And yet what is more neglected, and profaned
as that is? Psalm. 14.
Not to call upon the name of God at all, is a note of a wicked man: and to
pray though much and often without any regard or care to pray aright, Esai. 1.
is a badge of an hypocrite: Yet who almost for the whole neglect of so great a
duty, fears the censure of a wicked man? or for the horrible profaning of
the name of God in abusing an exercise so heavenly and necessary, suspecteth
himself to be in the way of hypocrites, which leads to eternal destruction
both of body and soul? Some care not whether they pray or no, and think it a
needles labor and unprofitable to call upon the almighty, and such there were
in Jobs time. Job. 21. ^5.
The reason of which their outrageous blasphemy, or blasphemous outrage, is
their abundant prosperity, and great wealth, wherein they put their
confidence, and in the pride of their wicked hearts stick not either to deny
God, or to defy him. Psalm. 55.
Some think prayer to be needful, and do sometime use the same, being
forced thereunto either by the biting of conscience, or extremity of pain, or
because it is the custom, and that it is good manners to do as others do.
Some pray when they are at leisure, and till they be at leisure God must wait
upon them, and when their good leisure seru^th them, the Lord shall have his
stint, whether they understand it or no, or whether it be between waking and
sleeping, or no, they never look to that: and if God will not take their lazy,
drowsy, cold, slothful, ignorant, and idle prayers, he is like to get none
of them: as though the halt, the lame, blind, and skuruie sacrifices were good
enough for him, when the devil has the best. Some are a little more devout
and earnest in prayer, but yet very preposterous and profane, preferring
earthly things before heavenly blessings like Esaw, who preferred pottage
before an inheritance: and when they crave such things, it is likewise as S.
James says, Iam. 1.
to spend them upon their own pleasures. Some pray, but not in charity,
because they are all for themselves, forgetting quite the communion of Saints,
which yet they say they do believe. But if their prayers did proceed from that
faith which works by love, and by that love which seeks not her own
things, Galath. 5.
then would they also remember the affliction of poor. 1. Cor. 13.
Joseph, and the wants of their Christian brethren in all places of the world.
Othersome have more charity in prayer, for they will not stick to pray for all
Christian souls living or dead, like beggars which straw their prayers at
every man's door they come at. Some again never pray for any man until they
be dead, and then they are merueilous pitiful, and painful in throwing the^r
devotions after them, whom in their life time they never regarded. Some again
are grown to be more charitable in prayer the^ God would have them to be, like
the Papists, which will do more work for their wages, then ever the Lord
required at their hands, because they will not be beholding to him for heaven,
but he shall be beholding to them for their works of supererogation. Such are
they that hold we ought to pray for all men, according to the very letter of
the scripture, without any exception, living or dead, elect or reprobate, for
the enemies of the Gospel as well as for the friends of the Gospel, that God
would bless them in all their enterprises, whatsoever they be, whether with God
or against him, with Prince, or country, or against them, all is one: and for
the reprobate likewise, that they may be saved, as well as the elect,
whatsoever God has decreed to the contrary: and some think it a point of
charity too, to pray for the devils, and it may be in good policy that they
do it, for by this means, if they should chance to go to hell, they may
find more favor at the devils hand, then others, because they were so
charitable as to pray for him when they lived. Now as touching those that of
their charity are so good as to pray for the salvation of the reprobate
(whosoever they be that is known to GOD) what warrant, or example out of Gods
book have they to bear them out in this superfluous and foolish charity? I
cannot yet find of whom they should learn to be so pitiful, except it be of
Pope Gregory, of whom in the Popes Legend there is this story recorded, to
his everlasting commendation, as they thought, viz. That on a time going
through the Market of Rome, called Traianns Market, he remembered that Traianus
was in Hell torments, because he dyed a Pa^nime or Infidel: and all on a
sudden he betook him to his devotions, and in great pity fell to prayer for
Traianus being in Hell, and (as the story says) a voice from heaven told him
that his prayers were heard, and Traianus should be delivered from the pains
of Hell, but not from the prison of Hell: and he for his part (because he was
so saucy and bold with God as to pray for one that God had decreed to be
damned) must needs be punished, and two penalties were appointed him, of
which he was to take his choice, and that was either to lie two days in
Purgatory, or to suffer sickness while he lived. He knowing the pains of
Purgatory very well, would none of that, but chose rather to endure sickness al
days of his life: whereupon he presently ^^ell sick, and diseased, and was
ever after to his dying day troubled with fevers, or the axes, or head ach, or
sore eyes, or gow^e in the feet, or with one disease or other. And well enough
served, to teach him to pray for a reprobate another time. And surely if all
those that are so charitable as Pope Gregory was, that is, to pray for the
salvation of all men, without exception, if (I say) they were sure to be
enjoined Pope Gregory's penance, it would make them take heed how they prayed
against the will of God for reprobates and all, while they lived.

But now for the better satisfying of those which have been troubled about this
matter, and desired resolution at my hands for the removing of their doubts,
we will a little further consider of the matter, and see what we are to judge
of it by the word of God, which is the perfectest rule that we can go by. The
state of the question.
Your question (beloved in the Lord) is, Whether it be lawful to pray for all
men or no: yea even for the very reprobate whom God has rejected in his
eternal counsel, that they may be saved in the day of the Lord: for that is
the state of the question indeed. To which my answer is, that all men being
taken in that sense, we are not, nay we ought not to pray for all, because all
shall not be saved. Indeed some of the ancient writers have thought that al men
shall be saved, Origin.
and that the devils and all shall be saved in the day of judgment. But that
was their error: for it is evident by the whole course of the scriptures, that
al men shall not be saved. Matthew. 7.
There is a broad way, and there is a narrow way, says the Lord Jesus, the one
leading to destruction, the other to salvation. Many walk in the one, few
find the other. And being once in hell there is no redemption. Again, many
shall strive to enter and shall not enter: to show that all shall not be saved.
And the Apostle says, that the church is like a Noble man's house, 2. Timoth. 2
wherein are vessels some appointed to honor, and some to dishonor, and the
Lord knows who be his: as if he should say, also the Lord knows some that
be not his: and all to show that all shall not be saved. The whole world
stands of believers and unbelievers; they that believe pass from death to
life; Ioh. 3.
they that believe not are condemned already: therefore all shall not be
saved. When the Son of man comes to judgment, who shall stand before him?
Goats and sheep says the Evangelist, Matthew. 25.
to whom he shall say, Depart ye wicked into hell fire: to the other, Come ye
blessed, etc. therefore all shall not be saved. This does Saint John also
plainly show, Apocal. 21.
when he says, that there is a burning, lake without the heavenly Jerusalem;
wherein the whore of Babylon shall be tormented, and with her dogs, that is,
dogged people, enchanters, whoremongers, liars, blasphemers, the fearful and
unbelievers, etc. all which places do cry loud enough, and tell us that all
shall not be saved. The Apostle Paul rendereth a reason for it, when he says,
that it pleased the Lord to choose Jacob, and to reject Esau, that he might
show his wrath, Romans 9. 22, 23.
and make his power known in the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction: and
that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy,
which he has prepared unto glory. But you will say, that we know not who be
reprobates, and who be not, therefore we ought to pray for all. It is true
indeed, that no man knows certainly who are the Lords but the Lord himself,
does it therefore follow, that we must pray that all may be saved? What? for
those whom God will not have saved? God forbid. Our Savior Christ (that was as
wise and as charitable as they that hold this point) has taught us to pray
otherwise: When you pray, say* Thy will be done: that is, Lord save those whom
thou will save, and not whom thou will not save. So that our prayers we see
must be grounded upon Gods will, and not upon our own wills. If then he will
not save all, we must not pray against his will, that he would save al: For
then in stead of saying, thy will be done, we should pray thus or to this
effect: Lord we know that thou have decreed, and appointed from everlasting,
whom to glorify in thy kingdom, and whom to cast down to hell for ever:
Esai. 46. 10.
and we know that thy counsel shall stand, for so says thy word: but yet for
all that we have a mind and desire to have all men saved, therefore alter thy
decree, and change thy purpose, that is, be contrary to thy self, and so not
thy will, but ours be done. From such kind of praying, or rather blasphemous
and presumptuous prating, the Lord deliver us, and give us grace to pray as his
word does teach us to pray, that is, in our prayers to refer our wills to
Gods will, and not to presume to crave that which God will never grant. But
for as much as God has his number in all parts of the world, who are known to
himself, and Christian charity which is a most lively fruit of faith,
binds us to pray for the whole Church of Christ, which is Catholic, that is,
scattered upon the face of the whole earth, which Church likewise is sometime
visible, and sometime invisible unto men, and sometime more visible, and
sometime less visible, as in the days of Elias, when the Lord had 7000. in
Israel more then Elias saw, as sharp sighted as he was: and because all are
not called at one hour, but some to day, some to morrow, some at one time,
and some at another: therefore it is lawful for us to pray for the^ thus: That
in Spain, Portingale, Rome, Turkey, Iewrie, and in all other places of the
world, yea, and of those which do now persecute Gods Church, as sometime Paul
did, so many of them as do belong to Gods eternal election, it would please
his Majesty to convert by the preaching of his word, and the effectual
working of his holy spirit in their hearts, or by such means as shall seem
good to his divine Majesty in his best appointed time. And as for the rest,
which do not belong to his eternal election, and covenant of grace, we are to
pray that his will may be done upon them, and he may be glorified in his
judgments upon the^, as he was glorified in the overthrow of Pharao, and his
host.

But the matter must not be so lightly carried away: Object.
for they that hold the contrary, seem to have scripture to bear them out:
which if they did understand and apply so well, as they can avouch it, al
should be well. The common alleged place is out of 1. Tim. 2. 4. 1. Timoth.
2. 4.
God will that al men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Now for an answer, this I say, that, that place must of necessity be
understood either of the revealed will of God, or of his secret will. If this
place be understood of Gods revealed will set down in his word, then the
sense is this, that God does call all men by the preaching of his word to the
knowledge of his truth, and to eternal life, if they believe in Christ: and
this salvation is offered to all men, though al men believe not. For by this
means the reprobate and unbelievers, are showed what they should do, and so
are left without excuse in the day of judgment. But God does not give them
grace to repent, and believe, as he does to the elect, because he has
otherwise decreed of them, and if he does not, who shall compel him so to do?
or who shall complain justly against his divine Majesty, seeing as the Lord is
bound to no man? If that place be understood of the secret will of GOD, then
the sense is threefold: First, God will that all men shall be saved: that is,
God in his eternal counsel, according to his good pleasure, has decreed of
all sorts and degrees of men to save some, of Jews and Gentiles some, of Kings
and Princes some, of subjects and commons some, of learned and unlearned some,
of rich and poor some, of Captains and soldiers some, of Merchants and
Mariners some, of Craftsmen and Husbandmen some, and of all sorts, of all
estates, and of all degrees, and conditions of men some shall be saved: which
agrees with the saying of S. John in the Revelation, who says, Revel 7.
That he saw a great multitude of all nations, and kindreds, and languages
follow the lamb, that is, Jesus Christ, and stood before the throne, and
praised him that sat upon the throne. And the cause of the Apostles writing
thus to Timothy, was for that the Church of God lived the^ under Nero a wicked
Prince and cruel tyrant, and an enemy to the Gospel of Christ, in so much as
some doubted whether he were to be prayed for or no: therefore the Apostle puts
them out of doubt for that matter, and shows that prayers must be made for
Kings and Princes, and all men, and therefore for their Prince, though he were
a wicked enemy, for that of all men and all sorts of men God has his number,
and what could they tell whether he were one of that number or no? therefore they
were to pray for him. There is a second sense or meaning of those words
delivered by the learned, and that is this: God will that all men shall be
saved, etc. That is, so many as are saved, are saved by the will of GOD, for as
much as none are saved against his will. And that this may likewise be the
Apostles meaning, it may appear by another place of scripture like unto that.
It is in John. 1. 9. where the Evangelist speaking of the Son of God, he
says thus: He was the true light that lighteneth every man that comes into
the world: meaning indeed, that whosoever is lightened, is enlightened by the
Son of God; not that every one particularly that comes into the world is
lightened, none excepted: for there be some in the world which remain in
darkness, and the Gospel is hidden from them, 2. Cor. 4. 3, 4.
such as the god of this world has blinded, that is, the devil has blinded
their eyes, that the light should not shine unto them, as the Apostle shows.
And this is no otherwise spoken, then we use in our common manner of speaking:
For if there be but one man in a town that reaches Grammar, we say, such a
man teaches all the town Grammar, meaning, that all that are taught of that
town are taught by him. Or if there be but one way into a Noble man's house,
and suppose by one gate only the way lies into the house: if any man ask of
us whether he may not go into the house another way, we will answer and say:
No, al men go in at this gate, or the Noble man has given commandment that
all shall come in at that gate: meaning, that so many as do go in, do enter
by that gate. So in God there is but one will, by which all men do enter into
heaven, that is, all that do enter into heaven do pass by that will of God,
and not without it, nor besides it, nor against it. But yet there is a third
sense of that place in Timot. God will that all men shall be saved, etc. That
is, God has certainly decreed, that all his elect and chosen people shall be
saved, but not every particular man in the world. And we are to consider,
that this word (all) is not put always in the scripture for every particular
man, woman, and child, but sometime for the greater part, and sometime for the
elect only. For the greater part it is taken in Gen 47. 15. Genesis 47. 15.
All the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said, give us bread, etc. that is, a
great part of the Egyptians came to Joseph: for you must imagine that some
might be sick, and some were infants, and could not come. And so it is also
taken in Matthew. 21. 10. Matthew 21. 10.
When he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, that is, the
greatest part of the city was moved. And in Mark 1. 5. Mark. 1. 5.
All the country of Judea went out unto John, and were baptized of him, that
is, a great company of Judea. For the elect only it is also taken sometime: as
in Luke 3. 6. All flesh shall see the salvation of God, that is, Luke 3. 6.
all the elect shall ^^e it. Romans 5. 18.
And in Romans 5. 18. As by the offense of one man, the fault came on all men to
condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the benefit abounded toward all to
the justification of life: that is, toward all the elect it abounded. 1. Cor.
15. 22.
And in 1. Cor. 15. 22. As by Adam all dye, so by Christ shall al be made
alive: that is, all the elect shall be saved by Christ. These general
speeches must be restrained to their kinds, because (as Pet. Martyr says) the
holy scripture does mark two sorts of men, one of the godly, and another of
the wicked: and does usually set down universal or general propositions of
them both, which the wise and discreet reader should observe, and refer
them, or restrain them to their proper kind of which they be spoken, and of
which they are to be understood: As for example, I^h. 6. 45.
in John 6. 45. They shall all be taught of Goa. Ioh. 12. 32.
Ioh. 12. 32. If I were lift up from the earth* I will draw all men unto me,
says the Lord Jesus. And in Esai. 66. 23. Esai. 66. 23.
From month to month and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall al flesh come to
worship before me, says the Lord. And in Joel 2. 28. Joel. 2. 18.
I will power out my spirit upon al flesh: with many such like. Now all these
places are universally and generally propounded, but yet they are to be
restrained only to the godly and faithful people of the Lord, of them only
they are to be understood, and cannot be applied to the wicked. So there be
other places of scripture, which be as universally propounded, but are to be
understood only of the wicked, and unfaithful, and not of the godly: as in
John 3. 32. Ioh. 3. 32.
That he testifies, which he has seen, and heard, but no man receives his
testimony: that is, none of the wicked receive it, or very few do receive
it: for the faithful do receive it, but the reprobate and unbelievers do not
receive it. And in Matthew. 10. 22. Matthew. 10. 22.
Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake: that is, of all the wicked. And
again, see the like in Philip. 2. 21. All seek their own, and not that which
is Jesus Christ's: that is, a great number do so, all the wicked do so, but not
the godly. There be many more places like unto these, which must be restrained
to their proper kind: but this may suffice for an answer to that objection out
of Timothy.

There is another objection as common as the former, Object. 2.
and to as great purpose. And thus they reason: So many shall be saved as
Christ dyed for: but Christ dyed for all, therefore all shall be saved. To
which objection some answer as the Schoolmen do, that Christ dyed for all
men, sufficienter, non efficaciter, sufficiently, but not effectually: meaning,
that his death was sufficient to have saved 10000. worlds, in respect of the
merit of his death, by reason of the worthiness of his person, if all did
believe in him: but all do not believe in him, therefore all shall not be
saved. But this distinction of sufficiency and efficacy, is thought, and that
of very learned Divines, to be a very idle distinction, and too weak to bear
away the burden of the question: for if Christ dyed sufficiently for all, he
dyed effectually for all: and if it be not effectual, how is it sufficient?
And they hold that the efficacy of his death, and the sufficiency of his
death be all one. But to this reply will be answered again, that it is
sufficient, in respect of his own merit, and should be effectual for all if
all did believe. But all do not believe, and for them it is not effectual.
True it is, for unbelievers it is neither effectual, nor sufficient. And
whereas it is effectual for the faithful, it is in respect of the infinite
merit of his death and passion, by reason of the worthiness and excellency of
his person, wherein dwelt the fulness of the Godhead bodily: (...) 2.
or else it had been neither sufficient, nor effectual for them, no more then
for the other. Now whereas they say, if all did believe in him, his death were
sufficient to save all; it is true: but then it is demanded again, Why al do
not believe? It cannot be denied, but that faith is the gift of God, (...)
and that it is not in man's power to believe when he will, as freewill Papists
dream. Sure it was never intended in the vnchange^ble will and eternal
purpose of God that they should believe, as it was his purpose on the other
side to give faith to his elect. And as it was never intended by God that all
should believe, so likewise was it never intended by God that his Son should
dye for all: but it was ever intended by his divine Majesty that his elect only
should believe, so likewise was it intended that his Son should dye only for
the elect, whom only the Lord purposed from everlasting to save by faith in
the merits of his Sons death and passion. But as touching the unbelievers, it
was never intended by his Majesty that his Son should dye for them: for if
he had, then should they also have believed as well as others. And therefore
what sufficiency of Christ's death can be there imagined for unbelievers, where
there was never any intendement of his death for them? The death of Christ had
been in deed sufficient for all men, if God had decreede it for all, or else
not, for his will, power and grace, do always go together: for what he will
do, his power is sufficient to effect, but what his will or nature resists,
his power and grace cannot effect. 2. Timo. 2. 13. He is faithful, and cannot
deny himself. In 2. Corin. 12. 9. The Lord says* My grace is sufficient for
thee, but in Ro^. 9. 18. He joins his will and his mercy together in the
softning of the elect: and likewise matcheth his will and his wrath together in
the hardening of the reprobate: to show, that both of the elects salvation, and
the reprobates damnation, there is a higher cause then faith in the one, and
unbelief in the other, and that is the will of GOD: with which his grace is
sufficient to save many, and without which it is not sufficient to save any:
for neither does his grace draw any to heaven, nor his wrath send any to hell
against his will, but both are according to his good will and pleasure, and in
both his own glory is the mark that he aims at.
If any man will say that Christ has saved more by his death, then his father
had from everlasting elected, and chosen, he does plainly deceive himself: for
Christ's will and his fathers are all one: He prayed, Thy will, not mine be
done. Christ dyed for none but those and such like, as he prayed for, being our
Mediator: And he prayed for none but for such as his father had given him,
that is, for such as he had elected to be saved by faith in him, as appears
in John 17. 9. I pray not for the world, but for such as thou have given me,
for they are thine. Now, if the Lord Jesus had dyed for all the world, as he
did for the elect only, shall we think that he would not also have prayed
for them as well as for the elect?

But (to draw to an end) if it be lawful to pray for the salvation of the
reprobate, the is it lawful to pray for Judas, and Saul, and Esau, of who^ the
scriptures do testify, that they be rejected of the Lord. Judas is called the
lost child of perdition, and a devil. Ioh. 6. Esau is said to find no place
to repentance, though he sought the blessing with tears, Heb. 12. And of Saul,
the Lord himself in expres words says, that he has rejected him, 2 Samuel 7.
Shall we now pray that he would change his decree and receive them again to
favor? (Suppose that they were alive again, as they be dead) but indeed
prayer for the dead, and prayer for the reprobate, are much alike, the one has
as good warrant as the other, and the one shall be heard as soon as the
other. That it is not lawful to pray for such as God has cast out of his
favor, appears plainly by diverse places of the scripture: In Iere. 7. 15.
16. the Lord faith thus, concerning the obstinate Jews which contemned the
word of the Lord: I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your
brethren, etc. Therefore thou shall not pray for them neither entreat me, for
I will not hear thee. Upon which place we may reason thus: Whosoever God has
cast out of his sight, that is, out of his favor, and will not be entreated
for them, for such we must not pray, but such are all the reprobate, therefore
we must not pray for them, I mean for their salvation. The very like words we
have again in Ier. 11. 14. (speaking of obstinate Idolaters in the land of
Judah and Jerusalem) he says thus to the Prophet: Therefore thou shall not
pray for this people, neither lift up a cry, or prayer for them, for when they
cry unto me in their trouble I will not ^eare them: To teach us that we must
pray for none but for such as shall be heard themselves when they pray: but
such are not the reprobate, Prouer. 28.
for the sacrifices of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: therefore we
must not pray for them. Many reasons and arguments more might be brought for
this purpose, but these may suffice.

Now, as the scripture has forbidden prayers to be made for those that are
cast out of Gods gracious presence, so does it also approve the prayers of the
faithful which have been made against them, and against such as have been
apparent and professed enemies of Gods truth and Gods Church: and thereof we
have many examples; as the Is^aelites praying against the Egyptians, both when
they were oppressed in Egypt, and when they were dist^essed at the red sea. We
have also Moses holding up his hands in prayer against Amal^^k till they were
weary: Exodus 17. 12.
Hezechiah against Rabsakah, and Senacherib: David prays against the
unnatural conspiracy of Absalom his son, and the ungodly counsel of
Achitophel his subject. And in the Psalme^ how many prayers does he make
against the enemies of God, that the Lord would confound them in their devises,
and destroy them in their conspiracies, that their memorial might perish out
of the earth? and many such: which are to teach us, that as we are not to pray
for the reprobate, whether they be known to man or not known: so also we are
bound sometime to pray against them, but especially against such as oppose
themselnes maliciously against God, against his truth, and against his Church
and children: for such were the persons against whom David prays so
earnestly, and denounces such fearful curses and judgments. As the Pope,
Tur^^, Spaniards, and Papists, and other traitors do.
For shall we pray God to bless and save those that go about to destroy his
Church, his truth, his anointed, and his children? God forbid, but that either
the Lord would convert them, or so many of them as do belong unto his
Majesty, or else confound them in their mischievous devises and practices,
when, and how it pleases him, that they may not make spoil of the Lords
inheritance. And yet thus far, the scriptures do teach us to pray for the
very known enemies of Gods Church, Note.
that the Lord would vouchsafe in his mercy to bless them with temporal
blessings, as health, and plenty, and peace for the Churches sake, that is
amongst them: which is manifest in Iere. 29. 7. Iere. 29. 7.
The Jews being Captives in Babylon, are commanded to pray for the prosperity
of Babylon: his reason is this: for in the peace thereof you shall have peace:
which is nothing else but to pray that the Whale may do well, and come safely to
the shore, for Jonas his sake which is in his belly, and lives in hope to be
cast up on land. And what else is this kind of praying, but in policy to
reprieue a woman condemned by law, and to use her well, to save the child that
is in her womb, which may prove a profitable member in the common wealth? But
otherwise, if Gods enemies come to invade, or deal extremely with Gods
servants, or go about any wicked enterprise against the Prince, or Country,
or Gospel, or any Christian professor of the same, we ought to pray against
them, and do what we can lawfully to suppress them and root them out, which
is nothing else but to kill a Lion, that a man may be saved which is in the
Lions claws ready and likely to be devoured: or to pluck down one house
that is on a fire, for the saving of many that else are likely to be consumed:
or to pull up the weeds that the corn be not choked. And further, as it is in
these and such like points touching manners of men, so ought it also to be in
matters of faith and doctrine, which (if it be not sound, but corrupt and
false) tends to the destruction of the faith, and the souls of men, as the
sword comes to destroy the bodies of men. And therefore is commandment given
by the Lord, that the false Prophet, and seducer of the Lords people should dye
the death: and if any come with any other doctrine, then that which is
agreeable with the word of God, Saint John says, we must neither receive him
to house, 2. Ioh.
nor so much as bid him God speed, that is, we must not be familiar with him,
much less must we pray for him, except it be for his conversion, if it
stands with the will of God, and not else neither.

Now a little to clear our selves from the suspicion of Pelagian heresy,
wherewith some think that they are tainted, which deny prayers for the
salvation of reprobates, and all men without exception, not respecting the will
of GOD, whereunto all our prayers indeed are to be referred. Indeed Pelagius
and his followers as they held many very foul and monsterous heresies, so in
that matter of prayer they erred most grossly. But that the difference may
appear between Pelagius and us, it will not be amiss to set down the words
of S. Augustine, as they be gathered by that reverend and learned man Dan^us in
his book of Heresies, who I belceaue did as well understand S. Augu^^ine, as
they that would seem to make thi^ doctrine Pela^ian heresy by alleging S.
Augustine: Destruunt etiam orationes, quas facit Ecclesia, sieve pro
infidelibus, and doctrinae Det resistentibus, vt conu^rtantur ad Deum, sieve pro
fidelibus, vt augeatur eis fides, and perseuerent in ea. Haec quippe non ab
ipso accipere, sed a seipsis homines habere contendunt, gratiam Dei, qua
liberamur, dicentes secundum merita nostra d^ri: that is, The Pelagians do
destroy prayers which the Church makes either for infidels, and those that
resist the doctrine of God, that they may be converted unto God: or for
believers, that their faith may be increased, and they may continue in the
same: for that they hold that men have not this grace from God, but of
themselves, saying, that our deliverance is given us according to our deserts.
Here we have the heresy of Pelagius and his disciples plain enough: (...)
for my own part I hold to be most accursed, and all true Christians fearing
God, do with all their hearts detest, and abhor it. But let us see what it
is. They will have no prayers to be made by the Church, either for the
conversion of unbelievers, or for the confirmation and strengthening of the
faithful. We hold the contrary ^o them both: for with the true Church of
(...) we pray for the conversion of Turks, of Jews, of Papists, of Atheists,
and al unbelievers, and heretics, and ungodly men, if they belong to God, and
stand with his sacred will: and we doubt not but that God has his number
amongst them all, which are known best to himself, for he knew 7000. in
Israel that were no friends to Baal, more then Elias saw. Again, amongst our
selves that profess the Gospel, an unbeliever to day may be a believer to
morrow, if his hour be come which God has set: for all infidels or
unbelievers, which is all one, are not reprobates, for some may be converted,
neither are all called at one hour: therefore charity binds us to live in
hope of him so long as he lives, and in hope of his conversion (if he belong
to God still I say, which no man knows but God himself) we are to pray for
him, but still referring our prayers to the will of God. And again, we hold
it a most necessary and Christian duty of love, to pray for the confirmation
of Gods children, and the proceeding and growing up of the faithful in faith,
and godliness: therefore there is great odds between the heresy of Pelagius
and our doctrine.

There is no less difference in the reasons, then there is in the
propositions: the reason why they deny the prayers of the Church for the
conversion of infidels, and the increasing of the faithful, is for that man
has (as they say) this grace of converting, and ability of believing,
repenting, etc. of himself, which we utterly both deny and defy. But our
question is of praying for the salvation of reprobates, and of all men without
exception, and our reason is grounded upon the will of God, and the
vnchangablenes of his will. And thus you see beloved, that we are as far
from the heresy of Pelagius, as they which would charge us with heresy, are
from understanding what Pelagian heresy means. Much more might be said of
this matter, but the large and full handling thereof I leave for those that are
more able to perform it then my self, as God shall give them occasion to
deal therein. In the mean time, this may serve as a plain confession of that
which my self believe of that point, according to the word of God, both for
the clearing of my self from all suspicion of heresy, as also for the better
satisfiyng and further confirming of you my beloved in the Lord Jesus, which
are of my congregation which fear God, and are desirous of the truth: and for
your benefit indeed I was principally drawn to the penning and publishing
hereof. The Lord give that blessing unto it which I could wish: and the God of
all mercy and grace confirm and establish your hearts and souls, in the
saving knowledge of his blessed truth; and grant that your love may abound yet
more and more in all knowledge and judgment, that you may discern those
things which differ, and allow the best things: and that you may be sincere and
without offense, unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, filled with the
fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of
God. Read with your best affections: and assist me with your prayers.

Your servant for Christ Jesus, William Burton.

Of Prayer in general.
Question. WHat is Prayer?

Answer. Prayer is a familiar, The definitions of Prayer.
and friendly talk of miserable and mortal man, with the glorious and
immortal God, wherein the heart being lifted up, with sure faith and steadfast
confidence in his promises, we do either crave for such things as we want, or
else give thanks for benefits already received.

Q. Now let me hear how you can prove this definition of prayer by the
Scriptures, and first, that it is a familiar talk of man with God?

A. That it is a familiar talk of man with God, it appeare^h by Abraham's manner
of entreating and praying for Sodom, in Genesis 18. 27. Genesis 18. 27.


Q. How prove you that it is a friendly talk between God and man?

A. It appears in that the Lord Jesus vouchsafes to account of the faithful
as of his friends, and so to call them: in Ioh. 15. 14. Ioh. 15. 14.


Q. You say that prayer is a familiar and friendly talk of man with God, what
may we learn by that?

A. We may learn two things: 1. That the love of God is unspeakable, which
will vouchsafe to talk with most miserable and sinful men, and not seldom,
but when, where, and how we will. 2. That we ought to prepare our selves both
with outward and inward worship, and reverence, when we come in prayer before
his Majesty, Hest. 4. 16.
like Hester, who fasted and prayed before she went in unto the King.


Q. You say in your definition of prayer, that prayer is made to GOD: ought we
not to pray to Saints as well as to God?

A. No. but to God only. To God only.


Q. How prove you that?

A. I prove it by three special reasons, Proved by 3. reasons.
or arguments drawn out of the word of God.

Q. What is your first reason? 1. Reason.


A. In Matthew. 4. 10. The Lord Jesus said unto the devil, Thou shait worship
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.

To pray to God is to worship and serve him, therefore to him only must we
pray.

Q. What is your second reason? 2. Reason.


A. We must pray only to him to whom we may say, Our father. But we can say
thus to none but to God only: and therefore we must pray to none but to God
only.

Q. What is your third reason?

A. In Romans 10. 14. it is said: Romans 10. 14.
How shall we call on him on whom we have not believed? upon which place I
reason thus:

The object of our faith must be the subject of our prayers: 3. Reason.
Christ only is the object of our faith, therefore Christ only must be the
su^^ect of our prayers.

Q. The Papists say we must believe in the Saints, Object.
and therefore pray to the: and that they seem to prove by two places of
Scripture: the one is, Philem. 4. 5. I thank my God for thy love, and faith
which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and all Saints: only by placing the
words: How answer you this place?

A. There must be an inuersion of the words, for love in the first place is
given to the Saints, and faith in the second place is given to Christ.

Q. How prove you that?

A. It appears plainly in the 7. verse, where the Apostle sayt^: We have
great joy, and consolation in thy love, because by thee brother, the Saints
hear^s are comforted.

Q. The other p^ace is in Exodus 14. las^ verse, Exodus 14. (...).
They believed God, and his servant Moses.

A. To believe one is to give credit to his word, so did they: for they
believed Moses, that is, they gave credit to his words, but it is not said
they believed in Moses: so we may believe the words of Saints, when they
speak the truth: but to believe in Saints we may not, for that is proper to
God only.

Q. We pray to Saints not as helpers, but mediators. Object.


A. We stand in need of no mediator, but only one, and that is Jesus Christ,
as appears in 1. Tim. 2. 5. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
There is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man Jesus Christ.

Q. Why may not a Saint, or a holy man be a mediator to God for us?

A. Because none can be a mediator between God and man, but he that is
perfectly just: but none is so but Christ, and therefore none can be a
mediator but Christ.

Q. How prove you that?

A. In Heb. 7. 25. Heb 7. 25
He is able to save perfectly them that come to God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them: for such a high Priest it became us to
have, which is holy, harmeles, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made hier
then the heavens.

Q. It were great presumption for any man to step to Christ at the first,
Object.
considering our own unworthines: therefore we must have one more worthy then
our selves, who being in greater favor with him for his worthiness, may boldly
make intercession for us.

A. To this objection I answer 3. ways: 1. If it be presumption to go to
Christ at the first, 1. Answer.
then were all the Primitive Church very presumptuous, who concluded all their
prayers not by Peter, nor Paul, nor the Virgin Mary, nor any Saint, but only
by Jesus Christ. 2. The Saints of God having most occasion to cast down
themselves by reason of their sins, 2. Answer.
yet neuerthelesle had access by prayer to God himself.


Q. What examples have you of any such?

A. There be diverse examples: 1. David in consideration of his murder, and
adultery, was greatly humbled, yet when he was thus abased in his own eyes,
he went to God himself: as appears in Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51.
2. The Publican was greatly humbled, when he durst not look up to heaven,
and yet he prays to GOD himself, saying, Lord be merciful to me a sinner.
Luke 18. 13.
3. The prodigal son in his greatest extremity used not the help of any
his fathers servants, which were in greatest credit with him, nor of his own
brother, but steppeth to his father himself. Luke 15. 25.
4. The Centurion had no conceit of himself, when he said to the Lord Jesus,
I am not worthy thou should come under my roof: and yet he went not to
any of his Disciples, but to the Lord himself, for his servant that was
sick. Matthew. 8. 5, 6



It is no presumption to be bold where we are commanded, The 3. answer.
and warranted, but where we have no commandment, nor warrant, there it is
presumption: the Papists have no warrant to pray to Saints, therefore they are
presumptuous.

We have a warrant out of the scripture to go unto Christ.

By Christ we have boldness and entrance, Ephesians. 3. 12.
with confidence by faith in him.

Let us therefore go boldly to the throne of grace, Heb. 4. 16.
that we may receive mercy, and find grace in the time of need.

If men may not presume to come to earthly princes at the first, Object. ^
but by the means of many mediators they do come unto them; much les may we
presume to come to God, that is the prince of all Princes, without the
mediation of many.

To this objection I answer, Answer.
that the comparison holds not between God, and earthly Princes: for, 1. No
king knows the want of al his subjects; and though he do, yet he must have
some to put him in mind of them: but Genesis 19. 29. Psalm. 105 8. Psalm. 111. 5.
God knows and remembers all the wantes of all his children himself, and of
himself.

2. It is not safe for all sorts of men to be admitted unto the Kings
presence, because of treasons: but the Lord Psalm. 2. 7. 3. 4. Prou. 21. 30.
^eareth nothing that man can do to him.

3. They for pride will not, or for weighty affairs cannot attend to the suit
of every man: But the Lords Psalm 34. 15. Psalm 139. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.
ears are always open to hear the suits of al his children in all the world
at one instant.

But to grant that the comparison holds: We say, that if the Prince should
appoint ani^ one, by whom, and by no other we should offer to him our
supplications, then it were our part to offer our suits to him only: and the
Prince might justly punish us, if we should go to any other.

Even so, seeing God has appointed his Mat. 3. 17. Ioh. 16. 23, 24.
only Son to be the only means by whom we shall present our suits unto his
Majesty, we must go only to him, and if we shall go to any other, the Lord
may justly punish us for the same.

Objection. Object.
The Saints prayed for us, while they hued amongst us in this vale of misery,
much more therefore will they pray for us now being in perfect joy and happiness.

Answer. Answer.
It follows not: for, Iam. 5. 14.
1. We have precepts commanding us to crave their prayers being alive: but
being dead there is no such matter. 2. We do not so desire prayers of the
Saints which be alive, as they do of them which be dead: for they pray to
them, that by force of their intercession, and by virtue of their merits they
would obtain that at Gods hand which they stand in need of: but we pray them
to join with us in humble prayer to God, or to commend us to God in their
prayers. 3. Here in earth we may certify them of our wants, and so they may
pray with us for the supply of our wants: but after death we cannot tell them
of our particular wants, neither do they know our wants upon earth: as
appears most plainly in the scripture.


Esai. 63. 16. Esai. 63. 1^.
Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not, yet thou O Lord art our father, and our redeemer, thy name is for
ever.

Q. You say in your definition, that in prayer the heart must be lifted up to
God: how prove you that?

A. I prove it by the word of God, Psalm. 25. 1. Psalm. 25. 1.
Unto thee O Lord, lift I up my soul.

Psalm. 86. 4. Psalm. 86. 4.
Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee O Lord, do I lift up my soul.

Ephesians. 6. 18. Ephesians. 6. 13.
Pray always, in all manner of prayer and supplication, in the spirit. See
more in Esai. 29. 13, 14. Esai. 29. 13.
Hose. 7. 14. Hose. 7. 14.


2. The lifting up of the hands, and eyes, etc. ought to put us in mind of the
lifting up of the heart: for the hand lifted up to God without the heart, is
but hypocrisy.

3. This lifting up of the heart without the outward gestures of the body has
prevailing with God: See 1. Sam. 1. 12, 13. 1. Sam. 1. 12.
Exodus 14. 15. Exodus 14. 15.


Q. You say again in your definition of prayer, that prayer must be joined
with faith in the promises of God: how prove you that?

A. Because faith is the very life of our prayers, yea, there is such affinity
between faith and prayer, that without faith there is no prayer.

2. Our prayers are answerable to our faith: much faith, much prayer, little
faith, little prayer, weak faith, weak prayer, no faith, no prayer.

Iam. 1. 6. Iam. 1. 6.
Let him ask in faith, and waver not.

Psalm. 71. 1. Psalm. 71. 1.
In thee, O Lord, I trust, let me never be ashamed.

Psalm. 116. 10. Psalm. 116. 10.
I believed, therefore did I speak.

Q. If our faith be weak, h^w may it be strengthened?

A. If our faith be weak, it may be strengthened two ways. 1. By remembering
the sweet promises of God made to them that pray to him unfeignedly. See Esa.
65. 24. Psalm. 50. 15. Psalm. 50. 15. Psalm. 91. 15. Esa 65. 24.
2. By looking to the performance of these promises, either to our selves, or
to some other, as David did, 1. Sam. 17. 37. 1. Sam. 17. 37.
and Iehosaphat. 2. Chron. 20. 7. 2. Chron. 20. 7.



Q. Now it remains to be proved, that in prayer we do either crave such
things as we want, or else give thanks for benefits already received: which is
the last thing I observe in your definition of prayer.

A. It is true: for every true prayer stands upon petition, or thanksgiving,
if not both, unto which two, all kind of prayers may be referred.

Q. But are not these two, viz. petition, and thanksgiving, to be joined
together in prayer?

A. Yes, they are often coupled together, as in 1. Timoth. 2. 1. 1. Timoth. 2.
1.
I exhort that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be
made for all men.

Col. 4. 2. Col. 4. 2.
Continue in praer, and watch in the same, with thanksgiving.

Philip. 4. 6. Philip. 4. 6.
Be nothing careful, but in all things let your requests be showed unto God,
in prayer, and supplication, with giving of thanks.

Q. What if one of these be wanting?

A. It is no true prayer which want one of these,

Q. The Papists have added the salutation of Mary, In Luke 1. 28.
and the Creed, to fill up the number, what say you to the salutation of Mary,
is it not a prayer?

A. The salutation of Mary, is no prayer: for, 1. There is no petition, nor
thanksgiving in it. 2. If we should grant it to be a prayer of the Angel, The
salutation of Mary, no prayer.
yet it is not to her, for Aue, is as much as if he said, I pray God thou
may rejoice. 3. It is a salutation and no prayer, as appears in verse 29.
She thought what manner of salutation that should be.


Q. What say you of the Creed, is not that a prayer?

A. No: It is nothing else but a brief rehearsal of our faith, The Creed no
prayer.
or a brief sum, or abridgement of the chief heads of Christian religion:
wherein we do not address our speech unto God, but make a public
confession of those things unto the congregation: Ergo, it is no prayer.

2. There is in it neither petition, nor thanksgiving, that is, we do neither
crave any benefit, nor give thanks for any benefit in the Creed: therefore
it can be no prayer.

Q. When are petitions to be made?

A. When occasions be offered, The necessity of prayer.
and that is at all times both in respect of outward and inward wants. If we
look to our souls, they have three wonderful enemies, the world, the flesh,
and the devil: therefore we ought continually to be exercised in petition, or
prayer. Yea, it is so needful, that without it there is no comfort to a
troubled mind.

Q. Have any used prayer as a means to find comfort, when their minds have
been troubled?

A. Yea, it is said of Anna, 1. Sam. 1. 10.
that she was troubled in her mind, and prayed to the Lord. It is also said of
our Savior Christ, Luke 22. 41.
that he went aside from his Disciples, and kneeled down, and prayed: 43.
and there appeared an Angel unto him from heaven comforting him: 46.
and afterward he bad his Disciples to rise, and pray, using this as a reason,
lest ye enter into temptation: to show that prayer is a special means
appointed of God, both to prevent temptations, and to comfort in temptations.

Ob. God knows all our wants before we pray, therefore it is a needles thing
to pray.

Ans. He has commanded us to pray, therefore it is not needles, and he knows
our wants before, and therefore we ought to pray unto him: for if he did not
know our wants, we ought not to pray unto him.

Q. Seeing as GOD knows our wants before we ask, why does he command us
to tell him of our wants in prayer, as though he knew them not?

A. Not to be informed at our hands of any thing which he knew not before: but,
1. To acknowledge him to be the author and giver of all good things, and our
helper in time of need. 2. To exercise our faith and obedience: our faith,
while we wait patiently, and look steadfastly for the performance of his
promises: our obedience, while we do that which he has commanded us.


Ob. Gods deer^e is unchangeable, and therefore to pray is in vain.

Answ. Nay therefore we are sure to be heard, because his counsel and purpose
is immutable, for according to his promise he will hear our prayers, always
provided, that our prayers be agreeable to his will: so that this serves
rather to make us more willing, and earnest in prayer, because we have Gods
commandment for our warrant, and his promise for our encouragement.

Q. When is thanksgiving to be made?

A. At all times, and in all our prayers, for we have occasion of it,
wheresoever we look, and seeing the Lord never cease to do good unto us,
therefore we must not cease to speak good of his name.

Of the diverse sorts of Prayer.
Q. HOw many sorts of Prayer be there?

A. Although we have set down but two in general, yet under them are
contained many particular kinds.

Q. Show which those be?

A. Petition is two fold: 1. In respect of others. 2. In respect of our selves.


Q. Petition in respect of others, of how many sorts is it?

A. It is of two sorts, either for them. or against them.

Q. Petition for others, how many ways is it?

A. It is either general, or special.

Q. How general?

A. When it is made for the whole Church of God, militant upon the face of the
whole earth, as in Psalm 28. 9. Psalm. 28. 9.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance, feed them also, and exalte
them for ever.

Q. How is it special?

A. When it is made for particular Churches, or persons.

Q. Where find you, that prayers have been made for particular Churches?

A. In Romans 1. 9. 10. Romans 1. 9. 10.
Paul says, that continually in all his prayers, he prayed for the Church
which was then at Rome. And in Philip. 1. 3. 4. Philip. 1. 3.
He says that in like manner he remembered the Church of the Philippians.

Q. Where find you any praying for particular persons?

A. David prayed for his child.

The Centurion for his servant. 2. Sam. 12 16.


The woman of Canaa^ for her daughter. Matthew. 8. 6.


The congregation for Peter in prison. Matthew. 15. 22.


And Saint James says, Act. 10. 5. Iam. 5. 16.
The prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent.

Q. When is prayer to be made against others?

A. 1. When we see Gods glory by others defaced.

2. When we our selves are iniuried, and oppressed by others.

Q. How prove you the first?

A. In Esa. 37. 17. ^sa. 37. 17.
Hezekiah hearing the railings, and blasphemies of Rabsakah (who was sent by
Senacherib for that purpose) fell to prayer saying: Incline thine ear O Lord
and hear, open thy eyes, O Lord and see, and hear all the words of
Senacherib, who has sent to blaspheme the living God.

Act. 4. 24. Act. 4. 24.
And when they heard it, they lift up their voices to God, with one accord, etc.

Q. How prove you the second?

A. In Exo. 22. 23. Exo. 22. 23.
If you vex, or trouble such, (that is) the widdowe, or fatherles child, they
shall call and cry unto me, and I will surely hear their cry.

Apoe. 6. 9. Apo. 6. 9.
I saw under the altar the souls of them that were killed for the word of
God, and for the testimony which they maintained, and they cried with a loud
voice, saying, How long Lord, holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?

Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much harm ( says S. Paul) the Lord
reward him according to his works. See also in Luke 18. 7. 8. 2. Tim. 4. 14.


Q. What say you of Prayers which respect our selves?

A. In them we desire of the Lord two things in general: 1. To turn away
evil things from us, and this is called deprecation. 2. To grant us good
things, which we stand in need of, and this is called petition.


Q. Where have we any examples of the first?

A. Solomon prayed: Prou. 30. 8. Genesis ^2. 11.
Remove from me vanity, etc. Jacob prayed in like manner. I pray thee deliver
me from the hand of my brother Esaw, for I fear him, etc.

Q. Where find you any of the latter?

A. In Solomon, when he said, Prou. 30. 8. Genesis 24. 27.
give me food convenient: And in Abraham's servant, who prayed and said, O
Lord God of my master Abraham, I beseech thee, send me good speed this day,
and show mercy, etc.

Q. When we have occasion to pray against evils and calamities, what course is
best to be taken?

A. In these prayers the saints in times past, have used two things, which do
also belong to us: 1. A confession of their sin, whereby they deserved that
punishment which was upon them. 2. A lamentation of their present estate,
thereby to set an edge upon their prayers.


Q. How prove you this?

A. In Dan. 9. 5. Dan. 9. 5. 6. 7.
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea, we
have rebelled, and have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments,
for we would not obey thy servants the Prophets, which spoke in thy name to our
Kings, to our Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the people of the land: O
Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and unto us open shame, as appears
this day, etc.

Q. When we pray for any good thing which we want, what must we do?

A. We must acknowledge our own Gen 32. 10.
vnworthienes, and crave it in the John. 16. 33 24.
name and Feuela. 5. 9.
worthiness of the Lord Jesus.

Q. When God has granted our requests, what is then to be done?

A. We are then to return thanks unto the Lord for the same, Genesis 24. 27.
as Abraham's servant did, Judges 1.
as Deborah did, as Moses and the Israelites did, Exo. 15. 1.
as Hanna did, as the Leper did, 1. Sam. 2. 1.
and as all the faithful do Luke 17. 15.


Q. But in whose name must we return our thanksgiving; in our own, or in
some bodies else?

A. It must not be in our own name, Ioh. 16.
but in the name and mediation of Jesus Christ, in whom God is well pleased,
and in whom all our service and sacrifices of prayers and praises must be
accepted, or else they are most abominable in his sight.

Of the place of Prayer.
Q. WHere must all these kinds of prayer be made?

A. The place is either general and uncertain, according to necessity and
occasion, or special, and certain, according to order, and custom.

Q. How general?

A. In every place, or in any place it is lawful to pray, if occasion do
serve, Genesis 24. 12.
as Abraham's servant prayed in the field, Dam. 6. 22.
Daniel in the Lions den, Paul in prison, Act. 16. 24. 25.
David in the wilderness: and to this agrees the Apostle when he says: Let
men pray every where, lifting Psalm. 42. 6. 1. Tim. 2. 8.
up pure hands without wrath or doubting.

Q. What place call you a special place for prayer, that is according to order?

A. It is of two sorts, either public or private.

Q. Which call you public prayer?

A. That is, when the Church of God is met in a public place with a
public consent, for public benefits.

Q. Where have you a warrant for that?

A. Iehosaphat proclaimed a fast through all Judah, 2. Chro. 20. 3. 4.
and Judah gathered themselves together to ask counsel of the Lord.

Peter and John went up together to the Temple, Act. 3. 1.
at the ninth hour of prayer.

Q. These are good examples indeed, but what promise of blessing do you
find, that God has made unto public prayer?

A. It is promised as a blessing of it self, and a blessing is promised unto
it besides.

Q. Where is it promised as a blessing?

A. In Esa. 56. 7. Esa. 56. 7.
Every one that keeps the Sabbath, and polluteth it not, and embraces my
covenant, them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my
house of Prayer.

Q. Where is a blessing promised unto it?

A. In Math. 18. 19. 20. Verily I say unto you, Math. 18. 19. 20.
that if two of you shall agree in earth, upon any thing, whatsoever they shall
desire, it shall be given them of my Father which is in heaven: for where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.

Q. What say you of private prayer?

A. Of private prayer there be certain degrees.

Some be more private, less private.


Q. When is it the more private?

A. When a man sequestreth himself from al company, and has none to hear him
but the Lord.

Q. Where have we any warrant for this?

A. We are exhorted unto it by the Lord Jesus himself, in Mat. 6. 6. and we
are therein confirmed by the example of Christ, in Luke 22. 41. and of Peter in
Act. 10. 9.

Q. Which call you less private prayer?

A. That is less private when a man prays in company of others, as the
Master with his family, the Tutor with his pupilles, the Husband with his
wife, the wife with her servants and children, in her husbands absence, Act.
10. 30.
or one friend with anothe, as Cornelius prayed with his householde.

Q. Of public prayer, and private prayer which is most forcible?

A. That is public prayer, for if the prayers of one righteous man be
auailable, Iam. 5. 16.
much more are the prayers of many together with one consent: and therefore this
has been most desired, and David complained that he was not suffered to come
to the house of God with the congregation, and took it for one of the greatest
crosses that ever came unto him, as it appears in Psa. 27. 10. Psalm. 42. 1.
2. 3. 4. Psalm. 84. 1. 2. 3. 4.

Of the Conditions of true prayer.
Q. WHat conditions are required in prayer, that it may be acceptable in the
sight of God?

A. They are of two sorts. 1. In respect of God, and they are 6. 2. In respect
of our brethren.


Q. Which is the 1. condition y^ is required in prayer in respect of God.

A. 1. It is necessary that we bring in our prayers true and unfeigned
repentance, ^^^nce.
humbly confessing, and earnestly bewailing our selves, and craving pardon for
our sins.

Q. Why is confession Confession.
to God necessary?

A. Because it is as a key to open Gods privy chamber door, for our sins have
made a wall of separation between God and us, so that this must first be
removed, before our prayers can ascend to him, or his graces descend unto us.

Q. Where find you that the Saints have taken this course in prayer?

A. The saints and holy men have always used to confess their sins to God,
making mention of all their fresh sins, and by them bringing to mind their
sins done long agone, as David did Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the sins of my
youth, Psalm 25. 7.
nor my rebellions. Craving pardon for murder, and adultery newly committed,
he calls to mind his natural sin and corruption, Psalm. 51. 5. Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me.

Q. What may we learn thereby?

A. By this we may learn that when we cannot repent effectually as we would,
that then we should press our selves to repentance, with the remembrance of
our former sins, like him that calls for more weight, that he may be the
sooner dead.

Q. What say you then of impenitent persons which pray, but are never touched,
not grieved with the feeling of their sins?

A. They which continue, and go forward in sinning without repentance, are not
heard.

Q. How prove you that?

A. David says: Psalm. 66. 18.
If I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Solomon says: Prou, 15. 8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the
righteous is acceptable unto him.

Again: Prou. 28. 9.
He which turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer shall
be abominable. And,

Esai says in the person of God, Esa 1. 15.
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide my eyes, and though you
make many prayers, I will not hear you, for your hands are full of blood, i.
e. full of oppression and cruelty.

The second Condition.
Q. WHat is the second condition?

A. It is a true and lively faith.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that in prayer we must have a sure and steadfast confidence in the
promises of God, that they shall be performed, yea albeit we can see no
natural reason for it.

Q. Why is it necessary that we have faith in Gods promises when we pray?

A. 1. Because without faith our prayers are but vain babbling.

2. Because prayer is a fruit of faith, and a branch of it, and therefore it
is impossible that true prayer should be without faith.

3. He that doubts of the promises of God (as the Papists do, and teach)
do make God a liar, and no performer of his promises, which is as great
dishonor to him as can be, for then is he not a God, but a very devil: Ioh.
8. 44.
for the devil is a liar from the beginning, and the father of lies.

4 What hope can he have to obtain his request, that makes God a liar? and
Iehoua, who is perfect holiness, no better then a devil?

Q. By what Scripture do you prove that we must pray in faith?

A. In Mark 11. 24. and 1. John. 5. 15. James 1. 6.

Q. How shall we know the promises of God?

A. That we may know the promises of God, it will stand us in hand to frequent
the word preached, which is the only ordinary means to beget faith in us: and
often to read the scripture, because they are the storehouse of Gods promises.

Q. What must we do, when we do know the promises of God by the word of God?

A. We must believe, and embrace them, and ever in prayer charge God with his
promises, and make use of the^ in our prayers as Simeon did, Luke 2. 26. 29.
saying: Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy
word: i. e. according to thy promise.

Q. May not we use those words of Simeon as a prayer as well as he?

A. If we be ready to depart as Simeon was, and have such a promise of
departure, and in that manner, as Simeon had, we may, or else not.

Q. Why so?

A. Because we must pray for nothing, but we must have a commandment for it,
and a promise to be heard.

The third Condition.
Q. WHat is the third thing that is required in prayer?

A. True humility, and reverence.

Q. Why is that requisite?

A. Because then we present our selves before the great king of kings, and as
beggars, and we have nothing in us that is good, but look for all graces of
him. Yea, we come as thieves, and traitors before our Prince, and therefore we
must come with reverence, and in all lowlines to prostrate our selves before
him.

Q. Theu belike we may not come in a confidence of our own merits and
righteousness?

A. No, al our deserts must be cast away, and we must rely only upon the mercy
of our prince, for if we come arrogantly, we shall rather move him to anger,
then to pity us.

Q. How prove you all this?

A. In 1. Pet. 5. 5. 1. Pet. 5. 5.
Godresisteth the proud, but gives grace to the lowly.

The Publicane came in all humility, Luke 18. 12. 14.
when he durst not lift up his eyes to heaven but fell down, Luke 18. 12. 14.
and said, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: and the Lord Jesus says he went
home more justified then the other.

Such humility had the Centurion when he said, Luke 7. 6.
Lord I am not worthy thou should enter under my roof, etc.

The fourth Condition.
Q. WHat is the fourth?

A. It is also required that our prayers be neither cold, nor fainting, but
zealous and earnest, not coming only from our lips, but from the bottom of
our hearts.

Q. What reason have you for that?

A. Because it is as odious, and unseemly a thing for a man's heart to be led
away in prayer, as for a man that is making his suit to the Prince, to turn
his back upon him, or to turn his side to talk to another, as though he
regarded him not: for our secret Psalm. 139. 1. 2. 3. 4.
thoughts are so visible unto him, as outward gestures are unto man.

And again: Heb. 4. 13.
Cold prayers have cold entertainment, for he that craves coldly, does but
teach the other to deny him his request.

Q. What if we want this (...) prayer, or would have this (...) and zeal
increased in us, how may it be done?

A. It may be done two ways.

1. Our hearts must be in wardly touched with the want of those things which
we crave, and for this end, we are seriously and duly to consider by our
selves, how necessary those things are which we ^ske, and how miserable we are
without them. 2. We are to consider our own wants, our poverty, weakness, and
inabilitie to accomplish those things which we ask, without the blessing of
God: for if we care not for those things which we ask, or put any confidence
in secundary causes, as strength, friends, riches, etc. it is no marvel
though our prayers be cold.
Q. What other reason have you for this?

A. He that desires meroy must be touched with the feeling of his misery,
or else, for want of this, our words are but wind, our prayers are but
pratlings, and our pitiful show of mourning is but a shameful mocking of
GOD: this may (...)

Q. (...) how for example?

A. As thus, to say (as many do commonly and customably say, by the book of
common prayer,) That it may please thee to give us grace to amend our lives
according to thy holy word, etc. Yet mean nothing less, neither do they
know wherein they do amiss, though the words in themselves be good, yet in
them that so say them, it is a mere mocking of GOD, and profaning of his name.

Again: to say, Pitifully behold the sorrows of our hearts: when their
hearts be no whit sorrowful for their sins, it is the like.

Likewise, to say: O Lord let thy mercy be showed upon us, as we trust in
thee: when we trust in GOD no further then we see outward means to help us
withal: though the words be good, yet to them that so use them, they be not
so: and so I might say of many more such prayers.

Q. (...) such kind of prayers (...) and condemned in the word of God?

A. (...) 22. the Lord says thus: Your free offering shall (...) blemish shall
(...) in it: blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a wenne, or skur^i^, or
skabbed, these shall ye not offer unto the Lord, etc.

Q. But this concerns the sacrifi^^ces of the Jews, what is this to our
prayers?

A. Yes, and it touches us and our prayers too, for under those offerings of
beasts commanded to the Jews, were shadowed and figured out the prayers of the
faithful under the Gospel, Prou. 15. 8.
which are called by the needs of sacrifices, Hos. 14. 3.
and calves of the lipp^^. And therefore we are to know hereby, that as he
then could abide no sacrifice that was of the blind, or broken, or maimed,
skuruie, or skabbed, etc. to have it offered upon his Altar: so now he can as
ill abide our ignorant prayers, or profane, or cold, or sluggish, or
counterfeite prayers to be offered unto him: for he accounts of them, but as
of lame, and skuruie sacrifices, etc. but as then the Lord looked for the best,
so does he (...).

The fifth Condition.
Q. What (...) prayer?

A. It is further required that our prayers be made according to the will of
God, and not according to our (...) ^ff^ctions.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that we must not appoint unto God, what, and when, and where, and
how, and how much, or how little, etc. but all to be as himself will in his
holy word.

Q. What if we pray for spiritual graces, as for faith, repentance, hope,
love, patience, knowledge, zeal, wisdom, etc.

A. Then we must pray absolutely without any condition, because the Lord has
promised to give his spirit unto his children, whatsoever else they lack.

Q. What if we pray for temporal blessings?

A. Then* we must pray conditionally, if the Lord see them good for us, and if
they may be for the furtherance of our salvation, and the advancement of his
glory.

Q. How prove you this?

A. In Iam. 4. 3. 1. Ioh. 5. 14.

Q. What if a Christian be in pain, or the Church under the cross of
persecution, on other affliction, is it not lawful to pray against those
things, and to be delivered from them?

A. If God may get more glory by our sufferings, then by our ease and quiet,
then we must not pray against them, but as the Lord Jesus did, John 17. 15.
Ioh. 17. 15.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
keep them from evil. So we must pray, not that God would take us out of our
pain or sufferinges, but that in them he would keep us from evil, as from
murmuring against his hand, distrust, impatiencie, despair, etc.

Q. What say you to the infirmities and weaknesses of Gods children which
remain in their unregenerate part, to humble them: whether is it lawful to
pray against them or no?

A. Yes, it is lawful, because they are sin, and sometime the Lord does
(...) some of them, and many times he (...) his children their request, when
they pray against their infirmities, (...) his power is made manifest in them,
and so his glory (...) thereby the more advanced.

Q. But what? does the (...) the^ give his children leave (...)?

A. Not (...) with his grace he does ^o uphold them, that they shall not fall
finally way from him.

Q. How may all this be proue^?

A. By the words and witness of the Apostle who says thus of himself* And
lest I should be exalted out of measure, 2. Cor. 12. 7. ^. 9
through the abundance of revelations; there was given unto me a prick in the
flesh, the messenger of satan to buffer me, ( by which he means the
unregenerate part of remnants of (...) in him) because I should not be exalted
out of measure. 8. For this thing I be sought the Lord i. e. oftentimes.
thrice, that it might (...) from me. 9. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient (...) thee, for my power is (...) perfect through weakness.

Q. What do you conclude upon this place?

A. I conclude that we must pray, That Gods name may be hallowed: i. e. that
he may have glory by us: but whether it shall be by our infirmities, or without
our infirmities he has appointed, and must appoint that himself.

The sixth Condition.
Q. What is the sixth and the last condition that is required in respect of God
himself?

A. That we continue in prayer, and not give over at the first, nor prescribe
God a time, but patiently wait his leisure.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Luke 11 5. 6. 7. etc. by a parable propounded by our Savior Christ.
2. Out of Mat. 15. 22. to 1. 29. by the example of the woman of Canaa^. 3. out
of Ge. 32. 24. to 30. by the example of Jacob, (...) with the Angel, until be
received a blessing.

Q. (...) in what respects our prayers must ^e like Jacobs wra^^ling?

A. There must be, 1. a striving: 2. a suffering: 3. a denial of our request:
4. a continuance all repulses notwithstanding: 5. blows and crosses more then
we looked for: 6. perseverance for all that: 7. a blessing will come in the
end. Esa. 62. 6. 7.
See more in Esa. 62. 6. 7.

Q. Why does the Lord defer to hear the prayers of his children?

A. For many causes: 1. To try their faith and patience, not that (he) is
ignorant of their faith, etc. but to make them more manifest to the world. 2.
That they may humble themselves and suspect themselves of some sin that they
have not repented of. 3. To make the^ more earnest in prayer, for, the more we
be denied, the more we do entreat to obtain, if we desire it greatly. 4. That
they may make the more account of Gods benefits and graces, when they have
them, and may be the more thankful for them.


Q. What be those conditions that be required in respect of our brethren?

A. In general it is required, Conditions in respect of our bethren.
that we pray in love and charity toward all men, so far forth as we can.

Q. What branches has this general?

A. This general point has two branches.

1. To forgive them that offend us.

2. To satisfy them that be offended with us.

Q. How prove you the first?

A. Out of Mark 11. 25.

Q. How prove you the second*

A. Out of Matthew. 5. 23. 24.

Q. Why must we satisfy them that be offended at us, before we pray?

A. For two causes.

1. If we have iniuried any in deed, he shall pray to God against us, and be
heard against us, and so his prayer shall counterchecke ours. 2. If our brother
has taken offense unjustly against us, before we gave any, we must
notwithstanding labor to satisfy him, because, while he thinks evil of me
without cause, his prayers are stained with the blot of uncharitable judgment,
neither can he pray with a quiet mind, and so his prayers are sin to him:
therefore in pity and compassion toward his soul, we ought to talk with
him, and to labor to satisfy him.
Q. What is he be such a one as will not be satisfied with any reason?

A. Indeed there be unreasonable persons in the world, such as David
complained of, Psalm. 120. 7.
that when he spoke of peace, they made themselves ready to war: such we must
leave unto God, and if they continue so after admonitions given by the Church,
they are to be cut off, Matthew. 18. 17
and cast out by the censures of the Church, until they do repent.

OF THE LORDS PRAYER.
Our Father which art in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 9.
hallowed be thy name, Luke 11. 2.
etc.


Q. Why is God called a Father?

A. In two respects.

1. Of his natural son Jesus Christ. 2. In respect of his Church.
Q. How is he called a Father in respect of his Church?

A. In two respects.

1. In respect or our creation. 2. In respect of our adoption. As for
preservation and sanctification, they may be reduced unto these two heads.
Q. Is God a Father by creation, of his Church only?

A. Nay, so he is a Father of all mankind*

Q. Is GOD a Father of all mankind by adoption?

A. No, so he is a Father of the faithful only.

Q. Where find you that God is called a father, in respect of our Creation?

A. In Mal. 2. 10. Esa. 64. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. ^. So Adam is called the son of God
by immediate Creation. Luke. 3. last verse.

Q. Where find you that GOD is called a Father in respect of adoption?

A. In Esa. 63. 16. Ioh. 1. 12. Romans 8. 14. Gala. 4. 4. 5. 1. Ioh. 3. 1.

Q. How is he called a father in this place?

A. Not only in respect of our creation, but especially in regard of our
adoption.

Q. What is your reason for that?

A. Or else we could have no comfort, by calling him our Father, if he were
not our Father by adoption, but by creation, for then we should not differ from
the reprobate, whose Father God is by creation, as well as of others.

Q. Cannot the reprobate call (...) their Father, as the elect do^ in this
place?

A. No, not so: for only they which are made heirs and fellow heirs with
Jesus Christ, by Gods free grace and favor, with whom his spirit has wrought
reconciliation, sons by adoption I mean can only call him their Father to
their comfort.

Q. Why, if God be the Father of the reprobate by creation, then they are his
children, are they not? For there (...) be no Father without a Child?

A. It follows not, for some are called by the name of Father, only in
regard that they were the authors and in^entors of things: which things cannot
properly be called their Children.

Q. Yea? how prove you that?

A. I^ball is called the father of all that dwell in tents, Genesis 4. 20.
that is the first inuentor often^s: and yet the tents are not his children.

So Iubal is called the father of such as play upon Orgaines, the Harp, 21.
i. e. the first inuentor of wind instruments, and yet wind instruments are
not his children.

Q. What infer you upon this?

A. Even so, God is called the Father, even of the reprobate, because he first
created them, and yet they cannot be called the children of God, except by
creation, as Adam was, no more then the tents, and pipes can be called the
children of Iaball and Iuball.

Q. It had been some benefit, and privilege if God had been our natural
Father, but to be our Father by adoption, seems to be no great matter, i^ it?

A. Although God be not our natural father (for so he is only of Christ)
but by grace, yet performs he ^ll the parts of a natural Father, ^^tter
then any natural father does whatso^^er.

Q. The natural Father hears love and affection unto his children?

A. So does GOD unto his, for the Psalmist ^aith, As a father has compassion
on his children, so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him: See more
of this point in Esaias 49. 1^0 Matthew. 7. 9.

Q. The natural Father proudeth things necessary for this life*

A. So does GOD for his, Matthew. 6. 30. 31. 32. And though we receive the^ of
our natural parents, yet they come from GOD. See more of this point, in 2.
King. 6. 27. 2. King. 6. 27.


Q. The natural Father brings by his child in some art and knowledge to get
his living by?

A. So does GOD by his children Ierem. 31. 33. Iere. 31. 33.
I will write my (...) their hearts, etc. besides that they have the best
schoolmaster, Job. 14. 17.
the spirit of God.

Q. The natural Father defends his children from injuries and wrongs?

A. So does God, and wills us to come unto him. Luke 18.
Shall not God avenge his elect, which cry unto him night and day?

He is therefore called the helper of the helps, and the widdowe, and a
father of the fatherles.

Q. The natural father chastises his children whom he loves, and if he has
cast any out of his favor, he lets him alone to do what he list?

A. So does God correct his children whom he loves, Prouer. 3. 12.
and therefore does he correct them because he loves them. Heb. 12. 6.
Esa. 1.


But as for the wicked world, and worldlings he lets them grow in
prosperity, giving them up to their own hearts lust, because he has cast
them out of his presence and favor.

Q. The natural Father prepares an inheritance for his children?

A. So does God for his, Luke 12. 32.
Luke 12. 32. It is your Fathers pleasure to give you the kingdom: yea, ^.
Pet. 1. 4.
he has provided for us an inheritance (as Peter says) immortal, and
undefiled, that withers not, which is re^er^^d in heaven for us.

Q. What use may we make of this word, Father in this place?

A. This word Father, may serve to expel all distrust 1. Of Gods favor and
all fear in prayer. 2. It makes joy in our hearts, and emboldeneth us to go
unto the throne of grace. 3. It teaches us, Mal. 1. 6.
that we owe him the duty of children, and that we must live like the
children of such a father, if we look for benefits at his hands. 4. It is
auailable to work patience in us in trouble, and affliction, and at such times
as our prayers are not granted at the first, Heb. 12. 7.
Heb. 12. 7. If ye endure chastening, God offers himself unto you (...)
sons.


Q. It should seem by this preface, that we ought not to pray to the second
nor third person in the Trinity, (that is to say) to the Son, and the holy
Ghost, but only to the first person, that is the Father: for so are we taught
to pray, Our Father: what say you to that?

A. For the better understanding of this point, we must consider that this
word Father, (being spoken of God) is put two ways in the Scripture, sometime
personally, sometime essentially.

Q. What do you mean when you say it is put personally?

A. It is taken personally, when it is put but for some one of the three
persons or beings in the Trinity, and cannot be attributed to any of the
other persons.

Q. What do you mean when you say it is put essentially?

A. It is taken essentially when it does extend to the whole essence of being
of the Deity.

Q. (If you can) make your meaning more plain?

A. Then more plainly this is my meaning: that wheresoever this word Father is
attributed unto God, being joined in the same sentence, with the Son, or the
holy Ghost, or both, then it is taken personally: that is, it is restrained to
the person of the Father only. But when it is not coupled, nor compared with
any of the persons, but is taken simply, without relation to the other persons,
then it is taken essentially for the whole Godhead, and for all the persons in
the Godhead.

Q. Where is it taken personally?

A. In these places following:

The comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the father will send in my name,
Ioh. 14. 26.
he shall teach you, etc.

The father loves the son, Ioh* 3. 35.
and has given all things into his hands.

If ye then which are evil give good things unto the children, Luke 11. 13.
how much more shall your heavenly father give the holy Ghost to them that
desire him?

Q. Where is it taken essentially?

A. In these places following:

The fowls of the a^re sow not, Matthew* 6. 26.
etc. and yet your heavenly father feeds them.

We have had the fathers of our bodies which corrected us, Heb. 12. 9.
and we gave them reverence: should we not much rather be in subjection to the
father of spirits, that we might live?

Q. How is it taken in this prayer?

A. In these words: Our Father which are, etc. it is taken essentially, for the
whole deity, and does not exclude, but inlcude the Son and the holy Ghost,
the they are all one in nature and substance with the Father.

Q. If they be all one in nature and substance, then the second person, Jesus
Christ, is called father too, is he not?

A. Yes, he is so called by the Prophet Esai, Esai. 9. 6.
To us a child is borne, to us a son is given, etc. and they shall call his
name Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, etc.

Q. Then it appears that we may also pray to Jesus Christ, and the holy
Ghost, and we do so in this prayer, but can you show any that have prayed unto
them by name?

A. Yea, Stephen called on God, and said, Act. 7. 59.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit.

And S. Paul pra^ed to the holy Ghost, saying: 2. Cor. 13. (...).
The fellowship of the holy Ghost be with you all.

Now of this word, Our.
Q. Why does the Lord Jesus teach us to say, Our Father, rather then my father?

A. For diverse causes: 1. To teach us that true prayer is tied to Church of God
only, 1. Doctrine.
and therefore requires of necessity unity with the same.


Q. What reason can you give for this?

A. My reason is this: We cannot pray aright* except God be our father in
Christ; if God be our father in Christ, then we be his children; if we be his
children, then are we also brethren to his children; if we be brethren to
them; then have we true faith and love; if we have true faith and love, then
are we knit to Christ, and one to another: if we be so, then are we of the
true Church of Christ.

Q. What is we were not of the Church?

A. They that are not of the Church, can not make this prayer.

Q. Why then belike of necessity we ought to have unity with the true Church,
in faith, and doctrine, and substance of religion.

A. It is very true: for as we have our father adopting us, and making us his
children, so here we profess that we hold our faith with all the members of
Gods Church, and hold one and the self same true religion and worship of God
with them: yea, and all that can say this prayer truly, are joined in unity
of faith and religion, in respect of the substance.

Q. What think you then of Schismatiques, which do separate themselves from
the public exercises of the Church?

A. It follows therefore, that no Schismatiques can truly say, Our Father,
because in their hellish pride they coumpt the children of GOD none of their
brethren.

Q. What else does this word [ our] teach?

A. Secondly, 2. Doctrine.
it teaches us that we must have Christian love unto all men, without the
dishonor of God, and breach of a good conscience. See 1. Ioh. 5. 1.

Q. What else does it teach us?

A. Thirdly, 3. Doctrine.
it puts us in mind of that sympathy and fellow-feeling of our brethrens
miseries, which may move us to help them even when we can, and have fit
occasion: Romans 12. 15.
for we are all as members of one and the same body by faith: Heb. 13. 3.
therefore if one be hurt, all must help; 1. Pet. 4. 10.
if one be grieved, Iam. 5. 16.
all must be grieved; and if one rejoice, all must rejoice. See the places
quoted.

Q. May we not say at any time, My father, but always Our father?

A. Yes as in sickness, poverty, etc. so that we have a care of others
as well as of our selves: for in prayer al pride and self-love must be quite
shut out.

Q. What else may we gather from this word, Our?

A. Fourthly, 4. Doctrine.
it banisheth all pride and disdain of our brethren, and breeds all
humility, and lowlines, yea, and it teaches us to have a base conceit of our
selves, Romans 12.
and a reverend opinion of others, yea even of the simplest, if they fear God,
and have the spirit of adoption (which God knows) for then are they the
sons and daughters of the same father that we have, or profess to have.

Q. What? must superiors, and men of authority, which have great places and
callings, so far humble themselves unto simple and poor Christians, as you say?

A. Yea, that they must, if they will call God their father, and (to deal
plainly) no superior can use this prayer aright, before they so abase
themselves, that they take the most simple, and meanest Christians that are for
their brethren, and so likewise use them.

Q. Some will not be called brethren, nor call others by that name: for they
hold this name of brother or sister, (especially in Christ) to be a most odious
name, and they use it (if they do use it at al) in scorn and reproach,
accompting them Puritanes, etc. Which use such kind of speeches: what say you
of them?

A. Surely, I think that they do much forget themselves: for howsoever they
will seem to deny and defy y^ name of brother and sister, out of prayer, ^et
in prayer (if they pray as they ough^) they do confess it: except they do
mock and dissemble with God, (which is no small sin) for God cannot be our
father, except the rest of his children and true Christians, be our brethren.

Q. If superiors must so abase themselves, Object.
as to take the simplest and meanest for their brethren, and so their equals,
then you shall agree with the Anabaptists, which would have no distinction, nor
difference to be allowed between the Prince and subject, the Magistrate and
people, between one and another, but all must be as one.

A. No sir, that is not my meaning, far be it from me, for there must be
degrees of persons, of callings, and of estates, and there must be a
distinction between Magistrates and inferiors, for the avoiding of disorder,
and confusion, and maintenance of peace, which is Gods ordinance, or else all
should be head, or all should be foot, etc. which were as monsterous and
absurd in the body political, as it would be in a body natural.

Q. If that be not your meaning, then what is your meaning?

A. This I mean, and affirm, that all those which have any prerogative above
others, should consider, that though they be above others in things of this
world, yet others may be above them in heavenly things, and equal with them in
respect of their heavenly father, who has called us all with a heavenly
calling to a heavenly inheritance.

Q. How may this point be confirmed?

A. By the testimony of holy scripture. When S. Paul would persuade masters to
deal well by their servants, Ephesians. 6. 9.
he uses this as a reason: that they have a master in heaven, with whom is no
respect of persons. And this is the Apostles meaning, when he says: There is
neither Jew, Galath. 3. 28.
nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female,
for you are all one in Christ Jesus: In the 26. verse he shows the reason
why, and how: For, ^e are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. And
for this cause it is said: Deuteronomy. 17. 18. 19. 20.
The King shall have the book of the law by him, that he exalt not himself
above his brethren.

For want of the true knowledge of this point, the Corinthia^s despised the
poor, and would not receive the Lords Supper with them: and therefore the
Apostle reproves them, 1. Cor. 11. 33.
and wills them to tarry one for another.

Q. How can his equality and superiority stand together, and be acknowledged
on both sides at one time, and in one place, and in one action business?

A. Very well: as they do in the public assemblies and exercises of the
Church, where: 1. That a distinction and difference of persons and degrees may
appear, (for avoiding of confusion, etc.) every man has his place appointed
according to his worthiness, in respect of office, or calling, or learning, or
degree, or birth, or wealth, etc. then 2. That it may likewise appear that we
are all brethren, having one God, whom we call (Our father) in the merits of
Christ, and because all by one faith believe one Savior, and look all by him
for one kingdom, therefore there is also in token thereof a community and
equality of diverse things, without any respect of persons.

Q. How do you mean that?

A. Not as the Anabaptists, which would have all things common: but my meaning
is this: There is not one place for the poor, and another for the rich, one
Minister for the greater learned, and another for the less learned: one
Sabbath for superiors, and another for inferiors: one water for the baptizing
of great men's children, and another for poor men's children: one bread and wine
for the velvet gown, and another for the frize gown: But on the contrary in
the reformed Churches of Christ, there is one place of meeting for all, one
pastor to instruct all, one Sabbath to be kept of all, one font, and one
water for the baptizing of al, one time for the receiving of all: and at the
Lords Supper, all receive together, all partake of the same bread, and wine,
all drink of the same cup, and all give thanks by the same spirit, for the
same benefits: and where it is not so, it should be so.

Q. You have satisfied me for that point: but have you any thing else to note
upon this word (Our)?

A. Yea, 5. Doctrine.
it teaches us further, that if we be of the number of Gods children, then
all the faithful in all places do commend us to God in their prayers, even as
themselves: and amongst those there are some Abraham's, some Moses, some Elias,
some Iobes, etc. whose prayers are more effectual then others.

Q. What? and is this such a benefit?

A. Yea, it is a great benefit: for if we feel not that zeal, and power of
faith, etc. in prayer, which we desire, yet we are not to be discouraged, for
that is ever in some of them which is wanting in us: and Christ has so framed
this prayer, that saying it, we cannot choose but pray as well for others, as
for our selves.

Q. But will not this make men negligent in prayer?

A. No, this is not to make any negligent in prayer, but to strengthen those
that are diligent.

Q. If you have any thing else to observe from these words [Our father] note it
briefly that we may go forward?

A. But one thing more I draw out of them, 6. Doctrine.
and that is a confirmation of two maine points: 1. Concerning particular faith
in applying Christ's merits unto our felues. 2. The certainty of our salvation.


For the first, when I say Our father, I am taught to call GOD, my father, and
so Christ my redeemer, etc. for when I exclude my self, I cannot truly say,
Our father.

For the second, I know that God being my father, he loves me, and that I
shall be partaker of salvation: for whom he loves once he loves for ever:
therefore my salvation is certain and sure.

Which art in heaven.
Q. Why are these words added?

A. In the former words we are taught what the Lord is concerning us, viz. a
loving father.

In these words we learn what he is in himself, viz. a God of all majesty,
power and dominion.

The 1. shows his willingness to help us.

The 2. shows his ability to help us.

Q. Why does the Lord Jesus speak of his willingness and ability?

A. To show that of those two we must be persuaded in prayer, or else we cannot
pray aright. Some came to Christ doubting of his willingness, Matthew. 8. 2.
as the leper, Master, if thou will thou can make me clean. Some doubting
of his power, as the man whose son had a dumb spirit: Mark. 9. 22.
If thou can do any thing for us, help us, etc. But here we are taught not
to be like either of them.

Q. God is every where, why then is he said to be in heaven?

A. Because he is every where, therefore he must needs be in heaven.

Q. But why is he said to have his dwelling in heaven, rather then in any
place of the world, or in all the world?

A. For two causes.

1. Because his glory is most apparent there. 2. Because we see from thence
most evident signs of his properties, and attributes, more then in other
places, as of his omnipotency, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy, etc.
Q. What use may we make of these words?

A. We may make use of them many ways: 1. They teach us that God has power
over all, and can perform that which he promises.


Q. How do you gather that?

A. I gather it thus: As the heaven is hier then the elementall world, so he
that sits* in the heaven, must needs have all things in subjection under him.
Psalm. 2. 4.
And as we cannot see any thing above heaven, Psalm. 24. 3.
so we are not to imagine any thing above him. Psalm. 113. 4.
See Psalm. 2. 4. Psalm. 24. 3. Psalm. 113. 4,

Q. What else may we gather from them?

A. They teach us that God is no earthly father, but heavenly and immortal,
therefore not subject to alteration in nature, nor change in his purpose, as
men be. And this makes much for the certainty of the election of Gods
children, 1. Sam. 15. 2^.
Romans 3. 19.
seeing it depends upon such a father. Iam. 1. 17.
See the places quoted. Revel. 3. 6.


Q. What else do we learn from them?

A. They serve to breed a reverence in us when we pray, Doctrine.
because we be but dust and ashes, and we speak unto that God that (as the
Psalmist says) has devouring fire going before him, Psalm. 50.
and mighty tempests are stirred up about him, etc. Psalm. 60. 4. 8. 17


Q. Declare your meaning more fully.

A. I mean that seeing in prayer we speak unto the immortal king of heaven
and earth, we should not clappe our selves down so irreverently, (as usually
many do) thinking of any thing rather then of the mighty Majesty of him to
whom we pray: but with a reverend trembling and affection of all our parts:
and (to use the very words of a reverend father) leisurely, carefully, and
heartely, considering the puissance, glory, and imperial Majesty of him to
whom we speak.

Q. What else do they afford us?

A. Lastly, they teach us, That not only our minds ought to be sequestered
from other, Doctrine.
but in all our conversation to behave our selves as becomes the children of
such a heavenly father.

Which art in heaven.
Q. These words [which art] are the words of one speaking unto another, and
not of another, what may we learn by that?

A. They show the Churches privilege, which is such, that every true child of
God may have free access unto God by Christ, and may not only speak of God,
but unto God himself.

Q. What use may we make of this point?

A. The use of this point is four fold.

Two ways against the Papists.

Two ways for our selves.

Q. How may it serve against the Papists?

A. 1. It teaches us that (seeing as we talk with God himself,) therefore
we need no Images to put us in mind of him: for what need one have a picture
to put him in mind of him with whom he is conversant, and in conference?

2. It teaches us that we need no other mediators then Christ, to go unto
God for us, seeing as we speak in prayer unto God our selves.

Q. That is very true: now what use may we make of it for our selves?

A. 1. It is a comfort to the children of GOD, to remember that their prayers
go straight from their lips into the ears of the Lord, and are not spilt
upon the ground.

2. This point must be our instruction: and it serves to breed in us
reverence, and a care what to speak, and in what manner to speak, or do,
because we are always in the Lords hearing

The first Petition.
Hallowed be thy name.
Q. What is the effect of this petition?

A. This first petition craves the aduauncing of GODS glory: as the first
commanundement of the moral law requires the same, and does also bind us to
seek the same.

Q. Why is this order observed?

A. To show that not only in our prayers, but also in our whole life, we must
first seek the glory of God.

Q. Why are we taught to pray for the advancing of Gods glory, before we pray
for our daily bread?

A. To show that the glory of God must be preferred before all the pleasures
and profits of this life.

Q. Why must we pray for that, before we pray for the forgiveness of our
sins, and the salvation of our ^oules?

A. To show that we must rather desire that his name may be glorified, then
our souls to be saved.

Q. Yea? must we have more care to win him glory, then to gain our selves
salvation? what if we have not that care?

A. If we have not, then do we not pray like dutiful children, rightly
affected to our father.

Q. What if any preferment, or benefit or pleasure, or affection of ours should
be found to fight against the glory of our heavenly father?

A. We must not rest till our consciences do bear us witness, through the power
of Gods spirit, that we have renounced it.

Q. This is hard, but yet I confess it ought to be, but (for our
encouragement) do you read of any that have been thus affected as you speak?

A. Yea, David said: The zeal of thy house has consumed me. Psalm 69. 9.
Moses had that affection to Gods glory before his own salvation, Exodus 32.
32.
when he said: If thou will pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear, if
not, I pray thee raze me out of thy book, etc. The like zeal and affection
was in Paul, Romans 9. 2.
When he wished himself to be separated from Christ, so that God might be
glorified in the salvation of his brethren the Jews, which were his kinsmen
after the flesh.

Q. These examples be good encouragements, for by them I perceive that (as
hard as it is) yet it has been found, and therefore it may, and ought to be
found in the children of God?

A. Yea, and shall be granted, if we pray heartily for it, for Christ has
promised, that if we ask, we shall obtain.

Q. There are some, which (if their own credit be touched never so little)
chafe like Naman, when the Prophet refused to come at his sending for him, but
if Gods glory be never so much defaced, they are not a whit moved, nor touched,
what say you of them?

A. It is a great sin indeed, and the best of us all are guilty of it: but
they and every one of us that deal so, should consider what we pray, when we
say: Hallowed be thy name, lest we be found continual mockers of our heavenly
father.

Q. What is here meant by the name of God? What is meant by the name of God.


A. That we shall know the better if we do first consider how far this
word (Name) reaches unto other things.

Q. Uery well. I pray you do so.

A. This word [name] is given unto men in two respects.

1 To distinguish one from another, as, what is his name? John? or Thomas? or,
etc. 2 It signifies credit, or good report, as, what is a man but his good
name?
Q. How is it given to other creatures?

A. Two ways.

1 To distinguish them from other kinds, or one kind from another. 2 To make
the natures of them to be the better understood, every creature of every
kind has his several name.
Q. Is any name given to GOD in such respects?

A. No, God has no such name, for he is one, and but one, and has no fellow,
nor any of the same kind.

Q. What then is signified by the name of God?

A. His name signifies two things.

1 That honor which is due unto him. 2 Al things whereby he is made known.
Q. By what things is he made known to us?

A. By three things.

1 His works, Psalm. 10. 1.
for as me^ are known by their names, Psalm. 20. 1. 7.
so is God by his works. See Psalm. 19. 1. Psalm. 105. 10. Psalm. 20. 1. 7. Mar.
16. 17. Psalm. 105. 10.
2. His word, Mark. 16. 17.
which is also called the name of God, because it makes his will, and nature
more evidently known unto us, Leuit. 22. 31. 32.
then his works do. See Leuit. 22. 31. 32. 1. Timoth. 6. 1. 1. Timoth. 6. 1.
Act. 9. 15. Act. 9. 15.
3 His Titles, which he himself declared to Moses, as in Exodus 34. 5. 6. where
it is said, that The Lord descended in the cloud, Exodus 34. 5. 6.
and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of the Lord. So that the
Lord passed before his face, and cried, The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful,
and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth, etc.
Q. What is meant by hallowing or the name of God? Hallowed.


A. By this word is not meant any adding of purity, or holiness unto Gods name
which it had not before, but the publishing, and professing of it.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the like speech in another place of scripture: Luke 7. 35*
Wisdom is justified of her children (says the Lord Jesus) and yet wisdom
is always just, and justified. So God is hallowed of his children, and yet he
is always holy and pure: but then we do hallow his name, when we think so
of it as it is, and as we ought.

Q. How show what we crave in this petition?

A. Generally in this petition we crave that the honor of GODS name may be
advanced.

More particularly: 1. That his justice, mercy, wisdom, truth, goodness, and
all his properties may be known to all. 2. That he may have that reverence
which is due unto him. 3. That they which obseure his glory may be removed.

Q. His name being taken for his titles, what do we crave?

A. In this respect we crave three things.

1. That the names of all Idols, and fained. Gods, may be taken away, because
they obscure his glory. 2. That those names whereby God is described, be not
abused and given to others in swearing, perjury, or soothsaying, etc. And that
when we be called to swear, we do it in all reverence. 3. That every man may
make use of them to himself, and call upon others to do the like: as for
example, he that is overwhelmed with miseries, may comfort himself with this,
that GOD is almighty, wise, merciful, the governor of all things, etc. He
that is tempted to presumption may bridle himself with the consideration of
Gods justice, and severity, etc. He that is assaulted with despair, may arm
himself with this, that God is truth, and his promises are sure, etc.
Q. As it signifies his works, what do we ask?

A. The name of God being put for his works, we crave three things.

1. That in his creatures all may see him, and extol him, and his name for
them. 2. That we and all men may make use of his works, as by the works of
his justice to become more duetifull, by his judgments to become more humble,
by his benefits the more thankful, and by his keeping of promise, to become
the more faithful. 3. That his creatures may not be abused, as that we use
not our meats and drinks to surfeting, etc. but may use all his creatures
modestly, soberly, and reverently in the fear of his name, with thanksgiving
for the same. Yea and as well for taking as giving as Job did. Job. 1. 21.

Q. As the name of GOD signifies his word, what do we crave?

A. 1. That his word and Gospel may be continually and faithfully preached,
and also may be believed, obeyed and reucrenced.

2. That men in preaching the word of God, do not seek their own praise and
glory, nor their own revenge which is worse.

3. That the doctrine of the word of God be not evil spoken of by the lewd
and loose conversation of them that profess the same, See 2. Sam. 12. 14.

The second Petition.
Thy kingdom come.
Q. WHy is this in the second place?

A. Because then Gods glory is advanced by us, when he rules in us as
absolute king, and we are content to be subject to his laws.

Q. What is meant by the kingdom of God?

A. The kingdom of God is three fold.

1. Of power. 2. Of grace. 3. Of glory.
Q. Which call you his kingdom of power?

A. His universal government over all things. Psalm. 99. (...)


Q. What mean you by the kingdom of grace?

A. The particular regiment of the elect.

Q. Which call you the kingdom of glory?

A. The life to come which is in heaven.

Q. For which of these three, do we pray in this petition?

A. Not for the first, because that is always over all the world, and ever
was, and ever shall be, though all should conspire against him.

Q. But all things are not governed by the power of GOD, some things come by
chance and fortune, do they not?

A. Not so, for in those things that are most casual (as we say) God has the
greatest stroke: as in the Pro. 16. 33.
casting of lots, the coming of 1. Sam. 24. 4. 19.
Saul to ease himself in the cave where David hid himself. And the same may
we say of those that are Exodus 4. 11.
borne blind, and deaf, and du^^ etc. the loosing of a Matthew. 10.
hair from our head, the lighting of a sparrowe upon the ground, and a
thousand such like.

Q. If we pray not here for the kingdom of Gods power, which then is it that
we pray for?

A. For the coming of the second, and the hastening of the last.

Q. What is that kingdom, which you call the kingdom of grace?

A. It is that power and government which God of his free favor and goodness,
does exercise in his elect to save them from hell, and to bring them to heaven,
which is his kingdom of glory.

Q. But I would have you make it more plain?

A. To understand this kingdom of grace more plainly and fully, we must
consider of three points.

1. How we were created. See D. Babbington.
2. How we were corrupted. 3. How we are restored.
Q. Uery well. How were we created? Creation.


A. According to the image and likeness of God. Genesis 1. 26.


Q. How was that?

A. In righteousness, Ephesians. 4. 24.
and true holiness, for so the Apostle expounds it.

Q. What does he mean by righteousness and true holiness?

A. By these two words, he understands al perfection, as wisdom, will to do
good, Truth, Innocence, love of God, etc.

Q. And does man continue in this perfection still?

A. No, for when Adam transgressed, Corruption.
Gods image was defaced, and his happiness forfeited according to the doctrine
of the Apostle. Romans 5. 12.
By one man came sin, and by sin death entered over all unto condemnation.

Q. How is it now then with man?

A. Now it is otherwise, for Sin is entered. Satan rules. Death follows.
Our familiarity with GOD, Genesis 6. 5.
turned into mortal hatred. Romans 7. 14. 19. 21. 23.
Our wisdom into folly, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
and our happiness into everlasting cursednesse. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2.
Romans 8. 7.


Q. And do we thus continue?

A. No, for God in a contrary course of love: Restoration.


1. Takes away our corruption by little and little. 2. Begettes us anew to a
better life. 3. By Christ restores his image again. 4. Lighteneth our minds
to know him aright. 5. Strengthens our wills to embrace his word. 6.
Purges our hearts to love the Lord. 7. Makes all our members in measure to
become weapons of righteousness.
And so Sin dies. Grace lives. We love him, and are loved of him.


And this is now the kingdom of grace.

Q. In this kingdom of grace, who be the subjects?

A. The elect, and faithful only.

Q. What chair of state has this king?

A. The hearts of men.

Q. What scepter has he?

A. His word.

Q. What laws does he rule by?

A. The old and, new testament.

Q. How does he put them in execution?

A. By the power of his spirit.

Q. What kingdom is opposite to this?

A. The kingdom of Satan.

Q. What is Satan?

A. An enemy, and the prince of darkness.

Q. Where does he rule?

A. In the children of disobedience.

Q. How does he rule?

A. Like a tyrant.

Q. How do the wicked serve him?

A. Like miserable bondslaues.

Q. How does he reward them?

A. With eternal confusion of body and soul.

Q. Why do they serve him then?

A. Because he has 2. Cor. 4. 4.
blinded their eyes.

Q. How does he blind them?

A. With fair shows and Genesis 3. 4. 5. Matthew. 4. 9.
promises, which he can never make good nor perform.

Q. Where may we read of Christ's kingdom, or the kingdom of grace?

A. In Ioh. 18. 36. Romans 14. 17. Col. 1. 13

Q. Where may we read of the kingdom of Satan?

A. In Romans 6. 12. Ioh. 12. 31. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 6. 12. Luke 11. 21.

Q. What difference is there between the kingdom of grace, and the kingdom
of glory? (...) Kingdom o^, glory.


A. The kingdom of glory differs from the kingdom of grace two ways.

1. It is not in this life, as the other is. 2. It has no enemies, as the
other has.
Q. Who shall inherit this kingdom of glory?

A. None but Matthew. 19. 28 Luke. 22. 28. 29. 30.
those which have been subjects unto Christ in the kingdom of grace.

Q. Which is the way unto it?

A. The one brings us to the other, for by grace we must come to glory.

Q. And not by nature?

A. No ^ for the natural man sees not the things of God. 1. Cor. 2. 14.


Q. Nor by merits?

A. Yes, by the merits of Christ.

Q. And not by our own merits?

A. No, for then it were a kingdom of merit, and not of grace, of desert, not
of favor.

Q. Where may we read of this kingdom of glory?

A. In 1. Cor. 2. 9. Reave. 7. 9. 14.

Q. Now show what is meant by coming? Com^.


A. To come, signifies the approaching of any thing in our presence.

Q. But what is understood by the coming of Gods kingdom?

A. Here it being spoken of the kingdom of grace, it signifies two things.

1. An erecting of it where it is not begun before. 2. Where it is once
erected, a full continuance of it to the end.
Q. Being understood of the kingdom of glory, what is meant by coming?

A. Then it signifies also two things 1 A hastening Apocal. 22. l^s^.
forward of that time wherein we shall be partakers of it. 2 A full Mat. 25. 34.
possessing of it when that time is come.


Q. By what means is this kingdom erected, and maintained in us?

A. The principal means are in number four.

Q. Which is the first?

A. The powerful ministry of the Romans 1. 16. 2. Cor. 10. 4. 1. ^et. 1. 23.
word, unto which are joined the sacraments, for the greater strengthening and
confirming of our faith.

Q. Which is the second means?

A. The effectual working Ezec. 36. 26. 27.
of the spirit of God in our hearts, Esa. 11. 3.
without which the other means are unprofitable unto us.

Q. Which is the third?

A. Godly princes, good rulers, and Magistrates.

Q. Why? what must they do?

A. It belongs to them to reform religion, to purge the Church of God, and
to defend the true worship, and worshippers of God: and to subdue all that be
enemies unto the same.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the testimony of the Apostle, who wills that they be prayed for, 1.
Tim. 2. 2.
for this end, Esa. 49. 23.
that men may lead under them an honest and a godly life: As also by the
Prophet Esaias, who for this cause calls Kings and Queens nursing fathers, and
nursing mothers for the Church of God.

Q. What is the fourth and last means for the building up of the kingdom of
God?

A. Ecclesiastical discipline, or the government of Christ in his Church.

Q. Wherein stands it?

A. It stands in three things Admonition. Suspension. Excommunication.


Q. By whom and how must these things be put in execution?

A. By such officers, and in such manner as Christ himself has ordained in
his Gospel.

Q. What be the effects and benefits of this kingdom?

A. The Apostle has set them forth, Romans 14. 17.


1 Negatiuely, nor meats and drinks, that is, not any transitory, or earthly
matter. 2 Affirmatively, but Righteousness peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Q. Now show briefly what is the sense and meaning of this second petition?

A. The meaning of it is this, we pray that the Lord would subdue unto his
Majesty all the power of Satan in us, and all the wicked lusts of the flesh:
and enable us both in body and soul by his holy spirit, to work acceptably
in his sight: And to throw down all his enemies and ours, that he may
gloriously reign and triumph over all: And that we by Christ may finally be
made partakers of his everlasting kingdom of glory in heaven.

Q. Now as briefly show the particular graces that we crave in this petition.

A. The particulars are these: we crave, 1 That it would please the Lord to
pull down by the preaching of the word, and working of his holy spirit, the
kingdom of sin, and Satan: and to establish his own kingdom in the hearts
of the faithful.


Q. What else?

A. 2 That Christ may reign by his own laws, and that he would give all
furtherance unto it:

As that it would please him: 1 To increase the number of faithful preachers.
2 To increase the gifts of the preachers. 3 To maintain al schools of
learning. 4 To join with the outward preaching, his spirit within.


5 To stir up the people, to hear, confer, read, believe, and obey, etc.

Q. What else do we pray for?

A. 3 That the Lord would raise up careful Magistrates, which may be nurses
to his Gospel.

Q. What else?

A. 4 That God would erect and maintain such an ecclesiastical government for
his church, as he knows fit to advance his glory.

Q. What else?

A. 5 That he would remove all contrary lettes, and whatsoever is against the
furtherance of his kingdom.

Q. Is there any more?

A. 6 And lastly, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
that God would hasten either the day of judgment, or the day of death.

Q. But many you know cannot abide to hear of death, nor the coming of
Christ.

A. It is true indeed, for the wicked tremble at the hearing of them, as Foelix
did when Paul spoke unto him of the judgment to come. Act. 24.
But the children of God being holden with the temptations of Satan, and their
own corruption: Cry out with themselves, Apocal. 22. last.
Come Lord Jesus, and with hearty affection do pray and say: Thy Kingdom come.

Q. What say you to such as hinder the kingdom of Christ?

A. I would wish them to consider that when they say this petition, they pray
for their own confusion and destruction.

The third Petition.
Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
Q. WHat is the sum of this petition?

A. 1 That every man in his calling may obey God.

2 In our callings to direct all things to the glory of God.

3 To take in good part whatsoever God sends, whether it be with us, or
against us.

Q. Why is this next?

A. To show that then Gods kingdom does come, when his will is done.

Q. What is your meaning more plainly?

A. I mean that the Lord does not rule in us, if we remain unwilling to
obey his word, and striving against his will.

Q. How may we come to the true understanding of this petition?

A. For the better understanding of this petition, we are to consider of three
points.

1 Of how many sorts the will of God is. 2 Whether God wills sin or no.
3 Whether the will of God should be done, if we pray not for the doing of it,
or no.
Q. Uery well, the points are very necessary, what say you then of the first
point?

A. In respect of God himself, his will is always but one, and that most
simple, but in respect of us,

The will of God is twofolde, Hidden. Revealed.


Q. What does the Scripture speak of the secret will of God?

A. The Scripture compares it to: Psalm. 36. 6.
great deep or a bottomless sea, Romans 11. 33.
which cannot be sounded: and unto hie mountains which cannot be climed.

Q. What call you the secret will of God?

A. That counsel which he never revealed in his word, neither has promised to
reveal in this world.

Q. Whether may this secret will of God be searched after, or no?

A. No, it ought not.

Q. How prove you that?

A. In John 21. 23. Act. 1. 7.

Q. What call you the revealed will of God?

A. That which he has made known in his word.

Q Whether may we search after that or no?

A. Yea, we may and ought.

Q. How prove you that?

N. In Deuteronomy. 29. 29.

Q. Whether do we pray here for the doing of Gods secret will or no?

A. No, for that is ever Esa. 46. 10. Numb. 24. 13.
done, and shall while the world endures.

Q. Of how many sorts is the reuealeo will of God?

A. Of two sorts. 1. That which God does require to be done by us: and that is
revealed in the law. 2. That which he has decreed of us in his eternal
counsel, as touching our salvation: and that is revealed in the Gospel.


Q. In what places find you that revealed?

A. Our savior Christ says. John 6. 40.
This is the will of him that sent me, that every man that sees the son,
and believes in him, should have ever lasting life, etc. And Saint Paul says,
Ephe. 1. 5.
He has predestinate us, to be adopted through Jesus Christ, in himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will. And for the doing of this will we
pray here.

Q. But may we enquire after the knowledge of this will?

A. Yea, and diligently we ought to enquire after it.

Q. But if we do search after it, may we know it?

A. Yea, for as it is revealed in the scripture, so is it confirmed and sealed
before our eyes in the Sacraments.

Q. What if we cannot at all times, or at any time, understand, and know this
will of God?

A. The fault is in our selves, because we be 1. Cor. 2. 14.
carnal, and destitute of the spirit of Christ.

Q. To whom then is this will of God revealed?

A. To every one of Gods children this will is particularly revealed.

Q How prove you that?

A. Paul says, that this will of God was manifested unto him, Gal. 2. 20.
when he says that Christ loved him, and gave himself for him.

Q. Yea, but Paul is not every one?

A. No, that is true, but if all the elect are led by the same spirit that
Paul had, it will also persuade them of this will of GOD as it persuaded Paul.

Q. But how prove you that the same spirit is given to all the Elect?

A. It is manifest in Esa. 59. 21. Romans 8. 11. 14. 15. 16.

Q. Will not this breed carnal security in men?

A. No, but clean contrary, for when we are once armed with the knowledge of
this will of God, we shall pass through fire and water, without any danger,
without fear of the world, or death, or the devil, Romans 8. 38. 39.
and triumph over all our enemies, as Paul did.

Q. Whether is any thing done in the world, The second point.
whether GOD will or no?

A. God forbid we should think so, Romans 9. 19.
that were to deny the omnipotency of God. Esa. 46. 10.


Q If nothing be done in the world^ against the will of God, then sin is
committed by the will of God?

A. Yea it is the will of God that sin should remain in the world.

Q. You mean that God does suffer it to be in the world, do you not?

A. Nay, I mean that God does will it, and work it, which is more then
permitting or suffering it to be done

Q. How prove you that?

A. It may be proved by these places of scripture:

As they regarded not to know God, Romans 1. 28.
so God delivered them up unto a reprobate mind, to do those things which are
not convenient.

Again, 2. These. 2. 11.
Because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved,
therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe lies,
this is more then suffering them to be deluded, and to be delivered up.

Again, Psalm. 81. 11. 12.
My people would not hear my voice, and Israel would none of me: So I gave
them up unto the hardness of their heart, and they have, etc. This is more then
permitting them to be given up.

Q. Is not GOD then the author of sin?

A. He is, and he is not.

Q. How can that be?

A. For the better clearing of this point, we must consider two things.

1. How many ways sin is to be considered 2. What things are to be
considered in every sin.
Q. How many ways is sin to be considered?

A. Three ways.

1. As a thing contrary to the law of GOD, and so GOD is not the author of
sin. 2. As a cause of more sin following, neither that way is GOD the
author of sin. 3. As it is a punishment of sin past, and so God is the
author of it.
Q. How prove you that God does punish one sin with another?

A. By Romans 1. 28. 2. These. 2. 11. 12. Psalm. 81. 11. 12.

Q. That God does punish one sin with another, I now see it manifestly, but
why does he so?

A. To punish sin, stands with his justice, and every punishment is a work
of his justice, but how or which way he will punish sin, that is in his own
will or pleasure: if not, who shall teach him, and direct him?

Q. It is true, I am satisfied for that point, now show how many things are to
be considered in every sin?

A. Two things. 1. The Action, o^ deed done. 2. The corruption of the action.


Q. What mean you by the corruption of the action?

A. The swaruing from the rule of Gods word, or the transgression of his law.

Q What say you of the action, is that of God?

A. Yea, the action so far as it is an action, God does will it, and work
it, for without him we can do nothing, because (as the Scripture says) In
him we live, Act. 17. 2^*.
and move, and have our being.

Q. Is not God also the author of the evil, or corruption that is in the
Action?

A. No, not of the evil in the Action, except it be (as we have heard
already) a punishment of sin past, and so a work of justice.

Q. How prove you that God is not the author of the corruption that is in the
action?

A. It may be proved by these places. Psalm. (...) 1. 13. Zach. 8. 17. 1. Ioh.
2. (...)

Q How else can you prove that God is the author of the action, and not of the
corruption that is in it?

A. By the very light of nature, and common reason. For, 1. The Sun shines
upon carrion, Similitudes.
and it stinketh more then it did before. It shines also upon flowers, and
they smell


Q. What other similitudes have you?

A. A lame man, by the power of his

Q. Have you any more such similies?

3 A. Yea. A liberal father gives his children their portions, which they
spend riotously, the fathers liberality is the cause of their spending, for
without him they had nothing to spend, but their riotous spending comes not
of their father, but of themselves: and even so God is the author of an action,
but not of the evil that is in the action.

Q. The case is clear. Now show me why God does let sin be still in our
nature, when as he could by his grace (if it pleased him) take it quite away?

A. The cause is this: That he may use our sins to his own glory, for
hereby he makes known unto us two things, which otherwise we had never known.

1. His justice in punishing sin. 2. His mercy in pardoning sin. and both
in Christ.
Q. How prove you that?

A. By the witness of the Apostle in, Romans 9. 22.

Q. Whether should the will of God be done, The third point.
if we did not pray for the doing of it?

A. Yes, for his will stands not upon our prayers.

Q. Why then do we pray that his will may be done?

A. Therein we acknowledge 2. things: 1. Our duty in calling upon God as we
are commanded. 2. Our inabilitie to do the will of God of our selves, except he
help us with his grace.


Q. Whether may we by our prayers make the Lord to alter his will and purpose
in any thing, or no?

A. No, we cannot: for his decrees are, and always have been, and always shall
be fulfilled, and none shall hinder, nor alter his purpose: for it is
unchangeable.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By these places following: Numb. 23. 19. Esai. 46. 10. Malac. 3. 6. Romans
11. 29. Pro. 21. 30, 31. Iam. 1. 17.

Q. What may we learn hereby?

A. To pray always according to the will of God.

Q. What if we should desire any thing y^ we know God will not grant?

A. Then we sin against the commandment of our Savior Christ: for he has
taught us to pray that his will may be done, not ours, and that his decrees may
stand, and not be changed.

Q. What say you of praying for all men? Of praying for all men.
is it not lawful to pray for all men?

A. Yes, so far as our prayers agree with Gods will: but no further.

Q. Yea, but may we not pray for the reprobate that they may be saved, as well as
the elect?

A. No: for it is against the will of God.

Q. How do you mean that it is against his will?

A. I mean that it is a thing which shall never be granted: for God has
decreed the contrary in his everlasting counsel.

Q. But good prayers may prevail much with God.

A. Yea, that is true, if they be agreeable with his will, or else they are not
good prayers.

Q. Why? does not the scripture say, Object.
that God will that all men shall be saved, 1. Tim. 2. 4.
and come to the knowledge of the truth? Now if all be not saved, then the
will of God is mutable, is it not?

A. The meaning of the Apostle is to be taken as well as his words.

Q. Why, the words are very plain, what whould be his meaning?

A. Yea, but they be not so plain as you take them to be: for if they be
understood of the revealed will of God, then the Apostles meaning is one way:
but if they be understood of the secret will of God, then ^is another way.

Q. What if he speaks of the revealed will of God?

A. Then his meaning is this, that God does call all men by the preaching of
the word, to the knowledge of the truth, and eternal life, if they will
believe in Christ.

Q. What if that place be understood of Gods secret will?

A. Then the sense is three fold.

1. God will that all, etc that is, God has decreed of all sorts and degrees
to save some. 2. God will that all, etc. that is, so many as are saved are all
saved by the will of God. 3. God will that all, etc. that is, God has
certainly decreed that all the elect shall be saved.
Q. But does not this word ( all) include every particular person?

A. No not always: for sometime it is put for the greatest part, or a great
number, as in Genesis 47. 15. Matthew. 21. 10. Mark. 1. 5. sometime for the elect
only, as in Luke 3. 6. Romans 5. 18. 1. Cor. 15. 22.

Q. How must we then understand such universal and general speeches when we
meet with them?

A. These general speeches are to be restrained to their kinds: as for
example. Es^^. 66. 23. Joel. 2. 28. Luke 3. 6. Io^. 6. 45. Ioh. 12. 32.
These are to be restrained to the faithful: But, Psalm. 14. 3. Mat. 10. 22.
Ioh. 3. 32. Philip. 2. 3
To the unfaithful.

Q. But did not Christ dye for all men?

A. The common received opinion is, that his death was sufficient for all, but
not effectual unto all: for all have not faith.

Q. But I expect a direct answer.

A. Then I say that Christ dyed not for all men, but only for the elect, whom
God had chosen to be saved by Christ and his merits, from everlasting.

Q. Where do you read of any that have been forbidden to pray for any in
particular?

A. Jeremy was forbidden to pray for the obstinate Jews whom God had cast out
of his favor: Iere. 7 16.
and the reason why he might not pray for them, Iere. 11. 14.
was grounded upon the will of God: Iere. 14. 11.
For (says the Lord) I will not hear thee.

Q. What, is it in no case lawful to pray for the enemies of Gods Church?

A. Yes, for temporal benefits, as, peace, and plenty, and liberty, etc. so
far as it may be for the ease and benefit of Gods people which be amongst
the^: but otherwise, if they practice any thing against Gods Church, we ought
to pray against them, 2 Samuel 15.
as David did against Achitophel.

Q. How prove you that we may pray for the prosperity of the wicked, when it
may serve for the ease and good of Gods people?

A. The Prophet Jeremy. wills the captive Church of the Jews which were at
Babylon to pray for the peace of Babylon (now the Babylonians were Idolaters)
and gives this reason: Iere. 29. 7.
For in their peace, (says he) you shall have peace.

Q. Well then: Now I see that our prayers must be agreeable to the will of God,
because his will, and counsel must, and shall stand. Now show how we shall be
acquainted with the will of God which is to be done by us, and for us?

A. We must 1. look what is required of us in the word of God, we must hear
it, read it, mark it, and meditate in the same: 2. Pray for the spirit of
understanding to open our eyes that we may see, etc. Psalm. 119.


In earth as it is in heaven.
Q. What is meant by these words, in earth?

A. By earth in this place is meant the inhabitants of the earth, which ought to
obey Gods will.

Q. What do these words teach us to pray for?

A. That we may do y^ will of God, eue^ as the Angels which are in heaven do his
will.

Q. How do the Angels in heaven obey God?

A. The Angels have six properties in serving of God, which ought to be in
every one of us when we do Gods will.

1. Willingness without ^^udging* Heb. 1. 14.
2. Swi^tnes, Psalm. 103. 20.
or readiness* without delaying. 3. Faithfulness, 2. King. 19. 35.
without adding or diminishing. 4. Gladness, and ioyfulnes without envying, Luke
15. 10.
when they see others please God. 5. Constant perseverance, without giving
over, till the Lord bid them stay. 6. Whatsoever they do, Judge. 13. 16.
they still refer all the glory and praise unto God, Revel. 19. 10
not suffering any to be given unto themselves.
Q. What do we learn from all this?

A. We learn here that our obedience to God should not be halt, lame, or
maimed, but whole, and perfect, such as is in heaven.

Q. Now show briefly what particular graces we crave in this petition?

A. In this petition we desire: 1. That the Lord of his mercy would change,
Romans 8. 5. 7.
and frame our wills by his holy spirit, that we may will, and wish nothing
that he misliketh. 2. That we may believe in Christ, and look for salvation by
none other but by him: Ioh 6. 4^
for this is a part of Gods will. 3. That we may have holiness of life, 1. These.
4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
in a true and lively faith. 4 That God would make us able and content to bear
the labors and sorrows of this life. Mat. 16. 24, 25



Q. Some say this prayer, and yet look for salvation by their own means, how
do they say this petition?

A. With their lips, but they do not mean as they say: for not Gods will,
but their own must be done.

Q. What say you to those that say to God, Thy will be done, etc. yet live in
all security, and uncleanness, hating that which is holy, delighting in all
that is unholy, bathing in wantonness, and pleasure, and wishing therein to live
and dye?

A. They do most impudently mock the Lord, and most desperately deceive their
own souls.

Q. You spoke of suffering troubles and sorrows in this life, is that a part
of Gods will?

A. Yea, this life is subject to many troubles.

Q. But a Christian man need not fear any troubles as a wicked man does, may
he?

A. He need not fear them, Romans 8.
because they work together for the best to those that love God.

Q. Yet he that is a true Christian may live in this world without any
trouble, or persecution, may he not?

A. No: for the Apostles have set it down for a certain truth, that through
many afflictions we must enter into Gods kingdom: Act. 14. 22.
And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, 2. Tim. 3. 12.
shall suffer persecution more or less: they say we must, and shall, that is,
we must look for it.

Q. Why we that live under the Gospel in England are not persecuted (God make
us thankful for it) as they are in other countries?

A. No, that is true: but persecution is of diverse sorts: There is persecution
by the hand, Galas. 4. 29*
and persecution by the tongue, and though many be free from the one, yet no
man that fears God is free from the other.

Q. Why will God have his children thus to be exercised with crosses and
tribulations?

A. That they may not be damned with the wicked world. 1. Cor. 11. 32.


Q. What are men y^ better for troubles?

A. Yes much, when afflictions and troubles are sanctified of God, they are
means to make Gods children the better: as pouer^^^ seems to bridle lust,
Psalm. 119.
baseness to humble them, and many encumbrances serve to drive them to God.

Q. What if the world lowre upon us? what if our friends forsake us? our foes
defy us, what if persecution arise and we be slandered, and unkindly handled,
must we then say, Thy will be done?

A. Yea even then especially: for in prosperity it is an easy matter.

Q. It is a hard thing to flesh and bl^od, but what if God give such a grace?

A. Oh, if we can then say with a contented mind and a joyful heart, thy
will be done: it is a grace above all treasure, and a true note of a child of
God.

Q. But many will say, who can bear such things? what examples therefore have
you to encourage us?

A. There be many notable examples of diverse, which in time of great trouble
have been content with the will of God, 1. Sam. 3. 18.
even because it was his will: 2. Sam. 15. 25, 26.
as Heli, Job, David, Matthew. 26. 39.
and the Lord Jesus himself, as appears more largely in the places quoted.

Q. What sweet promises of God, or comfortable speeches have we in the
scripture to uphold our faith from fainting, when troubles do come?

A. The scripture is full of them: as these and such like:

Our times are in the hands of the Lord.

Our hairs are numbered.

Our tears are put into a bottell.

We must sow in tears, Psalm 126.
if we will reap in joy.

He is our present help, and in a moment can deliver us.

But if he will make a trial of us, 1. Cor. 10. 13. See Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34,
35, 36, 37.
yet, The Lord is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above that we
are able, but will even give the issue with the temptation, that ye may be able
to bear it, says S. Paul.

Q. These are most comfortable indeed to the children of God: Gods will
therefore be done, and God give us grace to submit our wills to his will as we
ought. Now rehearse the 4. petition.

The fourth Petition.
Give us this day our daily bread.
Q. WHat is the sum of this petition?

A. That it would please the Lord as a father and a king, to provide all
necessaries for us his children and subjects in this life.

Q. Why is this next?

A. To teach us, that then his name is hallowed of us, his kingdom does come
unto us, and his will is done by us, when we depend on his providence for all
our provision, and fly to him in all our wants.

Q. What does this petition teach us?

A. It teaches us many lessons.

1. To acknowledge the providence of God in the whole ordering of our life. 2.
To depend on his providence for our whole provision in this life. 3. To fly to
God in all our wants. 4. That we have no right to the creatures, before we
have asked leave of the Lord for the use of them.
Q. What be the graces that we pray for here?

A. They be in number three.

1. Carefulnes in measure how to live. 2. Contentednes with that estate wherein
we live. 3. Confidence in the providence of God while we live.
Q. What sins do we pray against?

A. The contrary to the former graces, and they be in number also 3.

Carelesnes. Covetousness. Distrustfulnes.
Q. Some think that religion will make men careless of the world, and their
families, is it so?

A. They are deceived that think so: for all that truly fear God are
careful for the world, if they be not too careful, which is more to be
feared.

Q. Why are we taught to pray for the things of this life, before the
forgiveness of our sins? etc.

A. To relieve our infirmity: for we do not so easily pray for heavenly
things, as for earthly things.

Q. How does this relieve our infirmity?

A. It is a means to make us pray for heavenly things better then we have
done.

Q. How may that be?

A. Very well: for when we have trial of Gods goodness in the things of this
life, we need nothing to doubt of his mercy in the things concerning another
life. And having found him friendly in lesser matters, we may fully accoumpt of
his favor in greater matters.

Q. This shall suffice for the order of it, now let us come to the particular
view of every word, and show what we are to learn from the same.

A. For the right understanding of this petition, two things in general are to
be considered of: 1. The thing it self which we are taught to ask. 2. The
manner how we must ask it.


Q. What say you of the thing it self, or the benefit that we do crave in
this petition?

A. It is described by two adjuncts, or circumstances: 1. Of the quality, or
nature of it. 2. Of the quantie, how much we must ask.


Q. Of what nature or quality is it?

A. It is corporal, temporal, and earthly, and is called by the name of
daily bread.

Q. What quantity, or how much must we ask?

A. The quantity is noted in these words, our, and this day.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that we must ask, first, no, more then our own: secondly, no more
but for the present time and need.

Q. After what manner must we ask it?

A. Concerning the manner of asking I observe two things: 1. We must ask it
as a gift, not as a merit, or a thing bought or sold, or borrowed, or
changed, but as a free gift. 2. We must ask it, for us, that is, not for my
self alone, but for others as well as my self.


Q. This is brief and plain, but yet I would have every thing made as plain
as may be (if it were possible) that no doubt might remain: therefore, now
show first what is meant by bread in this place.

A. This word bread is put in the scriptures three manner of ways.

1. Figuratively, for other things besides bread, as sometime for Christ
himself, in Ioh. 6. 51. Sometime for the benefits of Christ, Matthew. 15. 26.
Sometime for hunger, or a small portion, 1. King. 22. 27. Sometime for
liberality to the poor, Eccle. 11. 1. 2. Properly, for bread it self, Matthew.
15. 33. 34. 3. Both properly, for such bread as we eat, and figuratively, for
whatsoever is necessary to the sustentation of this life, together, as in Genesis
3. 19. Psalm. 41. 9. and in this petition.
Q. By bread then I see the Lord Jesus means, all necessary things for this
life: but why are they set down under the name of bread?

A. For two causes, 1. Because bread is most usual and necessary. 2. To teach
us that we must stint our immoderate desires, and be content with a little.


Q. What if the Lord send us more then bread?

A. If the Lord give more, we must be thankful, 1. Timot. 6. 8.
and use it well, and if he give us but bread, that is to say, a little
portion, we must be content.

Q. Is it not lawful to pray for riches?

A. Whatsoever is needful to the life of man, is included in this word, bread,
and prayed for here.

Q. But what call you needful?

A. This needful is to be measured and judged of, according to men's several
callings and charges.

Q. How is that?

A. If men's necessaries be great abundance, then great abundance is here prayed
for: but if we go from necessaries to superfluities, then we have no such
warrant here.

Q. As we have no warrant for it, so you can she wenothing against it, can you?

A. Yes, both the precepts of God, and examples of Gods children are against
it. See Deuteronomy. 8. 7. etc. Prou. 30. 8. 9. Job. 31. 24. etc. 1. Timoth. 6. 17.

Q. With what mind and affection must we desire things necessary for our
calling?

A. We may crave such things as are necessary and convenient according to
our calling, always provided these two rules: 1. That it be with condition of
Gods will, and pleasure. 2. That the end be to serve God, and our neighbors
by them and with them. See James 4. 3.


Q. Why are we taught to call it (...) ^read?

A. To teach us, that we must not shift for our selves as well as we can, or
get our living when, or where, or of whom we can, as the manner of the
world is.

Q. No? how then?

A. Every man is to use such honest means as he may eat the labors of his
own hands, and nothing to be found about us, for our selves or ours, but
that we have good right unto, and we may truly call our own.

Q. What then do we pray for here?

A. In calling for our bread we pray: 1. That we may be contented with that
portion which the Lord gives us. 2. That we may not bereave any of that which
is theirs.


Q. How does that follow upon this word our?

A. It must needs follow, because that which is another man's, is not ours.

Q. But by your leave many do rack and rob, and pull from other men their
right, and yet say this prayer too?

A. Yea, it is too true, but they say it to their own condemnation. For their
own tongues have given sentence against themselves.

Q. But many will seem to do it by law, and then it is well enough, is it not?

A. Yea, and it may be by such a law too as the Jews put Christ to death by,
and that was a law of their own.

Q. Can you name any whom this does concern especially?

A. Yea, there be many in the world whom this point does concern very
narrowly: and I could wish them to consider of it, lest they go to hell for
their mocking of God: 1. Those that keep the Churches lands and livings in
their hands, which they cannot call theirs. 2. Those that keep back the
Ministers maintenance, and say, they will find cause enough. 3. Those Ministers
that take the fleece, and feed not the flock. 4. Usurers of all sorts and
sises, with their bawdes the brokers. 5. All that live by forfeitures of
bands, and poor men's pledges. 6. All that live by unlawful means, as
filching, and stealing, etc. 7. All gamesters, and common dicers, which live
only upon play, and make an occupation of gaming, etc.


Q. What would you have these men to consider of?

A. Whether that which they get in this and that manner, they can call it their
own, as lawfully and truly gotten, without check of conscience.

Q. What if they cannot?

A. If they cannot, then let them consider that when they say this prayer, they
play the monstrous hypocrites, and dissemblers with God.

Q. Why? what if they do so?

A. Then their sin is twice so great as before, and their condemnation must
needs be heavy, and just, without great repentance.

Q. What other reason can you give to persuade men to be content with their
own?

A. He that can truly say when he comes into his house, this house, this
stuff, this money, this meat, etc. is mine by Gods ordinance and allowance,
he may go in, lie down, and eat, etc. with comfort, because he has no
check of conscience to trouble him.

Q. Why? its conscience such a matter?

A. Yea, a good conscience (says the scripture) Is a continual feast, Prou.
15. 15. and it is that which makes a little so sweet to the children of God.

Q. How do the wicked enjoy their goods?

A. They fill their houses, but their hearts do tell the^ that many alye have
they made, many an oath have they sworn, and many a poor body have they
deceived, for that which they have.

The Usurers heart says, Many a fatherles child will curse me for this that I
have, which is fearful.

Q. Oh Lord I marvel how these men can be merry with that they have?

A. Surely they eat and drink, and feast, etc. but it is like the feasting of
Balthashar, when the hand was seen writing against him, Dan. 5. 6.

Q. What should these men do to prevent Gods wrath?

A. If they be able, they ought to make restitution as Zacheus did, Luke 19.
if not, to ask forgiveness with hearty repentance, both of God and men.

Q. God grant if even for his mercies sake in Christ Jesus. Now show me but one
thing more concerning this word ( Our) and then no more, and that is this: If
it be our, why should we pray the Lord to give it us as though it were not
ours?

A. Because it is not ours by desert, but by mercy, and things given in
mercy, must be asked in a feeling of misery.

Q. Are we not worthy of our daily bread, how prove you that?

A. By the confession of Jacob in Genesis 32. 10.

Q. What is the reason of our unworthines?

A. The reason is, because when Adam transgressed, both he and his lost their
right to all the creatures.

Q. How is this right to be recovered again?

A. No way but by the merits of Christ and faith in the same.

Q. What? belike then we must ask our necessaries for Christ's sake, and in
Christ's name, must we?

A. Yea, and by a lively faith, be in Christ too, or else we have no right to
any thing, but are like thieves and usurpers.

Of this word, Daily.
Q. Why do we call it daily bread?

A. For diverse causes, 1. To note our mortality, and fading estate, if the
Lord should not daily feed us, Act. 17. 28. 2. To keep us in the exercise of
prayer, for if we should ask for many years provision at once, we would
take liberty thereby to pray no more. 3. To bridle our insatiable desires, and
to teach us to be content with so much as shall be fit to preserve life
honestly, not wantonly. For see Psalm. 37. 16. 1. Tim. 6. 6. 2. Cor. 4. 16. 17.
18. 4. To teach us that all our wantes are known to the Lord so well, that
for every day he can tell what is sufficient, and what we have need of.


Q. What use may we make of this?

A. The use of this point is two fold.

1. To preserve us from distrust, and al bad means to be relieved by, which
come of distrust. 2. To encourage us to go to God by prayer, when we hear how
privy he is to our estate.
Of this word, Give.
Q. WHy do we say give?

A. This word does teach us many things.

1. That God is the author and giver of all the good that we have either
spiritual or corporal. 2. That such is our misery by sin, that of our
selves we are not worth a piece of bread. 3. That if we have but bread, we
ought to thank the giver, and much more ought we to thank him for our
abundance. 4. To get our riches in such sort, as we may rightly call them the
gift of God, and that is when we get our living, either by right inheritance,
or by true honest labor. 5. To show that all our labor is to no purpose
(although we be commanded to labor) except the Lord give a blessing, See
Psalm. 128. 1. 2. Eccles. 6. 7. Psalm. 127. 1. Psalm. 107. 34. 35. 36. 37. 38.
Mic. 6. 15. Hag. 1. 6. 6. To show that the nourishment of bread, and the use of
our goods is of God, as well as goods themselves, See Leuit. 26. 26. Eccles. 6.
1. Dan. 1. 10. 12. 13. 15.
Q. You say that we be not worthy of a piece of bread, but in the worthiness
of Christ, whether are we then worthy of heaven as the Papists say?

A. If we be not worthy of a piece of bread, Genesis 32. 10.
much less are we worthy of the kingdom of heaven: but if bread be the free
gift of God, much more is the kingdom of heaven the free gift of God.

Us
Q. Why do we say, give us, and not give me?

A. For that there be two reasons: 1. To teach us, that when we pray, we must
pray for others as well as for our selves, or else we pray not aright, and in
love, 1. Cor. 13. 5. Love seeks another own, that is, only. 2. To show that
we must possess our goods, so as others may have part with us. For God by us
does give unto others, as he does by others give unto us.


Q. Who must have part with us?

A. In deed that is a needful question, for we must not give to all, because
the Apostle says, 2. These. 3. 10.
If any will not work, let him not eat. Neither must we give to all alike,
because the same Apostle makes a restraint, Gal. 6. 10.
and says, Do good to all, but especially to the householde of faith.

Q. To whom then ought we not to give?

A. If we see any idle bodies, or counterfeite persons, or any that live
without an honest trade, as fiddlers, rimers, iesters, walking mates, players,
Iuglers, couseners, and such like, I doubt whether we ought to give unto
such, or no, until they take a new trade of life.

Q. To whom ought we to give?

A. To the poor and needy, but especially to the godly poor, such as are
decayed by the hand of God, to strangers, fatherles and widows, etc. This
knew Job very well, Job. 31. 17. 19. 20. 22.
and he put it in practice to his great joy and comfort.

This day.
Q. Why do we say, give us [ this day?]

A. By that we mean that the Lord should help us when we have need, and
not tarry too long.

Q. Why do we use the same words in praying for others?

A. To teach us that we must help our brother, both by our prayers, and
otherwise, when he needs, and not to tarry until he be past recovery: See
Genesis 24. 18. Exo. 22. 26. Luke 10. 31. 33.

Q. Is it not lawful to lay up in store?

A. Yes, so that in storing we keep these rules: 1. Our reservation must be
void of covetousness and distrust. 2. It must be to lawful ends. 3. We must
not rob the poor to store our selves. 4. That we trust not in our store,
but in the Lord. 5. That it be made only in the reverence of the Lords gifts.


Q. What examples have we of such as have so stored?

A. There be many. See Genesis 45. 7. Matthew. 14. 20. John 6. 12. Act. 11. 28. 29.
2. Cor. 12 14

Q. The Lord Jesus says. Object.
Care not for the morrow. Matthew. 6. 34.

A. His meaning is that we should not care for the morrow with distrustfulnes:
but with moderate labor, and faithful prayer.

Q. He says again. Object. 2.
Labor not for the meat that perishes. John 6. 27. and Lay not up treasure
on earth, where thieves break through, etc. Luke 12. 33.

A. These speeches are by way of comparison spoken, comparing earthly things
with heavenly things, and his meaning is, that we should not labor so much
for this life, as for the life to come, because the one does perish, the other
does not, and so for treasuring up treasure on earth, the like is to be said.

Q. What need rich me^ say this prayer, that have enough for many years?

A. For two causes they ought also to pray this prayer: 1. To acknowledge the
giver. 2. Though they have riches, yet the use comfort safety is of God.


The fifth Petition.
And forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us.
Q. WHy is this next?

A. From the placing of this in the next place, we learn two things: 1. That
we must have a care of the life to come, as well as of provision for this life.


Q. Why, if we have our daily bread, what need we care for any more?

A. All the things of this world will do us no Math. 16. 26.
good, except our sins be forgiven us.

Q. What is the forgiveness of our sins such a great matter?

A. Yea, it is such a thing that without it, there is no comfort in the things
of this life.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the speech of the Lord Jesus to the man that had a palsy: Son, be of
good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. To teach us, that nothing can give
good comfort, but the forgiveness of sins.

Q. Why does he say, be of good comfort, rather then be of comfort, any
comfort is good, is it not?

A. No, this is to teach us, that all comfort is not good comfort, for some is
counterfeite, and false, as that which arises from transitory things, but
only that is true comfort which grows upon the favor of God in pardoning
of sins.

Q. What is the second thing we learn from the order and placing of this next
to the former?

A. Secondly, we learn hereby, that if we want our daily bread, our sins
are the cause, for when sin entered into the world, the curse entered. See
these places, Genesis 3. 17. 18. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. Deuteronomy. 32. from the 13. verse
to the 26.

Q. How shall we do to avoid the curse of God?

A. We must desire the Lord in mercy to do away our sins, and not to deal
with us in judgment, for sin is the stop of Gods blessings, and when our
sins are removed, then is there a way made for daily bread.

Q. What use may we make of this point?

A. This point serves for our instruction two ways.

1. To teach us that religion is not the cause of want (as some do imagine,
like Achab, who said that Elias troubled Israel, when in deed it was himself)
but sin is the cause. 2. That when we want any temporal thing, for this
life, we should examine ourselves of sin, and of some special sin that God
is angry with, which has deprived us of that which we want and would have.
Q. How prove you that?

A. By the testimony of the Scripture, in Iere. 5. 24. 25. For they say not in
their hearts, let us now fear the Lord our God, that gives rain, both early
and late in due season, he reserueth unto us the appointed weeks of the
harvest, 25. Yet your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins
have hindered good things from you.

Again, Josh. 7.
when Achan was unknown that played the thief in taking away the cursed
thing, Israel was plagued, but when search was made, and he executed, the
plague ceased.

So should we also make search in our selves, when the hand of God is against
us, until we find what sin it is that has moved God against us.

Forgive.
Q. What does this word [ Forgiue] teach us?

A. It teaches us many things. 1. That before pardon can be obtained, our
sins must be truly and unfeignedly confessed to God, without covering, or
excusing any at all.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Out of Psalm. 32. 5. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither hid I mine
iniquity, for I thought I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the
Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin.

Prou. 28. He that hides his sin shall not prosper, but he that confesses
them, and forsakes them shall have mercy.

Q. Of how many sorts is the confession of sins?

A. It is of two sorts: either Civil, or Religious.

Q. What manner of confession is that which you call Civil?

A. That is a civil confession of sin, which is made before a civil Judge,
or Magistrate, by malefactors.

Q. What example have you thereof in the Scripture?

A. Such kind of confession was that which Achan made when he was examined
before Joshua, Josh. 7. 19. 20.

Q. When is it religious?

A. When it is made to God only, as a part of his worship.

Q. Of how many sorts is this religious confession?

A. It is double: either private to God only, or public in the assemblies of
the church of God.

Q. When must it be private?

A. When the sin is private.

Q. Of how many sorts is public confession?

A. It is of two sorts: either generally to be made by the minister, with the
whole congregation together: or particularly, by some one man before the
congregation.

Q. How many ways do you consider that which is made by the whole
congregation?

A. Two ways: for it is either ordinary, as at the usual, and common
assemblies: or extraordinary, as in time of some great, and general
calamity. For the proof of the former, see Leuit. 16. 20. 21. for the truth
of the latter, see Joel. 2. 15. 16. 17.

And this confession of the sins of others, may be made also to God by any
godly man privately, in time of any great and general affliction, as in Dan. 9.
4. 5. 6. etc.

Q. When must public confession of sin be made by one man particularly?

A. When any one has committed any offense that is public and heinous.

Q. Why must it be public?

A. That the Church of God may be satisfied, which by that sin was offended.

Q. What mean you when you say the Church is offended?

A. That is to be understood two manner of ways. 1. The spirit of God which is
in the faithful, is grieved at the sin. 2. The faithful (being led by the
spirit of God) are also grieved to see God dishonored.


Q. Why? every man shall bear his own sin, we shall not answer for an other
man's offense, what need we then care or be grieved at the matter?

A. Yes, we ought to be grieved in two respects: 1. In respect of God. 2. In
respect of others.


Q. Why in respect of God?

A. Because he is, 1. Our God, and father, therefore we must be grieved when
we see him dishonored, as children are grieved when they see their parents
abused. 2. A GOD that loves purity, and hates iniquity, therefore we must
be grieved when we see that done in his house which he abhors. 3. A God of
all mercy and kindness undeserved, therefore we must be grieved to see his
mercy so abused, and his kindness so unkindly requited. 4. A GOD of justice,
therefore we should be grieved lest his wrath break out against us.


Q. How are the godly gr^eued in respect of others?

A. 1. In regard of the party offending.

2. In respect of the parties offended.

Q. Why in regard of the party offending?

A. Because he is in danger of Gods displeasure, and of being cut off from
the body.

Q. Why in respect of the rest of the body are they grieved?

A. Because some are in danger of learning his ways, and to be infected by
his example. Some stand in doubt of his salvation, which so publicly
offends: and some are in doubt of the truth, while he so falls that
professes the truth.

Q. What do you conclude upon all this?

A. I conclude, that therefore it is very necessary and requisite, that when a
fault is public, confession be public, that the Church of God which was
offended, may be satisfied.

Q. What mean you, when you say the Church is satisfied by his open confession?

A. I mean that when he has publicly confessed his sin with promise of
amendment, and signs of hearty repentance, then the rest which before were
grieved, are eased of their grief, as the body is when a corrupt member is
healed.

Q. And is that all?

A. No, then also those which were in doubt before, are now resolved and out of
doubt.

Q. Whereof are they resolved?

A. Of many things: 1. That it was evil which he committed. 2. That the
truth is still the truth, for all his fall. 3. That the body is not in danger
of being infected by his evil example as it was before. 4. That he is in the
state of grace again. 5. That they may receive him again as a member of the
body, as he was wont to be, which before was doubtful.


Q. How I see how necessary it is that public confession of public
offenses be made: but what say you to punishing by the purse? is not that a
better way to reclaim offend^rs, then open confession of the fault?

A. No, that is rather a means to maintain sin: for who will not sin when
he knows it is but a money matter? especially rich men which have money at
will.

Q. What if the money be given to the poor, or to the mending of some hie
way, or to some other good use?

A. It is counted with the Lord, but as the price of a harlot, Mat. 27. 6.
as the money that Judas took, was the price of blood: and therefore is most
abominable in the sight, of God what use soever it be put unto.

Q. What? is it not a good deed to relieve the poor?

A. Yes that is true, but yet we must not do evil that good may come
thereof, Romans 3. 8.
(for then as the Apostle says) Our damnation is just.

Q. Why? what evil can there be in helping the poor?

A. To relieve the poor is good, but to relieve the poor by a means which
maintains others in sin is not good, and therefore by the Apostles rule is
condemned.

Q. You speak of the money that Judas took of the Jews, which you say is
called the price of blood, that makes against you, for it is said in the
Gospel, that he cast it into the Temple, and the ^ie Priests did accept of it.

A. That is true indeed, but how? they also said it was not lawful to put it
into the treasury, because it was the price of blood: and besides that, that
money was not a satisfaction for Judas his sin, for to show that his money
did him no good, neither in the taking, nor in the restoring, he went and
hanged himself to make amends.

Q. But when they had his money again, they did not cast it away, but went and
bought with it a field to bury strangers in, and why may not the like be done
with the money of public offenders now?

A. Your comparison holds not, for 1. Judas never had any right to that
money, and therefore ought to restore it again. 2. If he had come by it
lawfully, yet could not the Jews have given it him again, for he went
presently and hanged himself. 3. The Jews did not take him for a traitor, or
an offender in that he did, for if they had, it is like his money would not
have saved him from their censure and judgment: nay they were as deep in the
sin as he was. 4. When they had his money again, it was not lawful to cast
it away, being of it self a good creature of God, but they must employ it to
some use.


Lastly, the field that they bought withal, Mat. 27. 8.
is called the field of blood unto this day: and so whatsoever use that money
is put unto (which is given to buy out their open punishment) should be called
the work of sin.

Q. Show your meaning more plainly this last point?

A. I mean this, that if a harlotte, or a whoremonger should with money buy out
their open confession of their fault, in the Church, or the civil punishment
to be inflicted by the Magistrate; and if that money were given to the poor,
it might be called the reward or alms of a harlot, and so in other things:
the high way of adultery, the college of fornication, the hospital of
whoredom, the Church of blasphemy, and all the reparations of iniquity,
which do all cry for the curse of God to come upon the founders, and authors
thereof. See Habak. 2. 11. 12. 14.

Q. What if any be so obstinate that they will not be brought to an open
acknowledgement of their sin?

A. Then by the censure and sword of excommunication, he is to be cut off from
the body of Christ's Church, as a rotten and infectious member, and to be cast
out unto Satan, till God give him repentance, according to the doctrine and
rule of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 5. 4. 5.


Q. What if after that he do repent, and offer to satisfy the Church of God?

A. Then is he to be received again as a brother, 2. Cor. 2. 5. 7.
as the same Apostle teaches.

Q. What if then (after his public repentance) he will give any thing to
the poor, or etc. is it not lawful to take it?

A. Yes, for then it is taken as a fruit of faith, which before was only a
fruit of sin.

Q. I am satisfied for that matter of confession, what else does this word
forgive, teach us?

A. It does further teach us the wonderful long suffering of God toward
mankind, which is not weary in forgiving of poor sinners when they ask
forgiveness at his hands.

Q. Why then we may sin as much as we list, may we not?

A. God forbid, for this patience and goodness of God is to lead us to
repentance, and not to presumption, as the Apostle teaches in Romans 6. 1. Romans
2. 5. and therefore we ought not to abuse it.

Q. What else do we gather from this word forgive?

A. It does further teach us, that there is no satisfaction to Gods justice
for sin, by works of our own, no, not in temporal punishments, but the
doing away of four sins is of Gods mere favor.

Q. How do you gather that upon this word forgive?

A. It does necessarily follow, for if God does freely forgive us our
sins, then we do not satisfy for them, for to forgive and to satisfy be
contraries.

Q. What is here meant by forgiving of sins?

A. To forgive sins, is to cover them, ^or not to impute them unto us. See
Psalm. 32. 1.

Q. But may not we make satisfaction to GOD for our sins our selves?

A. No, it is not possible.

Q. How may that appear?

A. It shall easily appear, if we consider against whom we sin, or whose
commandments we transgress.

Q. We sin against God, I know that, but what of that?

A. Yea, but that is not all, but we must consider that God is infinite, and
therefore the offense is multiplied according to the worthiness of the person
against whom it is committed.

Q. And what do you infer upon that?

A. I infer that our offense against God cannot but be infinite, and
consequently so must our punishment be too.

Q. And must that punishment be suffered?

A. Yea, for Gods justice requires the same.

Q. How shall we do then to be saved, for if we suffer it, we can never be
saved, because that which is infinite is without end?

A. In deed it is true, and therefore we have need of a remedy, or else we
cannot be saved.

Q. But what shall that remedy be? Gods mercy?

A. No, for mercy must not be contrary to justice.

Q. What then? Gods justice?

A. No, for we have need of mercy.

Q. By what mean may God execute his justice with ^^sanulling his mercy? or
exercise mercy without prejudice of his justice?

A. To appease his wrath, and to make way for his mercy, there must come some
satisfaction between God and Man.

Q. What manner of satisfaction must that be?

A. Considering the fault is infinite, and the punishment must be
proportionable to the fault, and the satisfaction likewise to the punishment,
therefore it must be infinitely infinite.

Q. How shall that be made? cannot man help to make it?

A. No, he can do nothing that way.

Q. No? What if he should do the works of the law of God, will not that
satisfy Gods justice?

A. To satisfy by the works of the law, we cannot for two causes: 1. Because
it is a task which no man can keep. 2. If we could, yet all the works of
the law be debtes, and no man can discharge one debt with another.


Q. What if man offer himself to God?

A. If man should offer himself, he offers nothing but unthankfulness, and
disobedience, and wickedness, that is, he provoke Gods wrath more and more.

Q. What if man should offer the whole world unto God?

A. If he should, what should he offer but that which he has first received
of God, and lost again by his disobedience?

Q. What if the Angels should step in to satisfy for man?

A. If the creature should labor to pacify the Creator: a thing finite in
goodness, to cover an infinite evil, the indebted to discharge one that is more
indebted, what were that but a covering, that does but half cover, and a
plaster infinitely too little for the sore?

Q. How then shall this satisfaction be made?

A. God himself must be feign to step in between his justice and his mercy,
and as he created us at the first, so to create us new again, and this is it
which the scripture calls regeneration.

Q. Who then shall be this mediator? God unto God? infinite to infinite? and
able both to discharge the bond, and to assuage the infinite punishment?

A. That must needs be the second person in the Trinity, the son of God, who
is also God equal with the father, and therefore infinite.

Q. Why must it be the second person?

A. For two causes: 1. Because he is the wisdom of the father, for as he at
the first uttered his wisdom in creating us, so he was to employ the same in
regenerating us. 2. Because we were to be adopted his children, that is,
admitted to an inheritance, which could not be done but by the mediation of
his own natural son.


Q. How did the son of God satisfy God for our sins he being God himself?

A. He in his infinite Godhead recompensed honor that great benefit, and
call upon the father in his name: and thus we come to the forgiveness of our
sins, which here we are taught to pray for.

Q. You have well satisfied me for this (...) let us come to the next word why
do we say, us.
forgive us, and not forgive me?

A. Therein we are taught, to beseech the Lord as heartely to forgive the
sins of our brethren, as our own. See Iam. 5. 17. Exodus 32. 21. Romans 9. 1.

Q. What if we fail in this duty?

A. Then we fail in the greatest duty of brotherly love, and Christian
compassion, neither can we say that we love the brethren, neither can we be
assured that we are the members of Christ.

Q. What? do we not love our brethren except we care for their souls? what
if we with them riches, honors, and favors in this life, is not this
sufficient?

A. No: the best love of man to man, consists in wishing his spiritual good,
the good of his soul, forgiveness of his sins, true joy in the holy Ghost,
etc.

Q. Where read you of any that were grieved for the sins of the people?

A. In Psalm. 119. 136. David says his eyes gushed out with tears, because
men kept not the law of God.

Q. What think you of those that laugh for joy, when they see men br^ake the
commandments of God, and yet say this prayer?

A. If they know what they say their sin is the greater, and they must needs
be condemned of notable hypocrisy: but indeed it argues that they never felt
that in their hearts which they utter with their lips.

Q. What else do you gather upon these words, forgive us?

A. We learn further, Another note.
that if we must desire God to forgive both them and us, we must not allure
them to sin.

Q. How do you gather that?

A. It must needs follow: for if we be mediators and suitors for pardon, we
may not in any case be procurers to wickedness: for shall he that sueth for the
Princes pardon for a Traitor, or a murderer, or etc. when he has so done go
presently and stir up the same party to work treason again, or to murder
again? God forbid.

Q. But this is a thing most rise, especially amongst such as bear the name of
good fellows.

A. It is too true indeed, but it is wicked good fellowship that tempts unto
sin, and draws to hell: which such good fellows shall one day feel to
their cost, if God give the^ not great repentance.

Q. What sins do we pray the Lord to forgive us?

A. All our sins whatsoever, our sins committed in our ignorance, our sins
of weakness and of presumption, our sins committed privately and openly, and all the evil thoughts and motions of our heart.

Q. What say you to the Papists distinction of sins, venial, and mortal,
and their 7. deadly sins?

A. It is most absurd and wicked: Romans 6. (...)
for all sin in his own nature is deadly, and every sin in the merits of
Christ's blood is venial, to him that truly repents and believes in Christ,
and not else.

As we forgive them that trespass against us.
Q. Why be these words added?

A. They are added as a reason of the former, and serves to persuade the Lord,
or rather to confirm our faith in Gods favor toward us.

Q. How can you make them a reason of the former?

A. It is a reason to prove that God will forgive us our sins, and is drawn
from a comparison of the less to the greater, thus: If we that are void of all
goodness do forgive others when they crave mercy, then the Lord who is the
fountain of all mercy will forgive us.

Q. Where find you that the scripture uses to reason so, and to prove Gods
goodness by man's goodness?

A. Our Savior Christ does so reason in Luke 11. 13. If you which are evil (
says he) can give good things unto your children, how much more will your
heavenly father give unto his children, etc.

Q. But what if men would not forgive one another, could we not then be
assured that GOD would forgive us?

A. If all mercy were dried up in the bowels of men, yet it were to be found
in the Lord. See for the proof hereof, Esai. 49. 15. Therefore, much more may
we be assured hereof when men do forgive.

Q. What does this clause teach us?

A. It teaches us many things: 1. That all hypocritical forgiveness is
condemned in the sight of God. See Psalm 28. 3. 2. That all lame and half
forgiveness is condemned, as to forgive a piece, and carry a piece vnforgiuen.
3. That if we will be like our heavenly father, we must be merciful and
forgive.


Q. How must we show mercy?

A. 1. In giving of alms, Deuteronomy. 15. 10.

2. In gathering our fruits, Leuit. 19. 9. 23. 22.

3. In taking up of debts, Matthew. 18. 23.

4. In pardoning of offenses, Mat. 18. 21.

5. In punishing offenses, Deuteronomy. 25. 2. 3.

Q. Our Savior Christ names here no degrees of persons, as parents, friends,
etc. why is that?

A. To teach us that our forgiveness must not go by affection of men, but in
general to all that have offended us, whether they be friends or foes, etc.

Q. Our Savior Christ (...) no manner of trespasses, as little ones, or great
ones, old or new, etc. why is that?

A. To teach, that of what sort soever the offenses be, we must forgive them
all: because the Lord does forgive all, both small and great, etc.

Q. But the matter may be so grievous, or prejudicial to us, that we may take
exceptions unto it, and not forgive it, may it not?

A. No, for the Lord Jesus in this prayer makes no exceptions, and therefore
bids us to make none. Again, there is no offense committed against us by
man, but God forgiueth us as great committed against him by us, and why then
should not we forgive, being so forgiven?

Q. What if we deserved better at his han^s that has done us the in^rie?

A. So does God of us.

Q. We meant him no harm.

A. No more does God unto us.

Q. What if we be his superiors?

A. So is God our superior.

Q. What if we live not of him?

A. No more does God live of us.

Q. (...) have often warned him.

A. So has God done us.

Q. We have often forgiven him.

A. So has God done to us.

Q. Well then, I perceive we can find no cause to retain malice, if we
consider things well: but ^n long as I cannot find in my heart to forgive my
ene^ie, what if I say not the Lords prayer, but some other good prayer?

A. That is a notable shift to deceive our selves, but not the Lord: for it is
not the saying of the prayer that God only regards, but our being in that
estate that we may say it. See Esai. 1. 14. 15. 1. Ioh. 3. 15.

Q. Then what if I pray not at all?

A. Not to pray at all is a manifest note of a wicked and a reprobate person.
See Psalm. 14.

Q. Whether is a man bound to forgive all debts?

A. Civil debts which come by lawful bargaining, may be exacted, so that it
be with showing of mercy.

Q. Whether may a Christian pray this prayer aright, and yet sue another man at
law?

A. Yea, he may in a holy manner sue another for an ini^rie, and be free from
malice, so that in doing thereof of these rules be observed that follow.

1. We must take heed of all private revenge, and inward hatred. 2. Our doings
must not be offensive to the Church. 3. That our suits be taken in hand to
maintain godly peace. 4. The end of our suing must be, the good of the
party offending, that he may be chastised and brought to repentance. 5. The
law must be the last remedy, when al other good means do fail. See 1.
Cor. 6. 7. And touching the lawful authority, and use of Magistrates, see 2.
Chro. 19. 6, 7. 8. Rom: 13. 1, 2, 3. Of Paul's sending to the Centurion, and
appealing to Caesar, we may read in Act. 23. 17. Act. 25. 11.
Q. How may a man forgive trespasses, seeing as GOD only forgiueth sins?

A. In every (...) which any do to their neighbor, there be two offenses: 1.
To God, and in that respect it is called a sin, which God only forgiueth. 2.
To man, and in that respect it is called an injury, and so man may forgive it.


Q. What use may we make of this clause?

A. The use of it is very profitable: for it shows us a lively sign to
assure our consciences that but sins be pardoned.

Q. How may that he?

A. Very well: for if we can find our hearts as readily to forgive, as we are
to desire forgiveness at Gods hand, then we may assure our selves of Gods love
to us in this point.

Q. How prove you that?

A. In Matthew. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Q. What, is our showing of mercy the cause why God shows mercy to us?

A. Not so: but a sign of Gods mercy to us: for he that shows mercy to
others, has first received mercy from God.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the words of the Apostle in ^. Cor. 1. 3. Blessed ^e God (...) f^ther,
etc. the father of mercies and God of all comfort, which comfort us in all
(...) tribulations* that we may be able to comfor^ them which* (...) any
affliction* by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God.

The sixth petition.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
Q. WHy is this the next and the last?

A. To teach us, that when we have done what we can, yet we must look for
temptations so long as we live in this world.

Q. What they that have their sins forgiven them subject to temptations?

A. Yea, forgiveness of sins and temptations unto sin, be inseparable
companions in this life.

Q. What the penitent sinner that is belou^d of God, is he troubled with
temptations?

A. There is none in this world so beaten and buffeted with temptations as the
penitent sinner, that ^rieth most bitterly for the pardon of his sins.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the words of our Savior Christ (...) Peter, Simon Simon, Satan has
desired to sift you as wheat is sifted, Luke 22. 31. to show, that if we were
as good as Peter, Satan will be sifting of us, yea the better Christian, the
greater desire has Satan to sift us.

Q. How else do you prove it?

A. By the confession of the Apostle Paul, who was continually exercised with
the buffetings of Satan, 2. Cor. 1^. 7.

Q. What means the Apostle by the buffetings of Satan?

A. He means that rebellion which he felt in the unregenerate part against
God.

Q. Why are Gods children thus troubled with temptations unto sin?

A. For two causes: 1. To humble them, and keep them under, least they forget
themselves and wax proud of those good things which GOD works in them, and
by them, 2. Cor. 12. 7. 2. That Gods power may be made manifest in their
weakness, and his grace may appear in upholding them that they fall not quite
away from him, verse. 9.


Q. But ^oth God love them that are so troubled?

A. Yea, it is a note of Gods favor and grace: for if we had no grief for
sin, nor any buffetings, or striuings, it were a sign that we were under
the power of Satan, and not under the love and favor of God.

Q. But it is marvel that the devil will be so bold with those whom God
loves.

A. No marvel at all: for he was as bold with the Lord Jesus himself our
head, Matthew. 4.
and he cannot choose so long as he is a devil, for he is by nature an
adversary: And therefore whom God loves, the devil hates, and where God
works in love, the devil works in malice.

Q. What are Gods children then to do?

A. Hereupon we are taught (for fear of being overcome) to pray continually
vnt^ the Lord that we may not be led into temptation, but may be delivered from
evil.

A second reason of the cohaerence.
Q. WHy else is this petition put to the rest?

A. To teach us, that as we must be careful to pray for the pardon of sins
past, so also we must be as careful to prevent sins to come: we must take
heed that we fall not into our old sins, nor be over taken with new.

Q. Why? what need we pray against sin to come? if we be forgiven our
sins past, we may take heed well enough of sins to come, may we not?

A. How needful it is to pray for Gods grace against sin to come, may
appear if we consider these six things following: 1. Our own corruption, and
pronenes to evil, Job. 15. 16. 2. The infinite allurements to pull us from
God, Heb. 11. 25. 3. The deceitfulnes of sin, Heb. 3. 13. 4. The power of the
enemy, Ephesians. 6. 12. 5. The diligence of the adversary, 1. Pet. 5. 8. 6. The
cruelty of Satan if he does win.


Temptation.
Q. What is meant here by temptation?

A. Temptation is the entisement of the soul, or heart, either By the
corruption of man^ nature, or, By the allure me^^s of To any sin.
The world Or The devil



Q. What is meant by leading into temptation?

A. To be led into temptation, is to be overcome of the temptation, when it
prenaileth, and gets the victory.

Q. What then is the meaning of this petition?

A. It is as much as if we should say thus: When we are moved, and entised to
sin, O Lord, keep us that we be not overcome, and give us a good issue with
the temptation.

Q. Does God lead men into temptation, or only suffer them to be led into
temptation?

A. Indeed some read i^ so, s^ffer us not to (...) into temptation: but the
text is plain* (...) us not into temptation.

Q. But does not God suffer men to be tempted?

A. Yes, and more then suffering* he is the worker of the temptation it self.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the scripture which does so speak of God, as in these places following
is manifest:

Exodus* 7. 3. God hardened Pharaoes heart.

2 Samuel 24. 1. God moved David to number etc.

Esai. 19. 14. God mingled amongst them the spirit of error.

Esai. 42. 24. Who gave Jacob for a spoil? and Israel to the robbers? did not
the Lord?

Esai. 63. 17. Why have thou made us to err out of thy way* and ^ardned our
heart from thy fear*

Romans 1. 26. God gave them up to vil^ affections.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. God s^nt them strong delusions, etc.

In all these places is more then suffering (...) to God*

Q. But if God do lead men into temptation, is he not the author of sin?

A. No, for all this, God is not the author of sin.

Q. How may God be a worker in temptations, and yet free fro^^ sin?

A. The Lord may be a worker in temptations, and yet f^ee from sin 5. ways:
1. He tempts by offering occasions, to try whether a man will sin or no:
as a master will lay money in his servants way to try his faithfulness, which
money if he steal he sins, but his master in trying him, Sins not. 2. By
withdrawing his graces, as he did from Sa^l, neither can this be a sin in
God, because he is not bound to any. 3. As temptation is an action, God is a
worker in it, and he is the author of the action, but not of the evil that is
in the action. Act. 17. 28. 4. As temptations be punishments of former sins,
and so works of justice, God is the worker of them, and yet free from sin.
5. In respect of the end to which God tries his children, God is a worker in
temptations, and yet free from sin: for God has one end, and the devil
another.


Q. To what end does the devil te^pt a man?

A. Only to bring him to destruction.

Q. To what end does the Lord tempt his children?

A. God has diverse ends and purposes in tempting and trying his children and
servants: 1. Sometime to humble them for their sins, and to try how they
will abide the cross. 2. Sometime, to make his own graces in them (as faith,
love, patience, zeal, thankfulness, etc.) to shine forth more clearly to his
glory, and their comfort. 3. Sometime to open their shame and naughty
corrupt nature, as namely their impatience, their unthankfulness, their
dullness, their distrustfulnesse, etc. which were in them and they not knowing
so much.


Q. Why will the Lord thus lay open their shame?

A. For three causes: 1. To let them see that they are not the men that they
took themselves to be. 2. That they may live afterward in greater warines,
knowing their own weakness. 3. That they may the more earnestly desire his
help, knowing their own wantes.


Q. It should seem that these kinds of temptations which proceed from God, may
be better called proofs and trials, then temptations, may they not?

A. Yea, it is very true, and so they ought to be esteemed and accounted.

Q. But seeing as GOD uses these trials to the profit of his chosen, and
his-owne glory, why should we pray against them?

A. We ought for all that to pray that we may not fall into them, because we
must abhor to commit anything whereby our God is justly offended.

Q. If God be offended with our deeds, why does he bring us into them?

A. With our deeds he is offended, but with that which he brings to pass
by them (namely our humility, warines, etc.) he is delighted.

Q. What difference is there between Gods tempting of his children, and his
tempting of the reprobate?

A. This te^ptatio^ into which God brings his elect, endures but for a time:
but the reprobate he brings into a perpetual te^ptatio^, utterly giving the^
up to Satan and hardening them in wickedness for ever.

Q. Is it not unjust, that God should lead some into temptation, and harden
them in wickedness, and yet punish them for their sins?

A. No, for even in this life we may see good and just causes, that God should
harden the reprobate, and lead them into this woeful and eternal temptation.

Q. What cause can you allege for y^?

A. They are worthy to be hardened, and therefore what unrighteousness is it
in God, to harden them that are worthy to be hardened?

Q. How can that be, when the scripture is plain that God himself has
hardened their hearts?

A. When the scripture says that God hardens men, the meaning is not that
they were soft before, and that then God did harden them when they were soft
before: but that God makes them harder, and that is lustly done, for their
former hardness deserved to be made harder.

Q. Why does not the Lord so^ten all men?

A. If any man will say, it is Gods fault that he softneth not all men, let him
show that God first hardened all men, and not themselves.

Q. That is true indeed, b^t what of that?

A. If al men first hardened themselves, what shall constrain God to soften
them again?

If he will, he shows his mercy.

If he will not, he shows his justice.

But who shall compel him to show his mercy, where he may show his justice?

Q. I am satisfied for this point, but what use may we make hereof?

A. By the knowledge of this point, the godly may learn to have in reverend
admiration the exceeding great goodness of God, when they shall consider that he
vouchsafes to take them into the number of those, whom of his mercy he would
soften, whereas of his justice he might have hardened them for ever.

Q. Do none tempt man but God?

A. Yes, man tempts man, and Satan tempts man.

Q. How does one man tempt another?

A. Two ways, sometime for good, sometime for hurt.

Q. When are they for good?

A. When we try him whom we do suspect: as some that ask to borrow money,
etc. before they need.

Q. How do men tempt men for the hurt one of another?

A. Two ways: sometimes by words, sometime by deeds, or both together.

Q. How by words?

A. By propounding captious and curious questions, as the Scribes and Pharisees
did tempt Christ, Mat. 22. 16. Luke 20. 20.

Q. What is that?

A. To entangle men in their words, to bring them within compass of law, or
to win some advantage against the truth, by the weakness and slendernes of
men's answers.

Q. How by deeds?

A. When by their own example, or by urging the examples of others they labor
to draw men to evil.

Q. How are we to pray against these temptations?

A. We are to beseech the Lord: 1. To keep us from trials above our power to
satisfy. 2. That it would please him to give us a mouth and utterance to
speak to his glory, that the enemy may have no just advantage against the
cause which we maintain.

Of Satan's tempting.
Q. How prove you that Satan tempts any man to evil?

A. I prove it two ways: 1. By the testimony of the word of God, as in 1.
Peter 5. 8. 1. John 3. 8. John 8. 44. 2. By his own confession in Job. 1. 7.
8. for when the Lord asked him from whence he came, he said that he came
from compassing the ear^h.


Q. What does he mean by compassing the earth?

A. He means that he came from tempting the inhabitants of the earth.

Q. Why did not Satan tell the Lord a lie, as Cain did, but tell the truth so
plainly?

A. Because he knew that it was in vain for him to lie unto God, for he knew
that God knew well enough where he had been.

Q. Seeing Satan told the Lord the truth, why does he teach men to lie?

A. By that we may see that carnal men do not know so much of God as the
very devil does.

Q. But why will the Devil teach his scholars to do worse then he will do
himself?

A. That he might bring them (if it were possible) into a worse plight then he
is in himself.

Q. Where does Satan tempt men?

A. In all places.

Q. What in Temples, and Churches, and at holy exercises?

A. Yea, there he is most busy, both at the exercises of prayer and
preaching, and when they be done.

Q. What is his drift at the time of holy exercises?

A. His purpose is to compass men's eyes with shows, and their ears with
soundes, and their senses with sleep, and their thoughts with fancies, and all
to hinder them from hearing.

Q. What if he cannot prevail that way? what does he then?

A. Then, when we are gone he will compass us with business, and cares, and
pleasures, and quarrels, either to make us forget that we heard, or else to
contemn it.

Q. Papists teach men that the devil is afraid of holy water, and holy bread,
and holy candles, and hallowed bells, and the name of Jesus, and the sign of
the cross, and that these things will drive him away, what think you of that?

A. The devil invented those weapons himself for the Papists to fight
withal, because he knew that they could never hurt him with them, but
themselves.

Q. No? is not the devil afraid of the name of Jesus?

A. If the devil were afraid of the name of Jesus, he would not have tempted
the Lord Jesus himself: and how little the devil feared the name of Jesus
appears more largely and fully in Act. 19. 13. 14. 15. 16. by those vagabonds
which took upon them to use his name without any lawful calling.

Q. What say you to the sign of the cross, or a crucifixe, is not the devil
afraid of that?

A. No, for he did help to set up the cross, and to nail Christ upon the
cross.

Q. What say you to the holy water, and holy bells, etc.

A. They be but childish toies, and strawes to fight withal instead of
spears: for when the devil deprived the Papists of true prayer, and the
powerful preaching of the word, he gave them those bables to play withal,
and made them believe that he was afraid of them.

Q. Whom does the devil tempt?

A. All men in general, both the elect and reprobate.

Q. But is he not more busy with some, then with other some?

A. Yes, his chiefest desire is to sifte the godly, as his desire was to sifte
Peter, and his greatest malice is against the best men in the world, Luke 22.
31.

Q. Why does he not desire as well to sifte the wicked?

A. He needs not, for he has them already at commandment.

Q. How can Satan te^pt all the world to sin, seeing they be so many?

A. There be armies and multitudes of devils and wicked spirits in all places,
and these do all conspire together the destruction of men's souls.

Q. But how do they know all men, and all men's affairs?

A. They are never at rest, but night and day do labor, and one certifieth
another most nimbly and lively.

Q. But how can they know every man's nature?

A. By observing their manners, and their customs, and their complexions, and
their company, etc.

Q. Does the devil know the thoughts of the heart?

A. No, that is proper to GOD only, Ieve 17.
who is called the searcher of the heart: but the devil does conjecture of
men's thoughts by outward signs.

Q. Show how that may be?

A. By his own long experience of the world, he knows many things: for he
is the oldest, and the greatest politic in the world.

2. By the words of a man's mouth, he can give a guess what is in man's heart,
because he knows that it is written: Out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks, Mat. 12.

3. He observes what every man does most busy himself about, and by the
outward fruit he judges of the inward root which is in the heart, and
when he knows the heart, he infecteth it, that it may bring forth
eu^llactions.

Q. Does Satan tempt al men alike?

A. No, not so, but he marketh how every man is inclined, what he loves,
what he hates, what he fears, and what wantes, and when he has found him
then he fits him.

Q. How does he fit them?

A. He provides for every one according to his humor. The tyrant shall not
want flatterers, the wanton shall not want a mate, the Usurer shall not want a
broker, the thief shall not want a receiver, he is a factor between the
merchant and mercer, he is a makebate between the man and his wife: he is a
talebearer between neighbor, and neighbor.

Q. Has he but one suit or shifte for one man.

A. Yes, the devils riches is in baits, whereof he has great variety and
store.

Q. As how, for example?

A. For every one that will swear he has a pack full of oaths: for every
one that will deceive, he has a pack full of lies: for every one that will
dissemble, he has a pack full of excuses.

Q. Has he but one may to compass one and the same man?

A. Yes, he has many ways and sleights to deceive one man withal.

Q. Show how he deals with one and the same man.

A. If he cannot compass him with Idolatry, nor adultery, nor theft, nor
any gross sin, then he will see if he can poison him with vain glory, if
not with carelesnes, then with distrust: if not with despair, then with
presumption: if he cannot keep men in popery, then he will draw them to be
Atheists, or libertines, or Neuters, or Protestants at large, as the time
serves: if he see any desire reformation, he will labor to draw them from
the Church by schism and separation, and he is always in his extremities,
either going too far, or coming too short.

Q. Will the devil be willing that any should embrace religion?

A. Yea that he is, for he hops thereby to give them the greater fall (except
God by his grace do mightily keep men) especially inconstant men he will
persuade to become religious, but he hops afterward by one means or other
to make them Apostataes, and blacksliders from the truth.

Q. Does the devil never cease from tempting one man?

A. Yes, sometime he will leave a man, as it is said, Luke 4. 13.
he left the Lord Jesus, that is, for a season.

Q. What? is his malice then at an ^nde?

A. No, but he does it only in policy, to bring the heart asleep, and to
make men secure, that he may come upon them afterward with greater force when
they mistrust nothing, as the children of Dan came upon the people of Laish,
and destroyed them when they were quiet and mistrusted nothing, Judge. 18. 27.

Q. How does he set upon a man when he comes again?

A. Where he sees a man most careless, or most weak, there he makes the
assault, like soldiers that invade a castle.

Q. How may a man know that Satan has been with him?

A. If God should make us see our country naked, our temples desolate, our
cities ruined, and our houses spoiled, we would say, the Spaniards have been
here: so when we see our minds corrupted, our hearts hardened, our wills
perverted, our charity cooled, our rulers persecutors, our lawyers brablers,
our patrons symonists, our pastors loyterers, and our people obstinate, we
may say the devil has been here, and so he has indeed, for these be his foot
steps, and surely, in every place where he comes (like a foggy mist) he leaves
an evil favor behind him.

Q. Why does Satan seek to bring men to a custom in sin?

A. That he may the more easily draw men to hardness of heart, and so to
impenitencie, Romans 2. 4. 5.

Q. Does the devil prevail against all that he tempts?

A. No, for although God suffers Satan to tempt, and to vex, yea and
oftentimes to torment his children, yet he does not suffer him to destroy them.

Q. But would Satan destroy us if he might be suffered?

A. Yea surely, that he would, and not leave one alive.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the scripture: 1. Pet. 5. 8. for which cause he is also called by these
names following, a liar, a deceiuer, a tempter, an accuser, a deuourer, a
murderer, an adversary, a viper, a lion, a dragon, a wolf, a serpent, etc.
by which names appears his unspeakable malice against man.

Q. The devil never called himself by any of these names, did he?

A. No: for he which is evil it self does shun the name of evil, because he
would not be hated.

Q. That's a trick of the devil indeed, but I think no man will do so but the
devil himself?

A. Yes, all the wicked and ungodly have learned of their master the devil, to
call evil good, and would be counted honest, though they be never so lewd.

But deliver us from evil.
Q. Why are these words added to the former?

A. To teach us how we are saved from the devil.

Q. How is that?

A. Not by our selves, nor by any thing that we can do, but by our heavenly
father who does deliver us, and set us free from his tyranny and power.

Q. How does the Lord deliver us from the devil?

A. By the means and merits of Christ his death and passion, who has got^en
the victory for us, and to our use, 1. Cor. 15.

Q. But why does the Lord suffer us to come into his snares?

A. 1. That he might make his mercy and goodness appear in delivering us out
of his snares: for except we were taken prisoners, we could not be delivered.

2. That we might see in what a miserable and woeful case we are in of our
selves without, our Captain and deliverer, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. What need we care then, seeing we have such a deliverer?

A. Indeed we need not fear any thing that Satan can do unto us, being so
brideled as he is, but we must be careful to serve the Lord, that has thus
mercifully and mightily delivered us. See Luke 1. 74.

Q. How must we serve him?

A. On^ principal part of the service which we owe to God, stands in
resisting the devil.

Q. How must we resist the devil?

A. In resisting such an adversary as the devil is, two things must
diligently be observed and regarded: 1. That we use such weapons only as our
heavenly father h^th appointed us. 2. That we use them in that manner and order
which he has appointed.


Q. What be those weapons?

A. They be not carnal but spiritual, such as S. Paul sought withal himself,
and he commends them to be mighty through God, to cast down strong holds,
and principalities, and powers, etc. 2. Cor. 10. 4. etc. and therefore also
exhorts all men to fight with the same: Ephesians. 6. 12. 13.

Q. What be the names of those weapons, that we may both know we them, and
prepare them in a readiness?

A. The Apostle names a breast^plate, butl it is of righteousness; and a
girdle, but it is of truth; a shield, but it is of ^aith; and a helmet, but it
is of hope; and a sword, but it is the sword of the spirit, th^^ word of God;
and shoes for our fee^e, but they be shoes of preparation for the Gospel of
peace: and unto all these he joins prayer, Ephesians. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. and
all these together he calls the armor of God*

Q. These be the weapons, in what manner must they be handled?

A. They must be used continually, with circumspect walking, or living
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15. with heedfull watching over our ways, and Satan's
sleigh^s, Mark. 13. 33. and with manly courage standing fast in the defense of
our ^elues, and of the quarrel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. This is too precise and straight, is it not sufficient if we live as our
honest neighbors do, and serve God as the time serves, like Protestants at
large?

A. Alas, no, the devil likes that very well: for he knows that the careless
man is easily taken and overcome, yea if we be never so precise and strict in
many things, and make no conscience of some one sin, it is enough for the
devil: for he will catch a man to hell as well by one bait as by a thousand.

Q. Yea? how prove you that?

A. By the scripture: for it is said of Herod that he reverenced John Baptist,
and his ministry, and heard him gladly, but yet for all that, could not abide
to be told of having his brothers wife, and for that he is condemned. And so
it is with others.

Q. Then woe be to those that go not so far as Herod did, except God give
them repentance. And blessed be God our heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ by
whom we be delivered from the devil, and from all his temptations, and fieri^
darts. Now come to the conclusion of the Lords prayer.

For thine is the Kingdom, Matthew. 6. 13.
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
Q. What is the effect of these words?

A. They are a conclusion of the whole prayer with praise and thanksgiving
unto God.

Q. What do we learn thereby?

A. We learn thereby: 1. Not to crave any thing without giving thanks: 2. Not
to end our prayers without giving of God due praise. 3. In all things, and at
all times to return the whole glory and praise unto him.

Q. What is meant by saying, Thine is the kingdom, seeing as there be earthly
Kings and Princes which have kingdoms also besides the Lord?

A. Though earthly Kings have kingdoms, yet they have them not from themselves,
but of the Lord, as the Lord says by Solomon: Prouer. 8. 15.
By me Kings reign.

Q. What is the meaning of these words, Thine is the kingdom?

A. They be expounded in 1. Chron. 29. 11.

Q. Why is the kingdom said to be Gods?

A. For two causes: 1. Because he is absolute possessor and ow^er of all
things. 2. Because he has sovereign rule over all at his will.


Q. Why do we say, for thine is, etc.

A. Because it is a reason to induce us to prayer, because he has absolute
authority and interest in all things.

Q. Why is it said, the power is his?

A. Because he has not only authority, but also ability in himself, and of
himself; and all other powers are derived from him.

Q. How does this serve to stir us up to prayer?

A. We have need to pray the more unto God, because we cannot do any thing
that we ask but by power from him.

Q. Why is glory ascribed to God?

A. For ^wo causes: 1. Because the fulness of glory is in him. 2. Because the
glory of the creature is all of him, which is but a spark of his glory.


Q. How does this move us to prayer?

A. Very much: for we must invoke his holy name, that in so doing we may
give him that glory that is due unto him.

Q. Why is it said, for ever?

A. For two causes: 1. To put a difference between the Lord and earthly
Princes. 2. To show the excellent and permanent estate of the happiness of Gods
children, for that kingdom and glory, of which they are made par^^kers, is
such as indureth for ever.


Q. Why is this word added, Amen, or, So be it?

A. To teach us two things: 1. That we must not (as many do) crave that in
words, which we have no desire unto in our heart, but that we must desire with
all our heart whatsoever we ask with our lips. 2. That in prayer we must
strive against doubting and unbelief, and to believe that as we have craved,
so God for Christ his sake will grant it unto us in his good time.


Soli Deo gloria.
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
page 107. lin. 26. For dull, read dumb. page 172. lin. 4. for with, read
without.

Man to humble himself under all.

God to exalte himself above all.

Man to suffer.

God to overcome.

Man to dye.

God to triumph over death, etc.

Q. How are we y^ better for all this?

A. We are the better for it two ways* if we believe: Discharge.
and not for his own, neede^ must his obedience be a discharge for our
disobedience, and his desert for our vndesert. Purchase.
so it is also a purchase of obedience for us, and his death is a purchase of
life for us.


Q. What is the reason of that?

A. The reason is this. To his obedience is love due, to his deserving is
reward due, to his humility is honor due, to his sorrow is joy due, to his
death is life due, and to his victory is triumph due, all which are purchased
and given by him, and imputed at Gods hand to all such as


