A TRIAL OF PRIVATE DEVOTIONS. OR, A DIAL FOR THE Hours of Prayer.

By H. B. Rector of St. MATHEVV^S Friday-street.

MATH. 6.7. When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the ^^athen, or
hypocrites do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much
Babbeling.

Gloss. Ordinar. in Math. 6. verse. 6. In fide interiori and dilectione oratur
Deus: non strepitu verborum, sed deuotione virtutum.

LONDON. Printed for M. S. 1628.

TO THE MOST BLESSED AND BELOVED SPOUSE of JESUS CHRIST, the Church of England,
my dear Mother.
Dear Mother, SOPHOCLES the Tragedian, when being intent upon his Studies in
his Old age, Cicero de Senectute.
he was of his Sons called before the Judges, and accused by them as one
unfit to govern his Family, and so, worthy to be removed and dismissed from
that charge: then the good old man, in defense of himself, produced and
recited before the Judges, the Tragedy of Oedipus Col^neus, which he then had
in his hands, newly written, asking of the Judges whether that verse seemed to
be written by a fool; which when he had recited, he was by the sentence of
the Judges ^reed. The like plea seems to be commenced against you, dear
Mother, and that by some, who call themselves your Sons. Your reverend old
Age, joined with a too motherly indulgence (as is too usual) toward your
younger Sons, they requite no better then to sue out such a Writ. For proof
hereof, may it please you but with your maturest judgment to (...) (so called)
lately published. (...) ^ou may see how one of your sons (at (...) about to
reduce you to an union with the Church of Rome, as your only Mother, and to
entertain again a conformity and communion with her in her superstitious
Rites and Ceremonies. Wherein ^ow nearely it concerns you to vindicate and
acquit your honor and reputation, your self can best judge. Nor need you (as
Sophocles) to produce some new proofs of your old and venerable wisdom in
the government of your so noble a Family, it being not only established upon
the pure doctrines of ^he word of God, but sealed with the blood of so many
Martyrs, and witnessed by the ^estimonies and writings of so many of your
ancient learned and reverend sons both Bishops, Doctors, and others. Nor
only so, but the same Religion, anciently and for so many years continuance
avowed and maintained by such a cloud of Witnesses, has been withal backed
hitherto from the first Reformation, and your just separation from Babylon, by
so many Parliaments all along. So that neither does your Mot^erhood need to
solicit Gods Vicegerent, your royal Governor and Protector next under
Christ, to call a n^w Synod for the discussing and determining of those
Tenants, which for so many years you have holden and maintained. It was the
serpentine Craft of the Arrians to procure a Council at Ariminum, wherein they
might, if not by number of voices (wherein they exceeded the Orthodox there
present) cry down the Conclusions of that famous Council of Nice, touching
(...), with the Father, in pugned by (...) yet at least so shake and wave them
by calling them into question, as thereby to disable their validity and
authority. Which fraud the Orthodox part smelling out, did openly protest
against them, avouching, that they there assembled, not now to dispute or
discuss the Decrees of Nice, but altogether to ratify and subscribe unto them
by common assent. May it please you therefore in your wisdom to resolve,
whether it were not expedient to petition his gracious and excellent Matie
together with the Hon: Court of Parliament now assembled, that an Act of
ratification may be decreed for the Religion hitherto maintained; and an Act of
Prohibition for the suppressing of all Popish and Arminian books henceforth;
since the Arminian section ^ath abused the Kings Proclamation, and so
dishonored the King, as if it gave liberty to Popish Arminian books to be
published, and restraint to their opposites, which maintain your Orthodox
doctrines, quite contrary to the intent of the Proclamation: and an Act of
qualification, that in case any Orthodox book, and such as tends to found
edification in piety, as in Eltons book of the Commandments, if it be in some
one particular or other, found faulty, may not presently all at a clap be
committed to the mercil^sse fire, as his was, but purged rather; whereas, on the
contrary, such books, as here is answered, the whole frame and body whereof is
Popish* and worthy the fire, yet upon the p^iring only of a nail, (as if now
thoroughly purged) is suffered to pass without control to be prin^ed and
reprinted. As if the Truth now were brought to such nice terms* and so weak
an estate, as the least straw is enough to stumble it, and cause it to fall,
and wholly to suppress and bury it in the ashes: and contrarily, Popery and
Heresi^ so highly advanced, as it can easily leap over all blocks and Bulwarks
of opposition. Again, be pleased to take notice of one great inconvenience, if
not rather mischief, which is like speedily to incroch upon your indulgence,
if not prevented. Some of your sons have already dared to add to the
Communion book; as the whole form of the consecration of Archbishops,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, being now inserted in the said book, I wot not
by what authority. Yea, and if such may be suffered to go on, they will
correct Magnificat. For if it please you but to make search, you shall find in
the great printing house at London a Communion Book, wherein the Author of the
book of private Devotions (and I saw it with mine eyes) has in sundry places
noted with his own hand (as they say) how he would have the Communion book
altered; as in the Rubric or Calendar he tells where and how he would have such
a Saints day called, and where he would have red letters, put for the black,
and so to canonize more Holidayes for you to observe. Also throughout the Book,
where he finds the word Minister, he would have Priest put in stead thereof;
such an enemy is he to the very name of Minister, as if he would have the world
believe, he had rather be a popish Priest, then a Minister of the better
Testament, as Christ himself is called, or a Minister of Christ, as the
Apostles were called, 2. Cor. 11.23. Acts 26.16.
I have ordained thee a Minister, says Christ to Paul. And in Conclusion, for
those private godly prayers in the end of the reading Psalms, he thinks them
fitter to be omitted, then added. I do but briefly touch them, leaving them to
your fuller inquiry, and more particular examination. But if such liberty may
be indulged to such like Sons, it will shortly come to pass, that as neither
you can own them for your sons, so nor they you for their Mother: such a new
face of Religion are they like to induce, if they be not the better looked
unto. Yea, what a Metamorphosis have we seen already in these our da^es? How
unlike is the present time to the former which we have seen? For, as I told
the L.BP. of London, it was a pitiful thing to see the strange alteration of
these times within this 7. years, from those former. For formerly, not a
Pop^sh, nor Arminian book durst peep out; but now, such only a^e
countenanced and published, and Orthodox books suppressed. It was not wont to
be so, my Lord, quoth I. And let your Motherhood be pleased to make inquiry
which of your Sons it is, that has dared of late days to incroch even upon
the liberty of Preaching it self, that in the most public place of the
Kingdom, Preachers have been forced sometime before, to show their Sermons
before they were preached, and some were not suffered to preach for their very
texts sake, whereupon they purposed to preach? Alas Mother, are our diseased so
desperate, as they cannot endure the plaster. And good Mother, I pray you well
and thriftily to discipline such your sons, as being Licencers of Books,
dare answer, that they must not license any books against Arminius; no^ yet
any Catechismes. But I forbear. I may fear, least, as Joseph, for bringing
the evil report of his brethren to his Father so I to you, may incur their
hatred, as he did. Now ^he Lord look mercifully upon you, and your goodly
family, least Simeon and Leui Brethren in evil, endanger the whole house of
Jacob to the uncircumcised. For great is the wrath of the Lord that is gone out
against us. Yet the natural constitution of your pure body promises long
life, if it may but be preserved from peccant humors, which otherwise may
prove mortal. We know that God will consume the Beast with his limbs. But
judgment must begin at the house of God: there will he begin to purge out the
dreggs of Popery. And if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged.
Now the Lord fill you full of holy zeal and courage for his glory and truth,
least Christ charge you, as he did the Church of Ephesus, I have somewhat
against thee, Revel. 2.
because thou have left thy first love. I^ therefore you be not zealaeus and
repent, take heed you prove not like to the Church of Laodicea, who said, I am
rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing: and know not that
thou art wretched, Revel 3.
and poor, and blind, and naked; neither cold nor hot, but lukewarm, for
which cause it came to pass, as Christ told her, that he spued her out of his
mouth. For the prevention whereof, good Mother petition, that an Act may be
made for the disabling and making incapable all Popish and Arminian Doctors of
either Bishopric or Denery, or other high preferments; so it is well hoped you
should quickly see an end of al such heresies. And let the knees of your heart
be ever exercised with your hands to lift up your humblest prayers for the
Lords anointed our most gracious Sovereign, Patron, and Protector, that as God
has most richly endowed his Majesty with such Princely and peerlesse graces,
as no Prince in Christendom with the like: so it would please him to vouchsafe
this sinfall nation, and unworthy to be beloved, long and liberally to enjoy
the fruit and benefit of so virtuous and religious a Prince: whom if our great
sins hinder not, I trust to see the most glorious and renowned King, that ever
the state of Christendom saw. I have no more to say, but to pray your Mothers
blessing to

Your dutiful and affectionate Son, HEN: BVRTON.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, he that in the winter season puts out to Sea, must expect
to be encountered with storms, and as the times are, with enemies ^lso. Alaes,
that ever we should live to see such troubles in Chrystendome. But of them
Christ and his Apostles foretold long ago. Shall Christians then think to
sleep quietly and securely in the midst of such a troublesome sea? Yea, that is
for the drunken man, who lies down in the midst of the sea, upon the top of a
Mast, senseless of the danger; a^ the wise man speaks. Prou. 23.34.
And yet shall the poor Mariner be counted a mad man, for toyling at the
tackling for the safety of the Ship: While the fresh water soldier counts it
wisdom to shroud himself under hatches, least he see his own death? Yet
this has been my lot. I hear, Alas poor Burton, he is cracked.
Coffeehouse, or hope of preferment have imbarkt him in this perilous
adventure. Such be the censures of the wise world. What shall J say? Am J
cracked? Wherewith? Not, J am sure, either with too much learning (as Festus
charged Paul,) or too much living. And if I am mad, J am not the first. Even
the Prophets of old were so accounted. When one of them was sent to anoint
Iehu, his followers said, what said this mad fellow to thee? Yea Christ the
Prince of Prophets escaped not this doom: He is mad, why hear ye him?
Patiently therefore will J bear his reproach. But am I discontented? for what?
What need I, when, blessed be my God, I have enough, no less then I desire,
and much more, then I deserve? Beneest, cui Deus obtulit larca quod satis est
manu; could the wise heathen say. Surely a speech worthy of Christendom: Well
is the man whom God (for goods or land)
Gives, what suffices, with a sparing hand.


For my self, J have Agurs wish: nor pouer^y, nor riches: both dangerous. And
having enough, what need I for hope of preferment imperill even that enough
which I have? Or will any man persuade me this is the way to preferment? It is
no beaten path, I am sure. Let others, who will, take this way: surely I never
went it, nor ever meant it, for that end. And yet (as all adventures are led
and fed with hope) I cannot say, but hope has had a special hand in all that
J have undertaken. But what hope? Or whereof* Hope of worldly preferment; A^as.
Nothing more absurd. But a hope to glorify God, to do faithful service, and
bring some profit to his Church, to my Sovereign, to my Country. And if this
should fail in the success, hope yet for Gods mercy in the rec^mpense of
reward. For this cause I have with Moses chosen rather to suffer affliction
with Gods people, then to enjoy worldly preferments. If J had consulted with
flesh and blood, and followed their council, I might have been as worldly wise
perhaps as others, and spared my labor, and spent my days in a more safe
silence, or silent safety. It was not any blind foolhardinesse that pusht me
on; J did first cast up the reckoning, before J began to build. And howsoever
the building may be impe* c^^ed by Sanballets, sure J am, they cannot raze the
Foundation, being such as the Gates of hell shall not prevail against. And
howsoever the Spider may extract poison out of the wholsomest flower (which is
not from the nature of the flower, but of the Spider, whose poisonous bowels
turn the best nutriment into poison) howsoever malice may misdeeme my
sinceerest meaning expressed in clearest and most n^ked words: yet (as J
uttered with a clear voice in the car^^ of the Lord Bishop of London, at my
first examination about Isreal's Fast) I have done nothing, but with a true
intent and desire for Gods glory, the good of my King and Country, and the
Church of England, whereof we are members; and for which I am ready (if need
were) to lay down my life. So little do I esteem the Serpents hissing, or the
dogs barking.

Not to stay thee too long in the threshold, here take a full view of my
answer to a Popish book bearing in the Front, A collection of private
Devotions, or, The hours of Prayer. If I have not fully unfolded the mystery
of iniquity wrapped therein, let thy charity pardon my imperfections, and thy
sharper judgment supply my defects. Only, J confess J have purposely omitted
many things for breuity sake, wherein the Author rather expresses his popish,
if not apish affection, in symbolizing with Jesuitical catechismes, Officium
B. Mariae, etc. then gives occasion of solid confutation, as being partly
ridiculous, though mostly superstitious, and some erroneous: for example, The
laws of nature: the Precepts of the Church: the three theological virtues:
three kinds of good works: seven gifts of the Holy Ghost: the twelve fruits of
the Holy Ghost: the spiritual works of mercy: the corporal works of mercy:
the eight beatitudes: seven deadly sins: the contrary virtues: Quatuor
nouissima, etc. To which he might have added, The five senses, etc. The four
Cardinal virtues: as they are set down in Officium B. Mariae, whence he has
the rest, and in, Las horas del nuestra senora, The hours of our Lady. As also
the 15. mysteries of the office of our Lord Jesus Christ, for to meditate and
say the Rosary of our Lady, whereof, five joyful; five sorrowful; and five
glorious: which with the rest are numbered up by Ledesm^ the Jesuit, in his
Catechism of Jesus Maria. But he would first try how these would relish. Yet
his seven deadly sins at least deserved to come v^der the ferula, or censure.
Wherein we might have showed the absurdity of Popish distinctions of sins
mortal and venial, yea how it verifies and cries down the inestimable price
of Christ's death, and extenuates or annihilates the rigor of Gods law, and
eleuates or sleights the nature of sin: the least, deserving eternal death.
Again, we might have showed, how by Christ al sins are veni-that pardonable:
but without Christ, mortal, and vnpardois, nable, seem they never so small.
Thirdly, we might have showed the absurdity of his number of those seven deadly
sins of the: of which ye shall not find the breaches of many of the
Commandments of the second table ranked, nor of any of the first Table: as if
Athiesme, infidelity, idolatry, blasphemy, perjury, profanation of the Sabbath,
and the rest, were not deadly sins, but to be reckoned (if the Author account
them any sins at all) only among his venials. But J hope some other will
supply, what I have omitted. Jn the mean time take this in good part, and so
Farewell.

Thine in Christ HEN: BVRTON.

A TRIAL OF Private Devotions. OR, A DIAL FOR THE hours of PRAYER.
Charis. GOD save you Madam.


Curia. Lady Charis? My love salutes you, much ioying to see you. Madam, it is
news to see you at Court. Some good wind, no doubt, has blown you hither.


Cha. Madam, no other wind, but of duty and affection to visit your Ladyship.
Only I must confess, that the late Book of Devotion, which your Ladyship
sent me, has occasioned me to come sooner, then otherwise I should, or well
could.


Cur. Madam, you are the more welcome. And I pray you, how do you like that
Book.


Chapter Madam, it were good manners I should first howsoever give your Ladyship
thanks; for I dare say, whatsoever the Book is, your Ladyship out of good
Devotion sent it me as a token of your love unto me. Otherwise, for the Book
it self, I must confess, that so soon as I looked but upon the Frontispeece
of it, and seeing it to wear the usual Badge of Jesuitical Books, I had
certainly without any more ado flung it away; but for the due respect I bore
to the sender, your Ladyship. And yet I thought with my self, that happily your
Ladyship had mistaken one Book for another. Otherwise I knew not what to
think; whither some might have gone about, if not to seduce, yet at leastwise,
to induce your Ladyship to a friendly opinion of the Popish Religion; or I wot
not what.


Cur. But Madam, though I have but little Latin, yet I have learned by rote
one Proverb, Fronti nulla fides: The outward front or face of things is not to
be believed. But have you looked within the Book, and read it over? Then you
will be of another mind, and conceive a better opinion of it.


Chapter Surely Madam to the front or face of it I confess I gave but small
credit: But looking further into the Book, and according to the scantling of
my slender capacity, and shallow judgment, taking a view of the whole frame
and mould of it, it seemed to me to hold suitable enough to the Front, and to be
much what the same in substance, that the Title made show of.


Cur. But Madam, I hope you are none of those, that censure the Book for
Papisticall, as Puritans have slandered it.


Cha. Madam, I dare not take upon me to pass my censure upon Books. Yet I
confess, seeing your Ladyship urges me, that it smells strongly of Popery.
Yet not relying upon mine own conceit, I desired some learned Ministers to tell
me their judgment of it, and none of them could approve of the Book.


Cur. I pray you what Ministers were those?


Cha. Madam, I dare be most bold to name mine own Chaplain for the rest.


Cur. But does your Chaplain hold the Book to be Papisticall?


Chapter Madam, I had rather I had some good occasion to be a suitor to your
Ladyship for some good preferment for my Chaplein, and no better then he
deserves: (...) present occasion, which I fear may perhaps prejudice his
preferment. We poor Countrey-people cann^^ ^^use sometimes, when our leisure
serves, but as (...), discern which way the game goes, (...) to hazard our
stake, where we see such infinite odds of Court-wit to Countrey-simplicitie.


Cur. Madam, you speak merrily. But in good sadness I desire for mine own
satisfaction to hear what your Chaplain can say to this Book, either in
whole, or in part. I promise you, of mine honor, it shall be no manner of
prejudice unto him, but I will rather do him all the good I can.


Chapter Madam, upon these conditions my Chaplain shall attend you, when you
please to appoint the time.


Cur. Madam, I thank you. Then, if it may stand with your conueniencie, I
shall entreat your Ladyship to bring him with you on Friday morning by eight of
the clock. I will set all other business apart for this. And for the better
boulting out of the truth, and satisfaction on both sides, my Chaplain also
shall be here, to answer to such things, as yours shall except against. For I
must tell you Madam, my Chaplain Master Diotrephes, does as much applaud this
Book, as yours does disallow of it.


Chapter Madam, I doubt not but my Chaplain is able to show good grounds for any
thing, that he shall except against. But I like it very well, that your
Ladyship is pleased to appoint your Chaplain to be here. Both I, and my
Chaplain (God willing) will be ready at your time appointed to attend your
Ladyship. But Madam (if I may be so bold with your Ladyship) will your honor
be stirring so soon, as by eight in the morning?


Cur. Nay, God help us Co^rt-Ladyes; (...) in the Country have but a poor
conceit of us, to think us such idle Hous-wines, as to lie a bed till eight of
the clock in the morning. But we must bear all with patience.


Char. Madam, if we in the Country think so of the Court, it is but because
we are willing to hope, that all the idle Hous-wiues be not in the Country.
But before I take my leave of your Ladyship for this time (...) me leave a
little to show my learning, and to try (...) (that our Chaplains may not seem
to carry all (...) away) let me object one very material (...) ^n the Book,
to your Ladyship.


Cur. Nay God a mercy Madam; For (I wis) if we women (as light account as men
make of our learning and judgment) might but as freely as men dispute, and if
the fashion were but ones on foot, they shall find that we have not only
words, but wit at will, and perhaps as smart and shrewd arguments, as the most
Scholasticall among them. But I pray thee Madam let us hear your objection.


Char. Madam, I am possessed with an exceeding wonderment, that this Book
should find such entertainment and approbation in the Court, especially among
(pardon my rudeness) you Court-Ladyes, being so full, I say not of
complements, but of many employments, chiefly your self. Yea the very
curiosities of Courtly attires, and the varieties of fashions, which not only
must be followed with the first, but studied also to uphold the Court credit,
are they not enough to take up all one forenoone? And then Madam where will you
find time for your Matins, and other hours of Devotion, which this Book
imposes upon you? What? Will the Author of this Book make the Court a
Monastery, or Nunnerie? Would he have the Ladies and Mayds of Honor to turn
Nuns? What? Nothing almost, but every hour of the day, to turn over and
over your Beads? This were a strange Metamorphosis, for Courtiers thus to keep
holy day. And therefore Madam, I wonder, that the Court, of all other, cries
not down such a Book as this. Nay Madam, seem to approve it as much as you
will, yet you can never persuade the simplest Rusticke, that you Courtiers are,
or can be ever a whit the deuouter for all this Book. For it is impossible for
you to practice one quarter of it. And taking upon you the observation of such
canonical rules, as stands not with possibility to keep, either you must
get a dispensation to remit the rigor of them, and to admit of such a practice
of devotion, as either your Court-leasure, or disposition can conveniently, or
but indifferently perform: Or otherwise you must be driven of necessity
either daily to go to shrift for absolution, or to chawke up all your defects
and failings for your general shrift: Wherein, and for which, such penance may
be imposed upon you, as you shall hardly determine, whither of the two is more
grievous, to observe the rules for your devotion, or to satisfy for the
penalty.


Cur. Surely Madam you argue very unhappily; nor do I think, your Chaplain,
or any man can say more to this Book, then you have done. But Madam, what
would you have us to do in this case? We poor Ladies, Protestants of the
Court, are in a great strait. We are pressed on the one side with importune
impossibilities, as you say: On the other, with the urgent examples of
Romane-Catholicke Ladies, among whom we converse, who press us with their
exemplarie practice of piety and devotion in their Religion, putting us and
our Religion to shame, if we do not equalize at least, if not outstrip them in
point of devotion.


Char. Madam, all such Romish practice of devotion is not worth Godamercie, or
that it should stand in the least competition, or comparison with true
devotion. The Priests of Baal, what a stir kept they, what zeal showed they
in launcing of their flesh, what unwearied devotion in the repetition of their
prayers, and that even until the evening Sacrifice, fulfilling almost all
their canonical hours, and yet all to no purpose: Whereas Elias Gods Prophet
used only a short prayer, which prevailed with God? Do you think Madam; that
your Roman-Catholicke Dames are ever a whit regarded of God, for all their
turning over their Beads, or saying over their Beadrowes of Pater-nosters, and
Aue-Maries, and they wot not what? Alas Madam, blessed be God, we are not so
childish, after so long a bringing up under the Word, to account such
Baby-deuotion worthy of our least emulation, much less of Apishimitation?
Therefore Madam, if I may advise you, away with this idle Apish Book of Popish
Devotion; suffer not either your Court, or your Christian liberty so to be
imposed upon with such observations, as are either impossible, and at the best,
perhaps unprofitable; as whereof it may be said, Who required these things at
your hands? But I fear I am too bold with your Ladyship. Thus you see a Fools
bolt soon shot. I will take my leave.


Cur. Madam, I will detain you no longer, my attendance also calling me away.
Therefore, till the set time, adieu Madam. Remember Friday morning.


Char. Madam, I will not forget.


The next meeting on Friday morning.
Charis. MAdam, God give you good morrow.


Cur. Welcome Madam. I was even expecting of you. Have you brought your
Chaplain with you?


Char. Madam I have; who is ready to tender to your honor such satisfaction,
as he has in his judgment conceived to be convenient.


Cur. Master Johannes, I would entreat you here to spend a little familiar
conference with my Chaplain Master Diotrephes, about that Book which your Lady
has acquainted you with. I suppose you come sufficiently instructed what to
say therein.


Johannes. Madam, I must crave pardon for my boldness in this my rudeness,
hoping that wherein I shall offend, my Ladies command in bringing me hither
will help to excuse me. For as for this Book, I confess I was loath to meddle
with it, but upon her over earnest pressing of me. And besides my time has
been very short to inform my self sufficiently touching all the particulars
of this Book, which perhaps a more judicious eye upon better deliberation
might more fully discover. Nor did I think it fit to trouble your Ladyships
ears with any tedious canuasses to and fro; but rather to recommend it to your
Ladyship in one brief view, to peruse the same at your best leisure. And here
it is in writing, praying your Ladyships honor to pardon my rudeness and
plainness therein, according to your honors promise to my Lady here.


Cur. Sir, I thank you very kindly, wishing I could as easily requite your
pains and courtesy, as I can hardly otherwise deserve it.


Ioh. Madam, your noble acceptance shall be to me as a most ample recompense.


Cur. I promise to bestow the reading of it thoroughly.


Ioh. Madam, God grant you may reap much fruit thereby.


The Lady CVRIA reads the Writing of M. Johannes here set down; concerning
the Book entitled, A Collection of Private Devotions: OR, The Hours of
Prayer.
AS, of all Christian duties, Igne quid vtilius? Si quit tamen vrere tect a
Comparat ^udac^s instru^t igne manus.

Ni^ prodest, q^ non l^der^ possit idem.


Devotion yields most reverence to GOD: So it lightly winnes most estimation
with men. Then it, none more useful; again, none more subject to abuse; and
being abused, it is like the fire, then which no Element more profitable, but
none more perilous. And the purest matter corrupted becomes the worst. This
then may admonish us by the way, not to be ouer-hastie to dote upon, or adore
all Books for their Title sake, yea though having the most specious name of
Devotion engraven in the Front. There is as well a Devotion blind and
superstitious, breathed from the Bottomlesse-pit by him, who can transform
himself into an Angel of Light: as a Devotion illuminate, and truly religious,
like ELIAS his Sacrifice, inspired and inflamed by Fire from Heaven. Nor does
the Old Serpent either so usually or effectually infuse his poisonous
enchantments into men's minds, as when he propineth them in the Golden Cup of
demure Devotion. Hence, as I take it, it is, that they paint the Devil,
tempting of CHRIST, in a devout Friars Cowle, or Hood, full of seeming
Devotion, to seduce, if it were possible, even the GOD of Truth with such
counterfeit sanctity. What rabbles and swarms of vowed Disciples (to omit
other the Father-Founders of their several Monasticke Orders) did those two,
St Francis, and St Dominicke draw after them, and all by the strong
incantations of their deep Devotion? Yea the new Ignatian Order, least they
should seem, as they are by common practice, altogether deuoid of all
Devotion, they affect at least to wear the Badge of it upon their Sleeue,
professing themselves the Votaries of JESUS, which is the reason, that their
Jesuitical Books for the most part have the Name of set in their Forefront,
that men might not suspect the Wine of Sodom to be sold there, where such a
holy Iuy-bush is hanged forth; that with IVDAS they may the more easily betray
CHRIST with a Hale Jesus.

And hereupon, as it seems, such is ^he affection of the Author or Authors
and Abbetters of this Book of Devotion, that rather then they will be
scrupulous to auow themselves affectionate well-willers at least of the Church
of Rome, if not rather symbolizers and intercommuners with her, yea and to be
Authors of reducing this Church of England back again to that spiritual
Egypt, while all along without difference they shuffle all together in one
Church, as more particularly will appear in the sequel: They stick not to
prefix the Jesuits usual Mark IHS upon the Frontispiece of their Devotion,
and underneath it a votarie or two, with a Cross devoutly erected. As if they
would with the Name of JESUS Inchanter-like, conjure down the Spirit of Truth,
and conjure up the spirit of Pontifician error and sedition again in this our
Church. So that this Book of Devotion bearing and wearing the Jesuits badge
upon the Forehead, we cannot better parallel, John de Serre^ in his History in
Henry 3.
then to that egregious dissimulation and counterfeit Devotion, which HENRY the
Third of France took upon him, when he found that he could not by downright
force suppress the Truth with the Professors of it. Therefore he attempts what
force there is in framing and conforming himself to be a pattern of Devotion
to others. Hereupon he builds Monasteries, undertakes Prilgrimages, confirms
the Brotherhood of Penitents, erects the Order of Hieronymites, is daily and
familiarly conversant with the Capuchins, and Fueillans, called Jesuits,
carries a Crucifix and Beads in Procession, with a whip at his girdle; causes
many Books of Devotion to be printed; and to conclude, he institutes the Order
of the Knights of the Holy Ghost, founded upon such conditions, as tie them by
a strict and sacred bond to the Church of Rome. And wherefore all this? Says
the Story (to omit other complementarie ends) For the entertainment of a
number of Minions, and Horse-leeches, to whom they must rather weigh, then tell
money; but chiefly to pull down the Protestants, to undermine them, by this
lure of worldly greatness, withdrawing the chief Heads, who could not attain
to this high and stately degree of Knighthood, but by renouncing of their
Religion. But see the mischief of it, this dissembled Devotion not so well
suiting with his other h^mours, of Feasts, Maskes, sumptuous pastimes, drawing
on new impositions to maintain them, led the first dance of rebellion; While
(says the Story) the Queene-Mother, and those of Guise, seeing the King
drowned in these delights of Court, did willingly entertain him in that humor,
that either busying himself in numbering his Beads, or treading the measures of
a dance, themselves might hold the Raines of Government, and dispose of
affairs of State without control. What way also this made for the
Spanish-faction, working by his Indian-Gold, the Story sufficiently touches.
But this by the way. The parallel I confess is uneven, in regard of the
persons compared, the one a Prince, the other, mean Parsons: But the things
compared are not so unequal, as Popish devotion on both sides; that, adorned
with the Badge of the Holy Ghost: this, of Jesus; in both, those two Divine
Persons in the Trinity most hellishly and impiously profaned, being made the
Badges of those, who are professed Vassalls of Antichrist, that Man of Sin,
and being worn by such as would still be reputed Protestants, they are the
very Ensigns of Apostacy from CHRIST to Antichrist; and therefore how true
Servants and Subjects such can be to Protestant Princes, who by their Order of
Knighthood are sworn Liegemen to the Pope, I leave to others to judge. Only
that King caused to be published sundry Books of Devotion, yet all of one
meal: But this Book has no fellow, must alone be published for a singular
and universal Platform of all Devotion, silencing and suppressing all other
Books of the like nature. So that what entertainment, in time, is this devout
Book like to find in the world, when none else shall be permitted to be
printed, yea, when as not only Books of religious Devotion, but also of sound
Doctrine, may not be allowed to see the light? As therefore Popish Devotion is
the Daughter of blind Ignorance: So on the contrary, this Devotion is like to
prove the Mother of Ignorance; verifying that Riddle of the Water and Ice,
mutually bred of each other, Matter me genuit, eadem mox gignitur ex me. And so
plausible is this Book of Devotion to all Papists, as they begin to triumph,
not sticking to say, that they hope ere long these fair and towardly
beginnings will grow on apace to the full and universal reestablishment of
their Roman-Catholicke Religion here in England, telling their seduced
Disciples (as one of them, now reformed, blessed be GOD, told me) that we had
now already at London a Book of Seven Sacraments publicly allowed. In sum
therefore, let not the Authors of that Book disdain to be vulgarly reputed
and reported for the Servants of the Church of Rome, whose Badge, specially,
that of the Jesuits, they stick not to put upon the Front of their Devotion.
And so much for the first Frontispeice of the Book.

Now to the next Page, wherein they father this Septenary horary form of
devotion upon the practice of the ancient Church; And these hours of prayer
are compiled, much (says the Book) after the manne^ published by authority
of Queen ELIZABETH 1560, etc. First for the ancient Church of CHRIST; No
Church did anciently observe, or precisely prescribe these Seven hours of
prayer, duly and daily to be used, as the Author or Athours would bear us in
hand. How ancient I pray you is this Canonical observation? Forsooth Pope
PELAGIVS the Second was the first instituter of the Seven hours; and that was
toward 600 years after CHRIST. This somewhat ancient. But what authority
have we for it? PAMELIVS upon CYPRIAN says, They say so, that this PELAGIVS
was the first instituter. Only, They say so. Though POLYDOR VIRGIL speak a
little more confidently. Satis constat, It is apparent enough; but tells us not
whence. Nor do I find this Septenary to be more ancient, then Pope GREGORY the
Ninth, Decret. de Celebratione Missar. C. Praesbiter. tit. 41
who composed the Decretals, about 400 years ago. He indeed sets down the
Seven hours, in the Title of his Chapter (just as truly, as our Author in the
Title of his Book) deriuing the same from some spring of antiquity, and
namely, Council. Agath.
the Agathen Council Provincial in France, which was, some 800 years before
his time. But the Pope there committed a foul error in setting down Seven
canonical hours, for two: The Agathen Council mentioning but two hours of
prayer, the morning, and evening. So that the best authority, and hoariest
antiquity for your Seven canonical hours, is GREGORY the Ninth, Pope of
Rome. This is that ancient Church, wherein this practice appears first to be
decreed, and solemnly observed. This Pope then first decreed the Seven
canonical hours. But of whom to be observed? Namely, of the Priests, Friars,
Monks, and such like holy-day-persons, for the most part Male feriati homines,
as Rome could afford ^now. Of others he says nothing, says the gloss;
although it say, Others seem not to be bound, but surely they are. But the
Priests, Monks, and other Votaries were specially bound to keep them
constantly. Which seems to be the reason why it is probable, that some have
coniectured PELAGIVS the Second to have been the first institutor. For about
his time did all kind of Monks, and such like Orders begin exceedingly to be
multiplied; many of them taking upon them such a strict discipline, as might
admit, yea in some sort necessarily require so many Canonical Hours of
Prayer, at least to refresh the tediousness of that austeritie, wherewith they
exercised their extreme patience. Some Monks were called Insomnes, Niceph. l.
15 c. 23. Euagrius. l. 1. c. 21.
for their continual watchfulness; And what could they do better, but pray,
to entertain the tedious nights, and vacant days? Some did so macerate
themselves with immoderate fasting, See Centuria 5. c 6. de Ceremoni^s
and course fair of small quantity, that they made themselves unable to do
any thing, but pray, if that. Others coopt themselves up, in such short and
narrow, and low Cells, as uneath they could either lie along, or stand upright;
so that the best and easiest posture for them, was to be on their knees
praying. Others forsaking humane society, and living among the wild Beasts,
called therefore Armenta, Droues, or Herds, feeding on roots and grass, and
lodging sub Dio, or in the Caves, what could they do else, but (if they had so
much sense left them) pray?

Now, seeing our Author will needs revive and recommend to the Church of
England these his seven Canonicalls: Upon whom will he impose their
observation? Upon Courtiers? Alas, they are taken up with a thousand thoughts,
perhaps, how to rise higher; perhaps, how to keep their standing; perhaps, how
to prevent and take off envy; perhaps, how to appease such an Opposite;
perhaps, how to purchase such a Friend; perhaps, how to compass such a
preferment; but specially the Female sex, incombred with a thousand womanish
Ceremonies, if not State-proiects, or their own honors (as I heard once a
great Lady of the Court say, there was never a day went over their heads, but
once at least their heart aked) so as they cannot attend such tedious
Canonical Service. Or Citizens, or Contrymen? They have their vocations to
follow, which if they should intermit, to say over this Book of Devotion
daily, and duly, as it prescribes, how should they live? Except ye could
persuade them to a thinner diet and courser habit, too good an allowance for
an idle life. Or will you impose it upon the Priests, or Ministers of the
Church? But you know our golden Priests (I mean in the best sense) are not
like those wooden Ones in the Church of Rome, who having little else to do,
but to say over their Mass, or a few Mattens, had need to be exercised with
Canonical hours, to keep them at least from worse exercises. But you know,
most Ministers in the Church of England are labourious in their calling, who if
they should precisely ^uerie day say over your Book of Devotion, they should
have little time left to prepare convenient Food for their Flocks on the Lords
day. Although perhaps you could be content to dispense with that; Nay rather,
if ye will needs enforce your Hours upon us, lay them upon dumb Priests,
such as either cannot, or dare not, or at l^ast will not preach the Word to
their people. These being the men, that cry so much for long prayers, and short
preaching, you might do well to bring them to a Canonical obedience of your
Canonical hours, and that they perform the same not by Proxy, or Curacie,
but in their own persons. Otherwise if you cannot find Holy-day-men enough to
take your Book to task, what does it import else, but a necessity of
bringing in Monkerie, and so of erecting Cells again, for the practice of your
Devotion? Which I trust all your Devotion will never bring to pass.

In the second place, from the practice of the ancient Church, the Author
descends to defend his Septiformious Devotion to be Much after the manner
published by authority of Queen ELIZABETH, 1560. Much after the manner, is
indeed a pretty qualification of the matter: Much-what, not so altogether. But
for your Much, Distingue tempora; Distinguish the times. That Horarie the
Author speaks of, was set out near the first year of her Reign, when as
Popery was not buried, nor the Gospel out of her Cradle. That noble Queen of
ever blessed memory, in the beginning of her Reign, did for the present
prudently conniue at, and act some things, which afterward by degrees she
suffered to vanish. For the purpose: In the very beginning of her Reign,
before her first Parliament, she set forth a Proclamation, inhibiting all
Ministers in and about London, and elsewhere, to preach at all, less or more,
but only to read Service, until further order from her Majesty. Is this a
good argument for the Author, or any his Fautors by his seeming devotion of
making many long prayers, to sholder preaching out of the Church, or to wayne
the people from hearing, because forsooth, QU. ELIZAB. once by Proclamation
prohibited preaching, and allowed only reading of Service? But how long lasted
this restraint? No longer then the Parliament approaching, wherein was most
happily established the liberty of preaching the Gospel, and administering the
Sacraments. Take another example, in the dawning of the Gospel in England
before her time, in King Henry 8. his reign: The Lord Cromwell in his English
Primer 1535. in the Preface before the Letany, apologizing his leaving out of
the Letany in his former Primer, says, wherefore, for the contentation of such
weak minds, and somewhat to bear their infirmities, I have now at this my
second Edition of the said Primer, caused the Letany to be printed, and put
into the same, etc. Mark, for the contentation of weak minds. Thus in the
Primitive Church some things were tolerated during the infancy of it, which
afterward were quite abolished; as Act. 15. The abstaining from blood, and
strangled, was enjoined the Gentiles for a time. And why? for says S. James,
verse 21. Moses of old time has in every City them that preach him, being read
in the Synagogues every Sabbath day: so that for offending the Jews, the
Gentiles, among whom they lived, must for a time forbear^ to eat blood, and
that which is strangled. So in the beginning of Reformation in England under
that blessed Queen, there were many Papists, of whom there was a tender
respect, to offend them as little as might be, until the clearer light of the
Gospel, like the Sun mounting, should of it self dispell and chase away all
those mists. And in our Communion book, in the Admonition to the Commination
against sinners, have we not these words, In stead of which godly discipline,
it is thought good, etc. By which examples wise men may learn, not to tak^
(...) all former precedents as current for present times. Ma^y things might be
winked at in the infancy of the Church, which are not tolerable in her riper
age. In that Horary ^et forth 1560. there was a tender regard had of the
weakness of the time, to allow of such things, which in these times of the
clear light of the Gospel, and full growth of the Church would be ridiculous.
When I was a child (says the Apostle) I did as a child, I imagined (...) a
child; but being a man, J put away childish things. Were it not absurd and
ridiculous for a man grown, to fall to his old childish sports and toys
again? And we know that sudden changes from one extreme to another, even from
evil to good in a State, are difficult, if not dangerous, being not discretly
carried. Nor could it be expected, that the Church having been long pent up as
it were in a dungeon, and coming suddenly forth into the broad light, but it
should at first be tender-sighted, till after a while her eyes were better
inured to look upon the light. Or being but newly pulled out of the puddle of
Popery, that by and by she should be washed clean from all spots. As Luther
entreats his Readers, if they find in his writings any thing smelling of the
old Caske of Popery, that they would remember, he was once a poor Monk. And
for any in these days, of a long and well settled Church, to plot the bringing
in again of Pope^y, they know it well enough, their way is not to do it
forthright, but by many insinuations, and winding ways, as, to suppress all
printing of books against Papists, to print and publish such books, as do in
part maintain our Church, and in part comply and symbolize with Popery, and by
seeming to slight Popery, slily to bring it into credit; to restrain
preaching as much as may be, by laying burdens upon the Ministry; to suffer
none to come to any place of eminency in the Church, but through Simony gate,
or ambition, and such by-ways, to make sure if possible a corrupt Clergy; if
any be sincere and bold in lashing of sin, especially reigning sins, to
snap him up, and muzzle him for barking, and such like. But to conclude the
former point of the Authors allegation of that Horary set forth 1560. and for
the further making good of the answer thereunto; it will not be impertinent
here to insert, what he adds in his Preface, page 7. quoting in the margent
together with that 1560. another set forth by the same authority, 1573. Over
against which words, his text has these words; These prayers, which for the
most part, after the same manner* and division of hours, as here they are,
having heretofore been published among us by high and sacred authority, are
now also renewed, and more fully set forth again, etc. Where he confesses
again, that he follows these former precedents, but for the most part: No,
nor that neither; for examining the copies well, we find great difference: For
besides many other good things, he has left out the himne, wherein is, Pellit^
falsam, insere veram Religionem. Consceleratum perd^ Papismum, etc. And ex
psalmo 2, Hoc tempore sentimus Deus Opt. Max. non solum Antichristum, etc. But
what he leaves out against the Church of Rome, he puts in for it; as a fair
Jesuitical frontis-peece, Seven Sacraments of the Church, and the like. It
would fill a whole book, to note all the differences. But herein lies the
maine matter, that he couples the book of Devotion set forth 1573. with the
other 1560. as if they were all one. For he quotes in the Margent, The Horary
set forth with the Queens authority, 1560. and renewed 1573. imprinted with
privilege at London, by William Seers. It is well that the copies of those
Moth eaten books are yet extant, at least to be an evidence, how far forth
the Author herein speaks truth. Yet, if he had inquired a little more
diligently, he might have found another set forth by the same sacred
authority, imprinted by the same foresaid William Seers, in the year 1564.
being the 7. of that blessed reign. Now comparing these three Copies together,
I find the two last very different from the first, not only in their form and
matter, but in their Title. For the first, in 1560. is inti^uled, Horarium: but
the two succeeding, the one 1564 the other in 1573. are entitled Pr^ces
priuata, etc. The Horarium indeed sets down the hours of prayer; but the
two latter books recommend only Morning and Evening prayer, with their matter
and form, together with a short form of prayer at rising, and going to bed;
but without prescribing at what hours. Observe then in the first place a
notable difference. The first book of Devotion, as coming nearest to the time
of Popery (the Gospel being yet but as it were in the dawning) bore some
resemblance to those Canonical forms of prayer formerly used in time of
Popery; and so was called Horarium. Yet this was in Latin, serving chiefly for
the use of all Clerks, or old Cloysterers, to content them for the time, till
better provision might be had, and till their stomakes could digest stronger
meat, and their eyes endure the clea^er light. So that within 4. years, the
Horarium disclaiming further affinity or Cosen-head, so much as in name with
the Popish Horaria* in the next Edition, and so forward, put on the name of
Pr^ces priuat^, and that in studio sorum gratiam collectae, etc. Private
prayers collected for Scholars or Students, such as understood the Latin
tongue, to the end such especially being informed in the right form and matter
of praying might the better instruct others in the same duty; that so by
degrees, all Popish superstition and erroneous devotion might get them hence
into their dark Cells.

Note again, that the third Edition of those prayers, 1573. was yet more
exact, then the former in 1564. and much more different, as the more distant
still from the Horarium. Ve^^r^ transieru^^, etc. Old things are passed away,
and all things now become new; the Gospel now promouing all things toward
their perfection. And now when all is done, would the author with his, bring us
back at least to the brinke and borders of Popery again, by his Canonical
hours, and the like? Being now men of ripe years, would he have us to become
children again? And after we have begun, and gone on so far^e in the spirit,
now to be made perfect in the flesh, by turning back to beggarly rudiments?
After the clear meridian Sunshine of the Gospel, would he reduce us to those
duskish dawning shadows, out of which that first Horarium was but newly
peeped, but to last no longer then till time might more fairly shake hands
with all Popish shadows? As the Jewish Ceremonies had a time, even after the
establishing of the Gospel, for their solemn obsequies. But to conclude, the
plain truth is, to such a pass is Popery now come in these our days, that if
ever, the Church of England ought henceforth to have the least correspondence
and conformity with it; yea to be so far from renewing any old acquaintance
with it, as utterly to shake hands; and if any rags or relics of that Whore
have been patched to our Mothers Robe, we ought to rip it off, and strip our
selves of it. Rome is now fully revealed to be the Whore of Babylon, the Pope,
the head thereof, to be that man of sin, that grand Antichrist; which for any
learned man not to see in these days of the Gospel, is to stumble at
Noonday, yea to be struck blind at the clear light.

It follows in the Title: Taken out of the holy Scriptures, the ancient
Fathers, and the divine Service of our own Church. Here be three authorities,
the least whereof not to be contemned. The first is, that he says his hours
are taken from the holy Scriptures. His quotations are strowed all along the
book; but so, as if we amasse all the general precepts and particular
practices of prayer in Scripture into one Canon or rule, there should not be
one hour, or minute, throughout the day and night, which we should not spend
altogether in prayer. So that the abusiue understanding of Scripture in this
kind was that, which brought the Euchet^ to do nothing else, but pray. The
Scriptures commend to us specially two times of public prayer for the day,
the Morning and the Evening prayer, the one about our nine in the foreno^ne,
the other about three in the afternoon, which our Church follows; these two
were called the Morning and the Evening Sacrifice. Hence it is, that Christ
began to be offered from the Morning Sacrifice, to the Evening Sacrifice, as
sanctifying all our Sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, Morning and Evening, in
that Sacrifice of himself.

But he speaks here of Private hours of Prayer. And where will he find in
Scripture any such practice, as the observation of his Seven Canonical hours?
DANIEL prayed three times a day. Yes DAVID says, Seven times a day will I
praise thee. But that is of Praise. And though it may be meant also of Prayer,
it signifies only his frequent praying, far from a superstitious
observation of Canonical hours, in those days not hatched, or heard of. But
of Prayer he says, Evening and morning, and at noone day will I pray, etc. But
for all this man's coloring the matter with Holy Scripture, he has no other
Scripture for his Canonical hours, but the Popes Scripture, in his Compare
this with page 86. in his later edition, where he mentions the Decrees of the
Church.
Decretalls; where the Pope takes all his Canonical hours from the actions
about CHRIST in his death. As in the Gloss: Haec sunt septenis, propter quae
psallimus heris,
Matutina l^gat Christum, qui crimina purgat,
Prima replet sputis, causam dat Tertia mortis,
Sexta cruci nectit, latus eius Nona bipaertit,
Vespera deponit, tumulo Completa reponit.


Indeed the Scripture does so command this excellent duty of Prayer to us, as
that no time should exempt us from it, but that we should be diligent in the
practice of it upon all occasions, and especially keep constantly ou^ morning
and evening sacrifice private, and public also, as the day requires; Yea to
let no opportunity slip, wherein we are not breathing out some eiaculations,
out of a sense and feeling of our manifold infirmities, and necessities. But
nowhere does the Scripture prescribe a set septenarie form of Devotion, as the
Author would impose upon us.

In the second place, he names the Ancient Fathers. But these fail him as
much for his purpose, as the Scriptures do. Indeed the Fathers do every
where (following the Scriptures) inculcate and pr^sse the incessant practice of
Prayer: Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
Hora nulla a Christianis excipitur, quo minus frequenter, ac semper Deus
debeat adorari, etc. says CYPRIAN: No hour is exempted from Christians, that
God might not frequently and always be adored. And he says indeed, that in
his time, the times and exercises of Prayer were much increased. Yet he no
where sets down seven Canonical hours. Yea CLEMENS ROMANVS, a great
Author with him, Clem. Constit. l. 8. c. 40. for 34.
though misquoted, in his Constitutions (which even Pontificians themselves
have confessed to be counterfeit) yet fail him at least in two of his hours,
as C^mplene, and the last. Only GREGORY the Ninth fayles him not, being, as I
said, his first complete Author of his seven Canonicalls.

But after the Ancient Fathers, in the third place he names the Divine
Service of our own Church, out of which his Hours are taken. Now surely for
ought that ever I could learn out of our Service Book, I can find but two set
Hours of Prayer, besides certaines private Prayers recommended to private
Families, for Morning and Evening; with a godly Prayer to be said at all
times, in the latter end of the Book: Unless out of this Prayer to be said
at all times, he would pick out his seven Canonical hours. But whereas he
seems to ground the form of his Devotion upon the Diuin^ Service of our own
Church: On the contrary, he offers foul violence to that more exact and
profitable form, prescribed in our Liturgy. For whereas the form of Prayer in
our Communion Book is so compiled, as that by a daily practice thereof the
whole or most part of the OLD TESTAMENT is read over once in the year, and the
NEW TESTAMENT three times, and the whole Book of PSALMS once every month:
The Author or Authors of this Book, intruding a new form of Devotion,
hereby coozen GODS People of their allowance in the SCRIPTVRES, while in stead
of the whole, he cutteth out here a piece and there a piece, here a quarter of
a Chapter, and there a quarter. Herein crossing the Communion Book, which in
the Preface f^atly reproves this very practice of the Author, in these
words: Now of late time, a few of the Psalms have been daily said, and often
repeated, and the rest utterly omitted. And is it not so in this Book of
Devotion? Does he not confine us to a narrow circle of so many Psalms, so many
pieces of Chapters, so many Law^e^, as he calls them, to be repeated over every
day? Does he not hereby rob us of the rest of the Scripture, Chapters and
Psalms? We like our Communion book better then so, thus to exchange it to
our loss. All Priests and D^acons are bound to say daily the Morning and
Evening Prayer* either privately or publicly* except they be let by
Preaching, studying of Divinity, or by some other urgent cause. Thanks be to
God, there are plenty of manual Psalters and Testaments, as easy to carry in
men's pockets, and I am sure far more profitable to edification, then this
book of Devotion. Yea, and it will appear all along this book, howsoever he
seem tenderly affected, and devoted to his mother Church, and to our divine
Service, that never any (though Popish) book published this threescore years
under the name of Devotion, has more slily and subtly undermined the state
of this our Church, then this does, while it would confound our Church with
that of Babylon* whereof more hereafter in the proper place. Preface to the
Communion book.
So much in general of the state of this Book, occasioned by the two first
title Pages.

The Preface.
NOt to entangle our selves with perplexed questions, a^ whither all prayers,
other then set prayers, and those either the Lords prayer, or the Churches
public forms* of this Authors private forms, be denied to Gods people, or
Ministers, as uttered from private spirits and Ghosts of their own (they are
the words of the Preface) wherein perhaps the Author takes the liberty to
bewray his malice, or ignorance, or want of experience of the supply of the
spirit of Christ, helping our infirmities in prayer, Romans 8.26. Phil. 1.19. as
not having his wits exercised that way: we have occasion given in the first
place to touch upon the second reason of these his hours: the words are, To
let the world understand, that they who give it out and accuse us here in
England to have set up a new Church, and a new faith, to have abandoned all the
ancient forms of piety and devotion, to have taken away all the religious
prayers and exercises of our forefathers, to have despised all the old
Ceremonies, and cast behind us the blessed Sacraments of Christ's Catholic
Church, etc. Is not here a sound reason, for the bringing in of old Popish
Ceremonies and superstitions, and such trumperies into our Church, to the end
that Popish mouths may be stopped, who slander our Church in this behalf, for
antiquating all old Ceremonies, whereof the observation of the seven Canonical
hours, is one? Then, belike we must set up Popery again, at least in a good
part, only to appease the clamours of Papists, accusing us for Nouelists. But
take heed what you do; for unless you mean thus by degrees to rear up the
whole tower of Babylon again in England, you strive in vain to stop their
mouths, who will have all or none. But in the mean time remember what your
Mother the Church of England (if ye be indeed her true bred sons) says, Of
such Ceremonies, as be used in the Church, and have had their beginning by the
institution of man. Some at the first were of godly intent and purpose devised,
and yet at length turned to vanity and superstition: some entered into the Churh
by vndiscreet^ devotion, and such a zeal as was without knowledge; and for
because they were winked at in the beginning, they grew daily to more and more
abuse, which not only for their unprofitableness, but also because they have
much blinded the people* and obscured the glory of God, are worthy to be cut
away* and quite r^i^cted, etc. Here consider, whether your seven Canonicalls
be not of the number of those Ceremonies, which have had their beginning by the
institution of man* by Pope Gregory 9. as we have showed, and perhaps for a
good intent and purpose, yet at length have turned to vanity and superstition,
as is manifest both by the doctrine and practice of the Church of Rome; or
such, as having entered into the Church by indiscreet devotion, and zeal
without knowledge, and for because winked at in the beginning* and growing
daily to more and more abuses, our Church not only for their
unprofitableness, but because of their much blinding of the people, and
obscuring Gods glory, has thought worthy to cut away and clean reject.
Consider it, I say. For has, not our Church among many other superstitious
ceremonies, quite casheered this of your Canonical hours? But thereupon she
hears, A nouellist, a setter up of a new Church, and a new faith, to have
abandoned all the ancient forms of piety and devotion, to have taken away all
the religious ^xercises and prayers of our forefathers, to have despised all
the old Ceremonies etc. But of whom does our Church hear this? Of the Church
of Rome. And can she blame Rome for it? But charity would, or Christian
prudence, or I wot not what tender care of her own reputation, being thus
exposed to the obloquy of her enemy, she should salve the wound again, which
the venomous tongue has made, How? The Authors of this book, her pregnant
young sons, though no small babies (I wis) can tell their old Mother, she
must now after threescore years and more (seeing there is no other remedy) in
her old age turn over a new leaf, begin to renew her old acquaintance with
her stepmother, or elder sister at least, the Church of Rome, intertaine some
of her old ceremonies again as religious, which long ago she abandoned as
superstitious; receive, revive that faith, and religion as the Old, which erst
she rejected as the New; thus after she has begun, yea so many years
continued and grown up to a ripeness in the spirit, she must with the foolish
Church of Galatia be made perfect in the flesh. But we hope better things of
our reverend Mother, Ci^. dese^ectute.
that with aged Sophocles, accused by his sons of careless improuidence in
governing his family, she will vindicate her wisdom, and motherly authority
over her darling, but ouerdaring sons.

As for that other clause* of having it cast in our dish, that we cast behind
us the blessed Sacraments of Christ's Catholic Church; which cannot be
objected to our Church, but only because we allow no more Sacraments, but two
(a point not a little material, if well weighed) of this we shall have
occasion to speak more, when we come to* his Sacraments of the Church. Only
by the way this is a fair inducement to draw on his 7. Sacraments; for
otherwise how shall he thereby acquit us (forsooth) of the grievous scandal
and imputation, which the Church of Rome lays to our charge, of our rejecting
the blessed Sacraments of Christ's Catholic Church? As if he should say (as in
effect, and almost totidem verbi^ he does say) They charge us falsely, in
saying that we cast behind us the blessed Sacraments of Christ's Catholic
Church; The Authors own words in is Preface.
alas, silly simples: these men do little else, but bewray their own
infirmities, and have more violence or will, then reason or judgment, for what
they say: the common accusations, which out of the abundance of those partial
affectious that transport them the wrong way, they are pleased to bring so
frequently against us, being but the bare reports of such people, as either do
not, or will not understand us, what we are. Do we cast behind us the blessed
Sacraments of Christ's Catholic Church; Who told you so, I pray you at Rome?
No; I would ye well wist it, we hold seven Sacraments, the same Sacraments
that the Church of Rome, Christ's Catholic Church holds; as shall appear by
good proof anon. But leave we his proof to the fit and proper place, and
prosecute we the rest.

His third reason for his 7. Canonicals, is, for the ease of those, whom
earnest lets and impediments do often hinder from being partakers of the
public; here they may have a daily and devout order of private prayer etc.
First what an incongruitie is this, to prescribe th^se his hours to men
earnestly employed in worldly affairs? Indeed the observation of these hours
is proper (if for any) for such as live a Monastical life, Abbey Lubbers, as
we say, such as have nothing else to attend, but to be busied with their beads.
And again, for all sorts of persons in our Church, blessed be God, we have
plenty of Psalters, and Testaments, wherein they may as profitably (I trow)
exercise their vacant hours, as in these consarcinated and new molded
prayers. And in the third place, does not this new Rubric of our Author trench
and intrude upon those forms of prayer both public and private* which by our
Church are generally prescribed for all persons in the daily practice of their
Devotions? And are not In the end of the Preface before the book of Common
prayer.
Ministers in particular admonished to read the Morning and Evening Prayer
privately every day* in case (at least) if he be not hindered by his studies,
and other employments of his calling?

Again, in the same Clause, he glancingly gives a sound by-blow to those, that
stand up in maintaining the quarrel of Gods truth against Popish perturbers,
and Pelagian innouators; the continual and curious disquisition of many
unnecessary questions among us, being nothing else, but only the new seeds,
or the old fruits of malite, and by consequence the enemy of godliness, and
the abatement of true devotion. This man would willingly fold his hands, and
wrap up all his Devotion in the mantle of ignorance, the Mother of his
Devotion. Like to the glowo^me, or rotten post, that shines not but in the
night, so shines his devotion, without light, or heat. Or at the best, like a
wandering ignis fatuus. And how should the lamp of true Devotion flame forth
and burn in holy feruency of effectual prayer, if it be not fed with the
oil of saving knowledge, being pressed forth more copiously by the ventilation
of errors, and dissipation of mysts* which would dampe and extinguish all. Nor
is he content herewith but this blind Devotion of his he dare call that true
devotion wherewith God is more delighted, and a good soul more inflamed, then
with all the subtilties in the world: when at one dash he interesseth God, as
an approuer of his superstitious, and blind Devotion, and a disallower of his
own fundamental divine Truths, as busy needless subtilties, yea as new
seeds or old fruits of malice, and as the enemy of Godliness, and abatement
of true Devotion.

His last reason is, that this his book of Canonical hours, might stir up
all those, who are coldly affected to the like heavenly duty of performing
their daily Christian devotions, etc. Thus this man hopes to convert all
England at a cast, and bring them within the circle of his Canonical hours,
wherein they may trauerse and turn round their Beads, as a blind mill-horse in
the ^ound. Impius ambula^ in Circuitu.

As for his exact and complete Calender of Saints, we omit it, as too
tedious, and fitter for the Almanack-maker to examine. Only we cannot but
touch upon his times, wherein Marriages are not solemnized: as, from Aduent
sunday until 8. days after the Epiphanie: from Septuag. sunday until 8.
days after Easter. From Rogation Sunday until Trinity Sunday. All which times
summed up together, according to the computation of his own Calendar, take up
above 19. weeks from the year. Now (under Benedicite be it spoken) where does
Gods sacred word suspend or prohibit any times from sacred and solemn
nuptial rites? I remember it warnes us of the perilous times of the last
days, 1. Tim. 4.
wherein men should give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of Devils. And
what be those? The Apostle there tells us, Forbidding of marriage, and
abstaining from Meats. Now God bless the Church of England from such seducing
spirits, and Doctrines of Devils. And is not the prohibiting of marriage for
some certain times in the year (and those no small times neither, as
incroching upon above a third part of the year) as well as forbidding of
marriage to certain persons, as Priests, a branch (at least) of that very
forbidding of marriage, which the Apostle calls a doctrine of Devils? And
might not the same Church, which prohibited above the third part of the year,
have also, with the allegation of a few more plausible pretenses of holiness,
or so, brought all marriages to secke and sue for lic^nces in the Court? Bu^
blessed be God, that these prohibited times are not any where set down either
in our book of Common Prayer, or any other books containing the Doctrines of
the Church of England, whereunto Ministers subscribe; least all should either
have cause absolutely necessary not to subscribe, or, subscribing to such a
Decree, they should prove a very pack of spirits of Frrour, teaching, or at
least subscribing to Doctrines of Devils.

But let us hear the Authors reasons, why in such times marriages are not
usually solemnized? Some of these (says he) being times of solemne-fasting
and abstinence, some, of holy festiuity and joy. Both fit to be spent in such
sacred exercises, without other unnecessary auocations. So he. Alas! Neither
times of fasting, nor times of feasting, for marriage. Indeed for time of
fasting and prayer something may be said; Yet with qualification.

The Apostle says (speaking to the man and wife) Defraud you not one the
other, except it be with consent for a time, 1. Cor. 7.5.
that ye may give your selves to Fasting and Prayer, and come together again,
that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency. A respect then might be had to
fasting and prayer, even to them that are married. But how? Does the Apostle
inioyne them by some Apostolic Constitution or Canon, to abstain for such,
or so long a time, unless they will purchase their liberty with a License? No
such thing. He leaves that to their own liberty, and referrs it to their
mutual consent, not limiting themselves to any set time, least in the mean
time Satan tempt them for their incontinency. Much less does he confine them
to mutual separation ten leauelong weeks together. A shrewd (...) for Satan
happily to work upon. Yea and this ten weeks limitation from (...) (by the
Authors allegation) falls unhappily (if we go according to the course of
Natures rules) upon the most dangerous (...) of the ye^re, the Springtime,
wherein the blood and spirits are most stirring. But our Author takes order
for that, he will have them well macerated and mortified, tempered and tamed
with Nine week^s (...). The which had need to be full strictly imposed upon
young people not married, to discipline and keep them in order, especially
such as have not the gift of continency, and cannot without danger stay till
those ten week be expired. And we know, that our Communion Book alleging the
authority of the Apostle, says expressly, That such persons, as have not the
gift of continency might marry, and keep themselves undefiled members of
Christ's Body; where also no time is limited, or excluded.

But whatsoever our Author may pretend for the time of solemn fasting and
prayer, as not seasonable for marriage: Yet to restrain men from marriage in
times of Festiuitie and joy, may seem to be very unreasonable. For what times
fitter for Solemnizing the Rites of Marriage, then times of Festiuitie and joy?
Yea, but the Author does not exempt all, fast of festival times, but only
such as are Solemn and Sacred, holy times. That Is somewhat to the purpose.
Holy times. Alas poor Marriage, art thou now become so unclean, unholy, as to
be shut out from holy times? Thou wast wont to be Honorable among all, and the
bed undefiled; If we may believe the Apostle. And our Church calls it; The
holy estate of Matrimony. Yea, and if we may believe our Author, and if he
have not forgotten himself, he places Matrimony among his Seven Sacraments.
And if it be a Sacrament, is it not holy? And if Holy, is the celebration of it
unsuitable for Holy times? But Marriage (it seems) is an unnecessary
auocation, as our Author terms it. An unnecessary auocation? And is it not a
necessary vocation? How then an unnecessary auocation? But why should
Marriage (if rightly used, according to Gods Ordinance) be either a necessary
or unnecessary auocation? Was the Marriage in Cana, whereat it pleased CHRIST
himself to be present, any impediment, or auocation to him from working a
gracious Miracle, whereby all the guests had abundant cause and occasion to
praise GOD, and his Disciples especially to believe more firmly in their
MESSIAH? And I pray you, when was this Marriage in Cana? When? Not (I hope)
within any of the holy times exempted from Marriage. And least of all within
Forty days of the Passover, the Holy time of Lent. Yet if we may believe
all those that have written and calculated the very time of that Marriage,
they say all with one unanimous voice, for the most part, that it was within a
little of the Passover, or Easter, yea within less then 40. or yet twenty
days. But we hope then, that the married couple had procured a License out of
the High Priests Court. Alas, they were a poor couple, not able to provide
Wine, as the usual manner of the Country required, but water only; and scant
of that too: For there were six water-pots of Stone, but wanting filling up:
But no Wine at all. And ten shillings, or more, for a License, would have said
well to the filling of those Pots with Wine, as Wine went in that plentiful
Country. But neither do we read, that on any such time, or times, Holy, or
Sacred, or call them what you will, were marriages ever prohibited to be
celebrated, no not in that present corrupt state of the Church of the Jews,
where notwithstanding the very High Priests office was ordinarily bought and
sold; enough to have put them to their wits to improve all means to scrape up
their disbursments again by hook and by crook, by pilling and polling as well
the people, as the inferior Priests. But this particular improuement was not
hatched in those days, as bad as they were. Antichrist was not yet known, not
yet ascended out of the Bottomlesse-pit, to bring into the world such a
Doctrine of Devils.

Ob. But it may be objected, How then is this practice crept into the Church of
England?

Answ. It is an easier matter to find which way it crept in, then (it seems)
how it may be swept out. It lurked among some rubbidge of Romish Relics, and
so escaped shipping away with other of Romes trinkets. Yea, it may well (in my
judgment) be answered, That it is not professed or auowed in the Church of
England: but in certain Courts only. And it were to be wished, that the
Author with all his Devotion could persuade those Courts, that forasmuch as
the times prohibited for Marriage are holy and sacred, fit for fasting or
festival joy, they would by these reasons dissuade their Suitors from taking
Licenses, Marriages also being an unnecessary auocation, and the like. Thus by
putting a difference between the times sacred, and common, the Courts may
either dissuade from Licenses for the time, or pully up such Licenses to a
higher rate, so putting a pecuniarie mulct upon such Delinquents. But a light
gain makes a heavy purse. And Licencia sumus omnes deteriores. And Auri sacra
fames can easily dispense with the most Sacred times, whether of Fasting, or
solemn Festiuitie.

Ob. But though the Ministers of the Church of England find it not as a Decree
or Doctrine to subscribe to, yet they conform to the practice of it. They do
not marry in any prohibited times without a License.

Answ. This is a thing but taken up of a fashion, as I imagine, and so,
practiced, as a Tradition, not well thought of. They (I am sure, I) know no
more reason or authority for this in the express Rubricks, or Rules of our
ministerial Order, then either by Tradition; or from the anniuersarie
Almanacke, and now at last from our Authors Canonical Book of Devotion. And
certainly there is no other law for it, that I know, but the Popes Canon Law. I
dare say it is not in all the Common Law of England, nor yet in the Statute
Laws of the Land. And whether the Popes Canon Law be cancelled in England to
be frustrate de iure, at least, though not, de facto, I cannot say. But enough,
if not too much, of this matter.

But come we to the body of the Book, wherein we purpose not to insist, but
to touch upon some points and passages lightly, according to the moment of each.

Upon the Second Commandment he glosseth no otherwise, in some particulars,
then a Jesuit may safely do for the defense of Romes Doctrine of the worship
of Images. Offenders of the second Commandment (says he) are they, that make
any other Images (to wit of the Creatures) or the likeness of any thing
whatsoever (be it of Christ and his Cross, or be it of his blessed Angels)
with an intent to fall down and worship them. Now a Jesuit with a distinction
can easily make this good for his Doctrine, to wit, not to worship those Images
with the worship of Latria, nor otherwise simply, but with relation to the
Prototype. So that, for ought we know, the Author implies, that some kind of
adoration may be either given to the Image respectively to the Prototype, or at
least before the Image, to the Prototype. Again he says, They that are
worshippers of Idols, or representments of false Gods. This clause is wholly
Jesuitical. See the Doway translation on Exodus 20. where the Jesuits allow
none other Images to be forbidden in the second Commandment, but only Idols,
and those forsooth are (say they) the Images of false Gods. Just so our Author
here. As if Angels or Saints, being worshipped in and by their representations,
were not turned into false Gods? Or as if (...), Idolum and Simulachrum, an
Idol and Image were not all one. See Polyd. Virgil. de Invent. rerum. Lib. 5.
Cap. 13.

Again, They that are worshippers of Saints Images, and out of a false opinion
of promeriting the protection of the blessed Uirgin, or any other Saint of God,
do give a religious adoration to those usual representments, which be made of
them. Now in all this, he speaks nothing against Popery, and so all his
flourish is but a mere froth, while he would seem to say something against
it. For howsoever Popish practice is, yet they teach not that Adoration of
Images, or Saints in them, is meritorious. So that the Author leaves it as
granted, that a man may use Images in their Saint-inuocation, so he account it
not meritorious. Thus he is rather for Popery in this point* then against it.

Upon the fourth Commandment, he says, They offend under a pretense of
serving God more st^^^tly, then others (especially for hearing, and meditating
of Sermons) do by their Fasts, and certain Iudaizing observations condemn
the joyful festiuitie of this high Holy Day, which the Church allows as well
for the necessary recreation of the body in due time, as for Spiritual
exercises of the Soul. Here we come more plainly to discern the Wolf in the
Sheeps skin, or in the Sheepherds cloak. For here he breaks down a gap, and
whistles out the Sheep, that straying, he may devour them. Yea in this
speech, he goes about to set open the very Flood-gate of all profuse
profaneness. First, All truly religious and conscionable serving of GOD he
makes to be but a pretense, Hypocrisy and dissimulation. But the maine mark
his envy and malice shootes at, is, especially, Hearing and meditating of
Sermons. By this very speech, a man that never saw nor knew the Author, may
easily conclude, whether he be a Resident upon his Cure, or no, a faithful
Sheepherd, or no. Hearing and meditating of Sermons he cannot away with; they
are a burden unto him. These he ranketh with I w^t not what Fast, and some
certain (but uncertain what) Iudaizing observations. But the worst is, that
by such exercises, as hearing and meditating of Sermons especially, such
persons condemn the joyful festiuity of this high and holy day, which the
Church allows as well for the necessary recreation of the body, as the
spiritual exercises of the soul. Well, yet he acknowledges the Sabbath, or
Lords day, to be an High and Holy day. Let him hold him to that. But what be
those joyful Festiuities of this High and Holy Day? He mentions not. But
seeing he shuts out none, we may well conclude, he means all kind of
Festiuity, and iollity, and iouialty, such as he ^e^^nes necessary
recreations: for example, Rush-bearings, Whitsun-Ales, Morice-dances, setting
up of May-poles, hearing of a play, or seeing of a Mask, or Dicing and
Carding, or bowling or bowsing, or whatsoever other Gloss the carnal vulgar
may make of this unlimited joyful Festiuity or necessary recreation. But he
says, that this joyful Festiuity the Church allows. What Church? surely none
other (as throughout his whole Book) but his holy mother Church of Rome.
Indeed that Church allows a most li^entious unlimited latitude of all such
joyful Festiuity, and especially on the Lords day, as may feed the humors of
the carnal and profane multitude. That Church indeed reckons, hearing and
meditating of Sermons, among Iudaizing observations. But the Church of God does
not, never did allow such joyful Festiuity as the Author allows. ^ S.
Aughstine says, Iudei seruillter obseruant diem Sabbati ad luxur^am, ad
ebr^etatem: guanto meliu^ ^emina eorum ^^nam facerent, quam eo die in Neome^iis
Sa^taren^? Al si^ ^raties, vt illos dicamus o^serua^e Sabbatu^ etc. Agu. Tract.
3. ^n Johan.
Iudaei, etc The Jews do seruilely observe the Sabbath day to luxury, and
drunkenness: how much better were it for their women to spin wool, and upon
that day in their New-Moones to dance? Far be it my brethren, that we should
say, they keep the Sabbath. And again, Sermo. 95. de T^mp. tom. 10.
Qui in obseruatione Sabbati, etc. They who keeping the Sabbath do not
continue in good works and prayer, which is to sanctify the Sabbath (and
sanctification is, where the holy Ghost is) are like to those little Flies,
engendered in the mud, which disquitted the Egyptians. And De Consensu Euang.
lib. 2. cap. 77. speaking of that flight in winter, and on the Sabbath day,
mentioned Luke 21. by Winter he understands the Cares of this life, and by the
Sabbath, surfeiting and drunkenness, (agreeable to Christ's admonition, ver.
34.) Quod malum Sabbati nomine, etc. Which evil is therefore signified by the
name of the Sabbath, because this was, as now it is, the impious custom of the
Jews upon that day to flow in delights, (all one with our Authors joyful
Festiuitie, or necessary recreation) while they were ignorant of the spiritual
Sabbath. And de Genesi contra Manichaeos, lib. 1. Iudaei carnaliter obseruando,
Sabbatum non nouerunt. The Jews by keeping the Sabbath carnally, knew not the
Sabbath. But our Author allows of joyful Festiuity, and necessary
recreations, in their due time only; not in time of divine service. Neither
did the Jews omit their divine service in their Synagogues, both Ma^ins and
Euen^ong. And yet spending the rest of the day afterward in such joyful
Festiuity as the Author allows, as done in due time: S. Augustine calls them
profane and impious, and that they might better spend the rest of the day in
spinning. For the work of a man's honest and lawful calling is at all times to
be preferred before the works of the Devil, that come not within the compass
of any Christian man's Calling, being renounced and disavowed in our Baptism.

And because the sanctification of the Lords day is so mightily impugned and
cried down, not only by such Ministers of Satan as are Popishly affect^d, by
their precept and precedent, by the profane rabble rout, especially in those
places, where there is not a settled Ministry of the word: Let me add a word
or two more in Gods cause, that we may not so easily suffer profane wretches,
like swine to trample the Orient pearl of Gods glory (so profaned on his own
day) in the mire* S. Augustine says again, Aug. Epist. 86. Casi^lano
Prasbytero.
Pr^ponitur Dies Dominicus etc. The Lords day is preferred befode the Jews
Sabbath, in the faith of the Resurrection, and not in the fashion of Refection
(...) in the Licentiousness of drunken Songs, And ibid* It is questioned,
whither a man must not fast on the Sabbath, but* not, whither he must not
revel it on the Sabbath which neither is done on the Lords day, of those, that
fear God* although they fast on that day. And devout Bernard: Observe the
Sabbath, Sermo super salve Regina.
which is, to exercise thy self, in the Holy Days, so as by the R^st present,
thou may learn to hope for that which is eternal. And that a profane
person may not flatter himself, as though his voluptuous keeping of the
Sabbath, may teach him to hope for those eternal and true joys in heaven:
Hear the same Bernard, or rather Gillibert, whose Sermons are added to fill up
Bernards upon the Canticles, inserted in Bernards works: where mentioning Esaias
58. he says, Non dicit, etc. He says not only, that the Sabbath is a
Delight, but he adds, And Holy and Glorious to the Lord, that these things
may not be in the confusion of thy Glory. Non sit desidiosum Sabbatum tuum,
operare in Sabbato tuo opera Dei. Let not thy Sabbath be idly spent, Domini
Resurrectio promisit nobis ^ternum diem et consecraui^ nobis Dominicum diem. De
^erbis Apost. ser. 15
but in thy Sabbath work the works of God. Opus Dei in die si^o. And surely
the Lords day is not called so for naught. If it be Christ's day, sanctified and
founded in his Resurrection, as S. Augustine says: then what works are proper
for that day, whereby it may be sanctified of us, and we of it, but such as
are the fruits of those that are risen with Christ from the grave of sin, to
newness of life, and not those, which with the swin^ would lead us back to
our wallowing in the mire? And is not the hearing and meditating of Sermons, a
special part of the sanctification of the Lords day? How come we to be
sanctified, but by the word of God? Sanctify them with thy truth, thy word is
the truth says Christ. And as we noted before, that Devotion is blind, whose
lamp is empty of oil to supply the light. A plain argument that the Authors
whole book of Devotion is but a mere counterfeit. And to inuy or inueigh
against the due sanctification of the Lords day, what is it but to raze the
very foundation, whereon all true religion is built? To hear Sermons, and not
to meditate of them, is to receive water into a Sieue: to be an unclean
creature, that chowes not the cudde: to receive the seed upon the highway side:
Math 13*
where it being vnharrowed, and uncovered, is, by the fowls of the air, that
foul spirit, that reigns in the air, and in the unsettled hearts of aerie and
windy brains, to be devoured. The Lords day is the Esa. 55, 1, 2.3.
Marketday of our fowls. He that stands idle in the marketplace, is justly
reproved. Or he that buys those spiritual commodities needful for his soul,
in hearing of the word, and goes presently and squanders it away, and brings it
not home to dispose of it for his weekly uses, is an improvident housekeeper,
a prodigal unthrift of grace, because he hears not for afterward, Esa. 42.23.
for the time to come. Such are they, that either are careless of hearing the
Word, or when they have heard, go and dance it away about the May Pole, or
walk and talk it away in idle prate, or any kind of profane or profuse
recreation. Those are like the Wolf, who never attain to any more learning of
God, then to spell Pater: but when they should come to put together, and to
apply it to their souls, in stead of Pater, they say, Agnus, their minds and
affections running a madding after the profits and pleasures of the world. Such
are enemies to all Godliness, and express their enmity in nothing more, then
in their pro^anation of the Lords Holy Day. If any man would know of (...)
estate and condition of any Parish in general in (...) Land, whether it be
religious or no, let him bu^ ^^quire what conscience they make of the due
sanctification of the Lords day. That Is the true touchstone of a truly
religious man. And although all are not that sincerely, whereof they make
outward profession, (for there will ever be some hypocrites among sound
Professors) yet none can be a true and sound Christian, who makes not special
conscience of a religious and sober keeping of the Lords day. For this day well
kept, sanctifies to a man the whole week. The seventh day sanctifies our six,
as the tenth of our goods does all the other nine. As Elias his meat made him
strong to travel forty days, and forty nights, to Hor^b^ so the hearing and
meditating of sound Sermons on the Lords day, ministers strength to our souls
to serve God all the week in our particular Callings. But I may not
transgress the bounds of my proposed breuity.

For Conclusion of the Commandments; among other offenders against the sixth
Commandment, he reckons those, that be sowers of strife and sedition among
any men whatsoever, Now how far the Author is guilty hereof, or whether he
may not merit to be put in the forefront with the most grand Authors of strife
and sedition, not only to set private men together by the ears, but the whole
Church and state of England in a most fearful hurly-burly and combustion, I
refer to all wise men to judge, that do but read this most As I told my
reverend Ordinary, when I was called before him the second time of my
Examination about Is^aels Fast.
pernicious, pestilent, and Popish Book.

As it follows: Of the Sacraments of the Church. What Sacraments, trow we,
are these. The Sacraments of the Church? This is written, I am sure fiylo
(...). This title is no where learned, but from the Church of Rome, from the
Council of Trent, and from the shop of Jesuitical Catechists. He learned not
this of his Mother Church of England (if so he account her his Mother, and not
rather that other Church, to which he intitles his Sacraments) for the Church
of England sets down the title simply. Of the Sacraments, saying also,
Sacraments ordained of Christ. Attic. ^^*
So that she intitles the Sacraments unto Christ, the sole Author of them.

But let us hear what those Sacraments of the Church be, or how many? Namely,
Two and Five: which put together (as every Arithmetician can tell) make seven.
Now England thou art come to thy seven Sacraments again. This every Papist can
now brag off. And have they not reason? for there is more in it, then the
bringing of us back to the seven Sacraments again: he would hereby knit us
fast again to be one Church with the Church of Rome. For these seven
Sacraments he calls the Sacraments o^ the Church. O^ what Church? surely no
Church ever held seven Sacraments, but the Church of Rome; nor do I read of
seven Sacraments, before Peter Lombard set them down. All the ancient Fathers
knew but two. Saint Ambrose writing six books of the Sacraments, could find
but two. The Cathol. Tradition q. 20. P. 119.
Greek Church never held but two; yet, says our Author, the Church holds
them, yea the Catholic Church of Christ, as before in his Preface. Whereupon
here he concludes, that the Church of Rome is Christ's Catholick^ Church. For
the Sacraments of the Church, and of Christ's Catholic Church, being seven:
and no Church ever holding seven Sacraments, but the Church of Rome, and that
of late days too: it follows necessarily, that the Church of Rome must be
The Church, yea the Catholic Church of Christ. But how will ^e prove, that
the Church of England holds these seven Sacraments? In his Preface in the 2.
reason.
Because she has not despised nor cast behind her the blessed Sacraments of
Christ's Catholic Church. How proves he that? Namely out of the Catechism of
the Sacraments, and out of the 25. Article, which he has alleged in the
Margent. Now let us for more cleernesse compare his proofs with his own text.

The Authors words.
The Sacraments of the Church.

The principal and truly so called (as generally necessary to salvation) are
Baptism, and the Lords Supper.

The Catechism.
Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

Ans. Two only, as generally necessary to salvation, that is to say, Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

Article. 25. Of the Sacraments.
Sacraments, ordained of Christ, be not only badges or tokens of Christian
men's profession: but rather they be certain witnesses and effectual signs of
grace and Gods goodwill toward us, by the which he does work inuisibly in
us, and does not only quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our faith in
him.

Let the judicious reader but well observe, and compare the Church of Englands
doctrine of the Sacraments, with this our Authors, and he shall find the
differen^e to stand upon terms mainely opposite. For first, is it all one to
say, The Sacraments of the Church: and, the Sacraments which Christ has
ordained in his Church? And between the Church, that which the Author expressly
means* and Christ's Church, His Church, there is (I wis) no small difference.
Again, The principal, says our Author; implying, there are other besides:
but, Two only, says the Church of England, excluding all other. And as for
the words of the Article, cited, they so set down the nature of the
Sacraments, as that they exclude all other Sacraments, from having any
fellowship with them. And therefore has the Author cautelously suppressed the
definition of a Sacrament.

But yet he finds five other Sacraments, following in the Article, which he
quotes over against his five in the Margent. Let us therefore parallel them.

The Authors words.
The other five, that is to say; Confirmation, Penitence, Orders, Matrimony,
Uisitation of the sick, or extreme Unction; though they be sometimes called,
and have the name of Sacraments, yet have they not the like nature, the two
principal and true Sacraments have.

Article 25. Ibid.
Those five, commonly called Sacraments, that is to say; Confirmation. Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments
of the Gospel, being such as have grown partly of the corrupt following of
the Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scripture: but yet have
not like nature of Sacraments with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or Ceremony ordained of God.

Note here the vast difference between the sincerity of our Church, and the
egregious sophistry of this our Author. Those five, says the one, as pointing
to those which now the Church of England in the beginning of the blessed
Queens Reign (newly then purged from Popery, as in 1562, when those Articles
were compiled) had cut off from the number of the Sacraments, although those
five were even then in high esteem still with too many, not yet powered from
their Le^s: but the Author comes roundly with, the other five, inducing
necessarily Seven Sacraments of the Church, Two, and, the other five. His
Conclusion is this in effect, and form: We hold the Sacraments of the Church:
But the Sacraments of the Church are two, and, the other five, to wit seven:
Therefore we hold the seven Sacraments.

Again our Church says, Those five, to wit, Confirmation etc. are not to be
counted for Sacraments of the Gosp^ll: But our Author says, They are the
Sacraments of the Church, and that no less then the other; they all tun
under one title, The Sacraments of the Church. Thirdly, our Church says, these
are such, as have grown partly from the corrupt following of the Apostles: but
says our Author, in his Preface, They are the blessed Sacraments of Christ's
Catho^icke Church, received from our forefathers (a good argument to prove the
lineall descent of Popery) so far is he from say^ng or assenting with the
Church of England, that they have grown partly from the corrupt use of
following the Apostles. In a word the Church of England says, These have not
any visible sign, or Ceremo^ie or (...) of God: but our Author says no such
thing, but in general shuffling them up under the ti^le o^ the Sacraments of
the Church, he will needs have them to be Sacraments. But Sacraments must have
a visible sign ordained of God, or else they are no Sacraments. And these have
no visible sign ordained of God, says our Church. Therefore our Author
crosses the doctrine of our Church expressly. Only he confesses that these,
the other five have not (in general) the like nature, that the two principal
and true Sacraments have. If in this his speech their lurk no equivocation
(for he may closely mean by The like nature, that these are not generally
necessary to salvation, as the first two) he must needs infer that these
his other five are no true Sacraments; therefore false and bastard Sacraments.
And if we take the word Sacrament in the largest sense, as those five are, then
according to that reckoning, the number of Sacraments will quickly amount from
other five, to five hundredth. For as Saint Chrysostom observes, in his 11.
Hom. on Luke, Omnia quaecunque fecit Christus. Sacramenta sunt, sieve ambulauit,
etc. All things, whatsoever Christ did, are Sacraments, whither he walked, or
eat, or drank, or fasted, or wept, etc. All these says Chrysostom,
Sacramenta nostra sunt, they are our Sacraments.

To conclude this point of difference, there is some odds between their
naming of these Sacraments: Our Church calls them, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme unction: Our Author is pleased to call his
five, thus, Confirmation, Penitence, Orders, Matrimony, and visitation of the
sick, or Extreme unction. In two of his five he varies; he calls Penance,
Penitence, and Extreme unction, he calls, Visitation of the sick. In which two
new names of his new Sacraments there lurkes not a little of Serpentine poison.
For first, he would bring Penitence to be all one with popish Penance. For does
h^e not mean by Penitence, Repentance? I trow so Repentance then he will make
to be Penance, as the ^esuites in their Rhemes, and Doway Tra^s^ation turn the
word for Repentance, Penance.

Now Penance is a Popish word, and implies the Popish practice in this their
Sacrament. Their practice is to inioyne Shrift, or Confession, to wit, a strict
and exact enumeration of all a man's sins in the ear of the Priest, like the
stream of a puddle or kennell, emptying it self into a common sink or Sewer.
Hereupon he receives his Absolution, which is a broom to sweep the kennell,
to make it fit for more puddle water, though sweet (I wis) to the Priests
palate. For Dulcis odor luchri ex re qualibet, as the Emperor said of his
Doung: Gain smells sweet though is come from a Dunghill. The second of his
misnamed Sacraments is, for extreme unction, visitation of the sick; all is
one with him; Visitation of the sick, or Extreme unction, which ye will. So
that if our Author do at any time go to visit the Sick (as I fear he does
seldom, at leastwise hio sick flock) it happly someone desire his Ghostly
father-hood, in cafe when the Priest or Jesuit is not in the way: I hope he
carries his anointing or annealling bottle at his girdle, like a careful
Shepherd with his tar Bot^le.

In the mean time, it would diligently here be weighed, what a mystery of
iniquity is wouen and wrapped up in these Sacraments of the Church, mentioned by
the Author. The sum whereof is, to reduce us all, even the Church of England
to one Church, the Church of Rome, the only Church, which maintains (...),
which Church he calls the Catholic^e Church of Christ. Which sum does (...)
and naturally ^^^olue it self into these particular (...) conclusion^. First,
that the Church of (...) reformation, and repurga^^^^ (...), chismaticall
Church, as (...) Church of Rome to be the (...), nor her self a member of the
Romish Church. Secondly, that these being but one Church, and that the Church
of Rome, and this Church of Rome having but one supreme Bishop, the Pope, and
this Pope challenging a supremacy of headship over all other Churches, as the
Head over the Members; and the Church of England being no otherwise distinct
from the Church of Rome, but as a member is distinguished (not divided) from
the Head, or as a branch from the Tree, or as a daughter from the Mother:
therefore it follows, that the Pope must be supreme Head of the Church of
England. Thirdly, Jf the Pope be supreme Head over the Church of England, he
comes over our gracious Sovereigns Head, and with his foot strikes off his
crown: Fourthly, hereupon it follows, that the Author, and his Abbetors and
Approuers, do impinge upon, and most impiously infringe and violate that
sacred and solemn Oath, which every Deacon, Minister and Bishop do take at
their ordination and consecration; in which they swear, to renounce, refuse,
The Oath of the Kings supremacy, in the book of Ordering of Deacons.
relinquish and forsake the Bishop of Rome, and his authority, power and
jurisdiction: never to consent or agree, that the Bishop of Rome shall
practice, exercise or have any manner of authority, jurisdiction or power
within this Realm, or any other within the Kings Dominions, but shall resist
the same at all times to the uttermost of his power: to accept, and repute and
take the Kings Majesty to be the only supreme Head in earth, of the Church
of England: yea to his cunning, wit, and uttermost of his power, without guile,
fraud, or other undue mean, to observe, keep, maintain and defend the whole
effects and singular Acts and statutes made, and to be made within this Realm
in derogation, extirpation and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome, and his
au^horit^e, and all other Acts and (...), made or to be made (...) and
corr^boration of the King^ power, (...) this to do against all manner of
persons, of what estat^, dignity or degree, or condition they be, and in no
w^se to do, nor attempt, nor to his power suffer to be done or attempted,
directly or indirectly, any thing or things, privily or apertly, to the let,
hinderance, damage or derogation thereof, or any part thereof, by any manner of
means, or for any manner of pretense: etc. So help him God. But our Author
(who set him a work, or subornd and animated him therein, let them look to
it, and let them be well looked unto) contrary to the contents and tenure of
this sacred and solemn Oath (which how many times he has taken, I know not)
has published a book bearing Authority in the front, wherein this whole Oath
is cracked from the top to the bottom; for all along speaking of the Church,
one Church, the Catholic Church of Christ, which he marks out in all points
for the Church of Rome, making and taking it for the Catholic Church,
whereupon the Pope makes himself the sole supreme Head over all particular
Churches, which acknowledge themselves members of that his Catholic see: he
necessarily not only not renounceth, refuses, relinquisheth, and forsakes the
Bishop of Rome with his authority, power, and jurisdiction: nor only consents
and agrees, that the Bishop of Rome shall practice, exercise or have,
authority, jurisdiction or power within this Realm, and other the Kings
dominions without resisting the same to the uttermost of his power: nor does
accept repute and take the Kings Majesty to be the only supreme Head on
earth, of the Church of England (if this Church be a member of the Church of
Rome, as his whole book mainely drives at, and so the Pope will come in for
the best share in the Headship) nor only to his cunning, wit, and uttermost of
his power, does observe, keep, maintain and defend the whole effects and
contents of all and singular Acts and statutes made within this Realm, in
derogation, extirpation, and extinguishment of the Bishop of Rome, and his
authority, and all other Acts and Statute* made in reformation and
corroboration of the Kings power, of the supreme Head in earth, of the Church
of England: but with guile, fraud, cosening, and undue mean goes about to
defeat and frustrate the same, and to bring in the Popes authority again, by
the Head and shoulders: yea, and led no doubt with personal respects to some
great ones of some high estate, dignity, degree, and condition, he and his
abbettors partly attempt to his and their power, by such means and pretenses,
as this his book of private Devotions, a fair pretense to cover a whole pack
of villainy; and partly suffer to be done and attempted directly and indirectly,
not only privily but apertly (if not most malapartly past all shame or fear
in their audacious daring) the let* hinderance, damage and derogation of all
the said singular Acts and statutes, for the corroborating of the Kings
Majesty's sole supremacy of the Church of England, and for the perpetual
extirpating and extinguishing of all Papal pretense or interest in this Church
and State: and therefore the author with his Abbettors, how will they not be
found most notorious violators of this most sacred Oath, and so, guilty at
least of perjury in a high degree? In the fifth and last place, it is lest to
the wisdom and judgment of his Majesty's learned Council, and Judges of the
Land, whether thus to go about to bring in Popery and the papacy again into
this state and Church, from which Antichristian religion and Tyranny we have
bin through Gods incomparable mercy to this Land now so many years delivered,
having thus long inioyed the light of the Gospel, attended with all outward
blessings of a peaceable and happy Government, till now of late a generation of
vipers, eating to themselves away out of their spiritual Mothers bowels, that
they may turn tails* and join with the great Beast of Babylon against the
Lamb and those of his side, the called, and chosen and faithful, have made a
fearful breach in this beautiful Body, like to be utterly wracked, if it be
not all the sooner made up again: Whether to go about with a high hand to
frustrate and make void* to violate and break in sunder all those sacred and
religious laws, which have bin made for the firm establishment of the Gospel
(the truth whereof, has been sealed with the blood of so many Martyrs, and is
and will be witnessed by Millions of faithful Confes^ours) of his Majesty's
Crown and Scepter, and religious government of us his people, and the rest of
his Dominions: whether (I say) to go about to bring in a new form of Papal
religion and dominion in this Church and state of England, be not more then
matter of perjury to cost a man's ears, but of high Treason, and that in a high
degree against God and the King* the Church and State. Who would ever have
thought, that in this shining of the Gospel, any Romish owls hoodwinckt with
the veil of superstitious Devotion, durst attempt such things, as the bringing
back of the Church of England to the captivity of Babylon? What Achitophel
du^st counsel all-daring young Absolon, thus to offer to go lie with his
fathers Concubines on the top of the house, in the sight of the Sun, and
all Israel? And wherefore? But in Policy, thereby to fasten the fickle false
hearts of those traitorous Israelites to the Crown* aspiring Absolon, when
they should see him become an open abomination to the King, and be at an
unreconcilable defiance with him. And what made Achitophel so confident, and
Absolon to take such wicked counsel, but the great strength, wherein they
presumed? But is the Popish faction grown so great and strong, as already to
advance their crest and colors in defiance of Religion and Laws, and with
strong hand to suppress and bear down David's Kingdom? It should seem their
confidence is arrived at a high pitch. But God bring it down, as he did that
subtil-headed, and shag-haired conspiracy against the King and state. He can
send Achitophel to his halter, and Absolon to his fatal Tree. He can? Nay
assuredly he will. For, Psalm. 50.
as David says, The wicked and blood thirsty men shall not live out half
their days; but my trust shall be in thee, O Lord. And again, God shall wound
the hai^ie scalpe of such a one, as goes on still in his wickedness. O
consider this ye that forget God, least I pluck you away suddenly, and their
be none to deliver you.

Proceed we to other particulars^ In his later, and corrected edition, Page
17, he bewrais a piece of old superstition, as formerly about his Hours, so
here about the place of Prayer, where he has one special saying of Scripture
for a man to use, at his entrance into the Church, and another for the
Chancell. Thus by his Jgnis fatuus* Devotion he will lead simple m^n through a
maze of superstition, that they shall no^ know where they are, if they will but
follow him.

He quoteth the decrees of the Church for his third hour. Those are the
Decretals of the Church of Rome, Page 86.
for, with our Author, no other Church, but the Church of Rome is, The Church
as he often in this book gives us occasion to remember, that we may not easily
forget a matter of such importance. But of the Decrees of that Church of Rome,
concerning the seven Canonical hours we spoke in the second Title Page. So
that here remains no more for us to reioyne but to oppose and prefer the
forms of private prayer prescribed in the end of our Communion book against
and before the Decrees of the Church, which he expressly means, or before
those cu^ious forms which the Author has devised for all his 7. hours, Our
Church has set down very good forms in the Communion book, both for morning
and evening* and some of them such, as I dare say our And i^ (...) (see (...)
of it) (...) lately to ^ee at a (...) Printing house an old Communion book,
^cored and no^ed all along with this Authors own (...), where among other
^h^n^s, which he ^ould have (...), he (...), that (...) p^iu^t^ ^^a^ers (...)
^ett^r (...) ^hen there (...) i^ the Communion (...)
Author could wish were cancelled. As that for the whole estate of Christ's
Church, in the end of the singing Psalms wherein is this prayer: Root out from
hence (O Lord) all ravening wolves, which to fill their bellies, seek to
destroy thy flock, etc. What would then become of our Author, and a great many
of his Consorts, if all such ravening wolves were rooted out of this land? And
that morning prayer for private houses a little before, wherein are these words:
And forasmuch as they cannot believe, except they hear, nor cannot hear* but
by preaching, and none can preach except he be sent: therefore O Lord, raise up
faithful Distributers of thy Mysteries, who setting apart all worldly
respects, may both in their life and doctrine only seek thy glory. Contrarily,
confound Satan, Antichrist, with all Hierlings, whom thou have cast often in a
reprobate sense, that they may not by sects, schisms, heresies and errors,
disquiet thy little ^^ocke. And because O Lord we be fallen into the later
days, and dangerous times, wherein ignorance has ^
gotten the upper hand, and Satan by his Ministers seeks by all means to
quench the light of the Gospel: we beseech thee to maintain thy Cause against
these ravening wolves, and strengthen all thy servants, etc. I dare say, this
pra^er does not relish well in the palate of our Authors Devotion. He could
w^sh it either expunged or at le^st excused to be used, by interposing his own
private for^^^. For this prayer was not fitter for those (...) was first
composed then for these of ours. (...) s^ands up for Preaching of the (...) who
in these times would cry (...) with their long prayers shoulder it out of the
Church. This prayer is against all worldly respects in Ministers, against the
shameless ambition of this age. It prays against Antichrist, contrary to
those, that would raise up again the throne of that Beast in this our Church.
It prays against all hirelings, such as in these days for preferments will
sell soul and body to the Devil, turn time-seruers, and men's servants. It
prays against men possessed with a reprobate sense, who are Authors of sects,
and schisms, heresies and errors, whereof this present age is full. Although
the ringleaders of sects and schisms, who make a pitiful and rufull Rent in
the Church of England, by Siding with Popery and Arminianisme, yet forsooth cry
out upon the true Ministers and Professors of the Gospel, as the only
sectaries and schismatickes. And if this were true then, no less now, when
Ignorance, if not has, yet at least strives to get the upper hand, seeking to
cast the black mantle of blind Devotion over all men's eyes, and that by Satan's
Ministers seeking by all means to quench the light of the Gospel? Therefore,
what great need have we ever to take in our mouths this worthy prayer,
recommended unto us by our reverend Mother Church of England, and to pray
heartily, We beseech the O Lord to mainetaine thy cause against all ravening
wolves, and strengthen thy servants, etc.

And so much the rather, because our Author (and he goes not alone) has also
in this his book patched up a prayer of his own head, which he intitles, A
prayer and thanksgiving for the whole state of Christ's Catholic Church:
wherein he prays for the holy Catholic Church, the mother of us all, that
bear the name of Christ: and that all may become one fold under one shepherd
Jesus Christ. Now comparing this holy Catholic Church with that Church, which
all along his book he recommends, and would obtrude upon us, as our Mother,
which is no other Church, but that Church of Rome: what does he here p^ay for
else, but that we may all become one with that Church, to be one flock under
one shepherd, Jesus Christ, and consequently under the great Antichrist, who
challenges the title of sole head of the Catholic Church, and ^ole Vicar
general of Jesus Christ.

But to the rest, Page 232.233. etc. He comes with his Septuagesima, and
therein, and thenceforth thoroughout Lent, ^e by a sudden motion brings men
upon the knees of their most solemn Devotion to expiate all their mad gamballs
and Revels in the Christmas time at least. As Saint Chrysostom says, Men
think to expiate the whole years excess and sin, Hom^^ ^7. (...).
with forty days humiliation: and then the week following they fall afresh to
their lusts. Only suddenness here from one extreme into another is
dangerous* except it be of our true conversion from sin unto God, and then the
more speedy and sudden, the better and safer. Otherwise, the saying here may
be verified, Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt. Yet this
suddenness from Christmas revels, to Lent-rel^ntings, may seem to be like
that strange and sudden alteration in those men, that being mad, lived among
the Tombs, and kept a pitiful rule, to whom Christ coming, he cast the
Devil out of them, and ^oorthwith they came to their sober and right wits,
sitting and Christ's feet clothed, and hea^^ng his word. But here is the
difference, commonly* out of those mad men the Devil was who^y c^st out: But
in our ordinary Lent-obseru^^s* he is but at the least wise bound to goo^
(...) for the time, but not cast out, when after ^^ster (at the furthest) he
breaks loose again: Such Obse^uants and selfe-castigators returning to their
excess of riot a fresh. These, for the most part, being much like to the
Images in Popish Churches, which all the Lent are all veiled over in black, as
mourning that they have been Idol-obiects to Idolators: But beginning on
Easter-Eue to peep out, oh how do the people begin a fresh to be ravished
with a glimpse of their glittering Gods, so long clouded and ecclipsed from
their devout Adorers! But on Easter Day morning, no sooner is the Veil
with-drawne by the Priests dexterous hand, but down they fall on their
Maribones beating their breasts more eagerly now, then ever, as imputing it to
their most grievous sins, that they have been so long withheld from their
pretty pettie-Gods. For ever, Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.
And this abstinence from their Images all the Lent, makes the people the more
to dote upon them all the year after, as accounting them the more precious,
the less familiar. And such are the most strict obseruers of Lent: If there be
any sin, or pleasure, whereof out of blind superstition they impose and
enforce a restraint upon themselves, for Lent-sake while they demurely go in
black: It gives them but occasion to affect and pursue the same sin or
pleasure with greater desire all the year after. The affections, for the time,
being but as waters stopped with the Sluice, which the longer pent up, break out
again with greater violence. Although in the mean time all the Lent long,
they abate nothing of their Pride, of their Covetousness, of their Ambition,
and other habitual Lusts. He that will eat no Flesh in Lent, will not intermit
his ordinary Swearing, and vain wicked Oaths, though he remit somewhat of
his Eating, yet will not abate an ynch of his Drinking and good-fellowship,
will take no less Vse-mony, then at Christmas, will not abate an ace of his
poor Tenants Rackt-rent, will stretch the strings of his Simon Magus pouch as
much now for a lusty preferment, as he will do any time out of Lent. Though
JOHN the Patriarch of Constantinople were for his much fasting called Johannes
Ieiunator, JOHN the Faster, yet he wanted for no pride and ambition to aspire
to be universal Head of the Church, that which GREGORY of Rome cried out
against, as Antichristian, but BONIFACE the Third a little after got that Title
wholly to himself, suffering none to be that Antichrist, but the Pope, and
Bishop of Rome. And it is usual, that as fasting breeds wind in the stomach:
So the opinion of fasting, specially when it is a part of Will Worship, and
humane invention, fills the stomach of the Soul full of windy pride and
hypocrisy. As Pope URBAN the Second, to make the better speed for the
recovery of the Holy Land, ordained that no Clergy or Lay man should eat
Flesh from Shrouetyde to Easter. [Guil. Malmes^ur. Lib. 4. Mystery of
Iniquity.] A meritorious matter (I wis) so to fast all Lent long, as to eat no
Flesh. For as nothing displeases God more, then the worship which we frame to
him out of our own fancifull brains: So no devotion is of more value with us,
does more please our humors, then such as we invent our selves. So that it
fares with our Lent devotion, as with the young Ape; we so dote upon it, so
claspe and hug it, as, being the barn of our own brain we strangle it, so
that such Lenten devotion seldom suruiueth the time of Lent, but is dead all
the year after. And what I pray you is all the Lent-fast, as it is generally
used, but a mere apish imitation and mocke-fast? The example of CHRIST'S Fast
forty days and forty nights is brought by our Author for us to imitate.
Well. Let our Author begin to imitate CHRIST: Let him fast forty days, and
forty nights, without eating and drinking, as CHRIST did; and if he be able
to endure such a Fast, ^ see no reason, but others may brook it as well, who
happily are more acquainted and inured to fasting at other times, then himself
is. Nor do I see any reason, why such a keeping of Lent, as our Author
prescribes, should have the name of a Past. For a Fast, is to eat nothing, and
drink nothing during the Fast. Nothing at all. If our Fast be for a day, we
are to eat nothing till night, when the Fast is ended. Such was Nineueh's Fast.
Nor can that be a Fast of forty days, in which space any thing is eaten or
drunk. But is that a Fast, to eat no Flesh, and to fill the stomach with good
Fish, and the best Wine? To eat no Butter, but the purest Oil? Ierom. ad
Ne^ot^an. Epist. 7
To eat no Eggs, but the most restoratiue Figs? Sint tibi I^iunia pura,
casta, simplicia, moderata, and non superstitiosa, says St JEROME. Quid
prodest, etc. What auailes it not to eat Oil, and to seek out meats hard and
troublesome to be gotten? As dried Figs, Pistacke nuts, Almonds, Dates,
Meal, and Honey? Tota hortorum cultura vexatur, vt cibaria non vescamur pane:
and dum delicias sectamur, a regno Caelorum retrahimur. All the Gardens and
Orchards must be troubled, to serve our palate: And while we follow such
delicacies, we are haled away from the Kingdom of Heaven.

And why should our Author impose upon us such a Lent-Fast, as a matter of
Religion, and a special part of his Devotion? Whereas this Noble and Religious
STATE does not prescribe or inhibite the use of any Creatures, but out of a
civil regard, and for a civil end. In that case do not men take Licenses
from the Exchequer? And does not the KINGS Proclamation inioyne forbearance of
Flesh during that time of the Spring, and that expressly for the increase of
Cattle? But if our Author will needs urge the Authority of the Church for the
Lent-Fast, I do but refer him to the Order of Pope URBAN the third before
cited. We know no such constitution in the Church of England. Neither after
CHRIST'S Resurrection, wherein all Jewish ceremonial observation of days was
abolished, remained in Scripture any one day in the week, or week in the
month, or month in the year, to be religiously and yearly observed of
Christians, but only the Lords day. Gal. 4.10.
The Church of Galathia intangling herself in Jewish Ceremonies, the Apostle
sharply reproves them, saying, Ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years. I am in fear of you, least I have bestowed on you labor in vain.
This was, as he tells them, to begin in the Spirit, and to end in the Flesh.
And Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of
an Holy Day, or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbaoth-dayes,; which are a
shadow of things to come; but the Body is Christ. Wherefore if ye be dead with
Christ, from the Rudiments of the World: Why, as though living in the world,
are ye subject to Ordinances? (Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are
to perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men, etc.
But now, they that go about to destroy, or at least to defalke from the due
observation of the Lord's Day, consisting in all religious exercises, both
public and private, excluding all profane pastimes, and licentious mad
mirth, so as Christians being thereby inured to a religious conformity of life
in all seemly sobriety, have the less need of superstious observations to be
imposed or obtruded upon them, for their private humiliation, seeing the whole
tenure of their life is a constant walking in a sober and moderate course, not
mad to day, and sad to morrow for fashion, so adding drunknesse to thirst, and
never well (as we say) full nor fasting, whereas, every day to a true
Christian is a day of sobriety, and all his life a Lent, while all along his
life is seasoned and sanctified with a conscionable keeping of the Lords day,
wherein he prouides his store for every week: I say, they that go about to
cut away a a great part from the religious and sober keeping of the Lordsday,
no marvel, if they would fill up the want of true Religion with some
satisfactorie Superstition of man's devising; and so to expiate all the years
profaneness with the seeming sanctity, and superstitious solemnity of a
pretended Lenten Fast, which indeed is no Fast, as men do use it. And yet, for
all it is so abused, it has monopolized and engrossed to it self all other
true Fasts, wherein Gods people in time either of any present public
calamity, or eminent danger ought to be humbled, in making their peace with
God, deprecating as the sin, so the punishment, the consequent fruit of it.
But the As the Pharisee, who will neither enter into Heaven himself, nor
suffer those that would to enter in.
Lent-Fast must keep out all, beat down all other Fasts. Good Lent, either,
fast as thou pretendest, thou should, or give place to other Fasts, which
being performed as they ought, may stand in the gap to turn away that wrath,
which thy Superstition and Hypocrisy is like to bring upon us.

But the Author cites St JEROME, to prove the Quadragesimall Fast to be an
Apostolic constitution. Cent. 1. lib. 2. c. 10. De vitis Doctorum.
Indeed we read of one ABDIVS, who tells strange Tales of St MATTHEW the
Evangelist, and among the rest, that he taught that Saints must look to go
into Heaven by their Merits: That the time of Lent must be kept with abstinence
from Flesh, from conjugal benevolence, or else a man becomes polluted, and
commits a heinous offense, which must be washed away with many tears. These,
and other the like, be so likely to be true, as it may be lawful for us to
believe St MATTHEW wrote one thing, and spoke another. But we must know, that
the Mystery of Iniquity began to work even in those prime times, while Satan
wanted not his Instruments to lay the foundation thereof in superstitious
Devotions, the strongest supporter of Antichrist. As for S. JEROME, and other
of the Ancients, who knows not that many things of this nature have been
foysted into their Works? Neither is it necessary, that we should either
labor in all things to clear the Fathers, nor in every thing to follow them.
But howsoever our Author would draw down the Lent-Fast from the observation of
the Church: although he still means the Church of Rome, yet we know that the
ancient Churches, which were no members of the Church of Rome, but as all then
were, joint members of the Catholic, did observe their Quadragesima after a
different sort, both for the time and manner. Socrates, Socratis Hist. Eccl.
lib. 5. cap. 21.

Also Zorom. Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 19.


who was much about the time of S. Jerome, says that in those days, Qui sunt
Roma, etc. They that are at Rome, do Fast three weeks before Easter, the
Saturday, and the Lords day only excepted. In Illyria, and all Greece, and at
Alexandria, they begin their Fast 6 weeks before Easter, and call that time
Quadragesima. Others begin their Fast 7. weeks before Easter, although they
keep their Fast but 15. of those days, scattered among the rest; and yet they
call that time Quadragesima too: Nor differ they only about the time, but
about the manner of abstinence. For some eat Fowls and Fishes, as both coming
of the water; Others abstain from shel-fruits, and eggs; some feed only upon
dry bread: and others not that. Some after they have fasted till nine of the
clock, use sundry meats: And others otherwise. And because none can show any
precept upon Record concerning Lent, it is evident that the Apostle therein
left free power to every man's mind and will, that every one might do that which
is good and honest, being induced thereto neither by fear, nor by necessity.
Thus Socrates. And Eusebius before him says, that some thought one day
sufficient for fasting, Eusebu. Eccl, Hist. lib. cap. 23.
some two, some more, others in reckoning 40. continued hours day and night, do
determine that the time of their Fast. This being so, what is become of the
Apostolical Constitution for 40. days Fast, when it was left free for every
Church, or Christian, to fast as few or many days as they thought fit? And
therefore never let our Author obtrude upon us the authority and practice of
the present Church of Rome, to impose a necessity of a religious, if not a
superstitious 40. days Fast, when notwithstanding the old Church of Rome in
her purer times, fasted but three weeks, yet two days in every week
excepted. And besides, in those times, Easter being a general time for
public Baptism, as also Whitsuntide: for that cause they thought fit to
humble themselves with fasting and prayer, for the better preparation
thereunto. But enough of this.

Page 246. of the last impression, He mentions Christ's Rest in the grave,
and his Descen^ also into Hell, as upon Easter Even. The Author is very
skillful to tell us the punctual time of Christ's Descent into Hell. Of the
manner of it, or how the Article in the Creed is to be understood, he makes no
question, but comes with an actual down right Descent. But he grounds this
his time of Christ's Descent into Hell, upon the Epistle and Gospel for Easter
Even. Indeed the Epistle is taken out of 1 Pet. 3.27, etc. where the words of
Peter are thus translated, according to the corrupt vulgar Latin, In which
spirit he also went and preached to the spirits that were in prison, etc. Now,
the Author hereupon infers, that this place of Peter is to be meant of
Christ's Descent into Hell; contrary to all sound Interpreters; the Text it
self no way bearing it. And upon the same ground, according to the corrupt
translation, wherein is added (contrary and besides both the Original Text,
and our last and best English Translation) these words, That were: whereas the
Text is, To the spirits in prison, that is, now, still in prison; not, that
were in prison, as if upon Christ's descent into Hell, and preaching unto them,
he had delivered them thence, as out of some Limbo; which the Author (if well
examined) must needs mean. And indeed he is too much helped by the corrupting
of the Text; so that it were to be wished, that vulgar English Translation of
the Epistles and Gospels in the Communion book were corrected, yea and wholly
made uniform to our last Translation of the Bible, that so no Popish spirits
may have any such starting holes for their lurking and sly old Popish and
mopish doctrines.

In the next place (page 291.) he sets down sundry sayings, prayers,
Psalms, Hymns, before the receiving of the Sacrament, to page 301. In all
which it should seem (...) ^rescribeth a new solmne service for the Sacrament.
For else what time is there allowed for any man's private devotion, while he is
present at the public administration of the Sacrament? Or would he have a man
busied about his private devotions, while the Minister is in the public
service? Or would he have the Minister to be mute until every man present have
said over such lessons, as our Author teaches? Indeed if it were at a Mass,
which the people understand not, these forms of private devotion were good to
exercise every man, while the Priest is mumbling over his Mass. But blessed
be God there is no such need.

Page 298. he sets down a new form of prayer, but taken either from the Bull
of Pope Clement 8. where he commands the Angels, etc. or rather he borrowes
it from the Roman Missal in the Cannon of the Mass, restored by the Decree of
the Council of Trent, and published by the Commandment of Pope Pius 5.
printed at Antwerp, 1574. Cum priuilegio Pontif. Max. et Regis Cath^l. page
272. where the Mass Priest, Profunde inclinatus iunetis manibus dicat. Lowly
ducking with his hands joined let him say: Supplices te rogamus Omnipotens
Deus, iube h^c perferri per manus Sancti A^egli tui in sublime Altere tuum in
conspectu diuinae Maiestatis tuae, vt etc. that is, We humbly beseech the
Omnipotent God, command these things to be conuayed by the hands of thy holy
Angel into thy high Altar, in the presence of thy divine Majesty, that etc.
But what a presumption is this in our Author to prescribe God a new way of
conueying our prayers into the presence of his Majesty by such a mean, as he
has no where revealed in his word? Where has God commanded his Angels to be
our Mediators between us and him? Yet see how slily this Author would foyst
in, the mediation of Angels. Is not the only name of Christ our Mediator, in
whom we offer up all our Service and Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise, sufficient
to bring them up into the presence of his Father, yea and to make both us and
them acceptable to his Majesty? But what promise of acceptance has our
Author of such Mediation of Angels, if they should presume to present our
Prayers? Much more, when they do it without warrant. And warrant they have
none in GODS Word. And without the Word we have no warrant for any service we
do to GOD. But contrarily the Word allows unto us but one only Mediator as
well of Intercession, as of satisfaction. 1 John 2. If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. The same must be our Advocate and Intercessor, who
is also our Propitiation. Therefore our Author here commits high Sacrilege,
if not Blasphemy against the Sacred Majesty of GOD, and the honor of JESUS
CHRIST, to assign GOD the appointing of a new way, whereby we may come unto
him, namely another way, then by JESUS CHRIST.

But proceed we to Page 388. where he sets down, The manner of commending the
Soul into the hands of GOD at the very point of time, when it is departing
from the Body. Before ye have his Form of Prayers at the hour of Death; now,
another Form at the point of Death: Nay (which ought diligently to be marked)
at the very point of time, when the Soul is (not about to depart, but)
departing from the Body. Surely a man would think his prayer had need to be
very short, only a jaculatorie breath and away, least the Soul be departed
from the Body, before he make an end of his prayer, and so he shall pray for
the dead. Yet for all this he sets down a far longer prayer, then can be
said at the very point of time, when the Soul is departing from the Body. Yea
and among the rest to lengthen it out, he sets down thirteen eiaculatorie
Meditations and Prayers, which he will have said plainly, distinctly, and with
some pawses. So that of necessity the Soul must be departed, before his
prayers be half ended. And what then? Is that so great a matter think you?
His first printed Book, which is yet extant, and walks abroad, wherewith
Jesuits are mightily helped to draw on Disciples after them, blusheth not to
make a solemn prayer for the Soul, and that expressly and distinctly after it
is departed from the Body. For after his Eiaculatories, ending with, Lord Jesus
r^ceiue my Spirit; He puts these words of direction next under, Page 104.
see his first impression.
And these (to wit, the foregoing eiaculatorie Meditations and Prayers) to be
repeated, until the Soul be departed. Well: The Soul being now departed,
What then?

Then,

O Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the world, grant him thy peace.

With this Prayer.
O Lord with whom do live the Spirits of them that dye, and by whom the Soul^s
of thy Servants, after they be delivered from the burden of this Flesh, be in
perpetual joy and felicity: We most meekely beseech thee for this thy
Servant, that having now received the absolu^um from all his sins, which he
has committed in this world, he may escape the Gates of Hell, and the pains
of eternal darkness: That he may for ever dwell with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, in the Region of Light, and thy blessed Presence, where there is neither
weeping nor heaviness. And that when the dreadful day of the general
Judgment shall come, he may rise again with the Just, and receive this dead
Body, which must now be buried in the Earth, to be joined with his Soul, and
be made pure and incorruptible for ever after in thy glorious Kingdom, for the
merits of thy dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ, Amen.

Thus runs the Prayer for the Dead, word for word. But here the PRINTER steps
in, and setting forth a second Impression, he in an Epistle before the Book,
styled, The Printer to the Reader, Excuses the Author, and very courteously
takes all the blame upon himself. Which he is the bolder to do, because this
Book is Censured (as he t^rmeth) rather through false reports, and mistakings
in them, that either judge before they see, or out of disaffection make
sinister construction of that which deserves better understanding, and so good
intentions are wrested, and truth impeached. Note here the fruit of the
Authors Devotions, how soon they have blindly led him into Error, which he
desires may be excused by his good intentions; howsoever it goes, he meant no
harm good man. Which also the most ignorant Papist is able to plead for
himself. You must take his good meaning. Well: Let us hear out his Apology.
So has it befallen this Hand-full of Collections for private Devotions, which
was compiled out of sundry warranted Books, etc That Is something. But out of
what warranted Books could he collect or compile Prayer for the Dead? That, he
might expile from Popish warranted Book, as out of the Roman Missal, and the
like, wherewith the Author seems to be better acquainted, then with GODS
Book. So that I fear me some has taught the PRINTER here to equivocate a
little. But what follows? It was for the private use of an honorable
well-disposed Friend. He, or She? Protestant, or Papist? Or between both? Or
one, whom the Author by the virtue of this Book was about to convert to be a
Roman Catholic? yet being an honorable person, it deserves some pardon for
their honors sake: Nay rather it is the more censurable, that the author
should dare to attempt to seduce any honorable personage under the color of
his painted-popish Devotions. But what more? without any meaning to make the
same public to the world. This is one part of his good intentions. Published
it is, but it was not his meaning. How then? Though (to save the labor and
trouble of writing Copies, to be sparingly communicated to some few friends) a
certain number of them, by leave and warrant of the Ordinary, were printed at
the charge of the party, for whose only use the same was collected. Good.
Pity, but such a Book, with such devout prayers collected, should be copied
out, and rather then fail, for more expedition, to be printed; but to be
sparingly (O warily spoken) to some (and but some) and those but a few friends.
One of the best reasons you gave hitherto, to extenuate the fault: for the
fewer were printed, and the more sparingly, and to the more few communicated,
the better. But how comes it to be printed again and again, and so lauishly
communicated and dispersed every where? Is it not, but by leave and warrant of
the Ordinary? I assure you the author had extraordinary favor to get the
Ordinaries leave and warrant for such a Popish Book; for believe me, Orthodox
Books, and such as impugn Popery and Heresy, and propugne the established
Doctrine of the Church of England, cannot have the favor to obtain ordinary
leave and warrant to be printed, but upon (to speak mildely) extraordinary
terms. But go on. It has therefore seemed good to AVTHORITY to give leave
to the reprinting thereof, and permitting the same to be sold, to such as
please to buy it, only for private use, as in former times way has been
given to the printing of private Prayer-Bookes. Stay there, Me thinks, Mr
Printer, you begin to gather a great deal of confidence already. I pray you
(if I may be so bold) what authority is that, which you so boldly build upon,
and which you put in such Capital Characters, as if you would affright the
Reader withal. But good Subjects, and honest men obey, honor, reverence, love
Authority, are not terrified with it. It is for such Printers, that are so
ready to print Mountebanke Arminianisme, and cos^ning Popery, as you have done,
to be frighted with Authority; for it carries not the sword for naught. But if
thou do evil, fear. Did you never hear of one Tucker a printer in Queen
Elizabeth's reign, who, for printing a Book of Popish Devotion, was arraigned,
and though the Queens mercy saved his life, yet he was confined to perpetual
imprisonment? Yet you fear not, not only to print, and reprint, but to sell
your book to every buyer, and to some who exchange it also for all other
books, which a little before was thought fit only to communicate and but
sparingly to some few friends, being set forth at first only for the use of
the party, that bore the charge. But do you make no more difference between
this Popish book of private Devotions, and other private prayer books
formerly printed by Authority (and as good Authority, as you can bring any) in
this Church? I pray you how long have you been a Mr. Printer? But a Young one
I da^e say. Or how many such books have you printed by Authority? Not many I
am su^e of it, though too many by any. Surely it is but newly the change of the
Moon, si^ce such Books have cropen under the wing^ of Authority to fly
abroad. If you reckon but from seven years ago, there was then no such
Authority extant in this Church, that would appear to give allowance to such
base books as this of your printing. Therefore you see the case is altered.
But I trust, his Majesty, when he comes to understand how much his Authority,
transferred upon others, is dishonored, will take order for the suppressing of
such wicked books, which you are so ready to reprint. But all this while (for
I cannot but be jealous of the honor of mine Ordinary in this kind) I pray
you in what manner was the License given? Speak the truth: For I hear, that
you had only a loose Paper for your warrant, not affixed to the book, much
less (as the ordinary manner is) the Licencers hand to the book. So that, were
ye not deceived? Was it not some other book of private Devotion, mentioned or
meant in the Approbation? Or if this were meant, yet has not the Author added
or altered at his pleasure. For the loose paper, did it set down how many
sheets it contained? A loose Approbation it was. And I suspected that your
Authority was none of the best, or most authenticke, you do so brave it out in
your capital Characters. But yet forasmuch as you had no other Approbation of
this book, but only an Indiuiduum vagum written in a loose Paper; who (I pray
you) gave you Authority to set it so fast upon the book, with the whole
strength and weight of your Press? Do you know what you have done? you have
hereby affixed and impacted such an Aspersion of dishonor upon our Reverend
Dioc^san and Ordinary, as cannot be easily clawed off again. Therefore if you
had had such a reverend regard to the Ordinary, as you ought, you might both
have favored his honor, and saved your own stake, keeping the loose Paper by
you in your box, as your acquittance or discharge. But go on with your learned
Apology Mr Printer. Whereby it is presumed, all well disposed Christians may
receive satisfaction that there is not in it such cause of dislike, as it
seems has been rumored. But what if any, yea a great many receive not
satisfa^tion? Then it is to be supposed, they are not of the number of well
disposed. But is there not in your Book such cause of dislike, as it seems
has been rumored? Wh^? Is it purged from all that Popish dr^sse wherewith i^
so abounds? It is imagined no, because it has not yet felt the fire. Or is
it grown better now, or brighter, as Iron, with wearing? Or what I pray you is
done to the Book, that all well disposed Christians may receive satisfaction?
Now truly (I confess) till now my dull pate did not apprehend your far fetched
reason. But at last I perceive it is AVTHORITY you build upon for giving
satisfa^tion. I promise you it is a strong argument to convince the gain-sayer.
Therefore I pray you go on. And for the avoiding of all mistakings hereafter,
ca^e is had to amend such escapes, as either by the Printers haste, or the
Correctors oversight were committed. This clause joining close upon the former,
confirms me, that I have not mistaken your meaning in the point of
satisfaction by Authority. But if this your sentence had begun with [ For] as,
For, for the avoiding* etc. we should have expected some sp^ciall repu^gations
of your book, as reasons to induce all well disposed Christians to receive
satisfaction. But it is, And; which puts us out of hope of any reason, but
downright Authority, for satisfaction. Well, we must be feign to make the
best of it, and instead of expecting the correcting of your book, so backed
with Authority, begin to correct our own mistakings. What? was it rumored,
that among other exorbitances, this book contained prayer for the dead? Alas!
it was but a mistaking. On whose part? On the Printers; or on the Correctors;
or on the disaffected Readers: altogeth^r. But though disaffected Readers have
been mista^en, yet for the avoiding of all mistaking hereafter; To wit, that
the old l^aues may yet be had for money.
care is had. That Is well. I pray you good Mr Printer have a special care,
that simple meaning m^n may not be mista^en hereafter. But what means or care
will you use, for this prevention? Care is had to amend such escapes, as either
by the Printers have, or the Correctors oversight were committed. Well. I see
yet you are so i^genuous (though your m^desty ^^usheth to speak all you know)
as to acknowledge your self and your Corrector (if it be your self that
speaks all this while) to be in some fault. Although it were but an Escape, or
so, and that committed either by the Printers haste, or the Correctors
oversight. It is well yet, that it proves not all this while some escape
committed by the oversight of the Collector, unless you have here misprinted
(being full perhaps of perplexed thoughts) howsoever you set a good face on it)
Corrector, for Collector. But for your part Mr Printer, what needed such haste?
There was no fear, least the Wardens coming to search, should take your
Canonical hours n^pping; for you had at least leave and warrant from the
Ordinary, for your first edition, though not as yet Authority in Capital
letters, whereby this your second correction was set forth. Nor were you
printing then Burtons second part against Mountagu^, or the like, that you
should be in such haste. Or what haste was ther^ of that Book? It might well
have been spared hitherto, for ought I know. As though the Jesuits seduce not
fast enough without it? But of all things, good Master Printer, beware of
haste. Did you never learn so much in your Latin School (for I am sure you
have learned to speak unhappy English) Canis sestinans caecos parit eatul^s.
And desire your Corrector to beware of oversight; for I have known that
between the Printers haste, and the Correctors oversight, soul escapes have
been committed: as in the great Bible (and I beshrow them for committing the
least escape in that blessed Book, one tittle whereof shall not pass away,
nor escape unfulfilled) Judas, was printed for Jesus. But I easily believe,
that was in good earnest either the haste of the Composer, or the oversight
also of the Corrector, without any circumstances, or circumlocution. Well, an
escape or oversight acknowledged, and corrected, and withal a care had to
prevent the like for afterward, makes a full amends for all. Well: for the
care you promise, we must take your word. Yet forasmuch as you seem here to
speak in your own defense, that all the rumors about your printed Book was
but upon some escapes of the Printer, or oversight of the Corrector: you must
give us leave a little to examine the truth hereof, by comparing your first and
second Impressions. Now reading over diligently both the Books, I find no
difference at all between them, but only about Prayer for the Dead, which we
last touched. And there we cannot come to discern your escapes better, then by
setting down so much of both the Copies one against the other, as is requisite
at least for the more full satisfaction of all well disposed Christians.

The first Impression.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And these to be repeated until the soul be
departed.

Then,

O thou Lamb of God, etc.

The second Impression.
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. And these (with the prayers following) to be
repeated, until the soul be departed.

O thou Lamb of God, etc.

Here we observe a huge difference between your Impressions. And is this but
an Escape, or oversight? Certainly it is a very monstrous one, and such as a
man in his right wits could not easily commit, unless in some sit either of
drunkenness or madness. But I spare you. Let us compare the rest.

With this Prayer.
O Lord with whom do live the Spirits of them that dye, etc.

O Lord with whom d^e live the Spirits of them that dye, etc.

And a little after toward the end.
And that when the dreadful day of the general Judgment shall come, he may
rise again with the just, and receive THIS DEAD BODY, which must now be buried
in the earth to be joined with his soul, and ^e made pure and incorruptible
for ever after in thy glorious Kingdom, etc.

And that when the dread-day of the general judgment shall come, he may rise
again with the just, his body being reunited to his soul, pure and
incorruptible, and be received into thy g^orious Kingdom, etc.

Now Mr. Printer, I will not alone take upon me to judge of these your escapes;
but rather I refer you to the whole Bench of the most judicious and learned,
yea and those grave and honorable Sages of the Councell-board. Only this I
dare say peremptorily, that in the first impression there is an express and
formal prayer for the Dead: but in the second it is qualified and corrected,
and the case quite altered. And yet is all this but an escape of the Printer,
or oversight of the Corrector; But was not the Author himself the Corrector?
was not his natural affection earnestly busied in licking his young Beer
while it past the Press, and received the perfect form. Or being an escape of
the Printer, how came not the Author himself, or some of those his near and
dear friends for him, first to espy the faults, and so to have them corrected,
before they came to be found out by others? For surely he and his had reason
first to read over that private first impression, before it should come to open
view; it being a book not of an ordinary stamp, and which for the admirable
ouerdaring of it, was like to run a most desperate hazard. But it seems
they would put it to a hazard. They imagined, that happily it might pass
unespied; and then all would have been well enough, and you might have spared
your labor of printing your Epistle Apologeticall before the second Impression.

But yet, Mr. Printer, you should have done well (which would the more have
cleared the credit of your excuse, taking all the blame from the Author) to
have cancelled all that Paper, beginning, O Lord with whom do live, etc. Unto
these words, We most meekely etc. Putting all those first six lines among your
Errata, See the Communion book, at the Burial of the Dead.
or Escapes. For so much is a part of a gratulatory Collect used in the
Communion Book at the Burial of the dead. So that unless this prayer stand
still in force for a prayer for the Dead, as it was in the first Impression: it
is very improper for your second and corrected Book. For even your own
reason, Mr. Printer, may induce you to think, that it is improper to use a
Collect for a man's burial, for him that is yet alive, unless you would bury
the man quick. And therefore me thinks you were very ill advised, and seem
to have for have committed another foul escape, in that you did not thoroughly
advise with your Author about a more exact correction of your escapes, that so
the book, upon second and more mature cogitations, might have passed current,
above all exception, to the better satisfaction of all well disposed
Christians. But did you consult with your Author, before you set upon your
correction? It may be feared noe. Otherwise it is hoped that the Author and his
learned friends would have thought better of the matter, then to have suffered
such an absurdity to stand still in the Book, and that upon a solemn
correction. And therefore, what if they come upon you, and disauoning it
themselves, lay a further blame upon you, then hitherto you have taken to your
self? For besides, that such an improprietie brings their judgment in
question, they may seem to take upon them to be Innouators, turning the
Collects, which the Church of England has appointed for the public burial of
the dead, to the private visitation of the living sick. So that, Mr. Printer,
for all your Apologies and Protestations, it is to be feared, that your Author
will disclaim this your correction, as not done by his direction, but of your
own head, it being left so full of Non sens^s and Non sequiturs. And what if
he shall call in this your corrected Book, and either put out those six lines,
or else bring his Authority for the first to stand in full force, and then all
will hold a due ^immetry and proportion? It will then be the more tolerable to
borrow a piece of the Church Collect, being a thanksgiving at the burial of
the Dead, and turn it into a prayer (private at least) for the dead, then to
use it for the living. But how it was shuffled up among you, you can best tell.

But tell me in good sadness, Mr. Printer, are you persuaded, that any man but
of common sense gives any credit to your Epistle? Or do you think your self
ever a whit the wittier, or learneder, that like a Parrot you have powered it
out, being infused into you: But Dignum patella Operculum. Will any, trow you,
take these gross alterations, and cobled breaks, for Escapes of the Printer?
Never so befoole your self.

Notwithstanding one thing remains unaltered: that in the same prayer he
places the souls of Abraham, Jsaac, and Jacob, in a certain place, which he
calls, the region of light, but at the resurrection he allows them Gods
glorious Kingdom. This Region of light, in his prayer for the dead unaltered:
may well be taken for some Limbus patrum, different from Gods glorious
Kingdom, in the resurrection; And Limbus, and prayer for the Dead will well
sort together.

But to return to the rest of your Epistle, I pray you go on where we left.
You see what a trouble your Escapes have put us too. The words of the Printers
Epistle.
Only the Collector hereof, and others that were therewith acquainted before
the printing of the Book. Stay a little I pray you; for my memory is bad, if
your period be long: who were those, that were acquainted with the book before
the printing of it? Were they Jesuits, or of what profession were they? But I
will not press you too far, least I loose my labor. Only go on with your
sentence ( The Prin^^r goes on.
who are as ready to engage their credits and lives in defense of the faith of
the present Church of England, by Law established, and in opposition of Popery,
and Romish superstition, as any others) do with grief observe the
maleuolencie of some dispositions of these times* with whom a slip, or
misprision of a word, or two, as liable to a fair and charitable
understanding, as otherwise, does not only loose the thanks, due for all the
good contained in the work: but also purchase to the Author a reproachful
imputation and way-making to Popish Devotion, and apish imitation of Romish
superstition. Nay I pray you Mr. Printer, continue out your speech to the end.
And howsoever he may be requited for his pains herein, he shall never depart
from his good intention and wishing, that the reader may at all times, and for
all occasions be assisted with divine grace, obtained by continual prayer. And
for the misdeeming Censures and detractions of any, he fears them not, but
rather hops, that his prayers to God for them will be more beneficial to them,
then any their Censures or detractions can be any way prejudicial to him: who
does in this and all things else humbly submit himself to the judgment of the
Church of England, whereof he is a member, and though inferior unto most, yet
a faithful Minister. Have you said all Mr. Printer? Now surely I cannot but
smile, to see how pretily and smoothly you can plough with another he yfer,
what an infinite disproportion there is between your style, and your person,
and yet both you and your leare-father are strongly conceited, that you are
able to cosen all the world, by making them believe that you are the man that
framed this Apologeticall Epistle. Alas, you do but dance in a net all this
while. Do not you think I smelled your cunning conueyance till now? Or do you
think the world is so simple as to praise or applawd you for the Author of
this your pretty witty Epistle? And now by the Epistle it self will I convince
it to be a very pack of knavery. And to put you out of conceit, that you are
the Author of this Epistle, Mr. Printer, I will go no farther, then the last
words of it. Dare you be so bold with the Author (who is no small man, and
hopes yet to be greater, at least for his good service in this book) as to say
he is inferior to most? I know this never came out of your lips, though it
went through your press* Ex vngue leonem. This could not come but from the
modesty of the Author himself, or from some friend to help^ out at a dead lift.
But be it his* or yours, or whose i^ will be, I will be bold to go over the rest,
where I l^^t.

You say, your Authors are as ready to engage their credits and lives, in
defense of the faith of the present Church of England, by law established, and
in opposition of Popery, and Romish superstition, as any others. Hoe there.
Here Master Printer, I must tell you, you take a greater engagement upon you,
then your credit will be taken for. If they should openly by word, as here you
have set down in print, engage themselves in this point, even the principals
if they, should have as little credit given them, as the surety, they may blame
themselves. Verba quid audio, cum facta videam? Let this book speak for them,
whence a Jesuit may conclude far stronger arguments to assure the Church of
Rome of these her sons: Then the Authors themselves with all their powerful
eloquence can ^uer persuade us, that they are the true br^d sonn^^ of the
Church of England. The Jesuits have the A^^^ors book to show a proo^e upon
Record, but we have nothing to show, but a poor Epistle, and that written in
the Printers name. And how shall they ever ingagage their credits and lives in
defense of the faith of the present Church of England, by law established (a
clause of some weight, had we any better authority for it, then the single
assertion of a Printer) who have been both so For, (...) fundo parsim^ niapunc;
prodigal of their Credit, aduen^urous of their lives (if the laws
established be of any force) and all to win countenance and credit to the holy
Catholic Church of Rome? and who will believe that they will oppose Popery,
that labor to advance it, and to suppress the truth of the Gospel, by law
established in the present Church of England? Or how shall they oppose Romish
superstition, that tooth and nail would hail it in by head and shoulders, in
a most superstitious form of Romish devotion?

But you proceed, and say, They do with grief observe the maleuolency of some
dispositions of these times; with whom a slip, or misprision of a word or two,
as liable to a fair, and charitable understanding* as otherwise, does not
only loose the thanks due for all the good contained in the work, but also
purchase to the author a reproachful imputation of way* making to Popish
Devotion, and apish imitation of Romish superstition.

O good God. What a pack of hypocrisy, and senseless absurdities, and
shameless impudency is here; All their damnable foysting in of popery, and
that no less then infidel prayer for the dead, must be excused (for sooth)
and all the blame laid upon the maleuolency of some dispositions of these
times. And who are those, and why maleuolent? surely those, that espying the
craft of Iesuited spirits in these our days in broching gross and palpable
Popery, dare oppose themselves, and cry out against such bold attempts. These
be the men of a maleuolent disposition in these times, and all because these
times do breed such Iesuited spirits. And therefore no marvel if the author
of this book cannot but grieve, that his Popish book cannot find a general
approbation. But they are maleuolent, as with whom a slip, or misprision of a
word or two, etc. But a word or two, at the most, misprinted, or misplaced, the
matter of all this maleuolency. Nay, but a slip, or misprision of a word, or
two. Why, we know that in Coin, he that is the author of a slip, and would
vent it for the Kings Current Coin, is guilty of treason. Now much more a
slip, or false doctrine foysted in for Gods Current silver? such a slip once
broched is an error: but stiffly maintained, it becomes an heresy. And is not
this such a slip here? A most wicked Popish doctrine was published by the
Author, or Authors, in print; namely Prayer for the Dead, against the Faith and
Doctrine of the Church of England: and yet the Authors will not acknowledge it
an error, but put it upon the Printer. But the thing it self cries shame upon
the authors of such iuggling tricks. And if there had not been some maleuolent
dispositions in the world, to quarrel such impious affronts given to Christ
and his blessed truth maintained in the Church of England, there had not been
so much as one word amiss, being all so exactly waighed in the Goldsmiths
balance, before it came to be minted for current; then, prayer for the dead
would have passed for a doctrine of the Church of England. But maleuolent
dispositions have troubled and marred all.

But it was nothing but the misprision of a word or two, a^ liable to a fai^e
and lawful understanding, as otherwise. Indeed if so, such dispositions cannot
be excused from maleuolency, if they judge not chari^ably, where there is no
cause to the contrary. Ever take a man's meaning rather with the right hand,
then with the left, if it be capable of a good instruction. But ^ere, the
quarrel is not about the slip of a word* but of a positive false doctrine. The
question is, whether prayer for the dead may not be taken as well in a good
sense, as in a bad, Charity being judge. Yes, if blind and popish Charity may
be judge. Nor is it a word or two, but a whole solemn prayer, of many words
and sentences, wherein the state of the dead is devoutly prayed for, and that
in express words: After the soul is departed, Then* O LAMB OF GOD, etc. and,
That he may receive this body. How are these things as liable to a fair and
charitable understanding, as otherwise? Unless it be a charitable work, to
pray for our dear brother, after his soul is departed from the body, that in
his passage between earth and heaven, which is a far journey, he may not
miss or mistake his way, by falling into the Pit of Hell or Purgatory? Or what
fair and charitable understanding are these words liable to, when after our
dead brother has received a formal absolution from all his sins, which he
has committed in this life, yet he has need to be prayed for* that he may
escape the gates of Hell and the pains of eternal darkness? What other
construction can be made of ^hese words (if Charity her self were the judge)
but that, according to the doctrine of that Church which ^olds Purgatory after
this life, and after absolution from a man's sins (which Church our Author all
along this book of Devotions, graceth with the name of the one and only Holy
Catholic Church, the Mother of us all, etc*) the soul being in danger to go
into purgatory for all his Absolution, shadowed here out by the For the
Pontificians say that Purgatory is in the suburbs of Hell, and that must needs
be close to the gates of Hell, and that the pains of Purgatory are, for the
time, no whit inferior to the pains of eternal darkness. Nor let any man
think, the Author would be so gross to name Purgatory here in plain terms,
no more then he does Limbus Patrum, when he says the Region of ^ight* disti^ct
from Gods glorious kingdom.
Gates of hell, and the pains of eternal darkness, close unto which (as it
seems) the soul passing, may be in danger to fall therein: Therefore the
Author devoutly prays, that in his pa^^age to heaven he may escape the gates
of hell and the pains of eternal darkness.

Nor need the Authors impute it to a maleuolent disposition, to expound the
gates of Hell, and the pains of eternal darkness, of Purgatory* especially
of finding them wrapped up mistically in an express prayer for the dead. But
if the Author, or any of his consorts can make a more ^haritable understanding
of this prayer for the dead* we will give them a charitable hearing.

But being understood in the worst sense, it does (say you) not only loose the
thanks due for all the good contained in the work: but etc. That were great
pity, that so much good, as is contained in this work, should be all lost, by
loosing the due thanks, and all by the mistaking of a word or two, let fall
too, but by a slip, or misprision. But for all that, let not the Pretense or
good opinion of the good contained in this work so far charm our affection
to it, as thereby to be drawn to take down withal the poison contained
therein, as in a mingled golden Cup. It is Scaligers note, that Malum non* est,
nis^^ bo^o. The original nature of the Devil is good* wherein all his
wickedness subsisteth. But is every book to be inrertained for the much good
(though the Printer say, All the good; as if it were all good, except the slip
or misprision of a word or two, as liable (notwithstanding) to a fair and
charitable understanding, as otherwise) contained in it? Why? The Roman
Missall, or Ma^le*booke has much good contained in it; in so much, as when a
motion was made to the Pope to have it translated into the Mother tongue, for
all countries, he answered, Not so, least the ^lies (to wit, the common people)
should come to taste of the good ointment. Yea the Turks Alcaron has much
good contained in it. Are these books therefore to be approu^d in the true
Church of God? When one highly commended the Cardinal Julian to Sigismund, he
answered, T^^en Rom^nus est* And though the Authors predicate never so much
good to be contained in this book of private Devotions, yet we may answer
Tamen Romanus est. It is a Romish book for all that. And let me tell you, Mr.
Printer, and so tell your Author, that the more he commends all the good
contained in this work, the more pernicious and perilous he makes it to our
simpler people. Satan is never more dangerous* then when he comes transformed
into an Angel of ^ig^t. And that poison proves the most speedingly mortal,
that is administered in a cup of the best wine, which being of a more
penetrating and searching nature, then other duller liquor, conueyes the poison
into every vain of the body, spurring the spirits post to their final period?
A book of Devotion is a golden cup of sprightfull wine, pleasant to every
palate; but if it be mingled with poison, it is the more dang^rous, especially
to vulgar palates, who want the quick and acute judgment o^ ^ast and relish,
to discern it primoribus labris, at the first touch, taste, or sent, which, as
the best and safest antidote may prevent the taking of it down. And so the
case stands with this work, Mr. Printer, that the better it is, the worse it
is; ^ith under the color o^ venerable Devotion, that execrable strumpet of
Rome (vai^ed and ho^ded under the name of The Church, The Church, The Holy
Catholic Church, the Mother of us all; which is the maine sum and scope of
the Authors Devotion) is obtruded and thrust upon us, to inchant and charm
even those* who should be most vigilant and most oculated A^gusses among us.

But besides the good, los^: it does also (say you) purhcase to ^he (...) nor a
reproachful imputati^^ of way m^ki^g to Popish Devotion, and apish imitation
of Romish superstition. If the Author has purchas^d to himself such an
Imputation, it is all at ^is own cost; he has paid or it, and who shall deny
it to be due unto him, as his peculiar chattell? Yea he has bought it at a
dear rate no doubt, much sweat, much oil has been spent in this laborious
Collection of private Devotions. Such a work as this may be a rich price for
such a purchase. But Mr. Printer, are you sure the Author accounts it a
reproachful imputation to be a way-maker to Popish Devotion? Is not that your
bare imagination, as perhaps not discerning the Serpent lurking under the
green leaves of Devotion, or perhaps having some spark of love to your Mother
Church left, as to judge your Author in t^is case, by your self, if it were
your own? Nay, does not your Author account it an honor to him, to be a
devout instrument among others, to bring in again, and re-e^ect the Religion of
Rome in England? Only, it may be, two or three words do not well relish with
him: to wit, Popish, Apish, Romish superstition, and perhaps imitation too. All
these put together, in this form, the Author may account it a reproachful
imputation, as to be a way maker to Popish Devotion, and Apish imitation of
Romish superstition. But let Popish, be turned into Catholic; and, apish
imitation, into absolute refoundation; and Romish superstition, into, Religion
of the sea Apostolic: Then set the sentence in more handsome terms, thus
and for a reproachful imputation, will he not trow you account it, an
honorable commendation of way-making to Catholic Devotion, and an absolute
refoundation of the Religion of the Apost^licke see?

You go on: And howsoever he may be requited for his pains herein, he shall
never depart from his good intention of wishing* that the Reader may at all
times, and for all occasions be assisted with divine grace, obtained by
continual prayer. It seems you are very intimously privy to your Authors
good intentions, and no less solicitous of his rich requital for his pains
herein. And pity but he should be requi^ed to the full, as he has deserved:
and if not in this world, he may look for it in the world to come. But has he
but a good intention of wishing? etc. But this good intention (it seems) bath
relation to his work, wherein his intention was good to occasion unto the
reader at all times, and for all occasions assistance of Divine grace, obtained
by continual prayer; namely by continual prayer out of this book of private
Devotions, in observing his 7. Canonical hours. Never will he depart from
th^s his good intention of well-wishing.

And as for the misdeeming censures, and detractions of any (say you) he
fears them not, but rather hops that his prayers to God for them will be
more beneficial to them, then any their censures or detractions can be
prejudicial to him. He that durst publish such a popish book as this, was
armed before hand from top to toe, not to fear any man's censure or detraction;
when not even the armed laws of the Land could deter him from aduenturing
upon such a bold attempt, as to go about to bring England back again to
Popery. But yet he hops that his prayers to God for his Censures will be more
beneficial to them, then any their Censures or detractions can be prejudicial
to him. You know, that the Fox, the more he is cursed, the more he thri^eth.
Their Censures and detractions cannot prejudice the Authors rising higher and
higher to preferments, for his good demerits to the Church. But yet he hops
his prayers will be beneficial to his Censurers. No doubt, but the Author has
learned the Art of Devotion to a hair. But what prayers has he in that kind?
He must not pray of his own head, but what the Church puts in his mouth. And
surely I find but one praye^ in all his book, (except the repetition of it in
sundry Letanies, a prayer borrowed from the Church too, and not from his own
bowels) for such as he calls his censurers and detracters; as, That it may
please thee* to forgive our enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and to turn
their hearts. But s^ing his hope of doing t^em good by his p^ay^rs, stands
rather upon comparatiue; then positive terms (for he rather hopes good to
them by his prayers, then fears evil from them by their Censures) therefore
we leave his prayers, as doubtful of their success; it being rather to be
hoped for by his Censurers, that his prayers shall do them as little harm, as
good. In the mean time let him look, that he wrong not his Censurers, in
miscalling their Censures, Misdeeming Censures.

For Conclusion, He does in this, and in all things else, humbly submit
himself to the judgment of the Church of England, whereof he is a member, and
though inferior unto most, yet a faithful Minis^er. I like your conclusion
well yet, that your Author does in this, and in all things else humbly submit
himself to the Church of England^ But I hope that he does not mean, that the
Church of England is pend up in a corner, or engrossed by Monopoly to this or
that man, or that any one man has a Papal definitive voice, to determine the
doctrines of the Church of England* for I remember your former apology. That he
will defend the faith of the present Church of England by law established (...)
oppose Popery, and Romish superstition. Well; I hope then, that the Church of
England, whose body representative is now happily assembled ^n Parliament, (I
mean, not only the representative body Ecclesias^i^k, but civil, both
together jointly representing the Church of England) will take such order with
this book of Deuo^ion, as he shall have no just occasion to complain he and
his book are unjustly dealt withal censured, or judged: but that he will be
as good as his word, in humbly submitting himselfe^ Only two things I heartily
pray for, as fruits and effects of his humble submision: that he may henceforth
approve himself a better member of the Church of England; and a more faithful
Minister: and that he may strive as much to excel others in the best
indowments, as he is not inferior to most in temporal preferments. Which that
he may be, and do, a more ingenuous and humble confession is requisite, then
is made under your name, of a slip or misprision of a word, or two.

Now to conclude all in a word with his own Conclusion, page 417. The
blessing: there he is not content with the peace of God, etc. The blessing of
God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: but he adds, the
virtue of Christ's blessed Cross, etc. This form of Blessing he has no where
learned out of the Communion book. The virtue of Christ's blessed Cross is of
his own addition. But the Cross ^u^ts well with his Devotion. He both begins,
and ends it with a Cross. And seeing you, Mr. Printer, have so well
appologised for your Author, there is one Cross for you, and another for him,
whereon you may crucify (at least) your sl^p and misprision. But pray rather,
that laying aside all disimulation, and daubing over of your rotten book; and
that dealing ingenuously with God and Man, in the humble confession of your
gross faults, and true repentance of the same, you may find that Mercy of God,
which follows upon all true belieuers through the only sovereign virtue of
Christ Crucified.

Now the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the Communion
of the Holy Ghost, be with all them that love the Truth in sincerity.

Amen.
FINIS.

