A brefe exhortation set fourth by the unprofitable servant of Jesus christ,
Paul Bushe, late bishop of Brystowe, to one Margarete Burges wife to Ihon
Burges, clotheare of kyngeswode in the County of Wilshere.

printer's device of John Cawood, a compartment with Royal Arms at top,
supported by a horned male figure and a female figure; at the bottom a crowned
figure holding a cross over a lion and a lamb (not in McKerrow)

An exhortation.
DEarly beloved sister in Christ, at our late being together in our very
worshyppeful friends house in the county of Gloucester, at a supper meal, with
diverse other of worthy reputation (which was the first and last time that
ever I saw you or spoke with you) And that time and there by occasyon as we
sat at the table (if you call to your memory) we entrede into a little talk,
and afterward continued the same standing at a wyndow, which talk albeit it
was but breife and short, yet the same (as our lord knows) was more than
Enough to declare to me, not only your high pretended knowledge, but also your
much ignorance which I do not a little in my heart lament, for I perceive you
have to little knowledge and to much ignorance. For in very deed, for lack of
the virtue of mekenes, and the spyryte of truth, (which teaches al goodness)
it appears that blind ignorance, permyxte with arrogancye, has greatly
overwhelmed your senses, much like as the obfusked and dark clouds of the
fyrmament, do many times shadow and obtenebrate the radiaunt and clear
shynyng beams of the son. And this comes (if you advise your self well)
thorough the wicked art and craft of (...) enemy the devil, which goes
always about to shadow the truth of gods most holy word, and the true
understanding of the same, namelye from them which have professed the
Catholyke faith, to bring them into the dangerous whyrlepoole of wicked
ignorance, yea and many times he plays with them, much like as does the
miller with his horse yt draweeth his mill: for when he has made his horse
blind that he can not se nor perceive his way by the means of a vysarde of
leather that he covers his face with all, than he makes him continuallye all
day long, to go round about keeping one trade, as though he went fourth
right the strayte way. And at euenyng when he comes to his stable, than he
shall have for his prauendere, the worste of his labor, that is a quantytye of
course branne, or a boolle full of drowsye draffe, Such is his reward for his
blind travel. And even thus fares the devil with the weak and feeble
chrystyans, for when he goes about to gryende the word of god in his
deuylleshe mylle of scismaticall and heretycall Doctrine, than because the
weak and feeble chrystians, should not perceive the fine meal of gods word,
from the roughe and gross branne of wicked doctrine, he goes and makes them
blind with the (...) mauncye, and stout^ (...) ^the them, with great arrogance
and with much pride, to maintain there evil conceived opinions, making them
to believe that they be in the right strayghte way. And so in conclusyon he
brings them to his filthy and stynkynge stable, there perpetuallye to be
fed with the roughe and course prauender of everlasting pain and torment,
Mat. xxii.
where shall be weapyng and gnasshyng of teath. This is the reward that he
prepares for the arrogaunte ignorauntes, which will and do defend their
wicked and damnable opinions with their rash temeryte, and will not be
instructed to follow and believe the doctrynes, decrees, and determinations,
which the universal church of Christ through out the whole world, does
confess and acknowledge. And therefore such arrogaunt ignorance in a
christian man ought much to be reproved and dispraysed, namely when he shall
so greatly err, that he thinks him self learned and to know much, when in
very deed he is nether learned nor knows any thing at al, and yet stoughtly
and arrogantlie many times such persons will not stycke with much impudence,
to approve and verefye that thing which is false, and utterly and craftelye
renege and deny (with tothe and nail as ye proverb says) that thing which
is most true

This is not only a great (...) and a wicked error in a chrystyan man, but
also it is such a pernicious and a dampnable sin in the syghte and presence
of GOD, that it requires no less than everlasting pain and ponishment. And
therefore such arrogante ignorance ought much to be feared and eschewed,
which proceeds of a ka^kered malice, toward God and his truth, and is the
specyalle cause, of man's great blyndenes, that he cannotte conceive the true
sense and meaning, of Gods most holy word. And this the wise man approves in
the second Chapter of his book, Sap. 2.
where he says. The ungodly goo astray, and their own malice has blinded
them. And the worthy ancient doctoure Chrysostom says also, Omel. xli opera
imperiorum
that ignorance of the knoledge of truth, can be no excuse of condempnatyon,
namelye when a man by occasion, may receive and find knowledge if he had good
and toward mind to learn. And also the noble doctor, and pyller of Christ's
church, Sc. lxxviii De. Ver. Domi
Saint Augustyne says likewise, that a wicked man hatethe the true
understanding, and sometime again of a peruerte mind he fearethe to know or
understand, because he will not be constrained afterward, to do and follow yt
thing which he knows. Of such Dauyd in his Psalmeste does prono^^ke and
say. Psa. xxxv
The wicked (...) not be instructed, that he might do good. And this ignorance
(as I said before) proceeds of an arrogant malice, and of a special contempt
to be taught or learned the true catholyke doctrine. For when they be once
noeffled in error they be loath to be pluck from there own wicked conceived
opinions, to know God and his infallible truth, which is the very light and
salvation of there souls, their arrogant pride to maintain their own blind
ignorance is so great And therefore most loving sister (to be short) I
exhort you in the bowels of our lord Jesus Christ, utterly to repel from you
that wicked maystres and mayntayner of all pernicious doctrine (I mean your
arrogancye) which so much puffethe up your ignoraunte mind, that it makes
you believe that you are fully instruct and perfectlye learned, with the readyng
of your English Pamflettes, and yet she greatly deceaueth you, as I trust
hereafter you will no less confess and acknowledge. For I assure you, if you
have not the virtue of mekenes to unclasp the book of gods word unto you, and
in the readyng of the same, the holy ghost to be your teacher, your labor and
study shall be always frustrate and in vain, and your knowledge, no knowledge
at al. The worthy Prophet King Dauyd, albeit he was high inspyred (by
instincte divine) with the holly spirit of truth and also the gift of
mekenes, yet he desysted not (with the same spyryte and gift) continually to
pray to almightye GOD (as one not satysfyed) yt he might have from time to
time a more deper and a more perfect understanding and knowledge of him and of
his most holy word. And among other of his deuyne oracles, thus he prayed
and said. Psa. cxiii
O Lord give me understanding, and I shall diligently seek out thy law, yea
and I shall keep it with my whole heart. Let my supplycatyon O Lord, come
before thy presence, and give me understanding according unto thy word. And
again, O Lord teach me goodness, disciplyne, and knowledge, for I went
wrong, and therefore now I have kept thy word. These words (O Lord give me
understanding) so often in culcat and so many times iterate, do no less then
evidently declare this holy Prophets humble heart, and earnest desire and
meaning, how glad he was to be taught, how desirous he was to learn, and how
wyllyng he was to have understanding, and not to stand in ye defense of his
own judgment, as the sturdy and blind ignorauntes do. And therefore this
wholesome lesson (loving Sister in Christ) I would wyshe you to learn of this
most godly Prophet, and with a steadfast heart and a faythefull mind to
embrace the same. And than no doubt you shall be well assured, God will pour
into you (as he did into him out of his plentiful treasures) the true
understanding of his most holly word, even as our hollye mother the Church
techeth and believes. For his dyuyne word may not be taken, nether yet
expounded after the rasshe fantastycall minds of the blind and ignoraunte, but
after the true and sincere meaning of the holy Apostles, blessed martirs, and
worthy fathers and rulers of Christ's most catholyke Church, from whom and
by whom the chrystian congregation, has always been ruled and governed, ever
sythen the death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ. And therefore let no
other doctrine then theirs led you, trade you or instruct you in the truth of
gods most lively word, for if you be otherwise scoled, or if you stand to
your own judgment, or if you be wedded to your own erroneous opynions,
then will the spirit of truethe flee far from you, and leave you alone to
your self, as barren as the wythered fygge tree. Mat. xxi.
Now to come to the matter which I entend (thoroughe gods might) to wryght
to you of. As far as I do remember, the little talk which we entered into,
and not fynished by reasone of your departure, send for by the worshypfull Lad
ye of the house, and your other neighbors and friends which you came in
company with all) was this, that the blessed body of our Savior Jesus
Christ, cannot be presentlye here in earth, and also in heaven at one time and
together. O little faith, If this your saying should be true (as it is plain
false) than in vain were our chrystyan religyon. But you shall clearly be
put out of doubt, and plainly understand, that our fyrme faith and believe is
grounded, founded and rered upon the head corner stone, elect, and precious,
that is upon Christ him self, in whose mouth was never fraud ne guyle fou^^^
And he that beleuethe in him (says Saint Peter) shall not be confounded.
Therefore unto the^ which believe he is precius but to the^ which believe not he
is a stone to stomble at, and a rock to offend them that sto^ble at the word,
and beleaue not that, where on they were set. And therefore now seeing that
christ our Savior is the truth, Iho^. xiiii
and also the auctour of all truth, as he says him self, I am the way, the
truth and the life, who than dare be so bold to denaye that thing which he
affyrmeth and approves. For he him self said at his most godly maundye (in
the presence of al his disciples) (...) his blessed Body was ^^^d there really
present (...) ^e fourmes of bread and wine. And this the holy Euangelyst
Saint Matthew in his Gospel, declarethe in words euydent and plain, Ma. xx.
where he thus says. As they were eating, Jesus took bread and when he had
given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to his disciples and said. Take eat,
this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave
it to them saying. Drink you al of this, for this is my blood of the new
testamente, that shall be shed for many for the remission of sins. Now
here have you hard, how plainly our savior Christ him self, affyrmeth that
his most holy and blessed bodi both flesh and blud was really, corporally
naturally and substancially present at this worthy maundy under the accedental
fourms of bred and wine. And as this holy euangelyste, has here most truly
declared, the manner and form of this godly institution and ordinance, even
so and no less do al ye other three evangelists and also the blessed Apostle
Saint Paul, whose sayings at this time I do here omyt, because I trust in
God, this fruitful declaratyon shall be sufficient unto you, if that you will
with a steadfast faith, open your heart and faithfully receive and follow the
same. And although christ alsoso be in heaven, and syttethe at the right hand
of God the (...) yet whosoever shall eat (...) bread in the supper of our
lord, according to Christ's institution and ordinance is assured by christ's
promis and testament, that he receives Christ's very body, which suffered for
us upon the cross. And likewise he that drynketh of that holy cup in that
supper of our Lord (according to christ's institutyon) is certified by
Christ's legation and testament, that he drynketh the blood of Christ which
was shed for us. So that no man can contempne or lyghtlye esteem this most
holy and blessed communion, except he contempne also christ's blessed body and
blood. And because it should not be thought, but that this most godly
instytution and ordinances, should always hereafter be put in ure, and to have
a perpetual contynuaunce in Christ's church to all forces, purposes, and
effects, like as Christ him self did leave it, and set it fourth unto us, at
his most blessed maundy, he went farther with us, and gave us a commandment
and said. Luc. xxii
This do, in remembrance of me. Now what was Christ's mening by these two
words this do, but that we must promptlye, fyrmely, and faythfullye follow
his example and doing. That is, Take bread, give thanks break it, say these
words, This is my bo^^ And than eating the same ^^^ate his very blessed body.
^^^kinge the cup and doing ye like, we drink his most precious blood. Here it
has been showed now, what is understand by these two words This do. Now to
fynyshe up the whole sentence and saying of the Evangelist Luke if we
faithfully (this do) than it shall follow that we must needs of very duetye,
and of a very co^gruence call to our remembrance not only this infinite
benefit and most loving deed of our Sauyoure, leaving here in earth with us
to our great comfort, this most precious treasour (I mean his most
blessed body flesh and blood) but also by the often receuyng of the same, we
shall daily hourly, and timely, call to our remembrance likewise, his mo^^
paynefull death and passion which he suffered for us most miserable
offenders, to bring us to the fruition of his everlasting glory. Now here have
you hard also this whole text truly declared.

This do in remembrance of me. I think verelye there is no person that will be
so bold (lokyng a christen man in the face with open eyes) to say or affirm
the contrary, saying that all the four Evangelists, and also the blessed
Appostle Sayncte Paul (declarynge the true and plain form and manner of this
godly institution and ordinance) do ground them selves upon the ^^^lyble
truth, that is upon (...) and upon his own words, sayings, and doings.
And therefore I trust louinge Sister, that these plain assercions and manifest
probatio^s are sufficient for you at this time, to verefie and prove that
Christ's blessed body flesh and blood, is contained reallye, naturallye,
corporally, and substantiallye, here in earth with us and among us, under the
forms of bread and wine. Peace, even now me think I here you and such other
(as it were behind a cloth) whisperynge one in a nothers ear, saying: What he
speaks al to gether against the whole course of nature, to say that bread
and wine is changed into flesh and blood, as I^ well it is a whote suppe
th^^ you will let fall, but I am glad that you have taken up this matter, for I
trust (the circumstaunce well considered in the resoluynge thereof) not only
your much infidelity, but also your great ignorance will a great deal the
better apere, for your instruction and amendme^t. I pray you, what though it be
against nature to change bread and wine, in to flesh and blood, shall not
the word of Christ be of that powere, to change and to alter the kinds of
the elements, as well as the grace and blessing of the Prophets did alter and
change other things against nature. (...) not the grace and bles^^ (...)
Moises of such pow^^ (...) changed a rod into a serpent, and the serpent
again into a rod. Exo. ^^.
Was not the grace and blessing also of the same Prophette of the like power,
when it turned the flouddes of Egypt from water sodaynely into blood, and from
blood again into water? Exo. xiiii
And likewise was not the grace and blessing of this worthy and constante
prophet of as much power, wha^ the people of the Hebrews, were compassed
about on the one side with the Egyptians, and on the other side with the sea,
and he lyfted up his rod, and the water divided it self, and stood up like
a wall, and between the waters was left away for him and his company to pass
on foot, and Iordaine against the course of nature, turned back to the head
of his spring And in like manner was not ye grace and blessing of Moses of
great power, Exo. xvii
when he towched the rock stone and water came out haboundauntlye which it
had not of nature? Exo. xv.
Also Marathe was a bitter flood, so that the people being dry could not
drink thereof, but when Moses had put a certain wodde into the water than the
nature of the water left his bytternes, which grace infused did sodaynelye
moderate. iiii. Reg. vi.
And likewise how wrought grace against nature when an axe head fell from
(...) the prophets servants (...) water, and he that lost (...) desired the
prophet Elyseus help, who put the helfe into the water, and received the iron
again, which thing we plainly know was done above nature, for iron is heuyar
then the lyquor of water? Thus we may perceive that grace is of more force and
strength than is nature. And yet hitherto I have rehearsed unto you, nothing
else but the grace of the blessyng of the prophets. Now than if the blessing
of men be of such power, that it may or can change nature, what may we say
or what may we think, of the blessed consecration of GOD, wherein is the
operation of the words of our savior Christ? For this sacrament which we
here treat of, is done (...) word of Christ? Than if the word of Helyas was
of such power that it could bring fire down from heaven, iii. Reg. xvi.
shall not than the mighty word of Christ be of that power (yea rather of
much more power) to change and to altar, the kinds and natures of elements
into flesh and blood? The infynyte works and the incomprehensyble doings of
Christ, may not be measured by our human reason, neither yet by the course
of nature, but by the spirit of GOD and by steadfast faith. What say we of
the making of the whole world? Read we not that God spoke, and the things
were ^^ne* He commanded, and (...) created? The word than of Christ that
could of nothing make things that were not, can it not change those things
that be, into those things which before they were not? For it is no less
matter, to give to things new natures, then to alter natures.

And therefore if there be so much strength in the words of our lord Jesus,
that things had their beginning thereby, which never were before, how much
more then be they able to work, that those things that were before should
remain, and also be changed into other things? Thus is a sufficyente
answer made unto your whisteringe for the first part of your fond oppinyon
prouyd unto you bye no profane novelties, nor disceitfull aucthorytyes, but
even by the divine scryptures of antiquitye. And therefore I most heartily
exhort you, worthelye to receive and enbrace the same, and combyne it and
lyncke it fast unto your senses, with the fyrme and infregible chain of
steadfast faith, Vincenti.
and glutten not your self with the filthy dragges of heretical opinyons. For
greatly you and all other ought to fear and to dread the dangerous
punishment which ye doctrine of ecclesiastical co^stitution and also ye
censurs of the apostolyke aucthoritye do threaten unto you, for that you be so
lightly deceived and seduced by sweet preaching ^^^^^^eryng words, from the
grounded verity of gods most holy word, geuyng your selves up to fables
having da^pnatio^. To. xvi.
And therefore you ought depely to remember, and earnestly to enpresse in your
heart the fearful and vehement saying of the blessed Apostle S. Paul, which
he wrote not only to the Galathians, but also to the universal church of
Christ that for the affirminge and stablysshing of the faith, newelye
received, he neither auored him self nor any other of the Apostles, but did so
execute his apostolical aucthorytie that with great severity he pronounced
these words and said. Although either we, or an angel from heaven prech unto
you, Gala. i.
any other gospel tha^ that which we have preached hold him accursed.
Vincentius
Here it suffised not this blessed apostle for the retention, of the true
christian faith (which the universal church of Christ thoroughoute the whole
world, does confess and acknowledge) to touch the condition and nature of man
(which is mutable variable, and chaungeable, and apt of it self to decline
from the truth) but also herein he co^prehendeth the angelical excellencye.
For although we (sayethe he) or an angel from heaven, not meaning that the
holy and heavenly Angeles, can preach any evil doctrine. but his meaning is
this. If yt might be, which cannot be. And therefore he enlarged his spech and
said. Whosoever he be that shall attempt to change and alter the true catholyke
faith let him be, sayethe he, Anathema, that is to say, let him be
separated, segregated, and excluded as one accursed, least the dangerous
infectio^ of one corrupt sheep, may poison and infect to whole sound flock of
Christ with his venomous permyxtion and company. And therefore it is not
laufull for you, nor for any other private person, to allow and follow any
other doctrine than such as ye catholic church, does universally prech and
teach. I cannot sufficientlye wonder at you, and at certain such other,
vincentius.
which cannot be contented with the auncyente beleyfe, taught and received
universally in Christ's church but must seek daily for new toys and games,
evermore coueitinge to alter and innouate the chrystyan relygion, either by
adding some thing that is new, or else by taking away part of that which
was old (as you do here declarynge your fond opinion which will take away
christ's being in earth, because he is in heaven) as though the christian
religion of the church were not an heavenly ordinance and decree, but rather
an earthly prouisyon and institution. But woe be to the^ which phantisie to
practice such rydles and dreams to shadow the glory of God and his truth.
The blessed Apostle Saint Paul, writing to his disciple Tymothe, did
earnestly counsel him and advertise him to forsee and beware, the danger and
peril of such innouations and alterations, when he wrote these words and
said. i. Timo. vi.
O Timothe keep that doctrine which was left unto the, and avoid all profane
novelties of words and opposicions of science falsely so called. What can be
more vehementlye spoken or said, against innouations and alterations, contrary
to the aunciente order of the universal Church of Christ, than this?
vincentius
Yet for all this we se the stony indurate hearts, the shameless impudency, the
styffe and outrageous pertinacye of diverse whom nether the great weight of so
manifest scripturs can move to yield, nor the waightye importans of so high
aucthorities can force to retire, ne yet so terryble threatenings of high
vengeance can persuade to repent. And therefore dear Sister I would wish you
to be none of this sort of people, but rather to be an earneste follower of the
holsesome counsel of the blessed Apostle Saint Paul, where he says as it is
before rehearsed. Keep that doctrine which was left unto the, and avoid all
profane novelties of words and opposycyons of science faulselye so called.
Which is no more to mean, but that you hold assuredly, ye and also save and
keep fast, the inuiolat and pure talent of the catholyke faith, received by
the consent of the hole universal Church of Christ, and committed unto you
faithfully to observe and keep. Exchange it not for no new fangeled novelties
but what you have received hold that still and no other. And if you coapte and
apply your self, to this sound and perfect doctrine, than the heavenly
prouydence of God will not suffer you to err, from ye catholyke says in any
point

For that man or woman is a true and a perfect catholyke person, which loves
the truth of God, vincentius.
which prefers no synguler persons aucthorytye, wit, love, affection,
judgment, knowledge or eloquence before ye true religion of Christ and his
universal catholyke faith. But dispysyng all those things, does abide
permanent, constaunt, and stable, in faith, and resolves with him self to
receive, hold, and believe, that which he knows the catholyke church
universally and continually to have received, holden and believed.

Now here I entende (after this littell dyscourse) to make an end of the
first part of your phantastycall opinyon, where you say that the blessed
body of our savior Jesus christ, cannot be presently here in earth, and also
in heaven at one time and together, which fond opinion of youres for the first
part, I trust I have suffyciently approved the contrary (that is) that he is
here remaining presently in earth among us, and with us, under the forms of
bread and wine most assuredlye both flesh and blood. And now to prove the
other part, that he is also in heaven, it shall not be needful to bring the
matter in question, For I know well there was never any true christen person
yet, of christ's faith and believe, that at any time doubted thereof, the
things it self being so clear, so plain, and so manifest in the whole body
of scripture. And therefore because I would not be seen prolyxe or tedyous
unto you, here I purpose to fynyshe and conclude this wholesome exhortation for
this time And thus much have I written unto you, not for any great acquayntaunce
that I have had with you, as I said at my beginning, for I was never in your
company more than one suppere meal. But the thing that moved me to take this
finale labor in hand was partly for that I am now appointed (by gods
providence) to be your pore adioined neighbor and your gentell husbonde my
very louinge friend. But the chief and principal cause (you shall understand)
was for that god has conducted and hired me with his penye to travel and to
labor in his vyneyarde, Mat. xx.
not only to declare the mutual bond of charity, and chrystyan love which
we chrystians ought to show, the one unto the other for Christ's sake, in time
of temptation. But also to preserve his faithful flock from the raueuynge
mouth of that monstrous beast, which S. Peter settethe fourth unto us in his
first epistle and last chapyter, saying in this wise. i. Petre. v
Be sobere and watch, for your adversary the devil as a roryng lion walkyth
about, sekyng whom he may devour who^ resyst stedefast in faith. And
therefore according to the counsel of this holy Apostle, let stedefast
faith be your shylde of defense, and shake of the wicked armor of the Devil
(by that I mean) the fylthy skorfe and the stynking froth of your dangerous
opynion, where you dream and say, that the blessed body of our Savior Jesus
Christ cannot be present lie hear in earth and also in heaven at one time and
together. And wha^ I shall perceive that you do digest this holsom preparatyue
well (which I have here addressed unto you) than hereafter I will not sese (if
need so require) to send unto you some other godly cordials to strengthen you
with all, So that by the same (I trust in our Lord) you shall fall into this
account with your self that your faith once tried being much more precious
than gold, ^. Petre. i.
which is tried by fire, shall be found unto land, glory and honor, at the
appering of Jesus Christ. But now on the other side, if you be so precise and
so hardened in your heart, that you will not believe this my aucthor of truth
(even Christ him self) whom I have here preduced and alleged for my
foundation, but will have him tried by a quest of witnesses, than I will endeuer
my self here after, to impanel you so auncyente, so worthy, and so
aute^tycall a quest of his most true and trusty friends (unspotted uncorrupted
and vndefamed) that you shall be feign I doubt not, to let your matter fall to a
nonsute, and to believe stedfastlye from thenceforthe that christ is presently
here in earth with us, and also in heaven at one time and together. Grace be
with you, Ephe. vi.
and with all them which love our Lord Jesus Christ in pureness and truth. Amen.

If any man err from the truth and another convert him, let the same know,
that he which converted the sinner from goinge astraye out of his way, shall
save a soul from death, and shall hide the multitude of sins. James.v. This
brefe exhortation was thus finished and directed to the above named Margarete
Burges of kyngeswod by the said Paul Bushe late Bishop In the year of our Lord
God, a thousand, five hundred, fifty and six, The seventh day of August, In
the years also of the reign of our most dread Soueraygne Lord and Lady,
Phylyppe and Marye, our King and Queen, the third and fourth.

i. Cor. iii. Paulus plantauit, sed deus incrementum dedit.

Paul planted, but GOD gave the increase.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard at the sign of the Holy Ghost by
Ihon Cawodde, Printer to the King and Queen's Majesty's.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.




