A COMMENTARY UPON THE THREE FIRST CHAPTERS OF THE FIRST EPISTLE general of
St. PETER.

VVHERIN ARE MOST JUDICIously and profitably handled such points of Doctrine as
naturally flow from the TEXT.

Together with very useful Application thereof: and many good Rules for a
godly life.

By NICHOLAS BYFIELD Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middlesex.

To which is now newly added an Alphabeticall TABLE, not formerly published.

1 PET. 1.13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind: be sober, and hope to
the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ.

LONDON, Printed by MILES FLESHER and ROBERT YOUNG. MDCXXXVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST noble Lady, the Lady LVCY Countess of
Bedford: Grace and peace be multiplied.
MADAM,
BY reason of my Lords absence, and your Honors, a great part of the year
past, I have had more leisure, than I desired, and thereby opportunity to write
out my notes on the first chapter of Peter, and not knowing which way to
testify so fully as I ought, my observance, and duty to your Honor, or to
satisfy the daily opportunity of many friends, I have adventured again to
come under the Press, that so (receiving daily an increase of favors from your
Honor,) I might thus publicly take occasion to profess my vows of service
and thankfulness, beseeching your Honor to vouchsafe the acceptance,
protection, and perusal of this abridgement of those Sermons, many of which
your Honor has bin pleased to hear with great attention. As for the desire of
many go^^y friends herein, I should not have been easily inclined to hearken
to it (the world abounding with books even to loathing) but that in writings
of this nature, and upon this Epistle, there is some want, and that I have
received encouragement from the acceptance of my former labors, and that I
know the matter herein contained is wholesome, and not unprofitable; and
besides having suffered an involuntary vacation in my weekedaies attendance in
your Honors family, and an extreme loss in the want of diverse of my chief
bearers, I was resolved to try, whether I might be helpful to the Church of
God abroad, by such an imploiment of my self in the hours I could spare from
my study for the Lords day. My most humble request to your Honor is, that you
would be pleased to grace these notes with the liberty to pass under the
protection of your name, and favor; I should much rejoice, if the reading
hereof, may make any supply of my intermitted service to your Honor, and your
worthy family. The God of mercy and father of glory (that has abounded toward
your Honor, not only in the outward happiness of unstained nobility,
greatness of means, and favor with the highest on our earth: but which is
greatest of all, in the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ, in the largeness,
and eminency of many singular gifts, and in abundance of all good works) make
you perfect to do his will, and work in you an increase of all that is
pleasing in his sight, that you may never lose, what you have wrought, but be
kept without offense till the day of Jesus Christ.

Isleworth, July 1617. Your Honors servant in things of Jesus Christ to be
commanded, N. BYFIELD.

THE LOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE first Chapter of the first Epistle of ST. PETER.
THis Chapter has in it 2 things: 1. matter of salutation, verses 1, 2. 2.
matter of doctrine, verse 3. to the end.

In the salutation consider, 1. the person saluting, 2. the persons saluted. 3.
the form of salutation.

The person saluting is described, 1. By his proper name, Peter. 2. By his
office, an Apostle, 3. By the author of his office, Jesus Christ.

The persons saluted are described, 1. By their outward estate. 2. By their
spiritual estate.

In their outward estate consider first, what it was: they were strangers
dispersed here and there. 2. where it was, viz: through Pontus, Asia, Galatia,
etc.

For their spiritual estate, they were the Elect of God; and their Election is
amplified: 1. By the foundation of it, the foreknowledge of God the Father. 2.
By the means of execution of it, the sanctification of the Spirit. 3. By the
ends of it, which are two: 1. the obedience of their lives. 2. the fruition of
the benefits purchased by the blood of Christ, and applied by the sprinkling of
his blood.

The form of the salutation is in the end of the second verse: grace and peace
be multiplied, etc.

Thus much of the salutation: the doctrine of the Chapter follows, which
conteins both matter of consolation, and matter of exhortation.

The consolation is from verse 3. to verse 13: where consider both the
proposition of the consolation, verses 3, 4, 5. and the confirmation of it,
verse 6. to 13.

In the proposition consider first the manner of propounding it. 2. The
arguments themselves.

The manner of the proposition is, that it is expressed in form of thanksgiving,
Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The arguments are three. The first taken from their regeneration, verse 3. The
second from their glorification, verse 4. The third from their preservation
unto glory, verse 5.

The consolation raised from their regeneration is amplified, 1. By the
impulsive cause, the abundant mercy of God. 2. By the effect, viz: a lively
hope. 3. By the cause of merit, or efficacy, viz: the resurrection of Jesus
Christ.

The second argument is taken from our glorification, which is said to be the
^nheritance of the Saints which is amplified, 1. By the properties of it, which
are three. For it is first incorruptible, 2. undef^led. 3. imma^cessible, it
withers not. Secondly, by the manner of their present interest; It is not now
possessed, but laid up for them. Thirdly, by the place, where it lies, and
that is heaven.

The third argument is taken from our preservation unto glory, verse 5: where
consider, 1. the means of our preservation, which is both power in God, and
faith in us. 2. The end, which is salvation, which is amplif^ed by the things
that go before it, viz: preparation and revelation, in these words prepared to
be revealed* as also for the ^ime, when it shall be communicated, viz: in the
last time.

Thus of the proposition of the consolation: the confirmation follows, which
is performed two ways. 1. By prolepsis, or the answer of objections, verse 6.
to 10. 2. By the testimony of the Prophets, verses 10, 11, 12.

First, the Apostle labors to confirm them against two objections.

The first objection might be taken from their crosses, to which the Apostle
gives answer, by yielding four reasons, why their manifold temptations should
not dismay them. 1. Because they may have much joy in the midst of many
crosses, verse 6. 2. Their heaviness is but for a season, verse 6. also. 3.
They are not bound always to grieve at their crosses, but when need requires,
verse 6. also. 4. Because their temptations do them good: for they try their
faith, verse 7: this effect is both propounded, and amplified: propounded in
those words, The trial of your faith: amplified, 1. by comparison with go^d
tri^d in the f^rnace. 2. by the event; it will be found to praise, and honor,
and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.

The second objection might be made thus: We know not whether the former
comforts belong to us; to which the Apostle answers by giving three signs, by
which men may try themselves: 1. The love of Christ, whom they have not seen.
2. Believing. 3. The unspeakable and glorious joys of the Holy Ghost, verse 8.
The end of all, which is, the salvation of their souls, verse 9.

Thus of the Prolepsis: the testimony of holy men fo^^owes, where consider
five things.

1. Wh^ ^e s^^i fie? In general, Prophets: In special, those Prophets, which
were app^^^^ed to testify of the grace that should come unto us Christians.

2. (...) prec^^^nes to furnish themselves for the knowledge of the things they
testified; They searched and inquired diligently*

3. The question they studied, or unto which they testify: In general, (...)
of salvation, verse 10. In special, it was of the manner, and time of the
grace foretold.

4. The (...) them to this earnest desire after this knowledge, and that was
the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, driving them to foretell of the passion of
Christ, and glories that should follow.

5. The success, and that is, that they were answered of God; where observe
two things. 1. The manner of the giving the answer, it was by revelation; Unto
whom it was revealed. 2. The matter of the answer, which concerns both Persons
and Things. The persons are considered negatively, and so they were resolved,
that they themselves were not the men, to whom those glories did belong: and
affirmatively, that they did minister those things unto us Christians. Now the
things promised are not only propounded, but commended: and that two ways. 1.
By the glory of their efficient causes, which were less principal, the
Apostles: and more principal, the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 2. By the
adjunct respect of the Angels, which things the Angels desire to look into.

Hitherto of the consolation. The exhortation follows from ver. 13. to the
end, where observe: 1. The things, unto which they are exhorted, verse 13. 2.
The reasons, by which the exhortation is enforced.

The things to which he does exhort are three: 1. The first concerns the
renovation of the mind, Girde up the loins of your mind. 2. The second
concerns the moderation of life, be sober. 3. The third concerns the
confirmation of their hope, Trust perfectly upon the grace to be brought etc.
ver. 13.

The reasons follow, and they are 6. in number, taken from the consideration,
1. Of the Image of God, verses 14, 15, 16. 2. Of the judgment of God, verse
17. 3. Of the redemption in Christ, verses, 18, 19, 20, 21. 4. Of the relation
to the godly, verse 22. 5. Of the immortality of the soul, verse 23. 6. And
sixthly, of the mortality of the body, verses 24, 25.

The first reason taken from the Image of God is both propounded, and
expounded: propounded in these words, as obedient children: expounded two
ways, 1. by description. 2. by testimony. By description, 1. negatively,
showing what they should sh^nne, Not fashioning your selves to the lusts of
your former ignorance, ver. 14. 2. He sets it out affirmatively, both by
showing the pattern to be imitated, viz: the holiness of him that called
them; and also the manner of imitation, viz: to be holy in all manner of
conversation, ver. 15. In the testimony two things are to be noted, 1. Whence
the proof was fetched in these words, As it is written: and 2. what was
alleged, viz: Be ye holy, as I am holy* ver. 16.

The second reason is taken from the judgment of God, where note, 1. The
proposition of the reason, viz: He that ye call upon as Father, etc. 2. The
inference, or use of the same, viz: Pass the time of your sojourning in fear.
In the proposition consider, 1. Who shall be judge, viz: he that was called
upon as a Father. 2. How he shall judge, viz: without respect of persons. 3.
Whom he shall judge, viz: every man. 4. For what they shall be judged, viz:
according to their works, verse 17.

The third reason is taken from the consideration of our redemption, and this
reason should move the more:

1. Because all the precious things in the world could not redeem man, verse
18.

2. Because the deliverance from our vain conversation, was one of the maine
ends of our redemption, verse 18.

3. Because our redemption was effected by a matchless price, viz: the passion
of Christ, which is increased, 1. In that it was a suffering even to the
effusion of blood. 2. that it was a suffering of one, that was so infinitely
pure, without spot or blemish, verse 19.

4. Because our redemption was ordained in Gods counsel, ver. 20.

5. Because the honor of manifesting Christ in the clear preaching of the
Gospel, is done now to us Christians, and not to the Fathers of old, verse 20.

6. Because our redemption was ratified by God the Father, and that two ways.
1. By raising Christ from the dead. 2. By giving him glory, verse 21.

7. Because all this was done, that our faith and hope might be in God, verse
21.

The fourth reason is taken from our relation to the godly, ver. 22. In which
reason observe, 1. A proposition of doctrine. 2. An exhortation by way of use.
The proposition in it self properly concerns sanctification, which is
described, 1. By the nature of it, imported in the m^ta^horicall term,
purified. 2. The subject of it, your souls: 3. the form of it, in obeying the
truth. 4. The cause of it, the spirit. 5. The end of it, which was brotherly
love, amplified by the property of it, unfeigned. The exhortation is therefore
to love one another with a pure heart fervently.

The first reason is taken from the immortality of the soul, which is
considered two ways. 1. In respect of the fountain of it, which is the new
birth. 2. In respect of the means of it, which is set down, 1. negatively,
not of corruptible seed. 2. affirmatively: where consider what the means is,
and by what it is. What it is, viz: incorruptible seed. By what it is, the
word, which is praised for three things. 1. It is of God. 2. ^t lives. 3. It
abides for ever, ver. 23.

The sixth reason is taken from the mortality of the body compared with the
eternity of the word of God, ver. 24, 25. Of the vanity of man, ver. 24 which
is ^^th propounded, and repeated* propounded as it concerns either the person
of man, All flesh is grass: or the condition of man, All the glory thereof is
as the flower of grass. The rep^tition ^s it concerns both, is in these words,
the grass withers, and the flower falls away. The eternity of the word of
God is propounded in these words, but the word of the Lord endures for ever:
and explained by showing of what word he speaks in these words, and this is
the word which is preached unto you.

THE METAPHRASE OF THE FIRST CHAPter of the first Epistle of ST. PETER.
Verse 1. PETER an Apostle of Jesus Chr: to the strangers scattred throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia, and Bithinia.


PETER by immediate calling and commission from JESUS CHRIST the Ambassador for
the Churches to the dispersed servants of God, strangers and Pilgrims in this
world, that dwell here and there in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bithinia.

Verse 2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father through
sanctification of the spirit unto obedience and sprinckling of the blood of
Jesus Christ: Grace unto you and peace be multiplied.


Who for their spiritual estate were chosen of God from everlasting, and
foreseen of God with special approbation above the rest of mankind, and
loved with a fatherly love (as appears by the inward sanctification of their
hearts, which can be found in none, but the Elect of God) separated of God to
these ends, namely that both they might glorify God by their holy
conversation, and be glorified of God by the fruition of the benefits purchased
by the blood of JESUS CHRIST, and now estated upon them by the application of
the merits of CHRIST: The grace of God, even his continual free favor, and
the gifts of his spirit, and peace, even tranquillity of heart and conscience,
and all comfortable and needful prosperity be established upon you, and more
and more increase in you.

Verse 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant me^cy has begotten us a^aine unto a lively hope by
the resurrecti^n of Jesus Christ from the dead.


Eternal thanks be given unto God, who is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ in
respect of his humane nature, and his Father in respect of his divine nature,
for all the consolations, wherein he has given us reason of singular
rejoicing, and in particular for that he has regenerated us and made us his
children by adoption, when we deserved nothing but his eternal wrath, merely
out of the abundance of his own matchles mercies, and sets us in such an
estate, as whatsoever our trials and affli^tions may be, yet he has given us
effectual and assured hope of full happine^se, the pledge and undoubted
testimony whereof we have, in that jesus Christ is risen from the dead, which
shows evidently, that all is discharged: For else he could not have come out
of prison, till he had paid the uttermost farthing.

Verse 4. To an inhe^^^ance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fades not
away, reserved in heaven for you.


And to show that he will acknowledge us for sons, he has reserved for us in
heaven such an inheritance, as shall never be lost, or taken from us, and
shall have no fault nor defect in it, nor ever decay in the incomparable worth
and glory of it.

Verse 5. Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready
to be revealed in the last time.


And that we may be sure of possession, his own almighty power will be as a
strong garrison about us to keep us; and he has given us also a lively faith,
that well preserve us, till we be possessed of that glorious and full
salvation, which he has prepared for us, and is ready to be revealed in the
full perfection of it, when the day of death, or judgment shall come.

Verse 6. Wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need be)
you are in heaviness through manifold tentations.


If you object, that you cannot take that comfort in these Arguments of
consolation, because of the many tentations, inward and outward, with which you
are daily disheartened: I answer, that for all your crosses you may have
exceeding much joy even in the midst of your tribulations; and besides the
trouble of your crosses is but for a little while, they are but short trials,
nor are you bound always to be pensive for your crosses, but only when need
requires, namely when you need to be humbled for some corruptions, that get
too much head in you, or for other profitable ends.

Verse 7. That the trial of your faith being much more precious, then of gold
that perishes, though it be tried by the fire, might be sound unto praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.


And lastly you lose nothing by your tentations, and afflictions. For your
says, which i^ a thing more precious in Gods account, than all the gold in the
world (for that will perish, and come to be of no use one day) is hereby tried;
and what though the fire of the furnace of affliction be somewhat hot, yet
remember what wonderf^ll praise, and honor, and glory you shall have for the
steadfastness of your faith, when Jesus Christ shall appear, and with his own
mouth commend you, and glorify you before all the world.

Verse 8 Whom having not seen ye love, in whom (though now ye see him not)
yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.


If you object, that you do not know, whether the former consolations do
belong unto you, or no: I will put you in mind of three infallible signs,
that you are converted and shall go to heaven. 1. The first is your unfeigned
affection to the Lord Jesus Christ, though ye never yet saw him with your
bodily eyes. 2. The second is your continual ^aith relying upon him alone for
your reconciliation and salvation. 3. And the third is the wonderful,
matchless, and unutterable, and celestial joy, that at sometimes ye feel in
the presence of God in his ordinances.

Verse 9. Receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.


And therefore ye need make no doubt, but believe confidently, that God will
reward your trust in him, by giving such an end to your course, as that your
souls shall be sure to be saved.

Verse 10. Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.


And that you may be the more abundantly confirmed in the former consolations,
think of the Testimony of the Prophets, that were men extraordinarily raised
up of God, and did Prophecy of this great salvation, which is now come to
pass, and fulfilled in us Christians; and being appointed, and inspired of God
to soretell the singular privileges of the Christian Churches, they took
marveilous pains about it, inquiring diligently by all the means they could.

Verse 11. Searching what or what manner of time the spirit of Christ which was
in them did signify, when it testified before hand the sufferings of Christ,
and the glory that should follow.


Studying to find it out, if it were possible, what, and what manner of time
the Holy Ghost, which was in them meant, when it made them foretell both that
the MESSIAH should suffer so many things, and withal that after his suffering
there should be wonderful glorious times for the Church.

Ver 12. Unto whom it was revealed, th^^ not unto themselves, but unto us they
did the things, which are now reported unto you by them, which have preached
the gospel unto you with the holy ghost sent down from heaven, which things th:
Angels desire to look into.


Now they were answered by revelation, that they themselves must never see those
glorious days on earth: but that they were used only as Gods servants to
signify to the Church, what should be the estate of Christians after the
sufferings of Christ; according also to the doctrine of the Apostles, who have
published the same things to you in the preaching of the gospel, being men
inspired by the Holy Ghost from heaven, and assisted with the visible gifts of
the Holy Ghost: and your happiness is so great, that the Angels ^f heaven
(like the Cherubins, that stood looking into the Arc) do with singular
admiration stand and wonder at, and search into the manifold wisdom of God in
the happiness, to which you are brought by Christ. And as you need to be
comforted, so have I thought it fit to exhort you, and first in things that are
general to you all, both concerning the matter of holiness, and concerning
the means of it.

Verse 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind: be sober, and hope to
the end, for the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of
Jesus Christ.


There are three things you should labor after. 1. The first is the restraining
and resisting of all l^ts of godliness, which within from corruption of nature
are wont like long garments to hinder you in the labor and race of a holy
life. 2. The second is the moderation of your selves, and that right temper in
your hearts and lives, especially in the use of the outward things of this
world. 3. The third is, the perfecting of the assurance of your hope concerning
the glory of heaven, which God has given of his free grace, and shall be fully
brought upon you at the last day, when Christ shall be showed in his glory to
the world.

Ver. 14. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according to the
former. lu^^s in your ignorance.


Now there are six reasons, which may induce you to the care of a holy
conversation intended in the former duties. 1. The first concerns the image of
God: ye are the children of God, and therefore you should live so, as becomes
Gods children, and express in your carriage the resemblance of the nature of
God, not given your selves over, on^ of the liking of sin, to the service and
obedience of any of those corruptions, which either your selves lived in before
your calling, or are usually found in such only, as know not GOD.

Verse 15. But as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of conversation.


But as God, who by the power of his word has converted you, is holy; so should
you strive with respect of all his commandments to resemble the praises of God
in all your car^age, striving in every duty to follow your pattern.

Verse 16. Because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy.


And the rather, because this has been anciently required in the old Testament
of Gods people, to propound unto themselves the imitation of Gods holiness,
and to detest sin, because they would not be unlike to God.

Verse 17. And if ye call on the Father, who without respect of persons
judges according unto every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning here
in fear.


2. A second reason may be taken from the judgment of God. For the time must
certainly come, when God, whom we call a Father, and call upon as a Father in
this life, will summon us before his Tribunal certainly, and speedily, and
then no man shall escape, but shall be dealt with without partiality, or any
corrupt respect, according as men's works have been either good or evil: and
therefore it behooves us, that are in this world but as sojourners for a time,
to spend our days in all carfulness, and godly fear.

Verse 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by tradition
from your fathers.


3. A third reason may be taken from the consideration of our redemption, which
has many important motives in it: For it cannot be, but ye all know, that
your misery by nature was so great, that ye could not be ransomed, if all the
treasures of gold and silver in the world had been given for you; and when you
were redeemed, a chief respect was had to the freeing of you from the
viciousness of your conversation, in which vainly ye spent your times, and
which corruption in many things ye sucked in from the sinful examples, and
precepts, and ill education of your Parents, and ancestors.

Verse 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish,
and without spot.


But especially, if ye consider, what a matchless price was given for your
ransom, even the precious blood of Christ, who as a most absolute sacrifice
for our sins, was without all soul of nature, or life, and so the full
substance of all the ceremonial sacrifices, and in particular was the true
lamb without blemish, or spot, that makes atonement for the sins of the
world.

Verse 20. Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world, but
was manifest in these last time^ for you.


And the rather, if ye consider, that from all eternity God had ordained, that
Christ should dye for you, and when the fullness of time came, that God was to
reveal his Son, as the Savior of the world, he showed him in the flesh,
and caused him to be preached unto you, and for your sakes with far more
evidence and clearness, than in for^er ages.

Verse 21. Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and
gave him glory, that you^ faith and hope might be in God.


To you, and for your sakes I say, that do constantly put your trust in Gods
mercy through his merits: that God, that to show he was fully paid the
uttermost farthing of our debts, came to the prison door, and let him out,
which he did, when he raised him from the dead; and besides exalted him to
wonderful glory, when he ascended up into heaven, that so for the time to
come, you might believe and trust upon Gods goodness and favor to you without
all fear or doubting.

Verse 22. Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren; see that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently.


4. And the rather in the fourth place should you be careful of the former
exhortation, if you consider your relation to the godly, to whom ye are (...)*
For seeing that by the spirit of God your souls are purified from the leprosy
of inward evils, by the holy course you have held in clensing your hearts of
those evils, which might hinder your internal sanctification, in that
obedience you yield to the truth of God: and inasmuch as the end of all this
reformation was, that there might be a holy communion and affection without
hypocrisy and dissembling among such as fear God, who are all the children of
one Father: therefore see to it by any means, that ye order your lives and
hearts so, that you may love one another both with ardent affection, and pure
and sincere hearts, which you never do, unless you gird up the loins of your
minds, and live soberly, and be settled in the assurance, that ye shall
altogether one day reign in heaven.

Verse 23. Being borne again not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by
the word of God, which lives and abides for ever.


5. And fifthly, the immortality of your souls should persuade with you: you
were made new men, not as you were made men by a natural propagation, but
inspired with a life, that should never cease, having the seed of this eternal
life cast into your hearts by the word of God, which in it self, and by effect
in you, lives and abides for ever.

Verse 24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man, as the flower
of grass: the grass wi^hereth, and the flower thereof falls away.


And lastly, if you consider the mortality of your bodies: All in a man's outward
estate is but vain and transitory, the bodies of all men are but as the
grass, which is to day, and tomorrow is cut down, and cast into the oven: Man
is quickly and suddenly gone, nor is the glory of men's outward estate better
than their bodies. For all the riches, pleasures, etc. of this life, in which
men glory most, they are but as the 'flower of grass: His body withers like
the grass, decaying in a short time, till he have nothing left but the very
root of life; and as for his riches and pleasures, they like the flower fall
off so, as they are never recovered again, many times in this life, but
always in death.

Verse 25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever; and this is the worcester*,
which by the Gospel is preached unto you.


But on the other side; the word of God, upon which men should set their hearts,
continues in the efficacy of it, in the sense of it, and in the fruit of it
for ever; and that you may not be mistaken, this is that word of God, which is
daily preached unto you.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE FIRST EPISTLE general of PETER. CHAP. I.
verses 1, 2. 1. Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to the strangers, that dwell
here and there throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bithynia:

2. Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father unto sanctification
of the spirit through obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ:
Grace and peace be multiplied unto you.


THe purpose of the Apostle in this Epistle is to confirm the Christians, to
whom he writes, The scope of the Epistle.
in the faith, and to assure them, that it was the true grace of God, they had
received, and to persuade them to all possible care of sincerity of life,
becoming the Gospel, and to constancy in trials.

The Epistle stands of three parts: The parts of the Epistle.
1. The salutation, Chap. 1. ver. 1, 2. 2. The body of the Epistle, Chap. 1.
ver. 3. to Chap. 5. ver. 12. 3. The Epilogue or conclusion, Chap. 5. ver. 12.
to the end.

These two verses then contain the salutation: where observe, The parts of the
salutation.
1. The person saluting: 2. The persons saluted: 3. And the manner of the
salutation it self. 1. The person saluting is described, 1. By his name,
Peter: 2. By his office, an Apostle: 3. By the author of his calling, Jesus
Christ. 2. The persons saluted are described, both by their outward estate, and
by their spiritual estate. For their outward estate, not^ both what it was,
and where it was: they were strangers of di^persion, and that through Pontus,
Asia, etc. For their spiritual estate: they are Gods Elect, and their election
is amplified: 1. By the foundation of it, which is Gods foreknowledge: 2. By
the means of execution of it, which is the sanctification of the spirit: 3. By
the end, which is twofold: 1. Obedience of life: 2. Remission of sins by the
sprinkling of the blo^d of Christ. 3. The form or manner of the salutation is
in the end of the second verse.

Peter] This Apostle was by Nation of Galile, Who Peter was.
borne in the town of Bethsaida: His fathers name was Iona, or John a
fi^herman: He was the brother of Andrew, who (as they were fishing at the sea
of Galilee) of a fisherman was made a fisher of men Mat 4.15.
: His name at his Circumcision was Simon, and his name of Peter was given him
by his Savior Mat. 3.16.
. It signifies a stone, a rock, perhaps it was given him for his confession,
and acknowledgment of Christ the rock I Cor. 10.3.
, upon which the Church was built: He was called by our Savior Cephas John
1.42.
which in the Chaldean tongue is of the same signification. The Si^i^ck vers^^^
se^s the (...) of the Epistle th^^: The epistle of Peter Simon Cephas. This is
he, that was ever accounted a Prince amongst the Apostles, taught in the
mysteries of the Kingdom of heaven by the voice of the Son of God himself
before his death: This is he, to whom the Lord after his resurrection three
times said: Simon thou son of Jonah, love thou me? feed my sheep, feed my
lambs. It is storied of him, that in one day he converted 3000. ^^ules: He
cured Aeneas of the palsy: raised Dorc^s to life, first preached to the
Gentiles being instructed by a sign from heaven, and baptized Cornelius with
his household; He was by agreeme^^ appointed to be the Apostle of the
Circumcision Gal. 2.
.

Apostle] Peter had a threefold call from Christ 1. To the Discipleship Mat. 4.
Ioh. 1.
. 2. To the Apostleships. Mark 3.
3. And then to the Apostleship John 21.
again, having fallen from his former call, by his threefold denial of Christ.

An Apostle was the highest office in the Church. The Apostle Ephesians. 4. reckons
the callings of the Ministry; some were extraordinary: viz: Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists: some were ordinary, viz: the Pastors and Doctors.

His mentioning of his Apostleship here shows three things: 1. Authority. 2.
Modesty. 3. Consent.

1. His authority must needs be great, seeing he was the Orator, Legate,
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, which should persuade these, to whom he wrote to
receive his doctrine with all reverence, and care; and not them only, but us
also, for whom it is left upon record, so as what is here forbidden we should
take heed of, and what is commanded we should receive as the words of Christ:
we should take heed, we fashion not our selves after the lusts of our former
ignorance, verse. 14. and not dare to live in malice, deceit, hypocrisy, etc.
Chap. 2.1. or yield to the fleshly lusts that fight against our souls, Chap.
2.12, or to be offensive, or disobedient in our particular callings, Chap. ^.
and ^. or to ^^ve^^^ our selves, Chap. 3.8.9. or to live after the wills of
men: or to walk in the sins of the Gentiles, such as are mentioned, Chap.
4.3, 4. and so of the rest.

2. His modesty appears in this, that he seeks not principality of Primacie.

3. And hi^ consent, in that he professes hereby to bring no other doctrine,
then that the rest of the Apostles did. For being in the same office with them,
he brings the same words of Christ also.

Of Jesus Christ] Here he shows, who put him into this office, and
Apostleship, even he, that was prime of Pastors, head of all principality and
power: The uncreate and eternal wisdom of the Father: The image of the
invisible God: The first borne of every creature: The great Messiah: The
promised seed: The son of David: The Lord our righteousness: The sheeph^^rd
1 Pet. ^. ult.
and bishop of our souls.

He is called Jesus a Savior, an Hebrew name, to intimate the interest of the
Jews, and Christ anointed, a Greek name, to intimate the interest of the
Gentiles: the joining of both together, note that he is a perfect Mediator
without respect of persons for the elect both of Jews, and Gentiles.

It is a matter of great weight in the condition of life, we live in, to have,
and to be able to show a good warrant, and sound calling thereunto: For the
knowledge of our calling from God may both encourage us, and support us:
encourage us to do the work required, as in this case of preaching: Woe unto
us, if we preach not the Gospel when we are sent of God: support us against
all the troubles, that ^ay befall us in our Callings for the doing of our
duties.

Seven sorts of men transgress about this matter of calling. Seven sorts of
men transgress about their Callings.


1. Such as run into callings, before God send them: as many Ministers do.
2. Such as live by such means, as God calls them from, as they do, that live
by usury, lottery, oppression, deceit, etc. 3. Such as do the works of a
lawful calling at an unlawful time, or on the Sabbath. 4. Such, as abide not
in their callings I Cor. 7.
5. Such, as meddle with many Callings, or Vocations, being called but to one.
6. Such, as live without a calling 2 Thessalonians. 3.
7. Such, as are slothful to execute the calling God has set them in: If
Christ make P^ter his Apostle, or if Peter be Christ's Apostle, he must go and
speak in his name.
Thus of the person saluting.

The persons saluted are first described by their outward estate:

The strangers, that dwell here and there. (...).

Advenis dispersionis.




There are three opinions about these strangers, who they should be:

1. Some think they were the provincial Jews, who were scattered into these
parts, and converted to the faith of Christ by Paul and Silas, Ly^a
and because Silvanus (which is Silas) was about to return to visit these
Churches, therefore Peter writes by him: Hierome thinks they were converted by
Peter himself, who had preached unto them, when he was Bishop of Antiochia. In
the sixth of the Acts, there are two sorts of Jews, viz: (...)
Grecians, and Hebrews: The Grecians were such Jews, as were scattered
abroad: The Hebrews were such, as kept their own state, and removed not.
There are two reasons alleged, why these provincial Jews should be meant:
1. Because they are not simply called strangers, but strangers of the
dispersion, which should note such Jews, as were driven thither either of old,
or by the persecution about Stephen, or at other times after. (...) be the
Apostle of the Circumcision.

Others think, they were Gentiles converted to the Jewish Religion, Beda.
Gl^ss: Heming.
and so they take strangers and Proselites to be all one; and to such Peter
preached Acts 2. and converted many of them, and they think he writes to them
now.

Others think, that this Epistle is so written to the Jews, as it is intended
also for those elect Gentiles in those parts, Ares.
because he says Chap. 2.10. that these people were not in times past a
people, nor under mercy, but now were the people of God, and had obtained
mercy: which words do not so fitly agree to the Jews, and so all the Elect of
God are strangers in this world, and so the word is evidently used, Chap. 2.12.
and I think it is to be taken in this last sense.

Strangers] Man may be said to be a stranger in five respects. Man is a
stranger in five respects.


1. In respect of absence from his natural friends, and his native soil: so
Abraham was a stranger in Canaan.

2. In respect of the want of Gods favor and grace, so wicked men are
strangers from the covenant of promise, from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
from the life of God Ephesians. ^.12. and 4.17.
.

3. In respect of the contempt of the world: so Gods children, when they begin
to fear God, the world accounts them as strangers, and avoids them. so David
was a stranger to his brethren and kindred Psalm. 69.8.
.

4. Some make themselves strangers by a wilful rety^ing, and coffeehouse
for crosses that befall them 1 Pet. 4.12.
.

5. In respect of absence from the heavenly Canaan, and the troublesome
condition in this world, and so all Gods elect are strangers.

Gods elect then are strangers in this world: this point is abundantly
confirmed in these places: Doctrine.
Genesis 47.9. 1 Chronicles. 28.15. Psalm. 39.13. Heb. 11. 12, 13. and 13.14, 15.

And it may teach us many excellent things for the ordering of our carriage both
in our selves, Uses.
and toward others.

There are 12 things, which may be gathered out of this metapho^icall term,
14 Things wherein we should be like strangers.
to teach us (with much life) by the comparisons may be taken from thence: Or
there be 14 things, wherein we should be like to strangers.

1. A stranger is unacquainted, and has little to do, but with his journey:
so while we are in this world, we should think chiefly on our journey, and
keep our selves estranged from the world, dissolving our sinful acquaintance,
and keeping our hearts from the cares of life.

2. A stranger uses to be much affected with lesser courtesies in a strange
place, Ruth 2.10. so should we be thankful to God for any kindness in this
world: it is enough it shall go well with us in heaven, we should say with
David, who am I, and what is my people, that we should, etc. for all things
come of thee? Now therefore our God we thank thee, and praise thy glorious
name: for we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as were all our
fathers: our days on earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding. 1 Chronicles.
29.14, 15.

3. A stranger is wont to be glad of any good company, that will go with him,
though it were but a part of the way: How should we then with all joy, and
dearness entertain Gods servants into our inward and perpetual society?
These are they will go with us to heaven.

4. A stranger will be careful to inquire his way, fears to miss it, seeks
best directions, and that every day, yea and at every turning: It will not
serve his turn once, or twice, or seldom in his journey to take general
directions: yea he is glad to ask of any body, even children, when he is out
of his way, or does but fear it, or is in danger of it: And shall not this
teach us to (...) should we go to God to seek a way of him? yea going and
weeping we should go, and ask the way with our faces thitherward, Ier. 51.4.
Ezra 8.22. How should we be glad of guides, and make our selves also equal to
them of the lower sort, that by conference, and all good helps from Ministers,
and godly people we might receive daily directions? It is a horrible plague to
have a heart, that is not willing and forward to ask questions about the way
to be saved, and intolerable pride not to make use of any that can give us
counsel. O the incredible stupidity of our spirits! we that cannot travail in
a road-way, that perhaps we have gone before, without every hours questions,
yet think our selves wise enough to find the way to heaven with little, or no
directions.

5. A stranger looks not for great things for himself, he does not seek
honors, and offices, and possessions in the City he travels through: his care
is only for necessaries for his journey. And are not we strangers on earth,
and is it now a time for us to take up our dwellings here, and to seek great
things for our selves in this world? Ier. 46, 5. a stranger never pleads any
privilege in the place he comes to: and this was the ancien^ mind of the
godly Patriarks, they quitted all claims, and confessed plainly, they were but
pilgri^^s, and embraced the promises as their portion, and so set up their rest
in their hopes, Heb. 11.3.

6. A stranger can endure wrongs: He stays not his journey to turn again to
every d^gge, that ba^kes at him, nor to seek revenge for every indignity: He
lets not his journey for every shower of rain, and should it not be thus with
us? Why do we fear reproach? what stand we still at every slander? why busy
we our heads for projects of revenge? or our hearts with indignation at every
currish caitife, or dogged Doeg, that will falsely accuse our good conversation
in Christ? When will we come to our journies end, if we every day trouble our
selves with the indignities we receive in this strange world? let the curres
bark, ride thou on, and mind thy way. What if thy crosses fall like rain?
ride on, it is but a shower, it will be over.

7. A stranger or traveller, so thinks of his travai^e in the day, that he
looks for rest at night, and so takes his rest at night, as he resolves to
travail again in the morning: so should we be minded: In prosperity to
provide for adversity, and in adversity to hope for prosperity again, as
assured, that man abides in no certain stay here.

8. A stranger never measures his own worth, by what he finds in the way, but
by what he shall possess when he comes home: 2 Cor. 5, 6, 7.
so should a Christian do, he should live by faith, and not by sight: It
matters not, what the world thinks of him, his greatness is in the kingdom
of heaven.

9. A stranger will be glad to send home upon any opportunity, and to get any
friend to provide for him against he come: should not we then be glad of any
opportunities to send home to heaven by our prayers, and to beseech Christ (our
friend, John 15.15.) to provide our place for us, who is ready with all
willingness to do all our business in heaven for us?

10. A stranger is unskilful in the language of the several people, where he
comes, only cunning in his own language: So it should be with us, though we
find in one place the ambitious man telling of his honors, offices, livings;
and in another place the covetous man telling of his barnes, wares, bargains;
and in another place the voluptuous man telling of his dogs, sports, whoores;
and in another place the wrathful man, telling of his adversary, wrongs,
revenge, etc. yet we should keep us to the language of Canaan, and speak as
becomes the oracles of God, and the gifts God has made us stewards of.

11. A stranger is cautelous and wary, he looks to his words, and behavior:
So should a Christian be circumspect, and get the wisdom of a serpent with the
innocence of a dove, he should not be curious nor inquisitive, but study to be
quiet, and meddle with his own business. Phil. 2.14, 15.

12. A stranger strives to ride on merrily, and to wear out the tediousness
of the way with singing sweet songs to himself: So should we: our songs should
be of the statutes of God in the house of our pilgrimage. Psalm 119.34.

13. A stranger, if by ignorance or passion he have brought restraint, or bonds
upon himself, he will use all possible entreaties, and means to get himself
loose again, that he may go on in his journey homewards: so should we, if by
sin we have brought restraint upon our selves, we should never be quiet, but
power out our tears and prayers unto God, and urge him to be good unto us
even for this reason, as David does. Psalm. 39.12, 13.

14. A stranger specially has his mind still running upon his home, his
thoughts, desires, longings, wishes, and all for his journies end: So should it
be with a Christian, his conversation should be in heaven, and our affections
continually running after God, and heavenly things, Phil. 3.20. Heb. 11.12, 13,
14, etc. and 13.14, 15.

This also should teach us, seeing Gods children are strangers in this world,
to use Gods pilgrims with all honor and kindness: let them be as princes of
God amongst us, though they be now far from home, yet they are noble persons,
they are Gods heirs, learn of the very Hittites, Genesis 23.4, 6.

This doctrine may also serve for great reproof not only to wicked men, who
like cursed Edomites, Hab. 12. abuse Gods Israel in their journey: but also for
many, that are in Israel, yea of Israel, for their worldliness and continual
plodding cares about the things of this life, miserably forgetting, that they
are but strangers, and this world is but an Inn: Psalm. 39.5, 6. Eccles. 7.1, 2.

Lastly, we should gather consolations to comfort us in our travail to heaven;
certainly the Lord has a great care of his pilgrims, he keeps the strangers,
Psalm. 146.9. If God command men to use strangers well, and not to wrong them,
Exodus 22.21. or vex them, Levit. 19* 33. but love them, Deuteronomy. 10.19. how much
more will God himself have mercy on his banished, and pity his weary servants
in their travail. What though the way be long, and labor great, and
dangerous: yet think of two things: 1. That Christ will be the guide of the
way, and never leave thee, nor forsake thee: 2. How great thy happiness shall
be, when thou art come home to that heavenly Canaan, that glorious new
Jerusalem, the City of the great King, when God shall wipe away all tears
from thine eyes, and give thee a thousand fold for all thy travail.

Dispersed here and there] If we understand this of the Jews: It shows the
malice of wicked men: if they may have their wills, they will never be quiet,
till they drive the godly from them.

If we understand it of the Elect in general, it teaches us:

1. That Gods children may be driven from their native dwelling, God does not
always build them a house in their own land.

2. That the Church of God is not tied to any one place, neither to Rome not to
Jerusalem.

3. That the godly are thin set: It is rare to find true godly men, they dwell
here and there.

4. That the Church has not always an external glory to commend it: It
consists sometimes of a few scattered persons, that live straggling here and
there.

5. That there may be a great inward beauty under a despised condition: These
dispersed ones are glorious creatures, sanctified in their spirits under the
abundant mercies of God, that have lively hope through the sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus, such as shall have an immortal inheritance.

6. That there may ^e excellent order in appearing confusion: One might think
the husbandmen spoiled their corn, when they scatter it abroad on the ground:
and yet we know, it is better so, then when it is in the barn all on a heap:
so is it with the godly.

Quest. If any ask, what good can come of this dispersion of the godly?

Answ. I answer* First by this means they carry the light of the truth all
abroad the world: The good that comes by the dispersion of the godly.
2. By this means they preserve the whole earth. For they are the worlds
guard: they bear up heaven as it were: were it not for these the world would
be destroyed: and by their dispersion they bind Gods hands, as it were, from
the places, wherein they are, and keep off his fierce judgments; and besides
it is good for the godly themselves to be asunder t^us: It quickens them to
prayer: It makes them love and long one for another more: It prepares them for
heaven: It trains them up in spiritual soldiery, when they see they must
fight alone: All the riches of a Christian is his armor, and he has nothing
but what he gets by wrestling and fighting.

Pont^^^, Galatia, Bithy^ia.]

For the Geography of these places: some think they all belong to Pontus:
Hence some of the Fathers cite this Epistle by this title: Epistola Petri ad
Ponticos Tertull: Cyp^: Cassiod.
. Some say, they were called by one name of A^tiochia Beza. Heming:
: Others say, they are all in Asia minor: It is certain, they are all in
Greece Beda. Gloss:
.

Two things may be observed from hence.

1. That Christians, though scattered here and there, yet they have one God,
one faith, one Lord Jesus Christ: the doctrine we see is common to them all.

2. That unthankfulness and contempt of the Gospel, and sinful living may
ruinate famous Churches. Where are the Churches, that then were in those
places? Oh how has the Turkish fury swallowed up almost all amongst them? If
we continue in sin, may not our sun set, as well as theirs?

Hitherto of their outward estate. Their spiritual estate in general is
comprehended in their election.

Elect]

There is a fourefold election.

1. There is a general election of a Nation, or City, A fourefold Election.
singled out to the benefit of Gods general covenant: and so Israel was Elect
Deuteronomy. 4.37.
.

2. There is an Election to salvation, which is the eternal predestination of
God appointing certain men to be vessels of mercy, and to enjoy the glory of
heaven Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
.

3. There is an Election to sanctification, which is performed in time by the
power of the Gospel, separating the foreordained from the mass of forlorn
men unto holiness of life John 15.19.
: This is nothing else, but effectual vocation.

4. There is an El^ction to the administration of some office, as to the
Apostleship John 6.70.
.

Election imports a singling of a man from some thing, that is vil^ and
miserable; and so the godly are elect from the mass of condemned men in Adam,
and from under the power of Satan, and the kingdom of darkness: From what
they are elected
from the first death: from the company of evil men: from the tyranny of
sins of all ^o^^s* from (...) ^igo^ an^ (...) o^ ^he law, and eternal
^ondemnation.

These Elect men are not to be known by their numbers Deuteronomy. 7.7.
, wit, wealth, How they may be known.
nobility 1 Cor. 1.27. James 2.5.
, beauty, personage 1 Samuel 16.7.
, nor by their presence, pains, or priority in Gods vineyard Mat. 20.16.
: but they are to be known both by their birth, and by their life: By their
birth, and so they may be known, for they are borne of God, borne by promise,
borne again: they are then called and converted of God, Romans 8.30. By their
life, they may be known, for they depart from iniquity, and call upon the name
of the Lord. 2 Timothy 2.19. they are fruitful in well-doing, and their fruits
remain. John 15.16. they are holy and unreb^keable. Ephesians. 1.4. they bear the
image of the Son of God both in holiness and sufferings: for holiness, Romans
8.29. They abound in faith, virtue, godliness, knowledge, temperance,
patience, brotherly love, and kindness, 2 Pet. 1.5.6.10.

These Elect men have admirable felicities, and privileges above all the men
in the world: For,

1. They have most dear acceptance with God, in his beloved, Ephesians. 1.5. 8
Privileges of Gods chosen.
they are his delight, Psalm. 132.13. his chief treasure, Psalm. 135.4. his
pe^uliar people, Deuteronomy. 7.6. and 26.18.

2. They are adopted to be the children, and heirs of God in Christ, Ephesians.
1.4.

3. They have the pleasures of Gods house, Psalm. 65.4, 5.

4. In adversity they are sure of countenance, Esa. 41.8, 9. Protection, v. 10.
the avenging of their wrongs, Esaias 41.11, 12. Luke 18.8. deliverance and
victory, Zach. 1.17.20.21.

5. The non-suting of all actions, and accusations in heaven against them, Romans
8.35.

6. They are made the friends of God, and from thence have audience in all
suites, and communication of the secrets of God, John 15.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 4.7.37.

7. They are assured of preservation to the end, Mat. 24.

8. They shall obtain glory in Jesus Christ, being chosen to salvation, ^ Thessalonians. 2.13, 14, 15.

Uses
Hence we may inform our selves: 1. That there is a choice: God did not drive
in whole Nations, Cities, Towns, etc. but a certain number of them. 2. That
the doctrine of Election may be taught: It is true, that it is in some respects
strong meat, and has in some things an Abyssus.

It should also inflame in every one of us, both praises, and prayers to God,
that he would above all things remember us with the favor of his people, and
comfort us with the joy of his chosen, Psalm. 106;3, 4, 5
and above all care, to care to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10. What shall it profit a man to be sure of his house, money, lands, etc.
and not to be sure of the salvation of his soul? Know ye not that Christ Jesus
is in you, except you be reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5.

Such as find by the signs, their Election, should abound in all possible
thankfulness to God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. etc.

Further, has God cho^en us, and shall we not live like Gods Elect? It should
teach us to endeavor to show by our works, that we are chosen of God,
separating our selves from the wicked, and holding forth the light of the truth
in all unrebukablenesse of holy conversation, not being discouraged with ill
entertainment in the world, Deuteronomy. 10.12. to 18. and 14.1. and 26.26. etc.
Ephesians. 1.5. and 2.10. John 15.18, 19, 20. etc.

Finally, we should hence learn not to be ashamed of Gods Elect, but choose
unto us, whom God has chosen to him: choose them, I say, both to honor them,
and to sort with them, and to countenance them, and defend them. Ministers
should acknow^edge there in their teaching, and great men in conversing.

This also may be a doctrine of singular terror to wicked men, that will not be
gathered and called by the means of salvation, Esaias 66.4, 5. If it be such a
felicity to be chosen of God, what misery is it then to be rejected of God for
ever? If such a vexation to be disgraced and scorned of great men, what is it
then to be rejected of the great God? and this is the more woeful, if the
forerunner of the full declaration of it be upon men, I mean a spirit of
slumber, Romans 11.7.10.

And thus of Election.

This Election is first amplified by the ground of it, which is the
foreknowledge of God.

According to fore-knowledge]

Distinctions about praescience.
Praescience or foreknowledge in God is considered more largely* or more
strictly: more largely, and so it notes the whole act of praeordination: so in
the 20. verse of this chapter, it is rendered ordained: more strictly and
properly, for the knowledge of God, praeceding in order the appointment to the
end, and thus it is taken two ways: For there is a praescience, they call in
schools absolute, by which God from eternity does know all things simply and
absolutely: Praesci^^tia 1. abso^u^^. 1. specialis and approbationis.
so the word is used, 2 Pet. 3.17. There is also a praescience, they call
special, by which God not only knows the Elect, as he knows other
things, but acknowledges them for his, and loves them above all others, and
this is called the knowledge of approbation. Romans 8.27. and 11.2.

In the first sense there is difference between Foreknowledge, Providence,
and Predestination: Praescience reaches to all things, to be done either by
God, or any other, and so to sins: Providence reaches to all, that God would
do: Predestination only to the counsel of God about reasonable creatures.

Quest. If any ask after what manner God viewes things, or looks upon them, or
knows them?

Answ. I answer; that we are not able to express the manner of divine
knowledge, How God knows things
unless it be by way of negation, that is, by denying to God those ways of
knowledge, which are in the creatures, and note imperfection: For God does not
know things

1. By sense, as by hearing, seeing, tasting, etc. For these things are in God
only by an Anthropopathy, or Metaphore.

2. By opinion or conjecture: For that knowledge is neither certain, nor
evident, and therefore cannot be in God.

3. By faith: For God knows nothing by relation, or report of others. Besides,
though faith be a certain knowledge, yet it is not evident. Heb. 11.1.

4. By Art: For God does not know things by defining, dividing, compounding, or
reasoning.

5. Successively: For God knows all things in one view, and not one after
another.

6. Nor lastly by Images, but by his essence, by a way more excellent above all
Men or Angels, by a knowledge most true, certain, evident, and perfect.

In this foreknowledge of God is as in a book recorded the persons, birth,
qualities, and deaths of every man, Psalm. 139.16. and the deeds of all men,
according to which they must be judged.

The special foreknowledge of God looks upon the Elect only, and is joined
with an infinite (...) and delight in them, Romans 8.27. and 11.2. 2 Timothy 2.19.
Exodus ^^. ult. This is called the (...) of life, and the writing of the house
of Israel, Esaias 4.4. Revel. 20.12. Phil. 4.3. Dan. 12.1. Ezekiel. 13.9.

The Uses follow.

1. For information: We have here a sea of contemplation, that the heart of man
can never be able to conceive of. Uses.
How great cause had the Apostle to cry out as he did, O the depths of the
wisdom of God! so David Psalm. 114.24. Romans 11.29. Secondly, this may show us,
that men cannot possibly be just before God, seeing the knowledge of God is so
excellent and infinite, Job. 9.2, 3.

2. The doctrine of this infinite and eternal knowledge, or foreknowledge of
God, is used in diverse scriptures for singular consolation in diverse
distresses: as

1. Against the malicious practices of evil men, How the foreknowledge of God
may comfort us in diverse distresses.
that set themselves against the godly. They shall not prevail, though they
think the Lord does not see: yet they shall one day know, that he that made
the eye does see, and he that gave man understanding will correct: and for the
godly in the mean time this may comfort them, that all the hairs of their
head are numbered: Psalm. 94.1. to 12. Mat. 24.

2. Against the errors, and spiritual frauds, and deceits of men: The deceiver
and the deceived are with the Lord, Job 12.13, 16. and therefore it is not
possible, that the Elect should be finally deceived. Mat. 24.

3. Against our own cares, and doubtfulnesse under the afflictions, and
troubles of this life: Does our heavenly father know what we stand in need of?
Mat. 6.33. does not knowledge also extend to the number, times, places, and
measure of our crosses? and not our persons only, but our banishment, tears,
etc. are in his book. Psalm. 56.9.

4. Against our unbeleefe and distrust of Gods love, and favorable acceptance
of us; His eye has been ever, is, and will be upon the righteous: Psalm. 34.16.

5. Against the fear of falling away: Is not the foundation of God sure? Has
it not this seal, he knows who are his? 2 Timothy 2.19.

6. Against the spiritual distresses, and diseases of our souls: He has
experience and skill to heal the broken hearted, and this is a great addition
to our comfort, he knows our desires in all the afflictions of our spirits,
Psalm. 147.5.

7. Against the troubles of our private Calling: Thus God comforted, and
encouraged Jeremy: Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee; and before
thou came out of the womb, I ordained thee a Prophet to the Nations, etc.
Ier. 1.5, 6, 7.

8. Against the weakness of our faith in things promised, and are not yet
performed: In respect of this foreknowledge, he calls things, that yet are
not, as if they were. Romans 4.17.

9. Against the doubt of audience, and success in prayer: and the Lord said
unto Moses, I will do this thing also, that thou have spoken. For thou have
found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name: Exodus 33.17.

10. Against the fear of Gods wrath, and forsaking of man, when he enters into
judgment: The Lord will not cast off the people, whom he knew before. Psalm.
94.12. to 17. Romans 1^.2. and 8.29.

11. Against the contempt of the world, and the censures of the wicked, and all
their flanders and indignities: The Lord knows us, and our desires, and
endeavors, God knows our hearts, and our innocence, whatsoever the world say
or think of us: It matters not what the prisoner says, if the Judge acquit
us: If God know us, it is no matter, whether the world do, or no.

12. Lastly, How can it be but well with the righteous, whom not only a God
loves, but with such a lasting and preventing love, when he cares for them, and
takes order so long before.

3. Thirdly, the doctrine of Gods foreknowledge may teach us:

1. To fear God, and forsake sin, and not to dally with disobedience, seeing
all is naked and manifest before him, with whom we have to deal, Heb. 4, 13.
and we may be the surer of it, seeing his very word can tell us of our
thoughts, and the secret intent of our hearts, ver. 12.

2. To trust upon God, and rely upon him in all estates, seeing there is
nothing but he knows it, and has considered of it long since.

3. It should inflame us to piety, seeing no good can be done, but he will know
it, though it be done never so secretly: It should make even holy thoughts
precious, and dear to us, and it should make us abhor hypocrisy, seeing it
is so vain, and God seet so evidently through us, at all times, and in all
actions. Psalm. 139.17. 1 Thessalonians. 5.8, 9.

4. It should quicken us to the meditation and care of our assurance of our
eternal salvation: God has delighted himself to foresee it from eternity,
and shall not we foreknow, and fore-meditate of our own glory?

5. Paul uses this as a reason, why we should help and encourage Christians,
and do all the good we can for them. For their names are in the book^ of life.
Phil. 4.3. etc.

6. When we are to choose men for any Calling, we should learn of God to know
before, and those we see to be wicked, we should never Elect: custom, riches,
friends, entreaty, kindred, etc. should never prevail with us.

7. It shows us how we should love one another, we should imitate God, no
time should wear out our affection, God is not sadded with love, though he
set his affections upon us before the beginning of the world was.

4. This doctrine of Gods eternal knowledge is terrible for wicked men, and
that in four respects:

1. Against the conceit of their own parts, and praises, Job. 11.11. If God
should set in order before thee, what he knows by thee, thou would appear
more ugly then any Leper.

2. Against their persuasion of secrecy in their sins, as these places tell
them: Psalm. 90.8. and 139.1.11. to 16. Ier. 17.9, 10, 11. yea this doctrine
tells them, that God has had time enough to know them, he has observed them
from eternity.

3. Against their persuasion of impunity, they think, they shall escape
punishment for their sins, but they are deceived. as is at large showed. Psalm.
94.1. to 11. and 139.8, 9. Revel. 2.23.

4. Lastly, woe to the man, whom the Lord does not acknowledge by his word,
spirit, and children in this world: This imports, that he shall not be known in
the day of Christ: oh how woeful will that sentence be, when he shall say, away
from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not: Mat. 7.27.

Hitherto of the foundation: The founder follows, who is described, by what he
is himself, viz. God: and what he is to us, viz: a Father.

Of God]

To be elect and known before others is a great benefit: but to be chosen of
that dreadful and immortal being, and that when nothing was, must needs add
to this prerogative. If God choose them, it matters not, who refuse them: If
God know them, it matters not who is ignorant of them: If God honor them, it
matters not who disgrace them.

He that fo^nded our election in his own eternal praesc^e^^e, is ^ee, that
founded this earth, and spread over it this great heaven: Jehovah Elo^im is his
name; and spiritual, incomprehensible, immortal, infinite, almighty is his
nature: The immense fountain of all love, mercy, holiness, justness,
goodness, wisdom, and bounty: It is he that before guided the ways of
eternity, as he now does of times.

What God has done in time, is done, that we might know, and praise him: but
what he did before time, is without our measure, and as it comes nearer to
Gods nature; so it goes farther from our apprehension; at least, till we be
glorified in heaven.

But this is a sea, over which no ship has failed: a Mine, in which no spade
has delved: an Abyssus, into which no buck^t has ^unke. our sight is too
tender to behold this sun; our understanding too finite to comprehend this
glorious and infinite being, and therefore I pass from what he is in
himself, to consider, what he is to us.

The Father]

God is Father to Christ, to Angels, to Men: To Christ he is Father by nature,
as he is God, and by personal union as he is man: To Angels he is father by
creation, and to faithful men by adoption: As he is father to Christ, I
consider of it ver. 3. here only, as he is father to the faithful.

God has an everlasting fatherly care and compassion over the faithful and
elect, Doctrine.
and this may serve for three sorts of uses: Uses.


1. For consolation to the godly: Comforts to the godly as God is their father.
God uses them and ever will use them like a Father, both for the affections
of a father, and for the provisions of a father: he both loves them, and
provides for them, as a father for his children. Gods affection to the godly is
a fatherly affection: for it is 1. free, and 2. tender, and 3. constant. 1. A
fatherly love is a free love, there needs no argument to a father, but that,
this is my child; so it is with God. 2. A fatherly love is a tender love, it
has much compassion and care in it* such is Gods love to the godly: Look how
Parents pity their children so does God pity them, that fear him, Psalm.
103.13. yea God is troubled in their troubles, and his bowels are turned in him
in their discouragements and griefs Esaias 63.8. Ier. 31.18, 19. 3. A father
still loves his child, so does God, and much more, then all fathers, or any of
them. For he loves with an everlasting love, Esaias 49.14. and is called an
everlasting father, Esaias 9.6. Add unto these, that a father will love his
child, though no body else do: so can God love us, though he love alone.
Though natural fathers, and kindred forsake us, Psalm. 27.5.10. and spiritual
fathers forget us, Esaias 63.16, 17. yet God will never cease to love us, he
will never leave us nor forsake us. Only we must ever remember, that Gods love
is a pure love: For it has not in it hurtful indulgence, he will not mar
his children with too much fondness: He can hide his face, and though he will
never take his mercies from them, yet if they sin, he will scourge them with
the rod of men, he will afflict them, though it be but for a short time. Psalm.
89. Esaias 67.7, 8, 9.

As is the affection of God, so is his provision for the godly, a fatherly
provision, he provides for them like a father, yea like a heavenly father in
their 1. attendance. 2. diet. 3. preservation in trouble. and 4. portion. 1.
For their attendance: he provides for them better, then the great men of the
earth can do for their children: He has given his Angels to be ministering
spirits to all these heirs of salvation, and these pitch their tents round
abo^t them, Psalm. 34. Heb. 1.14.2. And for diet, they are fed with the food
that perishes not, yea such food, as he that eats thereof shall live for
ever. John 6.27. 3. And for preservation in trouble, the power of God does so
keep them, that a hair of their heads cannot fall to the ground without the
providence of their heavenly father, Mat. ^^. and ^o that (...) all the hairs
of their head are numbered, and the spirit of God is given them to teach them,
to comfort them, and uphold them. 4. And for portion: he has blessed them with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly things, and since the earth was forfeited
into Gods hands again, he has restored the inheritance of the earth to none
(as is the opinion of many learned) but to them: Other men hold without any
title from God, Ephesians. 1.3. Esaias 45.11, 17, 18, 19. and in the world to come,
they shall shine as the stars of heaven, and as the sun in the firmament,
Mat. 13.43.

Object.
Ob. But God has so many sons of this kind, how can he provide for them
all?

Solut.
Sol. Our hearts are not troubled for that: we believe in God, and believe in
Christ also: In our fathers house there are many mansions: if it had not been
so, Christ would have told us, and he is gone before to make our places ready
for us. John 14.1, 2.

Object.
Ob. But they have so many adversaries without and within, that there is great
danger, lest they be pulled out of their inheritance.

Solut.
Sol. God that has begotten them, and given them to Christ, is greater then
all: no man can pluck them out of his hands, John 10.29.

Object.
Object. But they are for the most part a people of many, and those continual
wants, there is scarce any moment, wherein they want not something, and
therefore must either be uncomfortable in themselves, or burdensome to God.

Solut.
Sol. Whatsoever they ask the father he will give it them: It is no trouble to
God to receive Petitions from them continually, he delights in it, and rather
blames them for asking so seldom, and so little, John 16.23.

Ob. God himself plagues them with troubles as much, Object.
or rather more then he does other men.

Sol. The fathers of our flesh, correct us, Solut.
and shall not the father of spirits do it? and the rather if we consider, that
he shows his love therein: a man will correct his own son more, then another
man's, and he does correct us for our profit, that we might partake of his
holiness and live, and there is much fruit in the afflictions of the godly,
all working together for the best unto them: If God spare wicked men, it is
because they are bastards, and not sons, and yet there is a great deal of
difference between Gods usage of wicked men, and of godly, even in their
trouble. For he spares and pitties his own children as a man will spare and
pity his own son. He never strikes them but it is in measure, and in their
branches. He does not make a full end of them to confound them, as he will do
with wicked men, Heb. 12. Esaias 27.

Ob. The world sees no such excellency in them, or in their Estate. Object.


Sol. The world knows them not, because it knows not God their father: Solut.
they are now the sons of God, but it does not appear, what we shall be:
but we know, that when Christ shall appear, we shall be all like him, 1 John
3.1, 2.

This doctrine of Gods fatherly love to his people may serve for instuction.
Use 2.


1. To godly men. 2. To carnal men. 3. To earthly fathers.
1. Godly men should learn here to live like the children of God, and so
they'doe, if they look to three things.

1. That they live without sin, How we may live like Gods children.
and not shame their father by their wicked lives: their works should show,
and bear witness by their care to finish them, that God is their father, and
set them about them, John 5.36. Their righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of civil men in this world: Mat. 5.20. and therefore their
daily prayers unto God should be, that he would establish them in holiness
before him, till the coming of Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.

2. Secondly that they live without care, having such a heavenly father to
provide for them, Mat. 6.25. etc.

3. Thirdly that they live out of the society with wicked men cleaving only to
the household of God, 2 Cor. 6.18. they should love their fathers house, Psalm.
27.4. and deny utterly the love of this world, John 2.15, 16.

2. Carnal men should hence take notice, if it may be, to be better advised,
and not meddle with the godly, no not to despise the least of these little
ones: Their Angels always behold the face of God for them, and their heavenly
father will requite their wrongs, Mat. 18.10. etc.

3. Earthly parents should here learn of God: God cares for his children
before they were, and shall not they care for their children, when God has
given them to them: Gods greatest care is to provide holiness for his
children, and should not they learn of God therein.

Lastly, this may serve for reproof both of some of the godly, Use 3.
and also of the wicked, that live in the Church of God: some of the godly do
greatly forget themselves about this point, that is such, as stir not up
themselves to take hold of God, and to call upon his name in their distresses,
but sit down dismaide and dead hearted, as if there were not the compassion,
care, or help of a father, in God: this is reproved, Esaias 64.8. Those sons of
Belial also, that live in the Church, and call God father, but live like the
Devil, who indeed is their father, whose works they do: those I say are most
bitterly reproved in these, and such like Scriptures even from their daring to
call God father, Mal. 1.6. and 3. ult. Ier. 3.4. etc. Mat. 3.9. and 7.21. John
4.23. and 8.38.41.44. 1 John 3.15. 2 John 9.

Through sanctification of the spirit unto obedience and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ.]

There is difference of senses about the understanding and dependancy of these
words amongst Interpreters.

Some take sanctification in a large sense for man's righteousness in general,
and obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Christ, as the two parts or kinds
of it: by obedience understanding man's righteousness, or holiness in
himself, and by sprinkling of Christ^ blood, that righteousness of Christ,
that righteousness (I say) made ours by imputation, both which are applied or
wrought by the spirit of God.

Some others make sanctification the end, and obedience, and sprinkling the
means, and so conceive, that before man's sanctification there goes two things
in God: Election, and foreknowledge: and two things in Christ, obedience and
sufferings, and all this in both, that we might be sanctified.

Others understand sanctification of the heart, or spirit of man, as a means
intended in Gods Election for the fitting of us unto obedience of life, and the
fruition of the benefits purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ; and thus, I
take it, it is meant here.

The sum seems then to be this, that our lives may be obedient to Gods
will, and that we may enjoy the benefit of Christ's death, we must be sanctified
within in our spirits.

Sanctification of the spirit.]

Man is said to be sanctified, or made holy three ways:

Ex non sancto privative.
1. Of not holy privatively, and so man, that was once without holiness, is
made holy by regeneration, and justification.

Ex minus sancto.
2. Of less holy, and so Gods children are daily sanctified by proceeding from
grace to grace.

Ex non sancto negative.
3. Of (...) holy negatively, and so Christ as he was man was sanctified. For
there was a time, when Christ had not this holiness in his humane nature,
Thomas Aquinas.
viz. when his humane nature was not.

Spirit is taken sometimes for the holy Ghost, sometimes for an evil Angel, 1
Kings 22. Luke 10.20. sometimes for the Gospel, which has adjoined to it the
spirit, or working of the spirit of God, 2 Cor. 3.6. sometimes for the soul of
man, and so it is taken sometimes more strictly for the understanding, the
Queen of the soul, the reason of man's mind (and then the soul is taken for
the fear of affections) Ephesians. 4.^3. 1 Thessalonians. ^.23. sometimes more largely for
the whole inward man, the whole soul with all the faculties of it, and so I
take it here.

Diverse things may be noted here in the general.

1. First that without sanctification we can never have comfort of our
Election; by our obedience others may discover our Election, and by inward
holiness we may discern it of ourselves.

2. That our sanctification has some dependence upon Gods election, and that,
1. as he has ordained the rules of good works, we should walk in, Ephesians. 2.10.
2. as he has bound himself by his decree to guide his people to the
holiness, he does require of them.

3. That an outward civil life will not serve the turn, God requires
especially the sanctification of the heart of man, 1 Samuel 16.17. when God looks
for the marks of his own people he tries the heart and reins, Ier. 11.20.
and 4.14. Prove. 4.23. and 23.16. Gods ways are in the blessed man's heart, Ps.
84.5.

4. That there is flesh in the best of Gods Elect in this life, their spirits
only are sanctified.

Thus in general. More particularly concerning the sanctification of the
spirit, I propound two things distinctly to be considered of: 1. What need our
spirits have to be sanctified. 2. Wherein lies the sanctification of the
spirit of man.


Our spirits have great need to be sanctified: 1 By reason of the first sin,
What need our spirits have to be sanctified.
they want original righteousness, and they are corrupt and infected with a
general leprosy. 2. By reason of the steine and uncleanenesse all our actual
sins have added to the former corruption. 3. By reason of the inhabitation of
unclean spirits our spirits have in them trenches, cages, forts, and strong
holds of Satan, 2 Cor. 10.4. and therefore had need to be cleansed after
such soul spirits have been there. 4. The natural spirit of man frames
nothing but evil, and that continually: this makes God so weary, Genesis 6.

In particular all the faculties of the spirit of man need sanctification.

1. The mind is covered with a veil, wrapped in an ugly mantle of darkness,
distracted with error, coupled with a thousand forms of evil thoughts.

2. The memory performs no service to God: it should be Gods Treasurer, and
Register, but no body is in the office to keep record.

3. The Will is grievously diseased, and with sickness so distempered, that it
will not be ruled by any, not by God, not by men, not by reason, not by
religion, nor does it agree with it self. For man wills not always the same
thing.

4. The affections out of the first poison of natural corruption, have such
monstrous births of evil, that the spirit by them is set out of all order.
They are compared to beasts, Esaias 11. To fighting soldiers, 1 Pet. 2.12. To
tyrants making cruel laws, and leading into bondage, Romans 7.

5. The wretched Conscience (then which there was once no diviner thing on
earth) is now in miserable case. For either it is sick of a Lethargy, and
sleeps, or if it waken it is like a mad Dog* or Lion* or a Judge transported
with rage: It is ignorant without light: it is soiled or ^tein^d with a
thousand sins: It is impure, and exceeding base, and without all properties
of a divine Judge. For it is blind and will be corrupted, and will defer the
Affise, etc. Instead of a throne of judgment it is thrust into a hole, and
horrible dungeon of darkness, where the Sun of righteousness shines not,
and there for the most part, as if it were still night, it lies obscure and
sleeps.

And thus of the need we have of sanctification in our spirits. Wherein the
sanctification of the spirit lies.


The sanctification of the spirit lies in two things.

1. In cleansing the spirit from sin. 2. In adorning the spirit with graces.
In the cleansing of the spirit consider both from what, and how.

For the first, if any ask, Of cleansing the spirit of man, from what and how.
what there is in our spirits needs cleansing away?

I answer: That besides what has been showed, many more particulars may be set
out thus: There are vile both impieties, Answ.
and unrighteousness in our spirits must be done away. For impieties: There is
ignorance, error, atheistical thoughts, pride, hypocrisy, inconstancy,
hardness of heart, and division of heart, conceitednesse, vanity, self-love,
hatred of goodness, false fears, carnal confidence, forgetfulness, doubts,
unsetlednesse, unbeliefes of all sorts, and love of the world.

For unrighteousness: There are evil cares, and covetousness, lusts of all
sorts, hatred, malice, desire of revenge, anger, fretting, worldly gri^fe,
bitterness, coffeehouse, vainglory, emulation, inordinate affection, and
evil concupiscence: as good as men think their hearts and meanings are, they
may by this taste see, how foul their spirits are.

8 Things to cleanse the spirit of man.
Now for the second: The spirit is cleansed from these sins by degrees; and to
that purpose the spirit of God works and uses 8. distinct new qualities,
which have not place in the soul, but upon occasion of this service against
sin. And these are, 1. Spiritual poverty, or sense of sin and misery. 2. Base
estimation, viz: of the world, with the pleasures, profits, and lusts of it,
Phil. ^.8. Esaias 30.22. 3. Hatred of sin. 4. Shame for sin. Romans 6.21. 5.
Godly sorrow. 6. Fear. 7. Indignation. 8. A purpose and inclination to forsake
sin.


Thus of the cleansing of the spirit.

Of the adorning of the spirit
The adorning of the spirit follows: The spirit of man in sanctification is
adorned with holy graces; and here I consider of the adorning, 1. of the mind:
2. of the heart: 3. of the conscience.

Three things which adorn the mind in sanctification.
The mind is adorned with three things, which come new into it.

1. The first is a heavenly light. 2. The second is humbleness of mind. 3.
The third is purity of imaginations.
1. This light comes in by the illumination of the spirit, setting in the mind
a celestial kind of knowledge, and this stands in two things: For first this
sanctification breaks open a way, and sets at liberty the light of nature,
which was imprisoned and withheld in unrighteousness, and then there is
besides infused a new light from above, and this light has in it:

1 The light of the mind has 5. things in it.
1. A holy discerning of good and evil, truth and falsehood, by which the mind
in a measure discerns a general course of avoiding the ways of death and the
(...) of hell.

2. A holy inquiry, by which the mind aspireth after God and truth, and tries
things that differ.

3. Wisdom from above, by which the mind is carried not only to a foresight,
and forecast for the things of the soul and a better life, above the things of
the body, and this life; but is furnished with certain feeds of discretion
for practice with observation of the circumstances of time, place, persons,
manner, end, occasions, etc.

4. A sacred frame of piety, and pattern of godliness and truth, and this
pattern is so communicated to the understanding, that it is indelible, no
dangers, sin, or death can ever utterly abolish it. This frame of truth is
perfected by degrees.

5. There is planted in the mind Gods watch, by the light whereof all the
ways of the heart, and life are over-looked.

2 Humbleness of mind has 6. things in it.
2. The second grace planted in the mind, is humbleness of mind. 1 Pet. 5.5.
and this has in it,

1. A sense of the wants of the soul, and life of man.

2. A lowly kind of forecast in all things to glorify God, and profit man,
accounting it no abasement to serve and please with all readiness.

3. A thankful acknowledgement of the mercies of God infinitely above desert,
by which a man holds himself not worthy of the least of Gods mercies,

4. A freedom in matters of opinion, from self-conceit, by which a man
attaines to that, not to be wise in himself, or to rely upon his own reason,
or judgment. Thus a man is not high minded.

5. An accounting of others of Gods servants better then our selves.

6. A pronenesse to humiliation for sin, and humility in carriage.

3. The third thing brought into the mind is purity of imaginations, Purity of
imaginations.
holy thoughts, by which the mind converseth as it were in heaven already, and
feeds upon the fairest objects in heaven and earth. Prove. 14.22. Phil. 3. 20.
Colos. 3.1.

Thus much of the adorning of the mind.

2. The heart is adorned with 8. graces.

1. Holy desires: such as the heart felt not before, such as these: The heart
adorned with 8. graces.
after remission of sins, and righteousness by Christ, Mat. 5. after the
means of Gods kingdom, and the power of it, Psalm. 42. 1 Pet. 2.2. after the
presence of God, even that of glory, and the coming of Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8.2
Cor. 5.8. after communion of Saints (the heart longing after them) and in a
word, after all sorts of heavenly things.

2. Divine love: and that of God, Psalm. 18.1. of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.8. of the
word, Psalm. 119.103. of Gods house, Psalm. 26.8. and 84.5. of the godly, Psalm.
16.3. 1 John 3.14.

3. Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. in such things as these: 1. In the
satisfaction of Christ for sin, Galat. 6.14. Romans 5.11. 11 Things wherein a
sanctified heart rejoices.
and 15.13. 2. In his Election, Luke 10.20. 3. In the breasts of the Churches
consolation, Esaias 66.10. 4. In the word both read and heard, Psalm. 119.77. Ier.
11.16. John 3.29. and so in the sacraments. 5. In the sabbath, Esaias 58.13. 6.
In well-doing, Prove. 21.15. 7. In suffering for righteousness, Mat. 5.10. 8.
In the presence of God knowing the soul in adversity especially, Ps. 31.7.
Romans 5.4. 9. In the people of God, Ps. 137.6. 10. In all the good things the
Lord has given, as the pledges of his love. Deuteronomy. 26.11. 11. In the things
that pertain to God. Romans 15.17.


In these a Christian has his seasons, and though he may sow in tears, yet he
reapes in joy.

4. A holy fear of God, and that of his mercies, Ps. 147.11. Hos. 3.5. of his
word, Esaias 66.2. of his presence, especially in time of his service, Heb.
12.28. and of his name and glorious titles, Deuteronomy. 28.58. and in all things a
fear of his offense and displeasure, in respect of which a man is jealous of
his own infirmities. Pro. 28.18. 1 Pet. 1.17.

5. Confidence: in which the godly are as mount Sion, that cannot be moved,
Psalm. 125.5. by which he commits his way to God, Psalm. 37.5. and runs to
God for refuge, that he may be under his arms for ever, Deuteronomy. 33.27. Gods name
is to him a strong tower, Prove. 18. in respect of which, his place is on high,
even in the defense of the munitions of the rocks, Esa. 33.16 etc. yea such is
the power of this confidence sometimes, that though God trouble him with his
own hands, yet he will hope, Job 15.19. By this sign God knows his in the
day of trouble, and will own them, Neh. 1.7. and the eye of God is never off
them, because they trust in his mercies, Psalm. 33.18.

6. A holy hatred, by which he cannot abide sin, Ps. 97.10. the garment spotted
with the flesh, Jude 23. any false way, Ps. 119.128. wicked company, Ps. 26.5.
the work of such as fall away, Psalm. 101.3. them, that hate God and goodness.
Psalm 139, 21.

7. Peace: whereby a man is made to rest from passions, and perturbations, and
enjoys tranquillity in the contemplation of Gods favor, Romans 14.17.

8. Bowels of mercy, Col. 3.12. I omit hope, patience, meekness, and the rest:
either because they some way belong to some of these; or because these are the
most eminent, and easy to be discerned: and all these are put on by faith.

And thus much of the adorning of the heart.

The Conscience adorned with 9. things.
3. The conscience is also adorned with 9. gifts.

1. Life: it being quickened from the dead sleep, it was in. 2. Light from
ignorance. 3. Peace from terrors, differing from security. 4. Purity and care
in all things to do uprightly. Acts 23.1. Heb. 13.1. 2 Timothy 2.3. 5. Joy and
refreshing, it is now a continual feast, Prove. 15.15. 6. Constancy, Job 27.6.
so as no power can compel it. 7. Plainness and harmelessnesse. 2 Cor. 1.12.
8. A divine sentence, so as in determining, it judges for God, and as God. 9.
Tenderness: so as it will now smit^ for lesser evils.
Uses.
All this doctrine concerning the sanctification of the spirit may serve:

First for humiliation: We may all say, if God look upon our spirits,
innumerable evils have compassed us, Psalm. 40. and therefore we had need to
pray to God to cleanse us from secret sins, even those sins of our spirits.

2. For admonition to all men, to take heed, that they neglect not this great
work of inward sanctification, especially if God have touched the heart with
any inward feeling of thy estate and remorse of sin: Look to thy self, thy
heart is deceitful, and sin is a witch: watch against security, or relapse
into security* ^e persuaded it is a dangerous thing to sin against the purposes
of amendment: The axe is now laid to the root of the tree, and therefore
trifle not, let not thy righteousness be as the morning dew; thou art come
near to the kingdom of God, quench not the sparkles of light and remorse. And
much more this may warn such, as will not be touched with the care of
sanctification, take heed of a swinish and dogged heart, the Lord will not cast
pearls before such swine still. And thirdly, it may warn such, as rest in
giving fair words: If they praise the Sermons, and speak fair to Gods
servants, they think all is well: The Devil could speak Christ fair to be
rid of him, Mar. 1.24. and so did Herod, Mar. 6.20.

3. For instruction to all sorts of men, that yet find not comfort in this
work: oh labor about it, that thou may be cleansed from all filthiness
both of flesh and spirit, even sanctified throughout, following after
holiness, without which no man shall see God, 2 Cor. 7.3. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. Heb.
12.14. and if there were in men a heart to return, there are many
encouragements: Christ is given to us of God to be our sanctification; and in
his intercession, he remembered to pray for this, that God would sanctify us, 1
Cor. 1.30. John 17.14, 17, 19. and the word of Christ is able to sanctify us,
Acts 20.32. and Christ hereby proves his resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4.
and God has promised his spirit to help us, Ezech. 33.37.

4. For confirmation: since this is so, let him that is holy, be holy still.

5. For much thankfulness, in such, as have attained in any measure to the
gifts of Gods grace herein, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13.

Thus much of the sanctification of the spirit.

Unto obedienc^]

The first end of our sanctification is, that our lives may be brought into
obedience.

This obedience must be considered either in the 1. whole, or in the 2. parts.
1. In the whole it is profitable to observe three things: Of obedience in
general.
1. the original of true obedience: 2. The rules or properties of true
obedience in the manner of it. 3. The motives that might stir us up to the
care of obedience.

1. The cause of this obedience is 1. either without us, or 2. within us:
without us it is both God, and the word of God; Of the causes of our obedience.
God the Father causes it by electing, etc. the Son by redeeming: the holy
Ghost by calling. The word of God is the sampler or pattern of our obedience;
for if ever we would bring our lives into order, we must resolve not to follow
men's examples, wills, lusts, or our own reasons, inclinations, or conjectures;
but only to have recourse to the Law of God: this must be the light to our
feet, and the lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119. and 19.2 Tim. 3.15. to the
end we must obey them that have the oversight of us, and do instructs out of
the word, and observe the form of doctrine into which we are delivered, Romans
6.17. Heb. 7.18. and receive such teachers as the Corinthians received Titus, 2
Cor. 7.15. we should get an ear of obedience: Prove. 25.12.

2. The causes within us are either 1. general: the sanctification of our
spirit; or 2. special, and so it is Faith: For the first, the coherence
shows, that unless our hearts be sanctified, our lives can never be framed
to true holiness and obedience; and for faith, it is certain before ever we
can practice true obedience to the Law, we must have the obedience of Faith,
that is, we must be persuaded of Gods love to us, and receive his promises in
Christ, and repenting of our sins, believe the Gospel: Romans 1.5. and 10.16.
2 Thessalonians. 1.8. The faith of the Truth is generally the chief guide of all our
actions, whether they be works of reformation, or of our general calling, or
particular carriage: 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. For we must believe Gods threatenings, power,
promises, assistance and reward, or else our work will go slowly forward.

2. Now for the second: there are six things to be observed in the manner of
our obedience, Rules* or six things to be observed in all true obedience.
without which our life will never be brought into order.

1. The first is care. The Apostle says, we must yield our selves as servants
to obey: Romans 6.16. which notes, that we must do the works of God, and s^ew
our obedience to him, as the servant does his work, that is with great heed,
forecast, and care: God does not only require we should obey, but obey as
servants obey.

2. The second thing required in our obedience, is Wisdom: It is not enough to
do good, but we must be wise to that which is good, and simple concerning
evil: This the Apostle shows, Romans 16.19.

3. The third is Constancy: our obedience must be fulfilled, 2 Cor. 10.16. We
must not be weary of well-doing: 1 Thessalonians. 3.13.

4. The fourth is abnegation: In obeying Gods will, we must throughout the
course of our lives be contented to deny our selves, so as we would do Gods
will with patience, though crosses follow, Luke 8. A sign of the seed sown in
good ground, it brings forth fruit with patience: and besides it imports,
that if we mean to reform our lives aright, we must live soberly, showing our
moderation in diet, apparel, recreations, and the like: yea we must not think
it much to be crossed in our reason, desires, ease, profits, or preferments:
but be contented to be that we may be, with a good Conscience: Heb. 11.8. Genesis
22.18.

5. The fifth is sincerity: and the sincerity of our obedience appears, both
when we show respect to all Gods Commandments, as well as one, obeying in all
things: as also, when we obey without corrupt and carnal ends and respects:
Genesis 26.5. Phil. 2.12.

6. The sixth thing is peace: we must lay our projects so for holiness, as we
follow after peace, as much as is possible, and that with all men, much more
with the Church and people of God, Romans 12.19. Heb. 12.14. so as our
conversation be without division or offense: Romans 16.18, 19.

3. For the third point, we may remember that it was long since noted by
Samuel, Motive to obedience.
that obedience is better than sacrifice: 1 Samuel 15. This obedience is the end
of the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. If we be not trained up by the
Scriptures to good works, we do nothing with general profession of the name
of Christ. Romans 1.5. 2 Timothy 3.15. etc. If we obey not, we are the servants of
sin, and it will be our ruin, we shall dye in our sins: The Ministry had
never been broken open, but that the Nations might be brought to obedience:
Romans 16.26. If you obey not, you break the hearts of your teachers: it is not
good words, and liberal pensions will serve the turn, you must yield
obedience to our Ministry in your lives, or else you do nothing: Phil.
1.15.16 2 Cor. 7.15. Vengeance is ready against all disobedience, every whit as
ready in Gods hand, as in the Ministers mouth, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. In this text we
may see God delights to receive the obedience of his people from all eternity,
and all the benefits purchased by Christ's blood, shall be given to them that
obey, he is author of eternal salvation to them that obey. Heb. 5.9.

Thus of obedience in general:

External obedience which is here entreated of, is distinguished by the
Apostle: Romans 15.18. into two kinds. Of obedience in words.
For either it is obedience in word, or obedience in deed.

Quest. Here might some one say, what need the obedience of the tongue, our
tongues are free?

Answ. It seems some men think so: Those hypocritical, flattering, and
wicked men mentioned Psalm. 12.3. say their tongues are their own, and yet it
is certain, the Lord will have the tongue bound to the good behavior, Iam.
3.3.

Quest. What great hurt can there be in the tongue, if men live honestly
otherwise? It seems there can be no great offense in the tongue.

Answ. Men are extremely deceived that think they cannot commit dishonesty and
impiety by their words. There is a world of wickedness in the tongue, Jam. 3.6.
There are many sins which are most vile and hateful, which have their
principal seat in the tongue, or are practiced in words, as blasphemy,
murmuring, desperation, lip-service, swearing, cursing, perjury, charming,
reproaching, persecution by the mocking of the godly, bitter words, silthy
speaking, lying, backbiting, slandering, flattery, and false witness bearing,
together with diverse sins of deceit, hypocrisy, heresy, etc.

And on the other side excellent graces, and duties depend much upon the
service of the tongue: Gods glory; our own Callings, and other men's good are
much furthered by the tongue. By the tongue men preach, pray, confess their
sins, give thanks, comfort, exhort, rebuke, swear, vow, etc. and therefore
great reason, we should show our obedience even in the tongue.

Under the obedience of conversation are comprehended duties of piety to God,
of mercy to the distressed, of justice to all men, of temperance to our selves.
The catalogues of the sins we should avoid in our conversation, or of duties
we should do, I omit here, having some purpose, if God will, to handle them
more largely in Treatises by themselves.

And thus of obedience.

And sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.]

Before I come to the more particular, and full opening of these words, these
things may be touched in the general.

1. There was blood in Christ, he took the true nature of his brethren, true
flesh and blood, that he might serve and satisfy God in the same nature, that
had offended.

2. This blood was shed. If you ask, who shed it? I answer: Judas by selling
it: the Priests by advising it: the people by consenting to it: Pilate by
decreeing it: the soldiers by effecting it: Christ himself by permitting it,
and after presenting it to God: ( Heb. 9.14,) our sins, that chiefly caused
it. If any ask for whom it was shed? I answer briefly for the Church, Act. 20.
not for himself, nor for impenitent, and obstinate sinners, that dye in their
sins.

3. It is not enough, that the blood of Christ be shed to make us happy,
unless it be applied also: which the word sprinkling notes.

4. This effusion of blood was solemnly prefigured, or foretold by the
sacraments, and sacrifices of the Law. For this word sprinkled is a Metaphor,
borrowed from the legal sprinkling; which shows us two things: 1. The great
account that God and good men make of it, in that it was so solemnly and
anciently typed out: 2. That the ceremonies of that Law are now abolished,
seeing we have here the true sprinkling of the blood fore-shadowed out.

5. That our estate in Christ is better now, than our estate in Adam was. Our
estate in Christ better then our estate in Adam here in this life.


For God here in his eternal counsel is brought in over-looking that first
estate in Adam, and setting up his rest in this estate purchased in the blood
of his Son. If any man marvel at this, he shall be thus satisfied: Our
estate in Christ is better, than our estate was at the best in Adam, even in
this life, and therefore much more in the world to come: In this life, it is
better only in two respects. 1. That we cannot fall from this happiness. 2.
That Christ's righteousness imputed to us is better, then that righteousness
was, inherent in Adam. Now for the world to come, heaven is better then
paradise.

6. We can never discern our comfort in the blood of Christ, till we be
sanctified in spirit, and set upon the reducing of our lives into the obedience
of Christ. Justification and Sanctification are inseparable. Thus much for the
general.

In particular, concerning this sprinkling of the blood of Christ, I consider
two things: 1. What benefits the Christian enjoyes by the blood of Christ,
which is here noted, as the end of his sanctification: 2. The mystery of this
sprinkling, or applying of the blood of Christ, as it was shadowed out by the
legal sprinklings.

The benefits which flow from the effusion of the blood of Christ are either
general, or particular. The general are; The benefits flowing from the blood
of Christ.
1. The purchase of the Church Acts 20. 2. The ratification of the new
Testament, or covenant of grace, Heb 9.18. 3. The breaking down of the
partition wall between Jews and Gentiles, and the adopting of the abject
Gentiles, the free denizing of the Gentiles, and repealing of all statutes of
aliens, Ephesians. 2.13. etc. 4. The reconciliation of all things both in heaven
and earth, and the dissolving of that enmity, which came in by sin, Col. 1.20.

The particular benefits, which flow from the blood of Christ to every
converted Christian, are

1. Justification: which has in it, 1. the pacification of Gods anger: Christ's
blood is the propitiatory, like the cover of the Arc, that hides the law from
the sight of God, Romans 3.25. 2. the pardon of all sins, 1 John 1. 7.9. Ephesians.
1.7. 3. prevention of Gods eternal wrath, or the loss of heaven, Romans 5.9. 4.
the garment of imputed righteousness, or putting on of robes made white in his
blood, Rev. 7.14.

2. Sanctification, and the cleansing the conscience from dead works to serve
the living God. Heb. 9.13, 14.

3. The sanctification of all the means of help to the believer both
spiritual and temporal: the very book of God is sprinkled with the blood of
Christ, that it may be opened, and of use to the faithful, and so all means
else in his general and particular calling. Heb. 9.19, 20.

4. Intercession: the blood of Christ speaking better things, then the blood of
Abel, pleading daily for the godly, and procuring the establishment of favor
in God, and acceptance. Heb. 12.24.

5. Victory over Satan, who is overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and the
word of the testimony, Rev. 12.11. so as his molestations, and temptations
shall not prevail.

6. The destruction of him, that had power over death, so as now the believer
needs not fear death, nor can he be hurt of it. Heb. 2.14.

7. Entrance into the most holy place, even within the Veil, that is, into
heaven. Heb. 10.19, 20. you may see more John 6.53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, etc.

All this may serve for diverse uses: As

Uses.
1. For singular consolation to all the godly: Oh what an honor is it to be
descended of the blood of Christ? How does a Christian man's new birth in this
respect excel all the nobility of birth in the world? John 1.13. What reason
have we of thankfulness for so happy a condition? what should we complain of?
what matters it, what we lose, or want, if we neither lose nor want the blood
of Christ? How incomparable are these benefits beyond all the glory of this
world, if we have eyes to see them, and hearts large enough to conceive of the
glory of them? The Lord from eternity looking upon the blood of his Son sets up
his re^t there, as having provided a sufficient portion for all that shall be
sanctified by his spirit.

2. For instruction: we should every one of us be incited to all possible care
of assurance, that Christ dyed for us, and get it ratified to our hearts by all
the testimonies we can. There be three witnesses of a man's happiness: 1. the
water: 2. the blood: 3. and the spirit, 1 John 5.6. The water of repentance:
the blood of expiation in the passion of Christ applied by faith; the spirit of
sanctification testified by saving graces, and new divine gifts.

3. For terror to all wicked men: that sin against the blood of Christ, by
despising and neglecting the grace of the covenant, by swearing, by unworthy
receiving the sacrament, and by their obstinate unbeleefe and impenitency.
Shall the blood of Abel cry for such vengeance, and shall not the blood of
Christ much more? What a blood-guiltinesse do these men draw upon themselves,
that sin against the blood of Christ? If Judas burst his heart with despair
for betraying it, how can their case be better for despising it?

Thus of the benefits, which come by the blood of Christ: Now it follows,
that I should open the meaning of those ceremonial legal sprinklings, and
show, how they did in their kind fore-signifie the mystery of this sprinkling
of the blood of Christ.

There was a ^ourefold legal sprinkling. 1. the first was of the blood of the
red Cow, and of a water made of the ashes of the red Cow, Number. 19. 2. the
second was of the blood of the Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12. the third was of the
bullock by the High Priest, cleansing the Tabernacle, Levit. 16. the fourth was
of the blood of the burnt offering at the ratification of the covenant: and
that these things may be made more plain, I would take liberty to explain
those types, as they lie in the text, though the explication thereof will in
some things contain a little digression from this Text. And first for the
sprinkling mentioned Numb. 19.

The Israelites by their wicked murmurings had brought the plague of God upon
themselves: In their distress they cry and seek reconciliation: An
explication of the whole Ceremony of the sprinkling of the blood of the red
Heifer, Numb. 19.
the Lord makes an ordinance, and shows a way, how he may be pacified, where
many things may be noted.

1. That of necessity the expiation must be made in blood, which was a type of
the blood of Christ: God will never be friends with offenders, till they bring
him the blood of his Son to make atonement; and this is of such absolute
necessity, that in the second verse the direction is called, the ordinance of
the law commanded of the Lord. Note: an ordinance, a law, and commanded: to
show the peremptorinesse of the Lord in this point, we must lay hold upon the
blood of Christ, or God will never turn away his displeasure from us.

2. That this expiation belongs only to the house of Israel.

3. That they of the house of Israel, that is, the members of the true Church
need to be called upon in this point, he must speak to the children of Israel,
verse 2.

4. That Christ, that should be the true sacrifice, must be one taken out of
the Congregation: one that lived amongst men on earth, and should be offered
up in the flower of his youth, and should likewise take the very infirmities of
our nature upon himself: This was shadowed by the H^ifer taken out of the
heard.

5. The Heifer was red, to shadow out the bloody passion of Christ: The Church
says of Christ, my love is white, and ruddy: white, in respect of the
righteousness of his life; and ruddy, in respect of his passion unto blood.

6. The Heifer was without spot, and blemish, to signify, that Christ should
be without sin: He was indeed in the similitude of sinful flesh, but had no
sin in his flesh: It is somewhat, that the Heifer must be such, as had in her
self no blemish: Note, in her self; for it is true, Christ had no fault in
himself, but his members were not without fault. For no flesh in this life is
without sin, but the flesh of Christ.

7. The Heifer must be such, as upon which never came yoke, and that fitly and
significantly required. For such was Christ: for he never bare the yoke, in
that he never sinned; he came to deliver those, that were under the yoke, and
servants of sin, but knew no sin himself. Besides, the yoke was not put upon
his flesh, because he had power uncompelled to lay down his life, and to take
it up again. Some say, that a Heifer was to be offered to expi^^e the idolatry
in the Calfe, and it was to be brought to Moses* because Aaron had sinned: and
must be without yoke, to note, that the Israelites had cast off the yoke of
Gods law, but the former sense is the right.

8. This Heifer was to be brought to Moses, and why that? not only to
signify, that Christ should be condemned under pretense of the breach of Moses
law; not only because he should dye by the appointment of the Magistrate; but
to import, that Christ must be offered up to God the Father, the Lawgiver, who
was the party offended.

9. Who must bring this Heifer to Moses? Answ. All the Congregation of Israel,
they must all get them a red Heifer, that is, a bloody Savior, or else they
can never be accepted: This is the best, yea the only present they can bring
to God to pacify his displeasure toward them.

10. Ver. 3. It is said, He shall give her to Eleazar the Priest. Who delivered
up Christ to be slain? In the letter, the Jews; in the mystery, the Elect.
But why delivered to the Priest? to note (as in all other sacrifices) the
priesthood of Christ by his eternal spirit offering up himself to God, Heb.
9.14. perhaps to foretell, that the Priests should kill Christ. But why to
Eleazar, rather then to Aaron? Some say, because Aaron had offended in the
Calfe: But other say, to note, that the passion of Christ should not only serve
for that time, or the time under the law; but for their successors, and all
successions to come; and to note, that this was a doctrine to be delivered
down by all Ministers one after another.

11. It must he without the camp, to prefigure, that he should suffer without
Jerusalem, and thereby leave us a warning to withdraw our selves from
conversation with this world, and bear our reproach, Ioh. 19. Heb. 13.

12. She must be slain before Eleazars face: The flesh of Christ was slain
before the face of the Priests of the Lord in the new Testament; or rather
Christ was offered up before the face of God the Father: that which in the sight
of the world was a punishment, in the sight of God was a sacrifice.

13. Ver. 4. Eleazar must take of this blood with his finger, to note, that men
may not rudely with blind hopes thrust in their hands into this sacred blood:
it must be touched, or applied with great discretion, and reverence; and the
blood of Christ is to be touched with our fingers, or hands, not with our
mouths, or hearts only: To note, that our practice should be dyed in the
blood of Christ, and savor of the virtue of his death, and our applications of
it, that so we may imitate his passion as well as know it: 1 Pet. 2.21.

14. The blood must be sprinkled directly before the tabernacle of the
Congregation 7. times. Some understand the Jewish synagogue, upon which the
curse for the effusion of Christ's blood came most exquisitely, according to
their own desire, when they said, His blood be upon us, and our children: But
rather hereby is signified, that the Church of God only has the benefit of
Christ's blood applied; and then 7. times notes both the perfection of
Justification, and the often need we have of the renewing of the application of
it, and also the continuance of it to all ages.

15. The skin, flesh, blood, and dung of the heifer must be burnt, Ver. 5. By
the skin, flesh, and blood may be meant the substance of the flesh of Christ:
and by the dung, the base indignities and contumelies, which were cast upon
him, and these were all offered up, and sacrificed in the fire of his passion.

16. Ver. 6. Cedar-wood, hysop, and scarlet are not without their
signification: The Papists reach high here, that can find in these three to
be meant three persons suffering with Christ: By Hysop should be meant the
Virgin Mary, and by the Cedar, John the Evangelist, and these two should suffer
with him per compassionem mentis, and by the scarlet should be meant the
thief, that suffered with him per compassionem carnis.

Some think that the Cedar-wood is hope, that dwells on high, and will not be
putrified: Hysop is faith, a low growing herb, that fastens her root upon the
rock: scarlet is charity: Others understand by the Cedar contemplation: by the
hysop humility, and by scarlet twice dyed, charity which is twice dyed, Coccus
bis tinct^^.
viz. on the one side with the love of God, on the other with the love of our
neighbor: All these must burn in the Lords passion: but I think, that hereby
may be noted, that three things arise out of the passion of Christ: 1. the
(...) of immortality. 2. the hysop of mortification: For so the word purge
applied to hyssop Psalm. 51. does import. 3. the scarlet is the blood of Christ,
which is twice dyed, in that it is twice applied: once for expiation, 600.
years ago: and then again for justification of every particular believer.

17. The impurity of the Priests mentioned verses 7, 8. might prefigure the
impurity of the Jewish Priests, till they were washed by conversion from their
sin in killing Christ, of whose conversion is mentioned Act. 6. But rather
hereby may be gathered, as the Apostle does gather it, the great excellency of
Christ's Priesthood above all those legal Priests. For they in their solemnest
sacrifices were impure themselves, and needed cleansing but Christ was not so,
Heb. 10.

Quest. How could the Priests be made unclean by that, which did purify the
people? Answ. Uncleanenesse was two ways contracted. 1. First by the
foulness of the things touched, and so he that touched a dead corpse was
unclean. 2. Secondly by the unworthiness of the man touching, and so it was
here: He must profess himself unworthy to touch so sacred an expiation; we
had need to take time even till the evening to humble our souls, and bewail
our unworthiness of the blood of Christ.

18. Now after the death of the Heifer, it is said Verse 9. that a man that is
clean, must gather up the ashes of the Heifer, and lay them up without the
Camp in a clean place. This man, that is clean, is the Gentile purified by
faith (For this is after the death of Christ) The gathering of the ashes is the
applying of the merits of Christ, and laying hold of the mysteries of his
kingdom. The laying up of the ashes imports the Christians accounts of Christ's
merits, as his chief treasure: The clean place is the clean heart, for the
merits of Christ belong not to all Gentiles, but to such as have a clean heart,
and will keep the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. Without the Camp
notes the native condition of the Gentiles, who were without the law: strangers
from the commonwealth of Israel, and from the covenant of promise, without
sacrifices, and out of the Synagogue of the Jews.

19. These ashes are kept for the congregation; to note, that there shall never
be want of merit to any Christian, to any member of the congregation of Christ:
when he says, it is to make a water of separation, it notes, what our sins
bring upon us by nature, we are separate and cast out of Gods sight, and need
the blood of Christ to recover us from our separation. This water was made of
the ashes of the Heifer, and running water, to note, that after separation, to
cleanse us again we must be sprinkled with a water made of the ashes of Christ's
merits, and the water of the grace of the holy Spirit of God: This is the
perpetual way of purification for sin, and in that it must be sprinkled upon
us with Hyssop, it notes, that we can have no comfort either of the merits of
Christ, or the grace of the Spirit, without the hyssop of true mortification.

20. He that gathers the ashes, must wash his clothes and be unclean, till
the Even: to note, that even the nearer a Christian comes to the merits of
Christ, the more he is affected with the sense of his own uncleanenesse, he
that has the strongest faith does most wash his clothes, yea he retains the
sense of his uncleanenesse till Even, that is, till death, as some interpret it.

Thus much of the sprinkling of the blood of the Heifer.

In the sprinkling, that was used, Of the sprinkling at the Passover.
about the passover there are not many things which need expounding.

The Lamb for the Passover is Christ the lamb of God: the blood is the blood
of Christ.

The sprinkling of the blood is the application of the blood of Christ.

The sprinkler is the Minister.

The hyssop wherewith it is sprinkled, is the word of mortification.

The people are the faithful.

The house is the soul of man.

The doors of the house are the ears, eyes, and mouth of man.

Exodus 24.
The benefit is deliverance and protection from the destroying Angel.

In the narration of the sprinkling of blood used at the ratification of the
covenant: Of the sprinkling at the ratification of the Covenant.
The sense of the most things may be briefly touched.

The altar under the hill, is Jesus Christ, ready, to succor and sanctify
those, that are afflicted in spirit with terrors of conscience, in the sense of
the law given on the hill Sina.

The pillars are the faithful, that stand before, and bear witness to the
comforts expected, or felt for the sacrifice of Christ, and they are 12. to
note out the 12. Tribes, and in them all the faithful.

The young men, and the first borne of the children of Israel, were types of
the Elect in visible Churches, borne again to God, his first fruits of the
multitude, a people consecrated to God, as his only portion.

These offer to God two kinds of sacrifice: the one was the Holocaust, or the
whole burnt offering, even the dedication of themselves wholly even of their
lives unto the death for the service of God, and the practice of godliness:
The other was the pea^e offerings, which were sacrifices of praise, and
thanksgiving.

The blood was the blood of Christ.

The basins, that received the blood, are the word and sacraments.

The Altar sprinkled with blood is Christ truly suffering, and truly retaining
in himself all sufficiency of merits.

The other part of the blood sprinkled on the people, notes the application of
the merits of Christ to the faithful, and of his graces without diminishing
from the fountains of excellency of merit and grace in himself.

The means, by which it is sprinkled, is to be supplied out of the Heb. 9.19.
viz. the hyssop of mortification, and the scarlet of charity, and the Christian
love (...) with (...) against sin and ^ervent desire of piety.

The benefit is the reconciling of the people to God, and the establishing of
the covenant.

Of the sprinkling Levit. 16.
In the aspersion of blood mentioned, Levit. 16. I note only four things.

1. The benefits, that come by it, which are first entrance within the veil,
even the right to the kingdom of heaven. 2. The assured procurement and
continued establishment of mercy from God, noted by the sprinkling of the mercy
seat 7. times.

2. The intercession of Christ noted by the incense, heated by the burning
coals of his own ardent affection, Ver. 12, 13.

3. The perfection of Christ's mediation, in that no man is joined with him, nor
must any man be present, Ver. 17.

4. The extent of the benefits to all the Elect, noted by the sprinkling of the
blood upon the four horns of the Altar.

Use.
The Use of all may be briefly both for instruction and consolation.

For instruction:

1. To the people, who should be above all things careful to seek the comfort
of the application of Gods favor in Jesus Christ: oh we must above all things
by faith keep this sprinkling of blood, as is said of the^, Heb. 11.28

2. Ministers should hence take notice of the maine end of preaching, which is
to sprinkle blood upon the hearts of the people, that they may both be settled
in the knowledge, and assurance of their right in Christ, and the covenant of
grace, and likewise purged in their consciences from dead works: we do little
by preaching, if we beget not reformation, and assurance in the hearts of the
people; he preaches not that sprinkles not.

2. For Consolation.

Be not fearful, Christ's blood will protect thee, as safely, as ever did the
blood of the paschall lamb the children of Israel.

Be not doubtful, of the efficacy of it: For if the blood of bulls and goats
etc. could purify in respect of legal cleansings? how much more shall the
blood of Christ, who by the eternal spirit offered up himself to God, purge
thy conscience from dead works, and make atonement for all thy sins,
cleansing thee from all unrighteousness, Heb. 9.13, 14, 15. 1 John 1.7.

Be not discontent, with thy condition, thou have what was merited, and
purchased with blood, how little soever it seem in thy eyes.

But especially be not unthankful for such a singular way of mercy, but with
all gladness of heart rejoice above all things in Christ, and him crucified for
thee. Hitherto of the persons saluted, the form of the salutation follows.

Grace and peace be multiplied to you.]

It was the manner in their salutations to wish to their friends that which they
accounted a chief happiness to them: The form of the Salutation.
So does the Apostle here wishing the multiplying of grace and peace. Grace and
peace]

Grace must be considered two ways. 1. First, as it is in God, and so it is
his free love and gracious disposition to show mercy in Christ. 2. Secondly, as
it is in man, and so it notes either the gifts of their mind, or their
condition, or estate in Christ, and so the faithful are said to be under
grace, and not under the Law.

Peace is both inward, and outward: Inward peace consists in the contentation
and rest of the soul, and so it is both the rest of the conscience from
terrors, and the rest of the heart from passion^ and perturbations. Outward
peace is nothing else, but prosperity, or an estate free from unquietness and
molestation, and adorned with needful blessings.

Grace and Peace are the two principal things to be sought, and wished in this
world, when Christ comes to enrich the world, he comes with grace and truth,
John 1. he cannot be miserable, that has th^se two, nor happy, that wants them
altogether. Which may be a singular comfort to a Christian: in grace and peace
is his portion, and he may go boldly to the throne of God in the intercession
of Christ to beg either of these in his need, Heb. 4. ult. God may deny him
other things, but he will never deny him grace and peace.

And therefore also Christians should joy in the grace of God, wherein they
stand, Romans 5.3. and be resolved in themselves, that the grace of God is
sufficient for them, 2 Cor. 12.9. Especially they should praise and esteem and
glorify the grace of God: It is all God asks for as it were at our hands,
even to honor him, by praising his grace and free love to us, Ephesians. 1.6.

Woe unto wicked men, that neglect the grace of God, what shall it profit them
to gain the world (which yet they do not) and want grace and peace: but
especially why do they not let Christians alone with their portion? why do
they trouble them in their peace, and despite them for their grace? can they
not follow their pleasures, lusts, profits, honors, etc. and let Christians
live quietly by the^, who desire but liberty to enjoy grace with peace?

There is something also to be noted from the order of placing: grace must be
had before peace, there can be no peace to the wicked, and he is undoubtedly
wicked, that has not the grace of God.

Be multiplied.]

Grace and Peace is multiplied. 1. First when the number of gracious persons is
increased: This is to be sought, and prayed for. 2. When the kinds of grace
and peace are all had: For there is the manifold grace of God. 3. Thirdly, when
the measures and degrees are augmented.

Uses.
The Husbandman would feign have his seed increase, and the tradesman his trade:
so would the ambitious man his honors, and preferments, etc. Even so should the
Christian be ambitious, and covetous in his desires, that his grace and peace
might increase.

Quest. What should we do, that grace and peace might be multiplied?

What we must do that grace and peace may be multiplied in us.
Answ. 1. Be sure it be true grace, else it will never increase.

2. Thou must increase in ^eeknesse, and humility: For God will give more grace
to the humble, Iam. 4.8. and the meek shall have abundance of peace, Psalm.
37.6.11.

3. If thou would have thy grace and peace increase, thou must be constant
much in the use of all the ordinances of God, which are the means of grace and
peace: As thou measurest to God in the means, so will God measure to thee in
the success: thou must be much in hearing. For grace is in the lips of Christ,
Psalm. 45.3. and much peace shall be to them, that love Gods laws, Psalm. 119.
and thou must go often unto God by prayer, who gives grace and glory, and will
withhold no good thing, Psalm. 84.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11, 12. Run by faith to
Christ, who is the Prince of peace, Esaias 9.6. and stir up the grace of God,
that is in thee. For thou have not received the spirit of fear, but of power.
2 Timothy 1.7.

4. Thou must not perplex thy heart with the cares of this life: but in all
things go to God by prayer, and cast all thy care upon him: so shall thou have
peace, that passes all understanding to keep thy heart and mind: Phil. 4. 6,
7.

Thou must make much of the beginnings of desires, joy, liking, and care of the
means of godliness, and not let them go out, so as thou should fails of
the grace of God, or receive those graces in vain.

6. Thou must be resolved upon it to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live righteously, and religiously, and soberly in this present world: else
thou c^^st never meet with true peace further then thou art good and true in
thy heart; and as thou increasest in the care of reformation in thy life, so
shall thou increase in every good and perfect ^ift, till thou come to a ripe
age in Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.12. Esaias 32.16. Psalm. 125. ult.

This likewise may be comfortable to a poor Christian, and that two ways.

1. First, If he consider, that grace is not given all at once, but by degrees,
and therefore he must not be discouraged, though he have many wants.

2. Secondly, if he consider the bountifulness of God to all, that seek grace
and peace, it may be had in abundance. For the Apostle implies, that God will
multiply grace and peace, if we be constant in the use of the means, and
glorify him by seeking to him, he will give liberally and reproach no man.

And thus much of the salutation.
Verse 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.


HItherto of the salutation: the substance or the body of the Epistle follows:
the doctrine whereof is two ways to be considered, The order of the body of
the Epistle.
1. as it is propounded, 2. as it is repeated: Three things are principally
propounded, and the same also repeated, or gone over again. For there is first
matter of consolation, 2. Matter of exhortation. 3. Matter of dehortation. The
consolation is from this third verse to the thirteenth of this Chapter. The
exhortation is from ver. 13. of this Chapter, to ver. 8. of the 3. chap. The
Dehortation is from ver. 8. of the 3. chap. to the end of that chapter.

Then does the Apostle a little changing the order go over the same three
things again. For he exhorts from ver. 1. of chap. 4. to the 12. ver. of the
same chap. and then he comforts from ver. 12. to the end of the 4. chap. and
the Dehortation he lodges under request to the Elders, and the people chap.
5.1. to 12.

In this first part he intends to comfort, where I consider, first, the
Proposition of comfort, ver. 3, 4, 5. Secondly, and the confirmation of that
comfort, ver. 6, to the 13.

In the Proposition I observe, first, the manner of propounding, and the
arguments themselves, by which he would comfort.

The manner of the Proposition is, that it is expressed in form of
thankesgiving in these words: Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. The arguments of consolation are 3. The first is taken from our
Regeneration ver. 3. the second from our Glorification ver. 4. the third from
our Preservation unto glory ver. 5.

Blessed be God, 2. Observation from the coherence.
etc. Two things I observe from the coherence of these words: First, that a
Christian can be in ^o such distress, but he has still cause to be thankful
to God for many blessings, though he be a stranger and used like a stranger,
though he be scattered and driven to and fro: yet in all dispersion he may
observe many memorable things, for which he ought to bless God. Secondly, that
a Christian should never

Blessing is diversely taken or carried: sometimes man blesses Psalm. 129.8.
man: sometimes God blesses man Psalm. 67.1.
: sometimes man is said to bless God: and so here.

Man blesses God three ways: 1. In his heart, Man blesses God 3. ways.
when being refreshed with Gods favor, and inflamed with the joys of his
presence, and nourished with the sense of his blessings, he does lift up his
heart within him inwardly with affection, striving to la^d God and acknowledge
his mercy* 2. In his tongue, when he takes to him words and opens his lips
to confess and praise God either in secret, or openly: either privately or
publicly. 3. In his works, and that 4. ways: ^. When he sets up memorialls
of Gods great works or deliverances. 2. When he receives the Sacrament,
setting himself apart to celebrate the memory of Christ's death, by which the
covenant of God was confirmed, and the fountain of all grace opened. David
when he would render thanks unto God takes the cup of Psalm. 1 16.12.
salvation. And the Sacrament is called the Eucharist from giving of thanks,
and so the cup is called the cup of 1 Cor. 10.16.
blessing: 3. By the obedience of his life striving to glorify God in a holy
conversation. 4. And lastly by showing mercy, and thereby causing the hearts
and lives of others to bless God.

Great reason has man to bless God* 1. For God is blessedness it self,
Reasons of blessing God.
and whether should the water run but into the sea, from whence it is
originally taken. 2. Besides the Lord has required our praise, as the chief
means of Psalm. 50.23.
glorifying him: 3. And thirdly he has blessed us, and therefore we have great
reason to bless him. He has blessed us in the creatures: blessed the work of
our hands: blessed the fruits of our loins: blessed us in his son: blessed
us by his Angels: blessed us by his Ministers: blessed us in the blessings of
the Gospel, and blessed us in the fruits of the earth: blessed us in his
house, and in our own houses: blessed us in our Sabbaths, Sacraments, the
Word, Prayer, etc. blessed us in our souls, bodies, states, names, etc.

And therefore let the people praise thee O God, yea let all the people praise
Psalm. 67.3.
thee. Use.
All thy works praise thee, and the Saints shall sing of thy praise, and of
the glory of thy power, and the majesty Psalm. 145.10, 11, 12.
of thy kingdom^.

The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

This periphrasis is used to distinguish our God from the god of Turks, Jews,
and Pagans.

The Lord was used to be known to the old Church by the names of the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: but now in the Church of the
Christians he is celebrated by the name of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

Two things are here affirmed, 1. that God is the God of Christ. 2. that he is
the Father of Christ: It is not against the use of Scripture to say, that God
is the God of Christ, for ( John 20.1.) Christ says, I go to your God, and to
my God, and Psalm. 45.7. it is said of Christ, God even t^y God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Now if any ask, how this
can be; How God is the God of Christ.
that God is the God of Christ, I answer by distinguishing the natures in
Christ. If you consider Christ in his divine nature, he is God of himself,
(...) but not (...).
but not son of himself: His person is of the Father: but his essence is of
himself: but I think that this is properly taken or meant of his humane
nature, for that he received from God by the mighty working and over shadowing
power of the holy Ghost.

How God is the Father of Christ.
And as he is the God of Christ, so he is the Father of Christ: his God in
respect of his humane nature, and his father in respect of his divine nature:
such an high Priest it became us to have, as was after the order of
Melchisedech without father or mother. For so wa^ Christ without father, as
man, without mother, as God: now in that he is here said to have a father, it
is to be understood of his divine nature, How Christ is without father or
mother.
in respect of which by an eternal generation the person of the Son was
begotten of the Father: dreadful is this mystery, and most difficult to be
understood, or conceived, and the rather because nothing c^rnall or earthly is
here to be imagined. For the Son was not begotten, as sons amongst men are: but
after a more admirable and more excelling manner, neither know I how to express
a way of conceiving of this generation better then by way of negation, denying
unto it, whatsoever has imperfection.

There is a threefold generation.

A threefold generation. Per se, de se, and extra se.
The first is corporeal, called i^ Schools Logical and predicamentall, and
this i^ of bodily things, which by themselves, and out of themselves, and
without themselves do beget. The second is transcendent and metaphysicall, and
this is of spirits, and is men^^ll. For here the mind as an uncomp^unded
subject, does not o^^ of it self, but by it self, and in it self beget, and
thus it begets contemplation or reason, thoughts or affections. The third is
supre^^^ and singular, N^^ de se, sed per se, i^ se.
or (...), and that is that generation, by which the Father in himself, and by
himself, by nature, and not by faculty or power, begets the Son, and this is
that, which in this place is to be conceived of: so that we must as^e^d
highe^, then the geni^u^^ of bodies, or souls, and when we are come to the
Ocean, that is beyond and highes, then either of those, we must rest and
wonder, especially taking heed to our thoughts, a^ in other things, so that in
three things we imagine no likeness between the Father begetting the Son in
the Trinity, and earthly fathers begetting their sons in the world.

First here is no priority in time between the father and the son, Three
things wherein Christ's generation is not like ours.
as in some sense there is in corporeal generations. For Christ is of the
Father, but not after the father.

Secondly, there is no inequality: the son is not lesser, then the father. For
Christ is coequall, as well as coeternall.

Thirdly, here is no division: the son is not divided from the father. For
Christ is not only like the father (...), but of the same substance with the
father, he is (...). Uses.


The consideration of this doctrine, that Christ is Gods son, may serve for
diverse uses. For as it may confirm us in the detestation of the blasphemous
wickedness of the Jews, that would never receive the doctrine, that John
5.18. and 6.42. and 8.19
Christ was the son of God: so it may diversely both instruct, and comfort: It
may instruct us three ways. For first, here we may see, that it is a matter of
necessity to be believed, and accordingly we should labor to inform our
selves aright in this doctrine, as being a point should be illustrious in the
Churches of the Christians, and the rather because of that promise, that
whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the son of God 1 John 4.15.
, God dwells in him, and he in God. Secondly we may hence gather our own
dignity. For if this be an honor unto Christ to have God to be his father,
then what reason have poor Christians to rejoice, considering that whatsoever
they are in this world, yet they have no worse then the true God, the great
I^^ovah to be their father also? Thirdly, from hence by inference we may learn
our duty to God: For by this doctrine we hear, that God is the father of
Christ, now by other Scriptures we may observe, how Christ ^^ryed himself
toward his father, and from him we may learn, how to order our behavior also.

Three things are memorable in Christ. 1. Hi^ (...). 2. His patience and
humility. 3. And his willingness to die: In three things we should learn of
Christ to carry our selves toward God as toward our Father.
all inferred upon this consideration, that God was his father. For first, Io^.
^.17, 1^* and 6.^8.
If the father work, the son work^th also, yea whatsoever the Father did,
the Son did also. Yea Christ did not desire to be believed, when he said, he
was Gods son, further, then he proved it, John 10.^6.
by doing the works of his father. And for his patience and humility it was
admirable. This son of God had not whereon to lay his head: he endured the
impious contradictions of vile sinners, he would not tempt God by presumptuous
trusting upon extraordinary support, when ordinary means was M^^. 4.3.
offered* he was to be consecrated through afflictions, and Heb. 2.10.
to learn obedience by what he suffered* and when he had suits to God his
father, he does in all humility pray and importun^, yea h^^ used strong cries
in the days of his ^^esh, and left his father to expound the meaning of his
prayer: Heb. 5.7, 8.
also by the good pleasure of his own will ^ven to honor him, as he thought
best for him. And for his willingness to die in the ^3. of John he uses that
as a reason, why he could gladly go out of the world, because it was nothing
el^e, John 13.1.
but to go to his father.

In all these we, that are younger brothers, should learn, how to order our
selves aright toward God. If we call God father, we should do the works of our
father, and never desire to be longer reputed the children of God, then by our
works we could show our generation to be of God by resembling his holiness.
And for patience and humility, we are specially charged with it by Christ, even
to learn of him to be lowly and meek, and it is a great shame for us to make
so much ado about our crosses, when we consider the patience of Christ, or to
think it much if we be not heard in our prayers at the first, or as we would
have it in the letter of our desires, when we observe the carriage herein of God
toward Christ the son of his love.

And as this doctrine does instruct, so it does comfort, and that especially
three ways: 1. For first it may comfort us against all the difficulties of
sanctification, and against all the power of Satan. For as this doctrine tells
us, that Christ is the son of God, so other Scripture does assure us, that he
will mightily prove himself to be the son of God by the spirit of
sanctification, showing his power in throwing down and dissolving Romans 1.4. 1
John 3.8.
the works of the Devil. 2. Secondly, it may comfort us in all our suits to
God. For as by other Scriptures we know, that Christ is our advocate and has
taken upon him to present our prayers to God: so by this doctrine we may gather
the success. We are sure to speed well, when we have the Kings son to put up
our petitions, and the rather because Christ does desire to show his greatness
with his Father by obtaining our requests at his hands. For thereby the Father
is glorified in his son, and God loves us so much the better, because we love
Christ, and believe, that he came from his Father, and show it by using John
14.12, 13, 14, 16, 23, 24, 26, 27.
him as our Mediator: and indeed what need we any other to the King, then the
Kings son. And thirdly, it may comfort us in respect of the hope of preferment
by his service: we cannot serve a more honorable Lord. Many times if we serve
earthly Princes, they may neglect us. For we seldom see all the followers of
the greatest Princes come to preferment: but if Princes on earth were never so
honorable, that they did purpose to exalt every one of their servants, yet
under that hope men may consume all their means, and in the end die beggars,
because the Prince may dye, before they get their preferment; but it is not so
with Christians in their service of Christ. For as for greatness he is the
King of all kings, and himself Lord of all lords* so for well, he never
neglected any, that served in truth and sincerity, and besides he cannot die.
For he has life in himself, and therefore blessed are they, that serve him,
and trust in his goodness. For he ever lives to make request for (...) have
^^tten them to himself, that where he is, there they may be also.

Thus of the manner of propounding: The places or arguments of Consolation
follow. The first is taken from their regeneration, which is amplified here, 1.
by the impulsive cause, the abundant mercy of God: 2. by the effect, a lively
hope: 3. by the cause of merit, or efficacy, the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

The necessity of the new birth.
Two things may be noted from the coherence: 1. the necessity of the new birth:
2. the honor of it. The necessity, in that it is so chained and linked, that it
is apparent, we can no way have John 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.17.
mercy from God, nor glory in heaven, unless we be borne again. 2. The honor
of it may appear, in that it is a work, that stands in relation to the mercy
of God, the glory of heaven, The honor of the new birth.
the resurrection of Christ, the power of God, etc. all which belong to this
admirable work of the new birth.

In the handling of these words, I consider of them, as they lie in order, and
so here are four general heads of doctrine to be thought of, 1. The mercy of
God. 2. The regeneration of man. 3. A lively hope. 4. The resurrection of
Christ Jesus.

Which according to his abundant mercy, etc.

Gods mercy is abundant.
The main proposition is, that there is abundance of mercy in God, he is full of
compassion, and of great mercy Psalm. 145.8, 9.
his mercy is over all his works: It is so great, it cannot be expressed.
Psalm. 36.5, 6, 7
The clouds may commend the extent of his faithfulness, and the mountains may
shadow out his righteousness, and the deepes resemble his judgments: but who,
or what can express the excellency of his goodness? It cannot be fully
discerned any way, but in heaven.

Gods mercy is abundant: 1. In the fountain in himself, 1. In the fountain.
there is an Ocean of mercy in God: It is infinite in him, as his nature is;
yea it is his nature it self to be so: 2. In the streams, and that either
generally considered, In the stream^s to all.
and so it flows to all the creatures reasonable and unreasonable, good and
bad, Psalm. 33.5. Mat. 5.
The whole earth is full of his goodness: or more specially, as it flows to
the faithful. Now Gods mercy is abundant to the faithful 3. ways: 1. In the
kinds of mercy: 2. To all the godly, and that three ways.
for the Lord Psalm. 32.10.
compasses them about with variety of all sorts of mercy. 2. In the extent of
mercy: He did not spend all his mercy on David, or Abraham, or the like: but
he keeps and reserves mercy for thousands, even for all the thousands in all
ages, that believe Exodus 20.
with faithful Abraham, and will Esaias 55.4. Acts 13.
hear and do all Gods will with obedient David: He is plenteous in mercy to
all that call upon him Psalm. 86.5.
3. In the continuance of mercy Psalm. 100.4.
: for his mercy is as himself everlasting: and it must needs appear to be so,
that God is wonderful abundant in mercy, because it is he, that is the father
2 Cor. 1.3.
of all the mercy in the world, and it is he, that requires mercy in men.

The use that may be made of the meditation of Gods abundance of mercy, may be
both for instruction, and consolation. 1. For instruction two ways
principally: For first it may teach us therefore to run unto God in all misery,
to seek, desire, pray for, Psalm. 123.2, 3.
wait for, and trust upon his mercy: Here is enough, and therefore woe unto
us, if we will not seek it, when it may thus plentifully be had: Our confusion
is just, if we neglect and forsake our own mercy, it being opened and offered
in such plenty: and secondly, this should teach us, how to show mercy, even to
do it in all possible abundance, both for continuance, and extent, and for all
the kinds both of corporal and spiritual mercies: for we should be Luke
6.36.
mercif^ll, as our heavenly father is merciful.

But especially this doctrine is intended for the singular comfort of all
humble, and godly Christians; and how can it but be comfortable, if they
consider, how exceeding abundant it is, (...) i^, how ^^^der his pity is, how
full his goodness is, how constant and large his treasures of grace are, how
slow he is to anger, how willing he is to forgive all sorts of sins, yea and
to multiply pardon too Exodus 34.6, 7 Mich. 7.18. Esaias 55.8. Zeph. ^.17.
: how he passes by transgression, and takes away iniquity, how wonderfully he
is pleased in himself with sh^wing mercy, and how he quieteth himself, and
rests in his love.

Ob. But some man may say, that this is a doctrine of liberty. Object.


Answ. It is not: For this doctrine is restrained for that; Solut.
both if we respect godly men, and if we respect wicked men. If we respect
godly men: How mercy is no occasion of liberty, either to godly, or wicked men.
It is certain, that though the Lord will not deny his mercy, or take away his
goodness from them; yet if they break his commandments, he will visit them
with the rod Psalm. 89.
, and make them to know by his strokes, how bitter ^ thing it is to abate of
their care to fear, and serve God: 1. And for wicked men, it is wonderful
clear, that the Lord for all this goodness in himself, or unto good men,
will not by any means Exodus 34.7.
clear the wicked. If they bless their hearts against his threatenings, he
will not be merciful to them Deuteronomy. ^9 19.
: It is true, that power and mercy belongs to God; yet it is as true, that
Psalm. 62.12.
he will give to every man according to his work: they only shall find Prove.
^8.13.
mercy, that confess and forsake their sins: while they Jonas 2.8.
follow foolish vanities they forsake their own mercies: Esaias 27.11.
He that made them will not pity them, and he that formed them, will not have
mercy upon them: God is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, etc. but it is
only to such, as turn to him with fasting, weeping, and mourning Joel 2.^2,
13.
.

Quest. But does the Lord show no mercy to wicked men? Quest.


Answ.
Answ. Yes, he does: but deceive not thy self, he does not show them this
mercy to forgive their sins, or save their souls: and that thou may know
distinctly, what mercy God does show, I will instance in one only place of
Scripture, What mercy God shows to the wicked.
and that is the 9. of Nehemiah: for there thou may see, what mercy the Lord
showed to the wicked and rebellious Israelites. To omit the extraordinary: he
gave them good laws, ver. 13. and made known to them his holy sabbaths, ver.
14. and forsook them not, when they dealt proudly against him, ver. 16, 17.
and gave his good spirit to instruct them, ver. 20. and for a long time
multiplied his outward blessings upon them, ver. 21, 25. and when they wrought
great provocations he sent them enemies to afflict them, ver. 26, 27. and when
they cried sent them Saviors to deliver them, ver. 27. and after often
revoltings, he was often entreated, ver. 28. and did withhold his worst and
consuming judgments for a long time, ver. 30, 31. these and such like mercies,
the Lord may, and does show to wicked men.

Has begotten us again, etc.]

Hitherto of the mercy of God: now it follows, that I should entreat of the
regeneration of man. As for the necessity, and honor of the work of the new
birth, I have touched it before; I only here propound three things to be
considered of: 1. The means: 2. The lets: and 3. the signs of the new birth.

The means of the new birth.
For the first: the ordinary means, by which God does beget us again, is the
word preached, as these places do evidently show. Romans 10. 14. 1 Pet. 1.23. 1
Cor. 1.21. Gal. 3.2. Esaias 55.4.

The lets of the new birth.
For the second: this great work is marvellously hindered, and that diversely:
For first many men are seduced: seduced I say, either with hope of

Secondly, multitudes of men are senseless and ignorant, and through
inconsideration wear out their days without care or conscience: they never
consider either the number, filth, or guilt of their sins: or the greatness
and fierceness of Gods wrath and threatenings against their sins: or of the
certainty and dreadfulnesse of the vengeance to come: or of the nearenesse of
death, or terror of judgment: nor consider they, the very effects of sin, that
are already upon them, they perceive not their death in sin, and the sleep of
their conscience; and the inefficacy of all Gods ordinances, and the absence of
Gods spirit, and the impotency of all the faculties of their souls unto that
which is good.

Thirdly, many are hindered through irresolution, and sluggish inconstancy:

Fourthly, worldliness is a monstrous let in many: I say not covetousness,
cares of life choke all the sense, they get in Gods house. For they suffer
their business to eat up their thoughts and consideration, whence flows
forgetfulness and hardness of heart.

Fifthly, this work has many and great adversaries, if we respect it in

Lastly, it is hindered in the most men by the perver^e love of some special
with which men are besotted, and unto which they are so engaged, as God must
have them excused, till they find time to give it over.

Thus much of the lets.

3. Now for the signs of new birth: amongst many, I instance in four. Four
signs of new birth.
The first is the washing of mortification, by which I mean a serious, secret,
and unfeigned voluntary godly sorrow for all sin, striving in particular to
bewail those sins, unto which they have been most prone, or in which they
have most corrupted themselves. This is to be borne of water and of the holy
Ghost John 3.5.
: This is the washing of the new birth Ti^. 3.5.
.

The second is the imitation of Christ, by which we Mat. 19.28.
follow him in the regeneration. Now this imitation of Christ must have in it
three things. First a willingness to deny our ease, profit, credit, will, or
what else can be, taking up any cross, that Luke 9.24. John 15.18. Romans 8.29.
1 John 5.4.
we may show our desires to be like him in sufferings: secondly, humility and
Mat. 11.29.
lowliness, which will show it self, not only in a continued base opinion of
our selves, by reason of our corruptions; but also in the meekness and
quietness of our affections, and in readiness to do the meanest office in
the service of Christ, or his members: thirdly, innocence of life, or a
constant care to be holy as he is holy, hungring after righteousness, and
loving purity, and seeking the contentment of all well-doing.

The third sign is the love of all such* as are 1 John 3.14. 5.1.
begotten again of God: For whosoever is borne of God, loves all those, that
are borne of God: but this love of Gods children is such a love, as shows it
self: first by a desire to love God and keep (...) 1 John 5.2.
godly do: secondly, by a willing and ready Apology for such as fear God:
thirdly, by fellowship with them Phil. 1.5.
in the Gospel: fourthly, by sympathy or compassion in Romans 12.16.
their joys, or sorrows: and fifthly, by an estimation of them, as Psalm. 16.3.
the only excellent ones.

The fourth sign is the inbred native desire after the sincere milk of the
word 1 Pet. 2.2.
. By the desire to suck you may discern a living child from an abortive
birth: but then it is to be observed, what kind of desire it is. For the
comparison shows, it must be a constant desire, such as is renewed every day,
as we see it to be in the infant; and besides, it must be such a desire, as is
joined with a secret and sound contentment in the word: The child does almost
nothing else, but suck and sleep, in the strength of that it has sucked; and
further, if it be a true desire, it is after the word, as it is milk and
sincere, it affects plainness, and acknowledges no wisdom like Gods, nor
effectualnesse of speech more powerful, then the words of sacred scripture;
and lastly it is such a desire, as intends growth in knowledge, wisdom,
utterance, prayer, grace, and holy duties.

Thus much of the signs.

The consideration of the glory and necessity of the work of our new The Use.
birth, may exceedingly reprove the wretched, and wilful neglect of it in
thousands of people, especially of such, as be continual hearers, and cannot
be ignorant of the doctrine of it; how many are the souls, that like the
blackamoores will not be made white? the spots of whose sins are like the
spots of the Leopard, which will not be gotten out. These have had promises to
allure them, and precepts to divert them, and threatenings to humble them, and
yet are never a whit the better: woe unto them, they have not sought their
peace in the day of peace: yea are there not many, who hear their own lets
opened, and yet go away unreformed? Oh the depth of the deceitfulness and
wickedness of man's heart!

Unto a lively hope, etc.

Four things may be here noted: three of them I will but touch.

First, that there is hope unto the righteous: He can be in no such estate, or
distress, but there is hope, the poorest Christian has Job 5.16.
, his hope, and if he were enclosed with crosses, yet he is Zach. 9.11.
a prisoner of hope: and therefore we should pray God to show us the Ephesians.
1.18.
hope of our calling, and should the more willingly suffer afflictions, Romans
5.3.
rejoicing in hope.

Secondly, none have hope, but converted Christians* For all carnal men are
Ephesians. 2.12.
without hope in the world; I mean without true hope. For the hope that wicked
men have, though they lean upon it, is but Job 8.13.
as the house of a spider, and therefore woe unto them; for their hope, when
they shall most need it, will be, as the giving up of the ghost Job 11. ult.
.

Thirdly, there is one hope unto all Gods children: they hope for the same
glory, as they have the same faith, and therefore we should live, and love so
together, as they that hope to reign together in heaven Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5.
.

But the fourth thing is the chief, and that is, that there is a lively hope,
and a dead hope. For the one is expressed, and the other is manifestly implied:
There is in godly men a lively hope; there is in wicked men, but a d^ll and a
dead hope. The differences between a lively hope, and a dead hope in six
things.
Now if any ask, what difference there is between a lively hope, and a dead
hope; or between the true hope, and the false: I answer, that they differ in
six things. First, in the use of the means: for a lively hope will use all the
means, that are appointed of God, and not that only, but it seeks and
expresses the Lam. 3.25. to 31.
affections requisite to the right use of the Psalm. 62.10.
resting satisfied if it can get comfort, and a promise from God; whereas the
dead hope is of no use, when miseries and adversity comes: It delights not in
prayer, and will not brook to come in Gods sight; it runs to carnal and
devilish helps, and if it fail in them, it excites impatient murmuring, or
despair. Thirdly, a lively hope is attended with lively joys: Gal. 5.5.
is righteousness that hope waits for. Tit. 1.1, 2.
will acknowledge the truth, which is according to godliness: but the false
hope thinks it enough to know it; it will not adventure it self to be so
forward as to profess it. Lastly, whosoever has the true hope, 1 John 3.3.
purges himself, that he may be pure, as Christ is pure: but the dead hope
cannot abide much mortification.

Use.
The use of all this may be to instruct both carnal men, and godly men: Carnal
men should take notice of this difference, that so they might address
themselves to seek this true and lively hope, which that they may obtain, or
attain; they must shun hypocrisy, and deny all ungodliness, and worldly
lusts, and labor for true grace: for the Job 8.
hypocrites hope shall perish, and we can never attain unto the blessed hope,
unless we resolve to Tit. 2.12, 13.
live soberly, and righteously, and religiously in this present world; and this
everlasting consolation and good hope 2 The^. 2.16.
is had only by grace: and the godly should here learn to hold fast their
lively hope, as one of the excellentest fruits of their regeneration, and their
daily refuge should be to nourish Heb. 6.18.
and strengthen themselves in it, and to that end acquaint themselves
constantly with the comforts of the scripture, which were penned especially to
that end, that they Romans 15.4.
might have hope.

And thus much of the third thing.

By the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Concerning the resurrection of Christ, as it may here be considered of, ^
propound four things. 1. In what sense it is here to be understood. 2. How his
resurrection has relation to us, in that our new birth is here ha^^ed upon it.
3. I answer a question or two, which here may be moved: and then I make use of
all.

For the first: Some have understood by the resurrection of Christ here
synecdochically, the whole work of redemption: Some understand the words, of
his spiritual resurrection in our hearts by faith through the operation of the
spirit of grace: for as he dies in us by infidelity; so he rises in us by
faith, But I ^ake it here, as it is commonly taken, even for the resurrection
of his own person, even for that work, by which he did shake off the power of
death, and quicken his dead body restoring the soul to it, and receiving to
himself in his humane nature, a blessed, celestial, and glorious life. In the
belief of this we differ from Pagans: They can believe, that he dyed; but we
must believe, that he rose again. This was solemnly foretold by Psalm. 16.10.
David, and foreshewed by Mat. 12.40.
Io^ah; manifested by an Mar. 16 6.
Angel; recorded by the Evangelists; published by the Apostles; and
demonstrated by 1 Cor. 15.5. etc.
six several apparitions.

Now for the second: The resurrection of Christ i^ ^ fountain of singular
benefits unto us: For from thence flows, 1. our glorification: for he went
away to provide a place for us, Four benefits of the resurrection of Christ
even to prepare John 14.3.
those heavenly mansions for us. 2. The resurrection of our bodies: for the
spirit that raised Christ from the dead, has thereby given us assurance, that
he will raise our Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.
mortal bodies also. 3. The confirmation of our faith, and that in diverse
things: For his resurrection assures us that he is the promised Messiah, and
Ron. 1.4.
son of God: and that our debt is paid, and that he has discharged the
uttermost farthing (for else he had not been let out of prison,) and that he
has vanquished all our spiritual enemies, and utterly foiled and disarmed
them, in that they could not keep him down, when they had him in the grave:
but he has triumphed over them. 4. Our justification, and regeneration: for so
the Apostle shows in the 4. to the Romans, that Romans ^. ult.
he rose again for our justification, and here it is expressly said, that we
are begotten again through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.

Quest. But may some one say: If this be true, Quest.
that we are begotten again by the resurrection of Jesus Christ; then it
seems, men were not b^gotten again in the old Testament; or else not by the
resurrection of Christ: For he was not then risen.

Answ. For answer hereunto, Answ.
we must consider in the resurrection of Christ two things: 1. The act of his
resurrection, and 2. the virtue of it: we are not regenerate by the act of his
resurrection: Christ risen in the old Testament 3. ways.
and for the virtue of it, Faith could receive it, as well as the act was to
come, as now in us it does the act being past: Christ was risen in the old
Testament three ways: 1. In the counsel of God. 2. In the word of prophecy.
3. In the efficacy of it.

Quest.
Quest. But how does it follow, that we are regenerate, because Christ is risen?

Answ.

How our regeneration depends upon Christ's resurrection.


Answ. I answer: Christ must be considered two ways: first naturally as man:
secondly mystically as head. If Christ be considered barely as a man, it does
not follow; but if he be considered in the mystical union with his members,
as he sustaineth their person, and was surety for them it will follow, he rose
again to this end, that he might receive power to raise our souls by the
first resurrection, and our bodies at the last day. Or more plainly thus: Our
regeneration depends upon the resurrection of Christ three ways: 1. As his
resurrection was a pledge, and assurance, that he would raise us; he showed his
power, that he could do it, he laid down his body before our eyes, and
quickened it again before our faces, and gave us that sign to assure us, of
what he could do fo^us. 2. As by his resurrection, he merited ours. 3. The
spirit of Christ applies the virtue of Christ's resurrection for the quickening
of us, and the accomplishment of our whole vivification, and new obedience.

Uses
The uses of Christ's resurrection are both for consolation, and instruction. It
may comfort us against all the accusations, or temptations of Satan, or the
censures of the world; who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen?
who shall condemn them? Is not Christ dead or rather risen again, and sits
at the right hand of God, and makes request for us? has he not paid our
debt? has he not fully triumphed over death, sin, and hell? Again: would we
have a sign, that in Christ all the promises of God shall be yea and Amen? we
need no other sign, then this, that as Jonas was three days and three nights
in the belly of the whale; so the son of man was three days in the heart of
the earth, and the third day rose again. Finally, why should we now be afraid
of death, or any other spiritual, or terrible enemy? why should those last
things dismay us? has not Christ had a most glorious (...) them in a most
^e^rible m^nomachy, when they did the worst they could? and therefore we may
solace our selves in the conquest, and say insultingly: O death where is thy
sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Is not death swallowed up into victory?
thanks be to God, which has given us victory also through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

But if we would have benefit of Christ's resurrection, we must then seek the
virtue of it to our selves, as the Apostle shows in his own practice, Phil.
3.9.

Quest.
Quest. But how may we extract virtue out of Christ's resurrection?

Answ.

How we may get virtue from the resurrection of Christ.


Answ. We may get out the virtue of his resurrection by meditation, seriously
thinking of it, and of the end of it; by found contemplation, pondering of it,
and by prayer begging the working of the spirit therein; but especially laying
hold upon it by faith, and glorifying God by believing, that it shall be
according to Gods promise effectual unto us: And we must also attend to the
motions of the spirit, yielding our selves over to be framed by them, and we
must not think much to suffer the labors of Gods messengers to work upon our
stony hearts, as the Angels of God rolling away the stone that lies sealed
upon our hearts by nature. And thus much of the resurrection of Christ, and of
the first argument of our consolation. Now the second follows in the fourth
verse.

Verse 4. To an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for us, or for you.


THis argument is taken from our glorification, which is here generally
described to be the inheritance of the Saints, which is amplified four ways.
First, by the properties of it, and they are three: For it is 1. incorruptible.
2. undefiled. and 3, immarcessible, or that withers not. Secondly, by their
present interest in it; it is not now possessed, it is held only in title,
being laid up for them. Thirdly, by the persons, that shall inherit, and they
are you, that is you that are begotten again. Fourthly, by the place, and that
is heaven, the best place. For it much commends an inheritance, if it lie in
convenient and commodious places.

Incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not, etc.

Three things are here said in the praise of this inheritance, which I purpose
in the doctrine of them to handle together.

The first thing affirmed of this inheritance is, that it is incorruptible, Our
inheritance is incorruptible in 4. respects.
and so it is in four respects. 1. because there we shall need none of those
means of preservation, which of necessity are requisite in this corruptible
world; neither for the body, nor soul. For our bodies, we shall need no air,
food, sleep, heat, or cold, apparel, or the light of the Sun, or Moon, or
marriage, or physic. And Mat. 22. Apoc. 21. 22, 23 and 22.5.
for our souls, we shall need no sabbaths, sacraments, temple. 2. Because our
happiness shall not be annoyed with any thing, that might corrupt it either
without us, or upon us, or in us. There shall be no Esaias 57. 2. Apoc. 22. Mat.
6.16. Esaias 25.^.
war, no unquietness, no violence, no fraud, no sickness, pain, weakness,
old age, no terrors, no sorrow. 3. Because this happiness shall never expire,
it is immortal, there is no death there; hence the word is rendered by some
immortal. 4. Because it is an estate of all perfection and blessedness, and
so some think it is the genus to the two other words.

The second thing affirmed of this inheritance i^, (...) ^^defiled, Our
inheritance is undefiled in five respects.
and so it may be said to be in five respects. 1. Because there we shall live
separate from all polluted things, such as are the devil, the grave, hell, and
wicked men: all things that might offend shall then be removed from us, no
temptations, no tares shall be there left. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 53. Romans 16.20. Mat.
13.
Because there we shall bejoyned to God, that most undefiled essence, the
fountain of all holiness, whence will flow two admirable felicities: First,
the continual Vision of God, in respect of which, we shall behold him
immediately, we shall converse with him no more by scriptures, creatures,
signs, or other means; but by an 1 Cor. 13.12. Mat. ^.8. 1 John 3.2.
admirable way not now revealed unto us: There shall the pure in heart he
perfectly blessed, when they shall see God face to face, as he is in his glory.
Secondly, the participation of the divine nature, not by a pouring out of the
divine essence, but by the communication of divine qualities, such as are 1
Pet. 1.4.
immortality, wisdom, glory, justice, virtue, etc. Thirdly, because we shall
there enjoy the fellowship with unspotted Angels, and blessed souls, and that
after an undefiled 2 Thessalonians. 1.7. Heb. 12, 19. etc.
manner with all purity, concord, and quietness. 4. Because we our selves shall
be clothed with perfection of nature, being made like: 1 John 3.2.
unto Christ-man, and that both in soul and body: In soul, Gods image in
undefiled graces being perfected without mixture either of defects, or
corruptions: yea our very bodies shall be made like the Phil. 3.22.
glorious body of Christ^ For they shall be without death, shame, weakness, or
trouble some drowsinesse, or unweildinesse. For so the Apostle to the
Corinthians excellently shows, by opening four dissimilitudes between the
sowing, and the raising of the body: It was sown 1. in corruption, 2. in
dishonor. 3. in weakness, 4. a natural body: but it is raised, 1. in
incorruption, so as it cannot putrify or die any more: 2. in glory, so as it
shall never be shamed or dishonored either through deformity, Dan. 12.3. Mat.
13.43.
or reproach; they shall ^ shine as the sun in the firmament: 3. in power, being
delivered from all weakness, or infirmities: 4. a spiritual body, because in
diverse respects they shall be as the spirits, or angels; as 1. in continuing
without meat, or marriage: 2. in swiftness, or agility able with unconceivable
nimblenesse to pass through the air, or Luke 20.36.
heaven: 5. Because as our natures, so our service shall be perfect, we shall
serve, and worship, and praise God day and night without either weakness or
Rev. 7.15. Psalm. 16.11. It withers not in diverse respects.
weariness.

The third thing affirmed of this inheritance is, that it withers, or fades
not, and well is this happiness praised for this: For how should it wither, 1.
if we respect Rev. 21.3. 1 Cor. 15.28. Psalm. 36.17.15.
the presence of God, and the Lamb, who will be all in all? Can the Sun in
nature refresh the creatures, and shall not the brightness of Gods presence
do it much more? Was it such a privilege to eat at David's table, or to Luke
22.30.
sit down in the kingdom with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: what then shall it
be to be refreshed with the fullness of the sweet presence of God? 2. If we
respect the fullness of all joys and contentment, which shall for ever support
the hearts of the Elect; their joys shall never be dried up, nor grow into
loathing, as all earthly Psalm. 16.11. 36.8.
joys do: 3. If we respect the perfection of all things round about them,
they shall inherit Rev. 21.7.
all things, and those made new also.

Uses.
The use is first for information. For here is employed the wretchedness of our
earthly condition, there is nothing here in this world, but it will corrupt,
and is defiled, and will lose his gloss and beauty: An estate that is
incorruptible, undefiled, and that withers not we shall never have till we
come to heaven. Secondly, for reproof: Oh do not men now know, what a kind
of place heaven is? why then do they turn the glory of such an incorruptible
estate into the similitude of corruptible things, while they prefer the things
of this world before the glory of that, which is to come? and why do^ (...)
they not that the Rev. 22.
un(...) shall not enter into heaven, and 1 Cor. 15.50.
this corruption shall not inherit incorruption? Oh why does silly man suffer
himself so to be bewitched, as with incurable doting to pursue these withering
earthly things, and neglect those immarcess^ole felicities in heaven? Thirdly,
for instruction, and so the thought hereof should esp^^ially affect us with a
desire to seek this immortal and undefiled happiness; and to this end we
should, first begin our separation here from the wicked ^ 2. we should subject
our selves to the incorrupt ordinances of Jesus Christ, if we would have God to
be a father of immortality, we must acknowledge him first 1 Timothy 1.17.
the king of all ages, and let him make us, and frame us by his ordinances: 3.
we must mortify our corrupt natures, and refrain from all things, that may
any way 1 Cor. 9.24.
corrupt us: 4. we must put on Christ; for he 1 Timothy 6.16. Romans 13.13.
only has immortality: 5. and lastly, we must continue in well-doing, as the
Apostle shows, Romans 2.7. we must begin our incorruption hereby sincerity of
life: for so this word is ^endred, Ephesians. 6.24. Lastly, it may serve for
singular comfort to a Christian in all distresses, but to think, what a
wonderful glorious estate is provided for him, yea even the more he has
experience of the vanity and wretchedness of this world, the more he should
admire the happiness he looks for: yea it may be one reason, that the Lord
will have his servants thoroughly tried with the miseries of this life, that so
they might know the worth of that rest and glory, they look for in the life to
come. Oh what reason have men to desire to dye, and to have to the coming of
Jesus Christ? to long for it? to pray for it? to be even impatient in the
fervent expectation of it? to sigh after it?

But before I pass from this point, one thing may in general be noted, that
is, that all these properties do equally belong to all the Elect: the whole
inheritance, and every part of it has these praises, which hinders not, but
there may be a proper reward unto every man; but it is sure, that the wor^t lot
in this inheritance shall have the fullness of the perfection of these praises.

Which is reserved, etc.]

We have the right and title in this world, but the inheritance it self is in
the fathers keeping, and possessed as yet by some of our elder brethren, we
are in our minority in this world, if thou were a Prince borne, thou must not
inherit the first day, and it is the better for us, that it is so: for so it is
the safer from sin, violence, Satan, etc.

For you] That is, for such as are begotten again: some read in us, or in
you, to note, that men must look into their hearts, whether they shall have
heaven: For if Christ and his spirit dwell not there, they are never like to
come to this glory; but I read it as before, and so it plainly notes, that
none but converted Christians have any interest in this inheritance.

Lastly, this inheritance is commended by the place, where it lies, it is in
heaven. The Holy Ghost would have us meditate much even of the very place of
our glory; but for explication of this, I propound two things: 1. where heaven
is: 2. wherein it excels other places.

First, by heaven, I mean not the air, as sometimes the word signifies: nor
yet the heavenly moveable orbs, that are visible above our head, but the place
of the blessed, where Esaias 57.15. Where heaven is:
God dwells, and Christ in his body is ascended, and where the spirits of
just and perfect men now are. Now where this place is, cannot be known by
sense, because it is not obnoxious to any of the senses, nor can we learn,
where it is by reason. For it is true, that the ninth heaven is not known by
sense: for we cannot see it, or hear it move, etc. yet Astronomers by the
effect of it, though it be above the starry firmament, have found it out
certainly to be. But now for the heaven of the blessed, that extends not to us
by any effect or influence, and therefore cannot be known by reason: Scripture
only does reveal it, and so it is manifest to be a place, that is above us.
For Christ Eph^s. 4.8.
ascended up into heaven, and we shall be John 14.17.
where he now is. It is called Esaias 57.15.
the high and holy place; and Gods family is called Gal. 4. Rev. 21.
Jerusalem that is above; and the Psalmist says, Psalm. 113. Heaven is not
every where.
God dwells on high: so that it is a place far above all those visible
elements and heavens. As for those, that imagine heaven is every where, where
God is, we may manifestly conceive of their error. For so to go to heaven,
were to go to hell: for God is there also, as the Psalm. 139.
Psalmist faith; and our Savior says not, Our Father which art every where,
but Our Father which art in heaven* and besides, God and the devil do not
keep house together. But we know, that the devils live in this air, and every
where round about us in these visible regions of the elements, and therefore
heaven must needs be above all these.

Now for the excellency of this place above all others: 2. The excellency of
heaven above all other places.
who is able to describe it? yet for help to thy meditation, consider the names
that be given to it. It is called Paradise, the Fathers house, the throne of
God, the kingdom, the heavenly Jerusalem. 2. The shadows, by which the
excellency thereof is signified. In the 21. of the Revelation a search is made
through all the bowels of the earth to find out all the precious treasures,
that could be had, gold, pearls, and precious stones of all sorts, and what
can these serve to? only to shadow out the glory of the walls of the new
Jerusalem, and the gates, and to pave the streets of that City. But there is
not treasure enough in the whole world, so much as to shadow out the mansions,
that are there, and the inward furniture, or the glorious clothing, or diet of
the Worthies, that shall dwell there, much less the divine Royalties, and
prerogatives eternal of that excellent heaven. 3. Consider but the sum of
that, which Divines out of the Scriptures write of it: For substance: It is a
place obnoxious to no corruption, alteration, passion, nor motion; it is not
whirled about as these heavens are. For quantity: it is greater, then all this
world besides. For qualities: it is most exceeding light, most pleasant, and
most fair; a place wherein none evil needs be found, and none good can be
wanting, having upon it the very glory of God, even a most divine splendour.

Verse 5. Which are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
which is prepared already to be showed in the last time.


HItherto of our glorification. The third argument follows, and that is taken
from our preservation unto glory, which is this Verse: It is two ways
amplified. First by the means of our preservation, and secondly by the end of
our preservation. The means are twofold: First in God his power, and secondly
in us our faith: The end is salvation, which is also amplified first by the
things which go before it, viz. preparation, and revelation: It is prepared to
be revealed: Secondly by the time, in the last time.

From the coherence and general consideration of these words three things may
be briefly noted.







(...)
Kept] The word in the original signifies properly to keep as a town is kept
from the enemies in the time of war with a garrison and so it is rendered 2
Cor. 11.32. where it is said Aretas kept the City with a garrison: In the Gal.
3.23.
third of the Galathians the word is used metaphorically to express our
condition under the Law, he says we were kept under the Law, that is, the
sinner having transgressed was kept by the Law, as it were under a strong
garrison, that he could not possibly escape, unless he be delivered by Christ,
the law will hold him so fast, he shall not possibly get away; now here it is
used to express the wonderful safety of all men, and women truly converted,
they are kept with a garrison, wherein two things may be noted.

The Christians condition here is a military condition.
First, that the dearest of Gods children in this world are in continual war,
they are never at such rest and peace, as to discharge their garrison: seldom
or never but they are continually in war either outward with the world of
wicked men, or with crosses, that daily assail them, or else inward with
temptations: Heaven properly is the rest of the godly: or if they be at any
time free: yet they are in danger, and therefore still stand upon their guard,
which should teach us under either afflictions or temptations never to account
it strange, and if at any time God give us some little breathing, not to grow
secure, but rather be still providing for the war again.

Secondly, that Gods children have a garrison to defend them. A fivefold
garrison of the Christian.
Now if any would know distinctly how this is true, I will endeavor to show it
to be true five ways.

1. For first we see, that sometimes they are fenced and protected by the
godly, who as an holy army rise up in their defense to help them, either by
Apology, succor, or prayers.

2. Sometimes the unreasonable creatures protect and avenge the righteous. God
can send the armies of silly creatures, as a valiant garrison to defend Israel,
and offend Pharaoh, and they are strong, that do Gods work.

3. It is sure, that the Angels are always in garrison for the Elect, pitching
their tents round Psalm. 34.
about them, that fear God. That which Elisha and his man saw with bodily eyes
every believer may be assured of by faith.

4. God can raise up in them even an army of powerful thoughts and
meditations, so as their very inward tranquillity, arising from the testimony
of a good conscience, and the knowledge of Gods excellent love, can make, and
Phil. 4.^.
keep them secure and sound.

5. But lastly, in all these, and above all these, God himself is the
Christian man's garrison, Psalm. 18.2.
as David says, God is his rock, his fortress, his strength, his buckler,
his high tower, and his deliverer.

All this may very fitly serve for two uses. Uses.
1. First for consolation to the godly, and that two ways: First if they
consider how carefully God has provided for their safety, and that he is 2 Thessalonians. 3.3.
faithful and will do it: Secondly if they observe, what is employed hereby,
for in that God plants a garrison about his people, it imports, that they are
wonderfully dear unto him, Jewels of great price, which God would by no means
lose, yea great Princes, that are preserved with such a continual guard: If
Gods government toward his people were every way visible and manifested, the
meanest Christian would appear to be no whit inferior to the greatest Monarch.

2. Secondly this implies terror and amasement to all the wicked. For it
imports, that God cares not for them, and takes no charge of them, yea thathe
accounts them as enemies, and yet they are not without their ^^^rison neither:
But what is it? they have their hearts kept by the devil, as a strong man
armed for their ruin, and the law keeps them with a strong guard, till the
day of Christ.

By the power of God.]

The word translated, power, is rendered Mat. 7.22. 11.20, 21. 13.54.58.
mighty works, sometimes Gal. 3.5. 4 Questions about the power of God keeping
us.
miracles, etc. but ordinarily it is meant as here, power: The maine doctrine
is, that the preservation and keeping of the faithful depends upon Gods power.
Now for explication of this doctrine, I must answer diverse questions.

First some one might say does it follow, God has power to keep us, therefore
he will?

It does not simply follow, but in two respects: 1 Quest. Answ.
1. First in respect of the intercession of Christ; he has John 17.
mediated for our preservation, and the father will grant what he asks, and
therefore so long, as he has power he will continually do it. 2. Secondly in
respect of Gods promises, he has promised to use his power for our
preservation, and therefore as sure as God has power, so sure are we to be
preserved.

Quest. Now if any ask, how it may appear, 2 Quest.
that Gods power is engaged to keep us?

Answ. I answer, it may appear evidently by these scriptures, Answ.
2 Cor. 12.9. and 1 Cor. 4.8. Heb. 1.3. Ephesians. 3.20. Heb. 7.16. Mat. 6.13. Romans
1.4. Jude 24.

Quest. Now if any yet ask, 3 Quest.
which way God does show his power in our preservation?

Answ.
Answ. I answer, the Lord does exercise his power in keeping us three ways. 1.
In his word, making that a glorious instrument to keep us to salvation, it is
as it were the arm of God, it is called expressly Romans 1.16.
the power of God unto salvation. For by the word is the demonstration of the
spirit and of power 2 Cor. 2 4.
, as the Apostle speaks; and thus Christ lives still on earth 2 Cor. 13.4.
by the very power of God in the word: yea there is an effectual working of
power Ephesians. 3.7.
given to the word. 2. The Lord exercises his power in keeping us by the grace
of his spirit in us 2 Cor. 12.9.
, by making grace to be sufficient for us: strengthening our says, and
establishing us with every needful grace, especially in times of trial. For a
Christian has 2 Timothy 17.
received the spirit of power, and of a sound mind. 3. In the works of his
providence, by his disposing and raising means to protect, and uphold the
faithful against, in, or out of all troubles, etc.

4 Quest.
Quest. But may some one say: Is the promise of Gods power in the preservation
of the faithful so absolute, as do what they will, Gods power will keep them?

Answ.
Answ. No: For if Christians would have God to keep them, they must themselves
keep that which is committed to them: they must keep the word, even the
pattern of wholesome words in faith and love: they must stir up the grace of
God in them; and wait upon God by prayer, and the constant use of all the
means, and here they must live by faith: they must keep themselves in their
ways, or else they must not wonder, that the Lord do as it were tumble down
the wall of their protection and seem to leave them to themselves.

Uses.
The use hereof is diverse: 1. First it may serve for confutation of that false
opinion of the Papists about their doctrine of free will. For mark it: The
very Saints have not power to keep themselves, no not after calling, and
therefore much less before calling. 2. And further it may confute the very
confidence of all the adversaries of Gods people: they insult many times over
the godly, because they are so few, so mean persons, so simple, and weak, and
pride themselves in the conceit of their own greatness, and power to compass
all their plots and malicious intendments against the godly: But they do
notably deceive themselves. For godly men are preserved not by their own
might, or means, or friends, or sufficiency, but 1 Samuel 29. Esaias 41.10, 11, 12.
by the power of God: grossly therefore are they deluded, if they think to
prevail finally against them. 3. Yea this might fully and at once confute the
objections of the weak Christian: Oh he has so many infirmities, and
temptations, and allurements, and corrupt inclinations, so many lets and
discouragements, and so wants the means, that he can never persevere to the
end: these are his fears, and this works his unbeleefe. But all this is soon
answered: Thou stand not by thine own strength, but by the power of God,
and therefore I must apply that speech of Christ to the Sadduces to them: a
little turning them: you err, not knowing the promises of God in the
scriptures, nor the power that is in Gods nature.

Secondly, this may serve for information: For it may show us the impotency of
all earthly things, nothing but Gods power can keep us to salvation. His work
it is to preserve, whose will it is to save. Man's natural life stands not in
the Luke 12.15.
abundance of the things, he does possess: neither is our spiritual life
sustained by the bare having of abundance of means.

Thirdly, it may serve for instruction, and that diverse ways: 1. First, we
should beg of God the spirit of wisdom, and revelation, to show the exceeding
greatness of his power Ephesians. 1.18, 19.
, that we might discern it, and believe it by faith; seeing we do not observe
it by sense and reason: 2. Secondly, we should daily ascribe power unto God,
even acknowledging continually his power in keeping us from day to day, as our
Savior Christ teaches us in the Mat. 6.13.
Lords prayer, when he teaches us to ascribe kingdom, power, and glory to
him: and with Peter we should learn to put off praise from our selves unto
God, as he did in the cure of the Cripple, saying, Acts 3.12.
not by our power is this man made whole. 3. Thirdly, we should particularly
of God seek the experience of his power. As for example, we should not rest in
2 Timothy 3.5. 2 Cor. 6.7.
the form, or show of godliness, but seek the power of it: we should not
only get a little faith, but strive with God by prayer, till he 2 Thessalonians. 1.11.
fulfill the work of faith with power: we should not think it enough to pray,
but we should seek the spirit of prayer, and to do it with power Zach. 12.12.
, even to be made by the anointing of Christ, Priests after the power of
endless life: so we should seek the power of conference, and utterance in the
confession of the truth, in admonition, instruction, consolation, or
propounding of our own doubts: for 1 Cor. 4.20.
the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. 4. Fourthly, we should hence
learn to be undaunted in afflictions, though it were to adventure all, even
life it self for the Gospel; seeing we are kept by Gods power, we may say in
any distress, as Paul did: 2 Timothy 1.2.8.
I know whom I have believed, and he is able to keep that which I have
committed unto him, till the day of Jesus Christ. If God keep our souls, it
matters not, what else be in danger. 5. Fifthly, Ministers should hence learn
to preach with power, and strive after it: For it is not the ordinance of God,
but the power of God, that preserves the hearers: It is not preaching, but
powerful preaching, that keeps the souls of men, till the day of Christ. 6.
And lastly, the people should learn to place their faith not in the wisdom,
learning, pains, or 1 Cor. 2.4.
graces of men; but in the power of God.

Lastly, this serves for consolation to all Gods servants against all their
fears, troubles, adversaries, temptations, or what else might make them doubt
their perseverance: For God is able to do above all that they can ask, or
think, according to his power Ephesians. 3.20.
, which works in them: The divine Power gives us all things 2 Pet. 1.3.
needful to life and godliness, and though they have but a little strength,
yet the Lord can open a door of knowledge, and grace, and comfort unto them,
which no Rev. 3.9.
man, nor devil can shut; and therefore let us from our hearts give praise
unto the only wise, and strong God, that is able to support us from falling,
and to present us faultlesse before the presence of his glory at the appearing
of Jesus Christ Jude 24.
.

By faith, or, through faith.]

The means in us to preserve us is our faith, and that this will keep us
through the power of God, is apparent by the scriptures: John 3.36.
He that believes on the son of God has everlasting life: (he is as sure
of it, as if he had it) and he shall not come into condemnation John 5.24.
, but is passed from death to life: Christ is the bread of life (for
nourishment) and he that comes to him by faith shall John 6.35.
never hunger nor thirst: He that comes to Christ shall in no wise be cast
out: Christ will be so far from losing any one soul, that believes in him,
that not so much as his flesh, or any part thereof shall be lost, but the Ioh.
6.37, 39.
whole body, that is delivered to the grave, shall be raised at the last day:
whosoever John 11.26.
believes in Christ shall never die: For he that Romans 10.9.
confesses with his mouth, and believes with his heart shall be saved: God
will keep that which by faith is committed to him, and Christ 2 Timothy 1.2.
will be at the last day made mavelous in all that believe: but that this
point may be more plainly understood, I propound three things. 1. First what
faith does for our preservation. 2. Secondly, how it does it. 3. What kind of
faith does it, and then the uses.

For the first, there are ten things, which faith works, by all which,
Faith does 10. things to further our preservation.
and every of which, we are greatly helped, and furthered in our preservation.

millstone were hanged about their necks Mat. 18.6.
, and they cast into the bottom of the Sea. 2. Secondly, as serpent, quenching
his fiery darts by showing us Christ John 3.15.16 Ephesians. 6.
the true brazen Serpent of our recovery. 3. As it is the daily hand and mouth
of the soul, John 6.35. 17.8. Romans 1.16.
life everlasting. 4. As it lights us the way to heaven. For as there is a
light apprehended by sense, and a light of light of faith, by virtue of the
promise of Christ, who said I am come a light into the world, John 12.46.
that whosoever abides in me, should not abide in darkness. 5. As it brings
us within the compass of Christ's intercession. For when he prayed the father
to keep them from evil, he expounds his meaning to be, to extend that his
intercession not only to his Apostles Acts 10.43.
, John 17.15.20.
but to all that should believe through their word. 6. As it procures the
pardon of all sins according to that of Peter; to him gave Acts 10.45.
all the Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him
shall receive remission of their sins. 7. As it will excite and compel a
Christian in all suits to faith will make him speak both by confession, and 2
Cor. 4.17. Acts 18.19.
prayer to God, and by inquiry and counsel, and reproof to men. 8. As it
procures the seal of the holy spirit of promise, and the earnest of the
inheritance purchased Ephesians. 1.14, 15. John 7.38, 1 John 5.10.
. Faith opens such a fountain of joy and encouragement within a man, that it
makes him break through at length all doubts and difficulties, having a
witness within himself, even the witness he that has given us to believe in
his (...) Phil. 1.27.
, gave ^^ also strength to suffer for him. 10. Lastly as it overcomes the
world, John 5.4.
that is, it fortifieth a Christian against all, pleasures,

How ^aith does this.
Now for the second: If any ask, how faith does all this: I answer, it does it,
first as in general it assures a Christian of Gods love, and that God is his
father, and will love him to the end, and this assurance is wrought by the
knowledge and application of Gods promises, and the observation of the signs
of those promises in himself. Secondly as it renewes upon every occasion a
particular persuasion, that God in such and such a cross or temptation, etc.
will for his promise and sons sake keep, and deliver him in particular: For
God stands upon this particular faith: I will not instance only in these cases
extraordinary, mentioned in these Scriptures, Mat. 8.13. and 9.28. Mark. 5.36.
and 11.23. John 4.20. but it is true also in cases ordinary: A persuasion, that
God will help, and keep us, will keep us indeed. Heb. 2.5.
For the just lives by his faith, and it shall be to us according to our faith:
so as he that believes, or is so persuaded, Romans 9.
shall not be ashamed.

All Mark 9.23.
things are possible to him that believes, and the true reason, why many
things are not obtained, is because we are not persuaded, they shall be
obtained: as for extraordinary things the same God that has determined, that
miracles shall cease, has caused that kind of persuasion to cease too.
Thirdly it does it, as it sets meditation and prayer aworke, meditation I say,
as it looks upon Christ, and the former promises of God in him, and prayer, as
it begs performance in all humility warranting hope upon that general promise
Mat 21.22.
whatsoever you ask the Father in my name believing it, you shall have it.

Now for the third, it must greatly be pondred, what kind of faith, What faith
will not preserve us.
or persuasion can effect all this? This I unfold negatively, and
affirmatively: negatively, it is not a verbal faith, will do it: By a verbal
faith I mean a bare affirming, that a man has faith without all reason or
discerning, that inwardly there is any such thing in his soul; and this
abounds every where amongst the ignorant sort, that take believing to be
nothing else, but to say they do believe: but this will avail nothing: Nor is
it a forced faith, that will work this: by a forced faith I mean such, as the
faith of devils, when a man is compelled to believe some truth, not for love,
or desire after the truth, but out of a servile disposition, because he cannot
tell, how to deny it, or object against it: Jam. 2.19.
The devils believe and tremble, and so do many wicked men. Nor is it a
partial faith; I am driven to use these terms, that by them I might express
the several humors of men: by partial faith I mean this, when a man will
believe some truths, but not all, as some men will believe Moses (...) 5.46.
, but not Christ: the Law, but not the Gospel: the truth of directions for
life, but not the assurance in particular by the promises in Jesus Christ: and
contrariwise some will believe Christ, but not Moses, they think the promises
are true, but they will never believe, that such and such threatenings can be
so: God will be more merciful. Again some men will believe in prosperity,
while they see means John 9.3 5.
, but not in adversity, when they want what they desire, or when their
confidence may bring them into disgrace, or trouble: Nor is it a limiting
faith, that will appoint, how it shall be before it be believed. The Jews
will John 4.48. 6.30.
believe, but then Christ must work wonders at their appointment: The Pharisees
will believe in the Messiah, but then he must be such a one, as they will
describe: many could believe, if God will do it by such means, or at such
times, or in such measure, as they could name Luke 22.67.
. Thomas will believe, but then he must first see Christ: but it John 1.50.
Mat. 27.42.
was otherwise with Nathaniel. Nor is it a dead faith that James James 2.
speaks of, that is without works, that will effect this: Nor will the Luke
8.13. Gal. 3. John 2.23, 24.
temporary faith do it. Lastly, the wavering faith, has but little force, I
mean a faith, that is tossed with so many fancies, and so many doubts, that
has a kind of habit of inconstancy, which may be found in many Christians,
that perhaps in the general have a true faith: my meaning is this that when we
give liberty to the power of every fancy, or temptation, or doubts, or
impediments, or affliction: so as if any thing fall in our way, that in the
least measure might seem to cross our desires, we are presently out of all
heart, or persuasion, and usually are never settled, but when nothing opposes
us; this kind of wavering and weakness is wonderfully scourged with want of
sense and experience of Gods mighty working, or at best it gives but
dishonorable entertainment to the greatest means of God. For though perhaps
great mercies are greatly affected for the present, yet the sense of them is
instantly gone, and every trifling cross turns the heart out of contentment,
and so out of persuasion too for all, that is not yet had: John 11.40. Romans
4.18. Iam. 1.6, 7.
These are unstable in all their ways.

But contrariwise that persuasion, that is thus mighty through Gods power to
keep us, is a persuasion Romans 10.14.
originally begotten by the word, prepared Mat. 21.31.
by repentance, witnessed 1 John 5.10.
by the spirit, confirmed Man. 16.16.
by the Sacraments, renewed Mat. 11.23, 24
by prayer, attended 1 Cor. 13.7.
with the love of God, encouraged by Romans 5.3, 4.
experience within our selves 1 Timothy 1.16.
or others, and continued by Luke 8.12. John 8.32.
some seed of the word.

The use of all this is threefold: 1. First for terror to all those, that live
without faith, and for humiliation to all those, that live without the settled
assurance of faith: Here men may see, what by faith might be had, Uses.
and the need of it. Now what can be the estate of such, as neglect it and
willingly sit down in unbelief, but even the condemnation hereunto belonging:
He that John 2.16.18
bele^veth not is condemned, and this is the condemnation of worlds of men,
even their wretched sinning against faith and assurance of Gods promises: This
is the true reason, that they John 8 24.
dye in their sins, this is John 10.26.
a sign they are not of Christ's sheep. For if they were, they would believe in
him; yea and the wretched wilfulness of many in confirming themselves in the
neglect of assurance, causes many times these fearful judgments, that they
should be given over to such an estate, as they should neither see nor
understand: the Lord being as it were made Ioh. 12.38, 39
unwilling, that they should be converted: yea this very unbelief may cause
God to repent of his mercies, and destroy men Iud. 5.
even after many singular favors bestowed upon them: what shall I say, if we
out of this text consider the use and need of faith, may not Christ wonder at
our unbelief Mat. 6.6.
, if still we will go on in security?

Secondly, we should all then be persuaded to settle about this work of faith
and assurance, knowing the singular worth and use of it, and to this end pray
unto God to show us the greatness of his power in them that believe, and
withal make use of the light, while we have it to walk in it, that ^o the
Lord may still own us, as the children of light, etc.

Lastly, it may be a great comfort to all, that have gotten assurance. He Romans
10.11.
that believes is in such an estate for happiness, as he needs not be
ashamed, no the Lord will so perform all things according to his faith, that
he shall never be ashamed. A man need be ashamed of nothing but his unbelief;
and of every such Christian it may be said, as once it was of one, Luke 1.45.
Blessed is she that believed. For there shall be a performance of those
things, which were told her from the Lord.

Unto salvation.

This is the end of our preservation.

From the coherence and general consideration of the words three things may be
noted.







Difference between temporary faith, and justifying faith
This is best at last; the other is most lively, when it is first hatched.

This is sorrowful at first, but leads to joy: The other is joyful at first,
but leaves men in such a case, as they must lie down in sorrow.

This is only in such, as shall be saved: the other in such as may be damned:
note, I say may may be, not shall be.

This is a strong garrison to guard us in the evil day: the other is
confident, till evil come, and then it betrays men.

This will not rest without assurance of salvation to come: the other is
secured with probabilities, and hopes, and conjectures present.

This is a great discerner of wants, and therefore bears it self upon Gods
power: The other looks chiefly outward, and considers not his fall, till he
be falling.

Thus in general.

Unto salvation] Salvation is threefold: 1. Acts 7.25.
Corporeal: 2. Luke 1.71. etc 19.9
spiritual in this life: or 3. Heb. 9.28. Of salvation, and what is imported
in the word.
eternal in heaven. It is eternal salvation is here meant, and so salvation
properly notes the negative part of our happiness in heaven that is, that there
we shall be made safe, that is, we shall be out of the reach of Satan, evil
men, the flesh, sin, infirmity, sorrow, pains, reproach, evil example,
discourageme^t, death, hell: but by synecdoche it notes the whole happiness of
a Christian for ever in glory: but this is named, because it is easier to tell
what shall not be in heaven, then what shall be there.

The Uses are both for instruction and terror: Uses.
For instruction this may teach us two things: first to acknowledge Gods great
mercy, in that he gives us the means of salvation, which was Job. 4.22. Act.
13.26. Romans 1.16. 2 Timothy 3*15.
wont to be the sole honor of the Jews: If carnal men had such availeable
means for earthly things, how would they esteem them? how rich and great
would they be? secondly, our hearts desire and prayer unto God should be, that
Romans 10.1.
we might be saved, even that we might have it as well as hear of it: and to
this end

First, we should shake off that natural security, and drowsy sleep Romans
13.11.
that Romans 13 13
. For many a man thinks he should be saved, when he has little reason for it.

Secondly, we should use all diligence to get the knowledge of heavenly
salvation Act. 3 47. Luke 1 77.79.
, where he is not first light.

Thirdly, we should be especially careful to seek the knowledge of Gods favor
in the remission of our own sins. For God gives knowledge of salvation by
Luke 1.77.
remission of sins; and to this end we should employ our selves in 2 Cor.
7.10.
repenting us of our sins.

Fourthly, as a singular furtherance hereunto we should be wise in discerning
the seasons, fearful to 2 Cor. 6.2.
stand out the day of salvation. For our repentance and assurance might be at
some times speeded with singular success, whereas delay may breed either loss
or difficulty.

Fifthly, our hearts should be so set upon heaven, that we should always be
Phil. 2.12.
working out our salvation with fear and trembling. Those daring, venturous,
bold spirits that dare live in any evil, so it stare not in their faces, and
have not a heart fearful of the last evil, aspire not to immortality: they
express not the care, or hope of heaven.

And as it serves for instruction, so it may serve for terror and great reproof
to all wicked persons, that do shift off and H^b. 2.3.
neglect so great salvation, and frustrate the means of saving H^b. ^.7, 9.
their own souls.

Prepared.] Salvation is prepared five ways: Salvation may be said to be
prepared five ways.
1. By preordination, and so it was Mat. 25.34.
prepared before the world was, as Esaias. 30 33.
Topheth was prepared of old for the wicked. 2. By creation, and so it was
prepared when the Lord made of nothing Prove 8 27.
that glori^us place above these visible heavens. 3. By the mission of Christ,
who by his obedience and sacrifice merited I^h. 3.16. Heb. 5.7.8* 9. Ephesians. 1.14.
for the elect this eternal salvation. 4. By regeneration: for so we are said
in the verses before to be begotten again to an immortal inheritance: for
therein the Lord breaths into us that lively hope and other immortal graces.
5. And lastly by justification, forgiving us all our sins that might keep us
out of heaven Luk 1.77. Rev. 19 7, 8. Ephesians ^.5, 6.
, and clothing us with the righteousness of Christ, and accepting us thereupon
as his adopted children in Christ.

2. Preordination is the fruit of Gods counsel: Creation of Gods power:
regeneration of Gods word: Christ's mission of Gods love: and justification of
Christ's resurrection. Preordination, and creation, and Christ's mission are
past, and so salvation is prepared: Regeneration and justification are present,
and so it is preparing; now there is a preparation which remains yet, and that
shall be in the last time, by the citation of the world, by the last trump, by
the collection of all Nations from the four winds of heaven, after they are
raised: But I think this is not meant here.

The Use is threefold: First we should acknowledge Gods great love, that thus
provideth for us so long before, and say with the Prophet, Lord what is man
that thou art so m^ndfull of him! Secondly, we should kindle our desires after
an estimation of this salvation: for certainly it must needs be excellent that
is so long in preparing. But thirdly and principally, we should learn to
prepare for it. For if God prepare it for us, we should much more prepare our
selves for it: yea it may be, that God writes this for our instruction: we
hear what God does, that we might learn what to do our selves.

Quest.
Now if any should ask, what we must do in preparing for salvation?

Answ.

We prepare for salvation five wai^s.


I answer, we must prepare five ways. 1. By Mat. 3.2.3.
repentance for our sins. 2. By procuring the assurance of it in the signs
Heb. 6.9, 11, 12.
, seals, and pledges of it. 3. By the labor of love, endeavoring with speed
to dispatch Gods ^ph. 6 13. Pr^v. 24.27. 2 Timothy 4 8.
work, even the task that God has set us to. 4. By laying up treasures in
heaven, both by sending our prayers thither before, and by conversing in heaven
by meditation Mat. 6.19 20. H^w many ways s^l^ation is h^d.
and desires. 5. Lastly, by special preparation for death, waiting till the
time of our changing do^ come.

Thus of preparation: The revelation follows.

To be revealed.] Two things are here implied, and one expressed: The things
employed are, first, that the salvation of the soul is a hid mystery. It is
not yet revealed, and so it is first in the doctrine of it to Pagans, secondly
in the assurance of it to wicked men in the Church, they sit in darkness and
in the shadow of death, sometimes for want of means, but always for Gal.
3.22, 23.
want of faith to believe it in their own case: nay they see not clearly the
happiness of the elect in general: for the glory of their salvation is darkened
by their afflictions and disgraces in the world: thirdly, it is in some
respects hid, and not yet revealed to the faithful: For first, many of the
children of God want the knowledge of it, which they might have, through
neglect either of the means of assurance, or the order of life. For God does in
the brightness of it show P^al. 50 ult.
his salvation to them that dispose their ways aright.

Secondly, none of the children of God know it, as it shall be, and that if we
respect either the instant of time, when God will Mat. ^4.
accomplish it, or the full perfection 1 Cor. 13.9* 10, 11, 12.
of the glory of it. 2. That it shall never be fully revealed till the last
time.

Quest.
But, is it not at all revealed in this life?

Answ.

To whom salvation is revealed, and how.

^
I answer, it is: But then consider to whom, and how, and in what things. It is
revealed to the godly in a more Ioh. ^7.6.
particular manner: for the wicked have but a general glimpse of it. It is
revealed by the word 2 Timothy 3.15.
, which teaches it: by the spirit 1 C^^. 2 10.
, which seals it, and causes us by the word to understand our right in it;
and by the graces of Christ, which as signs prove i^. And for the last it is
revealed three ways: 1. by way of negation: for in this life, we see by the
word, what shall not be in heaven, as not sin, sorrow, sickness, death, etc.
2. In respect of the assurance of faith and h^p^. 3. In ^^sp^^t of the f^^st
fruits, and pledges, and beginnings of salvation in saving graces.

Salvation (...) be revealed ^t the last day 3. ways.
The doctrine expressed is, that salvation shall be revealed at the last day,
and that three ways: first by the voice of Christ, who in the last Mat. 25.
sentence shall set out the glory of Gods mercy before men and Angels,
describing the worth of the Kingdom of God, which he has prepared for the
elect. 2. God will then enlarge, and perfect the understandings of the
faithful in full conceiving of the worth of eternal things. 3. It shall be
revealed, in that it shall be enjoyed. The revelation of it shall be the
possession of it, and this is principally meant here.

Uses.
The Uses of this doctrine concerning the revelation of salvation are diverse:
First it is exceeding comfortable unto Gods children, and thi^ comfort may be
concluded out of this doctrine three ways: First from the general, they may
hence be greatly heartned, that those great things which are promised, shall
one day be revealed: They are now the sons of God, but it does not appear
what they shall be: their miseries are revealed now, but their salvation is but
prepared to be revealed. Secondly, here is comfort in particular against
slanders and reproaches, and the evil censures and surmises of men, and
wretched imputations. Their innocence shall one day be revealed, and the
sins and secret plots of adversaries shall one day be discovered; Mat. 10 24,
25, 26.
There is nothing covered, that shall not then be revealed: that day shall try
men's works. And also against all sorts of erosses might this doctrine comfort
us: For if we did think of the things that are not seen as yet, they would
make us hold all our afflictions light and momentary, in comparison of what we
expect. And thirdly, from the less to the greater, they may hence deduce
singular comfort: For if now at some times, when it is but in preparation to be
revealed, Gods people do find so much comfort, what shall that superabundant
happiness be, when that Abyssus shall be broken up, Abyssus.
and the mines of treasure shall be discovered and possessed?

Here is also employed by the contrary wonderful terror to the wicked men: they
little know what shall befall them, the Lord now treasures up much for them,
and a Deu. 32 34, 35 Rom 2.5.
day will come, when it shall be revealed. If that anger, that God in this
world does Romans 1.18.
reveal from heaven by his threatenings, or by his judgments be so terrible,
oh what shall it be in the last day, they shall call for the mountains to cover
them, when the Lamb shall sit upon his throne to open the mystery of their
iniquity and Gods anger; and it is a misery added to their misery, that they
cannot discern it, but for the most part die without knowledge Job 36.12.
, and sink into perdition before they be aware: But especially woe shall then
be to the hypocrite, Luke 12.1, 2.
for his mask shall then be pulled off.

Thirdly, this doctrine may serve for instruction, and that two ways: First,
we should be thankful, if God have in any measure revealed unto us his love,
and this mystery of our salvation: For there are many wise men, and great men,
to whom in the secrets of his judgment that Mat. 11.25.
knowledge is denied: Secondly, we should with earnest expectation wai^ for the
revelation of the sons of God, seeing that that is the time of glorious and
unexpressible Romans 8.19, 21, 22.
liberty.

And thus of the revelation of salvation.

In the last time.]

These words are diversely accepted in Scripture: Sometimes they note in
definitely any time that is Genesis ^9 1. Deuteronomy. 4.30.
far off: sometimes they note the whole space of time from Christ's first
coming to the Esaias ^ 2. H^s 3.5. Heb ^ 2. 1 Ioh. 2.18.
second: sometimes they note the later age of the world nearer the second 1 Timothy
4 1. 2 Timothy 3.1. 2 Pet. 3.3.
coming of Christ: sometimes it notes the time after the resurrection, till
the end of the I^h. 11.24, 12, 48.
judgment, and so it is here.

Before I come to the particular consideration of these words, there are diverse
things may be noted in the general.

First, that Gods last works are his best works, which should teach us to
imitate Rev. 2.19.
God, and never fear the forbearance of God; time cannot change him, he will
be never the worse, or the colder for delay.

Secondly, if woe mark, what days these last days are, we may also note,
that God does his best works, when men do their worst. For of these last
days it is, that the 2 Timothy 3.1. 2 Pet. 3.3.
Apostle speaks, that they should be such wicked and perilous days: and this
we should learn of God also, to let our piety and patience then shine most,
when impiety and violence do bear most sway.

Thirdly, there is a time when God will at once fully deliver, and save his
servants, Deuteronomy. 32.^6. to 44. Luke 18.18.
and judge for them, and therefore Gal 6 9, 10.
we should not be weary of well-doing.

Fourthly, Gods servants must not think to be fully delivered, till these last
times, and therefore they must walk circumspectly redeeming the time, and
always Rev. 16.15.
stand upon their guard; seeing the days will be ever evil, we should
remember, and hold fast, and lay up provision for many days.

Fifthly, it is the will of God that the day of Judgment should not be known to
any man or Angel for the moment of it, and therefore it is here described by
ages not by days and hours, Act. 1.
which may confute curiosity, and teach us to watch at all times. Luke 21.9.
Mat. 24.44, 45, 46.


Sixthly, the world shall have an end, there is a last time, there will be an
end of all perfection, and therefore we should learn to 1 Cor. 7.29. 1 Ioh.
2.15, 16.
use the world, as if we used it not, and therefore woe is to them that so
greedily mind Ier. 17.11. Iam. 5.1, 2.
transitory things, and that place all their happiness in the things of this
life.

1 Quest.
Why is the time of the last Judgment called the last time.

Answ.

Why the day of judgment is called the last time.


It is called the last time, 1. because time shall thenceforth be no more. 2.
Because after that day there shall be no space left for repentance, or
salvation for wicked men. 3. Because Christians shall be delayed no longer, but
then all their wrongs shall be righted, all their sins shall be pardoned, all
their wants shall be supplied, all their infirmities shall be removed, all
their promises shall be fulfilled,
all their graces shall be perfected, all their desires shall be satisfied. 4.
Because all things shall then be fully determined, ended, and finally ordered.

2 Quest.
But why is this time deferred so long?

Answ.

Why the last judgment is deferred so long.


First to demonstrate Gods wonderful patience, and to clear his justice, in
that eternal vengeance shall then be exercised on the wicked. For by this
deferring, it will be made manifest, that he did it not suddenly, or
passionately, or privately, or before he had used all other means. Secondly,
it is forborne, till all Gods eternal decrees in the government of the world
be accomplished; especially it is stayed, til the number of the Elect be
gathered, and the fullness both of Gentiles and Jews be come in.

And thus much of this verse, and so of the first part of the consolation, that
is to say, the proposition of arguments: now follows the confirmation.

Verse 6. Wherein ye rejoice greatly, though now for a season (if need require)
ye are in heaviness through manifold tentations.
IN this Verse and the rest to the 13. is contained the confirmation of the
proposition, and that is performed two ways.

1 By prolepsis, or the answer of objections, verse. 6, 7, 8. 2. By prophetical
testimony, ver. 10, 11, 12.
For the first, the Apostle labors to confirm them especially against two
objections, whereof the first might be taken from their crosses.

1 Object.
For they might say, they were so pressed with the multitude of tentations,
inward and outward, that they were much disheartened in the contentation of
their estates.

Solut.
Now unto this the Apostle answers, that Christians have no cause to hang down
their heads for their afflictions, and that for four reasons. 1. Because one
may have many crosses, and yet have exceeding much joy. 2. The molestation that
comes by tentations or crosses is but for a season. 3. That a Christian is not
bound always to trouble himself, or be grieved at his troubles: It is but
when need requires. 4. Because great profit comes by afflictions and
tentations, that is to say, the trial of our faith, ver. 7.

2 Object.
Secondly, they might object, that they know not whether the former consolation
do belong unto them.

And to this he answers, Verse 8, 9. Sol.
by showing that there were three things in them, by which they might know that
those comforts did belong unto them. 1. The first was their love of Christ. 2.
The second their faith in Christ. 3. And the third their unspeakable and
glorious joys, the consequent and end of all which would undoubtedly be the
salvation of their souls: this answer is contained in the 8. and 9. Verses, and
thus of the order of those words.

Now whereas all these Verses contain answers to secret objections in the
minds of men; before I come to the opening of the particulars in the answers, I
note diverse things briefly from the general, and which is here employed.

First, that God sees the secret thoughts of men's hearts, he sees all the

Secondly, not only God sees, but the word of God meets with the Heb. 4.12.
There can hardly be an objection in a man's mind, but if he constantly attend
the Word, it will meet with it; which may encourage humble Christians to rest
upon the Word, for it will heal them of all sorts of spiritual diseases. The
Lord can strangely be their Physician, when no creature knows it: and withal
it confutes their stomach, that being met withal in the word, think the
Preacher aims at them, and that it comes of very spleen against them,
wilfully being ignorant of this, that the Word would search them, though the
Preacher never knew their faces. For it is the Word of him that knows all the
hearts of men, and was framed of purpose by the all-seeing Spirit of God, that
it might discover what was hid, and converse secretly in the very bosoms of
men.

Thirdly, we see here, that there may be objections in the minds of the very
Elect, even of such as have true grace: we may not imagine that they

Fourthly, objections, In that the holy Ghost is so careful to prevent these a
little leaven may sower the whole lump.

Fifthly, A question may be here demanded, and that is, why the Lord here Quest.
and suppress the objection?

For answer hereunto, diverse things may profitably be supposed. 1. First the
Lord hereby shows unto men in their own experience, Answ.

Why many times in Scripture the answer is, expressed and the objection
concealed.


what a divine light is in the Scpiptures, that can thus discern the hidden
things of man. 2. Secondly, it may be, the objections are suppressed, lest men
hearing the objections should learn to object. 3. Thirdly, the Lord hereby
shows man's nature, who usually will not say so much, yet the Lord says, they
do thinkeso. 4. Lastly, I think for the most part the Lord does it out of his
compassion and tenderness toward his people, these things arising out of men's
frail^y, he is willing many times to lay to the plaster, and yet not uncover
the soar: and for fear of discouraging them, he rather implies their
weaknesses then expresses them, that they might be assured, that he is
inclined rather to pity them, than to hate them; rather to succor them, than
to reprove them.

And thus of the general.

Wherein ye greatly rejoice.

The maine thing that I observe out of these words, is, that converted
Christians, though they have many afflictions, yet they are greatly solaced and
find great joy even in this world. Now because this point is not believed by
the most, who are loath to acknowledge so much gain in godliness, and because
also many Christians are not wise either to discern, or to make use of their
own felicity herein, I would (before I come to the use of this doctrine) for
explication propound three things. 1. How it can be made manifest out of
Scripture, that a Christian life is such a joyful life? 2. What are the
particular ways, whereby Christians can meet with such a joyful life and
comfort, as by Scripture is proved they might have? 3. And in the third place I
answer an objection or two.

How it may appear that a Christian life is such a joyful life. 9. things for
this.
For the first, The Scripture instanceth in nine things, all which do
manifestly import, that such as fear God, may have exceeding much joy. 1. For
first Phil. 4.4. Zeph. 3.14. Psalm. 32. ult.
God commands his servants to rejoice, yea Esa. 40.1, 9, 10
he commands his Ambassadors to comfort them. 2, God is bound by promise to
give them joy. For besides that the Gospel in general is a doctrine of glad
tidings there are particular promises for joy, Esaias 38. ult. 51. 3. 65. 13, 14
Ier. 31.12. Ioh. ^6.12.
as the places in the margent show. 3. Thirdly, joy is one of the express Gal.
5.22.
fruits of the Spirit. 4. Fourthly, it is Romans 14.17.
a maine part of the Kingdom of God. 5. Fifthly, God threatens his, when he
finds them without it, as is manifest in Deuteronomy. 28. this was one cause of his
displeasure, that they did not Deuteronomy 28.47.
serve him with joyfulnesse and a glad heart. 6. The Scripture is plentiful in
the examples of men, that have found exceeding much joy in the ways of God,
Psalm. 14. ^lt. Esaias 2^ 9. 38.19, 20, 21. Rom 5.3.
some few places I instance in the margent. 7. If a temporary faith find such
joy in the word, how much more a justifying faith. 8. The nature of God is
such, as he is as willing to communicate joy, 2 Pet. ^.3. I^b 8.19, 20.
as well as other graces. 9. Lastly, this is most apparent by this, that the
Scriptures show, that God has provided joys for his servants in such things
as might seem most to cross them or their contentment, as in Rom 8 3.
tribulation, yea and Ier. ^1.25.
in affliction of conscience it self. Now if we can believe it of them in such
times, then we need never doubt of it, but they either have, or may have great
joy.

But some one may say, Which way can they find such great joy? what means is
there for their consolation? Quest.


Answ.

G^ds (...) may find joy nine ways.


I answer: They find joy nine ways. 1. They have in them the Ioh. 14.16.
Spirit, even him that is called a Comforter, which no wicked man has, and
this Spirit of God is an everlasting spring of joy. 2. Gods ordinances are unto
them as Esaias 12 3.
wells of joy: the word is a well, so is prayer, reading, the Sacraments, and
conference. 3. They have their right to all Gods 2 Pet. 1.3.
promises to comfort them, and certainly the Gospel is a deep well. 4. They
have the presence of God ^^ke the Zeph 3. 15. Psalm. 36.7, 8.
sun to refresh them. 5. They find secret joy in the communion of Saints,
both to hear of them absent, and to have fellowship with them present, and that
both public and private: For if this be a great part of the joy of heaven,
then may it be some part of a Christians joy on earth. 6. There is joy in the
graces of the Spirit, to see the buds of the Lord grow in the garden of their
hearts, and the weeds of sin to be rooted out; yea great is the content of
grace and well-doing. 7. There is joy in the meditation of the misery they are
delivered from. 8. They are not barred from the joy in outward things, which is
all the joy wicked men have, and in these the worst Christian has more right
to rejoice, then the best carnal man. 9. Lastly, they find much joy even of
the Romans 12.12.
hope of the joy they shall have in heaven.

Ob. But might some ungodly person say, We see no such matter in them.

Sol. The stranger shall not meddle with their joy.

Ob. But might some scorner say, If any have found such joy in following the
word and godliness, it has been such, as have had nothing else to rejoice
in. Prove. 14.10.


Sol. That is false: The Psalmist shows by prophesying, that even Kings that
have abounded in outward things, yet coming to taste the excellency of the
comforts of godliness, and to feel the power of Gods word, should Ps. 138 4,
5.119.72.
sing for joy of heart, and greatly acknowledge the exceeding glory of God and
godliness.

Ob. But might some others say, We have been hearers thus long, and have
followed godliness, and yet can find no such comfort in it.

Sol. I answer, it may well be so: but then lay the blame where it is to be
laid, and let men examine themselves concerning the cause: For if thou find not
much joy in godliness, it is either because Ps. 126 5, 6. Esaias 61 1, 2, 3.
Ruth 5.5.
thou have not sorrowed for thy sins, or thou have not Ier. 33.8.
seriously sought the pardon of thy sins, or thou sowest not good seed, thou
art not conscionable in practice. If men were more fruitful in well-doing Job.
4.36. Gal. 6 8, 9, 10. Man. 25.21. Esaias 35.8, 10. Ioh. 5.10.
, they would find more joy: or thou 2 Co^. 13.12.
live not in peace, or thou art not Ioh 16.24. Phil. 4 6.
much in prayer, or thou Esaias 51.11.
receivest not the law into thy heart, or thou Prove 29 6.
art entangled with some gross sin, or thou art 1 Cor 7.30.
intemperate in thy earthly pleasures, or thou art not 1 These 5.18.
in all things thankful.

This doctrine may serve for three uses. First, It may confute that cavil of
carnal men, that Religion will make men dumpish and melancholy, whereas the
clean contrary we see here is true. 2. It greatly reproves the uncheerfulnesse
of many professors, who do thereby greatly darken the glory of Religion, and
cause the way of God to be evil spoken of, besides the hurt they do
themselves through unthankfulness and unbeleefe, Uses. The inconvenience of
uncheerfulnes in such as profess religion.
exposing themselves to the tentations, either of sin or apostasy, together
with a continual unfitness to all duties of piety: and this arises out of
aptness either to passion of anger, or worldly grief. 3. It may teach us to
seek the joys of God, and having found them, to be careful by all means to
preserve them.

But what shall I do to preserve the joys of God in my heart? Quest.


First, keep thy self free from the allowance of the least sin, violate not the
peace of thy conscience. Secondly, Answ.

What w^ must do to preserve the joys of God in our hearts.


digest the promises concerning infirmities after calling. Thirdly, take heed
of omission, or careless use of Gods ordinances. Lastly, care not for the
world, but retire thy self, else from thence will flow unavoidable unrest.

Before I pass from these words, yet two things more may be briefly touched.
First, in that he ^aith, ye rejoice, he seems to import, that true joy is
only in converted Christians. For as for the joys that the men of this world
have, they are not true: For besides there is much vanity Eccl.2.
and madness in them, there is also much danger in them; for Amos 6.
they breed security, and E^cl. 11.9.
men shall be called to account for them; yea men may lose Luke 12.15.
their souls for them. Secondly, where he says, wherein, he means in which
benefits of regeneration, glorification, preservation, etc. whence may be
briefly noted, that the chiefest joys of Christians are in spiritual things;
it ill beseemes Christians to set their hearts on earthly things.

Quest.
But is it not lawful to delight our selves in earthly pleasures?

Answ.

How far forth a Christian may joy in earthly things.


It is with these rules: First, thou must be sure thou have repented of thy
sins, before thou allow thy self liberty for Esaias 22.12.
pleasures. 2. Thou must not make a vocation of recreation. 3. Thou must spend
only thy own time upon them, not the Lords. 4. Thou must avoid scandalous
delights, and such games as are of evil report. 5. Thou must watch over thine
own heart, that thy recreations steal not away thine heart from the delight
of better things, but be used rather as an help unto them.

Lastly, note from hence, that they only are fit to give testimony of the
joys of a converted estate, that have had experience of it themselves; trust
not the judgments of carnal persons, for the dignity, utility, and
durablenesse of the graces of godliness.

And thus of the first reason.

Though now for a season you are in heaviness.

Sorts of heaviness.
There are diverse sorts of heaviness. 1. There is the heaviness of the
desperate, such was that in Cain and Judas. 2. and the heaviness of the
disappointed, such was the heaviness of Haman, Ahab, and Ammon, when they
could not compass their ambitious, covetous, and voluptuous ends. 3. And there
is the heaviness of the melancholy Rom 14.15.
, and of the scandalized. 4. There is the heaviness of the penitent for
sins. 5. and of the afflicted for crosses. 6. There is a heaviness in Gods
children after calling for spiritual respects, as for corruption Romans 7.
of nature, for C^nt. 3.
absence of Christ, for P^al. 42.
want of the means, for the Ezekiel. 9.
dishonor of God in public abominations, for the Lament.
miseries of the Church, for Gods Esaias 66.2.
threatenings and anger, for the 2 Cor. 5.
desire of death, for Esaias 6.3, 17.
hardness of heart, and for special sins after calling.

Quest. But may not Gods children be heavy for crosses?

Answ. They may; and I think that may be meant here; but then these rules must
be noted. First, that their heaviness be rather for some sin in themselves,
Rules for heav^nesse for cro^^es.
which might cause the cross, then for the cross it self. Secondly, that
their heaviness be moderate.

Quest. But when is sorrow for afflictions moderate?

Answ. First, when it exceeds not the measure of sorrow for sin. 2. Secondly,
when it withdrawes not the heart from God and holy duties through passionate
and incredulous perturbations: When sorrow in affliction is moderate.
but it is to be noted in the general, that the Apostle is very loath to grant
them liberty for heaviness, but it is with many limitations: as 1. it must be
but a little season: 2. they must be sure need does require it: 3. it may not
be allowed for many crosses that will not be allowed for lesser, or fewer
tentations.

For a season.]

Why the afflict^^ns of the godly are but for a ^^^^on: and how.
The troubles and griefs of Gods children are but for a season, for a moment:
God hides his face Esaias 54. Psalm 30.5.
but a little while; and the reason is, because afflictions are used of God,
but as plasters, or medicines, or as a ^urnace. Now in as much as the godly
will quickly judge themselves, and make their peace, therefore the Lord will
soon Job 36. Ioh. 16 20, 21, 23. Phil. ^. 6. Luke 18.8.
draw off the cross, the plaster shall lie no longer than till the sore be
whole; and the goldsmith will let his metal lie in the fire no longer than
till the dross be^ melted off, or it be fit to be wrought upon.

Now if crosses should continue long in our reckoning (say it were the whole
life of a man) what is man's life? even a vapor that appears a little time.
Besides, what can thy longest crosses be in comparison of the pains of the
damned from which thou art delivered, or of the joys and glory of heaven which
thou shall possess? Yea what is that thou do suffer, in comparison of what
thou deservest? but yet I say it is but a season, as we account seasons, even
a small part of the life of the godly: For either the Lord removes the cross,
or takes away the sting of it, or sweetens it with his mercies.

The Use may be to teach us to check the P^ 42.11.
unquietness and Ps 73.26. etc.
failings of our hearts, and to be ever ashamed of our selves, Use.
that we should make so much of our crosses, and so little of Gods mercies: we
should learn, seeing they are but for a season, to Heb. 10. Ps. 73.26, 28.
hold fast the confidence of our hope, and live by faith, and if the Lord be
angry Esa 26.19, 20
to hide our selves for a little season, till his indignation be past.

If need require.]

Here three things may be observed:

First, that Christians man^ times make crosses to themselves, and draw

Secondly, crosses and griefs are sometimes needful: needful I say to Why
crosses are sometimes needful.
to make us desire heaven, to drive us to seek more grace and holiness, to
prevent sin to come, to humble us for sins past, or to make trial of some
grace of God in us. It is a comfort, that God will not afflict us till there be
need.

Thirdly, In some crosses Christians need not be in heaviness: so was it Job,
and the Apostles in their sufferings; and that is first, when we find the sense
of Gods love: secondly, while we keep our uprightness.

Through manifold tentations.

There are four kinds of tentations: First, There are four kinds of
tentations.
there is the Mat 13.21. Luke 8.13.
tentation of persecution; and well may persecution be called tentation: For it
is a property in most persecutors to tempt and entice, that they may seduce;
and besides, the Lord hereby does try the faith of men; for in the time of this
tentation the temporary faith will fail. Secondly, there is the tentation of
affliction, afflictions in Iam. 1.3, 12.
general are called tentations in diverse places, and they may well be called
so, either because they tempt or because they try. They tempt, and that either
to vice, or despair: To vice, for afflictions they tempt men to lying, deceit,
stealing, swearing, oppression, usury, filthiness, idolatry, carnal shifts,
breach of Sabbath, passion, bitter words, inordinate desires, etc. yea and in
some men they tempt to despair, and the blasphemy against Gods mercy, as in
Cain and Judas. This should teach us to watch over our selves in our troubles,
that we be not led aside with the tentations of afflictions; and we should
account it a great mercy of God to get out of our trouble, free from the
infection of any of the former, or the like vices: and let wicked men know,
that to be taken with the tentation of the cross, is worse than the cross it
self; deceit is worse than want of trade, etc. Now afflictions are said to be
tentations also, because they try men: For they try our faith and patience, and
the constancy of our obedience to God. But of the trial of crosses in the next
verse.

The third kind of tentations is the tentation of concupiscence, of which Iam.
^.14.
James speaks, when he says, a man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his
concupiscence: Observe a plain proof, that the internal evils that arise
from corruption of nature are called tentations.

The last kind of tentations is the tentation of Satan, and this is usually
understood, when we name tentations. Of the first and second kind I have
entreated before: of the third I shall speak in the handling of the common
place of tentations of the fourth kind.

Concerning then the tentations of Satan chiefly I propound five things:





tentation of concupiscence, and the tentation of Satan.





Satan tempts men five ways.
For the first. Satan does tempt men five ways: 1. By causing men to tempt:
Thus he caused Peter to tempt Christ; and so he does commonly stir up wicked
men in all ages to be his instruments for tempting. 2. By assuming to himself
some outward shape or likeness, and therein vocally to allure and beguile men;
thus he tempts witches, and some monstrous offenders. 3. By presenting objects
to our senses that may tempt us: therefore Job said, he would make a covenant
with his eyes. 4. By enflaming the corruption of our own nature to evil: For
when evil is hatched in our minds, if it work there strongly, it will have
some effect upon the body in some part of it, and thereby Satan knows the
fire that is in us, and then he comes to us, and blows all those coals with
all cunning and fury to provoke us yet more and more unto sin. 5. Lastly, he
tempts us by injecting evil into our minds, but how he does this is
unknown: and this last is that, which usually we think of, when we speak
of the temptations of Satan.

1^. Degrees of te^^ation.
Now for the second: there are in all thirteen degrees of the temptations of
the devil.

1. The first is, the evil motion it self barely considered, as it is cast
into the mind.

2. The second is, the liking of it, when our concupiscence upon the discerning
of the evil thought, does yield a kind of approbation, we being content, that
such an evil thought should be there.

3. The third degree is delight: when we please our selves with contemplative
wickedness, taking a kind of contentment in musing upon such evil things,
suffering our thoughts to feed themselves in the delights of such imaginations,
where we suppose the practice of evil, though as yet we have no resolution any
way to give our selves liberty to do, as we think.

4. The fourth degree is security, or the willing omission of all such duties
or services to God, as might hinder that contemplative wickedness, this is,
when we are unwilling to pray, or hear, or read, especially any thing that
might put us out of that liberty of thinking evil, now are we drawn away
with the temptation, as the Apostle speaks.

5. The fifth degree is ensnaring, when a man that all this while had no purpose
to do the evil, let his thoughts yet run upon it, and he finds himself
now so entangled, that he doubts he shall be carried into the practice of it,
whereupon he struggles within himself and would fain resolve not to do it but
yet finds himself like the fish catched with the hook, so as he cannot get
off, but is strongly entised to yield to seek all that pleasure, or profi^, or
honor, or revenge, of which he has mused: Thus for some time continue men in
this degree, feign they would not do the sin outwardly, yet they fear they
shall do it: They could now wish they had not given their thoughts that
liberty. For now they are so fiered, they cannot tell how to be delivered from
them.

6. The sixth degree is Consenting: For at length the devil overcomes through
the flames of concupiscence, so as he now resolves, he will practice it, and
give his full consent to attend the opportunity to commit the evil, as
supposing to find to himself great content, that he never had: such is the
old fraud and murtherous lying of the Tempter.

This is called the conceiving of sin.

7. The seventh degree is Practice, or the birth of sin, and this is, when a
man overcome within as before, now commits his intended evil.

8. The eighth degree is custom, when a man now less fearful of sin, does
often commit it, and yields himself over to the continual practice of his
wretched evil.

9. The ninth degree is inward Apostasy, that is, departing from God with an
evil and unfaithful heart, as it is called, Heb. 3. this is when a man
confirmed in the custom of sin resolves to give over all care of godliness,
and accordingly by the working of Satan has his heart filled with all sorts
of vicious inclinations, and is so obdurate, that he believes or cares for no
threatenings, nor makes any great reckoning of any truth of God: But all this is
but within.

10. The tenth degree is outward Apostasy, and this is, when a man at length
growing audacious in sinning, gives over even outwardly all care of honesty or
religion, openly showing himself to be fallen away from all care of the
profession of the truth, or respect of godliness further than the laws of
men, or other carnal respects may lead him.

11. The eleventh degree is tradition to Satan, which is done either secretly,
the Lord giving the sinner up to Satan, or openly where the sinner is
delivered to Satan by the censure of the Church: It is true, that sometimes
Satan has possession at consent before practice. For then he entered into the
heart of Judas: It is true also, that the censures of the Church fall upon many
after practice before Apostasy. But if men do tarry out all these degrees, in
this place they will be given up, if they prevent not death, or death prevent
not them, etc.

12. The twelfth degree is a reprobate sense, when a man having been under the
power of the devil, and not escaping out of his snare by repentance, i^ most
fearfully forsaken of God, and with unspeakable spiritual wic^ed^esse besotted
by Satan, so as all sense and remorse is wholly extinguished i^ him, so as
neither the light o^ Nature, nor the light of Scripture can work upon him.

13. The last degree is death, even death eternal.

Thus we see the stairs that descend down to hell, and the several step^
(...) stairs.

Saint James makes but 6. degrees: For the first motions he suppresseth. Then
the first degree is drawing away, now that contains the 2, 3, and 4. degree,
as it is here in our reckoning, viz. liking, delight, and security. The (...)
^irth, that is, practice: the fifth, the finishing of sin, which has in i^
^^stome, in^^r^ (...) outward Apo^^acie, tradition and a rebrobate mind: the
(...) i^ death. Thus of the second point.

(...) the third, we must understand, (...)
that the tentations of concupiscence, (...) the ^entations of Satan differ
thus:

1. First, the tentatations of Satan are usually to things against nature, or
against the God of nature, and so the temptations of Blasphemy, as they are
te^med, are from Satan; or they are against the constitution of nature, a^ the
(...) which a man is moved to kill himself, or destroy or betray his C^untry
or Prince, or to commit ^^^^mitry, Bu^^^r^, or (...).

2. Secondly, the tentations of Satan are usually sudden, and fierce, and
violent like lightning, that leaves not a man time for deliberation: Thus he
(...) CHRIST with the glory of the world, but it is in a moment, lest ou^
Savior by deliberation should find our reasons of exceptions against earthly
glory: and so when the devil would persuade to sin that is gross and
m^nstrous, he labors to confound a man with the sudden fierceness, and
flame of the tentations; whereas concupiscence is more lingering and flower.

3. Thirdly, those evils that are instantly disliked, and in no measure
consented to, or approved, are from Satan, and not from concupiscence. For
concupiscence works by the natural pronenesse to the evil, which cannot be
without all desire, or liking, and these tentations may be none of our sins.
The first motions are not always to be counted our sins: For Christ was
tempted not only for the matter, but for the manner in all things like unto
us, yet without sin: he had monstrous things cast into his mind by the devil,
yet he sinned not: so likewise it is not our sin simply that tentations are
there. For a man does not sin in the tentation, till he be in some degree
drawn away by it.

Comforts against tentations.
Now for the fourth thing, there are many comforts against tentations diversely
to be raised out of the Scripture.

First, from example, and that both of Christ and Christians. Of Christ, for
Heb. 2.16. and 4.^5. now there is a threefold comfort from Christ's example.

1 First, that he was tempted as well as we.

2. Secondly, that we see by his example, one may be tempted, yet without
sin.

3. That he was tempted, that he might succor us when we are tempted.

And as we have the example of Christ, so we have the example of Christians.
For as the Apostle Peter says, The same afflictions are accomplished on your
brethren that are in the world, 1 Pet. 5.12.



1. First, Gods Spirit is within us to lust against the flesh, even to assist
with grace and strength against the workings of Satan.

2. Secondly, the good Angels invisibly and insensibly are as ready to help and
succor, as the evil Angels are to tempt and devour.

3. Thirdly, Christ is a present cure for the stings of this serpent, as the
brazen Serpent was to cure the stings of the bodily serpents. Now Christ cures
us, when we look upon him by faith, partly by his intercession, and partly by
a virtue flowing out of him to us. For it is certain, he prays for us, as
well as he did for Peter, Luke 21.31. Ioh. 3.14.

4. Fourthly, Gods care is for us: so as no temptation shall befall us, but by
his sufferance: and besides, he will have respect to our strength, and thirdly,
he will give issue with the temptation, as is excellently showed, 1 Cor 10.13.

winnow us. Luke 22.
And although it seems to be against all reason, that tentations should purge
us, yet it is certain Gods children are made more clear and pure by the very
experience in the conflict with inward evils: It does winnow them, and drive
away a great deal of chafe, even of lightness and vanity out of their
minds. Again, temptations are but to hide their pride, 2 Cor. 12.
and to keep them that they be not exalted overmuch.

Lastly, we may greatly comfort our selves, if we consider the promises tread
down Satan, Romans 16 10.
and that speedily, under our feet: He has (in the Apostle Paul) answered and
assured us, that his grace shall be sufficient for us, and his power shall be
made known in our weakness: 2 Cor. 12.9, 10.
yea and Christ has promised, when we enter into the combat, that he will
pitch his Tabernacle by us. Besides, it is an old and ancient promise made long
since, that if the Devil for terror show himself like the great Leviathan, or
for fraud like a crooked and piercing serpent, or for violence and fury like
the dragon in the sea; Esaias 27.1.
yet the Lord will smite him with his great, and sore, and mighty sword.

Thus much of the comforts against temptations.

The fifth and last thing I propounded to be observed, 12 Rules against
tentations.
was the rules to be observed to releeve us against temptations: and these are
twelve in number, whereof some are preservatives against temptation, and some
of them are remedies to deliver us out of temptations.

1. The first is prescribed by the Apostle Peter; 1 Pet. 5.
and that is to be sober and temperate in the use of all outward things. For
usually Satan gets in by the advantage he has from our too-much liking or
use of profits, or credit, or recreations, etc.

2. The second is, to watch, to watch I say indefinitely, observing our own
weaknesses by a care to repress the beginnings of sin in our own nature, by
avoiding the usual occasions of sin or tentations, and by providing our
selves against the time of the assault, looking ever for it, and standing upon
our guard. This if we did, certainly the Devil would be afraid to attempt any
assault upon us: but our own inconsideration and security, and dallying with
the beginnings of sin, or the occasions, usually tempts the devil to tempt
us.

3. The third rule is, to take heed of solitariness; I mean not only the
inward solitariness, or emptiness of the mind; but the very outward retyring
from company without cause or calling. The Devil set upon Eve when she was
alone, Genesis 3. Mat. 4.
and Christ was led aside into the wilderness to be tempted.

4. The fourth rule is, to be diligent and faithful in our particular calling.
It is almost impossible, that a life full of idleness should not be also full
of temptations: this was noted to be the door of David's tentations: whereas
contrariwise faithful employment bars out tentation. It is exceeding good
not to be at leisure to attend tentations. Labor is a great preservative from
a world of inward evils.

5. The fifth rule is, to be careful to walk uprightly, and to keep our
righteousness: For he that walks uprightly, walks boldly and safely; not
only in respect of evil men, but of evil Angels also. Righteousness is an
excellent breast plate to preserve the heart of a man; and usually outrageous
tentations get in by the love of some presumptuous sin. But to hold this
rule, that we would not allow our selves in any sin (which is true
uprightness) is a sure course, and seldom fails, and it preserves against
all fierce tentations.

6. The sixth rule is, to search the Scriptures, and to get store of provision
against the evil day. Now this rule is both a preservative, and a remedy: It
is good to keep Satan from assaulting us, (for when he tempts, it is upon
hope that we have no armor to resist;) or if he dare assault, It is written,
will be a sure weapon: The Word is the sword of the Spirit, that Christ fought
withal, and therefore we may be sure, it is a safe weapon.

7. The seventh rule is, that we must not complain only, as many do, but we
must resist also; we must do our best to oppose tentation; neither must we
think this a slender help, for it has a clear promise, that the Devil shall
flee from us. Iam. 4.8.


8. Eighthly prayer is a tried medicine: This Paul used when he was tempted, 2
Cor. 12. and certainly it is powerful either to remove the temptation, or to
procure an answer, or strength to bear it.

9. The ninth rule is, we must specially remember to run to the brazen
serpent. It is without all question, that the sight of Christ is as availeable
to help us against the stings of the old serpent, as ever the sight of the
brazen serpent was to cure them that were stung by the fiery serpents.

10. The tenth: we must labor for a persuasion, that tentations shall never
separate us from God: R^m. ^. ult.
unbelief gives them head, and sometimes ere the more they are mistrusted, the
more they grow infectious; whereas faith quenches them, Ephesians. 6.16.
though they were fiery darts.

11. The eleventh: If we find the devil practicing upon the flesh, the way is
not to revile the devil, but to beat the flesh: Mortification, and the
crucifying of the flesh with the lusts of it, G^l. 5.24.
will expel the devil.

12. The last rule is to be thankful for all mercies we find in temptations,
and it is a great means to help us: whereas unthankfulness does wonderfully
strengthen the temptation.

And thus much of the sixth verse.
Verse 7. That the trial of your faith being much more precious than the gold
that perishes (though it be tried by fire) might be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ.


THis Verse contains the fourth reason, why afflictions and temptations
should not darken the sense of our happiness, and that is taken from the
effect of afflictions and tentations, which is in this Verse both propounded
and amplified: It is propounded in these words, the trial of your faith; and
it is amplified two ways: First, by comparison with gold tried in the furnace:
And secondly, by consideration of the event; it will be found to praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. First of the effect, as it
is briefly propounded.

The trial of your says.]

Two things I would note here. 1. In general, that God will try men. 2. In
special, what God tries in men, viz. their faith.

Ier. 9 7. Esaias 31. ^ult.
For the first: It is certain that the Lord has his fire in Sion, and his
furnace in Jerusalem, and he will melt man. For what else should he do to his
people?

God tryes men six ways.
Now the Lord is said to try men diverse ways.

Psalm. 139.1, 2, 3.

Exodus 16.4.

Mat. 3.2. Heb. 4.12.

fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold, Prove. 27.21.

Deu. 13.1

Ezech. 22.21, 22. etc. The other is the furnace of mercy, and this is here
meant.

Now the trial in affliction is not simply or properly the affliction it
self, 7. ways God tryes men in affliction.
but certain specialties of consideration in the affliction: and thus God
tries us, 1. First, when he sends many crosses one in the neck of another, and
some of them of longer continuance, Dan. 11.33, 35. and so in Jobs case. 2.
Secondly, when he sends upon our spirits strange and unwonted terrors, Exodus
20.20. 3. Thirdly, when he smites some eminent men with sore, and unexpected
judgments, Dan. 11.34. 4. Fourthly, when he delayeth or withholdeth expected
favors, Deu. 8.2. 5. Fifthly, when he gives but a little help, Dan. 11.34. 6.
Sixthly, when he leaves us to our selves, and withdrawes the special working
of his spirit, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. 7. Seventhly, when he suffers us to fall into
the same miseries that wicked men do, yea sometimes making our condition to be
as the beasts of the field, Eccles. 3.17, 18, 19.


Now the consideration of this doctrine of Gods melting, Uses.
and trying men may serve for four Uses:

1. First, there is a great comfort in it, and that four ways: Comforts in
our t^^^ls.


1. For first it is a comfort, that God makes so much account of men, as to
think them worthy the melting or trying: even this favor Job wonders at, Ioh
7.18.

2. Secondly, it is comfortable, that it is Gods wont to try his servants, it
has been Gods custom to do so. It is no strange thing, if he try us, he
does no more than what he has done to them that were dear unto him, Heb.
11.36.

3. Thirdly, it is especially comfortable, if we consider out of other
Scriptures the manner of Gods compassion and care for his people, when they be
in the furnace. For

First he appoints their time how long they shall tarry there, and beyond that
time they shall not be in the furnace, Dan. 11.35.

Secondly, the Prophet Malachy says, he sits down himself by the furnace to
tend it, and to look to them, Mal. 3.2. or if he be upon any occasion urged to
be absent, the Prophet Esaias says, he flies, and returns, Esaias 31.9. and ult.
etc.

Thirdly, if they have any suit to God, or make any moan while they live in
the furnace, they are sure to be heard, no time like it for the hearing of
prayer, Zach. 13.9.

Fourthly, if the fire be too hot for them, he will defer his wrath, and
refrain from them, Esaias 48.9, 10.

Fifthly, he will take notice of a little grace in the midst of a great deal of
dross: if there be but a sigh, a good thought, a holy desire in the midst of a
great deal of ignorance and perturbation, he will accept it, and account of
it, Romans 8.27.

4. Fourthly, it is a comfortable doctrine to Gods children, if they consider
but the effect of this melting, and that either the present effect, or the
future. The present, it is to try them, not to consume them, or to make a full
end of them: it is to refine them, not to destroy them, Dan. 11.36. Ier. 46.
ult. and they shall come out, as Job says, as the gold, Job 23.10. And
besides, for the time to come, it is certain, the Lord tryes them, that he
may do them good at their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.14, 15, 16. and after they are
tried they shall have a crown of life, Iam. 1.12.

And thus of the Use for consolation.

Secondly, this doctrine is a terrible doctrine too: terrible I say in general
to all such as will not be purged by affliction: such as will not be made
better by their crosses: Let them consider, that it is the Lord that cast them
into the furnace, and seeing they mend not, one of these two evils will befall
them: Either the Lord will give them over, as altogether dross, and so they
shall never be purged, or else since they will not mend by the beginnings of
his displeasure, he will cause his fury to rest upon them, as the Prophet
speaks, Ezech. 24.13, 14. and in particular, woe to all wicked men that nourish
themselves in sin, because they are inward or secret sins. Little do they
know, or think that God will search Jerusalem with lights, even all them that
be frozen in their dregs, or settled on their lees, Z^ph. 1.12. When the Lord
will search for them, it is not the top of Carmell, nor the bottom of the sea
that shall hide them, etc. Amos 9.2, 3. And in special, woe is to all
hypocrites, they are fallen into Gods hand, that compasses about all their
ways, there is not a thought in their minds, but God sees: woe to careless
professors, the Lord will make all the Churches to know, that he searches the
heart and reins, Rev. 2.23.

Thirdly, this doctrine may teach us two things: 1. First, to be more careful
of in ^ard uprightness, seeing it is God that tries us, who tries the heart
as well as the life, 1 Chro. 29.19. 2. Secondly, in all the wrongs and
aspersions of wicked men to put our selves upon Gods trial, Psalm. 7.9. Ier.
11.20. 1 These. 2.4.


Of your faith.

Two things I note here.

1. First, that where God gives faith, he will try it, where he bestows the
assurance of his favor (let men look for it. For) certainly he will melt
them, God will try our faith for diverse reasons, he will thereby melt off the
rust of antiquity. There be certain odd and old opinions, and conceits in men
at their first conversion, and it is Gods manner to school men by afflictions,
and many times a Christian in a few days of adversity learnes more true
knowledge, then otherwise he would do in many weeks. Again, there are
dregs of unbelief in the best and these need to go into the furnace to get
them off: Besides, by affliction God does show the truth of his own grace from
that, which is but counterfeit in wicked men. The furnace manifestly puts a
difference between a justifying faith, and the best of all other faiths, to
wit, temporary faith: this may serve to confute their folly, that think
themselves happy, because they are not in trouble as other men. But
contrariwise, this is an ill sign many times that they are miserable, and have
not any faith that would endure the trial. This should also teach us so to
seek assurance of Gods favor, or so to hold the possession of it as to look
for assaults and trials, while we are in this world more or less.

2. Secondly, that of all other graces God stands most upon faith in
affliction, and this is so, both because it brings more glory to God (for to
live by faith is to yield an immediate glory unto God) as also, because it is
of most principal use for the good of Christians. For faith does in the midst
of all storms, and the waves of adversity set a Christian on a rock; it does
give him ground to be established upon, so as he needs not fear drowning,
hence the Metaphors of grounded and stablished are given to faith.

Again, Faith delivers from the curse of the law, so as what afflictions break
in upon a Christian, they are not curses, but chastisements, which may be a
great hearts ease in all temptations or trials. Again, Faith quiets a man's
heart, and works peace and inward tranquillity: for against the force of the
curse it gives a man access to the view of the glory of heaven, yea it does as
it were give a being to things which are not: (...) is the word used. Heb. 11.1.
it makes the glory of heaven as it were present; it lays hold on eternal
life. Lastly, faith is many times the very condition of deliverance; it is with
us according to our faith. Faith makes us whole: faith delivers us: as soon as
we can get our hearts to trust upon God, the Cross is gone: the Lord stayed
but till we would believe in him with all our hearts.

Now is this so? does God stand so much upon our faith in affliction? Use.
How is it then, that we do not believe? Oh unbelief! unbelief is ever
worse than the cross it self. M^^k 4.40.
There is nothing the tempter would rather deceive us of, then our faith. Oh
how is the heart of man turned away from true faith! there are a great number
of us, 1 These. 36.
as it were ^eprobates concerning the faith, we are of no judgment, we are
altogether blockish in this point of believing in God.

But in the second place, let this doctrine persuade with us, when we feel
impatiency, or any other perturbation rising in us, to check our selves, Luke
8.25.
and say to ^ur own souls, where is my faith now? and with the poor man in
the Gospel, let us run to Christ with tears in our eyes, crying, and saying,
I believe, Lord help my unbelief: and with the Disciples, let us still pray,
Lord increase my faith. Yea thirdly, Luke 17.5. 1 (...) 16.13. Heb 2.5. 2 These.
1.11.
since the Lord accounts so much of our faith, we should strive after
perfection even to get a strong faith, and to show our selves unmovable in
affliction, and to this end we should be much in the Apostles prayer, that God
would so fulfill the Counsel of his own will, that he would be pleased to
fulfill the work of our faith with power.

But some one may say, what is it in affliction to show our faith, Quest.
or what must we do to approve our selves to God, that we do believe?

He that would approve his faith in affliction must do four things: Answ.

How we show our faith in af^l^ction.




1. First, if he be conscious to himself of any evil that he has too much
favored, he must speedily repent, and give glory to God, and make his peace
with God, Dan. 12.10.

2. Secondly, he must be sure he hold fast his assurance, so as he call not the
love of God into question. For as the Lord will still own his people in all
their adversities, saying, they are his people: so must they still stick to
this, the Lord is my God. This is to believe, to hold fast this assurance,
whatsoever befall us, Zach 13. ult.

3. Thirdly, he must be sure to lose no ground, either in the affections of
godliness, or in the confession or profession of the truth. No affliction must
abate his love to godliness, or the Word, or Gods children; nor hinder his
free profession of the truth.

4. Fourthly, he must commit his way to God, and rely himself, and all his
a^tions upon God, putting his trust upon Gods promises and goodness, Psalm. 37.
Phil. 4.6.

But especially the praises of faith in affliction will be greatly enlarged, if
we can add these things following:

1. First, if we can trust upon (...) ^^mmit ou^ ways unto him* resting upon
his promise, though we see no means to accomplish it, Romans 4.

2. If patience may have her perfect work so as we could go through
afflictions with that firm unmoveablenesse that we would resist all
perturbations, and that in all sorts of trials.

3. If we would believe, though God himself did seem to withdraw, or to
neglect us. This was the great faith of the woman of Canaan.

4. If we can hold out without hasting to use any ill means, or unlawful
courses to deliver our selves, Esaias 28.16.

5. Fifthly, if we can in affliction be wise to sobriety, resting contented,
though God do not discover the reason of his proceedings with us, Romans 12.3.

6. Sixthly, if we can preserve a tender sense of our own vileness, being
glad of smaller favors, rejoicing when God is pleased to give us but a little
help, thankfully acknowledging any degree of succor, not seeking great things
for our selves.

Quest.
But might some one say, What should move us thus in affliction to rely upon
God, and to approve our faith in him?

Answ.
Seven things should persuade us to trust upon God in all adversity.

7 things should move us to rely upon God in affliction.
1. First, Gods promise: Heb. 13.4. Psalm. 50.15. Job 34.23. Esaias 30.18, 20.
Psalm. 94.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 97.11. Psalm. 125.3. Psalm. 126.5, 6. and it is
certain, we may trust God upon those promises: For Gods words are pure, and
sure words, and have been tried in the fire seven times.

Mark 11.24. 1 Ioh. 5.14, 15. Psalm. 91.15.
2. Secondly, the liberty of asking what we will of God. We have reason to
believe in him, when we are sure to have whatsoever we ask of him.

3. The consideration of Gods unchangeable counsel and decree; we are
appointed unto all our afflictions, 1 These. 3.2, 3.

4. Fourthly, the example of all the worthies of God, as a cloud of witnesses,
should persuade us with faith and patience to run the race of godliness set
before us: For these all lived by faith, Heb. 12.1. Their afflictions were as
great as ours, and they rested upon God and were not disappointed, therefore we
should be followers of them, Heb. 6.12.

5. Fifthly, the speediness of our help and succor. For yet a little while,
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry, and therefore the just
should live by faith, their tentations shall not last long.

6 Sixthly, our own experience: Did we ever lose by resting upon God? Was he
not a help in trouble ever ready to be found? Can we say, that we ever
believed in God and were ashamed of it afterward? Or can we tell the time,
that by our care we could ever add one cubit to our stature. Matthew. 6. Romans
9.33.

7 Seventhly, the recompense of reward proposed to them that will glorify God
by believing in him: He will be made mavelous in them that believe. 2 Thessalonians.
1.11. A crown of life is prepared for them, that by faith and patience prove
their love to God, in enduring tentations. Iam. 1.12.

Lastly, in that the Lord stands so much upon faith in the time of trial, it
may serve for singular comfort unto us, if the Lord be pleased so to lead us
through afflictions, that our faith has proved unmovable unto the end. This
is in a manner all that God would have of us: certainly he is happy, in whom
Christ may find faith, when he comes to try him in the furnace of tribulation.

Thus of the effect of tentations, as is briefly propounded in these first
words of the Verse: Now follows the amplification of it, and that first by
comparison with gold.

More precious than gold.]

These words more precious then gold, may be referred either to the persons of
Gods children tried: or to affliction, by which they are tried: or to faith,
that was tried.

Tit. 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.19. Deuteronomy. 7.6.
He bought them at a high price, and accounts of them at a wonderful high
rate: They are his peculiar people, and his jewels; which should teach us in
imitation of God to separate between the precious and the vile, accounting one
that has true grace, Mal. 3.17. Ier. 15.19.
above a thousand carnal persons: and we should oppose the love of God and his
account against all the scorns and oppositions of the world. 1 Ioh. 3.1.
Besides, it is an excellent comfort in affliction: for this great account God
makes of us, may assure us, that he afflicts us not willingly, but with
singular pity. To conclude, has God avouched us for his treasure, and
peculiar people, and shall not we then avouch God to be our God, to keep his
commandments, Deuteronomy. 26.15.
and set a high price upon the holiness he requires?

Now for the second: It is true also, that the very afflictions and trials of
Afflictions better then gold for diverse respects.
Moses thought they were better than the treasures of Egypt Heb. 11.26.
, and they are so in diverse respects. 1. Because they take away our sins,
which is all fruit Esaias 27.9.
. 2. In respect of the wonderful joys of God, which a Christian finds in
affliction Romans 5.3. 1 These. 1.5.
. 3. Because they are notable means to weane us from the world, and fit us for
heaven. 4. Because they work unto us 2 Cor. 4 17.
an eternal weight of glory, which all the treasures in the world would not
purchase. All which should greatly hearten us in all wrongs and troubles,
knowing that the Lord will cause all to work for the best Romans 8 28 34
, and in all these we shall be more then Conquerors. But I think chiefly it is
to be referred to faith, and so it assures us, that grace is better than
treasure, and faith is better than gold: and this will appear better, if we
compare the nature, or the use, or the end of these.

For the first: The substance must needs be better than the shadow; Grace
better than gold in diverse respects.
now gold is used, but to resemble and shadow out the worth of grace. Besides,
riches are neither true, nor ours. Not true, for it is manifest, that opinion
sets the price upon these outward treasures. Nor are they ours: for they will
not go with us. And for the use of these, there is a great disproportion:
Grace may bring riches, but riches cannot bring grace, Job 28.16. Prove. 24.4.
Riches are but for the use, or ornament of the outward man; but faith and grace
make the soul glorious, Psalm. 45.10. Riches occasion much sin, Esaias 2.8.7. 1 Timothy 6.9. but faith purifieth the heart. Riches will not avail in the day of
wrath, Prove. 11.4. Ezech. 7.19. and 28.13.19. Zeph. 3.18. but faith will find
a propitiation to still Gods displeasure, Romans 3.25. Faith works a great deal
of peace, and inward tranquillity; but riches are like thorns, and to have much
gold is to have much care, and all will still be vanity and vexation of spirit.
And lastly, for the end of these it is apparent, that the end of faith is the
salvation of our souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. but a rich man can hardly be saved, and
because of riches thousands of men lose their souls.

The Use may be either for instruction or consolation.

For instruction two ways: Use.
1. First, this should raise our estimation of poor Christians that are rich
in faith, Iam. 2.5. 2. Secondly, it should quicken us to the seeking of this
precious faith above all treasures: Receive faith and not silver, and assurance
above much fine gold, and when thou have gotten assurance, keep that which God
has committed to thee.

And for consolation, how can it but be comfortable to all that are thus
honored of God to be trusted with this true treasure: God will be their gold,
as he said, Job 22.23, 24, 25. Oh happy are the men that find^ the merchandise
of faith! Let all poor Christians rejoice, that they are thus exalted; and
contrariwise, woe is unto the world because of faith: men seek gold, but who
seeks faith? what shall it profit him to have an empty soul, and a full chest;
to have goods, and not be good?

Yet before I pass from these words, we may note some things that are employed:

First, gold is precious: He grants that, when he says, faith is more
precious. For these outward things are Gods creatures, and he retains his
title Gold perishes both actively and passively.


Secondly, gold is here said to perish, which is true, both actively and
passively: Actively, it makes many a man to perish, and therefore it is called
riches of iniquity, and is said to drown men in perdition: and passively it
perishes, because it vanishes, and will not continue; Riches have w^ngs, and
either vanity will rust them, or violence take them away; and many times they
are lost to the unexpressible grief of the owner, Nabum 2.9, 10.

Object.
But it seems, Faith does perish too, 1 Cor. 13.

Solut.
It perishes in respect of the act of it, but not in respect of the fruit of
it: for so it endures for ever. And all this should teach us to have our
conversation without covetousness, Heb. 13.4. and if riches increase, we
should not set our hearts on them, Psalm. 62.10. but rather lay up for our
selves a good foundation by the merciful communicating of them, 1 Timothy 6.17.

Though it be tried in the fire.

Fire is sometimes taken properly, and so it may be referred to gold, and then
the sense is, that faith is better than gold tried in the fire: Fire is
sometimes taken metaphorically; and so there is the fire of mortification, 1
Cor. 3.13. and the fire of renovation, Mat. 3.11. and the fire of tribulation,
and the fire of condemnation, etc. It is the fire of tribulation which is meant
here. Sometimes by this fire is meant any tribulation; and sometimes a
special, fierce, and unresistible cross is meant by it: and so I think the
fiery trial, 1 Pet. 4.12. is to be taken, and so it may be understood here. It
is sure, that God does sometimes try his best servants with strange
afflictions: yet here is comfort, that all this shall be for their good, which
should teach us in the greatest troubles to live by faith, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13. and
in lesser affliction^ not to be moved, seeing we have not resisted unto so
high a degree of affliction as many of Gods dear servants have. Again, we
may hence note, that Christians are not Stoics, they have sense of their
affli^tions: Crosses are fire, and fire will be felt, no affliction for the
present seems joyous.

Thu^ of the first way of amplification: the second follows, which is by the
consideration of the event.

Might be found unto praise, and honor, and glory, in the revelation, or at the
appearing of Jesus Christ.

For the sen^e of these words: The words praise and honor, and glory may be
referred to God, and so it is true, that trial of the faith of Christian^ in
their manifold tentations shall bring a great deal of glory and honor to God
in the day of Christ.

But I rather choose to understand it of the Christian.

Some think the three words should note the three ways of exalting Christians;
and so they should have praise in words, honor in gesture, and glory in deeds:
but I think they are but several words to express jointly one and the same
thing.

Before I come to the maine doctrine, here are diverse things to be noted, which
are employed both concerning Honor, and the appearance of Christ.

Concerning Honor these things may be noted.

First, that faith and sincerity in this world for the most part want praise,
and honor, and glory from men, and therefore he promises them, that howsoever
it go, yet in the day of Christ says shall not want praise, etc. It is here
no wonder to be made as a sign or wonder even in Israel, Esaias 8. If men
refrain from evil one beast or other will prey upon them, Esaias 9 15. To be
reviled with all man^r of evil sayings is ^upposed by our Savior, M^t 5.11.
They that are after the flesh have done it, and ever will persecute those that
are after the spirit, Gal. 4.29.

Secondly, it seems the Lord takes a power unto himself and his word, even
to judge and determine the cases of Honor. It is a fond conceit that our great
Gallants have, that they think that in defense of their Honor they are not
bound to the word: but they are deceived; Note.
and they do well (perhaps) to shun the sentence of Scripture in the case of
their monomachies or single fights; for it yields them but small comfort to
embolden their great spirits. For these are the words of the holy Ghost, It is
a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling, Prove. 20.3.

Thirdly, perfect Honor will never be had till the day of Judgment, which
honor of this world: In this world they are many times praised, whom God
abhors, and men say to the wicked, thou art righteous. It is an usual
thing, that they that forsake the law themselves, praise the wicked, Psalm.
10.3. Prove. 24.24. Secondly, earthly honor is wonderful deceitful, many get
it by ill means, and men may be praised by them that curse them in their
hearts: and besides, earthly Honor will not abide, nor can man continue here to
enjoy it long, Eccl. 8.10. Psalm. 49. 13. neither will it content the mind of
man if it be had, Eccles. 6.2. and for the most part it makes men sensual, man
in honor understands not, but they live and die many times as the beasts that
perish, Psalm. 49. ult.

Now concerning the revelation of Jesus Christ, we must know, that it is taken
sometimes actively, and sometimes passively. Actively, and so for that work of
Christ, by which he reveals his Father and his will to his members, so Mat.
11.23. Gal. 1.12. Now passively, there is a threefold revelation of Christ: 1.
In his flesh: 2. In his spirit: 3. In his glory. In his flesh: for so
godliness is a great mystery, in that God was revealed in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. In the spirit, so Christ was revealed in Paul; in that by the spirit the
grace of Christ was revealed in him, Gal. 1.16. Thirdly, Christ shall be
revealed at the last day in his glory from heaven, and this revelation is meant
here, as it is also 1 Cor. 1.7.2 These. 1.7.

The doctrines employed are three:

those mockers that walk after their lusts, and ask when his coming shall be.

Christ hid till his second coming in six respects.
Secondly, that Christ is as it were hid till his second coming, and so he is
in six respects.

1. First, in respect of the sense of our mortal eyes, the heavens like a
curtain hide him from us, Act. 1.

2. Secondly, in respect of the admirable glory of his person. For at that day
his glory shall be revealed, which now is as it were hidden.

3. Thirdly, in respect of the estate of his members, our life is hid with
Christ. He is not glorious in the outward glory of his members, Col. 3.3.

4. In respect of the manifestation of his love; he has not showed himself to
wicked men, Ioh. 14.22. nor fully revealed himself to the faithful; it does
not yet appear what they shall be, 1 Ioh. 2.3.

5. Fifthly, in respect of the secrets he shall then break open: little do we
know, or hear of, what he will then discover, when he shall break open the
everlasting counsels of God, and discover the depths of Gods providence, and
the deeds of all both good and bad, and the glory of the Elect, and the
eternal misery of the damned.

6. Sixthly, in respect of the suddenness of his coming, Luke 17.30.

All which should make us the more to long for his appearing: for that shall be
such a time as never was.

The third thing employed is, that the thought of the day of Judgment is

But the maine doctrine is, that faithful and patient Christians shall have a
great deal of praise, and honor, and glory in the day of Christ. Christ will
be made marveilous in them, 2 These. 1.11. they shall shine as the stars of
heaven, and as the sun in the firmament, Dan. 12. Mat. 13. they shall appear
in singular glory when Christ appears, Col. 3.4.

Quest.
But shall Christians have no glory till that day?

Answ.
Yes: For first there is a natural glory stamped upon their very persons, Col.
2. ult. Secondly, they are already vessels of glory in Gods decree, Romans 9.
Thirdly, true honor is restored them in the kingdom of gra^e: for God
acknowledges them: so do the Angels of God, and they have honorable
privileges, and such graces as will bring to glory. And lastly, God many times
does honor them with special Honor before men, Hest. 8.16. Psalm. 64. 3. to the
end. Act. 28.10.

The Uses follow.

Uses.
And first, the consideration of this great praise, and honor, and glory in the
revelation of Christ, should serve for instruction in diverse respects: For it
should quicken us to faith and good works, seeing our labor shall not be in
vain, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Men will say in that day, Oh blessed was he, or she,
that believed. It may also persuade us to cheerfulness and patience under
afflictions and the scorns of the world: we shall then have praise enough,
what need we care for a little disgrace in the mean time? and shall we ever be
ashamed of Christ and his truth, that will thus honor us at the last day?
Finally, we may here learn of Christ how to esteem of tried Christians, we
should learn of him to praise them and honor them.

Secondly, this doctrine should wonderfully comfort Gods servants. How should
they exult in the glory and honor they hope for? They shall then have so much
honor, as the Kings of the earth would be glad to bring their honor in
exchange for it. Think of it: If it were such a great glory to be honored by
earthly Kings, as it was done to Joseph and Mordecai; what is it to be such
whom God will honor? God gives more honor then Kings have, and therefore much
more then they give: and Christians shall have this honor, not in the sight of
a few men, but before all Nations of men and Angels: and this honor shall not
be for a small while, but for ever. For the King of heavens mind will not
change, nor shall the Elect die and lose their honor, or live and stain it.
Besides, God will give fullness of gifts and grace to use this honor, which
earthly Princes cannot give, and this honor shall be held without envy or
opposition, and they shall have eternal possessions answerable to their Honor.

And thus of the 7. verse, and so of the fourth reason to confute the first
objection.
Verse 8. Whom ye have not seen and yet love him, in whom now though ye see
him not, yet do you believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and glorious.


THis verse and the next contains an answer to a second objection, which might
be made thus: Might some one say, I know not whether the former comforts belong
unto me: I know not whether I be borne again, etc.

To this the Apostle answers by giving two signs, by which men might try
themselves. 1. The first is the love of Christ. 2. The second, the joys of the
holy Ghost. Concerning which, the meaning is, that whosoever loves Christ, whom
he has not seen, and has felt those unspeakable and glorious joys of the
holy Ghost, he is undoubtedly borne again: But such are you; therefore you
need not doubt your estate.

In general we may then note,

1. First, that there are certain and infallible signs of a child of God: there

2. Secondly, that the trial of our estate by effects wrought in us, is a safe
and profitable way.

3. Thirdly, that though we see not all the signs, yet if we discern any in
sincerity, they are infallible, therefore the Apostle here propounds two of
many.

Whom having not seen ye love.

Two things may here be observed: the one expressed, the other implied.

The doctrine expressed is, that the unfeigned love of Jesus Christ is in every
one that is borne of God; and where it is, it is an infallible sign. He that
loves Christ, it is certain, that both God the Father, and Christ love him,
Ioh. 14. 21. Ephesians. 6.23. and contrariwise, 1 Cor. 16.22.

The Use of this doctrine is threefold:

1. First, it should teach us to try our selves whether the love of Christ be
in us or no: now that this may be distinctly discerned, Uses.
we must understand, that the love of Christ may be two ways considered,
either as it is in the sparkle, or as it is in the flame. In some the true love
of Christ is, as it is but in a small measure. Now others have the inflamed
love of Christ.

First, there are 7. signs of the love of Christ wheresoever it is in truth,
7. Signs of the love of Christ in the sparkle.
though but weak.

1. First, we may know whether we love Christ by our estimation of him, if we
do truly love him, we esteem him above all other persons and things in the
world, Mat. 10 37 Phil. 3.9.

2 Secondly, we may know it by our constant desire after the means of
communion with Christ: he loves not Christ, that loves not the means in which
Christ makes his favor known to men: Cant. 1.1
do we love the kisses of his mouth? that is, do we affectionately desire the
means, by which he shows his love, even those sweet pledges of his love in
his word.

3 Thirdly, we may know our love to Christ by our love to Christians that are
his members: we love him that begat, if we love them that are begotten of him,
1 John 5.1.

4 Fourthly, we may know it by believing in him, John 16.27. For if we love him
we put our trust in him, and rely upon him and his merits.

5. Fifthly, we may know it by our care to keep his commandments. For so he
says himself, He loves me, that keeps my commandments, John 14.21. The
love of Christ and the love of sin cannot stand together.

6 Sixthly, we may know it by our grief for his absence: if to miss Christ be
the sorrow of our hearts, it is a sign we love him. Cant. 3.1.

7 Seventhly, we may know it by our willingness to suffer for his sake, Ioh.
21.19 Thus Peter must one day prove that he loves Christ, by being willing to
be carried whither naturally he would not, for the confirmation of the truth.

2 Now there are seven signs also of the inflamed love of Christ: 7. Signs
of the l^ve ^f Christ in the flame.
For they that have such tender affection after Christ:

1 Do sometimes feel the very passions of love, they are as it were sick of
love, for the time overcome with the wonderful affection they bear to Christ,
Cant. 2.5. especially when they have felt great comfort in the means.

2. Their love is unquenchable and unresistible, it is strong as death, and
much water cannot quench it, Cant. 8.6, 7.

3. They do wonderfully, earnestly, and affectionately sometimes long after
his second coming, greatly desiring to be dissolved and to be with Christ, 2 Timothy 4.8. Phil. 1.23.

4. Fourthly, they do almost only joy in Christ. God forbid I should rejoice
in any thing but the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14. They account all other things
loss and dung in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.9.

5. Fifthly, they continually talk of him, they never linn, they have words at
will, their tongue is as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45.1. They can easily
praise him, and admire almost every thing in him. Cant. 5.9. to the end.

6. Sixthly, their inflamed love is shown by a willingness with contentment to
do the meanest service to Christ, or his religion. This was a sign Mary loved
much, that she could even kiss the feet of Christ, and wash them with her
tears, and wipe them with the hair of her head, Luke 7.44. to the end.

7. Seventhly, they are wonderfully encouraged with his praises, they are more
fiered with his praises of them, or his acceptance of them in the word or
prayer, then with the applause of the whole world besides, Cant. 4.16.

Coherence.

2. Secondly, if we want the love of Christ, we should use all means to get
it. Now there are three things that would further us in getting this love.

What we must do to get the love of Christ.
1. To pray for it to God.

2. To acquaint our selves with the word of Christ. For that sets out his
praises, his love to us, and the singular blessings he has purchased for us.

3. To converse with Christians that do tenderly love Christ, and abound in
holy affections. Those daughters of Jerusalem, that wondered why the Church
should make such ado about Christ, when they had conversed with her a while,
and heard her speak with such affection and admiration, they are turned, and
will now go seek Christ as well as she, Cant. 5.9. to the end, and 6.1.

7. Things to be observed to keep our hearts in the love of Christ.
3. Thirdly, such as have felt this love of Christ, should be careful to keep
it; now there are seven things to be observed, if we would preserve the love
of Christ in our hearts.

1. First, we must establish our assurance of both our loves to Christ, and his
love to us: we must labor our own edification in the faith, if we would keep
our selves in the love of God, Iud. 20.

2. Secondly, if we would preserve this love, we must keep uprightness. For
if we relapse to the love of sin, the love of Christ will decay in us.

3. Thirdly, we must keep our selves out of the company of such, as might
entice us from the love of Christ, namely, out of the company of Idolaters, and
all profane persons.

4. Fourthly, we must take heed of worldliness: for the love of God, and the
love of the world will not stand together. The cares of this life will be a
snare and bait to draw us away.

5. Fifthly, we must take heed of security after feelings. For if the Church be
so sleepie after communion with Christ, that when he comes again she will be
slumbring, and not rise when he calls; Christ will be gone and not answer, no
though afterward she call, Cant. 5.2, 6, 7.

6. Sixthly, we must walk in the steps of the flock, and feed our kids near
the tents of the shepherds; we must converse with holy Christians, and keep
our selves under the powerful instructions of profitable Ministers, Cant. 1.7.
etc.

7. Seventhly, we must be much in the preparation for the second coming of
Christ. To be much in thinking of or praying for the coming of Christ will
preserve us from declination in our affection to Christ, Iud. 20, 21.

The doctrine employed in these words is, that when we shall come to heaven, and
shall see Christ face to face, we shall love him, and admire him wonderfully.
For the Apostle takes it for granted, that it is no hard thing to love Christ,
if we once saw him.

And thus of the first sign.

The second sign is the joy of the holy Ghost expressed in these words:

In whom, though you see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious.

There are six kind of joys.

1. Some are unnatural, such is the joy of those mentioned, Six kinds of joy.
Job 3.22. that are glad at heart to find the grave.

2. Some are natural, such are the joys Solomon commends, Eccles. 8.15. and
Prove. 15.13.

3. Some are sensual, such are the joys Epicures conceive in the pleasures
and sports of this life, Eccles. 11.9. Job 21.12.

4. Some are fantastical, when men rejoice upon mere conceits and fancies
without any ground. For as in some diseases there are abundance of sorrows
without cause, so are there also joys without reason in diverse.

5. Some are diabolical, and there are three sorts of devilish joys. 3 Kinds
of devilish joy.


1. The first is to joy in sin. 2. The second is to joy in the misery of Gods
people, Ezech. 25.6. 3. The third is the joy we call illusion, when Satan to
feed the security of men does tickle their hearts with a great deal of joy and
ravishing of the heart.
6. Lastly, some joys are spiritual joys: and these are either 1. Temporary:
or 2. Eternal.


Temporary joys are those, which wicked men may feel in the hearing the word,
Mat. 13.

Eternal joys are such, as only the Elect feel; I call these Eternal, not
because they are felt without interruption for ever, but because they are so
now in the hearts of Gods children, that they shall never either totally or
finally be lost, but shall be felt again.

Now there are two sorts of this joy in Gods elect. The one is a duty, the
other is a sign: the one man brings to Gods service, the other God gives as a
token of his acceptance of man's service.

The joys given of God are here meant, these are here called unspeakable and
glorious.

But how may we discern these joys of the holy Ghost from all the other sorts,
especially the temporary joys and illusions of Satan? Quest.


The true joy in the holy Ghost may be known by these marks. Answ.

How the joys of the holy Ghost may be discerned from all other joys. 8.
Signs.




1. It is given of God in the due use of some ordinance of God, the soul being
retired into Gods presence; especially these joys are felt in prayer, this joy
is drawn out of the wells of salvation.

2. It usually follows humiliation for sin, Esaias 6.2, 3. Ioh. 16.20, 22.

3. It may be felt in adversity, as well as prosperity, Hab. 3.17, 18. Romans
5.3. Phil. 2.17.

4. It is accompanied with righteousness. It can never be felt of any, in whom
the love of any sin reigns, Romans 14.17.

5. It ratifies the written promises, and does assure nothing but what the word
assures, Ephesians. 1.14.

6. It is kindled upon the sense of Gods favor, it follows here bele^ving.

7. It is unspeakable and glorious above all carnal or earthly joys: it does
ravish the heart, as if a man were already in heaven.

8. Lastly, it may be known by the effects: For

1. It will make a man more humble, and apt to acknowledge his own vileness
and unworthiness.

2. It will make a man less censorious of others, and with more compassion to
tender the wants and sorrows of others.

3. It will mar the taste of carnal joys: it causes us to find less
relish in the taste of earthly delights.

4. It breeds a great love of God and godliness, and quickens to diligence in
well-doing.

Whereas the joys, that are illusions, or temporary joys, will make men more
proud and careless, and contemptuous, and more negligent in the use of the
means, and the care to do good.

Quest.
But are these joys felt of every Christian?

Answ.

Whether the j^yes ^f the holy Ghost be f^lt of every Christian. The defects in
the joy of the temporary faith.


Distinguish of Christians, and of feeling, and of joys.

1 Some are Hypocrites, and so have not any power of godliness at all, but
only a show.

2 Some have temporary grace only: these have joy, but not such as will abide
the trial: For, 1 These joys are not accompanied with humiliation for sin,
or not for all sin. 2 They arise not from any grounds of particular
assurance. 3 They are not felt in the time of temptation.


3 Some Christians are always diseased with some spiritual malady, and that
many times till death, as with passion, or with strange effects of melancholy:
these may possibly dye without any evident comfort.

Some fall after calling, into some gross sin for a time, and these may so
lose the joy of their salvation, as they may never recover it till their very
end.

Again, distinguish about feeling.

1 Some have those joys, but observe them not, either through ignorance of the
doctrine of the joy of the holy Ghost, or through neglect.

2 Some have this joy and observe it, and are affected and established with it
for the time, but presently either forget it, or suspect it.

Lastly, this joy in the holy Ghost in some is an habitual gladness of heart,
which constantly after assurance is found in them, though they feel not the
passions of joy: but in others there is felt at sometimes the vehement passions
of joy, but not the constant gladness. Now either may be the true joy of the
holy Ghost, if it agree to the former signs.

Quest.
But what should we do to get the joys of God?

Answ.

Wh^t we must do to ge^ the joys of God.


1 Thou must be in the general Gods servant, and devote thy self to holiness,
else thou can never feel them. Esaias 65.13.

2 Thou must voluntarily seek godly sorrow for thy sins: for these joys are
promised to, and most felt by such as mourn for sin, Psalm. 126.2, 3, 5, 6.
Esaias 61.3. Prove. 14.10. Mat. 5.5.

3. Thou must labor after the affections of godliness: till thou come to love
Christ and the Word, and holy exercises, thou can not get the joy in the holy
Ghost: if we did once love to be Gods servants, the Lord would refresh us with
the joys of his presence, Quest.
Esaias 56.6, 7.

Answ.

What we must do to pr^se^^e the joys of the holy Ghost more constantly.


But what should we do to preserve the joys of God, that'wee might more
constantly rejoice in the holy Ghost?

Observe these rules.

1. Thou must get a meek spirit. For passion and pride hinder the refreshings
of God wonderfully, Esaias 29.19.

2. Preserve uprightness: the upright shall have an harvest of joy: But if
thou nourish the love of any sin, it is impossible to keep the joys of God,
Psalm. 96.11. Prove. 29.6. and 12.20.

3. Lose not Gods presence, but set him in thy sight, and walk before him,
There is fullness of joy at his right hand, Psalm, 16.11.

4. Be much in well-doing: For that will make our joy abound, Col. 1. 9, 10, 11.

5. Hang upon the breasts of the Churches consolation and sincerity, Esaias 66.11.

6. Take heed of much carnal, or outward rejoicing. For the immoderate liking
of earthly things hardens the heart in the things of God.

Hence we may briefly note the causes, why many professors have no more joy.

1. Some neglect the means. 2. Others are mastered by strong affections, as
Envy, or Passions, etc. 3. Others have neglected mortification. 4. In many
their very unprofitablenesse is the cause. 5. In some, the love of some secret
sin blasts all grace and joy.
Thus of the 8. verse.
Verse 9. Receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.


THis Verse is a ratification of the former, in which the Apostle labors to
assure salvation to all such as have the former signs. 1. The matter assured
is the salvation of our souls. 2. The certainty of the assurance is in the
word receiving, which imports, it is as sure, as if we had received it already.
3. The isntrumental cause is faith: for salvation is the end of faith.

Receiving. If this word be marked in it self, and the coherence, four things
arise to be observed.

1. First, that we should receive the graces and blessings of God with much
joy and love of Christ, who is the foundation of the merit of all. This I note
from the coherence with the former Verse.

2. Secondly, we are seldom glad at heart, longer then we are receiving some
blessing, or promises from God: Note, that he joins this word to the joys of
the holy Ghost in the end of the former Verse.

3. Thirdly, that salvation is received even in this life: received I say, 1.
In the promises of it. 2. In the graces, which begin eternal life in this
life. 3. In the certainty of the assurance of it.

4. The word in the Original signifies to carry back again, or to fetch out
of the field: which imports, we cannot get salvation, nor any promises, or
graces that concern it, but we must fight for it; there will be some bicketing
before it can be carried away out of the field.

Of your faith. Faith is here expressly made the instrument of our salvation.
This is a principle, and should be unmovable in the heart of every Christian,
that without faith our religion is to no end. For we cannot be saved without
it: which should teach us both to seek this faith, and to account of it as most
precious, and to this end to make sure that our faith be right: we cannot be
too often urged hereunto: I will instance but in four signs of a true
persuasion. For I take it for granted, that the most of us say, we are
persuaded God loves us, and Christ died for us. Now we may try whether this
persuasion be right four ways.

1. First, if it will endure the trial of manifold tentations, 4 Signs of a
true persuasion of our salvation.
as the coherence shows a true persuasion will. If it will support us in
adversity of all sorts in some measure, especially if it will fence us against
the scorns and oppositions of the world: this will prove it to be a true
persuasion.

2. Secondly, if it be such a faith as will believe all that is written, Act.
24.14. so far as it sees it to be the will of God, though it be against reason,
or affection, or profit, or the opinion of any other.

3. Thirdly, if it have the seal of the spirit. For he that truly believes,
has a witness in himself, even the witness of the spirit of adoption,
testifying by unspeakable joys the assurance of Gods love, Ephesians. 1.14. 1 Ioh.
5.10.

4. Fourthly, if it be accompanied with a sincere life, and love of all that
truly fear God for the image of God in them. True faith will show it self by
this love, Gal. 5.6.

The end of your faith. The word here rendered the end, does further signify a
reward, or wages which is given at the end: and so these things may be
observed: 1. First, that in the end the Lord will take account of the use of
all gifts, or graces in men. 2. Secondly, that unless we hold out to the end,
we can never have reward. 3. Thirdly, that true faith will hold out to the end,
if it be true, it will abide. 4. Fourthly, Faith it self will once have an
end, and therein love excels faith, because that will never end. 5. But the
last and chiefest point is, that it will be a glorious time, when the end
comes, that God disposes the rewards of believing: which may serve for four
uses.


Uses.
1. First, it may comfort Gods afflicted servants. For the expectation of the
poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. and God will certainly give an end
and expectation, Ier. 29.11. And have we not seen the end of the Lord in many
things in our temporal troubles, and can we doubt him for our last end? why
should any fear death? Is it not the time of receiving wages? No hireling is
afraid of the time of receiving his wages.

2. Secondly, it should teach us therefore to wait upon God, and possess our
souls with patience, holding fast our confidence of assurance. For the end
shall come, and it will not be long before it shall be.

3. Thirdly, for information: we may hence note one excellent pledge of Gods
love and goodness; he is not bound to give us any wages till the end, yet see
his mercy, he does recompense us every day.

4. Fourthly, woe unto wicked men, their end is shame and confusion, even the
fruit of all their evil ways, or as the Apostle says, their end is
damnation, Phil. 3.18.

The salvation of your souls.

What the soul is.
The soul is a spiritual substance within us, by which we resemble God; it can
subsist of it self, it has neither matter nor end: it was created of God of
nothing, and united to the body, that God might be rightly known and
worshipped.

The soul is a kind of picture of God within us, that can live, though the
body were not: when I say it is void of matter, I mean it is not made of any
other thing as our bodies be: there is no metal, as I may say, of which it may
consist, and it is such a divine creature, as it cannot die as the body does,
and it was of purpose put into the body, that so amongst the visible creatures
God might be known and worshipped. For if we had not a soul within us, we
could never attain to any knowledge of God, more than the bruit beasts: For
God cannot be known by bodily senses. Now for the union how the body and soul
are knit one to another I cannot express it.

Salvation notes especially that estate of excellency and glory, which the
faithful have in another world, though properly the word notes but only what
we are delivered and saved from in heaven.

This salvation excludes all misery, and includes all happiness. All misery
may be referred to four heads. 1. Sin. 2. Infirmities. 3. Adversaries. And
4. Death: none of these shall be in heaven. All happiness likewise may be
referred to four heads. 1. Perfection of nature. 2. Communion with the
blessed, viz. God, Christ, Angels, and just men. 3. And a glorious inheritance
in the heaven of the blessed. And 4. Immortality: all these shall be enjoyed in
that other world.

Now though the soul be taken synecdochically for the soul and body, yet the
salvation of the soul is principal, and more glorious.

The use may be threefold: Uses.


1. For information. 2. For instruction. 3. For reproof.
1. There are three things we may be informed in from the consideration of the
salvation of the souls of the faithful.

1. First, that godly men are in a wonderful happy case, whatsoever their
outward estate be, because their souls shall be saved: there are springs of
joy in the very hope of this immortal happiness: this salvation is so great a
mercy, as we may truly say, his reward is with him.

2. Secondly, that there is a matchless love in God to man, not only in that
he provides such an estate, but first that he does it freely without all
respects of merit, Tit. 3.4. and secondly, because he sends up and down the
world to offer this salvation. From hence arises the Phrase, my salvation is
gone forth.

3. Thirdly, that faith is wonderful precious, that brings us such a salvation.

2. Further for the second, there are diverse instructions may be deduced from
this doctrine: as

1. First, it should teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit.
2.12. the very thought of going to heaven should extinguish the desire of
sinning.

2. Secondly, we would make God all our trust, and our expectation, Psalm. 62.5.
We should resolve to rest upon God: For none else either will, or can do so
much for us as he can. He is well said to be the hope of Israel, none have so
great hopes as the faithful.

3. Thirdly, we should labor for the assurance of salvation, and lay hold upon
it, striving to get evidence for it. Heaven should suffer violence, seeing it
may be had, we should never be quiet till we can get it.

4. Fourthly and lastly, such as have attained some assurance of their
salvation, should look to four things. Such as have the assurance of
salvation should look to four things.


1. First, they should strive for large affections, to express the sense of so
great salvation. It is such an incomparable benefit, as we should be always
praising, etc.

2. Secondly, it should quicken them to good works: the remembrance that we
shall be saved, should be like a fire within us to inflame us to all possible
care to please God, and to be fruitful in all well-doing. Salvation should be
as a burning lamp within us: a Christian should never be without fire in his
heart, in respe^t of his care to maintain good works.

3. Thirdly, shall we not be content with any condition in this world, seeing
we are so well-provided for in a better? what should trouble us, if we can
remember that after a short time our souls must be saved?

4. Fourthly, shall we be so glorious in heaven? why then our conversation
should be in heaven: we should be always thinking of heaven: our minds should
run upon it.

3. Now as this doctrine may inform and teach, so it may reprove whole troops
of carnal Christians, that never labor after this glorious estate, that
scarce ever ask, what they should do to be saved, but sleep it out in a
Lethargy, and never ask after, nor remember their latter end.

Thus of the 9. Verse, and so of the confirmation by prolepsis, or the answer
of their objections.
Verse 10. Of which salvation the Prophets searched and inquired diligently,
which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.


THe consolation propounded, verses 3, 4, 5. is confirmed, first by Prolepsis,
or the answering of Objections, verses 6, 7, 8, 9. secondly, by testimony of
worthy and holy men, verses 10, 11, 12.

So that these words make good the consolation of Christians, by setting before
us, what witness holy men of old have given of our happiness, that live now
under the Gospel. In the words five things are particularly to be noted.

1. First, who testify, or who are Gods witnesses; and these are described, 1.
first, more generally, and so they were Prophets. 2. secondly, more specially,
and so they were those Prophets that were appointed of God to prophecy of the
gracious privileges should come unto us Christians.

2. Secondly, their adjunct pains and endeavors to furnish themselves in the
knowledge of those things that concern us, They searched and inquired
diligently.

3. Thirdly, the question they studied, or unto which they testify: In
general, it was of salvation, ver. 10. In special, it was of the manner and
time of the grace foretold.

4. Fourthly, the occasion that fiered them to this earnest desire after this
knowledge, and that was the inspiration of the holy Ghost, driving them to
foretell of the passion of Christ, and glories that should follow. Now they
rightly conjectured, that this glory did import some excellent estate of the
Church then, and that they would feign have known.

5. Fifthly, the success, and that was they were answered by revelation; which
answer is set down, verse 12.

Prophets.]

God has revealed his will three ways.

1. First, by the light of nature, imprinting in man certain common notions,
or small sparkles of divine light.

2. Secondly, by the book of the creatures; by these he did blow, and nourish,
and more kindle the sparkles infused by nature.

3. Thirdly, when both these proved insufficient by man's sin, God revealed
himself by his word* but after diverse manners, Heb. 1.1.

Sometimes by dreams, when men were asleep.

Sometimes by Visions, when men were awake.

Sometimes by types and resemblances.

Sometimes by Christ the Son of God; and so sometimes in the likeness of a
man, and in the last age of the world in a true humane nature.

Sometimes by Angels.

But most usually by the ministry of man. Now the men employed to reveal Gods
will, were called either

Extraordinarily, as Prophets and Apostles: or

Ordinarily, as the Priests and Levites under the Law, or the Ministers now
under the Gospel.

So that we now see, who these Prophets were.

It is true, that the word Prophet or Prophecy is diversely taken: Sometimes
more generally for any, that foretell things to come: so every Preacher is a
Prophet, and to preach is to prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. sometimes it is taken more
restrainedly for those that foretell by inspiration, or special revelation:
these were called in old time SEERS. Those students in the ancient Colleges,
that were of special gifts, and more hopeful, were called Prophets, not that
they did all prophecy, but because the Spirit did use to fall upon such men.
Those called children of the Prophets were younger students, that attended upon,
and were directed by those grave and more ancient Divines. Through the abuse of
the succeeding time, those that were taken out of these Colleges to serve
Princes, though many times they were men most ambitious and covetous, yet were
called still Prophets.

But the Prophets here meant were only those holy men, that by the immediate
inspiration of the Spirit of God did foretell things to come concerning the
Church, and kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Now in that the Lord refers us to the testimony of the Prophets, it may serve
for diverse uses.

1. First, it shows the excellency of Theology, Uses.
or the truth according to godliness, in that it is penned and confirmed by
such admirable instruments.

2. Secondly, it shows, that in matters of religion men must have recourse to
the testimony of the Prophets: their writings are the true touchstone and
square. And so in matters of consolation, if the Prophets speak comfortably to
our hearts, it matters not what all the world besides says, or thinks of us:
sure it is that Christ came not to destroy either Law or Prophets, and
therefore by them we shall be tried whether we will or no.

3. It should quicken us to study the writings of the Prophets: we cannot
receive their persons now into our houses, nor build tombs for them; but we
may receive their writings into our hearts, and it will be made good, that he
that receives the writings of one of these Prophets in the name of a Prophet,
shall have a Prophets reward. In the mean time we have a sure woid, t^ which
we may do well to trust without all wavering.

Which prophesied of the grace that should come unto you.

By grace to come, he means those excellent privileges, that God of his free
grace would bestow upon the Christian Churches, more than upon any Churches
before.

The Prophets then did foretell of certain great prerogatives, with which we
Christians should be honored.

But what were those privileges in particular?

There are an eleven prerogatives of the Christian Church, Quest.

Answ.

(...) Christ ^n Church.


wherein God has dealt wonderfully graciously with us.

1. The exhibiting of Christ in the flesh.

2. The freed^me from the bondage of the ceremonial law. Gal. 4.1,2.2.

^. The admission of the Gentiles to be copartners with the Jews, Ephesians. 2. and
3.2. to 7.

4. The multitude of believers in comparison of former ages, Esaias 54. 1,2,3.

5. The more evident vision or manifestation of Gods special favor and
k^^dnes^e in Christ Jesus, testified more fully both by the word and spirit.
The Lord i^ now fond over the Christian Churches, and does more famil^^rly
reveal his love n^w, Ephesians. 2.7.

6. The m^re evident clearing of our release from the moral law, in respest of
the rigorous perfection of it, we are not now under the law, but under grace,
so that if sin have not dominion in us, our obedience will be accepted, Romans
6.14.

7. A large extent in the proclamation of pardon, and forgiveness of sins; so
as now any man may get a pardon, that will seek it out in the name of Christ,
Act. 10.43.

8. The pouring out of the holy Ghost, and that either extraordinarily, as in
the primitive Church, or in the measure of ordinary gifts, as in utterance,
knowledge, etc. 1 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6.

9. The eminency of holy life, and that in the meaner sort of Christians as
well as the greater: This is only true of a remnant that are of the election
of grace; and so for the power of practice, that never age saw it more lively,
than it is now in many of all conditions that truly fear God, Esaias 35.8.

10. Abundance of outward blessings: This God has promised, Esaias 60.15,17. and
performed in several states of the Church in diverse ages.

11. Lastly, the more manifest revelation of the doctrine of heaven, and
eternal life; immortality being brought to light by the Gospel, so as now we
need not to be taught by the dark shadows of temporal and earthly ceremonies.

Uses.
Now since the holy Ghost has made us to know, that these are times of such
excellent graces; it may instruct us diversely. For in some things it may order
us toward our selves, and in some things toward others.

There are four things we may learn for our selves.

lest any man fail of the grace of God. For woeful experience shows, that many
thousands even in this light are as destitute of this grace, That we may not
fail of the grace of G^d, w^ must (...) ^oure things.
as ever Jew or Gentiles were. Now that we may not fail of the grace of God,
we must do four things.

1. We must be subject to the Gospel. For the Gospel is called the Gospel of
the grace of God.

2. We must take heed of resisting, grieving, and despighting of the spirit of
grace.

3. We must take heed we do not frustrate the grace of God, Gal. 2.21. and so
men do, 1. By seeking justification in their own works. 2. By neglecting it,
when it is offered by the word and spirit of God. 3. By turning the grace of
God into wantonness, as they do, that make the promises of God and our
liberty in Jesus Christ a bawd and cloak for sin. 4. We must go to the
throne of grace, and beg grace of God with all importunity, giving him no rest,
till he hear and show mercy, Heb. 4. ult.


make all grace to abound, that we might abound unto every good work, 2 Cor.
9.8. and we might all of us know the Lord from the least of us to the greatest,
Ier. 31.33.





1. That we be exceeding thankful, and set out the glory and praise of Gods
grace.

2. That we abound with peace and joy in believing.

3. That we be fruitful in good works.

4. That we stand in the grace received, and not fall from our sted (...), nor
receive Gods grace in vain, Romans 15.8,9,10,13. Col. 1.9,10.2 Pet. 3.18. Gal.
5.1. 2 Cor. 6.1.

Now concerning our respect of others.

1. First, Ministers should be encouraged to endure any thing, since they have
so honorable a function, as to dispense the Gospel of the grace of Jesus
Christ, Act. 20.24.

2. Secondly, the people should esteem worthy of all honor, such eminent
persons, and Christians, upon whom we see this grace of God prophesied to come:
yea such as abound in knowledge and p^ety of life, we should wonderfully
honor, as being the persons the prophecy ran of.

3. Lastly, this should be our great desire, and prayer for others, that the
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ might be with them.

They inquired and searched diligently.]

Two things are here affirmed of the Prophets: 1. First, that they searched and
inquired: 2. Secondly, that they did it with great diligence and pains.

Where did the Prophets search and inquire?

1. First, they inquired of God by prayer. 1 Quest.

Answ.




2. Secondly, they inquired and searched in the writings of the first Prophets,
Jacob, Moses, Samuel, David, etc.

3. Thirdly, they searched and inquired by meditation, studying their own
prophesies, into which they were carried by the Spirit of God, that they might
see whether they could find out this glorious salvation, especially for the
time and manner of it.

The Use is for wonderful great reproof of thousands amongst us, The Use.
that neglect so great salvation: did the Prophets search and inquire, and can
it be safe for us to be secure?

What should be the reason that multitudes of men have so little mind to
inquire about their salvation? Quest. 2.


1. Men are diseased after an unexpressible manner with a spiritual Lethargy,
when there arises any thought of the kingdom of God. Answ.


2. Salvation is far off: and unless the Lord by the spirit of wisdom and
revelation inlighten the eyes of men's minds, they cannot discern the glory of
it, or the need of it, Ephesians. 1.18,19. men only see things that are nearer, so
purblind we are.

3. The most men are drowned and distracted with the cares and pleasures of
this life.

4. Lastly, this comes to pass by the effectual working of Satan, who daily
and mightily labors to hide the Gospel from men's souls, and to hinder the
care of a better life. This is his every days work.

But for hereafter let us all be admonished by this example of the Prophets, to
devote our selves to the study of salvation: especially

1. To seek the grant of it from God.

2. To seek the evidence of it in the word of God.

3. To seek the signs of it in our own hearts.

4. To seek a way that leads thither in our practice and conversation.

Now whereas it is said, the Prophets searched and inquired diligently, that
should also fire us, and still stir us up not only to study and inquire, but
to do it diligently also. Now to inquire and search about salvation diligently
imports five things.

1. First, that we should refuse no pains, or labor, or care to attain it.

2. Secondly, that we should do it daily and constantly. He that is in a
journey does not think it enough to ask his way the first day. Oh Lord, how
are we guilty in thy sight, that inquire so seldom for the way to heaven!

3. Thirdly, that we should practice the directions which are given us out of
the wnrd: Else to inquire a way of God, and not to follow it, is greatly to
provoke God, Ezekiel. 14.3,4. Ier. 42.2,3. etc.

4. Fourthly, that we should seek affectionately, as David says, with our
whole hearts, Psalm. 119.2. as they did, that asked their way, and went weeping
as they went with their faces thitherward, Ier. 50.4,5.

5. Lastly, that we should seek help from all the ordinances of God, laboring
to further our salvation by all means both public and private.

Thus of the second part. The third is the subject matter, which in general is
salvation, and in particular the time, and manner of the time.

Of which salvation.]

By salvation may be meant all that, which befalls Christians after the time
of their calling. For as true grace is the beginning of it, and perfect glory
the full consummation of it; so all the means that work either, are
comprehended under this name: yea the very sufferings of the godly are a part
of their salvation, because they work unto them an eternal weight of glory:
yea so should all the godly be disposed, as they should make salvation the end
of all their actions; we should do nothing, which should not some way tend to
further our salvation.

Three things may be here noted.







There are three sorts of men Satan does in the Church bewitch. 1. The first
are they that will take no pains at all, nor trouble themselves to study about
their religion, and what belongs to their souls. 2. The second are they, that
though they will take some pains, and study diligently, yet it is in
bystudies, as matters of controversy, or the general knowledge of religion,
or matter that may fit them for discourse, or the like. 3. Now a third sort
there are, that will not be drawn aside from the needfullest studies, as are
repentance, assurance, order of life, etc. but their fault is, that they study
not these diligently. For they soon give over, and finish not their works
either of mortification, or sanctification, or illumination, or preparation for
salvation.

And thus much of the 10. Verse.
Verse 11. Searching when or what manner of time, the Spirit which testified of
Christ which was in them, etc.


THe particular subject of their inquiry was to have found the time of those
glories the holy Ghost foretold should follow the sufferings of CHRIST.

Four sorts of men have inquired about times, and the manner of times. Four
sorts of men inquire about times.
For there is the observation, 1. of the curious, 2. of the weak, 3. of the
superstitious, 4. of the wise.

1 Curious men search into times prohibited, and restrained from them: They
inquire what God did before he made the world, and in what year and day Christ
shall come to Judgment, with such like.

2 The weak Christian many times is too busy about time, as in his distress
his thoughts run about the time of his deliverance, and with impatience he
asks, How long? when he ought not to limit God, but live by faith, and leave
the time unto God.

3 The superstitious are employed in observing time; such were the Galathians,
of whom Paul was afraid. This was their humor* they did observe days and
times not commanded of God, but prescribed, and kept afoot by the inventions of
men.

4 Now in the last place, the wise observe time, and thus they observe time
necessarily, or arbitrarily. Necessarily they observe the seasons and
opportunities of Gods grace, and so not to observe time is a great offense.
Ier. 8.7. Luke 9. Mat. 16.3. Arbitrary, they enquire after time, as the
circumstance of some great things, wherein there appears some glory of God,
and good to the soul. Thus the Prophets here enquire about the time of Gods
manifestation of the great grace he promised to the Church.

Three things may be noted out of these words.

1 That the times and seasons of all things are known unto God: else the
Prophets would not have searched, but that it was a received principle that all
the times of all things are set and known to God.

2 That the Lord is many times loath to discover the precise time of his mercy:
as for a long time he would not let it be known when Christ should come, so it
was ab^ut the calling of the Gentiles, and so it is about the time of our going
to heaven. For if it should be far off, men would grow the more impatient
with their present condition, and by this means God tries the faith, and
patience, and obedience of his people: and thus are blessings more admired and
welcome when they do come; and by works of preparation the happiness of the
Elect is greatly furthered.

But is it not uncomfortable to be ignorant of the time when God will show his
mercy?

It is not: for 1 The time is infallibly set by God. 2 The Lord has chosen and
appointed the fittest time. 3 The Lord is precise in keeping his time.


3 The third Observation is, that when the circumstance of time is not of
absolute necessity for our good to be known, we must be sober and temperate,
and enquire with all humility: we may learn this of the Prophets about
salvation it self, they are said to enquire diligently; but about the time, it
is barely said, they searched.

Thus of the third thing.

4 The fourth thing is the Occasion; which was an inspiration of the holy
Ghost, which testified of Christ's sufferings, and strange glories should follow
after. So that the efficient cause of the inspiration was the holy Ghost, which
was in them: The final cause was to testify or bear witness: The subject
matter of this inspiration was twofold. 1 Of the sufferings of Christ. 2 Of the
glories should follow.

The Spirit that was in them.

Note that he says not the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of Christ: so the
holy Ghost is called the Spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. He may be called the
Spirit of Christ, because he is given by Christ, and because he is given to the
members of Christ, and because he should be especially manifested in the times
under Christ, and because it did especially reveal Christ, and chiefly because
it was essentially joined unto Christ, and did proceed of Him and the Father
from all eternity.

Now for the use hereof. Here is both Information and Consolation. We may be
informed here, that the doctrine of the Trinity was not unknown in the Church
of the Jews, in that we see, that the Spirit of God was called the Spirit of
Christ. As for that place in Act. 19. where some say, they had not heard,
whether there were a holy Ghost or no; It is to be understood of the
extraordinary gifts of the holy Ghost, which at the time of the conversion of
many did fall upon them, and not of the nature of the holy Ghost. This doctrine
also may comfort us greatly: for whereas it it the office of the holy Ghost to
mortify the deeds of the flesh, to lead us into all truth, to be a comforter,
to bear witness unto our spirits, to help us when we know not how to pray as
we ought, etc. This doctrine (I say) may greatly incourageus to beg the holy
Ghost, and to believe our help therein, seeing he is sent of Christ; and is at
his disposing that dyed for us, and gave himself for us: how shall he not then
give us his holy Spirit also, if we ask it of him?

Further, hence we may note, that the Spirit of God is the only immediate
fountain and original of all Prophesies concerning times and things to come.
The Oracles of the Gentiles were but either delusions under ambiguous
sentences, or but conjectures; or else when they did foretell aright, they were
permitted of God for the further hardening of the people, either from Scripture,
or other revelation to foretell. As for the Sibyls that prophesied of Christ,
etc. it is no absurdity to grant, that they were stirred up by the holy Ghost
to prophecy of Christ among the Gentiles, etc.

Verse 12. Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto themselves, but unto us
they should minister the things which are now showed unto you by them, which
have preached unto you the Gospel by the holy Ghost sent down from heaven, the
which things the Angels desire to behold.


THE fifth and last thing concerning the testimony of the Prophets, is the
success of their enquiry, and diligent search: and that in general is, that
they were answered and resolved of God. Now in the Lords answer there are two
things to be observed. 1. The manner how God gave his answer, that is to say,
by Revelation: To whom it was revealed. 2. The matter of the answer, which
stands here of two parts. The first concerns the persons: the second concerns
the things promised of God. The persons are considered both negatively and
affirmatively. Negatively: the Prophets were resolved that they themselves were
not the men whom those Oracles concerned. Affirmatively: they were told, that
those things, which they prophesied of, they did minister unto us Christians.
Thus of the persons. Now the things promised or prophesied of, are not only
propounded, but commended, and further described and that two ways. 1. By the
glory of their efficient causes, and those are either less principal, namely,
the Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel, or more principal, namely, the
holy Ghost sent down from heaven. 2. By the adjunct respect of the Angels in
heaven, who are said to desire to look unto those things that are thus
treasured up in the Arc of the Church.

Now from the coherence and general consideration of these words, we may be
assured of this general doctrine, that such as diligently seek unto God shall
be satisfied, and resolved, and answered. God is no accepter of persons: he
that resolved the Prophets, will answer us also: it is an unchangeable order of
promise, such as seek shall find, such as ask shall have, such as knock
shall be opened unto, Mat. 7.8. yea he says, every one that asks, etc. yea
it is certain, that God will make this good unto the diligent use of every one
of his ordinances, as Prayer, Esaias 30.19. Joel 2.19. Ier. 33.3. Reading, Job.
5.29. Hearing, Esaias 56.3. Mich. 2.7. Conference, Esaias 19.24.25.

The use is first for confutation of their wretched Atheism, Uses.
that scorn Gods ordinances, as bare and empty actions: but if there were no
more to commend them then what this doctrine assures, it might sufficiently
censure them for their just contempt. For in these and every of these the Lord
meets his servants, and does as it were by a heavenly intercourse confer
with his people* and familiarly make himself known unto them, as one man is
known unto another by conversation, or his name: therefore are they called his
name in the third commandment. 2. Secondly, we should be encouraged in all
distresses, and doubts, and ignorances to have recourse unto God, and in all
humility, and constancy, and faith to seek unto him in the name of Christ, who
was ever known to be a Counselor unto his people; Esaias 9.6.
but then let me add this, that we look to our selves when we come unto God,
for there are diverse men whom God will not answer, or if he do, it is in
justice, as Mich. 3.7. Zach. 7.11. Ezech 20.3.31.

But what must we do, that God might answer us? Quest. Answ.


1. First, we must be such as will answer when God calls, else it is just, we
should call when God will not answer, (...)
Zach. 7.11.

2. Secondly, when ever we receive a^swers from God, we must be sober and
humble, and take heed of swelling and pride, else the Lord in freed of feeding
u^ with revelation, may buffet us by the messengers of Satan, 2 Cor. 12.17.

^. Thirdly, we must take heed of security, and spiritual sleepiness, for
that will silence God, and not answering may be justly the scourge of it, or
else the Lord may permit the watchmen in stead of comfort to smite us with
their words of reproof and discouragement, Cant. 5.6, 7.

4. Fourth^y, we must take heed of Idols in our hearts, beloved sins. For
then either the Lord will not answer at all. Ezech. 20.31.3. or he will give u^
bitter a^swers, Ezech. 14.3,7. or he will make our sins answer against us, The
word translated t^stified, is by oth^^s translated answered.
Esaias 59.12. or his creatures as instruments of judgments shall answer us,
Heb. 2.11. or if when our sins do answer against us, the Lord yet do hear, it
is merely for his names sake, Ier. 14.17. yet mere infirmities are no
hindrances, Romans 11.4.3.

5. Fifthly, we must bring a mind that will give glory to God without limiting
God, or daring to neglect or contemn Gods answers: an instance of Gods
indignation at such, as will inquire at God what to do, and yet take their
own course i^ evident, Ier. 23.35,36.

6. We must carefully distinguish between answers of trial, and direct
answers: Paul received an answer of death, 2 Cor. 1.9. but yet he died not at
that time. The Lord will reserve the glory of absolute infallibility to his
word. As for private and secret revelations, Note.
they are not always to be infallibly trusted unto, but such inward answers as
have warrant from some promise of the word, such are infallible: but such could
not Paul's sentence of present death be.

Thus of the general, viz. that God will answer: Now the first thing in
particular is, how they were answered, viz. by revelation.

Unto whom it was revealed.

God answers diverse ways. For at some times extraordinarily he has given men
their answers in dreams, Mal. 2.12. sometimes by his Angels to men awake, Act.
10.22. sometimes by the extraordinary revelation of the holy Ghost, as Luke
2.26. Ordinarily also, God answers more ways then one, as sometimes by his
works, by giving what we desire of him: sometimes by his word, directing or
comforting us: sometimes by his Spirit, especially in time of private prayer:
The first is by operation, the second by information, the third by consolation,
but here it is by revelation.

Distinctions ab (...).
Again, Revelation is either uncreated, or created.

There is an uncreated Revelation which is infinite, and such is that which the
Father reveals to the Son from all eternity.

The created Revelation has three degrees, 1. Imperfect, 2. Perfect, 3. And
most perfect. The most perfect revelation is in Christ-man, in whom are all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. The perfect revelation is in Angels, and
blessed souls in heaven: the imperfect is in men on earth.

The revelation vouchsafed to men on earth, is either ineffectuall, or
effectual.

The ineffectuall is a revelation not availeable to salvation, such is that
revelation which may befall wicked men. For they may prophecy, as is granted
Mat. 7. But I call this revelation ineffectuall, because they may be Castawaies
for all this.

But properly, Revelation is the heritage of the Saints. For in them only it
is effectual, and thus the Lord does grant revelation in two degrees: 1.
Sometimes it is such an illumination as works a full assurance: sometimes it is
an illumination that works only a persuasion. In weak Christians, the work of
the spirit of revelation is persuasion, but in strong Christians it is full
assurance.

Unto the revelation of full assurance I refer also these revelations of the
Prophets, and I place all under the head of imperfect revelation, because
though the things revealed to the Prophets were perfectly revealed, in respect
of certainty and evidence, yet it was but a revelation in part, that is of some
things only. There were many things known to Christ and the Angels, which the
Prophets never knew.

There is also difference between Visions and Revelations; Visions are
external in some things showed to the sight: Revelations are internal showed
^nely ^o the understanding.

Quest.
But what is the difference between Revelation, and Knowledge, and Prophecy,
and Doctrine mentioned 2 Cor. 14.6?

Answ.
There are two ways by which men come to the understanding of Gods will. The
one extraordinary, and that is by revelation; and the other ordinary, viz. by
knowledge, attained by labor and industry in the use of means, this the
Apostle calls knowledge: now prophecy and doctrine depend upon these two.
Quest.
For men did vent, and utter their revelation by prophecy, that is, by
foretelling things to come, Answ.

Though we want revelations, yet we are not in wosse case then they in the Old
Testament.


and men do vent their knowledge by doctrine, and teaching others.

Are not we more miserable now then they were in the times of the Prophets,
seeing they had revelations, and we have none?

We are not: for these reasons;

1. Because we have the substance of all their revelations. For their most
glorious revelations were concerning Christ to come, whom we possess, as the
riches of the Gentiles, whom they had not in the flesh, but saw him a far off.

2. Because the Lord has now fully revealed his will in the Scriptures of the
old and new Testament to be a perfect guide unto eternal life.

3. Because we have all their revelations that could profit us in any special
measure, we have them I say left upon record, and written for our learning.

4. Neither are we altogether without revelations, We have fix sorts of
revelations under the Gospel.
that for the riches of them answer the full value of their revelations. For to
omit, that God has revealed his Son in the flesh in these latter ages of the
world, which was a greater show then was ever made in heaven or in earth: to
omit this; I say,

1. In the doctrine of the Gospel now, there are diverse riches, mines,
Mysteries of the Kingdom Mat. 13.11. Ephesians. 3.5.
and mysteries of knowledge broke open, which were hid since the world begun
from ages and generations, Col. 1. 26. Romans 16.26. and these made known not to
Apostles only, but to babes and infants, Mat. 11.25. to abject Gentiles as
well as Jews, ( Luke 2.32. for revelation of the Gentiles) to young men and
maidens, Act. 2.

2. Christ is revealed in the hearts of men now, as well as then, and that is
the best revelation, the works of the grace of Christ, such as his image
graciously revealed in their hearts: Christ lives in his people now, Gal. 1.12.
and 2. 20. Romans 8.29.

3. The righteousness, and favor of God, is with a special luster revealed
from faith to faith, Romans 1.17.

4. The Lord does still assist his servants in speaking and hearing, and
teaching to profit: we have more than we bring into the pulpit, and the Lord
still opens man's understanding, and is with our mouths to give us a doors of
utterance, Ephesians. 1.18. Col. 4.3.2 Cor. 3.5,6.

5. The Spirit of Christ does reveal now also, both daily the things given us
of God, 1 John 5.10. 2 Cor. 2.10. and at some times the particular pleasure of
God in some special cases.

6. We are nearer unto, and wait for the revelation of Christ, and the sons
of God from h^aven, of which theirs was but a glimpse, and in this we shall in
the day of Ch^^st have as full a measure as they. Their revelations were but a
drops to this sea. Romans 8.1^,19.2 These. 1.7.1 Cor. 1.7.

So that we are happy six ways in respect of revelation.

The Use should be therefore to learn thankfulness and contentation, Use 1.
as resting assure^, tha^ if we truly fear God, though he make us not
Prophets, yet his secrets shall be with them that fear him, and he will answer
us when we call, and show us great and hidden things.

Thus of the manner how God did answer them: the matter follows, which
concerns either Persons or things: Persons in these words,

That not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister.

The plain meaning is, that the Lord would have them to know, that they were
employed in these prophesies of glory, not that they should thereby reveal any
further blessedness unto themselves (for they should die before those days
come) but should therein do service unto Churches that should come long after.

Here are diverse things to be noted hence.

That the Lord has been used to deny the requests, Doct. 1.
or desires of his servants in respect of the circumstances of their suits,
such as were time, place, manner, means, measure etc yea, we see, how he
denies his best servants in the letter of his desires: Isaac must not have his
will concerning Esau: nor Joseph concerning Manasses: Moses may see Canaan, but
he must not enter in: David must not prosper in his beloved Absolon: the
Apostles must not be great in an earthly kingdom: nor Paul have his tentation
depart just as soon as he prays: Jonah must not be humored; nor Elias die when
he list: David shall not bring in the Arc at his pleasure: nay Christ himself
must not be heard in the very letter of his desires; for the cup did not pass
from him. The Use is therefore to commit our ways to God with all patience and
humility, Use.
and never rebel in our hearts, if the Lord cross us, but rather confess our
errors, and yield our selves to God, as knowing that all shall work together
for the best, etc. and he will so hear and so answer, as may be best for our
best good.

Doct. 2.
The Lord has been used to train his servants to know that their labors are
to be spent for the good of others, as well as themselves: thus the Prophets
must hear of it, God has distributed his gifts not only for the use of each
member, Use.
but for the benefit of the whole body, 1 Cor. 12. The Use should be to teach
all sorts of men to promote to their uttermost the common good, and to do it
out of conscience, and heartily, and with all diligence, as we would care for
our own things, especially promoting the edification of the body with all love
and industry, Romans 12.6.1 Pet. 4.9, 10. Ephesians. 4.26. Thus should ministers, and
magistrates, and masters of families, and every Christian with his
acquaintance. We are Stewards of Gods gifts, and they must be implo^ed about
Gods work, not our own only: the Masters advantage is most principally to be
respected: and therefore this must needs be a great reproof to such* as can
only mind their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ, Phil. 2. It
will be a singular comfort to such as excel in gifts, or riches, or power, if
they can say at their death beds, not unto my self, but unto the servants of
God, or to the poor, or to the Church, or to the service of my country, or to
the conversion of souls, etc. have I ministered the wit, or learning, or
wealth, or power the Lord has given me. Contrariwise, it cannot but be woeful
to some to remember on their death beds, that they have spent their means, and
gifts to promote wicked courses, and to procure sin, or to maintain the
riotous, or gamesters, or whores, or dogs, or any way their own lusts, oh what
will they say when they are asked, whom have you clothed, fed, comforted,
counseled, admonished, etc.

But unto us.

Quest.
But why are we honored thus and not the Prophets?

Answ.
The Lord shows mercy on whom he will show mercy: I mean it for the manner,
and time, and measure, and means: we must not herein dispute with God: yet
even this tends wonderfully to the praise of Gods constant love to his Church,
we see he does not grow weary of his affection; he did not spend all his grace
and favor upon Kings, Patriarchs, and Prophets, but he is ready to entertain
even the prodigal son of the Gentiles with as hearty, or rather more hearty
entertainment then ever he did the Jewish children that had not departed out of
their fathers household. Secondly, this also shows, that extraordinary gifts are
not the best for us: we want the gifts of prophecy, but to have the glorious
grace of Christ is better then all; for we see the Prophets desired it more,
and great reason: for one may be a Prophet and yet not be saved, Math. 7. but
so one cannot have the true grace of Christ but they shall be saved: he is in
better case that can pray with the Spirit, then he that can prophecy. For God
is rich to all that call upon him, and whosoever calls on the name of the
Lord shall be saved, Romans 10.10. Joel 2.

Besides, we may note here, that God will not be bound to show his tenderest
kindness to his best servants: no doubt the Prophets were better servants to
God then we are; yet you see, they must not envy it to know that others shall
be more made on then they. Finally, here is employed, that Gods promises and
provisions of grace can never be in vain. If it be not for the Prophets, yet
it must be for us. For so in the original it is, as if it were rendered: but
yet unto us; to note, that no word of God shall be in vain, Esaias 55.11.

They did minister.

This phrase imports diverse things.

1. We are here again occasioned to think of a strange depth of respect God
bears to the meanest of his children: none are too good in his account to do
them service: the Prophets must not think scorn to minister to them, yea so
does God reckon of them, that Kings and Queens must not be too good to nurse
them: yea, we see here the Angels are desirous to know, or do any thing that
concerns them: yea, the holy Ghost will leave heaven to do them good. Oh the
bottomless depth of Gods love! and oh the barrenness, and shallowness, and
unthankfulness of man's heart, that cannot be more inflamed toward God to
render love for love! yea we should be afraid ever to challenge God for want
of love, we should account it a great offense to call his affection in
question, the Lord takes it wonderful ill, Esaias 49.15, 16. and 40.26. oh that
God should love us so beyond all president, all desert; yea above all we could
desire, and yet we be still so slow hearted!

2. From this phrase we may note, that the greatest in the Church ought to
account it their honor to do service to their brethren. It it charged upon
all without exception to serve one another by love, Gal. 5. and Christ says of
the greatest, let him be your servant, Mat. 20. Use.
The Use is for all of us to search our hearts to see whether we can find such
a noisome pride in our selves, as that at any time, we should think our selves
too good to do Gods work, or to do service to any of Gods people; if we do
find it; let us purge it out as vile leaven, and be humbled for it before God:
else the Lord may perhaps find out ways to shame us, and scourge us, that we
dream not of.

3. This word Minister, as it is in the original, excellently imports how we
should serve one another. For it is to serve, as the Deacons did: 1. out of
conscience of a calling and commandment from God. 2. with all diligence. 3.
constantly. 4. cheerfully, Romans 12.5. with all humility, making our selves
equal with them of the lower sort. All this the Deacons did.

4. This word imports, that spiritual things are from God only in respect of
beginning and as the primary cause. For the Prophets do but minister them:
They have nothing but that they have received: for every good and perfect gift
comes down from God the Father of lights, which should teach us in the use
of all means to direct our hearts to God.

The things which were reported unto you.

These words evidently show,

First, that the primitive Church was first taught by tradition, that is, by
Adam: so were the Patriarks for the first 2000. years, 1 These. 2.15.

But might some one say, Object.
Does not this wonderfully make for the Papists in their opinion about
traditions?

No whit at all: and that this point may be more fully understood, Sol. The
question about traditions.
I will show out of Scripture that the word Tradition has been taken three
ways: and then declare particularly, that this doctrine can make nothing for
the Papists.

1. Sometimes by traditions are meant the inventions or precepts of men,
imposed with opinion of holiness and necessity upon the consciences of men,
and so it is taken, and taxed, Mat. 15.2, 3, 6. Col. 2.8.

2. Sometimes by traditions are meant certain rules prescribed by the
Apostles, concerning things indifferent, and their use. Thus the Corinthians
are praised, because they kept the traditions, as the Apostle delivered them
unto them, 1 Cor. 11.2.

3. Sometimes by traditions are meant certain orders appointed by the Apostles
for the prevention of disorder in manners in the Churches of Christians, and
thus I take it to be understood, 2 These. 3.6. when condemning such as would not
work, he says, they walk disorderly, and not after the traditions which ye
received of us. It seems the Apostle had prescribed some courses for
preventing of idleness, and such inconveniences.

4 Sometimes it is taken for the very word of God delivered by lively voice: so
the word was delivered 2000. years before the law.

5. Sometimes it is taken for the word of God, as it was first delivered by the
Apostles, while the Scriptures was yet unfinished, whether it were delivered by
report, or writings, and so 2 These. 2.15. 1 Cor. 11.23. and 15.3.

According to the fourth sense, or this last, it is taken here.

Now this can make nothing for the Papists: for

1. This word of God was afterward written, and so written, as nothing must be
added, Rev. 21.18.

2. The doctrine here reported was delivered by the holy Ghost sent down from
heaven, as the coherence shows. Therefore unless they can show the like
authority for their traditions, they say nothing.

3. Their traditions were of the first sort, and so condemned in Scriptures.

Mat. 13 16,17. 2 Cor. 3.16, 17, 18. which is one difference between the
knowledge of the godly, and the knowledge of the wicked. For wicked men have
but a dark glimmering knowledge that tends to baseness and bondage: and this
should teach us to pray for the spirit of wisdom, and revelation, to know the
riches tha^ is in Christ Jesus; being daily careful, that the god of this
world do not hide the glorious Gospel of Christ from us.

Object.
But have we the will of God only by report?

Solut.
This word report belongs principally to the first times, before the Scriptures
of the New Testament were written, and so the word was sure enough being
delivered by Apostolical men, who confirmed it by miracles. And if the word
do also belong to our times, then God^ Ministers are said to report Gods will
unto us, as Ambassadors do the wills of Princes by the instructions given in
their commissions; or as Lawyers report the law out of their great Charter, or
Statute-books; or as Physicians report their remedies out of the books of
practice, and tried experiments.

It is true, that the doctrine of holy things is like unto a report, 1. In
respect of wicked men, who pass all over as a tale that is told, or respect it
at best, but as a nine days wonder. 2. In respect of godly men, who receive it
but by pieces and degrees, not as one continued story, but as a report. 3. In
respect of the matter of happiness, it is so removed from our natures, and we
have so little right unto it, that it comes to us as a report, not a^ any thing
we knew before, or could expect or look for 4. In respect of the opportunity
of it; if we take not hold of it in the very season, it will be gone. The Lord
does not every day set before us life and death, but only at some times, and
then how soon is the voice gone, if our hearts open not to receive it?

Thus of the things contained in Gods answer, as they are barely propounded.
Now in the words that follow, they are further commended to us.

First, by the efficient causes of them.

By them which preached the Gospel unto you.

The Gospel is diversely accepted in Scripture. Sometimes it signifies the
history of the life and death of Christ: so in the title of every Evangelist
his book, and so 2 Timothy 2.8. Mat. 26.13. Sometimes it signifies the glorious
tidings of Christ come in the flesh, and of salvation in him: so it was
promised by the Prophets, Romans 1.2. Act. 13.32. but most usually it signifies
in general the joyful news of happiness eternal, through the favor of God
in Christ Jesus, notwithstanding our misery in our selves; and this was called
the promise in the Old Testament, and the Gospel in the new.

The Greek word properly signifies good news; and in the New Testament the
word is used to express that most happy news of God reconciled in Christ, and
of perfect happiness in him.

Now because this news contains the more excellent part of Gods word,
therefore I will consider of it more exactly. This heavenly news is the more
admirable, if we consider, 1. What it is that the Gospel does signify. 2. How
we are assured of the news in the Gospel. 3. What are the effects of it. 4.
What is required in the persons that have any part in this news.


Then I would resolve certain questions; and lastly, make some use of all.

For the first: the Gospel brings news unto forlorn men.

1. Of peace and reconciliation with God. The Gospel of peace, What news the
Gospel brings us.
2. Of remission and forgiveness of our sins, Act, 10.43. 3. Of freedom from
death and condemnation. 4. Of a divine and most sufficient righteousness to be
revealed from heaven, Romans 1.16, 17. 5. Of eternal life: The Gospel of the
Kingdom, Mat. 9.35. and all for Christ Jesus sake the son of David, Romans 1.23.
But how can we be certain of this news? Quest.


1. By the testimony of the Spirit. Answ.

How we may he certain of this news.


2. By the vaticinies of the Prophets. 3. By the miracles that first confirmed
it. 4. By the testimony of Christ himself, that in our nature preached it,
Mat. 4.13. 5. By the word of God, or of the Apostles.
The effects of the Gospel are: 1. It brings life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1.10. Eight effects of the Gospel.
2. It melts the hearts of Gods elect more then any thing with voluntary grief
for sin: it makes men condemn themselves in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4.6. 3. It
revives and refreshes with wonderful encouragements, 1 Pet. 4.6. 4. It makes
a man sacrifice himself to God, Romans 15.16. 5. It is the ministry of the
Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. It fenceth the affections against the love and care after
worldly things: Hence we are said to be shod with the preparation of the
Gospel of peace. 7. It establishes hope, Col. 1.23. 8. It is the power of God
to salvation, Romans 1.16.


Fourthly, there are eight things required in every one that would have part in
the Gospel.

1. Reformation of life. Eight things required in every one that would h^ve
part in the Gospel.
2. Faith and trust in it, Mat. 16.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.13. Heb. 4.2. and to this end
get evidence and seal to it, Ephesians. 1.13. 3. A singular estimation of it: so
great, as 1. Our chiefest praise should be in the Gospel. 2. We should be
content to suffer any thing for it, and not be ashamed of the afflictions or
bonds of the Gospel, Mark 8.35. and 10.29. 1 These. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.8. Philem.
13. 4. Poverty of spirit, Esaias 61.1. 5. A diligent strife and constant endeavor
to attend upon it, we should press to it, Luke 16.16. 6. Professed subjection
to it, 2 Cor. 9.12. 7. We should endeavor to live so, as might become the
Gospel, Phil. 1.27. 8. We should continue in it, and not be moved away from
the hope of it, Col. 1.23. a vile offense to be turned from it, Gal. 1.6.

Quest.
But was the Gospel never preached till now, that he says, it is now reported?

Answ.
Distinguish: If the Gospel be taken for the news of Christ come in the flesh,
then it was not preached, till the times of Christ and the Apostles: But if it
be taken for the promise of grace and pardon in Christ, it was given in
Paradise to Adam, and continued by the Patriarks and Prophets, Act. 10. 43.
Heb. 13.8. Moses wrote of Christ, Ioh. 5.46.

Moses wrote of Christ two ways. 1. By writing the promise concerning the
Messiah to come. 2. By the whole ceremonial law and service. For all those
were shadows of Christ to come.

Object.
But the Gospel is said to be hid and concealed from ages and generations etc.
Romans 16.26. Ephesians. 3.5. Col. 1.26.

Solut.
The text is, as it is now. It did appear, but not so clearly.

Quest.
But how does this doctrine of the Gospel differ from other Scripture,
especially from the law?

Answ.

How the Gospel differs from the law.


1. In the manner of revelation: The law is written in some sort in the heart of
man, Romans 2.15. but the Gospel now may not be known to nature, but revealed
by Christ, Mat. 16.17.

2. In the subject of doctrine: The Law tells us what we should be, but not how
we can be so. Now the Gospel shows us a full and sufficient righteousness in
Christ, that will be availeable. The Law says, pay what thou owe, do this
and thou shall live: But the Gospel says, believe the promise and thou shall
be saved.

Rev. 14.6.
3. In the continuance of the force of it. The gospel is an everlasting
gospel, God will never alter his mind: whereas he has changed his mind for
the covenant of works.

Quest.
But is it the Ministers duty only to publish the gospel, in that the Apostle
says, by them which preached?

Answ.
It is chiefly: For to produce the effects before mentioned it is his calling,
who has commission from God to be his ambassador: yet private persons may
comfort one another with these things.

Quest.
But is the gospel only effectual when it is preached?

Answ.
It is most effectual then, and that is the ordinary means God has appointed,
1 Pet. 1. ult.

Uses.
The Uses are,



1. For consolation. For the excellency of the subject exalts the dignity of
their calling, they are trusted with a very glorious embassage, Romans 15.16, 17.
and 16.26. therefore never be ashamed of it, Romans 1.16. and this was taught by
Christ himself, Mat. 4.13. and those Ephesians. 3.4.

2. For Instruction: Therefore to serve God in their spirits, even with their
whole hearts, 1 These. 2 2. 1 Cor. 9.15.
Romans 1.9. and suffer all things rather then hinder the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.12.
Paul says, It is better for me to dye, then to make my glorying void.



1. For instruction.

1. To pray for their teachers, that God would open their mouths, and make
their hearts fat with his goodness herein, Ephesians. 6.19. and to esteem them, as
Romans 1^.15. 2. To receive it with all gladness and power, yea and affliction
too, 1 These. 1.4, 5.
2. For terror to wicked men, that contemn or neglect so great salvation; this
is preached for a witness against worlds of them, Mat. 24.14. The anger of ^od
will be revealed from heaven against them, Romans 1.18. God will search men's
hearts both for desires, and care, and for contempt too, 1 These. 2.4. Act.
15.7, 8. and at the day of judgment the terrible vengeance of God shall fall
upon them, 2 These. 1.8. 1 Timothy 1.9, 10, 11. This makes their judgment greater.

Thus of the less principal: The most principal cause is the holy Ghost sent
down from heaven.

By the holy Ghost sent down from heaven.

The meaning is, to affirm that the things propounded in the Gospel are the
more eminent, because they were effected by the very holy Ghost.

This that is here ^^id, that the holy Ghost was sent from heaven, was first
and principally fulfilled in the days of the Apostles, and chiefly then also
in the day of Pentecost, as is showed in the second of the Acts.

But secondarily, it is true of all faithful Ministers, that the holy Ghost
works wonderfully from heaven in the power of the Gospel.

Ghost.] It is an old English word, and signifies a spirit: and the Spirit of
God is called an holy Ghost, or spirit, 1. for distinction sake, and 2. by
effect. For Gods Spirit is holy, that is, it has all holiness; and it has it
in it self, not by illumination from any other higher cause, and so are not
the spirits of men and Angels: holy men's spirits have sin in them on earth:
and the Angels, and blessed souls in heaven have no holiness but what they
received. 2. Gods Spirit is holy by effect. For it his proper work to sanctify
the elect, and so to work holiness upon the spirits of men by spiritual
regeneration.

But why is Gods Spirit called a holy Spirit, rather ^hen wise, Quest.
or merciful, etc?

First, when we call him holy, we comprehend all that in it: Answ.
for wisdom and mercy are but parts of holiness. Secondly, in respect of us,
and his working in us, it is a most proper word: for it notes his working in
the Elect above all reprobates. F^r a man may be a wise man and yet per^sh,
Mat. 11.2^. 1 Cor. 1.19. and a man may give all his goods to the poor, and yet
it is nothing, 1 Cor. 13.3. but now if a man be made a holy man, he is sure to
be saved.

Well then the first doctrine is, that Gods Spirit is a holy Spirit; Doct. 1.
V^es.
which may serve for diverse uses. 1. To exalt in us a further sense of Gods
goodness, that is pleased to put his Spirit within us, seeing our hearts are
so unclean, and his Spirit so holy. 2. It may humble u^* and fear us from
sin: if we belong to Christ, we carry about with us the Spirit of Christ,
Romans 8.9. Now think of it then, thou can not sin, but thou have a witness
and a Judge within thee. Besides, the very respect of the holy Ghost should
move thee to fear sin: for sin grieves the holy Ghost, and hinders his
work of sealing thee up to the day of redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. 3. It should
encourage u^ in the works of mortification: for Gods Spirit has his name of
holiness, and though it be never so hard, yet by the Spirit we shall be made
able in some measure to mortify the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.10. and to walk
in Gods statutes, Ezech. 36.27.

Secondly, if we consider why the holy Ghost is h^re named, Doct. 2.
we may learn, that the holy Spirit of God is the first and chief cause of
all that grace, which either Ministers, or people enjoy in the gospel.

Uses.
Which may first comforts us against all the impediments of the gospel. Oh
might some men have thought a 100. years ago; how is it possible to bring
down the power of Antichrist? why by the Spirit of Christ's mouth he will
consume him, 2 These. 2. In the mouth of Christ, in the preaching of the Gospel
there is a Spirit, even the Spirit of God, which will do more then 10000.
armed men to pull him down. Oh might some one think, I shall never understand,
or never remember so many holy comforts and instructions: why the Spirit of God
will teach us to profit, and lead us into all truth, and help our infirmities,
when we deal with God and his ordinances, and pull down those strong holds
which Satan has to hinder the obedience of Christ. Oh might some Minister
think, I shall never rule such a people, or persuade with them: yet you see God
will put his Spirit in their mouth, and men shall not be able to withstand the
Spirit by which they speak; he will give a door of utterance, and secretly bow
men's hearts unto the obedience of the truth.

Secondly, the consideration of this second doctrine may instruct us how to
order our selves toward the means of salvation; and so it may teach us, 1.
not to rest in the act done: we may hear the best Sermons, and receive the
Sacraments, etc. yet if we beg not the assistance of the Spirit, all may be in
vain: if we heard Christ himself, yet it may not profit us. 2. To believe in
God, when we carefully use the means, how unlikely soever the success seem
to be; God can work by the means as pleases him, notwithstanding infi^mit^e^
either of the teacher or hearer. 3. To render all the praise to God, and his
h^ly Spirit in the mediation of his Son, seeing thence flows all blessing and
good success, as being the only original fountain of all holiness, and
knowledge.

Ier. 31.33. to spare i^stances in other things. 5. Lastly, it may confirm us
against the scorns, and disgraces of the world, by which men every where
dishonor the knowledge and practice of the holy things brought to us with the
Gospel. These things that so many deride, came to us from the holy Ghost, who
came down from heaven to propound, and confer them upon the Church.

Sent down.] It is to be noted further, that he says, that the holy Ghost was
sent. For from thence,

1. I observe an evident proof, that the holy Ghost is a person distin^t from
the Father and the Son.

2. Hence arises the consideration of the nature of this mission. Mission is
a^ att^^bute given here to the holy Ghost. Now divine att^^bute* are either
essential, or personal. Essential are such proprieties as equally belong to
all the persons in respect of the essence, as to be wise, just, merciful,
holy, etc. Personal attributes are such proprieties as are given only to the
persons apart, the one from the other, and do note a difference of the persons,
as to beget, to be begotten, to send forth, to be sent forth, to proceed, to
conceive, etc. Now these personal attributes may be distinguished also thus:
Some are proper to each person alone; so in one, as not in any other: as to
beget ( in the Father,) to be begotten ( in the Son), to proceed ( in the
holy Ghost:) some of these attributes are common to two of the persons, but not
to the third, as proceeding in the holy Ghost is both from the Father and the
Son, so to send forth is the attribute both of the Father and Son: so
likewise to receive is common to the Son and to the holy Ghost: so that we see
whither mission must be referred. Yet to make it more clear, we must
understand, that there is a double sending forth: the one internal, the other
external. Internal, when the Father and the Son cause the holy Ghost to
proceed: External, when the Father and Son send forth the holy Ghost for
outward operations amongst the Creatures, especially in the Church; and thus
the holy Ghost is sent forth by the Father, Ioh. 14.16. and by the Son, Ioh.
15.16, of this mission is that speech, Gal 4.7.

3. Here may be a doubt: might some one say, Quest.
Does not this mission of the holy Ghost express an inequality with the Father
and the Son?

It does not. For 1. it is not always true, Answ.
that he that is sent forth is inferior to him that sent him. For Jonathan may
send David, and David send Jonathan, and yet be both equal. Commission may
import inferiority, not mission: or if it did hold amongst men, yet it is not
true in the Trinity. 2. This word is used for want of words, metaphorically, to
shadow out something above our reach. For it does not note either a servile
subjection, or a local motion; but it is used to express either some effect
of his working, or some sign of his presence: so that the meaning is, the holy
Ghost was sent: that is, he wrought some notable effect on earth, or showed
that he was present by some sign.

Now for some use of this sending of the holy Ghost, Uses.
we may in this doctrine observe, 1. That to be sent of God is no disparagement
unto us, he sent his own Spirit. 2. We may here note some things, wherein we
may resemble and express the image of the holiness of the Trinity in us.
Would we live together as the three persons in the Trinity do? Then 1. we must
live without envy one at another. 2. We must not think much to be employed
one by another, or to be advised and appointed in well doing. 3. The salvation
of the elect should be dearer to us, then any respect of our selves, or our
own estate, we must not seek our own things. The holy Ghost repines not at
his mission, and the Father thinks not his Son and Spirit too good to be sent
unto us. As we grow in these things, so we more express a likeness to the
Trinity.

Down from heaven.

Something may be noted in that the holy Apostle adds, that he was sent from
heaven. 1. It imports what this world is, it is but a place of misery, and to
come into it, is to come down. 2. It expresses what heaven is; it is the
place of Gods residence, the place where God dwells, the Palace of the great
King, as Princes have their Palaces, so has God, and as a Princes palace
differs from a cottage, so does heaven from earth.

The Use should be to inflame our affections toward this holy place: Use.
oh how should we long to see where God dwells? what natures have we to long
to see the courts of Princes, and yet cannot long after the courts of our God?
and yet in Princes courts, 1. Not entertained,^ ut many times repulsed. 2. Not
known many times of any body. 3. Not dwell there. 4. Not favored of the King,
or his son. 5. The Lords will not attend us to carry us to the King, or show
us all, etc. 6. Soon are we cloyed with the glory of it, if we had all we
would. 7. In the Kings court we see the glory of others, not ^ur own. But
contrary to all these, it is in heaven, as it shall be with the righteous.


Which things the Angels desire to look into.

In these words, the grace brought unto us in the Gospel is commended by the
adjunct desire the Angels have to look into it: if such glorious creatures see
such worth in these things, then they are certainly to be highly accounted of
and rejoiced in: but the Angels do so as says the holy Ghost, who is
acquainted with the desires of Angels as well as with the thoughts of men.
Therefore etc.

Doct.
Before I enter upon the particular consideration of these words, I must in
general observe one doctrine from the coherence, viz. that as any are more
holy and happy, so they do more admire the grace brought unto us in the
Gospel: it is much that the Prophets give such testimony: so is it that the
Apostles and Ministers of the Gospel spoke such glorious things of it: but if
that may not confirm us, the holy Spirit of God and the Angels of God shall be
brought in to deliver not their opinions only, but their desires also.

Which may serve,

1. For singular reproof of the madness of our natures, that cannot be won to
know or regard wherein the chief good lies, but are so infinitely distracted
with endless hunting after the riches or pleasures of life. Oh how are our
hearts sunk deep in rebellion, when neither the verity of these things, nor
our own mortality, nor such abundant testimonies from heaven can move us? But
woe unto us for two reasons from hence: First, we shall be made inexcusable,
since God has warned and instructed us with such undeniable testimonies.
Secondly, here we see the cause why we seek not after the grace of Christ in
the Gospel; it is because we are alienated both from hol^nesse, and
happiness. For if we had experience in either, we would judge as ^he Angels of
heaven do.

2. For singular strengthening and encouragement to every one that has true
grace: let him rejoice in his portion: the Gospel is the best riches, it were
^ot b^ught dear if a man sold all he had to purchase it: we should rather take
the judgment and opinion of one Angel, then of a thousand worldly persons:
(...) is no matter what they say, they know not their felicity: flesh and blood
has had no revelation in these things; it is the Spirit of God only tha^ can
show us the things given us of God; it is the scope of this place to confirm
the consolations, ver. 3, 4, 5.

Thus in general: now in particular there are four things to be considered of.

1. What these Angels are. 2. What account God makes of them. 3. What affection
they bear to men, in that they are said to desire, etc. 4. What their
knowledge is, in that they are said to look into, etc.
1. Now for the first you must understand, that all creatures are of one of
t^e^e three sorts. 1. Invisible. 2. Visible. 3. Both visible and invisible. Man
is both visible in respect of his body, and invisible in respect of his soul.
The heaven* and earth* and seas, and beasts, and fowls, etc. are visible: the
invisible creatures are these Angels.

Of A^g^^^, their (...) and natures.
The estate of this invisible world of glorious creatures is in the greatest
part (...) unrevealed to us: yet some things the Scriptures for our good has
let fall and therefore to this question I answer two ways. 1. By considering
what they are in name. 2. What they be in nature.

1. The names given them are of three sorts. In r^s^^ct of what they a^e they
are spirits: in ^espect of wh^t they do they are Ang^ls.
1. Some express their nature, and so they are spirits. 2. Some express their
excellency and dignity, and so they are called principalities and powers, etc.
3. Some express their office and employment, and so they are called Angels in
this place, which signifies Messengers; because they are sent to minister to
them which are heirs of salvation. Heb. 1.14.

2. Now for their natures: Angels are spiritual substances invisible and
immortal, subsisting of themselves, endued with singular understanding and
freedom of will, created of God for his glory in his service in the world,
especially in the Church.

But why are they called by the name of office more usually then by the names
that express their natures? Quest.


It is because God delights in them for their se^vice, Answ.
and they themselves are more glad of well-doing, then of their happiness in
nature: from whence we may learn, that it is not enough to get singular gifts
and excellent estates, unless we be industrious in the use of them: our glory
lies not in excellent parts, but in the fruitful use of them. We should learn
then of Gods Angels to obey as they obey, that Gods will may be done on earth
as it is in heaven: that is, 1 willingly, 2 speedily, 3 constantly. For so the
Angels obey, 2 Samuel 16 ^3.
else we may be as the Angels of God for gifts, and yet go to hell.

But are all these incorporeall spirits here meant? Quest. Answ.


No: for some of them fell away, and stood not in the truth: it is only the
good Angels, called the elect Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. are here meant; but it is
worth the noting, what sin has brought upon the Devils, they have not only
lost their nature in respect of purity, but their names to, so as usually when
the Scripture calls Angels, it means it of good Angels: they have lost the
dignity of their very title: this is the fruit of pride, or envy, or
disobedience, or whatsoever else was their sin. Some say it was pride in
affecting divinity: some say it was envy stirred by the decree of exalting of
man's nature above Angels in and by Christ: some say a transgression of some
commandments in particular, not expressed as Adams was.

Thus of their names and natures.

2. Now for the singular account God makes of them, it may appear diverse
ways: 1. By the excellent titles given them, a^ are stars of the morning, sons
of God principalitie^ and powers, etc. 2. By the place he sets them in, he
places them next his own person, in the chamber of his own presence to be
always about him, even in heaven, the fairest room in the whole building of
the world. 3. By the trust he has put in them, he has committed the charge
of his Elect unto their protection and care, Psalm. 34. and 91 Heb. 1. 14 4. By
the singular grace of confirmation, that now in Christ they (...) of all the
creatures should never have experience in their own nature of any evil, Col.
2.10. The consideration hereof should kindle in us a holy impatience of desire
so to dispatch Gods work on earth, that we might haste to that time and
place, when we shall be like the Angels of God, Luke 10.36.
yea their very society should kindle desire to be with such glorious
creatures, and in the mean time, how can we sufficiently praise God, that has
appointed such excellent c^eatures to attend upon us both in life and death?
how should we esteem faith and repentance, that in Jesus Christ works unto us
such a safety of estate under their willing and careful protection?

3. Now for their affection which they bear to man: we must in general know,
that as understanding is yielded them, so is will and desire inseparably joined
with their knowledge, though in a far more noble manner then they are in man.
There are two principal differences between the affections in Angels and those
in men. For first, Angels have not those base and inferior our affections that
are in men, I mean the sensitive appetites. Secondly, Angels have not their
affections seated in any one place, or subject, as the fountain of affections,
as in man, the heart is the seat of affections, (of some of them, I mean,
which are more noble:) besides that their affections are carried without all
sinful, or unhappy perturbations.

Now for their special affection they bear to man either of love, or joy, or
desire, diverse Scriptures testify, Mat. 18.10. Luke 15.7, 10. Ephesians. 3.10. This
also appears by their wonderful readiness, and wisdom, and care in the
discharge of their protection and preservation of man, excellently showed in a
Vision, Ezech. 1.

Now this desire in them arises 1. out of the flames of desire after the glory
of God. 2. Out of a sympathy or fellow feeling that they have as the members of
the same body with the Saints, Col. 2.10.

Uses.
Now for the Use of this third point. Do the Angels thus affectionately long
after, joy in, and desire to be hold the spiritual riches of the Church? 1.
How should this confound us with shame, that have no more care to look into our
own happiness? 2. The desire and joy of the Angels should be unto us a quick
spur unto all well-doing. 3. We should learn of them how to rejoice in, and
desire after the good of others; we should be so far from envy at their
happiness, that we should desire to know the riches of Gods love to them,
that we might joy in it. This were to be as the Angels of God, and the contrary
is to be like the devils of hell.

to look into.

To look into.]

Three things may be here noted.

1. That the Angels do look into the things of the Church; they do take
notice how things are carried, which may both comfort and instruct us: Comfort
us, that so excellent creatures, who have the charge over us, are so watchful
over all our ways: so as there cannot be the least advantage of our good, but
they behold the face of God, and are ready pressed to receive commandments for
our succor and good. 2. It should make us wonderful respective of our ways;
if not for other reasons, yet because of the Angels, they look upon us, 2 Cor.
11.
and take notice of all we do.

A (...)
2. The word here used in the original seems to allude to the Cherubins about
the Arc in the Law, and so imports, that the Angels look upon and into the
things of the Church, as the Cherubins did look upon the Arc; and so it
assures us three things in the manner of the looking of the Angels.

1. That they look into the Church and the things of the Church with
wonderful sincerity, and singleness, and purity of nature: This was shadowed
out, Exodus 26.8, in that the Cherubins that should look upon the Arc, were of
gold, yea of beaten gold, not only excellent by creation, but by confirmation
also, as the workmanship of Christ: so as their natures were every way far from
contempt or envy, or any corrupt desires or ends. Besides, they did take this
view as in the presence of God, whom they made the witness and Judge of the
uprightness of their desires.

2. That it is with singular perfection and exactness: This was shadowed in
that the Cherubins were not only placed within the most holy place, but close
to the Arc, yea at both ends of the Arc, ver. 19. so as they thoroughly look
into the affairs of the Church.

3. That it is with singular constancy of desire and admiration. For their
faces are always upon it, as if they could never look enough into it.

4. That they desire to look into these things, as being wonderfully ready to
do any service for the good of the Church: This was shadowed in the stretching
out of their wings, as if they were ready to fly to the succors of the Church.

Now lest man should grow proud of his estate, it is added in the Law, that all
this view of the Angels was upon the Arc, but especially as it was covered
with the Mercy-seat, to note, that that which they most wonder at, is the
mavelous favor of God in the mediation of Christ, stilling the displeasure
of God justly conceived by the view of his law broken by man.

Thus of the manner of the knowledge, as it was shadowed out in the old law.

Now thirdly I consider of the kind of knowledge more distinctly that is
negatively and affirmatively.

1. Negatively. We must lay this as a ground, Of the kn^wledge of Ang^ls
neg^tiv^ly and affirmatively
that the knowledge of Angels is not sensitive, but contemplative, that is, it
is not by sense. They do not know things as we do, by seeing, or hearing, or
smelling, or rasting, or feeling. They have no eyes to look upon things
withal, nor do they know things by images, or by reason, as the souls of men
do. When we conceive of any thing, we conceive of it either by images in the
fantasy, or we find it out by reasoning or discourse, and so make judgment
of it, and this judgment is as it were the eyes of the soul: but thus do not
the Angels know things, nor do they know things by their essence as God does.
For Gods essence is as it were an infinite looking glass, in which all things
shine in their natures and motions, and so he knows them. That God that has
given virtue to precious stones or glasses to show things remote from them,
has such a power in his own being infinitely much more: but thus do not the
Angels know things. Thus negatively.

2. Affirmatively: there is a fouretold knowledge in Angels.

1. Natural. 2. Supernatural. 3. Revealed. 4. Experimental.
1. Natural, was the knowledge all Angels good and bad had of things by
creation.

2. Supernatural, was that saving knowledge, as I may so call it, by which the
good Angels so know God, that they cannot, nor will not fall from him, but
perfectly cleave to him.

3. Revealed knowledge is that illumination, by which God many times
communicates the mysteries of his will to the Angels otherwise hid to them.

4. Experimental, is the knowledge which they get by experience and
observation in the world, especially in the Church, as things daily fall ou^.

But that this point may be yet more clear, it will be profitable to declare
it by considering the several things they know, and the rather because they
know them not all one way. All things Angels know are either, 1. God. 2. or the
creatures. 3. or the mysteries of the Gospel. 4. or the thoughts of men. 5. or
things to come. Now these things they know, but after a diverse manner.

How do they know God? Quest.


For opening of this I mist show it by the eye of man three ways. Answ.
By sight we know things first mediately, as by a glass expressing the
proportion of the thing we see, though we see not the thing it self. Secondly,
by the presence of the thing in the eye; or rather of the likeness, though the
thing it self be not in the eye, as when we look upon a man some what distant
from us. Thirdly, when the thing seen is present in the essence of it in the
very eye, so the light is in the eye of man. Now by the first way the Saints
see God on earth, 2 Cor. 3. ult.
that is to say, by means, as by a looking glass, not face to face. By the
second, that is by some sign or likeness of Gods presence, the Angels did see
God by creation. By the third, way, that is by the lightsome presence of the
glorious essence of God, is Godseene of the Angels face to face, as they are
confirmed in Christ, M^^. 18.10.
and so also do the blessed souls see God.

2. Now for the creatures of all sorts the Angels know them two ways. 1. In
the glass of Gods essence, in which they perfectly are resembled. 2. By
certain likenesses of things put into them immediately after their creation,
whereas man has his knowledge by degrees, and they view things as it were in
one view, not successively as we do, but at once, as it were by a sudden
coruscation, as I may call it, they see what is in the creatures; as the
heavens had their perfection all at once, so had the Angels: and as the
perfection in the heavens is always actually, so is the knowledge of Angels
always perfect in act, so there is no time wherein they know not any creature
God has made.

3. As for the mysteries of the Gospel, it is probable, that the maine heads
of salvation of the Elect by Christ, they knew it shortly after the creation,
else how could they discharge the guardianship of the Elect, if they knew
nothing of their salvation? It was their function to minister to them that
should be heirs of salvation: and they did often attend upon Christ as the
Savior of the Church, when he appeared: yet the several branches and
determinations, and the circumstances of time, and their employments, or the
persons in several ages that should be called, (as for example, the calling of
the Gentiles) or the like things, that concerned either their ministeries, or
the mysteries of Christ, they did not know by nature, but by grace of
revelation after, Ephesians. 3.10.

4. For the thoughts of men, I must distinguish: some thoughts are so secret
and still in the mind, as they make no impression upon the body at all: some
thoughts are so boiling and working, that either by gestures, or by the
impressions of some affections raised by them, they leave some print upon the
body. The first kind God only knows: of the second kind a wise man will know
much by guess, much more the Angels of God.

5. Lastly, as for things to come, they must be considered either as they hang
in their causes necessarily, or probable in nature, or as they are expressed in
the prophesies of Scripture, or as they are secret in the counsel of God.
Things to come of the first two kinds the Angels do know respectively. The
third sort only God knows.

Thus briefly of the nature, account, affections, and knowledge of the Angels.

V^^.
The maine use of all is that which is here intended, viz. that the desire of
these noble creatures should encourage and settle us in the assurance and
estimation of the grace brought us in the Gospel.

Thus of the 12. verse, and so of the first part, viz. matter of Consolation:
The matter of Exhortation follows to verse 8. of Chap. 3.
Verse 13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind: be sober, and trust
perfectly on the grace that is brought unto you by the revelation of Jesus
Christ.


HItherto of the first maine point of the doctrine of this Epistle, viz. matter
of Consolation. Now follows the second, viz. matter of Exhortation, from ver.
13. of this Chap. to ver. 8. of Chap. 3.

The Exhortation is twofold, general and special: general, concerning such
duties as belong to all Christians as they are Christians, to ver. 13. of Chap.
2. special, concerning particular duties, as they stand in special relation
to others, ver. 13. of Chap. 2. to ver. 8. of Chap. 3.

The general Exhortation is likewise twofold: For either it concerns the
matter of holiness in this Chap. or the means of holiness, Chap. 2.1. to 13.

In these words, and the rest that follow to the end of this Chapter, two
things may be noted. First, the things to which he does exhort. Secondly, the
reasons, by which he does enforce this Exhortation.

The things to which he does exhort are three.

1. The first concerns the renovation of the mind: gird up the loins of your
mind. 2. The second concerns the moderation of life, Be sober. 3. The third
the confirmation of hope, Trust perfectly, etc.
The reasons are six, taken 1. From the image of God, ver. 14, 15, 16. 2. From
the judgment of God, ver. 17. 3. From the redemption in Christ, ver. 18. to
22. 4. From the relation to the godly, ver. 22. 5. From the immortality of the
soul, ver. 23. 6. From the immortality of the body, ver. 24, 25.


Thus for the order: From the coherence diverse things may be noted.

First, that we are seldom comforted, but we had need to be exhorted, so apt
are our hearts to security, and so usual is it, that deadness of spirit
should follow lively joys. Besides, Satan is aptest to cast in his base
injections after any comfort, as it was with Paul after his revelations.

Secondly, that the best use of Consolation, is to stir us up to godly
conversation, and the settling of faith and hope; and thereby we may note a
difference between the illusions of Satan, and the true comforts of the holy
Ghost.

Thirdly, that the meditation of the desire of the Angels, and the true
Prophets of God should make us ashamed of the slownesse of our hearts, and
quicken us to gird up the loins of our minds.

Gird up the loins of your minds.

These words are metaphorical, and may be three ways interpreted.

1. First, hereby may be signified, that we should with all care lay hold upon
Gods covenant, and in our minds and affections embrace it: For the girdle upon
Ieremies loins is a type of Gods covenant with the people, Ier. 13.11.

2. It may note the humiliation wherewith our minds and hearts should be abased
before the Lord: so to gird the loins must be taken, Esaias 32.11.

3. But thirdly and chiefly, hereby is signified the care we should have to
remove all the impediments that might hinder faith and godliness: it being a
metaphor taken from the manner of the Eastern people, who wore long garments,
which till they were girded up, were a great hinderance both to labor and
travail.

4. To these may be added, that it is used to note the watchful expectation of
Christ's coming, Luke 12.35.

And so in general we may here note,

1. That true godliness, and devotion, and faith have many hindrances: There
are many letts in the way of life; never any could order their course so
wisely, but they did find impediments.

Use.
The use is for confutation of such as find no hindrances: If it be the true
grace of Christ, there are lets: a sign they are in a slumber, and know not
the ways of heaven: these ways are strait and narrow. Secondly, for comfort
and encouragement to the godly that are troubled with letts; it has always
been so, the godly were ever annoyed with the loins and long garments.

2. That the first care should be to be prepared, and resolved against these
letts.

3. That these lets are daily, they are as the very garments of our backs.

4. That they may be many times about things that seem needful.

5. That of all the impediments of godliness, those that are within are the
worst, therefore he says, gird up your minds. Ill company, multitude of
business, carnal counsel and friends, losses, disgraces, enemies, and wife,
and farm, and riches, and pleasures, are great letts; so is the world, and the
devil: but yet the worst are within the minds of men. And thus in general.

Now in particular diverse things may be profitably considered.

1. For what men must be thus prepared and made ready. 2. What are the garments
of the mind, or inward lets. 3. Why must they be girded up. 4. How must they be
girded or restrained. 5. It is to be noted, that he says, gird up, not cast
off. 6. The Uses.
metaphor in the letter was used in those countries upon four occasions. 1.
When they were to go a journey, 1 King. 4.29. and 9.1. 2. When they were to
run a race. 1 King. 18.46. 3. When they were to fight a battle, 1 King. 2.1.
4. When they went to labor, Prove. 31.17. In all four senses spiritually we
must have our minds girded and resolved against impediments; we are travelers,
runners, laborers, fighters, and in all these respects we must be girded and
addressed to them: we can never run the race of godliness, we can never do
the works of godliness, we can never abide the hard strife, and fight of
godliness and faith; we can never hold out in our journey to heaven, unless
we daily strive against the hindrances that, will be cast in our way, I say
daily, and inwardly.

14 (...).
and 2. of them in the similitude of loins.

The twelve inward lets are these: 1. Ignorance, a veil, Esaias 25.8. it
hinders, Ephesians. 4.17. 2. Carnal reason, 2 Cor. 2.18. 3. (...) thoughts, or
contemplative wicked^esse, I^r. 4.14. Genesis 6. and 8. 4. Security, mindlesnesse,
incogitancie, which shows it self either by not heeding, or by not
r^membring, or by not resolving, or applying, or practicing. 5. Love of the
world: It is not much business, or wealth, or many occasions; but the love men
have to the world, that hinders them. Cares of life. 6. Troubles of mind:
disquietnesse of mind, worldly or causeless sorrows, impatiency, when men's
unc^rcumcised minds will not bear the punishment of their sins. These hinder
assurance, society, labor of godliness, L^v. 26.41. see the phrases used
Prove. 15.15. Eccl. 2.23. 7. Fearfulness and doubts, fear of this trouble, and
that disgrace, or difficulty, or ill success, etc. Ier. 1.17. Rev. 21.8. 8.
Hypocrisy: a double heart, a heart and a heart, allowance of distractions,
etcetc This frustrates all for the present, and angers God. 9. Precipitation of
mind, when men's haste is in them, as the Hebrew phrase is, Job 20.2. Thus David
said in excessumentis: it is translated, in his haste, I am cast out of thy
sight: suddenness, rashness, adventurousnesse is hereby meant, Prove. 15.28.
This hinders, 1. soundness of understanding, by exposing to tentation. 2. by
leading out of the race. 10. Hardness of mind, opposed to fearing always,
Prove. 28.14. unteachablenesse: the difficulty that is in men to be persuaded,
or moved. 11. Discouragement, Heb. 12.13. 12. Consternation, or amazedness of
mind: Luke 24.4. 2 These. 2.2.


And when he says not barely, gird up your minds, but the loins of the
mind, it imports two things. For the loins in the mind signify 1.
heaviness, dullness: so the word used 2 Chronicles. 10.10. 2. concupiscence: these
must especially be girded hard; yea all the rest must be girded upon these.

Thirdly, we should gird up our minds for diverse reasons. 1. Because the mind
not attended will else run into a secret frame of evil cogitations, or stand
still in emptiness being not woond up. Why we must be so careful of our minds.
2. Because that which is halting may be turned out of the way, Heb. 12.13. 3.
Because the mind in pollution, as it is most secret, so it is most loathsome,
Tit. 1.15. Ephesians. 2.3. 4. Because else through custom we may come to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1. 5. Lastly, because the keeping of our minds is the
keeping of our souls, Prove. 9.8.


For the fourth, there are diverse rules to be observed for the girding up of
our minds: we may gird up our minds diverse ways. 8 rules for girding up of the
(...).


1. By confessing and complaining of them (I mean of these secret impediments)
unto God; one way to restrain them is to confess them.

2. By inflaming the love of God in our minds. For if we could love God with
all our minds, we were safe from all impediments.

3. We must be sure we be renewed in our minds. For the old mind will never be
girded up; we must be renewed in the spirit of our minds, that is, in our
carnal reason: for that like an old belldam is the mother and nurse of all the
rest, Ephesians. 4.23.

4. We must speak often with our minds, as the Hebrew phrase is, that is, we
must observe, check, inform, consider, and direct our minds.

5. We must get the word of God written in our minds, and obey the motions of
the Spirit, that law of our minds.

6. We must converse much with the godly, and wise, that they may stir up our
minds, especially laboring to be of the same mind with them.

7. We must carefully put on that girdle of truth, mentioned Ephesians. 6. which is
inward sincerity, which is a care speedily to strive against those inward
corruptions daily, and with strength of resolution.

8. Lastly, in this text two things are exceedingly availeable: viz. 1.
sobriety in the use of earthly things: 2. and perfect assurance of Gods favor
and glory to come. It is want of settled assurance, and the love of earthly
things, that so much entangles men with the hurt of all sorts of impediments.

The fifth thing to be observed is, that he says, gird up, and not cast off,
importing, that in this life, even in the godly,

The Use is for great reproof of our incredible slacknesse herein the most Use.
of us, who know not of any lets in our mind; never observe ignorance, carnal
reason, security, love of earthly things, worldly sorrow, hypocrisy,
precipitation, discouragement, dullness, and evil thoughts. Those of us that
do discern them, how weak are our hearts? how do we trifle? we feel them
not to be a burden: we resist them not in the beginning. How justly might God
leave us to a very reprobate mind for our slacknesse herein even of knowledge?
How justly might we be left to our selves, and so be turned out of the way, and
there left either never to return, or not without unspeakable horror of
conscience.



Be sober.] There is a sixfold sobriety.

1. Sobriety in opinions, of which the Apostle says, be wise to sobriety, Romans
12.3. This has in it, A sixfold sobriety.
1. A fear to conceive of God or godliness, after any senseless or
unwarranted course. 2. A repressing of that itching desire after the knowledge
of Gods secrets, or hidden things, Deuteronomy. 29. ult. 3. Modesty in venting our
opinions, or delivering our judgment. 4. A suspending in doubtful things. 5.
A yielding upon employed dangers in things indifferent, as in reformation of
such abuses as we see good men condemn, though we have not express
Scripture: A singular waiwardnesse in many, they will not leave their faults
till direct Scripture be brought against it, as in vanity of apparel, etc.

2. Sobriety in prayer, 1 Pet. 4.7. and to be sober in prayer is, 1. to be
advised and deliberate; desirous to pray according to Gods will. 2. It is not
to be intemperate or peevish, as Jonah was. 3. It is to be stayed, and settled,
and stablished in persuasion, not wavering, and unconstant, or tossed with
doubts and causeless fears. 4. It is to pray with due respect of Gods
Majesty, without trifling or vain babbling: it is to let our words be few,
Eccles. 5.5. 5. It is to keep Gods counsel, not to be proud, or boast of
success, or speak of the secret sweetness of Gods love without calling: it is
to conceal the familiarity of God in secret.

3. Sobriety in the practice of godliness: in general this the Apostle calls
holiness with sobriety, 1 Timothy 3.15. which stands, 1. in lowliness of mind,
and sense of our own vileness: it is to be holy without vainglorious
boasting. 2. In keeping the bounds of the Word both for sins and duties: it is
to take heed of fancies, or vain stretching out of our practice to avoid such
things as any way the word condemns: so in duties. 3. In not meddling with the
business of others: it is not to be a busy body, to spend our selves in
prying, or censuring, or inquiring after others: It is a vile thing to s^ffer
as a busy body, 1 Pet. 4. 4. In avoiding rash zeal and indiscretion in the
circumstances of well-doing. The word is sometimes rendered discreet, as Tit.
2.5. and vigilant, ver. 2. 5. In not judging, Gal. 6.1, 2.

4. Sobriety in respect of the pleasures and delights of this life: and to be
sober in them is, Tit. 2.12. 1 These. 5.6,8. Rules about recreations.
1. To let the Word of God be our rule for the matter of them, not to delight in
unlawful pleasures, as chambering and wantonness, or unlawful sports and
games that are of ill fame. 2. To restrain our affections in the use of them:
to use them as though we used them not, not suffering our hearts to be stolen
away by them. 3. To restrain the excessive use of them, not to make a vocation
of them, a special sin in the Gen^ry of this land, and their followers. 4.
To be well advised for the circumstances, the place, time, company, and such
like; that we neither ensnare our selves, nor give occasion of offense. 5. To
restrain the passions that use to break out about them, that they be not
occasions of discord or contempt, as Envy, or any evil affection. 6. Not to
make merchandise of them, as to use their sports as means of gaining from
others. 7. To use our delights with consideration of our callings, as
Ministers, children, women, servants, etc. that which may be comely in others,
may not be so many times, and in many things, in these.

5. There is sobriety in apparel, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. Rules about apparel.
This sobriety has in it four things: 1. Comeliness, which takes order for
both extremes, that our apparel be neither rude to dishonor our body, nor
strange for the unwontednesse or unseemelinesse of it. 2. Shame fastness and
modesty, which takes order 1. that our apparel be not the apparel of another
sex, Deuteronomy. 22.5. 2. or of known dissolute persons: modest women may not go as
whores go. 3. that it tend no way to provoke inordinate desires in our selves
or others, as painting, perfuming, naked breasts, etc. The third thing is
frugality, which has respect, 1. to our degree, that we go not above it: 2.
to our ability in that degree, as if we be in debt, or of less means then
others of that degree. 3. to the rate of our expenses: for to spend as much as
the foremost in our rank is no sobriety, though we observe the two former rules.
It is sobriety not to be so costly or brave as others, as we by our degree
might be. The fourth thing is piety: a Christian should in his very apparel
proclaim his religion, not only by the moderation of it, but by a free
willingness to do good to any, and by professing to know a greater
comeliness, even the decking of the hid man of the heart, and the ornament of
good works.

For the clear understanding of this doctrine concerning apparel 4. rules are
to be observed.

1. That whereas the Word of God does not precisely tell what apparel we
should wear: the judgment and example of the wisest and godliest men in the
country where we live is to be followed.

2. That the sin reaches as well to men as to women. For whereas the
Scripture for the most part reproves or directs women for their apparel, it
was because men in those times did less exceed; but now that men are grown so
effeminate, the censure lights upon them as well as women.

3. That sin may be committed in the fashion, or putting on, as well as in
the matter or cost, 1 Pet. 3.3. Romans 12.2.

4. That the vanity of often changing into fashions is to be condemned also.

There are diverse reasons why we should make conscience even of our apparel.
Reasons against the vanity of apparel.


1. Here it is a part of our sobriety. 2. Nothing is required of us more then
what is required of all that fear God, and is observed by many that might
stand upon it as well as we. 3. We are forbidden to fashion our selves
according to this world, Romans 12.2. 4. Vanity here is an occasion of contempt:
it does not make us the better thought on, but the worse: how shall I believe
that he has not vanity in his heart, that is clothed with it on his back? 5.
God will scourge us even for our clothes, Zeph. 1. Esaias 3. 6. Our apparel is
the fruit of our sin; and shall the thief be proud of his halter? 7. Vain
apparel begets in us pride, vain thoughts, lust, and many inconveniences,
especially if we persist in it against our conscience. 8. Sobriety in apparel
is a singular praise, an alluring virtue.
The sixth thing is sobriety in meats and drinks, and so restrains both
gluttony and drunkenness, but especially the later, Luke 21.24. Romans 13.13.

Reasons against drunkenness.
There are many reasons against drunkenness.

1. From the nature of it: It is a paganish sin, a lust of the Gentiles, 1 Pet.
4.3. yea it is a brutish sin, it transformes a man into a beast: a work of the
flesh, yea one of the worst, and therefore set in the last place, Gal. 5.21. a
work of darkness, yea it is dishonesty, Romans 13.13.

2. From the time, 1. Of committing it, they were wont to be drunk in the
night, 1 These. 5.7. as they commit whoredom, so were they ashamed of it. 2. Of
forsaking it: the night is past, the day is at hand, Romans 13.11, 12.

3. From the effects of it.

1. Internal. 1. It takes away the heart of a man: first from himself; it
swallows him up, Esaias 28.7.2. from Gods service, Hos. 4.11. 3. from the
consideration of Gods judgments, 1. present, Esaias 5.11. and 56.12. 2. the last
judgment, and his own end, Luke 21.34. 4. from the care of his own
happiness, Amos 5.6.1.4. 2. It breeds rage, Prove. 20.1. 3. It breeds lust and
filthy destres, Prove. 23.29. 4. It wonderfully besots a man, Prove. 20.1. and
23. ult.
2. External. 1. It draws a man out of the way of salvation, Esaias 28.7. 2. It
breeds vomiting and vile uncleanness of that kind, Esaias 28.8. 3. It breeds
mocking and contempt, Prove. 20.1, Psalm. 69.13. 4. It breeds a casting out from
the society of the godly, 1 Cor. 5.11. 5. It breeds poverty and famine, Prove.
21.17. Joel 1.5. 6. It breeds abundance of sorrow, Prove. 23.29. 7. It breeds
contention, Prove. 23.29. 8. It breeds unutterable danger, Prove. 25.32, 34. 9.
It breeds the wrath and curse of God in general, Esaias 5.11. 10. It breeds
damnation both of body and soul, 1 Cor. 6.10.

Ob. But I am not drunk, I can carry it and go away.

Sol. Woe to them that are strong to drink wine, etc. Esaias 5.22.

Ob. But I do not drink so excessively, I only sit in the alehouse, and now
and then drink but a little.

Sol. Drinkings is one of the lusts of the Gentiles as well as drunkenness,
and to sit at it is accursed, Esaias 5.11.

Ob. But I never drink my self, but give my friends the drink.

Sol. Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, Hab. 2.15.

Ob. But I never made any man drunk, nor do I drink much.

Sol. He is accursed, that eats and drinks with the drunken, that
companieth with them, Mat. 24.49.

Use.
Use 1. For drunkards to beware and take heed, and if it be possible to get out
of the snare of the devil; especially let those monsters be warned, 1. that
are usually drunk: 2. that take a pride in drinking, Esaias 28.1. Secondly, for
masters of families to restrain these abuses, and to this end, 1. to restrain
the liberties of their buttery and cellers: 2. to restrain their v^ry going to
drinking houses, or else to cast them out of their houses, Psalm. 101. Thirdly,
for Churchwardens and Justices of Peace to see the reformation of this, to
search and inquire from day to day, and especially to look to the houses that
entertain such, else they are guilty of all the drunkenness, and filthiness
is committed without punishment. Lastly, if the Lord have kept, any of us from
this vice, be thankful, and show our subjection also in the former rules.

Trust perfectly on the grace which is to be brought unto you in the revelation
of Jesus Christ.

The third thing he exhorts unto is hope, and trust in God, which is amplified
by the manner and measure, trust perfectly: and secondly, by the object, viz.
the grace which is to be brought at the revelation of Christ: which is
forgiveness of all sins, and eternal salvation of our souls, which is
called the hope of eternall^life, Tit. 1.2.

Hope it self is one of the three principal graces: Faith, Hope, and Charity
comprehends the substance of all holiness; but of hope in it self, I have
considered of it in the notes upon the third verse: it is the manner, and the
object is here to be considered. But first I note briefly some things from the
coherence, in that he first requires girding up of the mind, and sobriety of
life, and then adds the perfection of our hope in God for salvation; we may
observe,

First, that a sober and temperate life is not enough to salvation; one may be
free from drunkenness, and excess in gaming, and voluptuousness, and yet be
in a miserable case: we must get faith and hope also; as he said of peace
Heb. 12.14. so may I say of sobriety.

Secondly, that unless we order our minds, and moderate our lives, we cannot
ever attain to establishment of our hope of a better life.

Thirdly, yea he teaches us herein not to rest in the present gain of
godliness, as to look upon the present grace, but still to hasten to the
grace that is yet to be revealed. True grace should not so satisfy us, as to
make us neglect the expectation and desire of heaven.

Thus much for the coherence.

But yet the maine doctrine that the Apostle persuades unto, is, that we
should seriously labor to perfect our trust and hope of a better life; that we
should not be quiet, till we had established our hearts in the assurance of it.
Being converted, God would have us set our selves, as it were, wholly after
heaven. For the explanation of this doctrine, I consider, 1. What it is to
trust perfectly on the grace of God. 2. Why we should be so constant and
confident in it. 3. How we should show it, that we do trust perfectly. 4. What
we may do to attain this assurance, etc.


For the first: To trust perfectly, is

1. To hope and trust upon it sincerely, and that has two things in it: Five
things in a perfect trust.
For turn the grace of God unto wantonness, or to make the doctrine of our
salvation by Christ a doctrine of liberty for the flesh.

2. To trust perfectly upon salvation is to get a full assurance of hope: it is
to trust without wavering or doubtfulnesse.

3. It is to hope continually, to hope to the end, as some read it here It is
to hope in all estates, whatsoever befalls us either internally or externally.

4. It is to trust wholly upon it, even to trust upon nothing else: it is to
withdraw our hearts from confidence in any earthly thing whatsoever, so to
esteem it, as to care for nothing else.

5. It is to trust servently; not coldly, or dully, but with a lively hope, and
inflamed affections.

Reasons to trust perfectly on the grace is to be ^^vealed.
so constant in our hope of eternal life. Some few I will touch.

1. Because God requires it, as may appear by these places, Heb. 6.11, 18. and
10.23. Col. 1.23. and 2.2. Romans 15.13. Heb. 3.6. Psalm. 71.14.

2. Because we are saved by hope, Romans 8.24.

3. Because the ministration of the Gospel is so glorious: therefore it is a
shame to be ignorant of what is so fully and clearly revealed by the
commandment of God, 2 Cor. 3.10, 12.

4. Because Christ is our hope of glory: It is a dishonor to his merits to
doubt of it, Col. 1.27.

5. Because our perfect happiness consists only in that grace of God: we
shall never be perfectly well till we get into heaven.

6. Because our trust will be tried and opposed by tentations and afflictions:
it is good to get on our helmet, for we shall be sure to fight, and the combat
will be sore: a little hope will not serve turn, 1 These. 5.8.

7. Because else we dishonor the promise and oath of God, Heb. 6.18.

(...) hope.


1. If we can rejoice in it even in tribulation, being not ashamed of our
estate whatsoever befall us, Romans 5.3, 5. and 12.12. 1 These. 1.5. using it as
an ancre, Heb. 6.18. 1 Timothy 4.10.

2. If we can u^e with all humility, and honor all the heirs of the same
hope with us: If we can love the poor servants of God, and be affected to
them, as if they were already in heaven; this would be an excellent sign, that
we trust in this grace to come, Ephesians. 4.4. Heb. 6.10, 11.

3. If we mourn not immoderately for the dead, 1 These. 4.13.

4. If we can constantly acknowledge the truth that is according to godliness,
whatsoever the world think or do, Tit. 1.1, 2.

5. If we daily look for, and haste to that blessed appearing of Jesus Christ,
Tit. 2.13.

6. If we can keep our confidence though God himself seem to oppose us, as
Job said, If he kill me, yet I will trust in him, Job 13.15.

7. If we can withdraw our hearts from the care and love of this world, out of
estimation of that glory to come, Heb. 11.15, 16.

8. If we can get the mastery of the fear of death, so as to rejoice in the
very condition of our flesh, resolving that our flesh shall rest in hope, Psalm.
16.9.

9. If our conversation be in heaven, and our hearts run daily upon it, Phil.
3.21.

4 (...).
For the fourth* that we may attain this steadfastness and full assurance of
hope, five things are to be done:

1. We must acquaint our selves much with the comfortable promises of the
Scripture concerning eternal life in Christ, Romans 15.4.

2. We must try our selves, whether we have true grace or no, 1 These. 2.16.

3. We must pray unto the God of hope to give us his Spirit of revelation, that
we may know the hope of our calling, and accordingly may find all peace and joy
in believing it, Ephesians. 1.18. Romans 15.13.

4. We should labor to be established in all well-doing, even in every good
work and word, 2 These. 2. ult. denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
living soberly, and righteously, and religiously in this present world, or else
we can never attain this blessed hope, Tit. 2.12, 13.

5. We must hold fast our hope when we have it, and not cast it away upon any
occasion, Heb. 6.18. Heb. 3.

The Use may be,

First, for confutation of popish doctrine about the hope of salvation, Use.
and that in two points. First, that they make hope to differ from faith in
infallibility, as if faith were certain, but hope conjecturall: whereas we see
perfection, and full assurance, and not wavering, is given to hope as well as
by faith; and so it shows the tenure by hope, is as certain and infallible as
by faith. Secondly, in that they deny that men can be certain infallibly of
their salvation, their hope can be but probable; we see we are charged to mend
that fault in our hope, and to perfect it, (...).
and get even a plerophorie of hope to the end, Heb. 6.11.

Secondly, it may serve for humiliation to four sorts of men amongst us.

1. The first is hypocrites, who bear but the show of hope, or have but the
bare words of hope: what will become of them, when God shall take away their
souls, Job 27.8. their hope will be as the house of a spider, Job 8.13. and as
the giving up of the ghost, Job 11.2.

2. The second is open profane persons, that never made any show or conscience
of repentance. These are without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. so far are they from a
perfect hope, they are sure to lose heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. Deuteronomy. 29.19 etc.

3. Of weak and wayward Christians. This doctrine should found in their ears
as a great reproof, Why do ye doubt, oh ye of little hope? does God require a
perfect hope, and are ye still after so many days so much unsettled,
unperfected? We should account it a great shame to have but a little hope,
especially after so long profession, and so much means, and so many pledges of
Gods love.

4. Of backsliding Christians that fall away; or to ^se the phrase of the
Apostle, are moved away from the hope of heaven, either internally by an
habitual forgetfulness of it, or externally by revolt or apostasy to the
love of the world: These are so far from perfecting their assurance, that they
fall away from it.

Thirdly, Heb. 6.11. not suffering slothfulness to hinder from the seri^us
performance of our duties herein, ver. 12.

Lastly, here is great encouragement to all such of Gods servants, Lord will
never fa^le them that trust in him and whatsoever become of the hypocrite, yet
will he never cast away the perfect man, Job 8.13, 20. If God require so great
trust, it imports there is a sure preparation of a glorious estate. Oh says
the Psalmist, how great is his goodness that he has laid up for them that
trust in him, Psalm. 31.19. Thus of the m^nner of our hope, Trust perfectly. Now
follows the object of it, viz. The grace which is to be brought unto us in
the revelation of Jesus Christ: and here first of the object it self, and then
of the time of the communication of it.

The grace which is to be brought unto you.

Grace sometimes signifies the Gospel, What grace signifies in the several
(...) of it.
Tit. 2.11. sometimes the favor of God in Christ, so in the salutations of the
Epistle: sometimes an external calling or function so Paul calls his
Apostleship a grace, Romans 1.16. sometimes the gifts of the holy Ghost, so
usually: lastly, sometimes the glory of heaven, so here.

It is true, that some read it, the grace that is brought in the revelation of
Jesus Christ: and so it means that true grace which in this world the Elect
do receive, when Christ is revealed to them in their conversion to God by the
mighty power of the Gospel: and so four things might be observed:

1. That God reveals his Son in all that shall be saved at some time of
their life or other.

2. That Christ is never revealed in us till the time the grace of the
sanctifying Spirit be wrought in us, and the riches of Gods graces in his
promises be declared to us. For there is a double grace in the revelation of
Christ. 1 The declaration of Gods grace in his promises. 2. The possession of
the graces of his holy Spirit.

3. That were not, this grace is brought unto us, offered and urged upon us, we
would live and die without it.

4. That when we know our interest in Gods favor, and that we have received
the true grace of Christ, we should trust perfectly in it, and that i^ all the
four senses before opened.

But I take it in the sense as it is rendered by the Kings Translators, and so
understand it of the glory of heaven, which is to be considered both in the
nature of it, it is called grace; and the time of manifestati^n, not on^^y in
general, that is to be brought unto us: but in special, at the revelation of
Jesus Christ.

The glory of h^av^n c^ll^d g^a^e in three respects.
Grace.] The glory of heaven is called grace in three respects. 1. Because it
is given freely without our deserts, as the Scriptures prove, Ephesians. 2.5.8. Tit.
2.11. Romans 4.16. and 5.21. 2. Because it is assured unto us by grace: as the
body of Christ is called bread, because it is signified by it; so our hope and
everlasting consolation is assured by grace, 2 These. 2.16. 3. Because grace and
holiness is the greatest part of the kingdom of heaven. For righteousness is
the maine thing wherein the kingdom of God consists: as the image of God in
the creation was Adams greatest happiness, not Paradise only, see Psalm. 17.
ult. Romans 14.17.1 P^t. 3.7. and 5.10.

Uses.
The Uses are,

1. We should therefore disclaim al^ conceit of our own me^its, and use our
hearts to it affectionately, to profess that we are all that we are only by
the grace of God, 1 Cor. 15.10.

2. It should inflame our thankfulness: we should never be without this
sacrifice, considering we have so great inheritance by the mere grace of God
in Christ. It is worth the noting, that the same word for thankfuln^sse does
signify grace in the original.

3. We should have our conversation according to the grace of God, 2 Cor. 1.
12. seei^g grace is that which will live by us for ever, we should be taken up
with a perpetual care of getting and increasing of it.

4. Seeing God does all for us freely, w^ should be importunate in prayer that
he would make us worthy of the (...) him to fulfill all the goo^ pleasure of
his own goodness, especially the work^ of our faith with power, that h^^ name
and grace may be glorified in u^, 2 The^. ^.11, 12.

7* Things (...) should (...) Gods (...).
5. We should learn to show mercy as God does.

1. Though they deserve it not. 2. In great abun^ance. 3. In matters of
holiness as much as any other way, it being the best means to show mercy to
the souls of men. 4. To bring it to them, not tarry till it be sought of us.
5. In the most seasonable time: God does not give heaven, or his blessi^gs all
at once, as men do their works of mercy all at one time of the year. 6. With
constancy: God will never leave till they be in heaven. 7. With faith and
faithfulness: so as promised mercy may be trusted on without fail; God never
disappoints after he has promised, we may trust perfectly on it.
Which is to be broug^t unto you.

From the manner of the propounding of the words diverse things may be noted.

1. That the Christians happiness in hope is better than the carnal man's
felicity present: They must trust upon the grace to be brought; yea so a^ they
trust not in any thing el^e. For they are sure to have their happiness, and to
enjoy it when they have it: so are not carnal men of any thing they hold, as
we may see by experience. Is it not better for a poor man to have the hope of
heaven when h^ dies, then to be as some great men have been, which are now
confounded and mined?

2. God has thought it meet to defer the glory of heaven: it is to be
brought, it is not brought already.

If any a^ke, why God does not give heaven, Quest.
as soon as he gives grace and favor,

I answer: Answ.

Why God gives not h^ave^ as soon as he gives grace and favor.


1. That God thereby does give way unto the kingdom of Christ, for the exercise
of it on earth in gathering the Elect, and subduing his enemies, which when it
is done he will deliver the Kingdom into his Fathers hands, and th^n God shall
be all in all. 2. It is deferred, that so God might make evident proof of the
faith and patience of his servants, and to show that they stand by a better
grace then they had in their creation. But what should I wade into this point?
It is enough for us, that it is the pleasure of Gods will it should be so, and
it is equal we should do our work before we receive our wages.

3. It shows, that the Maker and Builder of that happiness is God, and that
our glory is made ready to our hands.

4. It imports, that as in the state of nature we cared not for grace; so in
the state of grace we are not so careful as we should be of going to heaven:
when we are justified, and sanctified, we forget heaven: it must be brought
unto us, we will scarce go seek it.

5. It shows, ^u^ security and forgetfulness shall not make the faith of God
of none ^ffect: it shall c^rtainly be brought unto us.

6. Lastly, we may here gather one way of comforting our selves against the
infirmitie^ that accompany our natures; that when we feel our weaknesses, yet
we should be comforted in the hope of the strength we shall have. Art thou
humbled for thy ignorance? why rejoice in the knowledge thou shall have. And so
I say of the untowardnesse of thy nature to good: think of the time when
Christ shall be perfectly formed in thee: think of the grace shall be brought
unto thee, if thou be discouraged, and never of (...).

^t the revelation of Jesus Christ.

That i^ at the day of judgment. Doct.

Why ^h^ day of judgment is called the revelation of Jesus Christ.


The day of judgment shall be a time of wonderful revelation. For then,

1. (...) glory of his person which he has received of the Father in heaven
shall ^e r^vealed.

2. The terror of Christ as a Judge shall then be fully expressed. The world
little know^ the terror of that day. He came not at the first coming to judg^
the world that is yet to be revealed.

3. The g^^ry of the body of Christ (the Church) shall then be revealed, when
we shall ^ee all the societies of all ages together in one army. 2. All the
good they have all done shall be fully opened. 3. All the glory of heaven shall
then ^e e^^ated upon them.

4. The everlasti^g counsels of God shall then be broken open, and explained to
the eternal clearing of Gods justice, and the exalting of the praise of his
mercy.

Use.
The Use may be,

1. For information: we may see one reason why Christ's Kingdom and the
righteousness thereof is so securely contemned of the world: It is because a
veil is as it were drawn over Christ that they cannot behold him: and so we
may see one reason why we are not more inflamed to the personal love of
Christ: it does not yet appear what we shall be by his merits, nor have we seen
the exceeding glory of the only begotten Son of God.

2. For instruction: we should long after that day: if Christ be so good unto
us now, oh what will he be at that day? If in this life holy men could say of
him, as Paul did Phil. 3.9. what shall we say or think of him, but as worth ten
thousand worlds in comparison? In the mean while, let us be content that our
life be bid with Christ in God, knowing that when he shall appear, we shall
also appear with him in glory.

Verse 14. etc. As obedient children not fashioning your selves unto the former
lusts of your ignorance.


HItherto of the three things to which the Apostle exhorts. The reasons follow,
whereof the first is contained in these verses, and it is taken from the image
of God, in which Gods children ought to resemble him: they should strive
against all inward evils, and refrain all the excesses of life, and address
themselves with all care and confidence to the provision of a better life,
because they are begotten again unto God, and it is required of them that they
should be holy as he is holy.

This reason is both propounded and expounded: propounded in these words, as
obedient children: It is expounded two ways, 1. By description, 2. By proof
or testimony. It is described negatively and affirmatively: by negation he
shows what we should shun, viz. fashioning your selves according to the lusts
of your former ignorance: Affirmatively he sets it out by showing, 1. the
pattern to be imitated: 2. and the manner of our imitation. The pattern is
the holiness of him that called us: The manner is to be holy in all manner of
conversation. Thus of the description. For the proof 2. things are to be
considered. 1. Whence the proof is fetched, ^n these word, As it is written.
2. What is alleged in these words, Be ye holy as I am holy.

As obedient children.

These two words import a twofold consideration: 1. they are the children of
God: 2. you must obey as children.

The first point gives an occasion to consider of three things.

1. That God has children, not only Christ his natural Son, and the Angels
his sons by creation, but the Saints also by adoption and regeneration.

2. That it behooves Christians to seek and know their adoption to be the sons
of God. It is wonderful to think of the almost infinite carelessness of men,
that can hear of so great felicity, as the adoption of sinful men to be the
sons of God, and yet there is no heart in man to seek after it.

3. In that the Apostle applies the consideration hereof to persuade to
holiness of life, it shows, that the assurance of Gods favor as our Father,
does kindle obedience, and make us more fit for all well-doing, as these places
prove. 1 These. 1.5, 6, 7. 2 Pet. 1.8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 2.12, 14. 2 Timothy 1.12. Heb.
10.22. Use.
The Use is, First for confutation of their fancies, that think assurance
would breed security, and that it is better to be a little doubtful then fully
resolved: whereas both Scripture and experience is against it; yea there is a
secret corruption in the hearts of the very godly herein, nourished perhaps by
the devil. But let us be fully persuaded to pray with all importunity, that
God would give us this knowledge.

But I have felt more hardness of heart, Object.
and corruption of nature since assurance, then I had before.

First, examine thy heart, whether thou call not peace of conscience by the
name of hardness of heart. Solut. Of those that think they feel more hardness
of heart after assurance then before.


2. Know, that hardness of heart, and unfitness to holy duties is in us by
nature, and is not taken away by assurance; neither is thy case the worse, that
thou feel it more now then before. For that may import more softness of
heart.

3. Consider, that God may withhold his comforts, and lead thee to some
tentations to try thee, whether thou will believe without feelings: It is not
strange for Gods servants after their greatest comforts to be assailed with
greatest trials. For so after forgiveness of sins, we are taught to look
for tentations, and pray against them in the Lords prayer: as Christ was
tempted presently after his confirmation in Baptism: Paul soiled with vile
tentations after his revelations: David afflicted worse then before after his
anointing.

4. It will be profitable to set thy heart in some order, and by examination
and particular judging of thy self, resisting evil, to reduce thy self into
a better frame, and order of well-doing.

Thus of the first point.

For the second: we may here observe, that the image of God in us consists in
obeying God with the obedience of children, where two things may be noted.

1. The imperfection of our obedience, it is but as the conformity that is in
children to the holiness either inherent, Our obedience must be ^he obedience
of children in six respects.
or prescribed by the Parent. 2. The manner of the truth of our obedience, and
so there are six things imported in that similitude, which must be in our
obedience. 1. It must proceed from love to God and goodness, not for servile
ends. 2. It must be without distrustful care about success in outward things,
or a present reward of well-doing: so is it in a child. 3. With constancy: a
child is not hired for a day, or a year, to give over upon a quarters warning.
4. With humility and fear. 5. With faith or some persuasion of acceptance. 6.
In all things: so do Children.

Not fashioning your selves according to the lusts of your former ignorance.

One great part of our holiness, and Gods image in us, is to keep our selves
free from the lusts of our former ignorance, that is, from the power of such
sins as we were specially guilty of before our callings, or are specially
hateful in unregenerate men.

Before I enter upon the particular opening of the words, in general these
things may be observed.

1. That it is a singular dishonor to our holy profession, for such as
profess sincerity in their carriage, to relapse into the similitude of carnal
men, and to bear again the image of the old Adam, or to fall to the sins
again, they have repented of in profession.

2. That after calling we must not only avoid the foul acts of evil, but
strive against the power of lusts of evil, even against the power of internal
concupiscence.

In particular I consider in these words three things.

1. The evils to be eschewed: viz. lusts, and former lusts. 2. The manner of
eschewing: not fashion your selves. 3. The motive: they were the fruits of
former ignorance.
For the first I propound three things to be also considered.

1. What those lusts are of our former lives, which are so hateful after
calling, and do so oppose the image of God in us. 2. What reasons there are to
move us so carefully to preserve our selves against them. 3. What means we
should use to be kept from them.
For the first. By lusts here the Apostle

1. May mean those gross sins, which before calling, while they were
wicked, some of them lived in, such as were whoredom, drunkenness,
covetousness, railings, etc. For these and such as these in the fourth Chapter
he calls lusts of the Gentiles, and such were some of them, 1 Cor. 6.9. Lust
signifies sometimes all sorts of sins, Ephesians. 4.22. Tit. 2.12. It is true, it
is a most lamentable grief to see Gods children fall into gross and soul
evils, and to run with the times in the same excess of riot and disorder; I
say it is lamentable both in respect of the scandal of it, and in respect of
the wound it makes in the conscience, and in respect of the fierce judgment of
God, wherewith he does pursue it: but I think this is not here meant, or not
chiefly. For this is not enough to show that we bear the image of Christ after
calling, that we are free from outward gross sins, but he goes further, and
therefore

2. He does mean those inward evil desires which deforme and disfigure a
Christian, especially when they show themselves outwardly by any signs or
fruits of them: Thus are they called affections, Gal. 5.24. and thus there are
diverse sorts of Lusts especially hateful after calling.

Sorts of lust hateful after calling.
1. The love of worldliness, and the love of earthly things: the relapsing to
the desire after earthly things, when it is immoderate. It is a most lamentable
thing to see a Christian that professes the assurance of a better life, lie
digging like a mole in the earth, etc. Ephesians. ^.3, 4. Ier 46. 2. The lusts of
envy, strife, and malice, 1 Cor. 3.3. Romans 13.13. 3. The lusts of vainglory
and conceitednesse, Gal. 5.24, 25, 26. 4. The lusts of uncleanness and
impurity, Romans 13.13. Col. 3.5. 5. The lust of Epicurisme, viz. the desire to
fare deliciously, and to wear dainty apparel. This was Dives his lust, Luke
16. 6. The lust of the eye, 1 Ioh. 2.16.
It is wonderful unseemely to behold any of these in Christians.

The reasons why we should be so careful to avoid these lusts, are Eight
reasons why w^ should avoid lust after (...).
1. It is the special will of God, and a special part of our sanctification, 1
These. 4.3, 4. 2. These defile the soul, and make it ill-favored like a
leprosy, Matthew. 15.19, 20. 3. These are works of the flesh, Gal. 5. and fruits
of corruption in nature, called lust o^ concupiscence: the unclean issue they
are, of our corrupt and putrified natures: the devil is the father of them,
and the flesh is the mother: it is to bear the image of Satan, Ioh. 8.44. 4.
These fight against the soul as well as gross evils, 1 Pet. 2.12. 5. The
Apostle disgraceth them by saying they are foolish and noisome: and so they are
in their nature and effect, 1 Timothy 6.9. 6. These hinder the efficacy of Gods
ordinances; as the word, 2 Timothy 3. 6. Mar. 4.19. prayer, Iam. 4.1, 3, 4. 7.
These lusts will quickly intise, and be intised, and quicken, yea and bring
forth too, if they be not watchfully suppressed, Iam. 1.15, 16. As in this late
instance; Lust begat chambering: Chambering begat sorcerie: Note.
Sorcerie begat whoredom: Whoredom begat desire of divorce: Desire of divorce
begat murder: Murder begat the unknown villainies. 8. Here lies the proof of
our sincerity in Christ, 4.21, 22.


Now there are four Preservatives to keep us from the power of these lusts.
Four preservatives against lust.


1. The sound knowledge of Gods Word. For as it is Ignorance that first bred
them, so is it knowledge that both drives them out, and keeps them out, Prove.
2.1, 3, 4. etc. Psalm. 119.9. especially the promises, 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 1.3.

2. Meditation of our short continuance in this world, 1 Pet. 2.12. 1 Ioh. 2.17.

3. To walk before God, and to keep our selves in the way of the righteous,
conversing with the wise and mortified, shunning the company of the wicked and
dissolute.

4. By confession and godly sorrow to beat down, and crucify our flesh, and
the lusts thereof, when they begin to rise.

Thus of the matter to be avoided, viz. The lusts of their former ignorance.
The manner follows, viz. not to be fashioned unto them; which imports,
Fashioning of our selves to sin has 7. things in it.
that they should not give themselves over out of the liking of sin to the
service and obedience of it. For to fashion our selves to evil has in it
diverse things.

1. The imagining of mischief: praeconsideration, deliberation: the frame of
evil. 2. An admiration of the beauty of sin, a liking of it, a secret inward
high estimation of it, a kind of adoring of the felicity contained in it, a
contemplative delight in it. 3. A taking care to perform it, and accomplish
it. 4. A framing and ordering of our affairs, that they may be obeyed, and the
inward frame effected. 5. A constancy in all this to be every day striving
about it. 6. A pursuing of sin, though we be disappointed or cloyed in the
enjoying of it. 7. A laying down of all our armor, and not resisting it.
The Use of this is: Use.


1. For information: we may here note implyedly, that Gods servants have their
frailties after calling, in that he does only exhort from fashioning our selves
to sin.

2. For trial: Art thou grieved for thy daily sins and wants, How to know
whether one sin presumptuousty or no.
and do thou foare thou do sin presumptuously? here thou may try thy
self by 1. inquiring, whether thou fall to thy old sins or no. 2. whether
thou sin with study and deliberation. 3. whether thou admire sin, and
accordingly favor it, and delight in it. 4. whether thou take care for it,
being vexed if thou be crossed in it, and casting about for all ways to
accomplish it. 5. whether thou yield thy self to it, as a servant to obey it,
or rather as a child of disobedience to be framed according to it. 6. whether
thou refuse to bear arms against it. 7. and lastly, continue in the love of
it, though thou be disappointed. For if thou bear arms against it, and art
thankful when thou art disappointed, and do not by covenants yield thy self
to it, nor place thy happiness in it, or not sin by deliberation; it is
certain thy sins are but of infirmity. But contrariwise, if these things be
in thee before condemned, thou sinnest presumptuously. Here also men may try,
whether they decline or no after calling.

3. We should be here informed to take heed of any of these degrees of sin, and
by a daily watch to look to our selves, that we be not overcome of the
deceitfulness of sin, and be thankful to God, if thy sins get not this head
in thee; or if they have, dally no longer, but repent: For certainly thou art
fallen away, inquire no further into it, but repent and amend.

4. Lastly, here is employed, wherein the holiness of a Christian does consist,
viz. 1. To be free from the power of his old corruptions. 2. To fashion
himself to the law of God, and the law of his mind: It does not consist in
the perfect resembling of the holiness of Gods law, but in a desire and daily
endeavor to fit and frame himself more and more to the holiness set before
him, and that daily striving still to come nearer and nearer to the pattern.

Ignorance.]

There are three sorts of ignorance. 1. There is a profitable ignorance. 2.
There is an ignorance of mere negation, that is no sin. 3. There is a
ignorance of corrupt disposition. There is a profitable ignorance, viz. not to
know evil: so it had been good for Adam never to have known evil by
experience: so had it been good for the Jews, if they had never known the
fashions of the Gentiles: and in some respect for Apostates, if they had never
known the truth, 2 Pet. 2.21. There is also an ignorance of mere negation, as
Christ knew not the day of Judgment, and husbandmen know not Physic, or
Astronomy, etc. and yet sin not. But most usually ignorance is taken in the
third sense, to note, that want of knowledge is joined with evil disposition
also: and so it is taken here. Now this ignorance is either of frailty, or of
wilfulness and presumption: The one is in the godly after calling, and they
pray against it, and confess it, and mourn for it; and the other is in wicked
men, and they like themselves well enough notwithstanding; yea they refuse the
knowledge of Gods ways, and willingly live without knowledge; and this latter
is here meant.

Quest.
But why is ignorance named as the special sin to set out their unregenerate
estate, seeing they were guilty of many other sins?

Answ.

Why ignorance of all the sins of unregenerate men is rather named.


Not because men sin only by ignorance, as the Platonists think; but 1. It
may be the holy Ghost does of purpose do it to aggravate the hatefulness of
the sin, because men use to excuse it, and make light of it. 2. Because it is
a sin none are free from: If he had named whoredom, or drunkenness, etc.
many unregenerate men would have pleaded not-guilty. 3. This sin serves more
to taunt and reproach the rebellious nature of man: It was the knowledge of good
and evil that Adam so much aspired unto, and lo now he and all his were set
in gross ignorance, as the just fruit of aspiring after forbidden knowledge.
4. Because ignorance is the mother and nurse of all sorts of sins, as these
places show, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. 2 Pet. 2.12. Psalm. 36.2, 3, 4.

Quest.
But have unregenerate men no knowledge, that he thus directly charge the
unregenerate estate of the very Elect with ignorance?

Answ.
Yes, they have some knowledge: For they are wise to do evil, and they may
have great knowledge and learning in Arts and Sciences; and they may have
excellent civil knowledge to manage civil affairs, and may abound in skill
to get money and advance their estates: and they have in matters of religion
the light of nature, and the general grounds of knowledge of the principles in
Scripture: yea they may raste of the good word of God, and the powers of the
life to come: But yet they are justly taxed with ignorance, because they know
no^ God as a Father by the light of faith, nor whom he has sent Christ Jesus:
and besides, they have no desire nor delight to know their own iniquities, or
the way how to reform their own lives; they have no knowledge to do good.

These things being thus resolved, there are diverse observations to be noted
from hence.

1. That a true Convert must make conscience of inward sins, as well as
outward: of defects as well as evil desires or lusts: as here of ignorance, as
well as of wicked thoughts. The same God that says, How long shall thy evil
thoughts abide in thee? complains also of ignorance, as Esaias 1.3.

2. That ignorance is no small sin: it is exceeding hateful to God: contrary
to the doctrine of the Papists, that say, it is the mother of devotion.

3. That without reformation of ignorance, we cannot be truly turned to God;
without knowledge the mind is not good: therefore to tear the veil is one
part of Gods work in our conversion, Prove. 19.3. Esaias 25.8.

4. That ignorance is wanton, and full of lust, Ephesians. 4.18.

5. That the way to be rid of lusts is to be rid of ignorance. For saving
knowledge keeps us from sin, Iam. 3.17. A godly man sins not, because his
seed abides in him; knowledge is the sword of the Spirit, and here we may see
the principal use we should put our knowledge to, viz. to cleanse our hearts
of base thoughts and desires.

6. That we may live in places of great means for knowledge, and yet be
grossly ignorant. For he writes here to the Jews, who had the law, and the
Prophets, and the Oracles of God, and the Priests, etc.

7. That all knowledge or learning without the knowledge of Gods favor in
Christ, and the way how to reform our own lives, is but gross darkness, and
foolish ignorance, as was before explained.

8. That habitual lusts are a sure sign of ignorance, whatsoever knowledge men
pretend.

Lastly, it may be profitably here asked, Seeing there is ignorance even in the
children of God after calling, Quest.
what are the signs of unregenerate ignorance?

Unregenerate ignorance may be discerned by diverse signs. Answ.

(...)




1. It hardens the heart, and works a continued evil disposition to sin with
greediness, Ephesians. 4.11, 18. Now the ignorance in the godly may be where the
heart is softened, and the overflowings of corruption stopped.

2. It hood winketh the soul in the maine things needful to salvation: as the
knowledge of a man's own iniquities, God in Christ, the forgiveness of a man's
own sins, and generally all the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. For either wicked
men perceive them not, or not spiritually, out of desire and care for them,
without corrupt ends. A wicked man may discern spiritual things carnally, but
not spiritually.

3. It has never been in the furnace, I mean of mortification; it has never
been truly repented of: whereas the ignorance of the godly has often been in
the fire: it has been often confessed, rended, mourned for, etc.

4. It will suffer no saving grace to neighbor by it; where ignorance has not
been repented of, there no fear of God, no holy contemplation, no
uprightness, love of God, or his word, or his people, will dwell. Now the
ignorance that is in Gods children, is well neighboured with many holy graces
that can dwell by it.

And as these ignorances differ in nature and working, so they differ in
imputation: For unto the godly there is a sacrifice for ignorance: God does not
impute ignorance unto the godly: it shall be to them according to what they
know, and not according to what they know not.

And thus of ignorance, and so of the 14. verse.
Verse 15. But as he which called you is holy, so be you holy in all manner of
conversation.


HItherto of the first branch of the description of Gods image in us, as his
children: viz. our conformity to God in holiness, and so the image of God in
us is our endeavor to be like God in all things in holiness.

There are three great considerations in this verse, 1. whom we must imitate,
viz. him that has called us. 2. In what we must imitate him, viz. in
holiness, 3. how, viz in all manner of conversation.

Ingenerall and from the coherence we must note,

Of the (...) of Gods (...).
1. That it is not enough that we approve our selves to be Gods children, that
we avoid sin, but we must also be employed in doing good. Hence we are compared
to trees, in which barrenness is as great a fault, as ill fruit.

2. That the pattern of all holiness is God himself, or Christ, or rather
God in Christ. For whither else should we go for example? If to the dumb
creatures, they have not natures capable of holiness. If to Angels, they are
invisible, and so we cannot behold them, and in Scripture little is recorded of
them; and besides, we know many of them fell away. If to man, they are all
fallen in Adam, and there is none that does good, and good men have their both
errors and sins. Therefore we may say, whom have we in heaven but God, Use.
and there is none in earth with him. Use. Therefore we should labor, 1. To
know God. 2. To observe the specialty of his prais^s, that are imitable both in
his word and works. 3. We must carry our selves with that humility and piety,
that we may walk with God, else we cannot set him a^ a pattern before us.

3. That there are two pictur^s as it were presented to the soul, and for both
there is great pleading for entertainment and liking: The one is the picture of
sin, even of sins repented of, which are n^w varnished, and with many
plausible motives commended by b^th the world and the devil, not without the
good liking of the flesh. The other is the picture as it were of the most holy
God, pourtraied out in the Gospel, especially in the glory o^ hi^ holiness.
Now here we are taught what to avoid and what to follow, and the rather,
because here we are put in mind of the experience we have of Gods goodn^sse:
for it is he that ha^^ called us. Now of the former lusts, t^ere can be
assigned no good that we ^ave gotten by them: The devil may lyingly tell us of
some good to come, but we know, that for the time past, we got nothing but
shame and sorrow by them.

Thus of the general.

As he that has called you.

The first thing i^ whom we must imitate, and that is here expressed by (...), to
be he, that has called us, viz. God; and the Lord does of purp^^^ (...) o^
descriptions of himself for diverse rea^ons.

1. (...) our disability to c^^ceive of God, as he is fully; and there^^re he
(...) his knowledge into us by drops or spar^les as it were; so far is our
nature swarved from the knowledge of God, that the doctrine o^ God in the whole
i^ a doctrine too transcendent for us. 2. This God does to excite affection in
us toward him, as taking no delight in a dull c^^templation of him, and
therefore by such p^riphrases he does with some (...) consideration either gore
us (if it be a phrase of terror or sudd^nly (...) with some divine spa^^les,
that like lightning force our att^^d^^^^. 3. The lord does use such
descriptions out of choice of (...) which is most pertinent to the question in
hand: The Lord thr^ugh^ut the whole Scripture is every where respective of the
names he gives (...): therein showing us, what care we should have in taking
up the name or title of God. 4. It is a most forcible kind of speaking; for
compendiously it imports abundance of matter, usually more then the bare
title it self would import: as here thi^ phrase ( He that called you) does not
only show, that it is God that is to be imitated, but it also gives an
excellent reason why; taken from his free grace in calling us: and it
expresses also the manner of imitation, viz ch^efly to follow God, as he is
revealed in the Gospel in our calling, or when we come truly to see him in
the state of grace. It is out of question, the Lord mentions our calling as one
of the chiefest and excellentest benefits bestowed upon us, as that which
should much stir us, and inflame, and has great force to prevail upon us.

In general from hence we may note,

1. That the consideration of our calling and election out of the world, should
be put to this use, to fire us so much the more to holiness of life and
conformity to God.

2. That he that has true grace, is as much stirred with the consideration of
his calling, as any one thing whatsoever ordinarily: It cannot but affect us to
think in how sinful a case God found us, and how freely he loved us; how
great m^rcy he called us unto, and how unexpected it was either for matter or
m^anes* and how ready he was to forgive, and how he passed by others worthier
and likelier then we, etc.

3. That of all the benefits bestowed upon us by God, the works of grace are
the best. It is more that God has called us, then that he has given us
treasures, or honor, or pleasure, or whatsoever of outward things; yea and
every true Christian does in his affections so account it.

4. That the works of grace in God do excel the works of nature. The Lord
thinks himself that he has done more for us, in that he called us, then that
he made us of nothing.

5. That (...) of God it is sufficient (through Gods acceptance) to (...), a^
he reveals himself to our understanding in our calling, acco^ding (...) the
revelation of his grace in our conversion, so as we are wil^i^^ (...)
knowledge for so to conceive of God, as he that called (...) to acceptance.
Thus of the general.

(...) the Lord singles out this work of our calling to quicke^ (...), it will
not be much amisle to consider of it particularly, es^ as it (...) ^ere
propounded.

Four things may be here noted: What, Who, Whom, and When. What, or the w^rk
it self, He called us. Who was the author of this calling, viz. He, a^ God.
Whom, or the persons called, you. When, or the time, has.

(...) may understand more distinctly what our ca^^^ng from God (...), it will
not be amiss to consider, 1. (...) God calls us. 2. What our effe^tuall
calling is. 3. Why our conv^rsion is termed by the name of calling. 4. How
(...) can know, that God calls me in particular, seeing he does not name me. 5.
Why did G^d call us. 6. To what he calls us. 7. The (...).


For the first: the ^^lling of God is either particular or general. The
particular is to se^ve G^d in some set function of outward life, ^. How many
(...) God calls men.
and so is the (...). The general calling is to the service of (...) with
promise of eternal reward through the (...) Christ. This general calling is
likewise of three sorts. 1. External. 2. Internal: or both 3. external and
internal. 1. The external alone is called common and ineffectuall: the 2. and
3. is called singular and effectual. 1. The outward calling is the work of
Gods grace in his word, offering Christ, and calling upon all sorts of men to
reform their ways, and receive Christ, and yield obedience to Gods holy will
to their salvation, if they will obey. 2. The inward calling is the work of
Gods Spirit, effectually stirring up and persuading the Elect to hear, and
obey, and receive Christ unto salvation. 3. The calling that is both inward and
outward is the action of God both by his Word and Spirit, What our effectual:
calling is.
calling out his Elect by name particularly, and persuading them to separate
from the world, and receive the covenant of Gods grace in Christ, and to devote
themselves to holiness of life; and this what our effectual calling is.

Why our ^onversion is t^rmed our call^ng.
is termed by the name of a calling, and that fitly for diverse reasons.

1. Because the means by which God works upon us, ordinarily is his Word, or
the voice of his servants, calling upon us for amendment, etc.

2. Because through the mighty working of the Spirit of Christ, the voice of
Gods servants speaking out of the word, is directed to us in particular with
such power and life, and our dead hearts are so revived, that the doctrine is,
as if God did speak to us in particular, we receiving the words of the
Minister, as the very voice or word of Christ: Thus the dead hear the voice of
the Son of God, and live.

3. Because God would hereby note unto us the easiness of the work, he can
do it with a word, as he made the world, and calls up the generations of
men, as the Prophet speaks, so can he in an instant with a word convert a
si^ner. He said, let there be light, and there was light: so if he say, let
there be true grace, there is presently true grace.

Quest. But how may a true calling be discerned, seeing wicked men may be
affected by the word, and see, that it concerns them?

How a true ca^ling may be dis^^^^^^.
Answ. It may be discerned by diverse effects that follow upon it, some
immediately, others appear some longer time after in the exercise of
godliness.

The effects are,

1. An inward sight, and willing confession of our sin-guiltinesse, joined with
a detestation of all sin, and confusion in our selves for our ways that are
not good: so Christ came to call sinners, not the righteous.

2. A willing separation from the world, both inward in letting go the love of
earthly things, even those most before beloved, and outward in forsaking the
needless society with wicked men. This the definition imports.

3. An unfeigned purpose to forsake all sin, never to return to it again,
desiring righteousness both imputed, and inherent with daily desires.

4. A love of God and his glory above all things. The called of God are
described by that periphras^s, of such as love God, Romans 8.28.

5. The exercise of daily and constant prayer: a spirit of prayer, Joel 2.32.

6. Teachablenesse, or willingness to be ruled by the word in all things,
which may be gathered by the contrary, Ier. 7.27.

7. The called of the Lord are such, as Isay 44.5.

8. The unfeigned hatred of Popery, and kingdom of Antichrist: this is made a
sign in these last ages, Revel. 17.14. This is so fair a sign, that it is
found in all the chosen of God.

not come from any preceding merits of ours, but from the only admirable free
grace of God, as it appears, 2 Timothy 1.9. Romans 9.12.

Sixthly, Gods wonderful mercy in calling us does appear by the consideration
What we are called to.


1. To his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. 2. To the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9. 3. To liberty, and a wonderful free estate from the
servitude of sin, Satan, the world, the ceremonies of Moses, etc. Gal. 5.13.
4. To the grace of Christ, Gal. 1.6. even to a holiness better then that in
Adam, Romans 1.7. 5. To an estate of immunity and free pardon, Romans 5.31. 6. To
all safety, Esaias 41.1, 2, 3. Romans 8.28. 7. To the glorious kingdom of Jesus
Christ, 2 These. 2.14. 1 These. 2.12. 2 Pet. 1.3. and 1 Pet. 5.10.
The consideration of this wonderful grace of God in calling us, may imply the
misery of such as have not embraced Gods calling, Use.
Prove. 1. Luke 14. with Mat. 22. Esaias 50.2. and 61.4. Ier. 7.13, 14, 15. and
35.17. Let such then as have the means, and are somewhat touched look to it
seriously, that they turn to God with their whole hearts, lest, as Mat. 20.16.

2. It should inflame every one of us to make our calling sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.

3. We should stir up our selves to live as may become the called of God, as
these Scriptures show, 1 Pet. 2.9. etc. 3.9. 2 Timothy 6.11, 12. 1 These. 2.^2.
Ephesians. 4.1, 4. Gal. 5.13. as also the use of this consideration in this text
shows.

Lastly, considering our daily trespasses, let us still go to God as to a
Father, and cry with humility, we are no more worthy to be called thy sons, etc.

Thus of the first point, or what, viz. calling. The second is, who calls u^:
It is here said, He, that is, God. We must understand, that our calling is the
work of the whole Trinity: for it is given to the Father, Gal. 1.6. to the
Son, Romans 1 2. 1 Pet. 5. 10. to the holy Ghost, 1 Ioh. 2.7. so that this He,
is the G^d of all grace, the whole Trinity. There is a rule among Divines,
that the works of God which are without are undivided. The are two sorts of
works (...) God, inward and outward: The inward are proper to each person, as
to beget proper to the Father, to proceed to the holy Ghost, etc. Now the
outward works, such as decrees before time, and Creation, Providence, Calling,
etc. in time, are common to all three persons; not that every particula^ a^t is
the act of all three persons, for that cannot be true; for only the Son was
incarnate: But the meaning is, that in the general worcester k, each works in his
own order and nature: as in Redemption, the Father works by willing and
sending: the Son by assuming our nature, and suffering, etc. the holy Ghost by
applying and confirming. Now calling is one of the work^ in common.

The c^nsideration of this, that it is God that calls us, may 1. Comfort us
in the assurance of his faithfulness, Uses.
he calls us that is uncha^geable, 1 These. 5.24. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. 2. It should
bind us the stronger to the care of a life answerable to his greatness that
has called us.


You.]

1. Not all men: there is a restraint and limitation of the effectual calling:
it is absurd to grant a calling out, and yet say it is universal. 2. This you)
imports all sorts of men, though not every one of every sort, yet without
exception of outward condition^ Jews and Gentiles, Romans 9. 24, 25. bond and
free, 1 Cor. 7.
Has.] Our vocation is past, it is no more to be renewed; we are justified,
and sanctified daily, but not called: we can be but once borne in nature, nor
can we be any more called, or regenerate in grace.

Thus of the first point, viz. whom we must imitate, viz. God that called us.
The second is, in what we must imitate him, viz. in holiness.

Four sorts of holiness.
Is holy.] There are four sorts of holiness: Independent and unlimited, viz.
the holiness of God. 2. Independent and limited, viz. the holiness of Christ:
for the holiness of his divine nature is independent, and the holiness of his
humane nature is limited, for it is finite. 3. Dependant and unlimited, and
such is the holiness of the Scriptures: Dependant it is, for it is of God:
Unlimited it is, for it entreats of all kinds of holiness whatsoever. 4.
Dependant and limited, and such is the holiness in man and Angels: it is the
first kind of holiness is here meant.

God holy three ways.
There is a threefold holiness in God, or he is holy three ways. 1. By
nature, being void of all corruption or change. 2. By administration, and so
his holiness is his justice, in distributing rewards to the good, and
punishment to the evil. 3. By conception, for the Lord does conceive the
Idaea, or the patterns of the holiness of all the reasonable creatures. The
Carpenter conceives first the frame of his house in his head, and then builds
it according to the pattern: So does God conceive first the holiness that is
fit for the creature, and then works it in them. This Idaea or pattern of
holiness, or virtues in God, is either internal in the mind of God from
eternity, or external in the word of God.

Now the holiness of God that we are to imitate, is both that holiness which
God has conceived in the pattern expressed in the word, and also that which is
in the nature of God, as it is described in the word. There is also a holiness
of works in God which we must imitate: I mean of particular works, as in
carriage toward enemies, Mat. 5. in mercy, Luke 6. in love, Ephesians. 5.1. and thus
as children we should imitate the holy nature, as it were of our heavenly
Father.

Now by the way we must know, that God is not holy by any legal holiness as
men are: that is, his holiness stands: not in the observation of any law given
by any other, but is himself the rule of all holiness: so as things are not
first holy, and then God does them; but God does them, and therefore they are
holy. Thus of the second thing. The third follows, viz. how we must imitate
God in holiness, viz. in being holy in all manner of conversation.

So be you holy in all manner of conversation.

Doct.
There are eight doctrines may be noted in these words.

1. That without holiness we cannot be accepted with God, we have no communion
with him, nothing but holiness will serve the turn, Heb. 12.14. 1 Ioh. 1.6.

2. It must be holiness indeed, not the picture of it will serve the turn, nor
counterfeit holiness, nor temporary holiness, nor civil honesty.

3. If Christians want holiness, the fault is in themselves; for he says, be
ye holy, implying, if they be not so, it is because they are careless, and
will not labor for it; and great reason the blame should lie upon us, if we
will still neglect sanctification.

1. Having such a great recompense of reward set before us.

2. Having so matchless and perfect a rule, and canon of holiness written in
the word of God to direct us.

3. Having our natures by regeneration in part healed, and freedom of will in
part restored; so as no^, if we be not holy, it is because we will not be
holy.

4. Having such mighty helps, as are 1. The assistance and supply of the spirit
of grace within us. Who h^lps to (...).
2. Prayer, with a promise of granting whatsoever we ask. 3. Guides and
spiritual Pastors to oversee and direct us. 4. A cloud of witnesses, even the
examples of the godly of all sorts. 5. Such acceptance with God, if we be
willing, and love to be his servants, Act. 10.36. But of this in the next point.


4. Here is employed, how infinitely kind God is in accepting our holy
endeavors, if we desire to be holy in all our conversation, he will account it
to be holy as he is holy; and yet alas it comes ten thousand degrees short of
the holiness of God; yea far short of what it should be: yea, which is more,
of what it might be in us.

5. The image of God is in conversation, as well as nature: we resemble God not
only in the renovation of our nature, but in the renewed actions also: so then
we bear Gods image, 1. In nature. 2. In action or obedience. Of this later
here.

6. A Christian should be especially careful of his outward conversation, even
to show forth the light of good works and holy carriage before men. We should
be exceeding careful to express holiness in conversing one with another.

There are many motives. 12 M^tives to holy conversation.


1. We are Gods witnesses, 2 Timothy 2.2. 2. It Is a good profession, 2 Timothy 2.2. 3.
There are many witnesses to observe us, 2 Timothy 2.2. 4. Carnal men are crooked
and perverse, Phil. 2.16. 5. A holy conversation will silence foolish men, 1
Pet. 2.15. 6. It will bring much glory to our heavenly Father, Mat. 5. 7. It
proves our justification, and foretells our salvation. 8. To walk upright is to
walk safely, Prove. 9. It Is as it were to live in heaven, Phil. 3.20. 10. It will
support us in wrongs and adversity, Act. 23.1.2 Cor. 1.12. 11. It will show our
knowledge is not idle, 2 Pet. 1.8. 12. It furthers our reckoning, and provides
us acceptance in the day of death and judgment, 2 Pet. 3.11. Rev. 14.13.
7. If we would be holy as God is holy, we must be holy in all conversation,
that is, we must show respect to all the commandments of God; we must show a
care of religion, as well as virtue: of godliness, as well as honesty: of
mercy, as well as just dealing: to enemies, as well as friends: at home as well
as abroad: toward inferiors as well as superiors: in prosperity as well as
adversity: in all companies as well as one, etc. Mark it in the trial of our
selves: by this doctrine we may know infallibly, whether we be called, or
bear the image of God or no: for if there be any one sin that we will not
forsake, or any one commandment we are not desirous to obey, it will prove all
is n^ught in us, Heb. 13.18.

8. Lastly, we must here further observe, that if we would have comfort that we
bear the image of Gods holiness, we must be careful of the manner of our
conversation, as well as the matter. For though these words ^ all manner may
note the extent unto the matter of all holiness: yet there is no evident
reason why a great part of the meaning of the holy Ghost, should not be
restrained to the manner, as the word sounds. (...).
Now there are diverse things in the manner of our conversation to be observed
for the resembling of Gods holiness.

1. The first is godly pureness; we must in our conversation show respect of
God and godliness, and keep our selves from the impurities of the times, and
watch against sin in all our ways, 2 Cor. 1.12.

2. The second is simplicity, or holy harmlesnesse, as it is opposed to fraud,
and fleshly wisdom, and shows it self in a plain and evident desire to do
what God requires, though it be never so much scorned in the world, 2 Cor.
11.3. and 1.12.

3. The third is preciseness or circumspection, making conscience of lesser
sins as well as greater, and avoiding the appearances and occasions of evils,
as well as the evils themselves, Ephesians. 5.15.

4. Conversation in heaven, which is so to use the world, as to let our hearts
still run upon God and his Kingdom, directing all our actions some way to
further that end, Phil. 3.20.

5. Meekness of wisdom, which is showed by lowliness, and not being wise in
our selves, but doing good in a continued sense of our own vileness and
unworthiness, to do any service to God or man, Iam. 3.13. This is called a
conversation with fear, 1 Pet. 3.2. and ver. 16.

6. Constancy, Phil. 1.27.

7. The affections of godliness, or well-doing, or zeal, Tit. 2.14.

Verse 16. Because it is written, be ye holy as I am holy.
THE first argument no enforce the exhortation ver. 13. is taken from the image
of God in us: and this reason is propounded in the first words of ver. 14. and
expounded in the two former verses and this, and that two ways: 1. By a
description of the image of God in us, ver. 14, 15.2. By the proof in this
verse. In this proof two things are to be observed: 1. Whence the proof is
taken, As it is written. 2. What is alleged, viz. Be ye holy, as I am holy.


The meaning is, that we stand bound to show regard of our conformity to God in
holiness: for this was long since required in the written word of God, that
we should be holy, as God is holy. And first then concerning the Scripture,
from whence the proofs of doctrine are fetched.

Here I consider, 1. Of the use of the Scriptures in general for proof of
doctrine. 2. Of the Scripture of the Old ^estament from whence this proof is
fetched.


For the first: Proofs of doctrine are of three sorts. 1. From men as they are
men. 2. From the senses. 3. From God. The first is not infallible: the second
is infallible in some respects: the third is infallible simply and for ever.
The testimonies of men work only opinion, as being but Arguments contengent
and probable. The testimonies of the senses and of God work knowledge, or bring
arguments necessary. Hence it is that the Prophets, and Christ, and the
Apostles in their teaching amongst the people almost never use any testimonies
of men in matters of religion; and when they do, it is chiefly for confutation
of adversaries by their own writers.

Now for the senses: they are internal, or external. Internal, and so there
is a double testimony, 1. from the law of nature, 2. from the conscience. The
external are seeing, hearing, tasting, etc. and the argument from them is from
experience. The testimony of the senses is in^allible in some respects, viz. as
they are rightly ordered and guided.

The testimony of God is either immediate, or mediate: God has given an
immediate testimony either by vision, or by voice. By vision either in in
sleep, or in a certain ecstasy when men were awake: thus did he reveal his
will often in the Old Testament; sometimes in the New, a^ to Paul. By voice God
testified either to particular persons, as when he gave answers to the Priest,
as some think wearing his Ephod; or else by public voice, as when from heaven
he said, Mat. 3. This is my welbeloved Son, hear him.

The testimony God has given by means is threefold. 1. By his Son. 2. By
his servants the Prophets and Apostles by word of mouth. 3. By the Scriptures:
and of this here.

Now concerning the proof of doctrine in Scripture, we must observe: 1. That
the testimony of God only is authentical. 2. That a divine testimony now
adays is no where to be had, but in the Scripture. 3. The testimony of
Scripture is sufficient for all things needful to salvation, 2 Timothy 3. 4. That
we, both Ministers and people, should have recourse to the Scriptures for
warrant for what we teach, believe, or do: For if Christ and the Apostles, men
privileged from error, do yet for honors sake allege the testimony of
Scripture; then much more ought we to have recourse to what is written, seeing
we can have no assurance that we err not, but as we are warranted by the
Word. Thus of the first point.


Now for the second point: Inasmuch as the proofs are taken out of the Old
Testament, it shows the wonderful harmony and agreement between the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; and that the Old Testament is to be
acknowledged of equal authority with the New. Hence it i^, that the quotations
of authorities out of the Old Testament are so frequent: for there are above
260. places of the Old Testament cited in the New; so as there is almost no
point of doctrine needful to salvation, but the harmony of the Old Testament
and the New is expressed: yea hence it is, that there are very few books of the
Old Testament, but they are cited in the New: amongst the historical books, I
except Judges, Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah, and Hester: amongst the Prophets I except
Obadiah and Nahum: amongst the dogmaticall books I except Ecclesiastes and
Canticles: else proofs are taken out of all the rest, and very frequent out of
many of them, as the Psalms are cited 53 times, Genesis 42 times, Esaias 46
times: and so I might note of the rest.

Lastly, from the manner of propounding this authority or testimony out of the
Word, we may note two things.

1. The great mercy of God afforded to us in these times, that have so many
helps for knowledge: we see here in those days, they quoted neither Chapter
^or v^rse, and many times not the book; and therefore we should praise God,
that have the Scriptures digested so easily, and our doctrine confirmed with
such express quotations.

2. This shows what labor and knowledge the godly then had; they were so
conversant in the Scriptures, that they could discern of a quotation, though
the place were not cited. And thus of the fountain from whence this proof i^
fetched. The matter alleged follows.

Be ye holy for I am holy.

The drift is to show that it has been anciently taught unto the people of
God, that if they profeste themselves to be his children, they must imitate his
holiness, and show themselves like unto God their heavenly Father. This
sentence is chiefly found in the book of Leviticus, and is there often used, as
Lev. 11.44. and 19.2. and 20.26. and 21.8. From hence diverse things may be
observed.

1. That exact holiness has been anciently required. This is a doctrine has
ever ^ounded in the Church, that we must be holy, yea so holy as we might in
some mea^ure be like unto God, and express his image, Exodus 19.6. D^ut. 26 19.

2. That holiness of life is indispensibly required of every child of God: for
so this speech is used, Lev. 19.2.

3. That true holiness stretches it self to the care of lesser offenses, as
these places show, Lev. 11.44. and 20.26. therefore God will accept our service
in lesser duties.

4. That we cannot have true holiness without some competent knowledge of the
nature of God.

Verse 17. And if you call him Father, which without respect of person judges
according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.


HItherto of the first reason. The second reason to enforce the exhortation in
the 13. verse, is here taken from the consideration of Gods judgment: The time
must certainly come, that we must appear before the Tribunal of God, and
receive reward or punishment according to our works, and therefore it stands us
upon with all care and fear to carry our selves so reservedly and holily, as
in that day we may have comfort and reward.

In the words two things may be noted. 1. The proposition of the reason. 2. The
inference or the conclusion of it; or, here is the doctrine and the use of it.
The proposition of the doctrine is, He whom we call Father, or call upon as a
Father, shall without respect of persons judge every man according to his
works. The inference or use is, therefore we should pass the time of our
dwelling here in fear. In the proposition concerning the last judgment,
observe; 1. who shall be the Judge, viz. God the Father, whom we call upon. 2.
How will he judge, viz. without respect of persons. 3. Whom he will judge,
viz. every man. 4. For what they shall be judged, viz. according to their works.

In the setting down of the first point, both matter and manner are to be
observed: The matter is, that the same God and Father who is called upon by us,
is the judge of the world: The manner o^ expressing it, is conditionally, if
you call him Father. The words in the original be both ways read: Some read,
if you call him Father, and the meaning is not of prayer, but of profession, if
you profess God to be your Father. Some read it, if you call on the Father,
that is, if in prayer you go unto God the Father with your requests: so the
Kings Translators read it, and so I think it is most agreeable to the intent
of the Apostle in this place.

If you call on the Father.]

Many things may be noted from these words with their coherence.

1. That the heart of man is not able to bear the contemp^ation of the last
judgment; nor can we with comfort any way be fitted for it, ^ill we know, and
by practice and experience do find that God is our Father.

Use.
The Use is, 1. for information: The reason why many are so troubled with the
thought of the judgment to come, is the defect of assurance of Gods love as a
Father: these fears show weakness of faith, and if they reign constantly, show
there is no assurance at all. 2 It should teach us by all means to labor about
assurance, that we might with boldness and confidence go unto God, and cry
Abba Father.

2. That he that is the Father of the Elect, will be the Judge of the world.
Though it be hard for a pitiful man to be strict in punishing, yet with God
his mercy and justice do not fight one against another.

Use.
The Use is to warn wicked men to take heed how they apply the promises and
prerogatives of the godly to themselves: for God will certainly judge them
according to their estate.

3. Constant prayer is a great means of comfort against the fear of judgment
in this life, and against the hurt of it in the last day, Luke 21.34.

The Use is, Use.
to show us how we may remedy the fear of death and judgments: much prayer
and calling on the Name of God will exceedingly avail.

4. That to call on God as a Father, will not serve turn, unless our practice
answer our prayers, unless we pass the time of our sojourning in fear: it is
not any pattering our of words will serve the turn, nor praying for customs
sake; it must be such a prayer as makes us afraid to sin before such a Father
(...) such a Judge.

5. When he says, if we call, it imports, that many profess God to be their
Father, who yet do not show it to be so by daily and constant calling upon his
name. It is a great question, whether many that profess God and his truth, do
indeed conscionably pray unto him; which should awaken us, and make us settle
close to the practice of daily prayer.

6. It is a lawful prayer that is directed to one of the persons of the
Trinity in the outward form of words: I mean, that though we should name
only the Father, and not mention the Son, or holy Ghost, yet the prayer were
lawful, so as

1. We do not exclude the other persons in our judgments and affections.

2. That we desire upon the present occasion to compel our hearts to a more
special meditation of the glory of one of the persons, as the occasion of the
matter requires.

But the maine and principal doctrine is, that God, as he is our Father, Doct.
shall be our Judge.

If any ask, How then is Christ commonly said to be our Judge? Act. 17.30.
Quest.


I answer, that the last judgment being a work ad extra, is common to all the
three Persons, and is so attributed in Scripture, but in different respe^ts:
Answ.
for the authority of the last judgment is in the whole Trinity, but the
execution of it is in the Son. This doctrine must needs be comfortable to the
godly: who would fear the trial when his own Father is Judge, yea and
lawgiver, and has before promised infinite mercy, and is an everlasting
Father, (...) compassion never fails, (for so is God to us,) and has given
pledge, and seals, and earnest of assurance, that it shall go well?

Thus of the person, who shall judge: The manner follows.

Without respect of persons.]

The^e are (...) down many admirable praises of the justice of these last
Assizes; whereof this is one, that here shall be no respect of persons. It
pleases God in so great mysteries as this is, not to set down all at once,
but to distill some few memorable things, and those severally. both to excise
diligence in the study of the Scriptures, and to imply the disability of our
na(...) comprehend much at once of such dreadful things.

Not to respect persons in judgment has diverse things in it: It is to judge
without (...): ^t is to judge without care how the judged takes it: it is to
judge without respect of their strength, or disgrace: it is to take no reward,
(...) accept the persons of great men for their greatness, or riches sake: it
is to be led with no colors, or vain pretenses: it is to judge according to
truth, and not according to opinion, or the common voice: and t^us much and
much more is imported in this justice of the Lord at that day.

The Use is, Use.


1. For humiliation and terror to wicked men: This should wonderfully pierce
them ^o hear how they must speed at that day: their judgment shall not be to
amend them, but to confound them: the same God that has dealt with other men
in justice, will judge them also: and this may increase the terror, that there
will be no taking of rewards, nor can riches avail in the day of wrath, Job
36.18, 19. unless it be to increase their judgment, Iam. 5.1, 3.

2. For instruction: it may teach diverse things.

1. To chase out all evil conceits, and secret boilings of the heart against
God, Job. 34.19.

2. To humble our selves now in the days of our flesh, and make our peace with
God before this day come, Deuteronomy. 10.17. Job 34.19, 32, 33.

3. To imitate this praise in God, not to know men after the flesh, or to judge
of things according to outward appearance, or the opinion of the world,
especially not to give titles to men, Job 32.21. and especially Judges, and
such as rule others should look to this, 2 Chronicles. 19.7. Col. 3.25.

4. To long to see that day: every body delights to be at the Assizes; and we
see how men are pleased, and that wonderfully, when Princes do justice upon
great persons; we gladly hearken after it, and continually talk of it: how
then should we long to see this last and greatest judgment, the like to which
never was in the world scarce any glimpse of it?

3. It may serve for singular consolation to all the godly, especially it may
encourage the poor, and all inferiors to do their duties, since here they
shall be assured of acceptance, and the oppressed shall here be righted, Act.
10.34. Col. 3.11. Ephesians. 6.9. Romans 2.11.

Of the last jud^ement, and the certainty of it.
Judges.] The manner of propounding the time is to be observed. There is a
threefold judgment. 1. The first judgment was that executed upon Angels, and
men fallen in the beginning of the world. 2. There is also a middle judgment,
even that by which God in this life judges the righteous, and the wicked every
day. 3. Now there is also the last judgment to be performed in the end of the
world, and that is here meant; yet the Apostle well expresses it in the
present tense, to note,

1. The speediness of it, he will come to judgment wonderful quickly either
by particular or general judgment, Phil. 4. Iam. 5.

2. The suddenness of the judgment, he many times comes on a wonderful
sudden, Job 36.33. and at the last he will come as a thief in the ^ight, 1
These. 5.2.

3. But principally it notes the certainty of it: it is as sure, as if it were
now a doing: certainty I say, in freedom both from inconstancy and impediments.

There are many things may assure us of the certainty of the last judgment.

1. The constant doctrine of it before the Law, Iud. 15. under the ^aw by
David, Psalm. 50. Solomon, Eccles. 11.9. Dan. 7. Mal. 4. and many more: after
the Law by Christ, Mat. 24. Paul, 2 These. 1. Peter, 2 Pet. 3. John Rev. 2^.

2. The types of it, which are so many pledges, do certainly though fearfully
foretell it: such as were those dreadful executions done upon wicked men in
all ages; as the drowning of the world: the burning of the Cities, Sodom. etc.
the opening of the earth to swallow Corah, Dathan, and Abiram: the destruction
of Jerusalem, etc. yea he spared not the very Angels, Iud. 6.2 Pet. 2.4. These
stupendous works are monuments of a strange judgment to come.

3. The exact fulfilling of the signs, so many of them as belong to times past,
and present, which were given as forerunners of that judgment: such as were
(...) Christ's, wars, the apostacy of the Church, the detection and falling
of Antichrist, etc.

4. From the need of it: for in this world the godly are oppressed and not
righted, and the wicked flourish and are not punished many times: therefore of
necessity there must be a time wherein all these things must be set in order.

1. Let every man repent, Act. 17.30. Here is no trifling: Use.
it will certainly be, and therefore repent, or perish.

2. Judge nothing before the time: let us not judge one another, but leave all
judgment to God, 1 Cor. 4.4.

3. Let us not be impatient, or fret at the prosperity of the wicked, or be
discouraged at the afflictions of the righteous: for there shall come a time
wherein the godly shall have full reward and honor, and wicked men everlasting
shame and pain.

Every man.]

The whole world must come to judgment, good and bad: we must all appear
before the Tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, Doct.
2 Cor. 5.10. not only all the godly, but all the wicked of all sorts, which
will appear by a distribution.

1. The Pagans shall come to judgment, such as have sinned without the law,
Rom 2. What s^rts of wicked men shall s^eed ^ll at the last d^y.
2. The Jews that crucified Christ, or still do deny him to be come in the
flesh, Rom 2. 3. Papists, 2 These. 2. 4. Atheists, that mock at his coming, 2
Pet. 3.3.
In the true Church.

1. Gross offenders, Mal. 3.7. Rev. 21. and 22. 2. Civil honest men, Mat.
5.19. 3. Rich and mighty men of the world: God will not accept the person of
Princes, Job 34.19. Iam. 5.1, 3. 4. Hypocrites, Mat. 23. Psalm. 5^.16. 5. The
unmercifull, Mat. 25. Iam. 2.13. 6. Apostates, Heb. 10.27. 2 Pet. 2. 7. All
that trouble the godly, 2 These. 1. Gal. 5.1^. 8. Inordinate censurers, Romans
2.1, 2.3. Iam. 3.1. 9. All unruly persons that will not be ordered according to
Gods ordinances, Mat. 25. goats. 10. All that use scant measures, wicked
balances, and false weights, Mat. ^.10, 11.
Yea, as I said before, all the godly must be judged: we must all appear.

It is said, the godly shall not be judged, Ob^ect. Solut. Use.
Job. 3.18. and 6.54.

They shall not be judged with the judgment of condemnation.

The Use. Therefore every man should stir up his heart to a careful
examination of himself, and make his account, and provide for his answer at
that day: and the rather should we attend hereunto, because the most men are
after an unspeakable manner forgetful of their latter end, and suffer
themselves to be drowned in the cares of life, as if there were no time of
cha^ging or reckoning.

The fourth and last point is the cause of the judgment, imported in these
words, according to their works.

According to their works.]

It shall be t^ every man at that day according to his works: Doct.
if his works be evil, he shall be damned: if his works be good, he shall be
saved, 2 Cor. 5.1^. Romans 2. For the better understanding of this doctrine
diverse questions and objections are to be resolved.

It seems then faith shall not be inquired after? 1 Quest. Answ.


It shall, yea and that chiefly, as appears in the 7. verse of this Chapter,
and in many other Scriptures, which avouch, we are saved by faith: yea and
works are mentioned to this end, because by them Christ shall evidently prove
to the world the faith of his Elect: he will th^n show their faith by their
works: yea faith is comprehended under the word works, as being indeed the
noblest of all works, and that which most shines in the life of a Christian:
it is the chief obedience required in the Gospel, and the just live by their
faith.

2 Ob^ect.
But how can works be looked upon in the Elect, seeing they are not acknowledged
as having merit in them? Can they be saved by their works?

Sol.
Works shall be inquired after in the godly, not as meritorious causes of their
salvation: for the merit of heaven is only in Christ's works, which only are
perfect. But works shall be examined and judged.

1. As the witnesses in that Assise, that give in evidence concerning their
calling and faith.

2. As the conditions of Gods promises, concerning reward in heaven, not for
their merit, but of Gods free grace, that will so crown them.

Observe, that the Scripture no where says, for their works, but according to
their works.

3 Quest.
But how can the works of men be numbered, they are so infinite?

(...)
The books shall then be opened: viz. first the book of Gods remembrance: in
which are fast graven the deeds of all men, Rev. 20. Mal. 3.16. Secondly, the
consciences of all men shall be extended to an exact view of all the works of
their life past.

4 Quest.
By what law shall men's works be examined, seeing the Pagans have not the
Scriptures to guide them, and the faithful have not fulfilled the moral law
in their own persons?

Answ.
The infidels shall be judged by the law of nature, Romans 2. the wicked in the
Church by the moral law, and the godly by the Go^p^ll.

5 Quest.
Shall not wicked men be judged for their original sin, but only for their
evil works?

Answ.
By works may be meant, 1. both the work of our fall in Adam, as well as (...)
work. 2. This phrase, according to works, does include all works, and yet
not exclude the respect of other things besides works, a^ faith in the godly,
and original sin in the wicked. 3. Works are but the ^ruits of corruption
of nature, and so syn^^dochically it is comprehended under them.

6 Quest.
But shall no man be then judged for other men's works, as well as for their
own? may not children be judged for their fathers sins, or one man judged
for the evil done by another, as the Pharisees for the blood of Abel and
Zachar^as?

Answ.
God as an absolute Monarch, and just governor may with temporal punishments
chastise the posterity of wicked Parents, and to warn the world (...); but he
cannot judge them to eternal damnation further then they be guilty of their
fathers sins, either by consent, assistance, or (...) the Pharisees be sent to
hell for Abels blood, only to far as they were not warned by that example to
avoid blood. To con(...), no man shall suffer for another works, further then
he is some way (...) of it.

7 Quest.
But how can infants be judged according to their works?

An^sw.
We understand not clearly how the proceedings shall be with infants: it is
evident, that corruption of nature can make even infants children of (...).
Psalm. 51. and the covenant of God with the faithful does (...) even their seed
also. Besides, the Spirit of God does supply external works, by internal
sanctification in the elect infants.

But how shall poor men do that are not able to do good works? 8 Quest.


It is an error to think that there are no good works but giving of alms: Answ.
For the obedience to Gods law in any commandment is a good work; works of
piety to God are good works, and so are the works of a particular calling. It
is a good work to provide for a man's family; and so to deal justly with men
is a good work. Besides, there are many works of mercy, which the poorest
Christian may do, he may pray for others, or reprove, or comfort, or
instruct, etc.

The Uses may be collected out of the several Scriptures, where this doctrine
is taught, as, Uses.


1. In Job 7.2. We should long for that day, seeing it is the day of paying
wages.

2. Job 34.11, 14, 15, 19, 20, to 25. It should terrify the mightiest sinners,
seeing God will not spare, but without respect of persons judge every man's
works: and if a temporal judgment so affright all sorts, as is reported Ezech.
7.27. how much more should this last judgment?

3. Psalm. 62. ult. We should daily think of this day of reckoning, and not
suffer any doubt against it: For it will certainly be so.

4. Prove. 24.12. Two things are inferred: 1. That we should not faint in the
day of adversity. 2. That without trifling we should do good, and show mercy
when we have occasion.

5. The Prophet Jeremy uses this doctrine as a means to stir up their
hearts to a more awefull fear, and admiration, and adoration of that God,
whose eyes behold the ways of all men, and whose justice will reward according
to their works.

6. Our Savior Christ uses it to excite the care of saving our souls, and to
work in us a contempt of life and this world, and to deny our selves, and take
up our cross and follow him, Mat. 16.27.

7. The Apostle Paul, Romans 2.7. uses this doctrine, 1. To fright and terrify
three sorts of men, viz. 1. Hypocrites, ver. 1, 2, 3. 2. Impenitent
hard-hearted sinners, ver. 4, 5. 3. Contentious and froward adversaries of
well-doing, ver. 8. 2. To encourage the godly in all well-doing, ver. 9, 10.


8. In the 2 Cor. 5.10. it serves to enforce, 1. Walking by faith, ver. 7. 2.
Care to be accepted of God, ver. 9. 3. Desire to be absent from the flesh, and
present with the Lord, ver. 8. 4. Diligence in Ministers with all power to
persuade with their hearers, ver. 11.


9. In the Ephesians. 6.8, 9. it is used, 1. To comfort servants. 2. To warn
masters, ver. 9. So it is also Col. 3.24, 26.


10. In Rev. 22.11, 12. it is used to upbraid the pertinacie of wicked men in
sin, and to encourage the godly in all perseverance in well-doing.

11. Lastly, you see, how the Apostle make a use of it: viz. that we should
pass the time of our sojourning here in fear. And thus of the doctrine of the
second reason.

Pa^e the time of your sojourning here in fear.

These word contain the inference, or use of the former doctrine: viz. it
should imprint in us such a sense of our mortality, as should stir up in us a
daily care, and fear in the spending of our time we are to live in the world.
These words a^firme f^ure things.

1. That we are but sojourners. 2. That we have but a time to sojourne. 3. That
this time passes. 4. That therefore we ought to spend the time in fear.
Sojourners.] This word may be taken either literally, or mystically: if it be
taken literally, it must be referred to the provincial Jews: so it may import
two things.

1. That Gods children in this life may be so driven from their native abodes,
that they may be compelled to live in strange places.

2. That though the Lord suffer the Jewish Nation to be under a so^e dispersion
for the time; yet the time will come when they shall be gathered home together
in great glory, though now they are but sojourners.

But it is rather to be taken mystically, and so it is to be referred to all
the Elect, who in respect of their absence from their heavenly Canaan, are but
soiourners at best in this world, Heb. 11. Psalm. 39.

There may be some difference put between a home-dweller, a stranger, and a
soiourner. The dweller is perpetually resident, and is at home. The stranger
stays but for a short time, and is from home. Now the soiourner differs from
them both; for he has some settled abode, but it is not at home as the dwellers
is: nor is it for so short a time as the strangers is.

Now if in this strict sense we should stand upon the words, then in this world
dwellers are no men, strangers are wicked men, and soiourners are godly men.
But it is evident, that this word sojourner is taken promiscuously for any
abode, that is from home: for Luke 24.18. it is taken for a stranger in the
strictest sense; and Act. 7.19. it is taken for a sojourner in the strictest
sense.

We are sojourners as the Israelites were in (...). Many (...) from thence.
But usually it is a word that notes the condition of the godly, absent from
their heavenly happiness; and imports an allusion to the childrenof Israel,
living in Egypt, absent from Canaan: and so our Egypt is the world, our
Canaan is heaven, our soiourning is our entertainment in this world.

The world is like Egypt, and our entertainment like the children of Israel in
Egypt: For 1. Pharaoh the Devil does with all cruelties oppress the g^dly.
2. As Egypt was full of enchaunters, so is the world. 3. As Egypt abounded
with superstitions, so does the world with ign^rance, and all sorts of vain
observations: ^ut the similitude will more appear in the use.

Use.
The consideration of this, that the godly are in this world, as Israel
soiourning in Egypt, may afford both matter of Instruction and matter of
Consolation.

For Instruction it should teach us diverse duties.

1. Not to seek unto our selves great things in this world, Ier. 46.

2. To study to be quiet, and meddle with the world no more then we must needs.

3. To please our selves or rest in no prosperity, but to expect alterati^^,
never trusting the favor of the Egyptians, the men or this world. For they,
will change.

4. To have recourse to the promises of a better life, and live by faith, and
wait for the time of our changing.

5. Live separate from the conversation of worldly men, as Israel did in Goshen.

6. Endure much with patience, and commit all to God.

Secondly, this similitude imports diverse consolations.

1. Christ our Joseph, whom our fathers sold into Egypt, has provided for us
before we came into the world.

2. God has promised to go down with us, and to soiourn with us there, Gen,
45.4.

3. Ever the more we are oppressed, the more we may grow; the godly lose
nothing by their troubles, Exodus 1.8.

4. God is I am still, ever the same, howsoever the world use us, Exo. 3.14.

5. God can give us favor in the sight of the Egyptians, when and as often as
he will, Exodus 3.22.

6. God has promised, covenanted, yea sworn that he will bring us home, and
take us to himself, and be our God; he will surely bring us up again.

7. God has given us Moses and Aaron, even his two witnesses daily to comfort
us with the glad tidings of his Gospel, even the good news of our departure
hence.

8. The very time is appointed, and at the very self-same time without fail we
shall depart out of Egypt, Exodus 12.

9. God can and does work many wonders for the proof of the love of his
people, and his power to subdue the mightiest adversaries.

10. Our part we have in this world is the best part of the world; we dwell in
Goshen in comparison of the servile estate of the rest of the Egyptians: we
are free from many a misery lights upon them. And if Goshen be so good, what
is Paradise? If there be some comfort sometimes on earth, oh how does milk and
honey flow in heaven?

11. In all our distresses our cries are heard to heaven, and God pities us
with wonderful compassion. Exodus 2.23. and 3.7.

Only this is our misery in this world, that many times if the very godly
enjoy not the ministry of Moses and Aaron, they grow very secure, and are much
infected with the manners of the world: And again, if they have them, and they
tell the world Gods message, if any trouble follow, they are too often ready to
murmr, as if they had much hurt by the ministry of Gods servants.

Thus of the first point, namely that we are sojourners: The second follows.
namely that there is a time of our sojourning here.

Time] Duration, or the continuance of a thing is either infinite, or finite.
The one is the continuance of God: the other of the creatures. Job 10.5.
^he measure of the one is eternity absolutely considered: the measure of the
other is time.

Time may be considered in the means of it: either the means of effecting, or
appointing, Genesis 1.14.
which is the decree of God with all the means of execution of it: or else the
means of declaring or numbering, which is the course of the Sun, and Moon:
Psalm. 31.
our continuance on earth is not disposed by the course of the heavens, but by
the decree and providence of God. Gal. 4.2.


By time here is meant that space of continuance on earth, Acts 17.26.
which God in his counsel has set us, and is numbered by the motion of the Sun
or Moon. Job 24.1.
This time we may number as it is past, but know it not as it is to come, A^^s
1.7.
it being ordinarily hidden from the sons of men.

Neither may we reckon of the time of man upon earth, as we do of the
continuance of heaven and earth: Job 14.1.
for the time of man is wonderful short in comparison of many other creatures.
1 Cor. 7.29.


This time also once set is unchangeable, we cannot pass it, Job 14.5.

The maine doctrine is, Doct.
that God has unchangeably set us a time for our continuance here, known unto
him, though unknown unto us.

The Uses may be diverse.

1. It may comfort us against the inconveniences of our sojourning; Use.
our time is set, we shall not always be from home, we shall short^y be
gathered to our fathers, and the afflictions of this present condition are not
worthy the joy and glory we shall enjoy for ever, Romans 8.18.

2. This should the rather make us willing to have little to do with this
world, but use it as if we used it not, 1 Cor. 7.29.

3. This should order us to a care of our preparation for death, and lessen in
us the fear of dangers and adversaries, and make us resolve never to use ill
means to save, or prolong, or shorten our lives; say with David, My times are
in Gods hands, Psalm. 31. and with Christ, I will work to day, and to morrow,
and the third day I shall, etc.

The third thing is, that this time passes; it runs out; it is continually
going away: and therefore the use should be,

1. To do good while we have time. Gal. 6.10.

2. To redeem the time past ill spent by providing, by forecast for the more
fruitful employment of the time to come: The more of this time past that has
been spent on sin, or the world, the more resolute we should be to be
conscionable in the strict use of the time that yet we are to remain in the
flesh, 1 Pet. 4.2, 3. Col. 4.5.

3. Especially we should be careful, that we discern and use the
opportunities of grace, the accepted times, the days of our salvation, they
may pass, and never return again, 2 Cor. 6.1. Mat. 16.3.

4. Since the godly are sojourners here but for a time, and this time passes
too; let us entertain them as the Princes of God, and make all possible use of
their fellowship in the best things: for they will be gone, they will not abide
with us long.

In feare] This word expresses how we should spend the time of our sojourning,
viz. with all carfulness, and due respect. But that we may reach the meaning
of this fear, we must know that there is a worldly fear, a servile fear, and
a godly fear. There is also a vain fear, as in the melancholy, of things
that are not.

worldly fear is about things of the world, as reproaches, losses, dangers,
adversaries, etc. this is a wicked fear, and the godly are commanded not to
fear the fear of the wicked. Esaias 8.

servile fear is chiefly in spiritual things, called the spirit of bondage:
such was the immoderate fear of the law, or justice of God; such is also that
fear of tra^sgression, where G^d has given no law.

god^y fear i^ ^ither restrained unto our respects of God only, and so it is a
part of his inward worship: or el^e it is that fear, which is required all
parts of holy life, and so it i^ taken here.

It may not be denied but that this fear may be referred in part to wicked
men: the Apostle warning them to be af^^aid, lest this day come upon them
before they have repen^ed of their sinne^, and so they fall into Gods eternal
wrath. Wick^d men have go^d cause to ^eare: for the threatenings of God are
against them: the wrath of God hangs over their heads; sin lies at the
door; their own conscience will witness against them; the devil is ready to
dev^ure them; death may fall (...) upon them, and then they must bear the open
and eternal shame and confusion of all their works: but I will restra^e the
di^course to the godly fear.

Of a conversat^^n with (...).
The f^are then here required, is that reverence, humility, lowliness,
tenderness, modesty, and carfulness, that should in all our ways. Thus we
should fear the presence of God, Psalm. 16. the name of God, Deuteronomy. 28* 58. the
Ministers of God, 2 Cor. 7 5. the displeasure of God, Psalm. 90.11. Thus we
should show fear, when we spea^e of the mysteries of godliness, 1 Pet. 3.16.
thu^ we should be afraid to offend the godly, 1 Cor. 10. or be infected by the
wicked; or that others should ruin themselves, when we might help them, Iud.
23. we should fear to provoke wicked men: we should fear lest we neglect the
precious promises off^ed unto us, Heb. 4.1. we should be jealous of others,
fearing lest they should fall f^o^ the simplicity in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.3.
we should fear the corruption of our own nature, and make conscience of the
least evil, 2 Cor. 7.11. we should live in fear, lest the day of Christ
should come upon us before we be prepared; we should also show this fear in
all our service of God, Psalm. 2.11. In these and many other ways we should
show our fear in our conversation. The wives also should fear their husbands,
Ephesians. 5.33. and servants their masters, 1 Pet. 2.18.

To have our conversation in fear excludes carnal mirth, and jollity, and
carelessness in our ways, and unreverentnesse in our carriage toward God or
amongst men.

This fear was eminent in Paul, 1 Cor. 2.3. and this is required, 2 Cor. 7.1.

The Use may be, Use.


1. For great reproof,

1. Of the universal fearelesnesse that abides in all sorts of men, never
regarding the terror of the Lord, nor thinking upon this fearful judgment of
Christ. How do men cast off fear, and dare restrain prayer, and all holy
duties, and plunge themselves into all sorts of sins with all stupidity and
carelessness*

2. Of the great neglect of this virtue even in the godly; there is not that
awful, humble, reverent, respective carriage that should be; the hearts and
faces of men are every where wanting in this fear: oh this conversation with
fear, where is it to be found almost? Where is this fear in the people
toward their Ministers? in the wife to her husband? in the servants to their
masters?

2. For instruction: Let us from hence be informed in this duty, and for
hereafter never have our hearts and carriages polluted, perfecting our
holiness in fear, and abstaining from all filthiness both of flesh and
spirit, showing in all places a fear to offend God, or dally with sin; in all
things mistrusting the corruption of our nature, 2 Cor. 7.1. Phil. 2. Romans
11.20.

3. Such as have attained unto this fear, should be wonderful thankful to
God, and careful to preserve so excellent a grace: it wins them a wonderful
deal of respect both from God and men, 2 Cor. 7.15. 1 Pet. 3.2. Psalm. 90.11.
Besi^es* of all other these are likely to hold out, Ier. 32.40. and are sure to
find comfort in the day of Christ.

And thus of the second reason.
Verse 18. Knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, a^
silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by the tradition of your
fathers, etc.


THese words contain the third Argument for the enforcing of the exhortation
laid down in the 13. verse, and it is taken from the consideration of our
redemption by Christ: we are bought out of a miserable servitude by the blood
shedding of Jesus Christ, and therefore being redeemed we ought to do two
things.

1. To be careful of the reformation of our vain conversation. 2. To place
all our faith and hope in God.
Now because he would the more drive in the power of this Argument, he lays
down diverse specialties and important reasons, why we should be moved with
this Argument from our redemption.

1. Because all the precious things in the world could never have delivered us,
in the beginning of ver. 18.

2. Because our deliverance from our vain conversation was one of the
principal ends of our redemption, and therefore if we should not be stirred
up to the care of a holy life, we should be as if we had never been redeemed,
in the latter end of ver. 18.

3. Because our redemption was effected by so matchless a price, viz. the
passion of Christ, which was inc^eased in that it was a suffering even to
effusion of blood, and in that it was a suffering of a person of wonderful
parity of nature, ver. 19.

4. Because our redemption was a thing before the world was made, ordained in
Gods eternal counsel, ver. 20.

5. Because we that now believe in Christ, have more honor done us in our
redemption, then all the Fathers in the old Church had: for the manifesting of
our redemption was an honor done to us that live in the times after the Law,
both if we respect the incarnation of Christ, who was exhibited now, and not
before; and also the publication of our deliverance by Christ already borne in
the flesh in the preaching of the Gospel.

6. Because the certainty of Christ's victory, and our purchase was in special
manner confirmed of God, and that two ways.

1. By raising him from the dead, to show, that no adversaries could hold him
down.

2. By exalting him to so great glory in heaven, which shows he had fully
pacified Gods anger, and accomplished the merit of our redemption, and this was
done, that our faith and hope might be in God, ver. 21.

So that all these words commend unto us the Argument taken from our redemption
in Christ, and serve to compel us to the perfecting of our hope, and the
ordering of our conversation.

In the unfolding of this reason, we may perceive that here are diverse great
things concerning our redemption to be entreated of, as 1. What would not
redeem us, viz. not corruptible things. 2. From what we are redeemed: viz.
from our vain conversation. 3. By what price we are bought: viz. the precious
blood of Jesus Christ, etc. 4. The antiquity of this project concerning our
redemption by Christ: viz. before ^ver the world was. 5. The time of
manifesting it to the world: viz. in those times. 6. The persons that have
profit by it: viz. you that believe in God by him. 7. The ratification of the
assurance of it, viz. the raising of him from the dead, and his glory in
heaven. 8. The end of it, viz. that we might have faith and hope in God.


Before I break open these particulars, two things may be noted: 1. The
coherence with the former reason: 2. The Apostles insinuation, or
communication, as they call it in Rhetoric. For he does not barely relate the
Argument, but to win advantage in their affection, he tells them, they know
this doctrine concerning our redemption, implying that it were a vile shame to
be ignorant of the doctrine of redemption, and importing that he was persuaded
that they had informed themselves in some good sufficiency of knowledge herein,
and therefore they might not neglect his exhortation, that might be proved by
such a known reason.

For as much.] This word notes a dependence with the doctrine of the former
reason, and shows that these reasons are linked in a chain; you cannot pull
the one, but you draw the other also. And from hence we may note,

1. The sacred combination of holy truth in the mysteries of religion, they
hang all as in one chain^, and (...) as in one body; there is a wonderful
agreement amongst them; they point one to another: whereas in the writings of
men by reason of their imperfection, they are oftentimes discording, not from
other men, but from themselves also: their assertions sound, as if they were
afraid one of another, or ready to fight one against another.

2. That the right knowledge of Christ's first coming to redeem us, serves
generally to inflame our hearts to a desire after, and care of his second
coming to judge us: For by his first coming,

1. We know he has satisfied for our sins, and therefore need not fear the
sentence of condemnation, or Gods anger.

2. We know how dearly he paid for our sins, and therefore we should for ever
hate sin.

3. We know that he cannot but do us honor then, since for our sakes he
himself was judged on earth, and did shed his own blood for us.

4. We know that at that day we shall be fully redeemed, and receive all the
inheritance prepared for us. What shall I say, if this his first coming were
so full of love, pity, care, grace, and profit for us: how then should we long
for his second coming, when he shall give himself not for us, but to us for
our eternal delight and happiness?

The Use may be for trial of the truth of our faith in his first coming; Use.
if we can stir us up with care and cheerfulness to provide for his second
coming, then we do effectually believe it; else it is very doubtful whether
we do indeed know Christ crucified.

Thus of the coherence: the insinuation follows.

Ye know.

From hence four things may be noted.

1. That we may be profitably put in mind of the things we know: yea we need
to be put in mind of them, for thereby we may know things the better and more
fully: but especially we need it for the use of knowledge. This is true in
rebu^es for sin, in consolations in affliction, in directions for our lives,
and as here in the doctrine of the mysteries of our religion: they and we know
the doctrine of redemption perhaps, but the powerful use of that doctrine we
are altogether wanting in: besides, what we know; we know but in part.

The Use is for great reproof of those vain persons, Use.
that neglect hearing, reading, admonition, etc. upon pretense they know it
already: if that were true, yet this doctrine shows we need to be put in mind
even in the things we know: yea wise men will receive commandments, yea and
rebukes too, Prove. 9.

It is a discreet and commendable charity sometimes the better to persuade, and
win affection, to insinuate the praises of others, as here the Apostle; so
did Paul to Agrippa, Act. 26.3. It is certain, that by nature we are pleased
highly with others opinions of our knowledge; and contrariwise, the a^pe^sion
or ignorance is wonderful hateful: there be some sins that vex us more then
others to have them imputed, as lying, and diverse others: so ignorance: the
devil knew this well in Eves case, the intimation of ignorance made her ruin
her self and her prosterity; and so does the devil still. What makes many go
to hell for want of direction how to be saved? even this, they will not have
their ignorance seen. What makes many leap from the cradle of religion to the
throne of censure, so as to think themselves fit to judge whole Nations, when
troops of learned men are extremely toyled with advising? Is it not this
opinion of knowledge? Now as the devil uses it for hurt, so may the godly
make advantage of the weakness of our natures herein, the better to direct us
to good.

3. Of all doctrines we must be sure to know the doctrine of our redemption:
for this is the most fundamental doctrine of all others. It is impossible to
be saved without the knowledge of this. 2. Of all doctrines this is most
clearly taught in Scripture. 3. Of all doctrines, we have most need of this
against the discomforts of temptations, infirmities, afflictions, and death it
self. 4. This most exalts the glory of Gods grace and mercy, and all others
are in a manner built upon this. 5. Lastly, this has exceeding great force to
persuade us to holiness of life: for it both shows us to whom we belong, and
what reason we have to obey him; and withal implies how vile we are in our
selves.

Use.
First, so labor for knowledge herein, that thou mistrust thy own nature, and
the policy of the devil: even the slower thou find thy disposition to it,
the more strive after it: let not the devil rob thee of this knowledge above
all other.

We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver and gold.

In these words is contained the first principal point, namely, the invalidity
of all earthly things to redeem us: they contain the disabling of the riches
of this world: and as the words lie, two things are said against the treasures
of this world.



Secondly, that they are corruptible things.

That they cannot redeem the soul of man is evident, 1. By proof, Psalm.
49.6, 7. 2. By experience, we see wicked men abound in these things, and yet
go to hell, Psalm. 17. ult. and 73.12. Eccles. 9.11. 3. This may appear by a
distribution of the parts of redemption: for they cannot appease Gods anger,
Prove. 11.4. they cannot restrain the devils power: they cannot buy us a
righteousness answerable to that the law requires: they cannot be a ransom to
keep the soul from hell, Job 29.9, 19, 20. they cannot cover our imperfect
work^: they cannot buy us a better nature, but rather choke the word of God,
Mat. 13. and make men careless of repentance, and conceited of the^^elves and
wilful to entertain sin, Prove. 28.11. Hosea 12.8. and drown men in noisome
lusts, 1 Timothy 6.9. yea how hard is it for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom
of heaven? Mat. 19. Lastly, they cannot make us immortal, Iam. 1.10, 11. Thus
it is clear, they cannot redeem us.

corruptible: This is manifest; Solomon says, they have wings, Prove. ^7. they
vanish, subject to violence or vanity, Mat. 6.13. yea many times they go away
with an ill loose, it may be the ruin of the owners, Job 20.18. Eccles. 5.
Ier. 17.11. nor can they go with their owners when death comes, Psalm. 49.17.

Use.
The Use may be,

1. For information: It should raise the price of true grace, and all the
means thereof: we should labor to be affectionately persuaded, that grace and
the means thereof is better then all gold, Psalm. 37 16. to 23. Ier. 17* 11,
22. Prove. 19.1. and 22.1. Psalm* 19.14. grace (...) called the unsear^^able
riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. yea grace with reproach is better then all treasures
with honor, Heb. 11.26.

2. ^t may inform us concerning the woeful estate of rich men, especially
wicked rich men, that have nothing to trust unto but their wealth. Alas, alas,
could they but think of death, oh how should they tremble! let them remember,
that at the day of Christ many a rich man shall howl, and wish the very (...)
to cover (...), and yet cannot escape, Rev. 6. the very rust of their riches,
which proved their corruptiblenesse, shall witness against them, I ^^. 5.1.
they should think often of that parable, Luke 12.15, 20, 21. and that other
Luke 16. of Dives in hell: yea in this life thou may be in honor, and yet be
but like a beast that perishes, Psalm. 49. especially they are to be bewailed,
if they trust in their riches, and rejoice in them, and boast of them, Job
31.24, 25. and will be as vain as their ancestors, Psalm. 49.12, 13.

3. If outward things in their lawful use be so base, what are they in their
sinful use, either of getting, or spending?

4. How excellent then is the Lord Jesus that did redeem us, when all these
could not and how worthy to be beloved?

2. For instruction: 1. To rich men, therefore never to trust more in uncertain
riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. Psalm. 62.10. 2. Not to despise poor Christians, and
admire wicked rich men, Iam. 2.5, 4. 3. Let not the rich man glory in his
riches, though he be a godly man, Ier. 9.24. 4. Let us rather strive to be like
green olive trees in Gods house, Psalm. 52.7, 8.


Quest. But what shall we do with riches, are they good for nothing?

Answ. 1. Make friends with them, Luke 16. 2. Buy the means of grace with
them, Prove. 17.16. 3. Be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6.19, 20. 4. Eat and drink
and rejoice, Eccl. 2.24. 5. It may teach the godly the willinger both to want
gold and silver, and to practice all the duties of abnegation, and the contempt
of them.


Thus of the first point: The second is, from what we are redeemed, viz.

From your vain conversation received by tradition from your fathers.

The thing from which we are redeemed, is our own conversation, amplified by
the quality, it is vain, and by the cause of it, viz. the tradition of our
fathers.

First of redemption from our conversation in general, if any ask, Quest.
From what we are redeemed in Christ? if I answer fully, I must say from six
things.

1. From the displeasure of God: Answ.

We are redeemed from six things.


the passion of Christ being a full expiation for all our sins that angered God,
1 Job. 2.2.

2. From condemnation, unto which we were justly sentenced; this is a fruit of
the former expiation also, Romans 8.1.

3. From the power of Satan, who as a jailer and executioner of vengeance had
possession of us, Heb. 2.14.

4. From the rigor of the moral law: For Christ having made redemption for
the transgressions of the former Testament, he has obtained for us new
conditions by virtue of the New Testament ratified by his blood, Heb. 6.8. Romans
6.

5. From the present evil world, even from the judgments might have fallen
upon us for our sins, and from the bondage under the course of this world,
and from all the enchantments with which we were bewitched, Gal. 1.^.

6. Lastly, we are redeemed from our vain conversation, even from the power of
our own corruption, and the practice of a body of sins. This last is here
mentioned either by a synecdoche, by one part meaning the whole, or else to
note, that till we be freed from the power of sin in our conversation, we can
never actually attain the comfort of any of the former, as were easy to prove
in the particulars. Thus in general.

In particular I consider of two things.

First, of the vanity of our conversation, from which we are redeemed.

Secondly, of the cause of it, here said to be the tradition of the fathers;
and in the explication of the first I consider of three things.

1. What the vanity of our conversation is. 2. I note diverse doctrines to be
thence observed. 3. I resolve certain questions, and then make uses of all
together.
Our conversation is vain in diverse respects, as we are unregenerate.


1. Because continuing in such an estate, they fail of the happiness unto
which man was created, and so they are as if they were created in vain, Psalm.
89.48. 2. Because in their sinful courses they cannot attain their own ends,
but are always deceived of their expectation, Job 33.27. Psalm. 31.7. Psalm.
127.1. 3. Because of their transitory condition, they are daily wearing away,
Psalm. 144.4. 4. Because unregenerate men seldom or never attain that equal
condition, that might give them a sufficiency without extremes: they are
either too rich or too poor; and this is vanity and lies, Prove. 30.8. Diverse
sins in respect of which men's conversations are said to be vain.
5. Because all earthly things are vain, Ecclesiast. every where. 6. There are
diverse special sins in the life of man, for which his conversation may be said
to be vain, (and this I think is here intended) as 1. To worship images is a
vanity, 2 King. 17.15. Zach. 10.2. Deuteronomy. 32. 21. Ier. 8.19. and 10.18. 2.
Lip-service is a vanity, Mat. 15. In vain do ye worship me, etc. compared
with Esaias 18.13. 3. Hypocrisy in carriage is vanity, Iam. 1.26. 4. To trust in
man, or vain helps, Psalm. 62.9. Esaias 30.7. 5. The care of life, Psalm. 39.6. 6.
Conceitednesse and boasting is a vanity, Job 11.11. 2 Pet. 2.18. 7. Opposing of
the godly, or disgracing them is vain. Psalm. 4.2. 8. The multiplying of
devises and projects in the mind is vanity, Psalm. 94.11. and such are the
fruitless thoughts of the mind, Ephesians 4.17. 9. Flattering and double-dealing is
vanity, Psalm. 12.2. and 41.7. 10. The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is
vanity, tossed to and fro of them that seek death, Prove. 2^.6. 11. The service
of the lusts of the flesh is vanity, Ephesians. 2.3. hence debauched men are said to
be vain men, 2 Chronicles. 13.7. 12. The excess in seeking the unprofitable
pleasures of the world, and delights of life, Ion. 2.8. Psalm. 119.37. Eccles.
11. ult. Psalm. 24.4.



1. That all men by nature are vain men; such is the depravation of nature in
all mankind, Psalm. 39. and 62.9.

2. That there needs no more to make a man miserable on earth, then to be
guilty of a vain conversation. It is an extreme wretchedness to spend our
time in the vanity of conversation: it is called a sore sickness in it self;
and besides, so long as we continue in that condition, we have no part of the
redemption by Christ.

3. It is the greatest happiness on earth to get rid of the guilt and power of
our vain conversation: This is a maine part of our redemption by Christ, and
chiefly intended.

Quest. Is there not vanity in the conversation of the godly themselves?

Answ. There is: for even in them there are vain thoughts, distractions in
Gods service; sometimes delight in vain things: always too much love of
earthly things, too much liking of their own ways, hidden hypocrisy, pride,
and such like.

2 Quest. But how then can men be said to be redeemed from their vanity, or
vain conversation, seeing there is vanity still in them?

Answ. There are five degrees of our redemption from our vain conversation. 1.
The first is the promise of it in the word. Five degrees of redemption from a
vain conversation.
2. The second is the purchase of it by paying the price. 3. The third is the
imputation of it. God justifying the sinner in Christ. 4. The fourth is the
^^cboation of it by the renewing of our natures in part. 5. The fifth is the
consummation of it in heaven. Four of the degrees are past upon the godly,
only the fifth remains.

3. Quest. But by what signs may a man know his own redemption from his vain
conversation?

Answ. Our redemption from our sinful and vain conversation may be discerned:
Seven signs of our redemption from a vain conversation.


1. By our putting off the deceiveable lusts of the inward man, even by our
throwing of them out of service, and denying the old vanities of our thoughts
and desires, Ephesians. 4.22. 1 Pet. 1.12, 13. Psalm. 24.4. 2. By our vexation at the
vain and wicked conversation of other men, 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. Psalm. 31 7. and
26.4. 3. By our contempt of the world, and desire after a better life, Phil. 3.
18, 20. 4. By our sorting our selves with such as fight against the corruptions
of the world, Phil. 1.27. 5. By our desire in all things to live honestly, Heb.
13.18. 6. By our good works, either of piety or mercy, Iam. 3.13. 7. By our
meekness of wisdom in the best things we do, La^. 3.13. 1 Pet. 3.16.
Seeing the freedom of a vain conversation is one chief past and end of our
redemption, there may be diverse Uses made of it. Uses.


1. It should quicken us to a care of a sober conversation: since this (...),
what manner of persons ought we to be in all godliness, and holy conversation?
yea we should strive to be examples to others in conversation, 1 T^^.* 4.12.
especially we should labor to live without rebuke, 1 (...) 12.

2. If shows the misery of all such as yet abide under the power of a vain
conversation: for thereby it is apparent, they have as yet no part in the
virtue of the death and resurrection of Christ, Ephesians. 2.3. especially of such as
draw iniquity with cords of vanity, Esaias 5.18.

3. It should in special awaken the godly to watch over their ways for the
suppressing of vanities: it is a foul sight to see men professing the love of
God, and hope of a better life, to grow va^^^; and be taken up again with the
delights in foolish vanities, such as are strange apparel, deliciousness of
fare, abundance of pleasures, lightness of carriage, etc. Job 31.5.

4. For singular comfort: if we feel the delights in foolish vanities to be
gone, and the power of our former (...) to be beaten down for hereby we may
know infallibly that we are in Christ, and redeemed by him.

Thus of the quality of our conversation, the cause follows.

Received by the tradition of the father^

There are amongst the rest six ways by which sin comes into the life of man,
and is charged upon him.

1. By imputation, and so we are guilty of Adams sin in paradise. Six ways by
which sin is derived upon man.
2. By propagation, and so we receive the ori^inall corruption of our natures,
Psalm. 51. 3. By imitation of the sins of others. 4. By consenting to the sins
of others. 5. By inventing sin our selves, Eccles. 7 ult. 6. By tradition, that
is, by direction, and (...), by word of mo^th: This is the way (...) meant
(...).
By fathers here he means their very fathers of their flesh, their natural
Parents, both those that were next unto them, and those more removed from them,
as ancestors, and other kindred in the flesh.

The (...) is, that one great cause by which the life of man is infected, is
the corrupt counsel, direction, and tradition of Parents according to the
flesh, Ezech. 20.4, 18. Amos 2.4. Zach. 1.4. Esaias 14.21. Ier. 9.14. Gal 1.13,
14.

Two things would be here explicated: 1. what corruption men receive by
tradition from their Parents. 2. how it comes to pass, they should be so bad
by such traditions.

How many ways children are infected by the tradition of their fathers.
as

1. Gross errors in opinion.

2. Diverse superstitions in their life, as were the traditions of the Pharisees,
Mat. 15. and so for the Papists, as the observation of diverse fasts, etc.

3. Children learn diverse sins only, or chiefly from their Parents: as these
sins should be put off, ( Ephesians. 4.22. to the end) viz. lying, frowardness,
corrupt communication, bitterness, etc. from whence have children them but
from the tradition of Parents? Do not Parents first train them to revenge,
pride, cursing, swearing, etc? Hence also come diverse vain words, either in
the use of Gods titles, or in nicknames, and reproaches of others. Whence are
the sins in every calling, but from imitation of Parents?

4. What is the reason, why many will not be drawn into any other care of a
religious life, either in respect of the service of God, or other reformation,
but only because they saw their fathers take another course? Whence are all
those objections cast in the way of all the parts of sincerity and rege(...) of
life, but from the tradition of their parents? Whence comes negl^ct of the
service of God at Church, or in the family, but from this fountain in many?

Quest.


Answ.
I answer, 1. Because they are cast into the natures of the children in the
youngest years, and so are the more infection, because they were first seasoned
with them. 2. Because of the affection children bear to their Parents, and
their opinion of their sufficiency. A child naturally thinks his Parents are
the best creatures in the world, at least for them to be guided by. 3. Because
they are continually conversant with them, and so see no other, or no better
precepts or examples. 4. Because most Parents are not careful enough to bring
them up in the nurture and in^tr^ction of the Lord.


Use. Seven rules for Parents in ordering their children.
The Use may be for Instruction both to Parents and children.

1. Parents should be humbled under the consideration of the misery they bring
upon their children, both by propagation, and tradition, especially they should
be careful by all means to prevent this hurt in their children: and to this
(...)*

1. They should for over abhor the teaching of their children such pride,
lying, swearing, etc. as does corrupt them. 2. They should contrariwise instill
good precepts into them, and the rather, because what good they are at first
seasoned withal by their parents, will more stick by them. 3. They should
(...) lead them to the Word of God, and betimes exalt the glory and (...) of
it in them; that they may be informed, that from thence all perfect rules are
to be fetched. 4. They should inure them to good company. 5. They should give
them good example themselves, and set before them the best example of others.
6. They should betimes correct those buds of sin, which spring out of the
propagated sin. 7. Lastly, they should carefully set up the worship of God in
the family, that from their cradles they may see the practice of piety.
2. Children should also learn from hence, 1. Not to rest wholly upon the
tradition of Parents, and to know it is not a sufficient rule to warrant their
actions: their Parents said or did so, and therefore they must say or do so
too. It is no dishonor to Parents, that their children should know they are
not absolute: it is a glory God the Father has reserved unto himself;
especially if thy Parents have been given to idolatry, or superstition, thou
must cleanse thy heart from all that dross thou have any way received from
them, Gal. 1.13. Ier. 8.19. and 10.8. 2. What good is commended especially of
the good fathers, those we should embrace, and the rather for their sakes.
There are three sorts of Fathers we should observe with great respects.

1. The holy Fathers mentioned in Scripture, we should study their praises and
precepts.

2. The glorious Fathers and Martyrs that have been in former ages, those
especially that either were before Antichrist his time, or in his time did rise
up against their idolatry and superstitions.

3. Our own particular, godly, and religious ancestors, and parents according
to the flesh. If God have given thee godly Parents, thou should^^ rejoice, and
with all affection make thy gain of their holy examples, and counsels,
accounting it a singular mercy of God to give thee such to guide thee, as carry
so much neerenesse and affection to thee.

3. Shall not this evidently confute their gross folly, that so much urge the
tradition of the Fathers?

4. Are men so zealous for the tradition of their fathers of the flesh: and
shall not we be much more zealous for the traditions of God himself delivered
in his word? and the rather, because we are bound to love God above all the
fathers or mothers of the world: and besides, his counsels are all perfect,
there can be no defect in them; and further, no parents can afford us such
acceptance, or reward for obedience.

Hitherto of the second point, viz. from what we are redeemed. Now follows
the third, viz. how we were redeemed.
Verse 19. But with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled and
without spot.


GReat is the wonder of Gods works of nature in the making of this huge ^rame
of heaven and earth of nothing, and in the providence about all creatures,
especially in diverse things more eminent in those works. But of all the works
of God, the works of grace, even the great work of man's redemption is beyond
all comparison wonderful, that he should set his love upon such forlorn
wretches, as men in their corruption are, and that he should provide for them
such an excellent happiness. But above all, the means by which he does this,
is infinitely beyond the reach of all the judgments and affections of all
creatures: and this is it which is most effectually comprehended in this verse:
That he should effect this redemption by his own Son, such a Son, so
richly qualified, with such a price as the very blood of his Son, with such a
strict account of him, that his nature and works for man must not have a spot
or blemish in them: oh how should we be swallowed up with admiration, and cry
out, oh the depths of the wisdom and mercy of God! yea how should we be vexed
at the vile dullness and deadness of our hearts, that cannot be more affected
with those indelible ravishments? How justly might we perish for ever, that
have no more mind to seek after such a Redeemer, and cleave unto that God and
Father of mercies, that has found out such a way of redemption for us?

But that the nature and use of this great point may be urged yet more fully, I
consider of the particulars in this verse concerning the means of our
redemption: For here are two things to be noted: 1. By whom we were redeemed.
2. How we were redeemed. 1. In respect of his passion: by his precious blood.
2. In respect of his obedience: by his righteousness. 1. Of nature: A lamb
without blemish. 2. Of action: A lamb without spot.




Christ.] This word is a collective: it imports not only the person, but also
the office of the Messiah. For Christ is not God alone, or man alone, but God
and man united in one person: for it is a word always used of the person,
sustaining both natures. Nor does it rest there, but it signifies his
anointing of God, as the word signifies, and so that he has accomplished
all that was signified by the anointings in the law, and so he was in substance
all, that the anointing of Prophets, Priests, and Kings could signify: and so
^^mmarily it puts us in mind of the excellencies of our Savior in person and
office above all things in the world. So then if you ask, By whom man was
redeemed? The Apostle by saying by Christ does as it were particularly tell
you, that we are redeemed by him,

1. Th^^ from all eternity was the begotten Son of God.

2. That in time was conceived so miraculously by the over-shadowing of the
holy Ghost, and borne of a Virgin (a most transcendent wonder,) made a true
man, and this h^^^ne nature of ours was taken into the subsist^^ce upon the
person of his divine nature, so as he was now (...)* a God and a man, Romans 9.5.

3. That in both these united natures by an unspeakable mission from God the
Father, he did undertake that marveilous office of mediation between God and
man, wherein he took it upon him to unite us to God, and God to us for ever.
This is our Savior, and this is he alone that claims the glory of this work:
he alone trod the wine press of Gods wrath; he alone is our Savior, and
there is no other, Act. 4. Esaias 64. 1 Cor. 1.30. there is no (...) in heaven
and earth by which we can be saved, but only by his.

Uses.
The Uses follow.

1. We may here observe the wonderful wisdom and mercy of God in the choice
of our Redeemer: for this is he that was foreordained of God: by him we are
restored, by whom we were created: by him we partake of Gods love, that was the
Son of his love: in him we obtain the adoption of (...), that was himself
the only begotten Son and heir of God by (...), that God and man might be
one in covenant. This one is made God and man in person.

2. For instruction we may learn diverse duties.

1. To bless God for our Savior Christ, as the foundation of all our
happiness. Shall (...) talk of his righteousness all the day? Shall not
everlasting joy be upon our heads* Psalm. 103.1, 2. and 71.23. Esaias 35.10. 1
Cor. 30, 31. Ephesians. 1.6, 7.

2. To seek redemption in him both from the guilt of our sins, Romans 3. 24, 25,
Esaias 44.22. and from the power of them, and from the punishment of them, Psalm.
1 30.7. Job 19.25. Psalm. 34.19. etc. Esaias 63.16. and 50.2. Psalm. 31.7. and
55.18. Hos. 13.14.

3. Therefore we must serve him in holiness, and righteousness all our days,
Luke 1.68, 74. Esaias 59.20. Tit. 2.14.

4. Let us follow the example of his humility, and let him that would be great
amongst us, be the servant of all, Mat. 20.28. Coherence.

5. Honor the redeemed of Jesus Christ, and ever say, what one Nation is like
to Christ's people?

By his blood.]

Hitherto of the person by whom we were redeemed: now follows the manner. We
were redeemed, 1. by the passion of Christ: 2. by the obedience of Christ; and
well are they joined together: for the justice of God required both, and it
has ever been the nature of the Devil, and the world to power out floods of
tribulation after innocence, especially in the eminent: As it was with Christ,
so it is with all his members, who are conformed unto him both in sufferings
and obedience: and as any are more innocent, so is their passion the greater:
but let that pass.

The first point here intended is, that the Holy Ghost would have us to know,
and knowing to be deeply affected with it, that we were ransomed by blood, yea
by the blood of Jesus Christ, God and man. For the explication of this point,
four things briefly would be considered. 1. That it is. 2. What it is. 3. Why
it is. 4. How it is.

1. The first: that our ransom was to be paid in blood, was foretold
continually from the very fall by sacrifices in blood, and is proved by
express Scriptures, Heb. 9.13, 14. Act. 20.28.

2. For the second: The blood of Christ is diversely taken: sometimes
sacramentally, and so the wine in the Sacrament is his blood, Mat. 26.
sometimes mystically, and so the blood of the Martyrs is the blood of Christ,
and so they are said to fulfill the rest of the passion of Christ: sometimes
imputatively, and so the Saints have their robes made white in the blood of the
Lamb, Revel. 7.14. but most an end properly for his natural blood, and so it
is taken here. For no Saints nor blood of Martyrs can make atonement for our
sins: But by his blood ( He) syne^d^chically means all his passion, even all
that he suffered of the malediction of the law, as the surety for our sins.

3. For the third: If any ask, Quest.
why Christ in suffering endured this kind of suffering? I answer, 1.
Expiation for sin was a way universally conceived of to be fittest done in
blood. Answ.

Why Christ shed his blood.


2. Hereby he fulfilled both the Scriptures of the Prophets, and the types went
before of him. 3. It was not only for example, but also for the sanctification
of the like sufferings in the Martyrs of all ages. 4. It was one of the curses
of the law. 5. It was his good pleasure hereby to show his matchless love to
us.


If we ask, why this part of the passion of Christ is so much stood upon,
Quest.
and so often remembered? I answer, Answ.

Why the blood of Christ of all other things in his passion is most urged.




1. To show the extremity of Christ's humiliation. 2. To show the full
accomplishment of all types. 3. To confirm our faith in the assurance of the
compleatnesse of our ransom. 4. To settle our hearts with more affection to
him.
4. For the fourth: Christ shed his blood for us many times: As first in his
Circumcision, as the first fruits, and pledge of the rest. 2. In his sweat in
the garden. 3. When he was crowned with thorns and whipped. 4. When he was
nailed on the Cross. 5. When his side was pierced with a spear: The last is
chiefly intended.

The Use may be diverse.

Use.
1. It may inform us of our extreme misery by nature: men must think upon it,
their native condition is most servile, else there had not needed such a
ransom by such blood.

2. It may import the horrible misery of wicked impenitent sinners, when they
shall fall into Gods hands: If Christ being but a surety for others suffered
such extreme things, oh what mercy can wicked men expect? The very dolours of
Christ should teach them, how miserable their case shall be.

3. To consider, that Christ has bought us to himself by his blood, should
compel our affections to resolve more unchangeably, and unfainedly to devote
our selves to his service that paid so dear for us. Shall we not live to him
in all sincerity, that was feign to shed his blood, before he could redeem us
to himself, as a peculiar people? If any thing will do it, this should kindle
the zeal of good works in us.

4. It may comfort us many ways. 1. It shows that Christ wonderfully loves
us. 2. That the satisfaction of our debt is fully made. 3. That his
intercession daily for us must prevail, since his blood cries in heaven for
us, and speaks better things then did the blood of Abel. 4. That our
nourishment to eternal life shall be surely effected, because he has given
himself as bread, and his blood as drink for us.

5. It should teach us patience in all our afflictions, or combats with sin,
seeing we have not resisted unto blood, as the author and finisher of our faith
did, Heb. 12.3, 4.

Precious blood.]

O^ the preciousnesse of the blood of Chr^^t.
The blood of Christ is commended for the mavelous preciousnesse of it, which
may appear besides the express affirmations of Scripture: 1. By the
continual view of the slain sacrifices. 2. By the amasement of the creatures,
when it was shed: The Sun eclipsed, the veil of the Temple rent, the
rockstorne, the earth trembling, etc. 3. By the admirable effects of it: it
appeased Gods anger. Romans 3.25. it purchased the Church, Acts 20. 28. which all
the gold and silver could not do: it ratified the covenant, therefore called
the blood of the covenant, Luke 22.20. Heb. 9.18. it is our drink indeed, John
6. it makes a holy consanguinity between Jew and Gentile, they are all allied
in the blood of Christ, Ephesians. 2.13. it overcomes the Devil, Rev. 12. it saves
us from the destroying Angels, Heb. 11.18. it makes intercession for sins after
calling continually in heaven, Heb. 12.24. it purges the conscience from dead
works, Heb. 9.14. and it opens the holy of holies* and gives an entrance into
the kingdom of heaven, Heb. 10.19.

Quest. But whence comes this preciousnesse into the blood of Christ?

Answ. I answer; many ways, 1. Because it was shed willingly, Ioh. 10.

What mak^s the blood of Christ so precious.
2. Because it was the blood of an innocent man; but especially because of the
dignity of his person: it was the blood of him that was God as well as man,
Acts 20.28. and therefore must needs be of infinite merit, and virtue.

Use.
Is the blood of Christ so precious?

1. Then let us for ever exalt that riches of grace in God, that spared not the
blood of his own Son, that he might not destroy us, Ephesians. 1.7. Revel. 1.5.

2. Then let us for ever detest merits of our own works, seeing the price is
of such infinite value, and sufficiency, Romans 3.25. Coherence.

3. ^t should then augment the confirmation of our faith in our redemption
against all the temptations of Satan, or rebellion of our own hearts, or
oppositions of the world, Romans 5.9.

4. If shows, how careful we should be of our selves, that were bought at so
precious a rate, Mat. ^6.

5. Let (...) all then take heed of sinning against the blood of Christ (for if
it be thus precious, it must needs diffuse a horrible guilt upon such as offend
against it: if Abels blood cried so, what will Christ's blood do? etc.) as they
do, 1. That swear by it. 2. That commit the sin against the Holy Ghost. 3.
That trust to their own merits. 4. That receive the Sacrament unworthily, 1
Cor. 11.

As a lamb without blemish and spot.

Hitherto of his passion. Now follows his obedience, or innocence both of
na^^re and action, and both as they commend the excellency of him, that
suffered for us: His innocence is set out by comparison of a spotless lamb,
in which words it is Gods purpose to lift up our hearts to an apprehension of a
wonderful purity in Christ, as he is our surety and Savior.

The maine observation is, that God would have us to know affectionatly the
wonderful holiness of Christ, as he is our Mediator and Redeemer: it is one
chief thing we should be informed in. Hence the sacrifices still shadowed him
out by the similitude of a spotless lamb, and therefore he is called the
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, Rev. 13.8. and the Apostles for
urging this point may well be called the Apostles of the Lamb, Rev. 21.24.
John calls him the Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.29, 36.

Christ may be called a Lamb: Christ like a lamb in six things.


1. For harmelesnesse. 2. For patience and silence in affliction, Esaias 53.7.
Ier. 11.19. 3. For price and value: for rareness and high account: it seems
lambs were of special account, Genesis 33.19. and 21.28, 30. 4. For infirmities:
he took the infirmities were miserable, but not those were damnable. 5. For
meekness and humility. 6. For sacrifice: The lambs in the ceremonial law what
they signified in Christ.
He was the substance of all that was signified by the typical lambs: he was
the substance of the paschall lamb, of the lamb for daily sacrifice, for the
peace-offrings, for the trespasse-offrings, for the purification of women, and
of the lepers, and the lamb for the first fruits, and for the
trespasse-off^ing of the Nazarites, and for the free will offerings, or vows;
and the lamb for the sabbaths, and new moons, and the feast of trumpets; and
the lamb for the day of humiliation, and for the feast of tabernacles; the
lamb for the Priests, and the Princes, and the people.
It is by the sprinkling of his blood we escape the destroying Angels: It is for
his sake, that God is every day pleased in his propitiation for our sins: He
is our daily sacrifice, that we must still offer to God for our selves: It is
he we must offer to God for our trespasses, and no gifts we can bring to God
will be acceptable without him: In him we are freed from the corruption of our
natures, and from the leprosy of actual transgressions: In him we have the
confirmation of all our outward blessings: The Priests, and Princes, as well as
the people must ascribe all their reconciliation to him: There are no persons
so devoted to religion, but they must acknowledge their needs of Christ; nor
can our best actions or times be accepted without him.

Whereas it is said, he was without spot or blemish, the Holy Ghost means to
avouch, that he was most holy both in nature and life, there could not be a
spot found in his actions, nor any the least blemish in his disposition.

And it was needful Christ should be so pure: 1. Because else his passion
could not be accepted. 2. Because he must become a righteousness to many.


Quest.
If any ask how he could be so, seeing he came of Adam, and had his infirmities
both of body and mind?

Answ.
I answer, that he came of Adam, but not by Adam, that is, not by carnal
propagation, but was conceived by the holy Ghost, and so original sin stopped:
and for his infirmities, I said before, he received such infirmities, as the
Fathers call miserable, that is, such as were punishments, not sins; but not
such as were damnable, as all sinful infirmities are.

Uses.
The Uses follow.

1. We should inform our selves by often meditation of this wonderful
righteousness in Christ, beholding by our medication the lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the world.

2. For instruction many things may be urged.

1. We should give honor to the lamb that sits upon the throne, whose
praises fill both heaven and earth, Rev. 5.7. etc. 2. We should daily send this
lamb to the ruler of the earth, daily present him to God for us, Esaias 16.1. 3.
These praises of Christ should convert us to his image: this very doctrine
converted the Eunuch, Act. 8.31. we should imitate the praises of Christ,
hereby imported, as these places show, Rev. 14.1. to 6. 4. Let us for his
testimony resist the gates of hell, by believing in him, and love not our lives
unto the death for his sake, Rev. 12.11.
3. For consolation: Shall we not sing the song of Moses, and the song of the
lamb? Rev. 15.3. Oh how happy are his servants! Revel. 22. What should dismay
us, if we know we are contracted to this lamb of God, and shall enjoy eternal
fellowship with him, and in the mean while to be clothed with the white linen
of ^^ righteousness, Rev. 19.7, 8.

4. Woe unto them that will not rest upon him for righteousness; the smoke of
their torment shall ascend for evermore, Rev. 14.10, 11.

Verse 20, 21. 20. Which was ordained before the foundation of the world, but
was declared in the last times for your sakes,

21. Which by his means do believe in God that raised him from the dead, and
gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God.


HItherto of the means by which we were redeemed: The antiquity of the project
concerning our redemption follows.

Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the world.

The drift is to show that we have reason to be wonderfully affected with the
manner of our redemption, because it was from all eternity projected by God.
Two things may be here noted in the words. 1. The fore-ordination of Christ. 2.
The time of it, before the foundation of the world.

Who ^^^^ly was foreordained.

This word leads us beyond time into the secret and eternal counsel of God,
giving us a glimpse of Gods eternal statutes, especially concerning the
eternal happiness of the Elect by Christ.

All Scripture entreats either of God or his works. The works of God are either
internal, or external. The internal are likewise eternal before time: The
external are in time. Of God the Scriptures draw us a perfect image, as the
weakness of man can be capable of it. Of the works of God external, and in
time, the Scripture likewise plentifully discourses, as far as is needful to
salvation. Of the works of God internal there is also some little glimpse
given in Scripture, not so much to satisfy the curiosity of men's minds, as to
ravish the hearts of the godly with incitations, that might the better guide
them to contentment in their happy estate: yet there is but little, because men
should not be led aside from attending the present means of their everlasting
happiness, and because as yet the nature of man is not capable of so glorious
revelations.

The works of God before time, are either personal or essential. The
personal works are such works ad intra as pass from the three persons in the
Trinity one to other incommunicably, as the begetting of the Son, the
proceeding of the holy Ghost. The essential works are such as all the three
persons do join in without division, and these are those eternal statutes or
decrees, the making of those unsearchable laws concerning the disposing of the
Kingdom of God in time, in the erecting and ordering of the world. God, as a
wise Carpenter, before he build resolves upon the plot in his head: and as a
wise King before he enters into the administration of the Kingdom, resolves
upon the laws, by which to govern it.

These statutes have in Scripture four singular praises.

1. They are in respect of us unsearchable: far beyond the reach of any mortal
brain, Romans 11.

2. They are mavelous glorious for the wonderful majesty, and mercy, and
justice of them: such as to look in at them, but through a chincke, as it
were, ravisheth the Apostle into that exclamation, Oh the depths ^ etc. Romans 11.

3. They are unchangeable like the laws of the M^der and Persians, so as they
never lose a jot of their force, till they come ^or the last p^^iod, Romans 8.30.

4. They are eternal, as here is said, before the foundation of the world: so
Ephesians. 1.5. Mat. 25.34.

The Lord has drawn these statutes in four books, Gods four statute* books.
each containing a several draught of them.

1. The first is the book of nature: He has iugraven certain ordinances
unchangeable in the creatures, by viewing which impressions man might be made
without excuse.

2. The second is the book of conscience: The Lord in the hearts of the Elect
causing an impression of immortal truths, wherein he declares his will, so far
as may concern the salvation of that particular Elect of God.

3. The third is the book of Scripture, in which he has drawn a most exact
draught of his laws and will, for so much as may concern the salvation of all
or any of Gods Elect.

4. Now the fourth and most absolute book of statutes, is that book of life,
wherein from all eternity God has enrowled the nature and ends of all things:
and there are also many other things besides the salvation of the Elect, Psalm.
139.16. a special part of which is the Lambs book of life, Revel. 21.27.

Now unto this book does this word foreordained lead us.

The word in the Original is properly fore-se^ne: Now there are three kinds of
foresight.

1. First, that bare knowledge of things, and this reaches to all things that
ever shall be.

2. Secondly, that knowledge of approbation, God knowing man above others with
his special favor: this reaches only to the Elect.

3. Now there is a third kind of knowledge or fore-knowledg, when God is said to
know things, as a Judge does in giving sentence: Hence Plebiscitum was an
ordin^^ce made by the commons; and so when the Judge had sentenced a cause, he
was said to have known the cause. In this last sense the word is here taken,
and therefore well rendered foreordained: to note such a foresight, as had a
determination and statute in it.

The decrees of God are by some Divines distinguished by the names of
Providence and Predestination: Providence they would have contain all that
order that the Lord took from all eternity concerning all things in the world
whatsoever; so as there is nothing but is liable to Gods decree. Now
Predestination comprehends only those decrees that concern the reasonable
creatures, and especially those that concern the Election of some of them.

Three sorts of the Elect.
There is a threefold Election, or the Elect may be cast into three ranks.

1. There is the Election of man unto salvation.

2. There is the Election of Angels unto confirmation in their estates.

3. There is the Election of Christ unto the Mediatorship, and headship over
Angels and men: Of this he means here, and the decree concerning the Election
of Christ is the most illustrious of all the rest, and concerns the execution
of the most glorious work that ever was to be in the world.

The sum then is, that the Lord in his book of eternal statutes has
recorded, and determined concerning this course of saving man by the mediation
of his Son. Christ is foreordained in respect of his office of Mediatorship,
not simply in respect of his person, as God: for so he is not the person
predestined, but with the Father and holy Ghost it is he that does
predestinate (...)s he was to show himself God made man, as Mediator be^weene
God and man, so he was subject to that ordinance.

Use.
Quest. Now what use may be made of this, that we here find, that God is so
careful to make all sure concerning our redemption in Christ?

Answ. First, it may serve for consolation, we need never doubt but God will
accomplish all his goodness to us in his Son, seeing he has bound
himself, and Christ to it by his everlasting decrees: it is an ordinance must
never be changed: we see God after all this time acknowledges it in this tex^,
to be bel^eved to the worlds end.

Secondly, it may serve for instruction.

1. Shall we not be ashamed of our negligence, that have not with all diligence
labored to make our calling and election sure, when we see God so careful to
make all sure?

2. Shall we not ever willingly be subject to Gods statutes and laws, when we
see Christ himself subject himself to Gods ordinances, and that from all
eternity?

3. Shall we not long for those times, when those eternal statutes shall be
ope^ed, and Gods counsels displayed to our infinite joy?

Thirdly, it may inform us, concerning Gods wonderful hatred of sin: in
that from eternity he cannot look upon the Elect, but as they are in Christ.

Fourthly, seeing it is certainly decreed concerning the gathering of men's
souls by the (...) of Christ: it should teach Ministers with all readiness
and patience to preach the Gospel in the places where they come, as knowing
that such as are ordained of God shall be gathered even so many in these
places, as belong to the election of God, Act. 13 48.

Verily.] This doctrine of (...) is ^^tered with a kind of mild asseveration:
the reasons of which asseveration are these.

1. Because the most men will hardly believe any such thing: men by nature are
wonderful apt to object against the doctrine of Gods decrees, and therefore he
urges it with an asseveration.

2. Because of the excellency of this decree above all the rest: this was a
golden statu^e, the most amiable ordinance that ever was, that God should from
everlasting resolve to send his own Son to redeem us.

3. This asseveration is to work the greater assurance of faith in the Elect:
they should never doubt Gods love to them in Christ: for ver^ly Christ was
pre-ordained, etc.

Before the foundation of the world.

This phrase is used in diverse senses in Scripture. 1. Sometimes the foundation
of the earth is taken for the peopling of the earth, since the foundation of
the world, that is, since the peopling of it, Exodus 9.18. 2. Sometimes for
justice and judgment in the earth, the foundations of the earth were moved,
that is, all went to wrack in matters of justice, Psalm. 82.5. But usually it is
taken for the creation of the world, especially in respect of the support of
this great frame of heaven and earth. The foundation of the world is that
admirable work of God, erecting this huge frame of heaven and earth, and
supporting it by his almighty power: so that before the foundation of the
world, is, before the world was set up.

But why does he rather say, Quest.
before the foundation of the world, then before the world was?

It may be for two reasons. Answ.
First, to raise up our thoughts to the contemplation of the wonderfulnesse of
the founding of heaven and earth, for the rareness of the wisdom of God, and
the cunning he showed in this admirable frame, Prove. 3.39. for the
unsearchablenesse, Ier. 31.37. for the surenesse and durablenesse of it, Psalm.
78.69. for the absolu^enesse and independance of Gods power in framing all
this, Job. 38.4, 5* for the suddenness of it, it being all done with a word,
and for that all this was made of nothing, and that this great earth, the
foundation of all the rest, should it self lie in the waters, Psalm. 24.2. and
indeed the whole borne up only by the power of Christ without means, Heb.
1.3. Secondly, this phrase may be of purpose used for the likeness of the
state of the Church to the world, and the promise of God for the upholding of
it: He that made the world of nothing, raised a Church to himself of that
which was worse then nothing: yea all that is said before of the world may
assure us of so much, and much more in the execution of Gods counsels in Christ
for the Church, Psa. 78.79.

The doctrines are, 1. That the world had a beginning, it had a foundation,
Doct.
it was not eternal. 2. That we ought to be deeply affected with the
admi^ablenesse of the making and upholding of the world.


But who can tell that there was s^^h a wonderfulnesse in the creation of the
world? Quest.


1. Scripture does tel^ it, Heb. 11.3. Answ.
2. Christ was by when it was done, Prove. 8.29. 3. The Angels of heaven saw the
whole when it was done, and were by at the doing of a great deal, and were
rapt with admiration at the wisdom and power of God, Job 38.4, 5, 6. 4.
Lastly, the frame it self, as it (...) ^^ands, speaks evidently for the wonder
of the workmanship.
But what use may be made of the wonderfulnesse of Gods workmanship herein?

1. We should disce^^, and mark, and acknowledge the power and wisdom of God
herein, and by our often thoughts raise up our hearts to the often meditation
of it, Psalm. 104 1. to 9. Shall the Angels shout with joy, and shall we be so
dull? Job 38.6.

2. It shows the eternity of God, and his sovereignty and power to dispose and
alter all things at his will, Psalm. 102.26. and 89.11.

3. It intimates to us many consolations.

1. That God can easily prolong the life of his servants, that could give and
uphold the being of so huge a frame, Psalm. 102.26.

2. That God himself is wonderful firm, and unchangeable to all generations,
and faithful in his word, that can give such a stable being to heaven and
earth, Psalm. 119.90, 89. Esaias 40.21. and 48.13. and 51.13, 16.

3. That if the world have such a sure foundation, then much more the Church,
Esaias 14.32. For if the foundation of the world be so glorious, oh how glorious
is the foundation of Sion? If he have made such an excellent house for his
people to dwell in, it shows he loves them much, and means to provide for
them for continuance, Prove. 20.26 but especially, how precious are the
foundations of the new Jerusalem? Rev. 21.

4. This intimates the fearful power of God, in the execution of his
judgments upon wicked men, Amos 9.5. Zach. 12.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 32.22. 2 Samuel 22.8.

Doct. 3.
The project concerning our eternal salvation by Christ, was before the world
conceived in God, Ephesians. 1.4. Psalm. 90.1. Ier. 31.3.

The Uses are diverse.

Uses.
1. Therefore let us admire the matchless love of God, that not only loved us
first, but loved us before the world was.

2. Let our love to God taste of the knowledge of this doctrine, since we
began not so soon as he, let our ways, and purposes, and desires be to extend
our affections toward God to the end; yea and beyond all end also.

3. Let it comfort us in all adversity to think of this everlasting love of
God, Esaias 40.

4. Lastly, does not thi^ evidently confute merit of works? It was for no
desert in us, for we were loved before we had done either good or evil, Romans 9.

And thus of the fourth point.

But was manifest in the last times for you.

The fifth thing is the manifestation of this great work of our redemption,
amplified by the time of it, viz. in these last days: and comprehended in the
manifestation of Christ.

Christ manifested five ways.
Christ is manifested five ways.

1. For the faithful. 2. To the faithful. 3. In the faithful. 4. By the
faithful. 5. With the faithful.

^. He was manifested for them, in that he did undertake for the merit of their
redemption. 2. He is manifested to them in the preaching of the Gospel,
revealing Christ and him crucified before them. 3. He is manifested in them,
when in respect of true grace, his image is formed in them* thus God (...) his
Son in Paul, Gal. 1. 16. 4. He is manifested by them, when with their
obedience they show forth the virtues of Christ, and resemble his holiness of
carriage. 5. And he is manifested with them, in that eternal fellowship of
glory in the kingdom of heaven* It is the first kind of manifestation which
is here meant.

Now Christ was manifested for them, 1. on earth, 2. in heaven. On earth he was
manifested, 1. In his incarnation, when he showed himself in our nature: thus
was accomplished that great mystery of godliness; God manifested in the
flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. 2. In his passion: for so he was that true brazen serpent,
Ioh. 3. 3. In his ascension, showing himself in triumph, leading captivity
captive, and giving gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.

In heaven he is manifested for us, 1. By session. 2. By intercession. By
session: for so he was declared wonderfully, as head of the Church, when being
set at the right hand of God, all power was given him both in heaven and earth:
And by intercession he daily appears before God for us.

In this manifestation Christ has turned himself into all forms for us: for
he has been manifested for us as a servant to do our work: as a surety to
pay our debts: as a sacrifice to expiate for our sins: as a treasurer to supply
all our wants: as a Prophet to instruct us: as an Advocate to plead our cause:
and as a King to subdue our enemies, and rule over us.

The points of doctrine from hence to be observed are these. Doct.


1. That God may conceive a wonderful love to his people, and have a glorious
plot for their good, and yet not manifest it of a long time. Coherence shows
this.

The Use should be in all distresses public or private, Use.
for the Church where we live, or for our own particular, to live by faith,
and not mistrust, or murmr, or limit God, as if he had forgotten the cause
of his people: little know thou the thoughts of God concerning thy good, and
therefore we should check our own hearts, as David did, and say, Why art thou
so sad, oh my soul? etc. Secondly, if God once do manifest his love to thee,
oh then know thy happiness, and rejoice in thy portion: how rich is that
goodness the Lord shows thee, when in prayer, or the word, he declares hid
and mighty things in his answers, Ier. 33.3.

2. When God manifests Christ he discovers his greatest treasure, the utmost of
all Gods benefits: for Christ is unsearchable riches, and ^^ is he in whom all
the nations of the earth are blessed.

The Use is, That therefore seeing God accounts the manifesting of hi^ Son for
us to be such a matter, Use.
we should hence admire and praise this goodness of God, that sent his own
Son into the world for our sakes, and nou^ in heaven honors, and hears him for
our sakes, and in our behalf; especially this should quicken us unto the study
of that sacred knowledge of Christ and his Kingdom, and we should willingly
serve so mighty and divine a Savior.

3. That it is no comfort to know that Christ is manifested, till we know he
is manifested for us: it is ill trusting to the knowledge of Christ's
incarnation: we must seek by all possible prayer and supplication, that he may
be acknowledged as a Savior for us.

4. The knowledge of Christ's manifestation for us, should be a point that
should move and stir affection in the heart of every believer, and therefore it
is to that end in this place urged.

But what should I do, might some one say, Quest.
to show that my heart is affected toward my Savior in this point of his
manifestation either on earth, or in heaven for me?

We must show our affection herein four ways. Answ.


1. By believing in him without any doubting, seeing in respect of the
obedience of the law, the discharge of our debt, the conquest of our enemies,
the advocation in our causes, etc. he has so fully manifested himself.

2. By manifesting our selves without fear, or delay for his sake, we should
put our selves out into the open profession of his truth with all boldness;
but yet so, as we learn by his example, how to manifest our selves^ that is
to say,

1. In the fullness of time, that is, after good advise and sound deliberation:
too hasty profession oftentimes does great hurt.

2. With resolution to endure all sorts of reproaches, or what else in the
labor or opposition might befall us, though we should be accounted as he was,
Esaias 53. Heb. 12.3.

3. With all integrity, being careful to show forth his virtue, and not to
blemish our profession with any spotted conversation, especially expressing our
imitation of his humility, and dove-like harmlesnesse, and respect of Gods law,
and contempt of the world.

4. With all constancy even unto the death, that we may receive the crown of
life.

3. By manifesting our selves to be ready to do any service to his servants.

4. By longing for the time of his last and full manifestation in his appearing
at the last day.

Thus of the fifth point concerning our redemption.

The sixth is, who are redeemed, viz. such as by Christ do believe in God: for
you who by him do believe in God, verse 21.

For you.]

Doct. 1.
The maine doctrine is twofold: 1. That believers only have benefit by Christ:
for them was redemption intended: for them Christ shed his blood: for them he
was made a sacrifice: for them he was manifested both by incarnation, and the
preaching of the Gospel, and by intercession in heaven, Ioh. 17.9, 19. Heb.
11.6.

Uses.
The Use is,

1. For instruction: Be sure thou have faith whatsoever thou want, 2 Cor. 13.5.
thou perishest else for ever.

Ob. If I have all faith, yet I may perish, 1 Cor. 13.3.

Sol. All faith to do miracles, not to lay hold on Christ.

2. It is all faith without love; and love thou not Gods children?

2. For cons^^^ation to the godly, to whom God has given this precious faith:
it is to be truly rich, to be rich in faith: it makes the poorest beggar
equal with the highest Monarch, Iam. 2.5. because it procures privileges
better then that of Princes: it intitles them to a birth better then that of
the so^^ of men, Ioh. 1.12, 13. and for honor, they have favor with the
Highest, that can do more for them then all the Kings of the earth, Ioh. 3.16.
and for alliance, it makes them a kinn to all the Saints: and for contentment,
it fills them with joy unspeakable and glorious, 1 Pet. 1.9. and for victory,
it makes them more then conquerors, Romans ^. and for riches, they have all the
treasures of Christ; and for possessions, they have an immortal inheritance,
especially their glory shall appear in the day of Christ, 2 These 1.10.

3. It should quicken the godly to a care to repair and establish themselves
in the faith, and to this end to pray, as 2 These 1.11.

4. It shows the miserable estate of diverse men in the very visible Church.
There are three sorts of Christians. For I meddle not with Pagans, or
Antichristians.

1. The first is of Christians in name, such as are so only in appearance, or
profession, or the account of man.

2. The second is Christians in sign, that is, such as are so only by
baptism, that have only received the outward badge of Christianity.

3. The third i^ such as are so indeed, and such only are they that believe in
God, and that by a lively says in Christ Jesus.

2. Doctrine i^, that every one that does believe is redeemed, John 3.16. Heb.
10.39.

Use.
The Use is, First for comfort to the abject, God accepts not persons; it
matters not what money, means, clothes, diet thou have, only if thou
beleevest, be of good comfort.

Ob. The devils believe, and yet are not happy.

Sol. They believe that Christ is, but they believe not in Christ: they trust
not in him, or they believe that he is their Judge, but not their Savior.

Ob. But diverse in Job. 2. believed, and yet Christ trusted them not.

Sol. They believed his doctrine, but they trusted not on his merits: they had
historical, but not justifying faith.

Ob. But those that received the word with joy believed, and yet fell away,
Mat. 13.

Sol. They had a temporary faith, but not a saving faith; they could
neversuffer for his sake, nor were they ever new creatures to desire to be rid
of all sin, nor did that joy arise from a particular application.

The second Use is, not to have the glorious faith of Christ in respect of
persons, Iam. 2.1, 2. etc.

Thus of the general: Now in particular concerning faith, five things may be
here noted.

1. The subject of faith: viz. you that are begotten again. Of five things
concerning faith.
2. The object of faith: viz. God. 3. The nature of faith: viz. to believe in
God. 4. The cause of faith: viz. Christ, by him you believe, etc. 5. The time
of the exercise of faith: Do believe.
For the first: when he says, for you, he means such, as he had described
before verse 3. so that the doctrine is, that faith is seated only in the
hearts of regenerate men, only in the godly: It is called the faith of Gods
Elect. Tit. 1.1. and their hearts are purified tha^ have faith, Act. 15.9. they
are turned from darkness to light, Act. 26.28.

1. This doctrine shows us a way how to try our faith, whether we have faith
or no, namely, by the trial of our regeneration: as 1. If our hearts be
purified, Act. 5.9. that is, if we have been humbled for secret and inward
sins, so as the filthiness of them is abated, and washed away. 2. If we have
overcome the respect of profits, and pleasures of the world, so as we can use
them as if we used them not, 1 Ioh. 5.4. 3. If we love our kindred in grace
best, Gal. 5.6. 1 Ioh. 3.14. 4. If we find the new gifts of the spirit, for
faith always dwells amongst them, Gal. 5.22.


2. This doctrine shows again the true Christians prerogative: God has dealt
better with him then with other men: It is no matter if God have not given them
so much money, or means, or credit, or health, as they; it is enough God have
given them faith.

3. It should awaken wicked men in the midst of all their pleasures and riches:
if they miss faith, it should tame their jollity, if they consider that they
must perish: for all those things, what hope or comfort can they have, when God
shall take away their souls?

Ob. But might some of these say, It seems the Lord puts a difference, and
shuts out men from faith, and keeps them without it.

Sol. 1. The condemnation of the unbeleeuer is of himself, John 3.20.

2. The Lord commands all to believe, even every creature, Mar. 16. 1 Ioh.
3.23. 3 He sends the Word to offer grace to all, the proclamation is general,
and no man excepted that has desires after God, Esaias 55.1. 4. We see of every
condition of men God retains some to mercy, and that shows he takes no
pleasure in thy death, and that he would have all men be saved. Yea 5. the Lord
does beseech men to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.20.

For the second: The object of faith is God.

God is the object of faith, not generally in his nature, but particularly in
his mercies and promises of grace, in his word of truth, the Go^pell. When I
say God is the object of faith, I mean he is that which faith both looks
upon, (...) relies upon. Faith is alive, when it beholds Gods face in Christ.
It thinks of God, it admires God, it longs for God, it trusts only upon God,
it carries us unto God, it is employed for God, it is contented with God, it
desires no more but God.

Ob. But what reason has man to believe in God? For God is terrible in his
nature, he abhors sin, and revengeth it with all severity, it is he that
will judge men for sin, yea it is he that wounds the very particular
sinner, etc.

Sol. Yet faith carries men unto God, because of his own commandment, that men
should believe, because of the gracious promises he has made to believers:
because of the experience of as miserable sinners as he, have believed, and
were not disappointed: because faith stils Gods displeasure, and makes the Lord
put on the bowels of tender kindness; yea here appears the wonder of faith,
that though it know that it is Gods own hand that fights against sin, yet
it will run only to God to heal them again, Hosea 6.1.

Ob. But must we not believe in Christ, as well as in God?

Sol. If by this title of God we understand the essence of God, then CHRIST is
included: for we believe in the promises of the whole Trinity, and so in
Christ, who is the second person. But if by God we mean the first person in
the Trinity, and the holy Ghost, then it is spoken to our capacity, the more
fitly to express the means of our reconciliation, which is by the mediation
of Christ the middle person of the Trinity: so that the word God does not
exclude Christ from being the object of our faith with the Father; but it
includes, that Christ is more then the object, for he is a means of our
acceptance with the Father, etc.

Use.
The Use is twofold.

1. Here again we may take occasion to try our faith: If thy faith be a true
faith, thou may know it by the object of it, if it set thy thoughts and
affections on God, if thou can say as David, Psalm. 73.25. then certainly thou
have faith, and so contrariwise.

2. Is God the object of faith? then be of good comfort, he will never deny
his promise, Tit. 1.2. He is able to keep what thou committest to him, 2 Timothy
1.12. He is an Ocean able every way to fill thee with all sufficiency and
happiness.

The third thing follows, viz. the nature of faith, which is to believe in
God. To believe, is more then to understand, conjecture, hope, remember, or
affect: It is to do all that with affiance, assent, or persuasion, and that is
more plain i^ we note the phrase of speech in God; for we may be said to
believe four ways: 1. To believe that God is. 2. To believe God. 3. To
believe of God. 4. To believe in God: for this latter does import a casting of
our selves upon God.


There are also four things distinctly in faith.

1. The understanding of the Doctrine of the promise of grace. 2. The second is
the ^^^ent unto the tender of grace signified. 1. By earnest desire after the
happiness revealed in the Gospel. 2. By a willing base estimation of all
earthly things, in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Gods love in
Christ.
3. The third is the relying upon God, or the resting of the heart upon the
truth of Gods promises, as having found the chief good, in which we will
trust, and beyond which we desire no more: All this is imported in this phrase,
if we note it.

4. The fourth is the resolution to acknowledge and avouch this confidence in
God both by our cleaving to Gods promises in all estates, and by our profession
of the doctrine of Gods free grace herein.

The Use is a gain for trial: If the Lord have enlightened thee to see the
doctrine of his grace in Christ: if he have gotten thy consent to his truth,
Use.
especially if he have won thy affections, so as thou can with love, and
joy, and affiance take his word, and rest in his love to thee, as persuaded of
his mercies toward thee, and that thou can also vow thy self to the
profession of it: assuredly thou do believe.

2. This doctrine confutes the Papists, and carnal Protestants, that think
faith is no more then to believe the story of Christ, and to hope well for the
rest, whereas to believe in God does evidently import more then to believe that
God is, and to believe God to say true.

The opinion of those that think, that to believe that Christ is the Son of
God is enough to salvation, has more charity then authority in it: Many places
of Scripture prove we must believe that Christ is the Son of God, and it is a
charectiristicall difference between the true Church, and diverse false
assemblies: but yet the Scripture shows, we must believe more then that, or
else we may perish: For the condition, Ioh. 3.16. is not to believe that he is
the Son of God, but to believe in him, which is to receive and apply him, John
1.12.

4. The fourth thing is the cause of faith: By him. It is by Christ that we
believe in God, and that for diverse reasons. Doct.


1. As he is the expiatorie cause of Gods favor to us: For did not he satisfy
for on^ sins, we had no reason to believe that God should regard us: Our faith
is in his blood, Romans 3.15.

2. As by his intercession he covers the weakness of our faith, and appears
before God for us.

3. As he is the giver and worker of our faith, Ephesians. 2.8, 10.

4. As he is Protector of our faith, and preserves it, Heb. 12.3. he is called
the author, and finisher of our faith.

5. As he crowns our faith, it is he that gives power to every believer to
become the son of God, Ioh. 1.12. It is he that gives them eternal life, Ioh.
17.2, 3.

The Use is first for confutation of merit, not only of works but of faith, we
neither could obey the law, nor yet believe the Gospel of our selves, Use.
Ephesians. 2.8. therefore there is no boasting of our selves.

2. It should teach us to keep our faith with all diligence, and to continue
grounded, and established in it, seeing it is a treasure Christ has entrusted
us withal.

3. Thirdly, if we find any sickness or weakness in our faith at any time,
run to Jesus Christ for succor, he that is the author of it, will be the
finisher of it also.

The last thing is the time: Do believe.

It is to be observed, that he speaks of faith in the present time, which
imports

1. That there was a time wherein they did not believe.

2. That a Christian has continual use of his faith; the just live by faith,
Habac. 2.4.

1. He cannot go into Gods presence without it.

2. He cannot hear the word without it, Heb. 4.2. 2 Timothy 3.15.

3. He cannot use well his calling, but must live by faith, Mat. 6.

4. He cannot bear afflictions without faith, 1 Pet. 1.7.

3. That there is no time, wherein a Christian believes not, this must be
understood thus.

1. There is a twofold man; the old man and the new man: In respect of the new
man, he always believes; for faith is the life of the new man, Gal. 2.20. 2.
That a distinction must be made between the act of faith, and the habit of it:
the habit can never be lost, the act may cease. 3. We must distinguish between
faith, and the Concomitants of faith: Actual joy, and peace in believing may
be intermitted, but not belief it self. 4. Distinguish between faith sick,
and faith found: Faith sometimes in spiritual diseases may have a Lethargy, a
palsy, a swone, a trance, etc. and so for the present is, but not discerned.
Use.
The Use is therefore.

1. First, for consolation to such, as are afflicted under the want of sense of
faith: it does not follow, thou have not faith, because thou feel it not,
because there is no time, wherein thou beleevest not.

Quest. But what should one do for comfort, when the sense of faith is gone?

Answ. First look to time past, think of the times wherein thou did stand,
and rejoice in the grace of God.

2. Look upon the present fruits of faith, and by that thou may discern
that faith has roots, though they be under ground: those fruits are: 1. An
unfeigned desire to forsake all sin. 2. Grief, because we have not faith, as we
would have it. 3. Love of such as fear God, even the meanest of them. 4. The
hatred of such, as by following foolish vanities, forsake their own mercy. 5.
Grief for the evil of our best works, though never so secret, joined with the
abhorring of our selves, so as we are confounded for our sins, which seem to
us to be as so many abominations, Ezech. 36. 6. By the desire of Gods favor
above all things.


3. Pray to God to help thy unbelief, and make thee sound in the faith.
instead of froward complainings, that thou have not faith, go to God and make
thy humble moanes unto him, and he will hear thy tears, and give thee faith.
For it is his gift, and he will be fought unto, Psalm. 143. the whole, and
142.3.7.

4. Know that this will be but for a short time: Faith will revive, and be
found unto praise and glory, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Psalm 30.6. David said in his haste,
he was cast out of Gods sight: yet he found, that God even then heard the
voice of (...). cry, Psalm. 31.22.



7. Rules for the (...) use of t^th.
1. We must be more afraid of doubts and cavils against our faith, making
conscience of unbelief, to avoid it as a grievous sin, and to see manifest
reason from the Word, before we doubt.

2. We must more study the promises of God, and shake off the slaggishnesse of
our natures, especially we should be more careful to attend upon the careful
application of them.

3. We should speedily run to Christ, when we find any disease, or neglect in
our faith, whose glory it is to be the finisher of our faith.

4. We should often think of those that have been examples of much faith, that
have been full of faith, Heb. 11. and 12.1.

5. We should watch against all things that might slacken our love to the
means: For it is certain, the love of the means is strong like death.

6. If we find we have offended God, let us not go long without humiliation,
but quickly run and confess our sins, and not be quiet till we be reconciled:
It is dangerous to defer our repentance, and neglect our communion with God
long.

7. Especially we should study for business, to be employed in well-doing, in
our general or particular calling, 1 Cor. 15.18.

Hitherto of the sixth point.

Who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory.

These words contain the seventh motive in the doctrine of redemption, namely,
the ratification of it. God himself was pleased after an admirable manner to
ratify the work of our redemption, and therefore it should much work upon us
for holiness of life. Now God ratified it two ways.

First, by raising Christ from the dead.

Secondly, by giving him glory in heaven.

1. Of the resurrection of Christ from the dead, diverse things may be here
noted.

1. That Christ was amongst the dead: this may show the hatefulness of sin,
when Christ became a surety for it, it divided his soul from his body, and
chased him down among the dead.

Has Christ been among the dead? then let us believe him in all the comforts
he has taught us against death. For he speaks by experience, Use.
we may trust what he says; for he has been there himself.

2. Therefore dead men have a being: it were good for us so to live, as we may
have comfort in our being after death: For Christ found a world of dead men,
with whom he was after his death.

3. How worthy is Christ to be loved, that thus adventured himself for us? how
is it meet he should reap of the travailes of his soul.

2. That Christ was raised from the dead.

Therefore it is not impossible for dead men to rise, Use.
we see the proof of it in Christ: Secondly, we should never be out of hope in
the desperatest afflictions, if we were brought as low as ever Christ was.

3. God raised Christ from the dead. Doct. 1. Use.


Therefore it is wonderful evident that our debt is paid, in that the creditor
came himself, and set open the prison door, and released our surety;
especially in the time of distress, we should know, that God does not require
our debts at our hands. For he has hereby acknowledged full payment by our
Savior, and we did owe nothing but unto God. Secondly, this imports, that the
righteous God may sometime forsake us for a time, and leave us to our thinking
in unmedicinable distresses, so as we should cry, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? and yet he will return speedily to our succor, and put to the
proof of his greatest power, rather then abandon those whom he loves.

4. That the resurrection of Christ is a great wonder, Doct.
therefore it is here mentioned as a mavelous course that God held in the
ratification of our redemption.

The Use is, Therefore cursed be those mockers, Use.
that scoff at the resurrection of the dead, and let us glory in the faith,
knowing the victory of our Messiah: as also that the time will come, that God
will glorify us also before men and Angels by mising our bodies also from the
grave, Romans 8.11. 1 These. 4.14.

Doct.
5. God looks we should be specially affected with his glory in this great work
of raising Christ from the dead.

Use.
The Use is, Therefore let us be humbled before the Lord for the deadness of
our spirits, and slownesse of our hearts, and beg of him pardon, and the
renting of the cursed veil of ignorance, that lets us from beholding the great
glory of God herein.

Doct.
6. Lastly, we see that the exaltation of Christ stands of two parts: viz.
Resurrection, and Glorification, and that all works of humiliation ended with
his coming out of the sepulcher.

And thus of his resurrection.

And gave him glory.

This is the second part of the ratification: The glory God gave unto Christ
shows, that he is fully pleased with him, and that Christ has perfectly paid
our ransom.

Quest. What glory did God give unto Christ upon his death for us?

Answ. Great and greatly to be praised, and admired: For The glory given to
Christ after his resurrection showed in 8. things.
1. He assigned him all the honor of a triumph is his ascension, when ^ee led
captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men, Ephesians. 4.7. Col. 2.15. 2. He removed
from him all infirmities both of body and mind. 3. He gave him all power in
heaven and earth* even preeminence in all things Mat. 28. Col. 1.18. For he
made him, 1. Prince of Angels, Col. 2.10. 2. Head of the Church, Col. 1.18. 3.
Heir of all things, Heb. 1.3. 4. Iugde of the world, Act. 17.30.



4. He assigned him his own best house to dwell in, and that with equal
honor with himself at his right hand in heaven.

5. He bestowed all the Elect upon him, Ioh. 17.

6. He commanded all creatures to worship him. This was the grace of adoration,
Phil. 2.10.

7. He gave him promise to grant whatsoever he asked, Psalm. 2.8*9.

8. He proscribed all his enemies, and undertook to make them his footstool,
Psalm. 110.1.

Use.
The Use may be, first for consolation. All these honors done to Christ, may
assure us of our reconciliation with God, and that our redemption is
accomplished: and it may encourage us to go unto God, trusting in his
mediation: for God can deny him nothing, yea his glory is our glory. The crown
is set upon our head, when Christ is exalted; and therefore being his members,
we should rejoice, as if it had been done to us, and the rather, when he
appears we shall appear with him in glory, Col. 3.4.

Secondly, in all affliction it should teach us to live by faith, and with
patience to run the race that is set before us, thinking upon the end of our
faith, the salvation of our souls, which is urged from the example of Christ,
Heb. 12.3, 4. 2 Cor. 4.17, 18. Romans 8.17.

That your faith and hope might be in God.

In these words the eighth point is contained, viz. the end of our redemption,
viz. that our faith and hope might be in God, that is, that knowing our debts
to be paid in Christ, and God to be well pleased in him, we might for ever
rely upon God for present favor, and future salvation. Faith and hope are not
all one.

Difference between faith and hope.
Faith looks upon Christ exhibited and made present in his ordinances: Hope
looks upon Christ hereafter more fully to be revealed.

Faith believes the promises to be true: Hope expects performance.

Faith believes eternal life is given us: and Hope waits when it will be
revealed.

Faith is the mother of Hope, and Hope is the nurse of Faith.

Faith takes notice of present prerogatives: and Hope chiefly looks to things
to come.

The doctrines that may be observed from hence are diverse:

Though we do truly believe, Doct. 1.
yet we do need to be often stirred up to faith and hope still: For 1. We
believe but in part. 2. We need faith all our life long. 3. We are hard of
belief in our selves. 4. There is nothing the devil more opposes. 5. There
is nothing God or Christ more desires, as the coherence shows. 6. Nothing more
glorifieth our profession, and daunteth our adversaries, then an
unmoveablenesse of hope. 7. Nothing more provides for us: A Christian could
live by his faith, if he had nothing else.


The Uses also are diverse: Use.
for therefore 1. We should stir up one another, and be examples one to another
in believing, and receive the exhortation one from another. 2. Especially every
one of us should be careful to increase in faith, and provide to believe in
God at all times.


Quest. But what must we do, that we may do so? Diverse questions and doubts
resolved.


Answ. 1. Desire the sincere milk of the word, 1 Pet. 2.2. 2. Be frequent in
the use of the Sacraments. 3. Pray to God to increase thy faith, Luke 17.5. 4.
Practice holiness, and be diligent about those graces mentioned 2 Pet. 1.10 in
the coherence.
Quest. But how can we believe still? For

1. We have not always means to accomplish the good we desire.

Answ. Do as Abraham did, Romans 4.10. believe the promise above hope.

Quest. 2. God himself sometimes fights against us.

Answ. Say with Job, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Job 1.3*

Quest. 3. But our crosses are desperate.

Answ. Yet say as David did, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk in the shadow of death,
yet, etc.

Quest. 4. But we have sinned.

Answ. Christ has prayed that thy faith might not fail, Luke 22.32.

Quest. 5. But our faith is so weak, we fear we cannot believe still.

Answ. There are comforts for that in these places, Esaias 42.3. 2 Cor. 12.9. and
God has received the weak in faith, Romans 14.1, 3.

Quest. 6. But I have so many hindrances, and have so many things to pass
through.

Sol. Yet be persuaded, as Romans 8.38. and say with Paul, Through Christ I can
do all things, Phil. 4.13.

3. All this ado about faith and hope, should make us careful to inform our
selves of the things by which faith is assaulted, that when such things befall
us, we may be armed against them. Now besides such things by which faith is
assaulted, intimated before, Ten things that assault faith, against which we
should be armed.
there are many things without us (to omit our own doubts, and Satan's
tentations within us) that have assaulted and tried faith.

1. False doctrines. 2. Contentions in the Teachers of the Church. 3.
Treachery of brethren. 4. Prosperity of the wicked, and impu^ity of
wickedness. 5. The small number of believers. 6. The deformity and oppression
of the Church. 7. The falling away of many from the faith. 8. The delay of Gods
promises. 9. The tokens of Gods wrath. 10. The scoffs of mockers.
4. Lastly, hence we may gather a reproof to our selves for our mavelous
neglect in faith and hope: how might the Lord justly have left us for ever, as
a people without Christ, and without hope in the world?

Doct. 2. Use.
There is one faith and hope in all Gods servants, Your faith, Ephesians. 4.5.

The use is therefore to love one another, seeing we have all one faith, one I
say in respect of the Author, means, object and end.

2. It should comfort poor Christians: whatsoever difference God has put
otherwise, yet they have the same faith that Abraham, David, the Martyrs, or
any had.

Doct. 3.
Here is employed, that all faith and hope in other things besides God is vain.

Hope in the wedge of gold is vain.

The Hypocrites hope in credit is vain.

Trust in the arm of flesh is vain, etc.

And the truth is, a Christian is never perfectly well, till he can place his
faith and hope only in God. It is good for him sometimes to be stripped of all
other things, that he may put his confidence in God.

Verse 22: Seeing you have purified your souls in obeying the truth through
the Spirit, to the unfeigned love of the brethren, so that ye love one another
with a pure heart fervently.


THE fourth reason to enforce the exhortation in the 13. verse, is contained in
these words, and is taken from that relation, and respect we bear unto the
godly, and it is in effect this: By repentance and holiness we are all made
brethren, and in repentance and reformation of our lives, one main thing we
aim at, is the advancement of our happiness, and holiness in the love of the
brethren, whom we prefer before all people in the world, and resolve to rest in
the contentment of their communion: and therefore we ought so to resist the
impediments within us, or without us, and to order our lives with such holy
sobriety, and so to stir up our hearts in the hope of the happiness to come,
that we may in all purity of nature and life, and earnestness of affections
cleae unto them in this world, as the only people we shall live withal in the
world to come.

There are two things in this verse. 1. A proposition of doctrine. 2. and an
exhortation by way of Use.

The proposition is this:

Ye have purified your souls in obeying the truth by the spirit unto unsained
love of the brethren, or brotherly love: The Use is, therefore see that ye love
one another with a pure heart fervently. Use.


The proposition properly and in it self concerns sanctification, which is
here described in five things.

1. The nature of it, imported in that metaphorical term, purified. 2. The
subject of it: their souls. 3. The form of it: in obeying the truth. 4. The
cause of it, which is twofold: 1. The principal, the Spirit of God. 2, The
cause in some respect is themselves: ye have purified. 5. The end is brotherly
love, amplified by the special property of it, viz. unfeigned.
Before I enter upon the particulars, in general and for the coherence diverse
things may be noted. The Coherence is double, 1. both with the verses
immediately before: 2. and with the 13. verse, upon which it depends, as the
reason of it.

1. From coherence with the verses next before, we may note, that God expects
love to the brethren at our hands, as well as faith in Christ: As we are joined
to God by faith, so he stands upon it to have us joined one to another by love:
nay it is certain, true faith will work this love: He cannot believe in God,
that loves not the godly.

2. From coherence with the 13. verse, we may note, that an affectionate love
to the godly is a strong inducement to holiness of life, and therefore used
here as a reason to enforce it.

3. Contrariwise, unless we look to those three things in the 13. verse, we
cannot love the brethren as we ought to do. For 1. Unless we gird up the
loins of our minds, such as our self-love, concupiscence, anger, etc. we
shall be unfit for society with the godly. 2. Again, unless we be sober in
the use of the delights and profits of the world, our affections will be stolen
away from the godly. 3. And thirdly, unless our hope carry us steadfastly to
the contemplation of the glory to be revealed upon the godly in the day of
Christ, they will in their present condition seem to us many times of all men
most miserable.


4. A Christian should look to his heart and ways, if not for his own sake,
yet for his respect to the godly, to whom he has joined himself, that he
neither shame them, nor grieve them. Now he may shame them, and dishonor the
profession three ways.

1. By sluggishnesse in his profession. 2. By inordinate living. 3. By doubting
and despair.
These three stand opposed to the three things in the 13. verse.

5. That God is not only careful, we should love one another, but he stands
upon the manner and measure of it, as the whole verse shows, and therefore we
should look to two things, that our affections grow neither 1. cold, 2. nor
corrupt.

There are four things do usually abate affection to the godly.

1. Self-love and pride, when men grow into great thoughts only of
themselves. 2. Discord and vain janglings. 3. Worldliness. 4. Too much
viewing of the infirmities, reproaches, or miseries of the godly: and thus
affection grows cold.
It is corrupt three ways.

1. When we love the godly for carnal ends. 2. When it is fruitless: it is
fellowship, but not in the Gospel. 3. When we respect persons.
Purified.] The term is a metaphor borrowed either from the Goldsmith, or the
Physician, or else from the ceremonial law. The Goldsmith purifieth his
metal, so does God his chosen ones: The Physician purges his distressed
patients, so does God distressed sinners: seldom is there any found
conversion, but there is some purgation taken; even some sound practice of
mortification, which pains the spirit, and throws out forcibly the filthy
matter lies in the soul. But I think the term is chiefly borrowed from the
Ceremonial law, and so shows us, that in the effecting of sanctification is
wrought that which was signified in those Legal purifyings, either of women
after childbirth, or especially of the Leper after the healing of his leprosy.

It is true, that seldom or never is there a birth of saving grace, but there
follows it a flux of mortification, a vehement casting out of natural
impurities, and there must be also a purifying of the soul: But I take the
term to be most fitly borrowed from the clensing of the Leper, for that most
nearly expresses the state of our souls both in nature and grace.

A large explication of the ceremonies about the clensing of the Leper, as it
concerns the sanctification of the sinner.
And so diverse things may be here noted: some employed, some expressed in those
ancient shadows.

The things employed are,

1. That by nature we are all of us polluted in our selves, and so polluted, as
we have reason to do as the Leper, Levit. 13.44. and cry unclean, unclean.

2. That the infection of sin is such, that it will infect the very house we
dwell in, and the garments we wear, even all the creatures we use, so as all
things are to us impure, Lev. 13. Tit. 1.13.

3. That in our native condition we are out of the camp, even strangers from
the commonwealth of Israel, even when we profess our selves members of it,
Number. 5.2, 3. Ephesians. 2.11.

The things expressed in the state of our souls in respect of sanctification,
are lively shadowed out in the ceremonies of purifying, mentioned Lev. 34. 4.
to 33. which howsoever they contain more then the precise respect of this Text
calls for; yet for the more full explication of the ceremonies of clensing, I
handle them as they are set down in order.

Now before we enter upon the particular explication of the Text, we must
understand,

1. That the ceremonial law did make two distinct things in sanctification: 1.
Healing. 2. Clensing: for first the Leper was healed, then cleansed. Now this
word here used does express only the likeness of the clensing of the Leper:
there is such a difference to be put in our sanctification: For first our
hearts are turned to God, and then we fall upon diverse exercises of faith and
repentance, by which we settle our own hearts in the assurance of our
conversion. The ceremony shadowed out the first of these degrees: the Leper
was clean, when after his confession of uncleanness, his leprosy stayed and
spread no further, and did not fret inward: So are we truly turned to God, in
that moment, when under the sense of our own vileness, we so judge our
selves, that our hearts begin to cease from evil, and sin loses his
dominion, and that it does not prevail over our hearts, but grows less and
less: but yet though this be done in a moment many times, yet there is a great
deal more to be done, before we can have comfort in our conversion, or be
soundly cleansed, and settled in our consciences before God.

2. We must know, that sanctification shadowed out by that clensing, is taken
in the largest sense, even for all that righteousness that is conferred upon
us either in justification, or sanctification, as it is strictly taken.

3. That in the business of sanctification none of the Lords people healed of
their leprosy, should trust only upon their own judgments, but seek all
direction and help they can from their faithful and able Teachers: There was
nothing done in the law, but the Priests said and did all, as it were, whether
it were in discerning the disease, or the healing of it, or in judging of the
state of the Leper, they took the testimony of the Priest in all things; yea
when one would have thought they might have done all by the same rules of
discerning.

The clensing or purifying of the leprosy was either more slight, or more
exact. In some leprosies it was but to wash, and so be clean, Lev. 13.53, 54,
55. to note, that repentance in some, and from some sins is far more easy
then in others.

The more exact clensing is distinguished into the actions of three several
days.

1. Some things were to be done the first day, verse 4. to 9. 2. Some things
the 7. day, ver. 9. 3. Some things on the 8. day, ver. 10. to 32.
These several days noted the different degrees in the sanctification of the
sinner.

In the first days work we may consider, 1. what the Priest does, ver. 8. 2.
what the Leper to be cleansed was to do, ver. 8. In the first consider the
things prepared, ver. 4. and the application of them, or use of them, ver. 5,
6, 7.

LEVITICUS 14. VERSE 4.
The things prepared were two live clean birds, cedar wood, byssop, and
scarlet.

1. The two live birds did signify the twofold estate of Christ: his suffering
estate, and his triumphing estate, as will appear more plainly after.

2. And Christ is shadowed out in the likeness of birds first, then of lambs
after, and then of a bullock at last, to note the degrees of the revelation of
Christ in the heart of a sinner: at the first though he have true grace, yet he
sees Christ but in a little form as it were: afterward God reveals his Son
in him more and more manifestly.

3. The cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet, might signify the graces of Christ,
with which he was to enrich and sanctify the sinner: viz. Faith, Hope, and
Love: Faith signified by the high growing cedar, which though it have a root in
earth, yet it aspires toward heaven above all other trees. Hope was signified
by the Hyssop, which though it grow low and secret, as it were in the heart;
yet it is always green, according to the several seasons of Gods providence:
and Love was signified by the scarlet, the double dye whereof might note our
double love to God and men, all sanctified and inflamed in the blood shedding
of Jesus Christ.

4. The sum of all then in the signification of the things prepared, is, that
we need two things for our clensing: viz. Christ, and the graces of Christ,
Faith, Love and Hope.

5. Now it is to be observed, that these are to be taken not for the whole
congregation of Christ or Israel at once, but for him that is to be cleansed
alone: to signify that there must be a particular application of Christ, and
sanctification with the graces of Christ in every believer, or else it will not
serve the turn, that there is a Savior provided for the Church in general;
which is further shadowed out in the particular taking of the birds for this
use, and gathering of the cedar wood, and hysop, and providing of scarlet.

6. It is further to be noted, that the Priest is said to command the taking of
these things, not to prescribe them only, which might show Gods willingness to
bestow Christ and his graces; he does not only offer him, but commands us also
to take him by faith, he is ready to give and reproacheth no man: yea this
command might enforce some care and terror into the penitent sinner, not to
dare to neglect the time in this great business of purifying the soul: and it
might also encourage the fearful, for God is not only contented that they
rest upon Christ, but shows himself to be discontented, if they do not seek
unto Christ, when they find need of him.

Thus of the things to be prepared, the application or use of them follows in
the three next verses.
VERSE 5.
Use.
The application concerns either the dying bird, or the living bird: The dying
bird in this verse, the living bird in the two next.

1. The one of the birds must be killed, to note, that without the death of
Christ there can be no purging for sin; and that in the conversion of a
sinner, the only thing the soul of man looks upon is Christ slain for sin.

2. This bird is to be killed by commandment, to note, that Christ was by
special appointment from the Father set apart unto death.

3. This bird was to be killed over running water: This running water was a
sign either of the Gospel, or of the grace of sanctification: The blood
falling into the water either did signify that the Gospel of Christ crucified
should be preached all over the world; or else it noted, that the blood of
Christ should then only be effectual to the sinner, when the fountain of
grace was opened, and both blood and water met together, that is, the merit of
Christ, and the Spirit of Christ: There ran out of the side of Christ both
water and blood, which it seems was to signify the same mystery, 1 John 5.

4. It is the more comfortable also, that by the running water is signified the
continual flowing of the fountain of grace dyed in the blood and merits of
Christ in the heart of a sinner.

5. This water was to be in an earthen vessel, to note, 1. That God did
measure unto every Christian according to his proportion, Romans 12.6. 2. That
the Ministers of the Gospel should have the power of dividing this treasure
unto men, and that God would glorify himself by the service of men, otherwise
contemptible in the world, 2 Cor. 4.6.


VERSE 6.
1. The living bird signifies Christ alive from the dead, and who cannot die,
but ever lives at the right hand of God.

2. The Cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet, signified the graces of Christ, Faith,
Hope, and Love.

3. The joining of both these together shows that we cannot be saved by
Christ without the grace of Christ. It is to no purpose to think of Christ,
without care to receive his graces also.

4. All these must be dipped in the blood of the bird that was slain over
running water, to teach us three things: 1. That it is the merit of the death
of Christ, that makes the presence of Christ in heaven acceptable for us. 2.
That all the graces we are to receive from Christ, must be dipped in his blood
also: for by his blood it is that we have access unto grace, or acceptance
for any grace in us, though received from him. 3. That by the Gospel and the
Spirit of Christ, all this good is conferred unto us from Christ out of heaven.


VERSE 7.
1. The sprinkling upon him that is to be cleansed, notes 1. Application: There
must be a particular application of Christ to the believer. 2. Imputation: For
this sprinkling is the work of God, imputing Christ, and his passion, and
holiness to the believer. 3. Valuation of the worth of the least drop of
Christ's blood: His blood, though but sprinkled, justifies a sinner. 4. Lesser
manifestation: For sprinkling imports not so much a restraint in God, as a
defect in us, that do not so fully discern our interest in Christ. 5. Strong
consolation: For if we can by faith lay hold but upon a drop of Christ's blood,
it suffices if we discern but sprinkling, though we are far from pouring
out, it is sufficient.


2. When he adds, from his leprosy, it is to assure us this comfort, that in
the justification of a sinner, God stands not upon the greatness, or
soulenesse of the sin, Ezekiel. 36.26. Zach. 13.1.

3. Where he says seven times, it was to note 1. The perfection of our
justification in respect of God; it was done seven times, that is, perfectly.
2. The imperfection of our application; we have need to have our pardon sealed
seven times, or with seven seals, God must tell us it often over and over.


4. Where he faith, and shall pronounce him clean, it notes 1. That
Justification evidently has two parts: 1. The imputation of Christ's
righteousness: 2. The forgiveness, or acquitting of the sinner, here called
his pronouncing him to be clean. 2. That if God and his Minister do speak
comfortably unto us, we need not care for all the world besides. 3. How easy
it is for God to justify a sinner: It is but to say, he is clean, or to bid
him be so. The word of the Lord made the heaven, and the earth, and the same
word of God makes sinners clean.


5. The letting of the living bird loose notes the loosing of Christ from the
bonds of death, and the grave, and from all that obligation, in which as our
surety he stood tied to God: secondly, that t^ll the sinner be justified,
Christ stands bound, though he have dyed for us.

6. The birds flying into the open field, might signify, 1. That the
justification of one sinner may be the ratification of the hope of all
penitent sinners. 2. That the righteousness of Christ is revealed publicly
from heaven in the show and offer of it to the whole Church.


VERSE 8.
Hitherto of what the Priest was to do. Now follows, what the person to be
cleansed was to do. What he was to do, concerned either his 1. cleansing or
his 2. returning into the camp. First of his cleansing.

1. Where he says, he that is to be cleansed, note two things:

1. That he is not called a leper any more, but described by a Periphrasis, to
note that when we have confessed our sins, and purposed to return, and God
has comforted us somewhat in Christ, though yet we have not finished our
assurance, or sanctification, yet we are no more accounted lepers: God does not
call us any more by the name of our transgression: This may comfort the object.

2. Lest we should grow too secure, he says he is still to be cleansed, though
he have been sprinkled, till he have finished his sanctification, that is,
till he have taken a sure course for reformation.

2. That besides sprinkling with blood, we must be washed in water, that is,
besides our justification we must be sanctified, and besides the necessity of
sanctification, here are diverse things to be observed: as

1. That we must of our selves labor our reformation, He shall wash.

2. That without voluntary sorrow we can hardly have comfort of true
sanctification.

3. That sorrow without reformation will not serve the turn: It must be
washing, that we may be clean. There is a great deal of water and washing in
worldly sorrow, but it makes nothing clean, Esaias 1.16.

4. That true sanctification is total: He must wash himself, the washing must
go as far as the leprosy.

5. That true sanctification makes a man repent of all the occasions of sin,
and fearful of every thing that might infect him: This is signified by
washing his clothes.

6. That the penitent has an extreme quarrel to his evil thoughts, which
for number he accounts as the hair of his head, and for sincerity he would
^aine be rid of all the wickedness is in his heart: So the Leper did shave off
all his hair.

3. Hi^ returning to the camp may note,

1. That the Church of God on earth is like a Camp:

1. For uncertainty of outward condition: They move up and down like an Army.

2. Yet there was providence in the seeming confusion of their estate: for they
rise not, but when the cloud rose and went before them, and besides the Arc
went with them: God leads his people, and his holy presence departs not from
them.

3. That the estate of the Church is a militant estate: they are in a
continual warfare.

4. The Church is like an Army lying in holy beauty, Psalm. 110.3.

That men justified and sanctified, have right to the Communion of Saints, and
ought to be so acknowledged, notwithstanding their former leprous evils.

4. His tarrying abroad out of his tent seven days, might note

1. The publication and sound trial of the repentance of the sinner, and the
great notice is taken of the conversion of a sinner: There is nothing but
looking on the Leper for seven days. As any are more holy, so they are more
glad at the conversion of a sinner: so the Angels in heaven.

2. That contempt of the world, and the killing of the cares of life, are
usually wrought when there is a sound conversion to God: The Leper cleansed
has no great mind to go to his tent. Yea it notes, that we ought to lay
aside the trouble of earthly things, till our hearts be well settled in our
sanctification and justification.

Note, that when he does go home, it is but a Tent: The best condition of a
child of God in outward things, is but like a Tent, quickly set up, and
quickly taken down, more for necessity, then for delight or glory.

VERSE 9.
Hitherto of the works of the first day. Now in this verse is set down what
he must do on the seventh day, which was to shave his hair, and wash his
clothes, and so to be clean.

Quest. But what might this repetition import? For these things were done
before.

Answ. It noted, that mortification must be renewed, and that we must even long
after our first conversion, be truly humbled for our evil thoughts, and
grieved for that corruption of nature, that still sweats out of us, and be
very fearful and watchful against the occasion of evil.

Yea it imports, that after calling, there may arise new thoughts of evil in
the mind, as this hair grows though it were shaven seven days before, and
that there may be corruption left behind, that though we have done much in
mortification, the leprosy may be in the clothes, though they have been
washed, etc.

Yea we may note here, that the more a sinner is exercised in mortification,
the more he searches out his corruptions: Now he shaveth off the hair of his
beard and eyebrows.

Note also, that such is the success of mortification sometimes, that for the
present it seems to cleanse the soul of all corruption, that there dares not
stir as it were one evil thought, or passion, or lust; I say for a time: for
like the hair they will grow again.

Quest. But what is meant, that he says, he shall be clean? Did not the
Priest pronounce him clean before?

Answ. Two things may be intended hereby:

1. That though Gods Ministers do comfort and acquit penitent sinners, yet
many times till they be more exercised in mortification, they will hardly be
persuaded of their own conversion.

2. That our every days corruptions even after first repentance, do make us
unclean of our selves, and therefore by renewing our repentance, we must be
made clean again: There are some seeds or roots of leprosy yet behind in us:
though we be cleansed truly, yet we are not cleansed fully.

VERSE 10.
Hitherto of the works of the first and seventh day.

The works of the 8. day concern either all ordinary persons to be cleansed; or
else a proviso for such as are poor. The ordinary course is set down from ver.
10. to 21. For the poor. ver. 21. to 32.

In the first consider, 1. The things to be provided by the person to be
cleansed, ver. 10. 2. The employment of them by the Priest, ver. 11. to 21.

The things to be provided for are either sacrifices, or oil.

The sacrifices are either for sin offerings, or meat offerings.

The things provided for the sin offerings were two: 1. The lamb without
blemish. 2. And one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish. The meat
offering was three tenth deals of fine flower mingled with oil.

1. These things were types of Christ, both as our sacrifice, and as our
nourishment, for both we receive and should look for in Christ.

2. The coherence imports, that we must first be settled in our sanctification,
before we can be comforted in our justification, and that no penitent sinner
can be deprived of the sacrifice of Christ, and that we must seek to be
assured of our justification, as well as to be reformed in our sanctification.

3. The lambs without blemish, did shadow out the innocence of Christ, 1 Pet.
1.19. and so shows here, the spots of our leprosy are taken away even by the
unspotted sacrifice of Christ.

4. The lambs were three, because of the three sorts of sacrifice mentioned
afterward, viz. The trespass offering, the sin offering, and the burnt
offering: which three sorts of sacrifices signified a threefold application of
Christ, viz. for trespass^s against men: for sins against God in particular:
and for all sins in general known and unknown, noted in the burnt offerings.

5. In that he, and not the Priest must provide these sacrifices, it shows,
that every sinner must be saved by his own faith: It will not help him that he
is in favor with the Priest, etc. He must provide his lambs, etc. himself.

6. In the meat offering consider both the matter, and the mixture: The matter
was fine flower, which was a type of Christ, and him crucified, both as he was
grownd for us, between the upper and the nether millstone of Gods wrath, and as
he was boulted out for us in the Gospel: all which shows, 1. That Christ was
sowed, and grew up out of the same earth with us. 2. That his sufferings differ
from all the sufferings of the Martyrs. For he was not only cut down, and
threshed out of the ear and husk, as they were in the death of their bodies:
but he was grownd in the ^ill of God^ wrath in his souls. 3. That Gods best
provision is for his own people, he seedeth them with the finest flower, and
will provide, that Christ shall give as much nourishment to their souls, as
the finest flower can to the body.

7. Oil signifies gladness, Psalm. 45.5. the mingling of the sacrifice with
oil noted the comfort Christians received, that lay hold upon Christ for
nourishment.

8. The cogge of oil that stood by, promised, that God had provided abundance
of joys for his people, above all that yet they have felt in the beginnings of
their faith; and that every convert should seek abundance of joy and
contentment in the application of Christ.

VERSE 11.
The things provided for the clensing are mentioned in the former verse: The
use or employment of them by the Priest follows in this verse, and the rest to
ver. ^^. and this use had two things: 1. Their presentation to God in the
general. 2. Their immolation and application in particular.

In the Presentation consider, 1. Who presents them, viz. the Priest that makes
them clean. 2. What he presents, viz. the man, and those things. 3. To whom,
viz. before the Lord. 4. Where, viz. at the door of the Tabernacle.


1. The Priest presenting of the man to God, may note the presentation of the
penitent sinner to God, either 1. By Christ in his intercession. 2. By the
ministry of the Gospel, Romans 15. 3. By himself, as he has the spirit of
intercession, and does commend himself by prayers unto God.


Ministers present us to God, as they carry us to God, either 1. In their
prayers. 2. In their preachings. 3. In their accounts at the day of judgment,
2 Cor. 11.2.


Quest. But how is the Priest said to make him clean?

Answ. The Priest was a type, either 1. Of Christ justifying the sinner, and
sanctifying him, 1 Cor. 13. 2. Of the Ministers of Christ, who as instruments
do sacrifice, and save their hearers, 1 Timothy 4. ult.


2. The things presented are, the man that is to be made clean, and the things
provided for clensing: which signified, 1. That Christ and his Word do present
none to God, but such as will be sanctified, and healed of their leprosy. 2.
Not our persons only, but all the means of our holiness must be presented to
God: They need the intercession of Christ, and our own prayers, etc.


3. Those things were to be presented to the Lord, to signify 1. That we did
acknowledge him, as the fountain of all holiness and happiness. 2. That we
did henceforth resign our selves unto the Lord, as a living sacrifice, Romans
12.1.


4. In that all this must be done at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation, it did teach them, 1. That the place most infallibly to find God
in, was the assembly of his people in the sanctuary, Lev. 16.11. 2. That in the
practice of publi^e duties, we are most effectually joined to God, and find
most help from Christ and his presence, that we are indeed that we are at the
door of the Tabernacle.


3. That we seek such acceptance with God, as we would desire to hold in
communion of Saints.

VERSE 12.
The particular use of them follows, and so it concerns either 1. The
trespass offering, to ver. 19. 2. The sin offering, ver. 19. 3. The burnt
offering, ver. 20.


The trespass offering must be considered, 1. In the waving of it before the
Lord, ver. 12. 2. In the killing of it in the holy place, ver. 13. 3. In the
sprinkling of it, ver. 14. to 19.


In general we may note, that there needs an offering for trespasses, even for
those casual wrongs we do either against God or man, that we need the
sacrifice of Christ for them; we need to go to God to forgive us our
trespasses through Christ.

2. The waving of them before the Lord might signify,

1. The extreme usage of Christ in suffering for our sins.

2. The waving of Christ in the preaching of the Gospel, he being diversely
shaked to and fro in the diverse manners of propounding of Christ in the Gospel.

3. The moving of the lips of the sinner in his confession and prayer before
God.

4. It might note the trembling of the Christian when he comes first unto God,
and the various conflicts in his soul with which he is shaken, and yet Christ
is accepted as an offering for them before the Lord for all their fear, and
doubtings, and tossings of temptations; for the Christian holds his sacrifice
in his hands for all his fears.

3. The pint of oil that was to be waved, also may note, 1. That there is
abundance of joys will follow care, and conscience in faith, and repentance
for trespasses. 2. That before we can get abundance of joy, it must be waved
before the Lord, that is, Christ must beg it for us in heaven, and preach it
often to us in earth, we must hear joy and gladness. 3. It may perhaps note
that mavelous fear and sorrow of heart for sin, which a Christian feels
when he is most joyed by the holy Ghost: He rejoices with trembling, Psalm.
2.11.


VERSE 13.
The killing of the lamb follows, amplifyed by the place, and the person to
whom it belonged, and the worth of it.

Four things were here signified: 1. That Christ must be killed for us, and in
his death is our sacrifice. 2. That the place where, being the holy place,
notes, 1. That Christ was slain only by and for the Elect. 2. That Christ
crucified is taught and known only in the Church.
3. In that the Priest must have all the offerings, is noted, 1. That Christ
only can make an atonement. 2. That the honor of our sanctification belongs
to the Ministers.
4. In that it was most holy, is noted, that this way of holiness in Christ,
is an absolute way as ever was devised.


VERSE 14.
The sprinkling follows, and is twofold: 1. Of the blood, ver. 14. 2. Of
oil, ver. 15. to 19.


1. The sprinkling of blood noted the work of God and the Gospel, applying
CHRIST'S blood to the distressed sinner.

2. The sprinkling of the ear, hand, and toe, noted, that our hearing of the
Word (the principal means) is sanctified by the blood of Jesus Christ, so as
our unworthiness shall be no bar to our success in the means. Secondly,
that our practice likewise is sanctified in the blood of Christ. Thirdly, that
our progress also, and perseverance depends upon the merit and virtue of
Christ's passion: and these are the three things Christ undertakes for the
penitent sinner.

VERSE 15, 16, 17, 18.
The sprinkling of oil follows: where note, 1. Who does it, viz. the Priest.
2. How he does it, He pours into his left hand, and dippeth his finger. 3.
How many ways he does it. 4. Where he does it. 5. Wh^t he does with the
remainder.


1. The Priests sprinkling of the oil noted, that Christ and his Ministers are
the chief fountain of our joy.

2. The wariness of the Priest in the manner shows, that God would have his
consolations warily propound^d unto men.

3. He was to sprinkle both before the Lord, and upon the party.

1. The sprinkling before the Lord, noted the joys of Gods presence, and that
he is privy to all the comforts befall us. 2. In that it was done many times,
is noted, 1. The perfection of the joys God has prepared, etc. 2. Our
imperfection in believing it.

3. The sprinckling upon the party noted the particular interest of the
penitent in the joys of Christ.

4. The sprinkling of the ear, thumb, and toe, assured comfort in hearing,
practice, and perseverance; and in that it must be put upon the blood of the
trespass offering, it signified, that we cannot have true joy but in the
sacrifice of Christ, and the application thereof: It is all merited in his
death, and to be applied by P^ith.

5. The remainder was to be poured out upon the head of the person, which might
note either, 1. The fullness of joy which Christ our head has in heaven; the
same with ours, saving in the measure. 2. That our consolations are given us,
that we might comfort others, by the running down of our, etc. 3. That we were
abundantly consecrated unto God, and anointed as Priests, Kings, and Prophets
unto the Lord, and shall have everlasting joy in our callings, Esaias 35. ult.


So that, that joy upon their heads was shadowed by this type.

Quest. But why joy upon their heads?

Answ. Though the seat of joy be the heart, yet the cause of joy is in the
head, and that is the understanding of our happy estate in Christ.

Where he adds, that the Priest shall make an atonement for him, we must
understand it thus, that the Priest hereby shall ratify the atonement (...)
in the sacrifice of Christ, etc. These joys shall abundantly settle his heart
in the assurance of Gods favou^ in Christ: and so it notes, that usually Gods
servants have not that settled pe^swasion of their happiness in reconciliation
with God, until they have had abundance of experience of the joys of the holy
Ghost in the knowledge of their calling in Jesus Christ.

VERSE 19, 20.
Quest. Now that the (...) i^ satisfied in Gods goodness and favor, what is
more to be done?

Answ. There must be yet a sin offering, and a burnt offering: For after he
has taken a course for outward sins, by which he trespassed against God and
man, he returns and finds a mavelous deal of dross in his nature, and of
secret corruptions that hang upon him daily: and therefore now he needs a new
application of the sacrifice of Christ to comfort him against his sins that
hang on so fast, though he be freed from gross sins, or outward trespasses,
that men take notice of. The repetition of his clensing from his uncleanness,
imports, that for sins after calling a child of God is afresh humbled with a
loathing of his impurities of heart, as he was at his first setting out: his
daily corruptions and frailties make him seem wonderful unclean in his own
eyes, and therefore he seeks a new atonement.

Now when he adds, And afterward he shall kill the burnt offering, it was to
signify, either

1. That God in this life after long conflicts does at length reveal Jesus
Christ in a great measure, so as the Christian is fully satisfied in the
application of all the merits of Jesus Christ, as knowing his discharge from
all his sins in him.

2. That at our death Christ's sacrifice shall fully free us from all the guilt
and stain of sin.

The repetition, that the Priest must offer all these offerings, shows we need
still both Christ's intercession in heaven, and the ministry of Christ's
servants to preach him crucified, while we live in the world.

The meat offering annexed to the burnt offering, shows, either that Christians
grow marvellously in this life, after they have full assurance of their pardon
for all sins; or else that Christ will be their eternal food in heaven.

The meat offering must be upon the Altar, to signify that we can have no hope
of nourishment, but from the merit and virtue of the sacrifice of Christ, as
all means are sanctified by it.

VERSE 21. to 32.
Hitherto of the sacrifice for the richer sort: Now follows the course to be
taken for the poorer sort, which in effect is the same with the former, save
that he must take Turtles or Pigeons instead of two of the Lambs.

The things here to be noted are:

1. That in the application of Christ, God puts no difference, the poorer sort,
if they be penitent, may be justified as well as the richer.

2. That without Christ's sacrifice no man can be justified, be he of what
condition he will.

3. That in the receiving of Christ, all are not alike qualified for the
measure of grace, and discerning, and faith.

4. That the endeavor is accepted for the deed: for the poor is excused, if he
provide a sacrifice according to his labor of his hand.

5. That if we through carelessness neglect the means of further grace, that
is a just exception: therefore it is urged three times, If he cannot get so
much, ver. 21, 31, 32.

Hitherto of the digression into the explication of the doctrine of clensing
the Leper.

And thus of the nature of this work of sanctification: The subject follows.

Your souls.]

Your souls: It is true, that by the soul synecdochically he means the
whole man: for he that is truly sanctified, is sanctified in soul, in body,
and spirit. 1 These. 5.23. The medicine is applied, and goes as far as the
disease, and Christ d^ed as well for the body as the soul, and both must be
purged before we can enter into the Kingdom of heaven, and therefore we are
charged to abstain from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 9.1.
and our bodies must be offered up as a sacrifice to God, Romans 12.1. yet
notwithstanding the soul is named, as that which God chiefly stands upon,
though he require and works both: for the holiness of the heart is that he
calls for to have given him, Ier. 4.18. and we do perform the most immediate
worship by our spirits, Ioh. 4.24. and the sanctity of the heart is the
fountain of all the outward holiness; as the impurity of the heart is the
cause of the outward impurities of life. Besides, the soul is the seat of all
holy graces, that are saving graces; they dwell there, though their employment
must sometimes be without: and further, the sanctification of the soul is
characteristicall, for that is the holiness that distinguishes between the
godly, and the wicked.

This then is the observation, that the chief seat of true grace and holiness
is in the soul of man.

The Use is diverse.

Use.
1. For Information: From hence it is manifest,

1. That they are grossly deceived, that think inward inordination of thoughts
and affections are no great faults: whereas the infection of the soul is most
dangerous, because it is the fountain of all the rest, and is more usually
committed, and more hardly cured, Psalm. 78.8. ^ and 66.18. and 95. etc.

2. That God looks not at the outward appearance of men, he asks not what
houses, clothes, fare, friends, etc. they have, but what grace they have in
their hearts; Rev. 2.22. Iam. 4.8.
yea it is certain^, that outward reformation will not here serve the turn;
Hypocrites, that make so much ado about washing the outside, are deceived in
their reckoning, God will not be deluded with painted sepulchers, he knows
what is within; and the civil honest man is in the same case.

3. That true grace may be, where there is not an outward show of it: the
truest sanctification is in the heart: yet this gives no liberty to wicked men.
For it is not true, that a wicked life may be found where there is grace in the
heart, therefore call thou not that unclean which God has purified, 1 Cor.
4.5.

4. That it is a grievous sin to infect the souls of men by example,
counsel, provocation, corrupt opinions, etc. They that would poison the bodies
of men were worthy punishments in all men's judgments: how much more they that
wilfully poison many souls?

5. There is no need of any purgation after this life: for God takes an order
to purify the souls of his people even in this world.

Secondly, for Instruction:

1. Therefore this should strongly persuade with us to seek inward holiness.
If there be so much ado in the world to get clean and clear faces, what
should our care be to have clean souls, seeing God looks at that? Psalm. 7.9.
God searches the heart and reins. The chiefest thing we can get for our
souls, is the purifying of them, Ierem. 44.14. what profits it to win the
whole world, if thou lose thy soul for the foulness of it? and it is
certain, no beauty of the face can allure a man so much, as the cleanness of
the heart does allure Christ. But this inward holiness chiefly consists,

1. In casting out the vices of the soul: evil thoughts, ignorance, pride,
inordinate affections, stubbornness of will and humor, with whatsoever
dross, hypocrisy, security, malice, etc. 1 Pet. 2.12. circumcise therefore
thy heart, Col. 2.11.

2. In attaining new gifts of the spirit of grace, such as are illumination,
discerning, faith, zeal, love of God, softness of heart, affections of
worship, etc. Heb. 13.9. 2 Cor. 4.6. Romans 5.5.

3. In the exercise of these in the daily co^rse of our lives: look to thy
heart, when thou do any work to God.

^. In the reformation of the heart, we must look to it, that we be
sanctified throughout: it is not enough there be some gifts in some of these
faculties, but there must be grace in all; and so of the sins of the soul to
be mortified.

3. This doctrine may be a great comfort to the godly, that have set their
hearts to serve God in their spirits, and labor for the true grace of Christ
in their souls, though they abound with infirmities, and the world speak evil
of them: it should comfort us against the many aspersions of men, Psalm. 17. 4.
etc. though it be true, as Prove. 20.9. yet God accepts of the desire, etc. Romans
8.27.

Quest. But how know I, whether I have the true grace of Christ in my soul?

Answ. By this text thou may know it by three things.

1. If thou seek inward purity as well as outward. 2. If thou find an
alteration in every faculty of thy soul. 3. If thou be like unto God, that
have most care of what shall become of thy soul, and art most careful of
means for thy soul.
Quest. But what shall one do to get a clean heart?

Answ. 1. Examine your hearts, as Psalm. 4.4. for the heart is deceitful, 8.
Things to be done to get a clean heart.
Ier. 17.9. etc.

2. Pray to God to create a new heart in thee.

3. Attend upon the means, that are powerful to cleanse the heart; our hearts
are washed by the Word, Ephesians. 5.25. Psalm. 119.9. the law in their hearts, Psalm.
37. and 119.80.

4. Keep still in Gods presence, walk before him, thou dare not then come in
thy uncleanness.

5. Avoid the beginnings of pollution, dally not with sin.

6. Inform thy self thoroughly of the vanity of all the things unto which thou
art likely to be tempted.

7. Come not near unclean persons, 2 Cor. 6.18.

8. Get the assurance of faith, Act.15.9. Heb. 10.22.

Promises to such as labor for a clean heart, Mat. 5.7. ^say 1.16, 20. 2 Pet.
1.3. Prove. 22.11. Psalm. 24.4. and 125.5. Romans 8.34, 38.

Hitherto of the subject of sanctification. The manner of exercising, or
expressing this purification follows.

In obeying the truth.

Four things must be considered: 1. What is truth. 2. What it is to obey the
truth. 3. How their hearts are said to be purified in obeying the truth. 4. The
observations and uses which may be here gathered.


1. Truth is taken diversely in Scripture: 1. What truth is.
Sometimes it signifies the verity of our words, as opposed to lying. 2.
Sometimes faithfulness in performing of promises; and so mercy and truth are
given both to God and men. 3. Sometimes for uprightness, as opposed to
hypocrisy, and so it is to do a thing with all our hearts, 1 Samuel 12.24. 4.
Sometimes for the substance of a ceremony, I^h. 1.17. 5. Sometimes for Christ,
Ioh. 14.6. 6. Sometimes for the word of God, and so here. The word of God is
called the truth, Ioh. 17.^1. Ps. 119.142. 1. because it agrees with the
eternal pattern of Gods will: 2. because there is no error nor falsehood in it:
3. because it shows us a true way for the infallible attaining of blessedness:
4. because it effects truth and uprightness in us.

What it is to obey truth.
2. Now to obey the truth, is to conform and subject our selves in practice
and works unto the will of God revealed in his word.

How our hearts are purified in obeying the truth.
3. The heart of man is said to be purified in obeying the truth, inasmuch as
there is an inward obedience to the truth required in the hearts of men: as 1.
the obedience of the Gospel in believing: this is called the obedience of
faith. When a man from his heart does assent to, and rely upon the promise of
God in Christ; thus to believe, is to obey. 2. In the practice of all outward
duties, there is required the inward purity of the heart, and the exercise of
the grace of Gods Spirit, without which all men's works are impure. Besides, by
the outward obedience of the truth, men show that their souls are purified.

There are four things may be observed from hence:

1. That the word of God must be the rule of all our actions: as we were
begotten by the word of truth, Iam. 1.18. so we must live by it, Gal. 1. 16.
Psalm. 119. This is that light to our feet, and lantern to our paths.

Use.
The Use is for instruction: Therefore first we should study this truth, and buy
it, Prove. 23.23. 2. We should pray to God to direct us in this truth, Psalm.
25.5. and 43.3. and never to take it out of our mouths and lives, Psalm.
119.43. Yea hereby we may show our selves to be truly sanctified, if we stick
to the word of God, as our only guide, as these places show* Esaias 26.2. Psalm.
26.3. and 119.30. 2 Cor. 13.8. and let us therefore come to the truth, to know
whether our works are wrought in God or no, Ioh. 3.21. And therefore woe unto
them that are destitute of the truth, both in respect of the means without,
and in respect of knowledge within: these sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of death. Finally, here we see our liberty: we are bound to obey nothing but
the truth.

2. That there can be no true sanctification without obedience, God stands
precisely upon obedience, and practice. It is not knowing the truth, or
praising the truth, or hearing the truth, or speaking the truth, or thinking
the truth, or purposing the truth, will serve the turn, 1 Samuel 15.22. Ioh.
^.^.1 Ioh. 1.6, 8.

Use.
This should serve mightily to urge us to practice to be doers of the word, Mat.
7. Iam. 1.22. etc. to follow the truth, and to express the power of it.
Without this obedience we can never prove our selves to be truly sanctified;
and therefore let us that have the means, take heed we examine our selves,
how we grow in the practice of it. How miserable then is the state of such as
only give God good words, Mat. 7. and such as resist the truth, 2 Timothy 3.8.
and such as blaspheme the way of truth, 2 Pet. 2.2. and such as fall away from
the truth, 2 Timothy 2.18. Heb. 10.26 Oh who has bewitched men, that they should
not obey unto the truth, Gal. 3.1.

^. That we must exercise the inward purity of the heart, in all the parts of
outward obedience. In all good duties we must look to the obedience of the
heart. The heart must add diverse things to the manner of our obedience. From
the heart must flow judgment, attention, care, and affections of all sorts.
This is true of all duties both to God and man.

Use.
The Use is therefore to teach us to set our hearts to work when we go about
well-doing, and to look to the inside, as well as the outside.

4. The indefinite propounding shows, that our obedience must be without
limitation: for we must obey.

1. A^ all times, Psalm. 106.1. Gal. 5.7. 2. To all truths, both of Law and
Gospel, of piety and righteousness, inward and outward, etc. 3. In all
places, absent as well as present: in all companies, as well as one: at home,
as well as abroad: before inferiors, as well as superiors. 4. All persons must
obey, learned, unlearned, rich, poor, high, low, etc.
This serves notably for the ransacking of hypocrites, Use.
and unmasking them: for here we may note diverse things, wherein they may be
evidently taken tardy: For either

1. They obey not at all, they practice not, but only give good words. 8 Things
for the discovery of hypocrites.


2. Or they obey but in show: It is not true obedience, that will leave the
trial o^ Gods truth.

3. Or they obey not out of conscience of the word of God, but only for
fashion sake, or other carnal ends, not for the truths sake.

4. Or their obedience is not from the heart, for either it is constrained, and
not ready and voluntary, or they do not employ the heart in the good work,
they do: The affections of godliness they want.

5. Or they obey not the Gospel in seeking ass^rance of Gods favor, though
they practice some things of the Law.

6. Or they obey but for a fit, Hos. 6.5. Demas returns to the world.

7. Or they obey but in some things: Herod will not obey the seventh
Commandment: They will not cross their profits, lusts, credit, etc.

8. Or they will obey but in some places and companies.

Quest. Now if any godly person should be dismayed, and ask, How might I know
whether my obedience be right or no, seeing I cannot have true grace else?

Answ. I might answer out of other Scriptures, that a child of God may know
his obedience is right, by two things:

1. Because God hears his prayers, Ioh. 9.39. Psalm. 66.18. How men may know
their obedience be right or no.


2. Because thou have hired thy self by covenant to do Gods works, as a
servant of righteousness, and thou do work as a servant every day, Romans 6.

But I answer out of this text: Thou may know thy obedience i^ right, because
thou have these four things: 1. Thou make the truth thy guide, and do obey
for the truths sake, and come to the light, as Ioh. 3.21. 2. Thy obedience
is from thy heart, and with thy heart: it is inward, as well as outward. 3. Thy
obedience is in all things: 1. Though it be against thy profit, etc. Heb. 11.8.
2. In the least commandments.
4. Thy obedience is in all places: 1. As well absent as present, Phil. 2.12.
2. Before the wicked as well as the godly. 3. Before the meanest Christian, as
well as the greatest.



Through the spirit.

Our sanctification was first wro^ght by the Spirit of God, Doct. In 8 things
the Spirit works our obedience.
and it is of the assistance of the Spirit, that we do perform obedience to
the truth of God: For

1. It is the Spirit that quickens us, and raises us, in the first
resurrection, Ioh. 3.5.

2. It is the Spirit that leads us into the truth, ^^d enlightens us, Ioh. 14.

3. It is the spirit that sets us at liberty from the bondage of corruption we
have lived in, 2 Cor. 3.17. and kills the deeds of the flesh, Romans 10.11.

4. It is the Spirit that makes us mourn when we fail of ^bedience, Zach.
12.12.

5. It is the Spirit that sheds a^^oad the love of God in our hearts, by which
we are inflamed with desire to obey, Romans 5.5. It baptizeth us with fire, Mat.
3.

6. It is the Spirit that makes us find a relish and sweetness in spiritual
things, Romans 8.

7. It is the Spirit that works in us the particular graces that adorn our
obedience, Gal. 5.22. yea by the Spirit the Lord works our works for us: it
causes us to obey, Ezech. 36. Esaias 26. Psalm. 90.

8. It is the Spirit that shows us the recompense of reward to encourage us to
obey, 1 Cor. 2.10.

Use.
The Use is,

1. For information: for hereby it is evident, 1. That the godly have Gods
Spirit, Romans 8.9. 2. That there can be no absolute free will in man, seeing it
is not by his own power that he does obey Gods will. 3. That the holiness a
Christian has in this life, is of singular worth. We use to esteem the work
by the workman: And if we admire them that can make us fair houses, clothes,
faces, etc. how much more should we admire the workmanship of the Spirit of
grace, that purifies and makes our souls fair? It is a better piece of
workmanship, then is showed in making of the world.


2. It should teach us, 1. To be more careful of sinning, seeing we shall
thereby vex, or grieve, or tempt the Spirit of God in us, yea and deface his
workmanship. 2. To stir up our selves to undertake the work of godliness,
seeing we have the Spirit to assist us, which is a Spirit of power, 2 Timothy 1.7.


Unto the unfeigned love of the brethren.

One chief end of our sanctification, is, that we might ever after live with
all holy love together: God has purifyed us to this end, that we might love
the godly above all others after we are converted: That which is chiefly to be
done of us, is the duty of brotherly love.

In these words three things are to be observed: 1. That the godly are
brethren. 2. That we must love the godly above all others, and that we were
converted to that end. Our chiefest fruit after conversion, is to show our love
to them. 3. That God cannot abide faining in this love.


1. For the first, the godly are brethren, Col. 1.2. 1 Timothy 6.2. Mat. 23.8.
borne of the same womb, 1 Pet. 1.23. adopted of the same Father, Ephesians. 4.5.
brought up in the same family, Ephesians. 3.17. estated in the same inheritance, Romans
8.17. written amongst the living in the same City with the writing of the same
house of Israel, Esaias 4.3. executing the same office of Prophets and Priests to
God, Rev. 1.7.

Use.
1. The Use is, first for information: We see the godly, though despised in the
world, yet are people of a great kindred: The meanest Christian has as good
friends as the greatest Potentate; Grace works as it were a consanguinity with
all the Saints.

2. For instruction: and it should teach us diverse things, to do, and avoid:
Are the godly thy brethren? Then 1. Live familiarly with them, visit them, be
not a stranger unto them, Act. 15.36. 2. Do what thou do faithfully for
them, Ioh. 3.5. 3. Defend one another by words and works, ye are brethren: let
not a godly man be wronged, if thou can help it. 4. Supply their wants with a
brotherly affection, Iam. 1.15. 1. Ioh. 3.17


The things we must avoid:

1. We must take heed of contention, Genesis 13. and this contention is either 1.
Public suites, 1 Cor. 6. 2. Private quarrels or discords.


Ob. But they do me wrong.

Sol. 1. Admonish them of it, Mat. 18.18. L^v. 19.17. 2. Be not unadvisedly
angry, Mat. 5.22. 3. If they repent, forgive them even seventy times, Mat.
18.21. and be quickly reconciled, Mat. ^.23, 24.


2. Call no man Rabbi, or father on earth, M^^. 23.8, 9. The Angels refuse it,
Rev. 19.10. and 22.9.

3. Speak not evil one of another, Romans 14.10. Iam. 5.9. and 4.11. It is the
devils property to accuse the brethren, Rev. 12.10.

4. Be not ashamed of them, for Christ is not ashamed to own them as brethren,
Heb. 2.10.

5. Have them not in respect of persons; The poor are brethren as well as the
rich, Iam. 2. Though they be in tribulation, yet they be companions in Gods
kingdom as well as we, Rev. 1.9.

6. Lastly, Superiors, Magistrates, Ministers, Masters of families, must take
heed of tyranny and contempt, for they rule their brethren.

The godly must be loved above all others: Doct.
this is a maine end of our sanctification, Romans 13.8. Col. 3.14. Ephesians. 4.16. 1
Ioh. 3.11^ and 4.21.

The Use is, first for reproof of worlds of people, Use.
that neglect this love of the godly, which should be as the life of their
lives, yea contemn them, yea and reproach them: they love none worse then the
godly.

Quest. But how shall I know who are godly?

Answ. Thou may know them, How we may know who are godly.
1. By their innocence: they bear their fathers image. 2. By their love to
Gods house, and the Word. 3. By their language, 1 Ioh. 4.5. ^ 4. By the
opposition of the world.


Quest. What good should I get by them?

Answ. 1. By sorting with them thou will be protected from many judgments, The
good men may get by conversing with the godly.
which else would fall on thee: Sodom had been spared for ten righteous:
Potiphars house is blessed for Joseph; so Labans house for Jacob.

2. Thou may learn their ways.

3. Thou may come to acquaintance with the Father, by living amongst the
children: thou may get to know God by living amongst the godly.

Quest. But what if they do neglect the love of the godly?

Answ. Thereby they shall discover their own misery, as these places show, 1
^oh. 2.11. and 13, 14* 15. and 4.8.10.

Quest. But what should be the cause multitudes of people have no more mind of
society and affectionate conversation with the godly?

Answ. There are diverse causes of it. Why the most men have no mind to converse
with the godly.


1. Worldliness. 2. A natural hatred of goodness: as in Cain^, 1 Ioh. 3.13.
3. A love of darkness and shunning of the light, because their deeds are
evil, Ioh. 3.21. very profaneness and love of sin: Men will not forsake their
corruptions, and therefore seek such company, as they may nourish their
corruptions in. 4. Ignorance of their privileges both in earth and heaven: For
if those were known, they would appear the only excellent ones.
2. The second Use is for instruction; It should teach and persuade with all
that (...) God to give him his end he aims at, and to show our love to them by
society with them, by defending them, and by well-doing to the uttermost of our
power.

3. It is comfortable in diverse respects: For

1. This very duty of loving the godly does much commend us to God: It is a
sign it is the maine thing Gods aim is at, and it affords us many benefits.
For it shows, 1. We are translated from death to life, 1 Ioh. 3.14. 2. Hereby
we know, 1. That we are of the truth, 1 Ioh. 3.19. 2. That we are borne of God,
1 Ioh. 4. 3. That God dwells in us, 1 Ioh. 4.11.
3. All we do shall be fully rewarded, Mat. 11.41. 4. And it may give us
boldness in the day of judgment, 1 Ioh. 4.17.


2. It may comfort all the godly in this, that God provided, that every body
should love them and encourage them: He gives a charge to that end, and
therefore it implies, that he himself will love them with all tenderness and
constancy of love.

Unfeigned.

Doct.
Our love must be without hypocrisy, Romans 12.10. 1 Ioh 3.18.

Use.
The Use is therefore for instruction, to teach us to avoid all dissimulation
and faining.

^ Signs of unfeigned love.
Quest. How may I know whether my love be unfeigned?

Answ. Diverse ways.

1. If I be as willing to do them good, as to proffer it, 1 Ioh. 3.18. or seem
to be willing. 2. If we seek not our own things, Phil. 2.3. but can love them
against profit, credit, etc. 3. If we love all as well as some; the meanest as
well as the greatest: all Saints, Ephesians. 1.15. 4. If I can go to God for them in
secret. 5. If I can love them constantly. 6. If I can reprove, as well as
flatter, or praise. 7. If I can propose them as patterns to follow. 8. If my
sorting with them make me more holy and humble. 9. In general, If I do to
them as I would be done by.
2. It serves for reproof of all faining dissimulation, especially in our
carriage toward the godly by lying, levity, flattery, complementing,
hypocrisy, despite, envy, malice, scorns, censure, and back-bitings.

3. ^ astly, cannot God abide faining amongst men? how much more does he abhor
it, when we counter^et with him? as hypocrisy is hateful any where, so much
more in Gods service: for hypocrites are re^koned as a kind of sinners shall
never escape, Mat. 25.

Hitherto of the Proposition: The Exhortation or Use folowes in the last word.

See that ye love one another with a pure heart ferv^ntly.

This contains the Apostles charge for the performance of brotherly love; where
note, 1. the matter of the charge, see that ye love one another: 2. the manner
how it is to be done, with a pure heart, and fervently.

See that* etc.] This word see to it, has two things in it; the one expressed,
the other employed: 1. That which is expressed, is the necessity of brotherly
love; it is a thing must be looked unto. 2. That which is employed, is the
difficulty of it, the^^ be many impediments, if we look not to it.

For the first: it is not arbitrary, whether we will carry our selves lovingly,
and brotherly, and show it by the fruits of love; it is not any special
goodness, or courtesy in us more than God calls for. For it is strictly
enjoined, and we must see to it. It is a special Commandment, that God and
Christ has given us, Ioh. 13. and 1 Ioh. 4.21. which I observe for two Uses.
1. First, it should much excite us to strive and labor in the works of love,
Use.
seeing God has given a special charge about them. 1. A servant that has
many things to do, if he be specially charged to look to one thing, is used
in that one to show a singular diligence: sure it is, God will take well, what
we do in this duty faithfully, and contrariwise will judge us for it, if we be
negligent herein. Secondly, this would be noted, to restrain that
beholdingness, which many stand too much upon. For as it is said in the
Proverbs, The borrower is servant to the lender: so it falls out often in
other cases, that men look for extraordinary observance, and subjection of
those, to whom they have showed their love by any works of it, whereas they
should remember, that they have done but their duty, as being specially urged
by Gods precept hereunto.

Now for the second observation: This word see to it, imports, that if men do
not look to it, there will be many impediments to hinder them from this
brotherly love, especially from the purity and servency of it.

For either Ignorance will blind them, or Envy will corrupt them, The
impediments of brotherly love.
or Pride and inequality of place and gifts will swell them, or In^^rmities
will dull them, or Forgetfulness will disappoint them, or Objections and
excuses will deceive them, or Trespasses will alienate them, or the scorns of
the world will sunder them: Note, this caveat given by the Apostle, should
quicken us to be sure, we look about us, that the Devil do not be witch us,
and by his methods in any of those eight ways, or any other hinder us, from
the comfort and reward of well-doing in obeying God in this especial charge.

Thus of the matter, to which he exhorts: The manner follows, 1. With pure
hearts: 2. Fervently.

With pure hearts.

We must love one another with pure hearts: Of purity of heart both as it
respects God and man.
The heart is in Scripture accounted pure, not only when it is void of all
corruption; but when it is upright and sincere: and this the purity of the
heart respects either God or man: In respect of God, there be four things,
which make the heart pure in Gods acceptance through the intercession of
Christ. 1. The first is Faith. 2. The second is the desire of purity. 3. The
third is the battle against inward sins. 4. And the fourth is, a spirit
without guile, a heart without hypocrisy: But of this purity he entreats not
here.

The purity of heart, that concerns men has three things in it, or there are
three things required in our affections toward others, whom we ought to love,
and with whom we converse, in which we should show the purity of our hearts.

1. The first is, the respect of holiness: In our love one to another we
should chiefly aim at holiness, and the furtherance one of another in the
best things: Our fellowship should be in the Gospel, Phil. 1.5. and we should
exhort one another to good works, Heb. 10.25. we should cleave to that which is
good, and abhor evil, Romans 12.10.

2. The second is, the respect of chastity, we should take heed of worldly
lusts, and all impurity of heart or life that way: we must mortify inordinate
affections, and the evil concupiscence, Col. 3.5. and avoid all those works of
darkness, such as are chambring and wantonness etc. Romans 13.13. avoiding both
the matter, and appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. 1 Pet. 2.12.

3. The third is, the respect of truth and plainness of heart: the heart is
pure when it is without dissembling, and so we must love one another indeed, as
well as in show, 1 John 3.18. and for right ends: For Gods] glory, and the
grace of God in them, and for their good, and not serve our, own turns only.

How we may know that our hearts are pure toward others.
We may know that our hearts and affections are pure, 1. If we rejoice not in
iniquity, but in the truth, 1 Cor. 13. 2. If we make conscience of lesser sins,
and the very appearance of evil to avoid them. 3. If we love purity in
others, and admire, commend, and defend it in them. 4. If daily we seek a pure
heart of God in secret, judging our selves for what dross we find in our
natures. 5. If we seek not our own things, Phil. 2.4. 6. If we cannot bear
sin in any. 7. If our conversing with them make us grow more in holiness and
grace, 1 These. 3.12, 13. etc.

What we must do to get and increase purity of heart.
And therefore we should both try our selves, and strive daily more and more
after this uprightness and purity of our hearts, that God requires of us: and
to this end we should, 1. Pray daily to God to create clean hearts in us. 2.
We should avoid society with impure persons. 3. We should take heed of idleness,
and fruitless mispending of the time. For the heart gathers impurity with very
emptiness. 4. We should often think of that rule, Do as thou would have
others do to thee. 5. Converse much with the pure. For with the pure thou will
be pure, and with the froward thou will learn frowardness. 6. Acknowledge
your sins one to another: This wonderfully fenceth the heart against impurity
in conversation, and excites a pure love one to another with much honor and
delight.


This greatly convinces and reproves such as have taken upon them a
profession of love to others, but it is for corrupt ends: their hearts are not
pure, nor are they stirred up with desire after the godly, further then lust,
or their own carnal ends give hope to their projects.

Fervently.] God in the second place requires a fervent love, he stands much
upon it, and therefore he requires elsewhere, that above all things we should
put on ferv^^^ love: God is not contented with it, that we do not hate one
another, but we must love one another; nor is he contented with a cold love,
but would have it fervent, a burning ardent, inflamed affection.

Quest. But how may the ferventnesse of our love be discerned, if it be aright?

Answ. If thy love be a fervent love, How the ferventnesse of love may be
discerned. 7. Signs.
1. Thou do account it the greatest felicity on earth to enjoy Gods favor,
and the delightful fellowship of the Saints, Psalm 16.^. 2. Thou may
discern it by the longings, and inf^amed desires after the godly, such as were
in Paul. 3. Thou can cover a multitude of sins, thou levest as God loves, 1
Pet 4.8. 4. It is diligent: thou show it by the pains and labor of love.
5. It is speedy: it seeks no delays, it fa^^h not go, and come again to
^^^row. 6. Thou do greatly lament thy absence from the godly, as a bitter
cross. 7. Thou do as Paul did in some measure, thou do daily and heartily
pray for them, and give thanks without (...), as he shows in the most of his
Epist^es: standing before God often the heart does take fire from thence, which
war^es the heart afterward.


Quest. What is the cause this fervent love is so rarely found amongst men?

Answ. There are diverse causes in diverse sorts of men: As 1. Unregeneracy: Nine
causes of want of fervent love.
We must know that no man can love his brother with this love, but he that is
borne of God, 1 Ioh. 4.7. without repentance, and the true love of God, this
love is never had. 2. Prejudice in others: The names of the godly are so buried
under the disgrace of the world, that this keeps off many from declaring their
love to them, though sometimes they have motions of good affections. 3. The
love of wicked persons. 4. In others the cause is hatred of the good, malice
like Cain, 1 Ioh. 3. 11. they can love any but the Saints. 5. Security in
prosperity: Many, when they be sick, acknowledge the way of God, and send for
the Ministers, and good people: but when they are well they start back like a
bow. 6. Conceitednesse and a high opinion of themselves. 7. Neglect of society
with the godly. 8. Worldliness. 9. Suspitiousnesse.


Quest. But what must be done, What must be done that our love might be fervent.
that we might be abundant in love one toward another; and that it might be
more general in the places where we live?

Answ. First, let the wicked turn from his wickedness; we may not return to
them, they must return to us: what peace, or love, while their whoredoms,
drunkenness, etc. testify to their faces? We may love them with a general
love, as Gods creatures; but with a fervent love we may not; nor may we
converse freely with them, as multitudes of places of Scripture show.

Secondly, to nourish affection amongst the godly, we must remember these
rules.

1. Remember much and often Gods love to us in Christ, 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10, 11. Ephesians.
5.1, 2. 2. Think much of the commandment of God, and his acceptance, Ephesians.
5.1, 2. 3. Meditate often of our dwelling together in heaven, Iam. 2.5. 1 Pet.
4.8. else pu^blind, 2 Pet. 1.7. 4. Converse much together, have fellowship in
the Gospel. 5. Consider the promises made hereunto, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. 2 Pet. 1.9,
10, 11. Phil. 2.1. Esaias 19.
Verse 23. Being borne anew, not of mortal seed, but of immortal by the word
of God, which lives and endures for ever.


IN these words the Apostle entreats of the immortality of the soul of man.
Now there is a double immortality of the soul: For sometimes immortality
signifies an everlasting continuance of man without ending, dying, or ceasing
to be; and so the souls of the wicked are immortal. Sometimes it signifies
an everlasting happy being, from which a man cannot fall, and so the godly are
immortal, and so their immortality differs from that of Adam also: for he was
immortal, that is, such as might have continued happy for ever, and might also
not continue.

The first kind of immortality begins at birth: the second at new birth, of
which he entreats here.

These words must be considered in their coherence, and in themselves: In the
coherence both with the 13. verse, and with the former. As they depend upon the
13. verse, they are a fifth reason, why we should regard those three things,
viz. because our souls are immortal. For if we soundly consider of it, it
evidently follows,

1. That therefore we should gird up the loins of our minds, and get
established our celestial cogitations and resolutions, as such as still mind
an eternal being, and therefore will strive against all impediments, which
might hold us down.

2. That therefore we should be wonderful temperate in the use of earthly
things, seeing these serve not unto immortality.

3. That therefore we should with all industry make sure all those evidences of
hope, concerning the grace to be brought unto us in the revelation of Jesus
Christ.

Now as these words depend upon the former verse, they confirm us in the love
of the brethren: we should therefore love them fervently and purely, because we
are borne together as heirs of the same hope, and must live together for ever
in another world: Look not upon the godly according to their birth, but
according to their new birth: nor according to their present condition, but
according to the happiness they are born to, and the fellowship thou shall
have with them in another world.

The words of themselves entreat of immortality two ways: First, in respect of
the fountain: Secondly, in respect of the means of it* The fountain of
immortality is the new birth: The means is set down negatively and
affirmatively. Negatively, it is not corruptible seed: Affirmatively, it is the
incorruptible seed: which is expounded to be by the word of God which lives
and abides for ever.

Borne again.] Being turned unto God by true faith and repentance: A
metaphorical tear^e.

We are borne again four ways: 1. Sacramentally, by Baptism. 2.
Spiritually, by the Word. 3. Corporally, in the Resurrection. 4. Eternally, in
our Glorification.


Quest. But why is our repentance likened to a new birth?

Answ. To distinguish true repentance, from that which is false and fained: for
it imports five differences.

(...) new birth. Wh^^^ ^. diff^rences between true repentance and false.
1. That in true repentance there is an utter disclaiming of all happiness in a
natural life, or what does, or can belong unto it.

2. That in true repentance, there is a total change in the whole nature of
man: He has grace in every part; a new mind, and a new heart, a new memory,
and a new conscience, a new language, and a new carriage both to God and man:
for birth is the producing of all essential parts of man.

3. That in true repentance, there is the pain of contrition, a broken spirit,
the throws and pains of travail, there is true godly sorrow and grief in
the birth of grace.

4. That there is in true repentance, a daily hunger and thirst after the
sincere mild of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.

5. That in the things of Gods Kingdom there is new life, and sense, and
feeling, and motion.

Secondly, to show the privilege of the penitent: For it signifies he gets
more by his new birth, then any child in nature can do by pleading his
birthright: For if in repentance we be borne unto God, then it shows, 1. That
we have received power to be the sons of God, Ioh. 1.2. 2. That with our
adoption we enjoy the privileges of sons. 1. The favor of God, as a father.
2. The care of God to main^a^eus, Mat. 6.33. 3. The pardon of God in saving us
from condemnation, Romans 8.1. 4. The portion of God, even the inheritance which
God gives as a Father, which is spoken of Romans 8.17. Gal. 4.7.



The Use should be twofold: 1. That we try ourselves carefully in the
business of our repentance by the former signs: Use.
and secondly, that we comfort our selves in the privileges of our new birth,
rejoicing in our portion, and the favor of our heavenly Father.

And thus of the reason of the phrase.

Concerning the new birth here we have occasion to consider of 2. things.

1. That it is needful often to be remembered of the doctrine of regeneration:
Why it is needful to be often put in mind of our new birth.
the Apostle having spoken of it before, falls upon it here again. There is
great need that men should be put in mind of it often for diverse respects.

1. Because of the extreme necessity of it, and the unspeakable danger if it
be neglected, Ioh. 3.5. Gal. 6.15. 2 Cor. 5.17. Luke 13.5. 2. Because of the
dignity of it: It is a second creation of as great fame and wonder, as the
making of the world: therefore Christ is called the beginning of the creation
of God, Rev. 3.14. 3. Because of the marveilous impediments with which men are
hindered from the effectual endeavor after it, such as are 1. Extremity of
blindness: The lets of the new birth.
A Ruler in Israel knows not what it is, unless it be to go into his mothers
womb again. This is still the case of the most. 2. Evil opinions about it:
as 1. That it needs it not: God made them, and therefore will save them: yet as
Ioh. 3.5. 2. That Baptism did it; yet but a seal, Romans 4.11. 3. That a civil
life is it: yet as Mat. 5.20. 4. That the purpose of it hereafter will serve.
3. Forgetfulness: the doctrine runs out, Heb. 2.1. the heart is so weak and
impotent in keeping alive the sparks of resolution, and remorse, and desire. 4.
Prejudice that lies in the minds of many in respects of the reproaches lie upon
such as teach it, or practice it. It could not be, but we should be more
respected in this doctrine, were it not that many of you have strange opinions
of us, the truth of which you seek not to be resolved in. 5. A dumb devil:
many have throws and give over: will not propound their doubts, nor seek
directions. 6. The marveilous pleading of the world, sin, and Satan, that
they might not be cast out or forsaken; especially the unspeakable methods of
Satan. 7. The lethargy of the soul, which appears in such as cannot leave
sin, that is hateful, hurtful to themselves, even gross sins, as we see.
4. Because it may be a means of conversion to such as are not yet converted:
The opening of the doctrine may open a way unto Christ into their hearts. Who
knows what, and when God will work? And it is certain, the work is done more
easily and successefully, when we go about it while the doctrine is fresh in
our memories. 5. Because of the excellent use of it, both 1. For consolation:
for this doctrine comforts, 1. Against the fiery darts of the devil, Ephesians. 6.
that is, the temptations of unbelief. 2. Against present affliction, when we
consider what we are borne to. 3. Against the scorns of the world: we are
borne, not of bloods but (which is better) of the blood of Christ, Ioh. 1.12.
2. For Instruction: for the remembrance of our new birth quickens us to a care
to live as becomes our new birth, which is the true reason why it is mentioned
here.

Use.
The Use is first,

1. First for Ministers, to bend the whole course of their ministry hitherto:
what do we profit them, if we gain them not to God? Yea hereby the glory of
many Ministers is to be judged, He is the excellentest teacher, that can
convert most to God. Here God will be free.

2. For all sorts of men, as 1. For all godly men, 1. If they be strong, to
build themselves up in the contentment of their birth. 2. If they be weak, to
look to the establishing of their hearts in the assurance of it.
2. For unregenerate men: it should awaken them to a care to shake off their
lamentable security, procrastination, prejudice, silence, sinfulness, or what
else hinders them from this glorious work.


To this end,

Think of death, and the threatenings and anger of God seriously.

Judge thy self for thy sins.

Pray with David for a clean heart: beg a new heart, Ezech. 36. Parable.

Get out of ill company.

Be warned to fly from the wrath to come.

Neglect not so great salvation.

Be not deceived, Gal. 6.7. 1 Cor. 6.9.

Take heed lest God leave you with the very discourse of regeneration.

What shall it profit to be borne of great blood, etc. if thy soul perish for
ever?

I beseech you therefore by the mercies of God, save your souls, that you
perish not in the condemnation of the world.

Consider God would not have you die, etc.

The second thing that may be noted from hence, is, that our blessed
immortality begins at our new birth: for by the Gospel God brings immortality
to life and light, 2 Timothy 1.10. and by the Spirit of Christ we are then
quickened, Ephesians. 2.1, 4. being by nature dead in respect of true immortality: For
from this moment of time Christ lives in us, Gal. 2.20. we are alive to God,
though we be dead to the world.

Use 1.
The Use should be, first to put us in mind of the mavelous power and glory of
the Gospel, that brings this life and light unto us, 2 Timothy 1.10. 2. We should
be comforted against all our fears, and doubts, and against all the
afflictions or temptations of our natural life: for immortality is begun in us
already. Those divine sparks are so kindled, as they shall never be quenched:
God has kindled the light of heaven in us: This is very eternal life we have
here on earth, Ioh. 17.3. God has made us immortal creatures already; for
though we have not yet attained to the full degree of the shining brightness
of our immortal happiness, yet from degree to degree we shall proceed, till
we be like the a^^ient of days.

Immortality may be distinguished into four degrees or states.

Four degrees of immortality.
1. The first i^ the life of the infant in grace, and then we live as babes; two
things being eminent companions of that estate, viz. weakness and crying, that
is, many frailties, and much grief for sin and wants.

2. The second is the life of young men in grace, 1 Ioh. 2.14. Heb. 5.13. and
here two things are eminent: 1. affections, and 2. strength, or might, or power
of gifts.

3. The third is the life of them of ripe age, or of fathers in grace, 1 Ioh.
2. 14. Heb. 5.13. Here likewise two things more shine: 1. greatness of
judgment, or experience. 2. an habitual conquest over all sorts of sins, so
as the very taste of them, or temptations to them are enseebled, and more
seldom: These three are on earth.

4. The fourth estate is that wherein we shall be like the an^ient of days,
even God himself in the perfection of all gifts, and possession of all
happiness.

Lastly, this doctrine may show the miserable estate of all such as will not be
informed by the Gospel: They fail of immortality, and must die in their
sins; for if they be not borne again, they perish for ever.

Thus much of the fountain of new birth: The manner follows, considered 1.
negatively, 2. affirmatively.

Not of corruptible seed.

Two things are here imported concerning the natural birth and propagation of
all men: The first is, that our natural birth does not advance our immortality
and everlasting happiness: we hold not our happiness by any title from our
carnal birth, Mat. 3. Romans 9. We are not borne heirs of heaven. In our birth
we receive the beginning of natural life from the seed of our natural
parents, but not of eternal life. The second is, that this natural seed is
corruptible; we so live, that we must die; we cannot hold out even in that
estate; for men will die, and they come of men that have dyed, H^b. 9. Job 10.
Ps. 89. and therefore the Use should be, Use.
1. To abate the great thoughts that arise in great persons about the
nobleness of their birth. 2. We should all be thereby the more quickened to the
care of new birth. 3. Therefore we should look for death, and prepare for it,
and patiently bear the infirmities accompany our mortal bodies, till the time
of our change come. 4. Impenitent sinners should awake to live righteously,
seeing their perfections must come all to an end: they cannot long abide in the
greatest glory of the world they can attain to. 5. Here is a manifest
difference between the children of the two Adams: the children of the first
Adam are borne corruptible, the children of Christ are borne incorruptible. 6.
Lastly, here is a singular consolation to the godly about their perseverance:
They are confirmed, as the Angels of heaven; they cannot fall away, they are
not borne of corruptible seed. Thus of the manner, negatively considered.

In the affirmative observe two things: 1. what the means is; 2. and by what
it is. Or thus: The means is seed, described by the properties* It is
incorruptible; and by the cause, or instrument of generation, viz. the word of
God.

Seed] To omit the usual acceptance of the word seed: It is taken in
Scripture in a restrained sense many ways: Sometimes for Christ; He is that
seed, in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed: Sometimes for the
godly; The children of the promise are the ^eed, Romans 9.8. Sometimes for the
body of man within the grave, which is cast into the earth as seed, in the day
of burial, 1 Cor. 15.43. Sometimes spiritual things in general, 1 Cor. 9.11.
Sometimes the fruits of righteousness or mercy, James 3.18. 2 Cor. 9.6. So
there is sowing to the Spirit, Gal. 6.7, 8. Sometimes for the word of God, Mat.
10.13. Sometimes for saving graces, conceived in the hearts of the godly, and
so I take it here. And thus grace is like seed, either that is sowed in the
field, or in the womb. If it be taken in the first sense, then the seed is
grace, the sower is Christ, the field is the heart of man, or the world, the
sowing time is the day of redemption, and the harvest is the end of the world.

But I rather take it in the other sense, and then the seed is grace, the womb
is the heart, the Father or sower is Christ, 1 Cor. 15.43. the instrument of
generation is externally the word, internally the Spirit of God; the birth is
the practice and exercise of the gifts of grace; the nurse is the minister, and
the means of nursing are preaching and the Sacraments.

Saving grace is likened to seed in the womb, because first it is formed by an
admirable coition of the Word and Spirit in the heart of man, causing
unspeakable delight in the soul: Secondly, because the gifts of grace do
thrive and grow up in the godly from small beginnings, though at the first but
as a grain of mustard seed, yet after it is once conceived, it will grow
marvellously and speedily.

This doctrine may serve for a threefold use:

Use.
1. It may comfort, and that diverse ways.

1. Because it imports a marriage of the soul with Christ. It is God that gave
the soul in marriage with Christ: a great preferment.

2. Because thou art cured of barrennes, and therefore rejoice, oh thou soul
that wast barren, Christ has made thee a mother of many children.

3. It may comfort thee against the weakness of thy gifts, and the grace
received: though thy faith, joy, feeling, etc. be but as a grain of mustard
seed, yet that God that gives to every seed his body, can make his grace to
thrive and prosper in thee.

4. From hence a godly man may know that he is truly borne again: for if thou
have felt that sweet delight when the Word and Spirit of God did join with thy
soul, this delight is an infallible sign of thy regeneration, and that Christ
is formed in thee.

Ob. But the temporary faith feels joy.

The differen^e between true (...) and temporary joys.
Ans. There is great difference between the joy of the godly, and the joy of
the wicked, in receiving the word: for first, in the wicked, there is no grace
left in the soul after hearing, nor new gifts, or dispositions; the soul is
empty, and void of seed for all that joy. Secondly, if there were some seeds of
grace, yet it abides not; it is like the morning dew, there is no true
^once^tion. Or thirdly, if it did abide for a time, yet it increases not as
the fruit of the womb does: the godly grow in grace.

2. It may serve to teach us, 1. highly to prize the graces of the soul; they
are the divine seed of Christ in us; Christ in the same is formed in us: The
light, love, desires, joys, humility, etc. in the heart, have the true picture
of Christ upon them. 2. To be careful to preserve the grace we have received,
seeing it is the seed of God in us. 3. To carry a high opinion of all the
godly, seeing they are the beloved ones of Jesus Christ.

3. Lastly, for great reproof of the whorish affections of all wicked men,
that shutting the doors of their hearts against Christ, suffer the devil and
concupiscence to engender in them, and to fill the soul with multitudes of
bastardly births of sin, Iam. 1.14.

Incorrupt^ble.] The grace begotten in the hearts of the godly is
incorruptible, and so it is in diverse respects.

1. In respect of the matter of them. For this grace consists of innocence and
in^^r^uption: so meekness is called incorruption, 1 Pet. 3.3. 2. In respect of
the Author of it: it proceeds from the incorruptible God. 3. In respect of the
continuance of it, it never dies. 4. In respect of the end it tends to: it is
that fair fruit that will grow up to eternal life. This may serve for
consolation and instruction: for consolation many ways.
1. This shows, that every godly person is an excellent one, they are
immortal creatures; they have divine sparkles in them: How dare wicked men
despise them, when God has thus honored them. His God, King, Crown,
Inheritance, gifts are all immortal.

2. They may conceive comfortable hope, Esaias 4.6.
that God will be careful to preserve, and bless his own work, Gods
blessing shall be upon thy seed, and his Spirit will refresh thy buddes: For
upon all the glory must be a defense.

3. It may comfort thee against death, when thy corruption has put on this
incorruption of true grace, thou being made thereby immortal, thou may
triumph over death, as 1 Cor. 15.54. Art thou an immortal one, take heed of
coffeehouse: This was the first s^one, even the devils sin.

This may comfort thee in thy perseverance to the end, the seed is immortal,
and therefore thou shall never fall away: Therefore has God given thee his
Spirit within thee, to tend these little graces: yea the Angels of God perform
their service no doubt to the spirits of the godly. That thou can not fall
from grace these Scriptures may establish thee. 1 Ioh. 5.9. Mat. 12.20. Esaias
65.22, 23. Ier. 23.4. 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. 1 Pet. 1.5. 2 Timothy 1.12. Ioh. 13.1. Ier.
32.40, 41. Heb. 12.3. and 7.37.

For instruction, and so it may teach both godly men, and wicked men: Godly men
should the more enforce their affections to the love of the Lord Jesus Christ
in incorruption, Ephesians. 6.24. and be careful to avoid all the inticements of
sin and Satan, by which their hearts might be corrupted: they should walk
in the spirit, Romans 8.1. And keep themselves from all filthiness both of
flesh and spirit, desiring to know no other happiness, then Christ and him
crucified. And wicked men should take notice of it, that corruption cannot
inherit incorruption, and unless they repent of their sins, and set their
hearts upon the word of Christ, they can never be made immortal.

Hitherto of the property of the seed: the instruments of the generation of it
follow: viz. the word of God, which is f^rther praised, 1. For the Author of
it: 2. For the vigor and effiacie of it, it lives: 3. For the continuance of
it, it lives for ever.

By the word of God.

Before I enter upon the particular observations of it, we may observe the
effectualnesse of the Apostles speech concerning the word: He does not mention
it, but with a lively praise of it, and that he does not casually do, but
with a great deal of reason: For it is exceeding needful to have the praises
of the word often, and lively expressed. For it may be a means to heal that
contempt of the Word, that usually reigns in the most. Besides, the praise of
it may lift up our hearts to consider the greatness of Gods mercy in bestowing
his word upon us. The word he gave to Jacob was a greater gift then he bestowed
upon all the world besides. And the praises of the word do also raise up in
the godly sparkles of appetite after it, and delight in it, and care to have
recourse unto it in all estates. It quickens to a continued diligence in
exercising themselves in it: and therefore we should study the continual
praises of it, and pray God also that he would give his Ministers a door of
utterance to set out the glory of those mysteries contained in it, Col. 4.3.
and besides it should much humble us for our mavelous neglect both in faith
and obedience, especially if any way we have caused the word of God to be
blasphemed by our indiscretion or sin: we cannot worse vex God, then by
neglecting, or despising, or dishonouring his word, Tit. 2.5.
and contrariwise God is wonderfully pleased with us, if he may find his word
to be had in honor, and respect with us; and therefore such as love the word
heartily, have great cause to comfort themselves. For they are dear to God and
Christ ever for that reason, as these places show, Ioh. 14.23. and 17.6. 1 Ioh.
2.5. Revel. 3.10.

The particular doctrine may be raised either from the coherence, or from the
words in themselves.

From the coherence we may note, that the Word is the only ordinary
instrument outwardly for the begetting of the seed of true grace in us, Iam.
1.18. Romans 10.14. etc.

Use.
The Uses are diverse.

1. For first this may inform us concerning the distinct offices of the word
and Sacraments: The Word begets grace: the Sacraments confirm it: the
beginning of grace we have from the Word: the strengthening and nourishing of
grace from the Sacraments.

2. This may inform us, how much we are bound to God for his Word, and how
much we are beholding to the ministry of the Word, 1 Timothy 5.17. spiritual
things are hereby ministered unto us: Hereby we are begot again to God, we had
perished for ever without the Word.

3. This may inform us concerning the woeful estate of all such congregations,
or particular persons, as live without the Word of God in the life and the
power of it: they sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. There is neither
womb to bear thee, nor breasts to give thee suck. Oh the depth of the
judgments of God upon millions of wretched men! Oh the sore famine of the
Word: and this distress is the more miserable, because people are less
sensible of it! Oh if men would think, without grace I cannot be saved, without
the Word I cannot have grace, and therefore what shall it profit me to win the
whole world, if I lose my own soul by living in places where I cannot hear
the voice of Christ!

Note, that the Spirit of God as the internal efficient is not mentioned: of
purpose it is lest out to compel in us a care of the outward means, in which
we are sure to find the Spirit working.

Ministers should therefore speak it boldly, and pray that God would open
their ^ou^hes to speak of these mysteries, as becomes the mysteries of God and
Christ, Phil. 1.14. Col. 4.2.

Hence we may know also how to judge of those that consent not to the wholesome
words of God. See 1 Timothy 6.3, 4.

In themselves the words afford us three doctrines:

1. The Word is of God; and it is of God as the Author of it. For man wrote it
by the inspiration of the holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. ult. and men preach it now by
the commandment of the everlasting God* Tit. 1.3. And it is of God that
disposes of the due times of publishing it, Tit. 1.3. and God is the subject
of it. For the Word principally entreats of God, his nature, and his works: All
the success also of the Word it depends upon God.

Use. 8 Thin^s to be observed if w^ will hear the word as the w^rd o^ God.
There are diverse Uses may be made hereof.

1. It should set us on longing after Gods word to hear God speak, or write
to us: we see men long to read, or hear the speeches of the King, much more
of GOD the King of Kings.

2. It should teach us to hear the word, as the word of God, and not of men, 2
These. 2.13. that is, 1. Reverently, as if the Lord himself spoke to us from
heaven. 2. Without ascribing to men the praise and glory is due to God, we
should glorify the word, Act. 13.48. 3. Not daring to let it run out, lest God
require it, Heb. 2.2. If the Angels keep them, how much more we? Rev. 22.9. 4.
With confident assurance trusting upon it infallibly, 2 Pet. 1.19. 5. With
subjection of our reasons, and conscience to it, nothing but the word has this
sover^ignty. 6. Without adding or detracting, Rev. 22.18, 19. 7. With passion
or wickedness, Iam. 1.18. etc. 8. With all possible care to practice it, Iam.
1.18.


3. We may be assured it will have effect: it cannot be bound, no malice of men
can hinder the will of God, 2 Timothy 2.9.

4. Therefore let not men despise it for the Ministers sake: It is of God, and
that will appear when the dust which we have shaken off our feet, shall
witness against the world that receives us not, Mat. 10.24.

Which lives.

This which may be referred to either seed, or God, or the Word; but that in
the original the word for seed is not of the same gender, and the testimony of
Esaias in the next verse quoted shows, it must be referred to the word.

The word lives in God: How the word may be said to live.
It is a fountain issuing out of the spring of Gods knowledge and will: It
lives in Christ the personal word of the Father: The word of life is
attributed to Christ, 1 Ioh. 1.1. to the Scriptures, Phil. 2.15. It lives also
in the heart of a Christian, who conceives by virtue of the seed cast in by the
word: It lives by effect as it makes us live, and so it does in diverse
respects: both in respect of our natural life, and in respect of eternal
life. In respect of natural life: First, Man lives not by bread, but by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Deuteronomy. 8.3. and the creatures are
sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy 4.4, 5. Secondly, because the
word upholds the godly in their afflictions: David says, he^ had long since
perished in his aff^^ctions, but for the word: and our Savior Christ prays,
that God would keep his by his word, Ioh. 17.14, 15, 16, 17.

Now for spiritual life: The word lives by effect, in that it enlives us three
ways: For first it quickens us in regeneration, so in this verse. 2. It
sanctifies us to live holily, Ioh. 17.17. 3. It preserves us in the most deadly
spiritual assaults, in which else we might perish, 1 Ioh. 2.14.

The word may also be said to live, because it is lively, Heb. 4.12. It may be
said to live, because of the sure performance of that which God promises,
though the promise were made many ages since, and because the efficacy of the
Scriptures abides still, they are as lively now, as in David^ time, or in
Christ's time.

There may be many Uses made hereof.

First, it should teach us diverse things. Use.


1. If we desire the kingdom of God should come, pray that the word of the
Lord may run, and have a free passage: for it will wor^ mightily in gathering
souls to the kingdom of God, 2 These. 3.1.

2. Would we have life put into us? Let us come to the word, it lives by
effect: If any thing in this world will either direct or comfort us, it is the
word.

3. Look to thy heart for uprightness: make conscience of thy ways: harbor
no secret sins: For the word is lively in operation, and is a discernes of the
very thoughts, and intents of the hear^, Heb. 4.13. If thou would have the
fruit of the lips to be peace, walk uprightly.

4. Such as profess love to the word, should hold forth this word of life, and
make it appear in their conversation that it is a living word.

Quest. But how should we show the life of the word in our conversation?

Answ. Many ways.

1. By practicing it: Six ways to show the life of the word in our
conversation.
It seems but a dead letter till thou put it in practice. For there is the
life of hearing.

2. By living without rebuke: Then thou show effectually, that the word has
a lively power ever thee, if it can make thee unrebukeable, Phil. 1.15, 16.

3. By the unmoveablenesse of thy conversation in all estates: There is life in
godliness, when a man has learned to be content with that he has.

4. By thy affectionatenesse and cheerfulness in the manner of doing holy
duties.

5. By the depending upon it, as upon the life of thy life, Psalm. 119.

6. Lastly, by thy confidence in believing all that is written in the word.

And thus for instruction.

Secondly, this may serve for humiliation.

1. To such as hear not the word at all: they sit in darkness, they want the
very life of their lives, that that should be the very joy of their hearts.

2. To such as hear it, but feel no life in it: If the word of God have no
life in it, woe unto thee, if the book be sealed to thee, when it is open to
others; fear lest the god of this world has blinded thee, that thou might
perish: search thy soul; there is abundance of soul stuff in thee, if the
word cannot quicken thee.

3. To such as find some kind of life in the word, and put it out by the
cares of life: Mat. 13.
such as by covetousness or voluptuous living extinguish that remorse was bred
in them, and so make the word an instrument of death, inasmuch as such remorses
or quicknings serve but to leave them without excuse.

4. To all hypocrites: For here they must know that which they have often
found, if they hear much, that they cannot be hid: though they may deceive
men, yet God and his Word will find them out, the shame of their secrets of
corruption shall be discovered: this word of God will ransack them, and give
them a very glimpse of the judgment to come, Heb. 4.13.

5. This may in special smite dreaming, and careless Preachers, that do the
work of the Lord negligently: such must know, their work shall never prosper;
for it is the word of God in the life of it, that gathers souls to God; a
dead, dull kind of preaching the word, will never do it. Besides, they
dishonor the word, as if it had no life in it, whereas the fault is in their
dull and dreaming kind of handling of it.

Thirdly, this may inform us.

1. That the word is not a dead letter, as many think of it, and have
blasphemously reported.

2. That it is the Gospel, (that is, that part of the word, that settles the
conscience in the assurance of Gods love in Christ) that is the principallest
treasure in the scripture: For the Law is a killing letter, and the ministry of
it, the ministration of death.

3. That it is never likely, that powerful preaching and sincere practice
shall have any long peace in the world: For this life of the word makes such a
stir where it comes, that wicked men will not be quiet, but ever hate the
godly for this very reason, as experience shows, Ioh. 17.14* etc.

4. That the wits of men, and the wisdoms of men's words and conceits are not
necessary unto the unfolding of the word: for the word is a lively word in it
self, it needs not the conceits of men's brains to quicken it, 1 Cor. 2.1, 4,
13.

Fourthly, this may be a great comfort to all the godly that love the word:
they may have sure recourse to it: it is as full of life now, as it was many
hundred years ago: it shall abide for ever: it is as mighty now to cast down
strong holds of sin, or Satan, as ever: It is as able to refresh them in all
afflictions, as ever: It will quicken them in all their dumps and distresses:
It lives and will live for ever.

And abides for ever.

Of these words in the end of the 24. verse, where they are repeated again:
and thus much of the fifth reason, etc.
VERSE 24, 25. 24. For all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man is as
the flower of grass: the grass withers, and the flower falls away:

25. But the word of the Lord endures for ever, and this is the word which is
preached among you.


THese words contain the sixth and last reason for the enforcing of the
exhortation in the 13. verse, and it is taken chiefly from the mortality of the
body; where his drift is to set before us the marvelous vanity and brevity, and
transitorinesse of the natural life and condition of all men: amplified by the
eternity of those spiritual effects, which are wrought by the word of God
preached, that so we might be induced with the more sincerity and earnestnes
to deny the world, and to provide an infallible assurance of hope, in the grace
to be brought in the day of Christ; and so it impliedly shows, that the reason
why the most men are so entangled with all sorts of impediments, and why men so
greedily, and excessively seek the profits and pleasures of this world, and
why men are so slenderly furnished with arguments of sound hope of a better
life: I say the reason of all this is, the forgetfulness of our mortality, and
our transitory estate in this world.

The words in themselves contain a lively description of our transitory and
mortal condition in this world, amplified by the commendation of the word of
God, by which we are borne again, and fitted for a better world: The vanity of
man is set down verse 24. the eternity of the word verse 25.

The vanity of man is both propounded, and repeated: propounded in these words,
All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass: repeated
in these words, the grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away.

The proposition concerns either the persons of men, or the condition of men.
For their persons, all flesh is grass. For their condition, the glory of man
is as the flower of grass; and so the proposition shows, that he is mortal.
The repetition shows, how he is so: His body withers as grass, and his
glory falls away as the flower.

From the coherence with the former verse I might note two things.

1. That man is a creature both mortal, and immortal: mortal, as he is borne
of his Parents: immortal, as he is borne of God: mortal, in respect of his
natural life, and immortal in respect of his spiritual life: mortal in
repect of his flesh, and spiritual in respect of his soul.

2. That the consideration of the mortality of our bodies will quicken man unto
a care of the immortality of his soul. But I pass from these.

All flesh is grass.

The words of the proposition are all plain, Doct.
taken in their proper signification, save that by flesh is meant the nature of
man in respect especially of his body: but for the doctrine of these words
three things would be weighed.

1. The affirmation concerning the body of man, that it is like grass. 2. The
extent of the affirmation, when he says all flesh is grass. 3. The
consideration of the time, when he says in the present time, It is grass, not
it shall be.
For the first: the word rendered grass is translated sometimes the blade of
wheat, as Mat. 13.26. sometimes hey, as 1 Cor. 3.12. but most usually grass,
and so the sense gives it here. Now for the phrase of speech: It is true that
sometimes it is spoken in the praise of Gods Elect, that they are like grass,
viz. for their growing, and flourishing in grace and happiness, as Esaias 44 4.
Psalm. 72.16. Rev. 9.4. but usually in scripture it is taken to signify the
misery of all men by nature: And so it notes especially the frail condition of
man in this life, he is like grass, because as the grass is to day, and to
morrow is cast into the oven: so is man to day, and to morrow is cast into the
grave: he is suddenly gone, and in short time spoiled of all his earthly glory.
The world of men might be resembled to a field of grass in many respects, but
this is that the Holy Ghost cheefely aims at.

So then the first doctrine is, that a man by nature is like grass for the
brevity of his life, and the suddenness many times of his death.

Use.
The Uses are diverse.

First, for reproof of three sorts of men. 1. Of all those that mind only
the things of the flesh; why do men so study for the provision of the flesh?
can men remember that their flesh is as grass, and yet seek great things for
this life only? let all men know, that they that sow to the flesh, shall
certainly of the flesh reap corruption. 2. Of such as place their trust and
hopes in man: for this reason, he is cursed, that makes flesh his arm, seeing
all flesh is grass. 3. It reprooves diverse of Gods children too for their too
much fear of the rage of wicked men. The Apostle, when he said, we wrestle not
with flesh and blood, meant to show, that we should not be so much distressed
for that kind of combat, as teaching, that it were better to wrestle with ten
adversaries, than with one temptation, but most plainly, Esaias 51.12.

Secondly, there is matter of consolation too, and that diverse ways. For
first, though our flesh be as grass, yet that hinders not Gods love to us: for
he cl^theth the very grass of the field, Mat. 6.
and shall he not provide for us also? Secondly, the Lord is pleased to use the
consideration of this doctrine, as an argument to move him to pity us; he
knows our frailty, and therefore will not deal rigorously with us, as these
places show, Ps. 103.13. and 90.6. and 78.39. Esaias 40. etc. Thirdly, the
mortality of the flesh should occasion us to rejoyce^ in the immortality of our
spirit, and to be glad at heart, that we are borne again, not of the bloods
of mortal men, but by the will and word of the immortal God, Ioh. 1.12.
that so we may be comforted against the sense of the decaies of our bodies by
remembering that we have a building made of God without hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.
e ternall in the heavens, though the earthly house of our Tabernacle be
dissolved. Lastly, it may comfort us, if we consider, that the Lord has been
pleased to resolve with himself to take the care of us, and our posterity
after us, because he knows we cannot continue always with our children: for
so the Prophet David assures the godly, that though their flesh be but as the
grass, yet God will establish his mercy to them, that are left behind them;
the Lord will deal righteously with their childrens children, Ps. 10^.15, 18.

Thirdly, we should all therefore learn to crucify the bootlesse lusts of
the flesh, and to compel our selves so to think of saving our spirits in the
day of Christ, Gal. 5.24.
as to forbear to entangle our selves with the cares of life; seeing it is all
in vain, we must dye, and go hence, and that suddenly, and shortly
^especially we should provide that Christ may live in us by faith, Gal. 1.10.
that so we may be provided to continue when our flesh will fail us: yea
thirdly, seeing in this world it will never be better with our bodies,
therefore we should reach our flesh, Psalm. 16*10.
that great lesson of resting in hope: even we should learn to wa^^ for the
resurrection, when even our flesh shall be made spiritual, and this corruption
shall put on incorruption.

Thus of the affirmation it self: Now the extent of i^ is in the second place
to be considered* viz. that all flesh is grass.

All flesh.

Not only the flesh of beasts of the field, and sowles of the air, but even
the flesh of man is grass, and amongst men there is no difference: The flesh
of Princes is as mortal, as well as the flesh of peasants: the most mighty
helpers must stoop to the power of death. There is a great deal of difference
in grass, a thousand forms in one meadow, or pasture; yet all alike in this,
that they must wither. The outward difference of men's places in the world makes
no difference in death: Prove. Psalm. 49.
The rich and the poor both meet together in the grave, as dies the beggar, so
dies the King: Riches will not ransom from death, no price can be a redemption
from the grave: Healthful bodies are as grass as well as sickly bodies: such
as abound in the helps of physic must dye, as well as they that are destitute
of all means to preserve life: The strongest must stoop to death, as well as
the weakest; the longest livers must dye at last, as well as the creature but
of a days continuance. If men then should live 900. years and more, yet at
length it must be said of them, they died: yea godly men must die, as well as
wicked, Psalm. 102.12. The people are but grass, Esaias 40.7. yea the flesh of
the son of God had no privilege from death, he was put to death in respect of
the flesh, 1 Pet. 3.21.

Therefore this may serve first for singular reproof of that unspeakable
beastliness that is in wicked men, that will not be moved with the
contemplation of the ruin of the whole world: oh the unutterable Lethargy of
these men's hearts, that will not consider their latter end, when so
unchangeable a decree is pressed upon all men, that at their appointed time, they
must once die! This very doctrine may show the horrible effect of sin in the
hearts of men, that can extinguish a consideration so universally obvious to
every man's sense; oh ye brutish amongst the people, when will ye understand?
Ps. 92.6, 7.


Secondly, this may inform us that multitude is no prerogative: multitude
cannot protect men against the stroke of God and death; Though hand join in
hand, yet sin cannot be unpunished: It is as easy for God to smite all
flesh, as any flesh: It is as easy for him to destroy the whole world, as to
destroy one man. All flesh is grass: If the sith can with few strokes move
down thousands of forms of grass; how much more easy is it for God with the
sith of his judgments to cut down multitudes of men? And besides, that may
inform us, that the doctrine of death must be sounded in the ears of all men;
there is no man but this doctrine belongs to him, and therefore woe unto him,
if he make no good use of it: yea so necessary is this doctrine, that the
Ministers of the Gospel are commanded not to write it only, but to speak it;
nor that only, but to cry it out with all possible both affection, and power
of inforcement, Cry, all flesh is grass^, Esaias 40.6.

Thirdly, this may teach.

1. Rich men in special to lay this to heart: For God has given them this
doctrine to humble them, and to teach them not to glory in their wealth, but if
they have gotten grace let them rejoice, that God has provided better things
than the things of this life for them: They are more happy, that God has made
them low by giving them a sight of their sins, and so to be humbled for them,
then that he made them great in the world: for their flesh is but grass, and
all that glory must vanish, as will be showed afterward. The Use is urged,
Iam. 1.10, 11. Ps. 49.

2. Strong men, to whom God has given helps of nature, or art: Use thy
strength, but rejoice not in it: Use thy Physic, but trust not upon it: For,
for all that thou must dye; there is no art nor remedy, against death.

3. All men, and so we should all learn two things especially. 1. To put our
trust in God, which lives for ever, since all men must perish, and we cannot
continue here, it is the best relying upon God, and his favor, and help, who
lives ever to perform his promise, and to provide for his servants: thus
David uses this consideration, Ps. 102.12, 13. 2. To be patient, when we feel
the walls of our earthly house begin to moulder down, when we feel death
beginning like a moth to feed upon us, we should be patient, seeing it is not
only unavoidable, but that it is the case of all men, as well as ours. Thus of
the extent of the affirmation. The time follows.

Is grass.

This mortality may be said to be so presently. It is so in diverse respects: 1.
It is so ^n the cause, which is sin; the cause of death is in us already, it
has infected our very bones. 2. It is so in the sentence; the doom is already
gone out upon all flesh: It is appointed, that all men shall once die. The very
sentence uttered in Paradise of dying the death, stands still unrevoked in
respect of our flesh. 3. It is so in experience: all flesh is dead, never any
escaped. 4. It is so in respect of d^sposition to death; we are all but dying
men, death has taken hold of us, and does every day feed upon us insensibly:
To live, is but to lie a dying. The disposition to death is inflicted upon all
men; for all tend to death. 5. Lastly, it may be said all flesh is grass for
certainty, that is, we shall as certainly vanish hereafter, as if it were now
presently done.

Use.
The use should be the more to enforce upon us the care of providing for a
change, since death is so many ways made fast unto us; and withal it may
serve to confute the vain hope of long life here, seeing we are all but as so
many dead men; here to day, and to morrow cast into the grave: and we should
also learn hence to be continually thinking of death: must we not do the work
that is present to us? why death is before thine eyes, why then do thou not
the thing of the day in the day? It is thy every days work to die, to learn
to die, seeing we die daily.

Hitherto of that branch of the proposition that concerns the body of man^no^
follows the vanity of man's condition in this world.

The glory of man is as the flower of grass.

Ier. 9.24. P^al. 49. Dan. 2.37. Phil. 2.3. 1 These. 2.6. ^ Cor. 11 18. Esaias 8.7.
Here first the s^^se of the words is to be considered: By the glory of man he
means whatsoever it is in outward things which man glories in; any thing
that man rejoices in, admireth, praises, seeks as an ornament, or
happiness to himself, such as are riches, strength, honor, high places, and
command over others, beauty, praise of men, excellency of natural gifts, noble
birth, calling, multitude of attendants, and such like.

By man he means here the natural man, or the outward man, for of the
spiritual man it is not true, because he glories in that shall never fade,
nor be taken away from him.

Now this glory is compared to the flower of grass for transitorinesse,
because it will fade and fall away, as the repetition shows, and that
speedily too, as the uses of this similitude in diverse scriptures show, as will
afterward more appear.

Doct.
The doctrine then is, that all the outward glory of man in this world is
exceeding vain, and so it may appear for six causes, or considerations, for I
omit many other reasons.

Man's glory vain for six reasons.
First, for the most part these things so much desired, cannot be had, or not as
they are desired, and therefore their glory is vain, because they are sought
in vain.

Eccles. 5.
2. If they be obtained, yet the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear
with bearing of them, they cannot fill the heart of man. 3. Many times it falls
alike in these things to the fool and to the wise, both in having them, and in
losing them, and this is a miserable vanity and vexation of spirit. 4. The
glory that is placed in these things, is liable to be interrupted with a
thousand crosses: either they expire the vanity, or are taken away by violence.
5. If they could make us happy, yet death will not let us enjoy them: many men
spend their days in getting these things, and then in learning how to put them
to their delightfullest use, and then (when to possess them might seem a
happiness) they die. 6. Lastly, that which is now our glory, will not be
remembered when we are gone, as we care not for the glory of those that are
past: It is a poor praise to say of a man when he is gone, he was a rich man,
a strong man, a noble man, etc. and yet even this also will be forgotten.
The holy Ghost in diverse Scriptures points at diverse uses of this doctrine,
and first for instruction it should teach us diverse duties:

1. Not to trust upon these outward things, if God give them, not glory in
them, nor boast of them, Psalm. 49.4. to 15. Ier. 9.24. yea if God give us to
taste some sweetness in them, yet be not too confident, for the comforts of
man's heart wither like grass, Psalm. 102.5.4. Iam. 1.10, 11.

2. Not to contend for precedence in these things, nor to strive that our glory
should exceed the glory of others; for God many times ends the quarrel with his
judgments, and stains their glory on al sides, as Zach. 12.7.

3. Not to fear wicked men, when they are made rich, or grow great, and when
their glory is increased. For their glory will not last, when they dye, they
carry nothing with them: their glory cannot descend after them, Psalm. 49.15,
16, 18. and therefore we should never envy their prosperity, for the same
reason, as Psalm. 37.1, 2.

4. Not to know any man after the flesh, nor to measure man's happiness by the
possession, or want of this glory, 2. Cor. 5.

5. If thou possess these outward things, do good to thy self, eat, and
drink, and let thy heart rejoice, and deny not contentment to thy heart
through vain care, or bootlesse fears, Psalm. 49.18. Eccles. 8.

6. It should teach men faithfulness in their particular calling. For seeing
these things last but a while we should take heed to our charge, whilst God
leaves them to our disposing or using, so Pro. 27.23, 25, 26. Heb. 13.5, 6.

7. If God give thee but a little, yet be content, it is no great restraint to
have the abundance of such transitory things withheld, see Pro. 27.23, 25. Heb.
13.5, 6.

8. It should teach us then to enquire after true glory, that may enrich the
spiritual man, seeing this glory of the outward man is so transitory: now here
is a great and profitable question to be propounded, and resolved, and
seriously to be received, and practiced.

Quest. What are those things, wherein true glory lies, and in the profession
of which, we possess true glory, seeing all those things be not worth the
seeking after?

Answ. For answer hereunto, if we follow this word glory through the
scriptures, we shall find it lighting down, and setting upon diverse particular
distinct excellencies worthy the utmost labor of all men to study them, What
is man's true glory.
and seek after the fruition of them. This glory is either in this world, or
the world to come: In this world, if we mark the scriptures quoted, we shall
find diverse things to be man's true glory, as 1. Christ is the King of glory,
the fountain of all true glory, Ps. 24. and he is unto us the foundation of
all our hope of glory, Col. 1.27. 2. The spirit of adoption is the spirit of
glory, and of God, and if this rest upon us we cannot be miserable, 1. Pet.
4.14. 3. Our souls are our glory, and if we provide for them, we provide
richly for our selves; so are our souls called, Ps. 16.8. and 30.13. Genesis
49.6. Esaias 5.14. 4. The means, and signs, and pledges of Gods presence, and
our communion with him are our glory: Thus the Arc was called the glory, Romans
9.5. and thus plain and powerful preaching is accounted glory, 1 Cor. 2.7.
and 2 Cor. 3.9, 10: and thus our godly teachers are the glory of our lives, 2
Cor. 2.14. 5. The favor of God and the assurance of his mercy is our glory, an
incomparable treasure, Psalm. 90.14, 16, 17. 6. Faith is a man's glory, and will
be so acknowledged in the day of Christ, Iam. 2.1. 1 Pet. 1.7. 7. True grace
and the gifts that resemble Christ, the virtues of Jesus Christ, even these are
our glory, 2 Pet. 1.3. Esaias 1.5. and thus wisdom is durable riches, Prove.
8.18. 8. A free estate in the profession of the Gospel, and serving of God, 1
Cor. 9.15. 9. The testimony of a good conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. In one word, God
is our glory, Esaias 6.19. Ps. 3.4.

Thus we see what is our glory in this life, and unto those things we must
aspire: The Lord give us understanding to lay these things to our hearts. Now
because these things are not fully possessed in this life, therefore our
greatest glory is in the world to come, Romans 5.2. Col. 3.4.

9. Seeing all the glory of man is as the flower of grass in this world;
therefore we should think the oftener of death, and pray to God to teach us to
number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom, Ps. 90.6, 12. Io^
14.1, 2.

10. Lastly, we should all be persuaded to subscribe easily and willingly to
the tried doctrine of Solomon, that has written a book of purpose to record
his experiences concerning the vanity of all those earthly things; such was his
Ecclesiastes. Oh that we could believe it without trying conclusions, and
further engaging our selves to these base and fading things! And thus of the
Uses for instruction.

Secondly, we may hence be informed, concerning the misery of wicked men. For
since they have no glory in another world, and their glory in this world is so
transitory and vain, it may evidently prove, that their distress is
extremely great, and their misery the more, that they cannot understand the
baseness of their own condition: This very similitude of grass, and the
flower of grass is used in diverse scriptures to this end: as Psalm. 91.7, 8.
and 49.20. Ioh 8.12, 13. Ps. 129.6. and 37.36. Especially, how woeful is the
estate of those men, that glory in their sins, that have no better felicity
in their desires, but that which is properly their shame. For if their estate
be vain, that have no other happiness, then in the riches, and honors, and
pleasures of life: oh how woeful is the case of these men, that glory in their
shame, their end is damnation, as their God is their belly? oh woe unto them,
they have rewarded evil unto their own souls, Phil. 3.18, 19. Esaias 28.1, 4.

Thus of the proposition: The repetition or exposition of it follows.

The grass withers.

The repetition imports generally three things.

First, the certainty of our vanity, and mortality, we must flee away hence:
all outward gloss and glory will decay: what man lives, and shall not see
death? It is appointed by a decree irrevocable, that all men shall once dye;
there can be no redemption for our lives, death passes upon all men.

Secondly, the necessity of the doctrine, when God says a thing over again,
it shows us, that that point must be known, we must take notice of it: it is
a doctrine cannot be missed in the Church: no work of God will well go forward
without it. He must cry aloud, that all flesh is grass: God lo^g^ (...) it
were to have this doctrine take in our hearts: He knows a great part of the
hardship of godliness were over, if this were soundly digested: oh that they
were wise, and would consider their latter end: men would apply their hearts to
wisdom, if they had once learned to number their days.

Thirdly, it imports, that God finds us wonderful dull of hearing* and
forgetful, and careless of this doctrine, and that naturally we are
wonderful impo^^nt in these considerations: The Lord does reproach us as it
were for negligence, that a plain point should need to be repeated: And
therefore we should examine our selves seriously herein, and not vex God with
our unteachablenesse in this point. Oh how might God be displeased with us, if
he should call us to account herein! have we not heard, have we not seen from
the beginning, that all flesh is grass? yea has not God heard our
attestations? we shake our heads, we confess it is true: we are sometimes
comforted, and conceive some weak resolutions to think better of it, and
provide for death: when God has us here in the Church, as it were in his
school, we seem as if we had learned this lesson perfectly, and yet
miserable wretches, (that the most of us are) we go home and forget all, as if
we had never bin taught it: nay is it not needful for the most of us to be
taught again the same doctrine, which the very last Sabbath we heard of this
argument? oh who is effectually persuaded amongst us indeed to lay it to his
heart? does not this repetion smite us all? certainly, if we be not warned,
death may come before we are aware, and surprise us, when we shall not have
time to learn to die.

There are many incoveniences come from this forgetting of the doctrine of our
latter end, and suffering it to run out.

1. Men's sins cleave fast unto them, their filthiness is in their skirts, The
inconveniences men bring upon themselves by forgetting death.
because they remember not their latter end, Lam. 1.9. men live securely, while
they keep out the thought of death. 2. This brings many miseries upon men. For
when God cannot prevail by doctrine, he will set upon us by judgment, and then
we may come down wonderfully, Deuteronomy. 32.29, 30. where^s we might avoid our
distresses by thinking of death voluntarily. 3. We keep our spirits void of
true magnanimity, we can never tell our strength, till we know, whether we can
die, or no: one would chase a thousand, one I say of these, that will consider
of their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.30. 4. We can never tell whether our knowledge
be right or no, till we have tried it with thoughts of death: they are a
people without understanding, that consider not their latter end, Deuteronomy. 32.28,
29. 5. Our hearts will grow harder and harder, if we put out these remorses
wrought in us concerning death: as ^ron is harder, the oftener it is heated and
cooled. 6. We keep our selves without those joys would come of the frequent
contemplation of the glory of heaven: we dare not think of heaven, because we
would avoid the thought of death. 7. We give wonderful advantage to the
temptations of life. 8. We keep our selves without the comfort of one
excellent sign of our salvation, viz: the love of the appearance of Christ; we
pray not that Gods kingdom may come, we desire not to be dissolved; we dare
not say with the Church, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly: we are loath to pray
God to teach us to number our days: for these things which have been the
excellent praises of the Saints, we suffer not to be found in us. 9. Lastly,
(as I touched it before) death may come suddenly, and then what case are we in,
that suffer the thoughts of death thus to go out, and be lost in us, so as they
produce no sound effect of preparation in us?

But what must we do that we might bring our selves to a more serious
consideration of our mortality and vanity, how may this fault in us be helped?
Quest.


Go to God by prayer to form this in thee, Answ.
strive with God by importuning his assistance in teaching thee to number thy
days: it is Gods work, we see the Israelites sentenced to death, yet could
not mind it, and therefore Moses makes that prayer, Ps. 90.12. 2. It is an
excellent help to inure our selves to die daily, to try how we could die by
the most effectual supposition of our present death compelling our selves to
put the case, what if I should now die? 3. The thought of death would not be so
put off, if we had got a sound assurance of our salvation, and of the remission
of our sins: it is want of assurance that makes many so afraid of dying. And
thus in general.

In particular, these words of the repetition afford us some observations, that
are common to both: some special to each, in which they differ one from
another. The observations that are common to both are these:

1. That men both in their bodies and glory will decay, man continues not in
one stay, if you look either upon his person, or his estate. 2. That man in
both decaieth speedily, he is of few days in his body, and full of trouble in
his estate, he comes up like a flower, and flees away as a shadow, Ioh 14.
1, 2. it shall be accomplished before his time, that is, before the time he
fancieth to himself, Ioh 15.33. The glory of may shall flee away as a bird;
from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception, Hosh. 9.11. 3.
That man decaies insensibly, he goes away by degrees, both in his body and
honor, he declineth like a shadow, and is consumed as it were by the moth. 4.
That man would come to this decay even without violence, as the grass and
flowers perish, though they were never cut down. 5. That when man is decayed
either in body or estate, he grows extremely base and vile, he is but as a
little stubble, or as a rotten leaf or flower. And all this should the more
force upon man the care to provide for immortality, and not to glory in or
trust upon his outward condition; especially it should make every one of us
afraid of procrastination, death does not always give warning, nor can we
always foresee our ruin, or loss of outward things. And thus of what is
common to both.

Now in special we may note:

1. That the text acknowledges more stability in the body of man, than in his
glory. For the flower falls off, or fades immediately after the spring
usually, whereas the stalk is green long after, and therefore it shows the
vanity of such men, as so greedily pursue the getting of outward things, that
they have not their own bodies in estimation, nor allow themselves the fit use
of the things they possess, Eccl. 6.2. 2. That the bodies of men do not
utterly perish, as does the glory of men. For the flower falls off, whereas
the grass only withers, the root is alive within the earth: when a man
dies, he shall never see his riches or pleasures of this life any more; but
yet his body has a root, and when the spring of the last resurrection comes,
it will revive again, which should in force upon us a more through contempt of
all these earthly things, and the rather, if we consider further, what may be
added concerning the glory of men. For besides that once it must fail, and
that speedily: First, it is all stained and durtied already with man's sins;
Esaias 21.9.
and also the Lord usually sets himself so to stain the pride of all glory,
that it is scorned and despised even in the prime of it, but especially when it
begins a little to decay. Besides, who knows how sudenly all may be gone: the
glory of many men we see is but as the hasty fruit before summer, which while
he that looks upon it sees it, whilst it is yet in his hand, he eats it
up, Esaias 28.4. Further, we may observe the manner, how the Lord does bring
down the glorious beauty of many great men, as it were with a temp^^^ of ^aile
(their afflictions coming in as thick as hail) and a destroying ^^orms as a
flood of mighty and unresistable waters overflowing, so does the Lord cast them
down to the earth, and tread their glory in the dust: yea and many times turn
their great glory into surpassing shame, Esaias 28.2. Ps. 7.5. Hos. 4.7.

Verse 25. But the Word of the Lord endures for ever: and this is the word
which is preached among you.


HItherto of the vanity of man in his flesh, and outward condition: The
eternity of the word follows in this verse. The hearts of all men naturally
tend to the admiration, and care for the body only, and the things thereof:
yea in the Church of God the faith of Christians is wonderfully deformed, and
disgraced by such cares: while men profess they believe in Christ for a better
condition, their practice continually proclaims the flesh still for the idol
of their hearts; therefore it is needful, that this wretched pertinacy should
be disgraced by a discovery of their vanity therein, which is done in the
former verse. Now if men be put out of their way in the projects of the flesh,
it is expedient they should be informed, what better things to settle their
hearts upon, else it will never persuade with them to leave the love of the
flesh, and this present life, if no better happiness be set before them. This
therefore is intended in this verse, briefly to tell men, upon what they might
spend their time better, than in the cares of the flesh.

The question then is: Quest.
since nothing in man's flesh or outward estate is worth the care and labor of
attendance, what then is the chief thing in this life to be sought after?

If we mark the direct Antithesis to the former verse, Answ.
it should have been thus: Man's flesh is grass, etc. but man's spirit endures
for ever, and so the soul of man should have bin the maine thing his heart
should have been set upon: But thus there had been great danger of mistaking
still; for God would have the body saved, as well as the soul, and the
holiness of the body as well as the soul thought of: and besides, the soul
naturally is as corrupt as the flesh, and it is no more safe to follow the
lusts of the soul, then the appetites of the body. For the spirit of man is as
much polluted, as the flesh, and the body is but the instrument of the soul:
therefore the scripture leads man clean out of himself, considered as he is
in his present state of nature, that he may be fully humbled for his misery.

Quest. If yet any say, what then is the maine object of our cares, and service
in this life?

Ans. I answer, that it is diversely resolved in diverse scriptures: In Ps. 102.
11, 12. it is thus: Man fades, and withers like grass, but the Lord
endures for ever, and so that place shows us, it is God we should know,
admire, love, care for, provide for, and set our hearts upon In the 103. Ps v.
15.17. it is thus: The days of man are as grass, and as the flower of the
field flourishes: but the love and kindness of the Lord endures for ever to
them that fear him: where we are guided to know in particular, what in God we
should most seek, and that is the assurance of Gods mercy, which will stand us
in stead for eternity. Here it is the word of the Lord endures for ever, and
this comprehends all the former: It is the word of the Lord, that reveals
God, and directs our hearts to the love of God, and the assurance of his
mercy: It is the word of God, that cleanses and sanctifies the souls of men.

So that then the chief doctrine of this verse is, Doct.
that in this life we should especially set our hearts upon the word of God,
that should be our maine care: It is the word, we should be most busied about,
and our hearts should specially be set upon, we should meditate in it day and
night, Ps. 1.2. It should be our portion and heritage: It is that we should
provide for, whatsoever we want, Ps. 119. For the word of God perfects our
natures, and sanctifies us, Ioh. 17. By the word we have communion and
fellowship with God, and Christ on earth, Ioh. 14.21. Rev. 3.10. It is the
word, that comforts us in all tribulation, Ps. 119. It is the word, that
directs us in all our ways: It is the light to our feet, and la^thorne to our
paths. Ps. 119. yea it is the word that maintains our lives: for man lives
not by bread, but by the word and prayer. It is the word, that fits us for
immortality, and brings salvation to us, and in the mean while nourishes us
up to eternity, 1 Pet. 1.23. and 2.2. Act. 26.18. and 4.16.

This may serve, First, for information concerning the estate of two sorts of
men. 1. Of such as want the word, or the love of it; what shall it profit them
to win all the glory of the world for the flesh, when for want of the word
their spirits and flesh must perish for ever? 2. Of such as follow the word,
and search the scriptures, and have nothing more in request: this justifies
them, they have chosen the better part with Mary, and it shall never be taken
from them.

Secondly, for instruction: we should all learn to glorify the word, Act. 13.
48. to receive it with all meekness, Iam. 1.21. to hunger and thirst after
it, as our appointed food: to embrace it, press to it, and never be ashamed
of it, Ps. 119.2^. esteeming it above all riches, Ps. 119.14, 72, 110.
exercising our our selves in it day and night; redeeming some time constantly
to be employed in it; laboring most for the food that perishes not, Ioh.
6.27. Amos 8. 12. being resolved to deny our reasons, profits, pleasures,
credits, and carnal friends, and all for the words sake, Mark 10.2. Thus in
general.

In particular two things may be noted in this verse. First, the praise of the
word for the continuance, it abides for ever. Secondly, the explication of the
kind, viz: this is true of the word, which we preach unto you. The first thing
the^ is, that the word abides for ever, which other scriptures with like
plainness avouch, Ps. ^ 17.2. Mat. 5. and 24. Two things would be explained:
1. how the word abides for ever. 2. of what word of God this is true. For the
first, the word of God abides for ever in diverse respects. 1 In the Archetipe
of it in God, the plotforme in the mind of God; though all Bibles were
destroyed, yet the word of God could not, because the original draught of it
is in God himself. 2. In the very writings of the word, it shall last for
ever, that is, till time be no more: If all the power on earth should make
war against the very paper of the scriptures, they cannot destroy it, but the
word of God written will be to be had still. It is easier to destroy heaven and
earth, than to destroy the Bible. 3. In the sense of it, all that is said in
scripture shall be performed: the counsel of the Lord shall stand, not a word
of Gods promises, or threatenings shall fail, Psalm. 33.11, 12. 4. It abides
for ever in the hearts of the godly, the impressions made in the minds of the
godly are indelible, every godly man has the substance of Theology in his
own heart, which seed will abide in him, 1 Ioh. 3. 5. Lastly, it abides for
ever, Ioh. ^.31. etc.
as it makes us abide for ever, and so it abides in the gifts of the mind
wrought by it: in the life of grace quickened by it, and in the fruits of
righteousness, to which it persuaded men, Romans 11. The gifts of God are
without repentance, and the word begets an immortal seed in us, and the fruits
of the faithful will remain, and their righteousness for ever, Ps. 111. 3. 1
Pet. 2.3. Ioh. 15.16. 1 Cor. 3.14. 1 Cor. 13. ult. 2. Now for the second: It is
true of every word of God, of every jott or tittle of it, that it abides for
ever: The Law and the Gospel: by the law I mean the moral law: for the
ceremonial law lasted but for the Jewish eternity, which was, till Christ
repaired the world, and made all things new.

Use.
The Use may be

First, for information, and so in five things.

1. Concerning the vanity of all outward things, the perfection of them does
come to an end, but of Gods word there is no end, Psalm. 119.

2. Concerning the estate of hypocrites, and such whose righteousness is but
as the morning dew, Hosh. 6.5. this shows they have not received the power of
the word, in that it does not abide in them.

3. Concerning the misery of all wicked men, heaven and earth shall pass away
before one tittle of the curses and woes denounced against them shall fail, or
be unaccomplished; yea it will remain to judge them at the last day, Ioh. 7.

4. Concerning the morality of the Sabbath: For since this is one of the ten
words of Gods law, even this word of the Lord must abide for ever, else more
then a tittle of it should fail before heaven and earth fail.

5. Concerning the madness of two sorts of men.

1. Such as account all diligence in preaching, reading, and hearing to be
foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. 2. Such as are scorners, and jest at the threatenings
of scripture, and say with them in the Prophet, let the word of the Lord come,
that we may see it, Ezech.
Secondly, for instruction: and so it should teach us all to add to ^ur cares
and desires after the word, as that which will do us good another day, since
in the lasting profit of it, it will endure above all things else, and
therefore is better then all treasures: yea to get this perpetuity of good, we
should not think much to be at any labor or cost for it: and the rather
seeing it is such a sufficient portion or heritage.

Lastly, this is comfortable to the godly diverse ways.

1. Against their unbeleefe, when they are in distress, especially of spirit,
they think the word of God was wonderful comfortable to David, and such like,
but they cannot believe it should be so to them: this doctrine assures them,
that the word of the Lord endures through all ages, and is as able to save
their souls, and sanctify, and comfort them as ever it was. 2. Against the
weakness of their memories: The word will abide for ever, some seeds of holy
truth will never be lost, and the spirit will lead them to all truth, and bring
the sayings of the word to their mind, when they shall have need. 3 Against the
scorns of the world, though men deride their counsel in making the Lord and
his word their refuge, yet they may be well pleased in themselves, and resolve
with the Psalmist, still in God to praise his word. For the profit of it will
last to them, when riches, and honor, and pleasures fade like the flower of the
grass to wicked men. 4. Against their fear of falling away. For the word of
God in effect abides for ever, and it makes them abide for ever.

This is the word, which is preached unto you.

These words explain the sense of the former, and direct men's minds to that
use of the word, which is most proper and powerful to effect immortality in
us, and so there is a threefold limitation.

1. That the word of God does then cheefely beget in us eternal graces, and
abiding fruits, when it is preached to us: The intent of the Apostle is to
exalt preaching, not to deny efficacy to the translation, or reading of the
word, but to show that then it is most lively, when it is in preaching fitted
and applied to us: and this may both instruct us what to do, and inform us
what to think. It should teach us especially two things: the one is to depend
upon hearing, as the especial means, by which our souls may live for ever:
Hear and your souls shall live, Esaias 55.4. 2. and it should also settle us in
the resolution to hear: if this be so, let him that hears, hear, Ezech.
3.7. It may likewise inform us in two things: 1. of the misery of all such as
have not the benefit of the word preached, how do their souls perish for
ever? 2. of the honor God does to his poor servants the Ministers of the word,
when he tre^^^ about eternal life, he sends the people to their Ministers, as
if he would tell them, they should not be saved without their teachers.

2. That not all preaching has this effect; but it must be good preaching or
preaching of the gospel, or publishing of the glad tidings in and through
Jesus Christ: the word may signify to preach happily, or to preach well, or to
preach glad tidings, or the gospel. It is certain it is a great happiness to
a people, when they get faithful teachers; and it is true, that not all
preaching, but preaching well is that which must make us abide for ever: but I
take it in the usual sense. It is the preaching of the gospel, that is thus
glorious in effect. For the law is the ministration of death, 2 Cor. 3. and
this should both teach Ministers to study to preach the gospel, (which to do
requires exceeding great labor, and judgment) and besides, the people should
set their hearts upon the comforts propounded to them in the ministry of the
word, and open their hearts wide to receive them with all joy and much
assurance; yea when they feel the sweetness of the gospel, they should
glorify God, and receive their teachers as the Angels of God, as the allusion
of the word imports.

3. That the word must be considered, as it is propounded to them, to you,
says the Apostle; and this may be restrained either to the scriptures, as they
were first preached by the Apostles themselves, men inspired of God: or in
general it may be extended to the faithful Ministers, that are over the godly
in any place. It is true, that there is great difference between the preaching
of the Apostles, and our preaching, and the people are not bound to respect our
preaching now, as theirs then, because the Apostles could not err, and were
immediately inspired with the Holy Ghost: but yet when that we preach, we
demonstrate to the consciences of our hearers to be the very word of God, and
doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, we ought to be received. Sure it is,
that though we give the scriptures never so fair t^^rmes, if we love not the
preaching of the word, we cannot live for ever, and there is a secret deceit in
men's hearts, they think they must honor Gods word, but they are not bound to
think any thing highly of their Ministers preaching, especially if they have
any quarrel or grudge against their Minister. But let all men well consider,
when the Apostle here says; this is the word which is preached unto you, if
the word which is preached to you be not regarded, you cannot stand in the day
of Christ.

Again, others think, if we had such preaching as was in the days of
Christ, and the Apostles, or as others have in other places, we could then do
that is required of us: still mark the words; it is the word preached to you,
you must rely upon: If therefore the Preacher prove, what he says, in the word
of God, this text will rise up in judgment against thee, if thou obey no^: Or
if for want of life and power in application in thy teacher, thy soul do not
prosper, then why live thou in places, where thou can not stoop ^^ this to
say, this is the word which is preached to me? Why are not men (...) ^^^^full
to provide a place, where their souls may live well, as where (...) ^^^ies may
live well? I mean this of such as live in a free estate.

4. Lastly, this ( to you) notes, that the word is never powerful, but when we
^^ply it to our selves, and receive it as spoken to us in particular in all
things (...); when we can say, this word was preached to me, then will the
(...) work.

FINIS.
A COMMENTARY: OR, SERMONS UPON THE SECOND CHAPTER OF the first Epistle of
Saint PETER: WHEREIN METHOD, SENSE, DOCTRINE, AND USE, IS, WITH great variety
of matter, profitably handled; and sundry heads of Divinity largely discussed.
BY NICHOLAS BYFIELD, late Preacher of God's Word at ISLEVVORTH in MIDDLESEX.

London Printed for George Latham. MDCXXXVI.

TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHT, SIR HORATIO VERE, General of the English Forces in
the Low Countries; and to his most worthy Lady, the Lady MARY VERE, all
happiness that a poor widow may, in their behalf, pray for at the Throne of
Grace.
My much honored Lord and Lady:
AS that special duty which I my self owe to you both; so that purpose which
my dear husband had (while he lived) of dedicating to you this Commentary of
his upon S. Peter's Epistle, binds me (who am left his sole Executrix, to see
his Will every way performed) to set out this first of his works, published
since his death, under your Honorable Names. It pleased you to take into your
Family a child of his body: be further pleased (I pray you) to take into your
Patronage this child of his soul; which, as an Orphane, yea, as a Posthumus,
in all humility is presented unto you. You manifested more then ordinary
kindness to my husband while he lived; we and ours have often tasted of the
sweetness of your bounty: so that I should deserve to be accounted most
ungrateful, if I should bury so many favors in oblivion, or neglect to
provoke others to love and good works, by proposal of your example. Accept, I
beseech you, this poor acknowledgement of thanks; which is most due, first, to
that primary Fountain of all goodness, Almighty God, for keeping your Lordship
safe in your late employment in the Palatinate, and for freeing your Ladyship
from those fears whereunto you could not but be subject, by reason of his long
absence; and for giving you both, a mutual and comfortable fruition one of
another: And next, to your selves, for all those kindnesses, which, while my
husband lived, you did to him and his, and since his death you continue to do
to such as he has left behind him. Now, the good God continue his blessed
protection over you both, and take all that belong unto you, under the wings of
his fatherly Providence. And so I rest, with the renewall of my suit, that you
would cast your eyes upon this Work of him who much honored you in his life
time; and is, after his decease, offered to you by

Your humble Oratrix, ELIZABETH BYFIELD.

To the Christian Reader.
MAny and great are the means which the Lord has been pleased, since this
latter Spring of the Gospel (begun above an hundred years ago) to afford
unto his Church, for opening of the mysteries of the Gospel Never since the
Apostles times were the Scriptures more truly interpreted, more fully
expounded, more distinctly divided, or more powerfully pressed, then in our
Times. The number of those who have taken good pain in this kind, is not
small. We may well put into the Catalogue of them, the Author of this
Commentary upon the second Chapter of the first Epistle of S. Peter, Master
Nicholas Byfield by name; who continued, for the space of twenty years, to
take more then ordinary pains in the work of the Lord. He had a singular gift
in diving into the depth of those points which he undertook to handle. As the
many other Treatises which in his life time be published, do verify as much;
so, in particular, this Commentary here commended unto thee. In it thou shall
find, besides the Grammatical exposition, Logical resolution, and
Theological observations, many divine points copiously handled by way of
Common place; which has made the book to arise unto that bigness that it
has. In this manner of handling the holy Scriptures, he has not gone alone.
Many of the main Pillars of the reformed Churches have beaten out a path before
him; as, Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchius, Lavater, Perkins, and
sundry others, The large volume of Peter Martyrs Common places, was gathered
out of his Commentaries on the holy Scriptures. The Church of God has reaped
much good by such copious and distinct handling of heads of Divinity. Their
labors therefore, who take pains therein, are not to be concealed from the
Church. If it had pleased the Lord to have continued the life, liberty and
ability of this his Servant longer unto his Church, he had (questionless) gone
on further in this course which he so well began: and so might we have had by
his pains as complete a Commentary on the two Epistles of Saint Peter, as we
have upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians, published by this Author.

But seeing it seemed good to the divine Providence here to put a stop to the
pains of this his industrious servant, we must rest content with what he has
done, and expect the pains of some other to go on in the finishing of that
which he has so well begun. I suppose it would be a great wrong to deceive
Gods Church of these good beginnings, because the whole Epistle is not fully
finished. If a Sermon on one verse be thought meet to be published, as daily we
see such Sermons to be published, why may not much rather many Sermons on many
verses and chapters together be published? That what was done by the Author in
his life time, may be the better accepted, care has been had to note the
heads of points in the margin, and to add an Alphabeticall index in the latter
end, that by the help of it, you may the more readily find out such points as
you most desire to read.

If the Author be of force to commend a Work the more, this Work may receive no
small commendation from the Author of it: for, he was a man of a profound
judgment, strong memory, sharp wit, quick invention, and unwearied industry.
He was in his Ministry very powerful, and that unto all turns, as we
speak. When he had to do with tender and troubled consciences, he was a
Barnabas, a son of comfort: but when he had to do with impudent and
obstinate sinners, he could make his face hard and strong, and show himself
like a Boanarges, the son of thunder. Grave, sober, and temperate he was in his
carriage; and yet, with his entire familiar friend, he could be modestly
pleasant. God gave him a great measure of patience; and he had in his very body
that which tried his patience: for, it appears, that he carried a t^rturing
stone in his bladder fifteen years together, and upward.

I have heard it credibly reported, that fifteen years before his death, he
was by a skillfull Surgeon searched; and that, upon that search, there was a
stone found to be in his bladder: whereupon he used such means as were
prescribed to him for his ease, and found such help thereby, as he thought,
that either the Surgeon which searched him, was deceived; or that the means
which he used, had dissolved the stone. But time, which manifests all things,
showed, that neither his Surgeon was deceived, nor yet his stone dissolved:
for, it continued to grow bigger and bigger, till at length it came to be of an
incredible greatness.

After his death he was opened, and the stone taken out; and being weighed,
found to be 33. ounces and more in weight; and in measure about the edge,
fifteen inches and a half; about the length, above 13. inches; about the
breadth, almost thirteen inches: it was of a solid substance; to look upon like
to a flint. There are many eye witnesses besides my self, who can justify the
truth hereof.

A wonderful work of God it was, that he should be able to carry such a stone
in his bladder, and withal to do the things which he did. He was a close
student, witness the many Treatises which time after time he published in
print. H^e was also a diligent Preacher; for, constantly he preached twice on
the Lords Days: and in Summer, when many of the Gentry and City came to his
Parish at Isleworth, and dwelt there, he spent an hour on Wednesday, and
another on Friday, week after week, in expounding the Scripture in his Church:
very seldom was he hindered by the forementioned stone in his bladder.

This course ^ee kept till about five weeks before his death; when the pain
came so violently upon him, as it wasted his vital vigor, yet did it no way
weaken his faith: but, as the outward perished; so was the inward man renewed
in him. He earnestly prayed, that the extremity of the pain might not make
him utter or do any thing unbeseeming his vocation and profession: but
withal, he advised his friends to consider, that he was but as other men;
and thereupon to judge charitably of his carriage in that case. Many heavenly
meditations issued from him in that time of his visitation, unto the last
period thereof. Quietly, meekly, and patiently be endured; till that surest
Surgeon of all, Death, had eased him of all his pain. In his soul he ever
lives: and in his name he will continue to live so long as the Church enjoys
his Works, more lasting then Marble Monuments.

Now, O blessed Savior and Head of thy Church, as thou transplantest some of
thy Plants out of thy Nurcery, the Church militant; plant others, we beseech
thee, in their rooms, that thy Church may never be unfurnished of able,
painful, faithful, and powerful Ministers.

WILLIAM GOUGE.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE SECOND CHAPTER OF THE FIRST EPIstle general of PETER.
1 PET. 2.1, 2, 3. 1. Wherefore laying aside all maliciousness, and all guile,
and dissimulation, and envy, and evil speakings:

2. As new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the word; that ye may grow
thereby;

3. If so be ye have tasted, that the Lord is bountiful.

FRom the thirteenth verse of the 1. Chapter, The coherence
to the eighth verse of the third Chapter is contained matter of exhortation:
and the exhortation is either general, or special: The general exhortation
concerns all men. chap. 1.13. to chap. 2.13. The special exhortation
concerns only some men, as subjects, servants, wives, husbands, from Chap.
2.13. to Chap. 3.8.

The general exhortation stands of two parts. First the one concerns the
matter of holiness: Secondly, and the other the means of holiness. of the
matter of holiness in the latter part of the former Chapter.

In these words and those that follow to the thirteenth verse, is contained an
exhortation to the right use of the means, by which we might grow up in all
holiness, and acceptance with God.

In the exhortation two things must be distinguished: first, The Analysis of
the first part of this chapter.
the substance of the exhortation, secondly the conclusion of it. The substance
is contained from verse the first to the eleventh; the conclusion in the
eleventh and twelfth verses.

For the first there are two things, in which if we be rightly ordered, it
cannot be, but we must grow wonderfully in grace and holiness: first, The one
is the word: secondly, The other is Christ. To a right order of our selves in
respect of the word, he exhorts, verses 1, 2, 3. To a right order of our selves
in respect of Christ, he exhorts, ver. 4. to 11.

The part of the exhortation, that concerns the word, has three things.
First, what we must avoid, we must lay aside Malice, Guile, Hypocrasie, etc.
Secondly, what we must do, we must desire the word, as the child does the
breast: thirdly, Why so; where diverse reasons are imported. First, we are
babes: Secondly, we are but as new born babes: Thirdly, the word is sincere
milk: Fourthly, it will make us grow: fifthly, have we not already tasted of
the sweetness of it? verse the third.

That part of the exhortation that concerns Christ, has likewise three things
in it, which I will here but touch: First, what we must do, ver. 4. Secondly,
how we must do it: ver. 5. Thirdly, why so: vi^. for two reasons. First, the
one taken from the testimony of Scripture, which is alleged ver. the sixth,
and expounded ver. 7, 8. Secondly, the other taken from the consideration of
our prerogatives we enjoy in Christ, which are set down, first, positively,
ver. 9. Secondly, and comparatively ver. 10. And this is the briefeorder of the
whole first part of this Chapter.

The first thing then in the exhortation is about the word: and therein the
first thing is about the things, which must be avoided, if we would profit by
the word: of which in the first verse.

5. Things to be avoided, if we would profit by the word.
THere are five things we should lay aside and be sure we be free from, when we
come into Gods presence to hear his word, or to be exercised in it: viz.
Malice, Guile, Hypocrisy, Envy, and Evil speaking.

Two things distinctly must be considered in verse first, the sins to be
avoided: viz. those five before named. Secondly, the manner of avoiding them,
imported in the metaphorical tear me laying aside. In general diverse things
may be noted.

General observations. The benefit of brief catalogues of sins, or duties, or
graces.
First, that it is exceeding profitable to gather special catalogues of our
sins which we should avoid, to single out such sins as we would specially
strive against, and do more specially hurt us, and hinder good things from us:
I mean not of all sins, so much as of special certain choice evils that yet
remain in greatest force in us. We may observe a great wisdom of the holy
Ghost in many places of Scripture, drawing such catalogues according to the
state of the people to whom they are given: and so it were of excellent use, if
we did gather catalogues of the duties which especially concern us, or of the
graces we would strive most to excel in, to the intent to keep them daily in
our minds and memories, striving to force in us the special holiness
required in them. It were exceeding useful to observe in several Scriptures,
how the holy Ghost singles out choice directions according to the diverse states
of the people whom they concern.

Secondly, the Minister ought to inform his flock concerning the particular
and special faults that hinder the work of his Ministry where he lives, and
accordingly to set himself against those sins. It is not enough to reprove
sin, but there is a great deal of discretion and judgment to be expressed in
applying himself to the diseases of that people.

Thirdly, the Apostle does not name here all the sins that hinder the word:
but he imports, that in the most places these five sins here named do much
reign, and usually do marvellously let the course of the word: they are the
five most usual sins in the auditories of Christians.

Fourthly, it would be considered, how these sins do hinder the word. These
sins do hinder the word many ways.

How many ways the sins ^ere mentioned do hinder the word.
1. These sins make wicked men many times to set themselves against the word,
and to strive to suppress the liberty of the word.

2. These sins hinder the word, in that they hinder many times other men from
the love of the word. The word is not glorified, yea, it is evil spoken of,
and why? Do not many men and women say they like not this going to Sermons,
etc? for, they see, that such persons can live in malice and deceit and envy
^^e another, etc.

3. These si^^es hinder the Ministers from discerning the work of their
Ministry in their hearers. Paul cannot see or judge, that the Corinthians are
any more then carnal, or at the best but babes in Christ, because there was so
much envy and strife, and division among them, 1 Cor. 3. verse 1, 2, 3.

4. These sins cause God many times to take the word from men. When the Jews
grew so untoward and envious at the Gentiles, and to have such ill tongues in
their heads toward their Teachers, what follows? but that the Lord should
turn the labor of his servants from them, and employ it among the Gentiles,
Acts 13. etc.

5. These sins hinder the word, because they hinder the persons in whom they
are, from a right disposition to, or use of the word. Any of these sins are
like poison lying at the stomach, that infects all the food which comes there.

And therefore for these reasons, and many more which might be alleged, we
should bring a general resolution to make conscience of our ways; and to
avoid these, and all, and each of these sins.

The first then of these sins is Malice.

The original word is diversely accepted. Of Malice. Acceptance of the word.
For sometimes it signifies misery, or grief for affliction; and so it is used
to signify the evil of the day, Mat. 6. ult. Sometimes it is rendered
naughtiness, or wickedness in general, and so it imports vile crimes, or
notorious offenses, and so it is taken James 1.21. Acts 2.22. In this sense it
may be taken here: For it is certain, that if men be guilty of wickedness,
and come in the love of any sin, the word is poisoned in them: especially
whoredom and wine take away men's hearts from the word. Hos. 4. Lastly, it is
rendered in diverse places, malice: as 1 Cor. 5.8. Col. 3.8. and so it is here.

Malice then is the first sin we should be careful to avoid: Malice, in
short, is anger inveterate; It is an inward hatred, or grudge harbored in the
heart against others, and it may be known by diverse signs: As, 1. When a man
bears a constant base estimation of another, Signs of malice.
and inwardly loathes him. 2. When a man has frequent desires of the hurt of
others, and longs for ability or opportunity of revenge. 3. By inflation: when
a man caries himself so proudly, and arrogantly, as he would have it appear,
that he despises others. 4. By the habitual backbiting, judging and
censuring of others. 5. When a man resolves not to forgive a wrong done him: By
these and the like signs may men try themselves, whether they be guilty of
malice, or no.


Now, there are many reasons, why this sin should be wonderfully hated, and
shunned; Reasons against malice.
why we should carry a constant malice against the sin of Malice.

First, if we respect the causes of this evil. For malice comes, From the
causes.
first from an ill nature; it cannot be in a good nature: secondly, It comes
from the devil the first deviser of this abominable poison: thirdly, it comes
from anger, as the next usual immediate cause. The infirmities, or wrongs of
others may be the occasions, but they cannot be the causes of malic^. Now we
should be ashamed to father any of the former three evils.

Secondly, if we respect the effects of malice: and that either in our selves,
From the effects. 1. In us.
or in God. In our selves, malice will work, first, a conformity to the nature
of the devil. For it was used to be noted, that to be angry was humane, but to
persevere in anger (which is this malice,) was devilish: Secondly, It will
plead forcibly man's unregeneration. Malice is noted as a mark of the
unregenerate man: Tit. 3.3. 1 John 2.9. Thirdly, If we have any gifts, it is
certain, malice is like leaven, it will sour them, and spoil the praise, and
acceptance of them: 1 Cor. 5.8. Fourthly, it hinders prayer and the word. That
it hinders prayer, is proved, James 4.1, 2, 3. That it hinders the word, this
text proves. Fifthly, it brings a man many times to wonderful shame, and by a
just Providence of God to open foiles and disgraces. Prove. 25.8. and 16.26. And
many times they fall unto the pit they dug for others. Prove. 26.27. A
malicious person knows not, what shall become of himself. 1 John 2.11. 2. In
God.
Now the effects which the malice of man after a sort produces in God are
first to make him to hate us wonderfully: he accounts the malicious person, as
a murderer, not respecting only what he does, but what he would do: 1 John
3.11. Secondly, he will never forgive a man his sins because he does not
forgive his brother: Mat. 6.14. Thirdly, the judgments of God are pulled down
upon him: God may make the malicious, as the grass on the house top, whereof
the mower fills not his hand, nor they that go by, say, we bless you in the
name of the Lord: yea, let men look to it, left they be cast into prison and
never come out, till they have paid the utmost farthing.

The use may be,

Uses.
First, for humiliation to all such, as find this vile poison in themselves:
they are in a miserable case, and extremely and dangerously diseased;
especially, Aggravations of malice.
if men be guilty of the aggravation of malice: Malice is evil in any, and in
any measure, and toward any: but it is extremely evil, first, when men put on
a resolution not to amend, but confirm themselves in their malicious courses,
and will not be entreated or persuaded to peace and love: Secondly, when men
suffer their malice to carry them into suits, and quarrels, and open
contentions. Thirdly, when men malice the godly, and such as fear God, and
love the truth. 1 Ioh 3.15. Fourthly, when they malice their friends and
familiars, the men of their peace. To hate them that love us is abominable, so
is that domestical hatred between brethren: Prove. 18.19. and between Man and
Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants. Fifthly, when men hate those
that reprove their sins: Amos 5.10. as some do their Ministers. Sixthly, to
hide hatred with dissembling lips, and to lay up deceit in his heart: Prove.
26.24, 25. and 10.28. Seventhly, to sow discord among brethren: this is one of
the six things God hates, Prove. 6.19. Eighthly, to conceive malice against
whole states of men, to hate whole Churches and Assemblies that profess the
Name of Christ, this is the devilish malice of Heretics and Schismatics:
Note.
and the beginning of these loathings must be looked to in such as yet have not
proceeded so far as to a separation. If to hate one man be so ill, what is this
offense of base estimation, inward loathing, and distempered censuring of the
Churches of Christ? Ninthly and lastly, it is one monstrous aggravations of
malice, for a man to rejoice in it, boast of it, account it his honor to
contend, and overcome in contending, to triumph in malice.

Secondly, for instruction: and so we should all learn all remedies and
directions to avoid malice. These remedies either concern malice in our
selves, Remedies for malice.
or malice in others: For both, we need rules to direct us. Now for avoiding
malice in our selves, these rules are of excellent use.

First, Watch thine own heart, for pride, and envy, and passion: For from
hence flows all contention and hatred: 1. In our selves.
Prove. 13.10.

Secondly, avoid three sorts of men, and thou may be free from malice.

The first is the talebearer. Where no wood is, the fire goes out: and where
there is ^o talebearer, strife cease. Prove. 26.20.

The second is the scorner: for, cast out the scorner, and contention cease.
Prove. ^2.10.

The third is the co^te^^iou^ (...), the froward person, the man of
imaginations, he that is apt upon every trifle to snuff, and contest. For as
coals are to burning coals, so is a contentious man to kindle strife: Prove.
26.21.

Thirdly, do thou mislike any thing in thy brother? go to him, Note.
and reprove him plainly, never hate him in thy heart, but tell him of it
plainly. Many times a godly reproof, cures both the reprover, and the reproved.

Fourthly, will not all this help? then go in secret, and humble thy self
before God for that vileness, that cleaves to thy heart: Many prayers and
confessions before God, will make a great alteration in thy soul, it will
purge out this leaven wonderfully.

Fifthly, Meditation of two things in Christ: his Passion, and his second
coming In his Passion, consider a man infinitely just, suffering for the
unjust, and from the unjust: Never so much innocence, never so great wrongs,
never worse enemies; yet see, he can forgive even upon the Cross, when they
took his life from him. In his second coming, consider first, that then there
will be an end of all wrongs, thou shall never be molested more. Secondly, that
an exquisite revenge shall then be executed upon all that do thee wrong, if
they repent not. Thirdly, a retribution shall be given to thee in glory for all
the indignities thou have patiently endured in this world. And thus of malice
in thy self.

For malice in others, it must be considered two ways: First, 2. In others.
how thou must do to cause it to cease, when it is conceived already:
Secondly, how thou may avoid it still, if thou live free from it.

For the first, if any body hate thee, observe these rules: 1. Render not evil
for evil to any man, at any time: Romans 12.17. 2. If thou have any way done
wrong, seek to be reconciled: Mat. 5. 3. If the contention be secret, complain
to no body, but go and debate the matter with thy neighbor himself, and
discover not thy secret to any other: Prove. 25.4. 4. Be courteous and patient,
and tender hearted, and ready to do any good to them, speaking no evil of
them without a calling: Romans 12.17. Ephesians. 4.3. Tit. 7.2.


To keep thee from other men's malice observe these rules.

First, keep thee from other men's strife: meddle not with the strife, that
belongs not to thee: Prove. 26.17.

Secondly, Wrong no man, but follow that which is good, both among your selves,
and toward all men: 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

Thirdly, strive to show all meekness, and softness to all men: Tit. 3.2.
James 3.13, 17.

Guile. Of Guile. The acceptance of the word.
]

The second sin to be avoided is Guile.

The word here rendered Guile is diversely accepted in scripture. Sometime it is
taken in good sense, and so there is a justifiable Guile: so Paul caught the
Corinthians by craft, he won them by his discretion and godly policy. 2 Cor.
12.6. So, Samuel by a godly policy; giving it out that he came to sacrifice,
did safely perform his chief business of anointing David. 1 Samuel 16. and so
did Paul deal cunningly, when in the broile he cried out he was a Pharisee.
But most usually this word is taken in ill sense, and so sometimes it is all
one with hypocrisy: as Hos. 11.12. Psalm. 17.2. But so it is not taken here by
all likelihood, because hypocrisies are mentioned in the next words: sometimes
it signifies fraud and falsehood in opinions: either in the matter, when the
doctrine is strange and false: and so the false Apostles were deceitful
workmen, when they put in that for good stuff, which was counterfeit and
devilish, 2 Cor. 11.13. Or when good doctrine is handled corruptly and
deceitfully for wicked ends, 2 Cor. 42.1. The. 2.3. Sometimes it signifies
deceit in words, and so flattery is Guile, Psalm. 12.2, 3. And lying is Guile,
Mich. 6.12. Zeph. 3.13. And so is all false testimony. Sometimes it signifies
deceit in works; and so false weights and balances, and all fradulent
dealing, and cousenage in buying and selling is Guile, Mich. 6.10, 11. So there
is Guile in Tything, Mal. 1. ult. And so all lying in wait to seek occasion
against others, and all subtle dealing to oppress others, is Guile: Psalm. 105.
2 Cor. 11.12, 13. Mat. 26.4. Mar. 14.1. and such Guile was in them that would
make a man sin in the word. Isay 29. Bribery also is Guile, Job 15. ult.

Object.
Now if any ask me why this sin should be avoided in them that desire to profit
by the word:

Solut.Why Guile is to be avoided.
I answer, it is to be avoided as it is a sin that much dishonours God and the
profession of godliness: It is a ^^amefull offense in any that would seem to
love the word; but more particularly the sins of deceit are a great
impediment in hearing the word: For, first the guile of false opinions and
strange doctri^e is like a poison to the sincere milk of the word, and to be
eschewed of all that follow the Truth. Ephesians. 4.14, 15. Heb: 13.7. Secondly, a
heart accustomed to deceit and subtlety, cannot be a plain and honest heart:
and, without a plain, honest, and good heart, men can never receive with any
fruitfulness the seed of eternal life. Luke 8. Thirdly, he that is false to
men, will never be true to God, he that will lie to men, will lie to God: Also
he that is not faithful with men, will compass God about with deceit, Hos.
11.12. He will never be faithful in the true treasure, that is unjust in
outward things. Luke 16. Fourthly, it is a sin that God in a special manner
hates, Psalm. 5.7. Fifthly, the sins of deceit usually attend upon some Idol
in the hearts of men, which has such command over the deceitful person, that
he cannot attend to the word of God, or not have leisure to practice it; he is
so mastered by this particular corruption, Ier. 9.

Use ^.
The use of this may be threefold.

For humiliation to all deceitful persons, that use lying, fraud, subtlety and
guilefull dealing in their trades and callings, and course of dealing, and
conversation with men; they shall never prosper in spiritual things. The
Ordinances of God are blasted to them: The misery of deceitful persons.
Moreover, there are two considerations which should wonderfully affright such
as are accustomed to lying and deceit.

First, it is certain they are wicked men, and have not the fear of God
before their eyes: they are the children of the Devil, and enemies of
Righteousness; as these places fearfully show, Psalm. 36.1, 3. and 10.7. Romans
3.13. and 1.29. Acts 13.10.

Secondly, the curse of God is upon them; God will weigh them in the balance,
Job. 31.5. They are an abomination to the Lord, Prove. 11.1. and 20.23. The Lord
will surely vis^t, and his soul will be avenged on such persons, Ier. 8.26,
27, 29. They shall be destroyed, Psalm. 52.4. They shall not love (...) half
their days, Psalm. 55. ult.

The ^g^^ava^ons of the sin of d^^^it. 1. The manner of deceiving.
And as this is terrible to all deceivers, so especially to such as are guilty
of the aggravations of the sin. As, 1. When de^eit is covered with smooth
words, and a flattering style, Ier. 9.8* Prove. 26.24. etc. 2. When men delight
in it, and take a contemplative kind of pleasure in their ^uilefull projects;
as the voluptuous person does in his lust: When ^ens bel^^^^ prepare deceit;
Job. 15. ult. not their heads but their bellies, Psalm. ^^.2. 4. 3. When men
make a trade of it, give their tongues to evil, and will frame deceit. Psalm.
^0.19. Bend their tongues to lies, and teach their tongues to speak lies, and
weary themselves to commit iniquity, Jer. 9.5. 4. When men think all time spent
about Gods service too long; they would have the Sabbaths over, that they might
practice deceit. Amos 8.5. 5. When men swear deceitfully: Psalm. 24.4. 6. When
men boast of it: Psalm. 52.1, 3.


And as deceit is aggravated by the manner, 2. The persons upon whom it is
p^actised.
so may it be by the persons upon whom it is practiced: and so it is an
aggravation to deceive ones neighbor and ones brother Jer. 9.5. and so it is
to deceive the harmless, and quiet of the Land, Psalm. 35.20. And as by the
persons, so by the time: 3. The time.
It is an aggravation when men imagine deceit (as the Prophet David says) all
the day long: Psalm. 38.12.

Now, if the former terrors belong to deceitful persons in the general, how
much more to them that are guilty of deceit with all these or any of these
aggravations.

Some one might here say, we feel the sweetness of it: Object. 1.
we grow rich by it; and we see many men in the world waxen great by the same
courses: and if we should not lie and deceive, we might give over our trades,
Solut.
etc.

For answer hereunto, let all such know, that though it be true, O^ the misery
of such as (...) by d^^^^^.
that some men are waxt great and rich by such courses, yea, though they be fat
and shine, yet the Lord will visit them, and his soul will be avenged upon
them Jer. 5.28, 29. For, wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, Prove.
13.11. and the tabernacles of bribery and deceit shall be desolate, Mic. 6. 10.
to the 16. All such as conceive with guile (by that time they have reckoned
their months aright, though they grow never so big) shall bring forth nothing
but wind and vanity, Job 15. ult. What shall be given thee, or what shall be
done unto thee, O thou lying and deceitful tongue? thou shall be smitten with
some strange and strong hand of God, as with the arrows of the mighty: so as
thy stroke shall be incurable and deadly, and thy destruction shall be as with
the coals of I^niper, that is, both fierce in respect of thy self, and
pleasing in respect of others. For, men are wonderfully well pleased, Note.
when they observe that ill gotten goods do not prosper. This hand of God
smells like the burning of Juniper.

Some others might say, we are servants, and we must lie, Object. 2.
and defraud others to satisfy our masters.

The Prophet Zephany reports, Solut.
that the Lord will punish all those very servants that fill their masters
houses with violence and deceit; Servants must not use lying and deceit to
please th^^ mast^^s.
the servants (I say) as well as their masters.

But might some others say, my courses are so secret, that my deceit shall
never be found out.

Let such m^n learn that the Lord found out this sin in Ephraim, Object. 3.
Hos. 11. and will punish it, though Ephraim said he was grown rich, Solut.
and in all his labors they should find none iniquity in him, that were
sin. Of (...) c^^(...).
He thought himself sure enough for being discovered: and therefore he would
contest vehemently, and cry out upon such dishonesty in men, as to use false
words and waights: besides, it is worthy to be observed, that God many times
does not only discover these secret fraudulent courses, but discovers them
openly; so as their wickedness is showed before the whole congregation, Prove.
26.26.

But others may say, in others things am I just, Object. 4.
and besides I am forward in religion: and therefore this offense is not so
great.

Shall I account thee pure, says the Lord, with wicked balances? Solut.
Mic. 6.12. as if he would say, all the shows of religion in the world will
not serve the turn, if sins of deceit reign in a man's dealing.

Use. 2.
And therefore the consideration of all this should in the second place
instruct us, and that three ways:

First, to look to our own carriage; and as we desire to live long, and to see
good days, to refrain our tongues from evil, and our lips that they speak no
guil; in all our dealing to detest lying and deceit, Psalm. 34.13. and so to
live, as we may be always ready to put our selves upon Jobs trial, Job 31.4,
5.

Secondly, to lay to heart the consideration of the horrible inundations of
deceit, that has over-flowed all states and callings of men: and so it should
work in us both lamentation and supplication before the Lord. For lamentation,
we may take up all the old complaints of the Prophets: Our times have reached to
the measure of iniquity then reproved; The iniquity of the time.
or rather, men now overpasse the deeds of those wicked men: wickedness is in
the midst of us: deceit and guile depart not from our streets. Psalm. 55.11.
Treasures of wickedness are in the house of the wicked, wicked balances, the
bag of deceitful wa^ghts and scant measures (which are an abomination to the
Lord, and for which he threatens vengeance) every where to be found, Mic.
6.10, 11. Men lay want, as they that set snares: they let traps to catch, not
beasts or foul, but men. As a cage is full of birds, so are men's houses full
of deceit and deceivers. It is now the usual course for men to wax great and
rich withal, Ier. 5.26, 27. yea, this sin so spreads, that we may truly
say, From the least of them to the greatest of them they are given to deceit,
and will deal falsely, Jer. ^. 13. Every brother will supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with lies and slanders. They will deceive one another, and
not speak the truth. A man can dwell no where, but his habitation is in the
midst of deceit: and therefore certainly God has a resolution to stretch out
his hand still by public judgments. How can it be, but God must visit and be
avenged for these great abominations? What should be else do, but melt his
people in the common furnace of great judgments for such common sins? Ier.
9.3. to 10. And as it should teach us lamentation, so it should teach us
supplication too; even to go to God: and that in two respects. First, to
implore his help and mercy for the Church: that he would be pleased to spare
his people, and keep them from the infection of these vile sins; and if it may
stand with his good pleasure, to work a repentance in men's hearts that are
guilty of these crimes: and withal to beseech him for our selves, to keep us,
that we fall not into the hands of deceivers (for, as it is a sin to
deceive, so is it a misery to be deceived, Psalm. 12.1, 2, etc.) and to give us
wisdom to beware of men, Jer. 9.4. Mat. 10.17. and to deliver us from the men
of deceit, Psalm. 43.1.

Thirdly, it should teach us (seeing the world is so full of guil,and that it
is so hateful a sin) therefore to honor and esteem such as we find to be
true hearted; Plain men with Jacob, without tricks and subtlety, and true
Israelites with Nathaniel, in whose hearts and mouths is no guile: We should
I say love them, delight in them, and stick to them, never to forsake them, but
to account them the very ornaments of the world, and great lights in this great
and general darkness, and to account our selves wonderful rich and happy in
their fellowship and friendship.

Use 3. Against ^quivocation.
Thirdly, this prohibition of Guile may inform us, and by intimation show us
the hatefulness of the doctrine of the Papists, and practice in the point of
aquivocation, contrary to the express Scripture; that forbids all lying and
deceiving of others, and commands us to speak truth, and that every one
(Priest and people) and that so his neighbor: how much more to the Magistrate?
Ephesians. 4.25. And Job shows that we ought not to talk deceitfully, no not for
God, to speak for him what is not right, Job 13.7.

Use 4.
Lastly, this may be implicitly a singular and secret consolation to honest and
upright hearted men, that hate this hateful sin of Guile: that speak the
truth in their hearts, and make conscience of their words, I mean those true
Nathaniels of whom Christ speaks: And for the better imprinting of this use, I
will show you two things. First, the signs and marks of a man without Guile,
even of a true Israelite. Secondly, the encouragement and comforts that belong
to such men, etc.

For the first, a true Nathaniel has these praises and especial marks: 1. He
shunnes Guile in his spirit as well as in his words or works: The signs of a
man without guile.
Psalm. 32.2. What he accounts vile to speak, he accounts vile to think. 2.
His praise is of God, and not of men: Romans 2.26. He more strives to do good,
then to get credit and applause; and if God accept him, he cares not though
all the world deride him. 3. When he confesses his fault to God, he will not
hide his sin, but confesses all his sins; that is, all sorts of sins, and
his sin without extenuation, or excuse, Psalm. 32.2, 5. 4. If he offend, it is
of ignorance, and he will not receive doctrine of trust; and if he be showed
the truth, he quietly yields, and gives glory to God, John 1.46, 47, 48. 5. He
is a plain man, and speaks the truth in his heart: What he says, he says
without fraud or dissembling, he says it from his heart; his heart and his
words agree; he hates lying, and all deceit: Psalm. 15.2. Zeph. 3.13. though he
might gain never so much, yet will he practice no untruth* 6. He is a constant
man, just of his word, he will perform his promise, though it be to his own
hinderance Psalm. 15.4. He will not deny the truth though it be to his extreme
danger.


Such men as these have many encouragements to hold on their courses.
Incourageme^ts to such men.
It was a chief praise of Christ, that he was without Guile: 1 Pet. 2.7. and
so was it in the Martyrs and Saints, Rev. 14.15. It is one of the signs and
marks of Gods household servants, Psalm. 15.2. Of a true Convert. Zeph. 3.13.
These men are faithful with the Saints, and rule with God. Hos. 11. 12. Such
as these will abide the Balance (to be weighed) and God will acknowledge their
integrity: Job 31.5. The wealth of these men gotten by labor and just dealing,
shall increase, when riches gotten by vanity shall diminish. Prove. 13.11. And
those lips of Truth shall be established for ever, when lying tongues shall be
but for a moment, Prove. 12.19.

And thus much of Guile.

Only before I pass further, Note, that he says all malice and all Guile.
it is worthy the noting that he says of these two first sins, that all
Malice, and all Guile must be laid aside: which imports; that howsoever some
other infirmities be in the godly, yet they should be found far from all
Malice and Guile; not a jot of either of them should be found in them: Malice
must be in them in no kind, nor in no measure; neither secret nor open
Malice, neither grudge nor desire of revenge, neither at home nor abroad,
neither in civil things, nor in matters of Religion, neither in any of the
aggravations, nor in the least drop of it: And the like may be said of Guile.
It were a shameful thing that any kind of Guile should be found in a
Christian, in any of his dealings, at any time, with any sort of men, or in any
measure. For if but a drop of Malice or Guile be left in us, it may break out
again, and our hearts prove like a festered sore. Malice is like leaven, a
little of it will sour the whole lump. It is like Poison, a drop may spoil
us. It is like a coal of fire within, it wants nothing but the devil to blow
it, and then into what a flame may it kindle? And therefore we should all look
to our hearts, to see that we be free from Malice; and look to our ways, that
we be guilty of no kind of Guile: Such as are reconciled, should note this
point to see to it, that they keep not the least drop of the poysonfull grudge
in their hearts. It is not enough that they say daily, they will forgive, or
can receive the Sacrament. For if they cannot respect them with a free heart,
without reservation, they are still infected with the disease of Malice.

Hypocrisy.]

The third sin to be avoided is Hypocrisy.

Concerning Hypocrisy I propound two things to be considered. First, how many
ways men commit Hypocrisy: Secondly, what reasons there are to dissuade us
from Hypocrisy.

How many ways men commit Hypocrisy.
For the first, the Scriptures discover many ways of the practice of
Hypocrisy: In the 23. of Matthew our Savior notes eight ways of being guilty
of Hypocrisy. 1. To say and not do: ver. 3. 2. To require much of others, and
plead for great things to be done by others, and not at all do it our selves,
as we prescribe it to others, ver. 4. 3. To do what we do to be seen of men,
ver. 5. This is at large opened, Mat. 6.1. to the middle of the chapter. 4. To
affect greatness in the respects and entertainments of others, ver. 6. to 12.
5. To do duties of Religion of purpose to hide some soul sin. ver. 14. 6.
To be curious and strict in small matters, and neglect the greater duties, ver.
23, 24. 7. To be careful to avoid outward faults, and to make no conscience of
the inward foulness of the heart, ver. 25, 27. 8. To commend and magnify the
godly absent, or of former ages; and to hate and abuse the godly present, and
of our own times, verse 29. to 36. There are diverse other Hypocritical
practices noted in other Scripture: As,

9. To serve God outwardly, and yet our hearts to be carried away with vile
distractions, Esaias 28.13. This is a chief Hypocrisy to be avoided, in such as
come to the word. 10. To pray only in the time of sickness or danger, when we
are forced to it, and to show no love of prayer or delight in God, in time of
prosperity or deliverance, Job 27.8, 9. 11. To judge others severely for
smaller faults, and to be guilty themselves of greater crimes, Mat. 7.5. 12. To
be just overmuch; I mean, to make sins where God makes none, Luke 13.15. 13.
To be convinced in his own conscience, and yet not confess it, nor yield,
though they know the truth, Luke 12.56, 57. etc.


Thus of the diverse ways of Hypocrisy.

(...)
There are many reasons to declare the hatefulness of this sin of Hypocrisy:
I will instance only in the reasons from the effects.

(...)
The effects of Hypocrisy are either, first to others: Or secondly to the
Hypocrite himself.

First, to others the Hypocrite is a continual snare: He walks in a net that
converseth with an Hypocrite, Job 34.30.

Secondly, to himself the effects of Hypocrisy in the Hypocrite, are both
privative and positive. The privative effects which the Scripture instanceth
in, are chiefly three. The first is, that the Hypocrite loses all his service
of God; In vain do Hypocrites worship God, Mat. 15. Secondly, he infecteth
all his gifts and praises: Hypocrisy is like leaven, Luke 12.1. It sowreth all
gifts and graces; a little of it will mar all his praises and gifts
whatsoever for the acceptance and use of them. Thirdly, he loses all reward
of his good works, Mat. 6.1. An hypocrite may do good works, though he never
does them well; and for the good he does, may have his reward with men, but
this is all; for, from God he shall have no reward.

The Positive effects of hypocrisy, may be referred to two heads: For some
effects may fail upon him; and some effects must and will befall him.

The effects that may follow his hypocrisy are three: What may befall him.
For first he is apt to be seduced by evil Spirits, and the doctrine of
Devils: An hypocrite is in the greatest danger of most men to be seduced into
vile opinions, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. Secondly, he may fall into a spirit of slumber:
his conscience may be ^^ared with ^n hot iron. Thirdly, he may fall into most
wo^ull terrors: such a fearfulness may surprise the hypocrite, that God may
be to him as devou^^^g fire, and as everlasting burnings, Esaias 33.14. Job. 18.
14.

The effects that will certainly fall upon the hypocrite, What will befall them
are these which follow: 1 Judgment in his own conscience. He goes about as a
condemned man: for, he is always condemned in himself. 2. The discovery of
all his villainy: for there is nothing had in his intents and dealings, but all
shall be laid open, Luke 12.1.2. 3. The miscarying of his hope. The hope of the
hypocrite shall perish, Job 8.11. to 16. and that with these aggravations: that
his hope will perish, first easily; secondly speedily; thirdly unrecoverably.
Easily; for God can destroy his hope as easily, as the maid can sweep down the
house of the spider with her beesome: Speedily; for it will wither while it
seems rooted, and is yet green before any other herb: yea, though it grow up,
yet it is like grass on the house top. Vnrecoverably; for his hopes being but
as the house of the spider, they will be dashed down for ever; and though he
would lean to his house, and take hold of it, yet his hopes shall perish for
ever: and when this day comes, his hopes shall be as the giving up of the
ghost. 4. Strange punishments in his death and condemnation. And therefore when
our Savior Christ would express a special terror in the plagues of especial
sinners, he says, they shall have their portion with hypocrites and workers of
iniquity, Mat. 24. and the last verse. Job 27.8.


And these effects will appear the more terrible, if we consider, that the
Scriptures take off all the objections of hypocrites; to show that they be
left naked to the fury of God: for all this will come upon them;

Though they be many in number, Job 15.34.

Though they be rich, The objections of hypocrites removed
Job 27.8.

Though they triumph in all jollity now, Job 20.5.

Though they be young, or widows, or fatherless, Esaias 9.17.

Though they cry at their later end, Job 27.9.

Though they do many good deeds, Mat. 6.

Though their wickedness be yet hidden, Luke 12.1, 2.

The use may be first for information; secondly for instruction; Uses.
and thirdly for consolation.

First for information: For information.
and so it may show us,

First, what to think of the great shows of holiness and mortification made
in the Church of Rome. Their fastings, and their prohibition of marriage, vows
of chastity, and wilful poverty, have a show of wisdom and piety, in not
sparing the flesh: but the holy Ghost tells us, that all this is but
hypocrisy, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Col. 2. ult.

2. How miserable the estate of multitudes of our own people is, by these
signs we may perceive, that the plague is wonderfully spread in Israel. Note.
There are whole congregations of Hypocrites, that is of men that say and do
not, that come near to God with their lips, and their heart is far from him,
that seldom or never pray but when they be sick; that regard not the inward
soulenesse of their hearts, so their lives be either civil, or evil but in
secret, Job 15.34. Esaias 9.17.

For instruction
Secondly for instruction; and so it should teach us all to beware of this
leaven of Hypocrisy, Luke 12.11. and if we would be thought to have the true
Wisdom from above, then let us show it by our fruits, that they may be without
Hypocrisy, Jam 3.17. And for the better enforcing of this use, I will put you
in mind of two things: First the sorts of hypocrisy you are most in danger
of: Secondly the remedies or preservatives against hypocrisy.

The sorts of Hypocrisy we are most in danger of.
The sorts are chiefly these.

1. The distraction in Gods worship, which is a most woeful fault, and most
common: This was it was showed before that so angered God, Esaias 28.13.

2. Secondly the omission of private worship, I mean to make a show of
Religion and the love of God, and yet neglect reading of the Scriptures,
prayers, conference and secret communion with God: This as was showed will
provoke God to stop his ear at our cry, because we do not pray at all times.
Job ^7.8, 9.

3. Neglect of mortification of inward sins, and secret faults; taking liberty,
so it be but sin in the heart or in secret. This will undo thee for ever, if
thou look not to it in time.

4. Affectation of praise and credit with men, to do our works to be seen of
men.

Now there are diverse rules to be observed, if we would not be poisoned with
the reign of hypocrisy.

Preservatives against Hypocrisy.
1. Keep thy self in Gods presence; forget not God; remember always that his
eyes are upon thee: Thus David set the Lord always before him, Psalm. 16.8. And
this God commands Abraham to do, if he will be upright, Genesis 17.1.

2. Thou must pray much and often to God to create a right Spirit in thee: For
by nature we have all double and hypocritical hearts, Psalm 51.^0.

3. Keep thy heart with all diligence, watching daily and resisting
distractions, wavering thoughts and forgetfulness. And to this end, mortify
the first beginnings of this sin in thy heart, mourn for it as soon as thou
discernest it, and judge thy self seriously before God. James 4.8. Matt. 23.26.

4. In all matters of well doing be as secret as may be, Mat. 6. both in
Mercy, Prayer, Fasting, Reading and the like.

5. Be watchful over thy own ways, and see to this point, that thou be as
careful of all duties of godliness in prosperity as in adversity, in health
as in sickness, Job 27.9, 10.

6. Converse with such as in whom thou discernest true Spirits without Guile,
and shun the company of open and known hypocrites.

7. Be not rash, and easy to condemn other men for hypocrites, only because
they cross thy opinions, Note.
or humors, or will, or practice. It is often observed, that rash censurers,
that usually lash others as hypocrites, fall at length into some vile kind of
hypocrisy themselves. Object.


Solut.
But may we not call an hypocrite an hypocrite?

About censuring other men for Hypocrisy.
Hypocrites are not all of one sort. Some are close hypocrites: some are open.
The open hypocrite thou may show thy dislike of his courses, and avoid him:
But the close hypocrite thou can not discern, or not certainly; and if thou
follow thine own conjectures, thou may sometimes condemn a dear child of
God, and approve a detestable hypocrite.

But how may the open hypocrite be discerned? Quest.


By diverse signs. Answ.


First, by an ordinary and usual affectation of the praise of men, How an open
hypocrite may be discerned.
in doing good duties. When a man constantly sets himself out to the show, it
is an apparent mark of a false heart. Mark that I say an usual affectation.

Secondly, if a man make a show of the means of godliness, or liking the
means of godliness, or of the persons that are godly; and yet it be manifest
that he hates to be reformed, lives in known gross faults, and being rebuked
by the word, or servants of God, will not reform, but carries a grudge at the
parties that labored his reformation: This is an evident mark of an
hypocrite. Now to judge these is no offense.

Thirdly, it is a sign of an hypocrite, when a man will be godly, and
restrained, and zealous in some companies, and in other company take liberty
for gross profaneness.

Lastly, he that will be rid of hypocrisy, must look to himself, to keep
himself free from the causes of it, and take heed that he be not bewitched in
those things that have bred hypocrisy in other men.

What is it can make a man an hypocrite? Object.


First, sometimes fear will do it: as in time of trouble or persecution,
Solut.
men, to avoid dangers, will play the hypocrites, Luke 12.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. What
makes an hypocrite.


Secondly, sometimes desire to get credit, and to be well thought on
(especially when it is mixed with envy at the respects of others) drives some
men headlong into hypocritical courses, Mat. 6.

Thirdly, sometimes men are emboldned unto hypocrisy, by a secret persuasion,
that Christ will defer his coming, and they shall not of a long time be
brought to account. Mat. 24.48, 50.

Fourthly, men fall into hypocrisy for gain, to hide their wicked and
deceitful courses: So the Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. so 1 Timothy 4.2, 7.

Fifthly, forgetfulness of God is a great cause of hypocrisy, and the reign
of it in many hearts, Job 8.13.

Sixthly, Lust, and some vile wickedness, drives many men and women into
hypocrisy, 2 Timothy 3.

These things we must take heed of, and preserve our selves from them, if ever
we would not be wretched hypocrites before God.

Thirdly, Use 3.
here is also consolation to all the godly whom God has kept upright, and free
from this damned vice (I mean from the reign of it: for, there is no man but
has some dregs of hypocrisy in him.)

But how may a man know that he is not a hypocrite? Quest.


By many signs. Answ.

First, when a man had rather be good, then seem so.




Secondly, when a man makes God his secret place, How a man may know that he is
not an hypocrite.
strives and desires secrecy to worship God, Mat. 6.

Thirdly, when a man loves no sin, but would feign be rid of every sin, and
so has respect to all Gods commandments.

Fourthly, when a man confesses his hypocrisy, and mournes for it, and
strives against it.

Fifthly, when a man accuses himself for it to others whose respects he most
desires.

Sixthly, when a man keeps his heart close to the substance of godliness, and
labors to be built up without distraction in the maine things needful for his
salvation, and is not carried to spend his time most about unnecessary or
impertinent cares or studies, 1 Timothy 4.2, 7, 8.

Seventhly, when a man is as careful to serve God in prosperity, as well as
adversity, Job 27.9.

Eighthly, when a man delights in the Almighty, and loves all the means by
which he finds any communion with God, Job 29.9.

Ninthly, when a man, from the hatred of hypocrisy, is stirred up against
hypocrites, cannot abide them, nor will converse with them, Job 17. ver. 8.

Lastly, Job comforts himself, that he was no hypocrite, by three arguments.

1. He would trust in God, though he did slay him. 2. He would reprove his
ways in Gods sight. 3. He sought Gods presence, and set himself always
before him: none of which an hypocrite could do, Job 13.15, 16.
Thus much of Hypocrisy.

Envy.]

The fourth sin to be avoided is Envy.

Envy is nothing else but a vexation or inward displeasure conceived at the
good of another: viz. either another credit, gif^s, preserment, profit,
success, or the like.

This sin, though in the world it be litile thought of, yet in it self i^ a
most fearful vice; and should be so accounted of by Christians, for many
reasons.

First, if we consider the subject persons in whom it usually is. It is found
most in natural men, The ha^^fulnesse of the (...) of envy.
Tit. 3.3. yea, in silly men, Job 5.2, This was the sin of Cain, Genesis 4. yea,
of the devil himself. The maine sin of the devil was the envy of man's
happiness. It reigned in the devilish Gentiles Romans 1.29.

Secondly, if we consider the cause of it, it is for the most part the daughter
of pride, Gal. 5.26* sometimes of covetousness, Prove. 28.22, and often of some
egregious vile transgression, such as in Romans 1.29. but ever it is the filthy
fruit of the flesh, Gal. 5.25.

Thirdly, if we consider the vile effects of it, which are many: for,

1. It has done many mischifes, for which it is infamous. It sold Joseph into
Egypt, Genesis ^7. and which should ever make it abhorred of us, it killed the Son
of God, Mat. 27.8.

2. It deformes our natures: it makes a man suspicious, malicious, contentious:
it makes us to provoke, back-bite, and practice evil against our neighbors.
It is ill for our sight: for the envious man has always an evil eye, and a
cast down countenance with Cain also many times.

3. It begins even death and hell, while a man is alive. It kills the silly
one, Job 5.2. It destroys the contentment of his life, and burns him with a
kind of fire unquenchable. It feeds upon the envious man, like the moth or
worm by degrees: and it hasteneth mischief in the envious man, because it
makes the person envyed more glorious; and besides, it is a vice that drives a
man from among men, in respect of comfortable society: for it was long since
advised, Eat not the bread of him that has an evil eye, Prove. 23.6. and no
man by his good will, if he can be free, will converse with such as he
perc^ives to be envious.

F^urthly, this place manifestly imports, that it is a notable hinderance to
the profi^ of the word, and so no doubt it is to prayer and all piety, as
evidently it is a let of charity; unless it be that men in hypocrisy to
disgrace others, will for envy do some good: as they preached Christ for envy
in the Apostles time, Phil. 1.15.

Uses. The use should be threefold.

First, for instruction, to teach us to follow the advice here given, in
putting away Envy, and cleansing our hearts of it: and to this end think much
of the reasons against it, and withal remember by confession and godly sorrow
to cleanse thy heart carefully of it. For those things help wonderfully in the
putting of it away.

Secondly, this may serve for great reproof of many that profess the fear of
God, who daily shame themselves by discovering this vice in themselves. This
was it the Apostle complained of in the Corinthians; and showed, that it is a
vice which not only holds down a Christian from growing, but it makes him look
like a carnal man, 1 Cor. 3.3.

Thirdly, for consolation, if we find our selves freed from this vice. Signs
of a man free from envy.
And we may know that we are not envious,

1. If we love the good things in others, and can rejoice in their prosperity,
and mourn for their miseries. 2. If we be vile in our own eyes, and lowly
minded. 3. If we enjoy contentation in our own estate, and are well pleased to
be that which God will have us to be. 4. If in giving honor we can heartily
go one before another.
Thus much of Envy.

Evil speaking.]

This is the fifth sin to be avoided.

If we would profit by Gods word, we must look to our own words, etc.

Evil speaking generally taken, comprehends all the faults of the tongue in
speaking: and so it is true, that a man can never be soundly profited by the
word till he makes conscience of evil words as well as evil works. But I
think it is taken more restrainedly here.

There are many kinds of evil speaking that are to be avoided. Lying is evil
speaking: and it is true, that he who is false to man, will never be true to
God. But I think Lying is not here meant.

Flattering is evil speaking: for he that praises his friend with a loud
voice, it shall be counted to him as a curse. It is a curse to be troubled
with a flatterer: and it is a kind of cursed speaking to flatter. But I think
this is not meant here neither.

But I think the sins here meant are Backbiting, judging, ^landering, and
complaining one of another, and all bitterness of speech between man and man.
These hinder charity, and provoke God, and let the growth of piety in the
hearts and lives of men. And therefore these kinds of evil speaking should be
detested of Christians, and altogether laid aside.

These sins as they are hateful in themselves, and in the least degree, or in
any kind: so evil speaking is made more vile in the aggravations of it. The
aggravation of evil speaking.
It is evil to speak evil any way, or of any: But it is much more vile,

First, when we speak evil of the absent, that cannot defend themselves:
Backbiting is a hateful degree of evil speaking, 2 Cor. 12.10. Psalm 140.11.

Secondly, when we speak evil of such, as God has humbled, or afflicted:
Lev. 19.14. Obad. 12. Prove. 16.28.

Thirdly, when we shall speak evil of such as are in authority, Eccl. 10.
ult. Jud. 8. Lev. 19.

Fourthly, when we speak evil of the godly, especially before the wicked, or
for things indifferent, or without cause: James 4.9. Romans 14. Psalm. 31. 18. or
for lesser failings: Mat. 7.1, 2. but especially their good conversation: 1
Pet. 3.16.

Fifthly, when we speak evil of our professed friends: Psalm. 5.6.13. Lament.
1.2.

Sixthly, when we speak evil of Gods messengers, taxing their persons: as
their carriage, especially when they labor, and take pains, watching over us
for our good: Ier. 26.8, 9. and 18.28. Amos 5.10. 2 Cor. 3.6.16. 1 Timothy 4.10.
Ier. ^5.10. 1 Cor. 4.3, 5.

Seventhly, when we speak evil of father and mother, or such as are nearly
knit unto us: so it is also monstrous uncomely to see the wife speak evil of
the husband, or contrariwise: Prove. 20.20. Lev. 20.9. Mich. 7.6.

Eighthly, when we speak evil of godliness, even of the good way of God,
calling sweet sour, and good evil, Esaias 5.20. scorning the Lords day, and
deriding sanctification, and reformation of life, 1 Cor. 15.32, 33. Acts 19.9.
especially when we do it out of an inward hatred of holy duties: Let such take
heed of despighting the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29.

Ninthly, when men speak evil of God himself: as does the swearer, and
for-swearer, the murmurer, and such as reason Atheistically, against the
nature, counsels, or providence of God: Comm. 3 Psalm. 73.9.

And as evil speaking may be aggravated by the persons against whom: so may it
be by the manner: For if it be evil to speak evil in any fashion, then it is
much more evil,

First, to rail: 1 Cor. 6.10. mouth full of cursing: Psalm, 10.7. Romans 3.14.

Secondly, to complain in all places for slight occasions, or trespasses.

Thirdly, to hide hatred with lying lips: Psalm. 62.4. Prove. 10.18. Psalm. 41.6.

Fourthly, to go about to carry tales, and slanders, Lev. 19.

Fifthly, to speak evil of others, when we are guilty of the same offenses our
selves, or greater, Romans 2.1, 2, 3. Mat. 7.1, 3.

Sixthly, to reveal^ secrets, this is slander: Prove. 11.13.

Neither are men free from this vice, or guilt, when they are whisperers, and
do it secretly, and as many do, with charge that they speak not of it
again, yet themselves in the very next company will tell it out again: 2 Cor.
12.20. Nor when they join with their evil speaking the acknowledgement of
their praises of whom they speak. For many times their [ but] tends to a
greater defamation, and by praising them they only save themselves from blame,
and intend thereby to enforce their defamation the more. Nor is it an
extenuation, when they revile their inferiors: For, Masters must not threaten
their servants, Ephesians. 6.9. nor parents must not pr^voke their children to
wrath, Ephesians. 6.4. nor husbands be bitter to their wives, Col. 3.9. Nor great
men may Lord it over their poor tenants, or people: Prove. 13.8. Nor men that
excel in gifts, be masterly in their words to their inferiors in gifts: James
3.1. Nor when men revile being reviled: For this is also prohibited unto
Christians, 1 Pet. 3.9.

R^asons to disswad^ from Evil speak^ng.
There are also many reasons, why we should put away evil speaking.

First, from commandment. Men are straightly charged by God to refrain their
tongues from evil: Psalm. 34. and not to speak evil one of another: James
4.9. to speak evil of no man: Tit. 3.1. nor to render reviling for reviling:
1 Pet. 3.9. we must bless and not curse: Romans 12.14.

Secondly, from the consideration of our own persons, and estates in Christ.
We are called to blessing and are the heirs of blessing: and therefore it is
monstrous uncomely for us, that are free borne, to use such servile and base
language 1 Pet. 3.9.

Thirdly, from example. Michael the Archangell, when he contended with the
devil, durst ^^t bring against him any railing accusation: Jude 9. The Apostle
shows their practice herein being persecuted, they suffer it: being reviled,
they bless ^ Cor. 4.12. When Shemei cursed David, and called him a Son of
Beliall, and a bloody man, he said: Let him curse, because the Lord has said
unto him, curse David, It may be the Lord will look upon my affliction, and
the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day, Thus he bore it, though
he continued cursing, and cast stones, and dust at him: 2. Sam. 16.8.10.11.12.
13. But above all we should learn this of our Savior Christ, In whom was
found no guile in his mouth, who, when he was reviled, reviled not again;
when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him, that judges
righteously: 1. Pet. 2.23.

Fourthly, from the causes of it. Bitter speaking comes from a bitter root of
a cursed disposition in our natures: Heb 12.14.15. It proceeds sometimes from
envy at the good of others, sometimes from malice and secret grudge, sometimes
from guile and fraudulent purposes, sometimes from Hypocrisy also: For, he
that is much in judging other men, Note.
is seldom without great store of hypocrisy in his heart. Well therefore is
this sin put last in the Catalogue, as that, which may be engendered of any of
the former.

Fifthly, from the effects; Effects I say both of restraining it, and committing
it. If we did restrain judging, reviling, backbiting, and all bitterness, How
happy would our lives be; How comfortable would our conversation be? We should
live long and see good days: Psalm. 34.12. Besides: it is a wonderful praise
of the gifts of God, and sign of a large measure of grace, to avoid evil
speaking: He is a perfect man, that sins not in these customary sins of
the tongue, James, 3.2. and it is always, a man's Honor to cease from strife,
Prove. 20 ^2.

The effects of committing it are many and foul: and that both to others, and
to themselves.

First, to others, and so first it grives the spirit of God, by which we are
sealed to the day of redemption For, a bitter spirit is a wonderful cross to
that meek spirit of Christ Jesus. Ephesians. 3.31. Secondly, it is a singular injury
to men, at whom we cast our bitter words. For we trouble their peace and work
much disquietness: and besides, when men contend by evil words, it can hardly
be avoided, but many will be desiled, yea many besides them selves as they are
severably inclined to either party, Heb. 12.14.15. Thirdly, and it is certain
in Gods account, and in men's too, thou were as good shoot arrows at them, as
bitter words, and run them in with swords, or cut them with sharp razors, as
mangle their names and credits, with thy censures, or slanders, or reproaches.

Secondly, to them selves. They bring much hurt to them selves, that accustom
them selves to ill language in any of these kinds. For, they make them selves
guilty of a world of wickedness. James 3.9. First, they wrong the law of God.
For he that judges his brother, condemns the Law: James. 4.9. Secondly, they
transgress against the lawgiver, whose proper office is to judge the ways of
all men. James 4.10. Thirdly, they discover also their own folly and weakness.
For, it is a man's honor to cease from strife, but every fool will be meddling:
Prove. 20.^. Fourthly, they shame the profession of Religion. For, this is
thank worthy if a man suffer evil for well doing. 1. Pet. 2.19. But what a
shame is it, when thou suffrest as a busy body in other men's matters: 1. Pet.
4.15. Fifthly, besides it is certain, Evil words corrupt good manners: thou
losest so much of thy honesty, and piety, as thou admittest of evil in thy
tongue: 1. Cor. 15.33. And if you bite and devour one another, take heed you be
not consumed one of another: Gal. 5.15. And if thou judge, thou shall be
judged. He that is given much to censuring, seldom or never scapes great
censures himself: Matthew. 7. Sixthly, Besides, also, these courses will increase
unto greater condemnation: God may be provoked to take thee in hand, and thou
may be in danger to be plagued for it for ever in Hell, Iam. 3.1. Seventhly,
and if this evil vice grow in thee, thou art fit to be cast out of the
Communion of Saints: men are charged to avoid thee, and not to eat with thee*
1. Cor. 5.11. And though that censure be not executed by the Church always,
yet God many times makes such persons so loathsome, that every body avoids them
as much as they can. Eighthly, further, this very effect here mentioned should
persuade much with us. It is a sin that greatly hinders the profit of the
word: bitter-tongued persons never grow much in religion. For, it is required,
that we should receive the word with meckenesse, and lay aside all supers^uity
of maliciousnes; such as this evil speaking in these kinds is, lam. 1.21.
Lastly, as m^n love cursing, so it shall come unto them: and as they love not
blessing, so it shall be far from them, Psalm. 109.17.

The use should be both for Humiliation, and for Instruction.

First, for Humiliation. It may greatly abase many Christians that are
extremely guilty of this sin. How has this wickedness prevailed in many
places! The way of peace few men have known: there is almost no meekness,
but lying and flattering, and censuring, and railing, and slandering, and
reproach upon reproach, and backbiting every where: Yea, what are the families
of the most, but as so many kennels of Curres, such snarling, and biting, and
provoking one another? Husbands bitter to their Wives; Wives contentions like a
continual dropping; Masters threatening their Servants,and Servants answering
again and cursing their Masters. How are the lives of the most destitute of
contentment, and their states of prosperity, even by reason of this sin?

But, let all that fear God, learn from henceforth to make more conscience of
their words, and refrain their lips from evil.

Quest. But what should a man do to keep himself free from this vice, or
that this fountain of evil speaking may be dried up?

Rules against evil speaking.
Ans. He that would restrain himself from being guilty of backbiting,
judging, reviling, or any kind of evil speaking, must observe such rules as
these.

First, He must learn to speak well to God, and of godliness: if we did
study that holy language of speaking to God by prayer, we would be easily
fitted for the government of our tongues toward men: we speak ill to men,
because we pray but ill to God.

Secondly, he must lay this rule upon himself, and watch to the performance
of it, he must study to be quiet, and meddle with his own business, and not
meddle with the strife that belongs not to him; resolving, that he will never
suffer, as a busy body in other men's matters. 1. These. 4. 1. Pet. 4.15.

Thirdly, he must keep a Catalogue of his own faults continually in his
mind: when we are so apt to task others, it is because we forget our own
wickedness.

Fourthly, his words must be few: for, in a multitude of words there cannot
want sin, and usually this sin is never absent.

Fifthly, he must not allow himself liberty to think evil. A suspicious
person will speak evil.

Sixthly, he must pray to God to set a watch before the doors of his lips.

Seventhly, he must avoid vain and provoking company. It may be observed
often, that when men get into idle company (which perhaps they like not) the
very complement of discoursing extracteth evil speaking to fill up the time;
especially, he must avoid the company of censurers: for, their ill language,
though at first disliked, is insensibly learned.

Eighthly, he must especially strive to get meekness, and to be soft, and
show his meekness to all men. Tit, 3.1.2.

Ninthly, if he have this way offended, then let him follow that counsel, Let
his own words grieve him, Psalm. 56.5; that this, let him humble himself
seriously for it before God by hearty repentance: this sin is seldom mended,
because it is seldom repented of.

Quest. But what should I do to avoid evil speaking in others?

Ans. First, live honestly and without offense: What we should do to avoid
evil speaking in others.
and then though men be never so crooked and perverse, yet either they will be
silent, or in the day of Gods visitation they will glorify God, Phil. 2.15. 1.
Pet. 2. verse 13.

Secondly, if men will yet revile, learn of David and Christ, and the godly,
to be patient, and not revile again, but rather bless them, 1. Pet. 3.5. and
2.23. 1. Cor. 4.12.

Thirdly, if men be still unreasonable and absurd, betake thy self to prayer:
and then either God will turn their hearts, or quiet thine, Psalm. 104.2.3.4.

Fourthly, thou must not give thy heart to all that men say; but be sometimes
as a deaf man that hears not, and as a dumb man in whose mouth are no words
of reproof, Eccles. 7.23.24. Psalm. 38.13.14.

Fifthly, if yet thou be pursued, then remember this comfort, The curse that is
causeless shall not come, Prove. 26.2. and though they curse, yet God will
bless, Psalm. 109.28. God will turn their cursing into a blessing, and he will
curse them that curse thee, Numb. 24.9. and if thy reproaches be for the cause
of religion and righteousness, blessed art thou that art accounted worthy to
suffer for it: For, Great is thy reward in heaven, Mat. 5.11. Acts 5.41. thou
have cause to rejoice in such contumelies, 2. Cor. 12.10.

Hitherto of the catalogue of sins to be avoided. The manner here follows to
be considered of: and that may be noted from the word Laying aside, and from
the manner of the expressing the sins.

Out of all, there are briefly five things may be noted. 5. General doctrines.


First, that by nature we are all inclined to and clogged with these sins:
for, that the word layed-aside imports. For, it shows, that by nature they
hang upon us. Tit. 3.3: which should teach us to watch our hearts against these
sins, seeing they are so natural to us; and to pursue the reformation of
them with so much the more constancy and diligence, by how much it is the more
hard to shake off what is natural to us. Secondly, it should teach us to
forbear intemperate words and carriage toward others, in whom we discern
these sins so far, as they are infirmities: but rather we should be soft,
and show all meekness to all men; considering, that we our selves also were
infected with the same faults.

Secondly, that the natural man is daily guilty of these sins, and uses
them as if they were necessary to his well-being. He cannot be without them: he
wears them as his garments, or betakes himself to them as to his weapons: he
thinks he is adorned by them. This is imported by the metaphor: He thinks,
if he did not ease himself by hypocrisy, the service of God would destroy his
contentment. If he did not use guile, he should never thrive. If he did not
use violent speeches, he should be despised: and so of the rest. This may
serve to put a difference betwixt the wicked and the godly in the guiltiness
of these sins: for, Note.
a godly man may by frailty be tainted with some of these; but then he does not
account them necessary, or place contentment in them, or daily fall into them;
he dislikes them, and would feign be rid of them: whereas the wicked think
their lives naked without them.

Thirdly, that true grace and respect of the word of God must put off and
banish all these things. He that would have comfort in his conversion, or bring
sound affections to the word, must take a course to mend these faults, Ephesians. 4.
22. Col. 3.8. This should be for great reproof of such Christians as shame
their profession of godliness by not shaking off these faults; and besides,
greatly darken the comfort of their calling, by walking so carnally herein, 1.
Cor. 3.1.2.3.

Fourthly, for the manner, how these sins are to be avoided in special:
Here are diverse things to be noted. The metaphor imports, that we must lay
these things aside, as the Porter lays aside his heavy burden; or as the
Rebel lays aside his Arms and weapons; or as the weary Pilgrim lays aside
his foul and troublesome long garments; or as the captive Maid, when she was
to be married, laid aside the garments of her captivity, Deuteronomy. 21.13. Now we
thus lay them aside chiefly two ways.

First, by confessing them, and mourning for them, Heb. 12.

Secondly, by renouncing and forsaking the practice of them: but then we must
further note, that they must be so laid aside, as they be never taken up
again. We must not lay them aside as we ordinarily do our garments, to
wear them again the next day or the next week. Besides, it is here to be
observed, that these sins are not rooted out in a moment. A Christian is long
laying them aside. He does speak of the present endeavor: It must be an
every-dayes work, to judge our selves for them, and resist them, till the
power of them be broken. Lastly, we may hence note, that we should give over
the practice, but not the remembrance of our former sins. For he says,
laying-aside; not burying them, or renting to pieces, or the like phrase, which
might import the utter forgetting of them. To remember our fau^tinesse in these
things, will keep us humble, and make us more innocent and free from them, and
more compassionate over others.

Fifthly, note the extent in setting down the sins to be avoided: whence
observe two things.

1. First, that he says all malice, all guile, and all evil speaking; to
note, that a Christian should not bear with himself in the least measure of
failing in any of these: For a little of this leaven will sour the whole
lump, and a small root of any of these will grow up to a great deal of
trouble and infection.

2. Secondly, In that he says Hypocrisies, and Envies in the plural number,
and so evil ^peakings: To note, that we should search our hearts so, as not to
tolerate in our selves any kind of these evils. It is not enough to be free
from some kinds of Hypocrisy, but we must be free from all: and our sincerity
shows it self herein, that seeing we cannot be wholly rid of hypocrisy, yet
we will hate it, and strive against every part and kind of it.

Verse 2. As newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby.


Hitherto of the things to be avoided.

NOw follows the second thing, and that is, what we must do, that we may
profit by the word, namely that we must get tender and constant affections to
the word, if we would ever grow by it in knowledge and grace: and this is set
out metaphorically by the comparison of appetite and desire in newborn babes
unto milk. The meaning is, that Christians, that would profit, must be like
children in their affections to the word: they must love it, and long for it,
and delight in it, and have their hearts set upon it, as affectionately, as
children do naturally thirst after the breast: This is a point of singular use,
and such, as all of us ought to take notice of, to get our hearts rightly
framed, and firmed herein. The disease of the most hearers lies in the defect
of this: and the happiness of such, as do thrive apace in godliness, is to
be ascribed to this affectionate love of the word.

There be three things about these desires for matter of observation, must be
distinctly noted: The first concerns the necessity of this desire: The second,
the utility: And the third, the true nature of this holy desire.

For the first: It is evident from hence, that all that come to the word, It is
indispensably required, that they come with appetite: men must bring affection,
and desire after the word, if they would ever grow by it. If we would ever
drink freely of the water of life, we must be such as thirst after it. Revel.
21.6. If we would have God to feed with milk and wine, we must be such, as have
a true thirst after it. Isaiah. 55.1. If we would not have all success blasted
in us, we must take heed of loathing the means, that is, despising prophecy:
1. These. 5.21.

For the second: It is likewise evident from hence, that though we have many
wants, and ignorances, and weaknesses, yet if we have affection to the word, we
shall never be destitute of some happy success in the use of it. The former
places assure Gods blessing and confirm it, that God will not be wanting to
any, that has this appetite: It is all that God stands upon. Every one that
thirsts may come, and buy and eat, annd drink abundantly: Isaiah.
^5.1.2.3. Let us be careful of the condition: to desire the word, as the child
does the milk; and God will not fail to give the success, we shall grow by it.

Now for the third point. It is here to be carefully noted what kind of desire
of the word is that, to which this promise is annexed: The true desire after
the word has chiefly four distinct things in it.

First, Estimation of the word above all other outward things. When we can
account it a great blessedness to be chosen of God to this privilege to
approach unto him in the courts of his house. Psalm. 65.4. Psalm. 119.127.128.
When we can say with David, Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles, and think it
better to be a doore-keeper in Gods house, then to dwell in the tents of
wickedness Psalm. 84.1.10. When we esteem the directions and comforts of Gods
word above Gold and silver: Psalm. 119.127. and with Paul account all things but
loss in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ, which may be here
had. Philip 3.9.

Secondly, Longing and appetite after it, as true and certain, as the very
appetite of a child is to the breast: this is expressed by the similitudes of
panting, thirsting, and watching after the word in diverse Scriptures: and when
this longing is more vehement, it is set out by the passion of fainting for it,
and of the breaking of the soul for it: Psalm. 42.1. and 84.2. and 119.20.40.
and 131.

Thirdly, Satisfaction and contentment, when we speed well in the word: as the
child is quieted, and sleeps in the rest and virtue of the milk it has
received: David says, his soul was satisfied as with marrow: Psalm. 63.1.5.
and is granted of all the godly and chosen ones, Psa, 65.4. When it is sweet
like honey to our taste, Psa. 119.103.

Fourthly, Constancy, and the renewing of affection. A childs appetite is
renewed every day, though it seem to be full for the present, and such is the
true desire of the godly. It is not a desire for a fit, but is renewed daily,
as the appetite to our appointed food is, Job. 23. He that has this desire may
be found daily waiting at the gates of wisdom: Prove. 8.34.

Vs^ 1. The use of all may be chiefly threefold: For,

For trial.
First it may serve for trial: we should every one examine our selves, whether
we have this true desire after the word, or no. For, if we find this, we are
sure to prosper: and if we find it not, we are nothing but starvelings in
matter of godliness,

Question. But how may we know, whether we have this estimation, longing after,
and constant affection to the word?

Answ. It may be known diverse ways, especially if our affections be grown to
any good ripeness, How we may dis^e^ne our desire, and affection after the
word.
and tenderness, in the measure of them: For it may be evidently discerned.

First, If we seek the blessing of the word of God, as a chief happiness, we
would desire of him in his special mercy to give it unto us. Psa. 119.68,
132, 144, 155. and so by the constancy of prayer we may also discern the
constancy of our appetite.

Secondly, if we can be diligent and content to take any pains, or be at any
cost, that we may be provided of this food that perishes not. John 6.27.

Thirdly, if we can hoord and hide up the word in our hearts, as worldly men
would do their treasures, Psalm. 119.11. ^oying in it as much, as in all
riches, Psalm. 119.14.162. especially, if we can batten and wax fat by the
contentments of it; as carnal men do, when they live at hearts ease. Psalm
119.70.

Fourthly, if it will still our crying, that is, if it will comfort us, and
quiet our hearts in all distresses: Psalm. 119.50, 143, 92. so as nothing shall
offend us. verse 16^.

Fifthly, If we make haste and come willingly at the time of assembling: Psa.
110.3. But especially, if we make haste, and not delay in practicing, what we
learn thence: Psalm. 119.60.

Sixthly, if we be thankful to God, and abound in the free will offerings of
our mouths for the good we get by the word: Psalm. 119. 7, 108.164, 171.
Seaventhly, if we can be truly grieved, and say with David, Sorrow takes hold
on us, because the wicked keep not Gods law, 119.159.

Eighthly, If we delight to talk of Gods word, and to speak of his wondrous
works discovered in his word. Psalm 119.27, 172, etc.

These things and the like are in them that have their affections tender, and
striving in them: Now whereas many of Gods children may have true desire to the
word, Note.
and yet not find evidently some of these signs: therefore I will give other
signs of true affection to the word, though there be not always such delight
in it, as they desire. The lesser measure of true appetite to the word may be
discerned by some of these signs that follow.

First, it is a sign that we do heartily love the word, when we can from our
hearts love and bless them, that do love the word, accounting them happy for
their very love to the word. Psalm. 119.1.12.

Other signs of true desire.
Secondly, it is a sign of desire after the word, when we can stick to the word,
and the constant frequenting of it, notwithstanding the scorns and shame of
the world: Psalm. 119.31.46, 141. It is a sure testimony of our love to the
Gospel, when we can forsake father and mother, brother and sister, house and
land for the Gospels sake: Mark 10.29.

Thirdly, It is a sign of love to the word, and of desire after it, when we
can mourn for the famine of the word, as a bitter cross. Psalm. 42.3.4.

Fourthly, Yea, when men have the word, and yet find not comfort in it, it is a
sign of their true affection when they long for those comforts with heaviness
of heart, and account themselves in an uncomfortable distress, yea bitter
distress, till the Lord return to them in his person in the power of the
means. Psalm. 119.82, 83, 123, 131.

Fifthly, It is a sign we love the word, when such as fear God are glad of us:
it is a sign, that the Godly do discern appetite in us, though we do not,
when they are tenderly affected toward us. Psalm. 119*74.

Sixthly, We may know our affection to the word, by our willingness to be ruled
by it: if we can make the word our Counselor, it is sure we do delight in it,
whatsoever we conceive of our selves. Psalm. 119 24.

Lastly, to strive against our dullness constantly, and to pray to be quickened,
is a good sign, that we have some desire to the word. One may love Gods
precepts, and yet need to be quickened. Psalm. 119.159.

Use 2. Secondly, this doctrine of desire, and appetite after the word, may
much humble the most of us; some being altogether void of all desire after it,
more then for fashion sake: and the better sort have their appetites either
dull, or decayed.

Quest. Whence comes it that people have no more affection to the word, or that
men are so cloyed with the word?

Ans. The lets of appetite and affection to the word may be considered two
ways: Impediments to true desires: external.


First, as they are without us.

Secondly, as they are within us.

Without us, the cause of want of affection is sometimes in the Minister:
sometimes in the Devil: sometimes in the company men sort withal: and
sometimes in God himself.

1. In Ministers there are two things, which marvelously hinder the admiration,
and desire after the word. The first is, the manner of their teaching, when
they teach unskilfully, deceitfully, vaingloriously, negligently, or coldly.
When there is not a majesty, and purity, and life in the teacher, it is no
wonder if there be no affection in the people. 2. Cor. 4, 2. 1. Thessa. 2. 2,
3, 4, 6, 8. 1. Cor. 2.4. 2. Tim. 2, 15. The second is their ill lives. What
made the people in Elies time so loath the service of God, but the wicked lives
of Hophn^ and Phineas. 1. Sam. 3. Ministers must teach by example as well as by
doctrine, if they will not be despised. 1 Timothy 4, 12.

2. The Devil, that god of this world, does mightily labor in this point to
keep men from affecting the Gospel. If he cannot hinder men from hearing,
then his next work is by all possible endeavors to blind their minds, and
mar their tastes, that they may not perceive nor regard the glorious things
of God in Christ: 2. Cor* 4.4.

3. Evil company is a wonderful impediment, it causes perpetually hardness
of heart, and carelessness: it keeps the hearts of the wicked men in a
continual habitual deadness, and the best men seldom light into profane
company but they get some degree of dullness, and deadness of affections by
it. Prove. 9.6. Psalm. 119.115.

4. God himself being provoked by man's extreme wilfulness in sinning, gives
them over to a spirit of slumber, and curses their very blessings; yea,
restrains sometimes the very gifts of his servants, that so he may execute
his judgments upon a rebellious people. The Lord hides his statutes from
them, and withholding his spirit, keeps back the life of the word in their
hearts. Esaias 6.10. Yea many times to scourge the unthankfulness, and
unprofitablenesse, of his own people, he does for a time hide his testimonies
from them. Psalm. 119.19.

Thus much of the lets without us.

The internal lets must be considered. First, in the wicked. Secondly, in the
godly.

The cause of this heartlessenesse, and want of affection in the wicked, is,

Inwa^d (...) wicked m^n.
First, their ignorance, they know not either the word, or the worth of the
word, or their own need of it.

Secondly, their profaneness and irreligiousnesse: they live without God, or
without Christ in the world, they make no conscience of their ways. They
forget their later end: they mind not the good of their souls, but only
earthly things: they never tasted of the bountifulness of the Lord, but were
altogether corrupt, and strangers from the life of God, only greedy in sinning.

Thirdly, Atheism: there is in the hearts of all wicked men in some degree
abominable conceits concerning God and his word* They either doubt, whether the
Scriptures be the true word of God: or else they are strongly carried to
resolve, there is no profit in the knowledge of Gods ways, or in serving the
Almighty. Job. 21.14. Malac. 3.15.

Fourthly, Cares of life: The love of the profits, or pleasures of this life,
cheak the word, and the power of it, as is apparent by these places. Matthew. 13.
Luke 14. Psalm. 119.36, 37, etc.

Fifthly, In some either whoredom or wine: for these two sins together, or
either of them take away men's hearts, they are void of all due consideration,
and of all affection to Gods word: They are senseless creatures. Hosh. 4.

Thus of the chief lets of the wicked.

The lets of affection in the godly are diverse.

(...) of affection in the godly.
First, Sometimes it is their worldliness, their too much minding and plodding
about the things of this life, or their excessive burthening of their heads
about their calling; they have too much to do, or they have too much care; care
I say, that is, distrustful and c^rking care. Psalm. 119.36.

Secondly, Sometimes it is want of comfortable fellowshippe in the Gospel.
Affection, that is alone, is seldom constant in the same degree. There is much
quickening and comfort and incitation in a constant, and tender, and profitable
society with such as love the word, Psalm. 119. verse 63.

Thirdly, Sometimes it is some secret sin that gets too much dominion over
them. As affection may stand with mere frailties and infirmities: So, on the
other sid^, if any sin once get head, and men yield to it, and agree to obey
it, their affections to the word presently dye within them, Psalm. 119.133. Yea,
if this sin be but in the thoughts, and be yielded to and delighted in, and
that constantly they seek the pleasure of contemplative wickedness, and do
not resist it by praying against it, even vain thoughts may dead the
affections, and poison them, Psalm. 119.113.

Fourthly, sometimes it is neglect of mortification: the s^ule will gather
abundance of humors, as well as the body:and therefore Christians should not
go too long, especially if they ^eele a kind of fulness to grow upon them, but
take a purge, that is, seriously and secretly set time apart to humble
themselves before God, purging out their most secretest corruptions with all
hearty confession before God.

Fifthly, sometimes it is want of practice or want of an orderly disposing of
their ways in godliness. If they rest only in hearing, their affections
cannot last long sincere: and, besides, the most Christians burden their own
hearts for very want of order, and that they go not distinctly about the works
of godliness, but rake together a great heap of doctrine which they know not
what to do withal. Psalm. 50. ult.

Sixthly, sometimes again it is occasioned by inordinate feeding: when
Christians begin to affect novelties, and seek to themselves a heap of
teachers, they escape not long without fullness, and the fits of l^athing. 2.
Tim. 4.3.

Seaventhly, sometimes very idleness is the hindrance. The want of a
particular calling to employ themselves in the six days, breeds a general
kind of weariness and satiety; which extends the heart of it, not only to the
times of private duties in the working days, but to the very Sabbath also.
They cannot work at Gods work with any great delight, that had no more mind
to their own work.

Eighthly, sometimes it is neglect of preparation and prayer, before we come to
the word.

Ninthly, sometimes it is a violent kind of ignorance and unbelief, when a
Christian knows not this right to the word, and will not be persuaded of the
fatherly love and presence of God in his ordinance. If Preachers must say, I
have believed, therefore I will speak: so must Hearers say, I have believed,
therefore I will hear. They should know, that they are welcome to Christ, and
may eat and drink Cant. 5.1. And that their heritage lies in the word. Psalm.
119.

Tenthly, sometimes it is a very disease in the body; as, melancholy, or some
other: which does so oppress the heart, that it does not take delight in any
thing. But of this more in the next Use.

Lastly, any of the sins mentioned in the former verse, will hinder
affection: Malice, Hypocrisy, or Envy, or any of the rest.

Use 3. The third use may be for instruction, to teach us to strive for
affection to the word, and to provide to order our selves, so as we be not
wanting in the direction of the Apostle: and so two sorts are to be taught,
that is, such as want appetite; and such as have it, that they may keep it
aright.

Quest. What must such do as find either want of appetite, or decay of it?

Ans. Such as would get sound affections to the word, must do six things.

First, they must refrain their feet from every evil way. It is impossible to
get sound affections, without sound reformation of life, Psalm. 119. Means to
get true desires ^o the word


Secondly, they must pray for it: they must beseech the Lord to quicken them,
Psalm. 119.37. and to enlarge their hearts, verse 32. especially to give them
understanding, verse 34. and to open their eyes to see the wonderful things of
his law. verse 18.

Thirdly, they must choose an effectual Ministry to live under it, such as is
executed with power and demonstration to the conscience, 2. Cor. 4.2.

Fourthly, they must remember the Lords day: and that they do, when they empty
their heads and hearts of all cares of life which might choke the word;
diligently doing their own works on the six days, and finishing them, that
they may be free for the Lords work on the Lords day. The cares of life choke
the word, Matthew 13.

Fifthly, they must converse much, if it be possible, with affectionate
Christians. For, as iron sharpneth iron: so does the exemplary affection of the
tenderhearted whet on the dull spirits of others.

Sixthly, they must purge often: they must be frequent in the duties of
humiliation, by solemn fasting, and prayer, and sound confession; striving,
when they feel fullness to grow upon them, to disturden their hearts, and to
quicken their spirits more forcibly to the love of Gods name and word.

Quest. But what must such do as have gotten some affections to the word, that
they neither lose them, not be unprofitable in them?

Ans. They must look to diverse things.

Rules for the preserving of good desires.
First, they must hate vain thoughts, take heed of those secret vanities of
imagination, and that delightful contemplation of evil in the mind, Psalm.
119. 113.

Secondly, they must try all things, and keep that which is good; they must
hear with judgment, and make special account of such parcels of doctrine as
do most fit their particular needs; laboring by all means, that such truths
run not out, 1 Thessalonians. 5.21.

Thirdly, they must take heed of itching ears. For, where men's desires are
still carried after new men, they are in great danger of fullness, or of
declining; and, which is worse, of being carried about with diverse doctrines,
and at length to be a prey to deceitful mockers.

Fourthly, they must preserve by all means the fear and trembling at Gods
presence, and humiliation of mind. For, so long as we can dread the presence
of God in his ordinances, we are in no danger of losing our love to the word,
Psalm. 119.120.

Lastly, in Esaias 55.1, 2, 3. we may note diverse things that God requires in
such as have the same thirst.

1. They must come to means. 2. They must buy and bargain with God by prayer
and vows. 3. They must eat, that is, they must apply it to themselves. 4. They
must be instructed against merit in themselves, and bring faith to believe
success, though they deserve it not* they must buy without money. 5. They must
hearken diligently. 6. They must eat that which is good: that is, they must
apply effectually that doctrine they feel to have life in it. 7. Their souls
must delight in fatness: that is, they must be specially thankful and
cheerful, when God does enlive his promises, and sweeten his words to their
tastes. 8. They must, after all this, incline their ear, and come to God: they
must make conscience to strive against dullness and distractions, and seek God
in his word still, or else their affections may decay: and then if they do
this, they shall live and enjoy the sure mercie^ of David by a perpetual
covenant.
Rules for such as be afflicted with melancholy.
Quest. But what shall such godly persons as are afflicted with melancholy do
in this case of affections?

Ans. They must attend these things.

First, they must be persuaded to see the disease in the body which extends the
oppression of it to the very affections.

Secondly, they must remember times that are past, and judge of their estate by
what it was before.

Thirdly, they may be infallibly assured, that they are in a right way,
because they desire to live uprightly, and to forsake the corruptions that are
in the world.

Fourthly, they must know, that it is a greater glory in faith to believe now,
when they feel not, then to believe when the heart abounded with joy.

Fifthly, they may judge of their affection to the word by their preparation
before they come, and by their only liking of such as love the word, and by
their constant frequenting of it, and by their sorrow for their dullness, and
unprofitablenesse.

Hitherto of the duty, to which he exhorts: the motives follow, The Motives.
and they are some:

First, ye are newborn babes:

Secondly, the word is sincere milk:

Thirdly, ye may thereby grow:

Fourthly, ye have tasted the sweetness of the bounty of God in his word
already.

The first reason tells what they are: the second, what the word is: the third,
what they shall be: the fourth, what the word has been.

As newborn babes.]

These words are taken in diverse senses. For properly they signify infants,
while they are tender and unweaned from the breast: Sometimes they signify
unable men, and such as have no fitness for their callings: so Isay. 3.4.
Sometimes they signify such as be weak in says and in the gifts of the
spirit, whether they be newly regenerated or lying in sin. 1. Cor. 3.1. Heb.
5.13. and so it is taken here.

And so the words are a reason to induce them to an affectionat^ desire after
the word, in as much as they are so weak, they can no better live without the
word, then the child in nature can live without milk.

Diverse things may be from hence noted.

First, that grace is wrought in Christians by degrees, Christ is revealed in
us by four degrees. First, as a child or little babe new formed and borne:
Secondly, as a young man in more strength, and vigor, and comeliness, and
activenesse: Thirdly, as a father, or old man settled with long experience:
these three are in this life, and mentioned 1. Job. 2.14. Now the fourth is,
when Christ shall appear in us as the Ancient of days, like God himself in a
marvelous glorious resemblance of the holiness, and properties of God: And
this shall be in another world. The use should be both for thankfulness, if
Christ be formed in us to any degree, and to in^i^e our industry in all the
means appointed of God, seeing we receive gifts by degrees, and not all at
once.

Secondly, that true grace may stand with many weaknesses. A child does truly
live, and yet it is very ignorant, and infirm, and wayward, and fit for little
or no imploiment: such may Christians be for a time, such were the very
disciples of Christ for a time: such were the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 3.1. and the
Hebrews, Heb. 5^.3. The use should be to restrain censuring of others,
because of their infirmities, to have no grace at all: Whereas we should
rather bear with them, and believe all things, Romans 15.2. 1. Cor. 13.5. And
besides, those that are distressed in mind should comfort them-selves with
this, they may be full of weaknesses, and very unprofitable, and yet have the
true life of Christ in them.

Thirdly, that the most Christians are but newborn babes, infants in grace,
not only such as are newly converted, but such as have spent a longer time in
the profession of godliness: the Apostle here takes it for granted, that all
they to whom he writes were little better, or stronger: and so it is usual in
all times and places.

Question. How comes it to pass, that the most Christians live still but as
weak ones and babes in Christ; especially why thrive they not according to the
time of their age in Christ.

Answer. In nature a child gets out of his childhood, as his years grow upon
him, but in religion and grace it is not so: It is not time brings any of
necessity out of the cradle of Religion. The causes why the most are but babes
in religion.
Now the cause why the most are but babes, and that after a long time, may be
such or some of these.

First, some as soon as they are borne, are destitute of the breast, have no
nurse, are taken away from their means, and deprived of the powerful
preaching of the word, which did beget them unto God: this comes to pass
sometimes by the violence of others, or by the afflicting hand of God upon
their bodies, or sometime by their own carelessness, that for worldly respects
remove to places where they have not the means to build them up.

Secondly some are infected with some bitter root of passion, or envy, or
malice, which was left behind in their repentance, not fully subdued, and this
holds them so down, that they cannot thrive, but are stocked in godliness;
that after many years, they show little bigger or better, then they were in
knowledge or grace: 1. Cor. 3. 1.2.3. 1. Pet. 2.1.2. Ephesians. 4.15.16. ^. Pet. 3. 7.

Thirdly, others at their first setting out are entangled with doubtful
disputations, and carried about with odd opinions, or strange doctrines, and
so ensnared with controversies about words, or things of less value; that
misplacing their zeal, and misled in their knowledge, they thrive little or
nothing in the maine substance of godliness, but need be taught the very
principles, Romans 14.1. Heb. 13.7. 2. Pet. 3.17. Especially when they be apt to
receive Scandal, and admit offense: such were the believing Jews the most of
them.

Fourthly, some are merely held back by their worldliness, they relapse to
such excessive cares of life, and so devour up their time about earthly things,
that they cannot profit not prosper in better things.

Fifthly, many thrive not, or not sensibly, being hindered by the ill company,
which either voluntarily or necessarily they are plunged into, and chiefly for
want of fellowship in the Gospel with such as might be patterns to them in
knowledge, and the practice of faith, and piety.

Sixthly, spiritual laziness and idleness is the cause why many grow not.
They will take no pains: but after they have repented, and believed in some
measure, Heb. 5.13. and be gotten a little whole of the wounds they were
diseased withal in their conversion, they fall into a kind of security, and
rest in the outward and formal use of the means, and neglect many precious
things, which from day to day they are moved and counseled to by the word, and
spirit of God: and this disease is the worse, when it is joined with spiritual
pride, and that vile conceitednesse, which is seen to come daily in many.

Seventhly, some Christians after calling are ensnared, and deceived by the
methods of Satan, and so live in some secret sin against their own knowledge
In f^vour of which they forbear the hearty regard, and use of Gods ordinances,
and so dangerously expose themselves to the reign of hypocrisy. These are
wonderfully stocked, and grow worse and not better.

These are the reasons why Christians thrive not: and who also is it whose case
some one of these seven is not? Let us every one examine our selves: for a
thousand to one we are kept back by some one of these. Note.
It were singular wisdom to note which it is, and to strive to amend that we
may not be such starvelings in godliness still.

The point then is clear, that most Christians are but as newborn babes. Now
what use should we make of it.

First, It may serve to humble many of us, that have had time enough, and
abundance of meane^ and helps to have been like teachers, and yet have even
now need to be taught the principles again. To us belongs justly that reproof
in the fifth to the Hebrews. 13.

Secondly, many d^ties must be urged upon us, if we grant our selves to be but
as newborn babes. For,

1. We must therefore be teachable and tractable, obeying them that have the
oversight of us, bearing their words of admonition, and loving them with a
singular love. Special duties of such as be but newborn babes.


2. We must therefore be the more willing to bear the chastizements of God,
that father of our spirits. For if we have had the fathers of our flesh, which
in our young years have corrected and that often for our profit, to subdue the
faults in us, which that age did breed, and sometimes, when they corrected for
their own pleasures, more than for our profit: How much more should we subject
our selves to the corrections of God, that find in us, being but babes, so
much perverseness, so much negligence, such head strong passions, such
frequent disohebience: and the rather, because he never corrects us for his
pleasure only, but for our profit, that he might make us more holy and more
fruitful, and more meek, as the Apostle shows, Hebrews 12.

3. We must therefore stick more affectionately, and constantly to the word,
and suffer our souls to be daily fed with this sincere milk of the word;
without which it is no more possible for us to grow in grace then a weak child
can do in nature without milk and food.

4. Yea the consideration of our estate, that we are but children, should beget
in us a desire to express those praises spiritually, which that infant estate
in nature does resemble. For,

1. Children in nature are without malice, Special praises in children by
nature to be expressed by us.
they may fall out one with another, but they carry no malice, they are quickly
friends again: so should we much more. 1. Cor. 14.20.

2. Children live without care, they are never troubled for what they shall
eat, or what they shall put on for the time to come: so should we do, as our
Savior Christ shows. Matthew. 6.

3. Children are not lifted up with pride for the great things they are borne
unto; nor does the child of a Prince scorn the fellowship of the child of a
beggar, but can play with him, and make himself equal to him: so should it be
with us, we should be void of great thoughts of heart, and not be lifted up in
our selves, or despise others; but make our selves equal to them of the lower
sort, especially seeing there is no difference in our birth. They are borne
again by the same immortal seed that we are, which our Savior Christ is
peremptory in. Matthew. 18.3.

Thus much of the third point.

4. A fourth thing may be here noted, and that concerns the privilege of
weak Christians, viz. that they are esteemed of God, and not deprived of his
favor and care for them because they are weak.

1. Parents love their little children, as well as their elder children:
Privileges of weak Christians.
so does God.

2. Parents provide means to bring up their little children, so does God: they
shall have sincere milk to make them grow.

3. Parents provide such as shall tend their children, and litt^e ones: so does
God, he has committed them to the charge of Christ, so as the least grace in
them shall be preserved, though it were but like a bruised reed, or the
smoking week of a candle. Matthew. 11.

4. Parents bear with the natural weakness of their children, without
lessning their fondness to them: so does God with infinite indulgence. Psalm
103.

5. Parents will not endure it to let them be wronged, or hurt, and much more
woe shall be unto them, that offend one of Gods little ones, Mat. 18.

6. Parents provide portions and inheritances for their little children: so
does God acknowledge them for his heirs, yea heirs with Christ his eldest
son. Romans 8. 17.

A fifth point that may be noted from hence, is, that only converted christians
can desire the sincere milk of the word with true affection: wicked men can no
more affectionately desire the word, than a dead child or no child can do the
breast.

Quest. But, have wicked men no desire after the word?

How far wicked men may desire after the word.
Answ. They may have: but only it is for the most part in two cases. First,
when they desire to hear the word only for men's wits or eloquence, or the like
carnal ends: and so they desire not the sincere milk of the word. Secondly, in
the case of a temporary faith; where the delight and desire after the word is
not constant, like the appetite of a child to the breast: for, they will fall
away in the time of temptation; and all their desires prove but as the morning
dew.

Desire the sincere milk of the word.]

Hitherto of the first reason taken from the consideration of their present
estate, and need of the word. The second reason is taken from the
consideration of the nature of the word which they should desire. It is
sincere, pure: there is no deceit, no mixture in it. And it is milk: it is
wonderful apt for nourishment.

There are two things then here said of the word in praise of it: First, that
it is milk; secondly, that it is sincere.

Milk.] This is a metaphor. Sometimes by milk is meant a man that is godly cast
into affliction; by which, God strains all the moats of corruption from him,
while his heart is poured out like milk with grief and fear. Thus Job says
of himself, God had strained him out like milk, Job 10. ve^. 10. Sometimes by
milk is meant the rudiments of religion, the principles, and grounds of
Catechism: and so it differs from strong meat: so it is taken, Heb. 5.12. 1.
Cor. 3.2. Sometimes it signifies the word of God in general, which is given
to the Church for nourishment of their souls to eternal life: and so it is
taken here; as, in Esaias 55.1. the word is called both milk, and wine, and
water; and, in other places, honey. It is honey, for the sweetness of it. It is
wine, for the power it has, to revive and refresh the spirit of man, and make
his heart glad. It is water, for cooling and quenching of his spiritual
thirst: and it is milk for nourishment. It does more for nursing up man's soul,
than the milk of the breast can for the bodies of infants.

The consideration whereof should work in us the desire to which the Apostle
here exhorts: and withal we should bring with us faith to believe, that God^
word shall turn to our nourishment. Shall we trust nature for the goodness of
milk? and shall we not trust God for the efficacy of his word, when he tells us
it will nourish like milk? And the rather should we make our recourse with
gladness to the word, because it is so cheap a food: we may buy this milk
without money: that is, without merits: only, if we will hear* our souls
shall live. Esaias 55.2.4; yea, let us for ever be thankful to God for his word,
in this respect. Was it so great a blessing, that God brought the Israelites to
a land that flowed with milk and honey, for their bodies? for the greatness of
which blessing, God does so often put them in mind of it: Note.
How great then is the mavelous goodness of God, that has made us to live
in these times of the Gospel, when the Land flows with this spiritual milk
and honey! Let us labor to be thankful, and bring forth fruits worthy the
bounty of God; left the Lord send the men of the East to dwell in these
palaces, and to eat our milk, and we be cast out, as it was said in the
Letter, Ezech. 25.4.

Oh that we could see our happiness in these days of salvation! this is that
milk of the Gentiles prophesied of, which we enjoy, and suck now from the
breasts of Kings, living under Christian Magistrates that command the preaching
of this sincere word of God, Esaias 60.16.

Sincere.] The word may besaid to be sincere in two respects. First, in it
self: secondly, in effect: in it self it is sincere, because it is without
error, without sin, and there is no deceit in it at all. Prove. 8.7.8. Psalm
19.8.9. And because it has no composition in it, but is the very pure word of
God, as it came from God himself at first: there is not a word in it, but it
was written by men inspired immediately by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. ult. And
as it is in it self, so it is by effect. It makes men sincere, It makes
crooked things straight. It purges out hypocrisy and all leaven out of the
minds and hearts of men; it both teaches and works in the godly a spirit
without guile, Psalm 19.8.9.

The Use may be both for instruction and reproof. For instruction both to the
people and to Ministers.

To the people: and so men should here learn,

First, to love the word, and long after it for this very reason, because it is
so pure and sincere, so void of harm or danger: so did David, Psalm 119.146.

Secondly, when we find our natures crooked and corrupt, and deceitful, and
tending to hypocrisy, we should bring our hearts to the word to be mended.
For, this you see is a property of the word, it will make men sincere, Psalm.
19. 8 9. and 119. John 17. 20. and as any men have more betaken themselves to
the word, the more sincere, they have always grown.

Thirdly, to receive the word with full assurance: we may trust upon it: it
cannot deceive us: what we find for comfort or directions in Scripture, we may
build upon it. Never man was disappointed of his expectation, that trusted upon
the word of God: but in God they have ever praised his word, 2. Pet. 1.20.
Psalm. 56.10. and 10.1.

Fourthly, as the Ministry of Gods servants does more declare the sincerity of
the word, so we should be more in love with it: we should like prayer,
preaching; I mean, not witless and unlearned preaching, but such preaching as
makes demonstration to the conscience, out of the pure word of God, in things
that concern the good of the souls of men, and the glory of God: the word
does ever profit men most, when it is most sincere, that men only speak the
words of God.

Fifthly, to stick to the word of God, without going to the right hand or the
left: there can be no sin but what is condemned in the word: nor can there be
duty not commanded therein: nor can there be matter of faith not propounded
therein. Oh how happy were we if we could stick to the old foundation, even the
sincere word of God, and not add nor diminish* the hatefulness of departing
from the word on the left hand, is in most places discovered. But Oh the
deceitfulness of men's hearts; and the wretched pronenesse of men to sin, by
finding out many inventions! Men run out, and that very fast on the right
hand: we have new opinions and strange fancies coined every day. Little do the
better sort of people (many of them) think of traditions on the right hand:
their faith is led into bondage, when they can yield no better reason, than it
is such a man's judgment, or else he thinks so himself: or the reasons
brought are urged without any demonstration from the word of God, and
Scripture. Happy, Note.
above the most Churches under heaven, were this nation, if this point were
understood and carefully observed, if we could stick to our first grounds in
parting from the Church of Rome; viz. to admit no opinions, nor charge our
conscience with more obligations, but out of the word of God.

Ministers also may learn from hence, what and how to preach: that is the best
preaching which is eminent for two things: First, that tends to beget
sincerity, clearness of judgment, distinct evidence of assurance, and strict
holiness of life in the hearers; Secondly, that shines in the native luster of
the word, in it self without mixture, when men know no matter, no style, no
wisdom comparable to that which may be had in the word.

This also may serve for reproof.

First, of such Ministers as preach not sincerely: and such are they that
preach for corrupt ends, though they preach true doctrine, Phil. 1. 17. and
they that preach obscurely and carelessly, and strive not to set out the glory
of the truths they propound; and they that are like lewd Vintners, which mix
the word with the error of their own brains, or with the tradition^ of men,
or with a manifest strife to bring in man's wisdom to Gods word; more desiring
to show their own wits and learning, than the glory of the scriptures. 2. Cor.
4. 2. and 1. Cor. 1. 17. and 2.4.5.13.

2. Of the people, for that great wan^ of appetite to Gods pure word, and the
plain preaching of it.

Thus of the second reason: the third is taken from the effect, and the profit,
which will follow: viz. they shall grow thereby.

That ye may grow thereby.]

This point of the growth of a Christian is of singular use, and meet to be
fully and particularly opened: and therefore I will observe five things
concerning it more especially.

First, that we ought to grow in grace.

Secondly, in what things we should labor to grow and abound.

Thirdly, what are the rules to be observed, that we might grow.

Fourthly, the signs of growth.

Fifthly, the uses of the whole.

First, for the first: Christians are bound not only to get grace, but they
must labor to increase in the gifts they have received: it is not enough to
begin the work of God, but we must labor to abound in it, and increase in
well doing, we must go on, and finish the measure of the work required of us:
these places evidently prove, that God looks for growth at our hands. 2. Pet.
3.18.1. Cor. 15.58.1. Thessa. 4.1. Prove. 4.18.1. Cor. 14.12.

Secondly, for the second: before I number particulars, I might tell you of
diverse kinds of growth, Diverse kinds of growth.
or increase in the kingdom of Christ. Christ himself is said to increase,
Ioh. 3.10. The word is said to grow, Act. 6. and in other places: and
Christians are said to grow: and so either first jointly in the mystical body,
Ephesians. 4. 16. Col. 2. 19. or secondly, severally every one by himself. Christ
was said to increase not only in stature and the declaration of his gifts,
Luke 2. 40:but also in the glory of his kingdom, and the advancing of his
dominion amongst men. The word grew, when the number* of faithful laborers was
increased, and when the light of the truth was more glorified, and received by
the people. Christians are said to grow chiefly in two respects. First, in the
number of believers, when there are daily added to the church: Secondly, in the
power and practice of their gifts, and this last is here intended: the word
rendered Thereby, might be read either in him: or in it, or, as it is, thereby.
In him, that is in Christ: In it, that is in the word: or thereby, that is by
the word. this last is intended here in all probability: Now then to the point;
there are certain things wherein a Christian should strive to grow: it is true
we should grow in every good gift and work, but if we mark the Scriptures,
these things in particular are especially to be labored after as being things
that do wonderfully honor God, and credit the Gospel, and bring a singular
increase of happiness to a Christian man's life, and it is wonderful profitable
to keep a Catalogue of these particulars still before us, that we may every
day be put in mind of what we should especially labor after.

These are the things then we should distinctly labor to grow in.

First, we should labor to grow in wisdom: In what graces christians ought
especially to grow.
Gods people should appear to be a wise people above all the people of the
earth. Christ grew in wisdom: Luke 2.40. Now wisdom has two things in it.
First, knowledge: and secondly, discretion. In both these we should grow: For
knowledge, the word of God should dwell plentiously in us. Col. 3. 16. and we
should increase in the knowledge of God, Col. 1.10. and for discretion, we
should abound in knowledge; yea and says the Apostle in all judgment too.
Phili. 1.10.

Secondly, we should grow in faith: that, which is lacking to our faith, must
be made up: 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. and we should still be praying with the Apostles,
Lord increase our faith, Luke 17.5. 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. Now there be two things
distinctly, which we should grow in about faith: viz First, assurance; and
secondly, the exercise of it. For assurance, we should he^eunto give all
diligence, that we might get the full assurance of faith and hope to the end:
we should never be quiet till it be established, and rooted, and soundly
grounded in our particular assurance of Gods favor in Jesus Christ, and our
own eternal salvation: Heb. 6.11. Col. 2.6, 7. And for the exercise of faith:
we should strive to learn every day to live by faith: in all the occasions of
our life; spending the remainder of our lives in the faith of the Son of God,
holding fast our confidence, and not withdrawing our selves. Heb. 10. Gal.
2.20. yea we should strive to be examples one to another in our faith in God.
1. Tim. 4.12.

Thirdly, we should abound in love one to another, and toward all men: this
the Apostle prays earnestly for, Philip. 1.10. 1. These. 3.12. Philip. 2.13.
and this we should show by all diligence, in preserving peace and unity
amongst our selves: so as there should be but one heart and mind amongst us;
to this end bearing, and forbearing, Ephesians 4 3.4.
and supporting one another, we should grow also in the tenderness and
heartinesse of our affections one after another, longing one for another, and
delighting one in another, yea our love should grow even in seeking to enlarge
our acquaintance with such as fear God, but especially in the labor of our
love to do good to such as fear God should we grow, etc.

Fourthly, we should grow in mercy, and that both in the bowels of pity, and
in the abundance of the fruits of mercy, Col. 3.12.2. Cor. 8.2. 7. and 9.11.
James 3.18.

Fifthly, we should grow in patience, and meekness, and lowliness of mind.
Patience should have his perfect work and it wonderfully would become us, if we
could increase in the image of Jesus Christ for meekness and lowliness: to be
free from passions and pride, oh, how it would adorn us! It is that one grace
Christ so much urges upon us, and was most eminent in himself, Matthew. 11.29.
James 1.4.

Sixthly, We should grow in prayer, and the gifts that concern our communion
with God, we should labor to be mighty and powerful in prayer, able to
wrestle with God himself, and overcome him, as Jacob did: and to this end we
should pray always, and learn to pray all manner of prayers in all things,
making our requests known to God with supplication, especially we should
strive to abound in thanksgiving to God, in all things giving thanks: this is
the greatest honor we can do to God. 1. Thessa. 5.18.19. Philip. 4.7. Psalm.
50.23. Col. 1.11. Ephesians. 6.18.2. Cor. 4.15.

Seventhly, we should grow in the contempt of the world, and the lesser
estimation of the things of this life, we should strive more and more to
express a mortified conversation,using the world, as if we used it not,
setting out affections on the things that are above, and having our
conversation in heaven, confessing our selves to be strangers and pilgrims, and
with all eagerness embracing the praises of a better life, Hebrews 11.13.
Philip. 3.20. in nothing being careful. Philip. 4.6. hastening to the coming
of Jesus Christ. 2. Pet. 3.11.

Eighthly, We should exceedingly strive to grow in the holy, and reverent use
of Gods ordinances, striving to come with more fear, and sense of the glorious
presence of God. This is a wonderful hard lesson, and little heeded of the
most. Oh that we could get it, to serve the Lord with fear, and to rejoice,
but yet with trembling! Oh blessed is the man, that can fear always, and
work out his salvation with fear and trembling.

Ninthly, there is another gift we should grow in, and it is marvelously
necessary, and comely, and yet extremely neglected, and that is utterance, of
which the Apostle makes mention in his short Catalogue. 2. Cor. 8.7. Utterance
(I say) to be able to speak one to another with profit and power in ^he things
of the kingdom of God. This is an admirable grace: and such as attain it and
grow in it, how precious are they amongst the Saints!

Tenthly, in that, 2. Cor. 8.7. You may see two other things we should
increase in. The one is, in all diligence: we should more and more every day
cast about, how we might take more pains to do good, and be more profitable
to others: and for our own souls, we should increase our pains.

Eleventhly, the other grace we should grow in, there mentioned, is the love to
our teachers: as God abounds toward us in the profit of their pain^, so we
should grow in affection to them, till we get that singular love of them,
which the Apostle speaks of. 1. These. 5.

Twelfthly now there is one thing more, which being added, would make us
wonderful complete Christians, glorious shining lights in the world, that hold
forth the life and power of the word, in the midst of crooked and perverse
multitudes of men; and that is contentation: Oh the gain of godliness if we
were settled and contented with that we have, and could learn of the Apostle in
all estates to be content! To have the skill to want, and to abound, and yet by
Christ to do all things: this would finish the glory of the whole frame of
godliness, and be like a crown to all other gifts and graces. 1. Tim. 6.6.7.
Philip. 4.11.12.18.

Rules to help our growth.
Now for the third point, namely, the rules to be observed, that we may grow.
They may be referred to these heads:

First, we must be diligent and conversant in searching the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, in the ^ame of Jesus Christ, as the chief cornerstone,
and then the promise is, that our hearts shall be so sweetened, and seasoned
with these divine knowledges, that God himself shall be with us, and dwell in
our hearts as a holy temple, and we grow more and more in acquaintance with
God, Ephesians. 2.20.21.

Secondly, we must bring so much sincerity to the grace of Christ, and the use
of the means, as to resolve to seek growth in all things, as well as one,
setting our hearts wholly upon the kingdom of God; we must not go about
godliness with a divided heart, we must grow up in all things, or else in
none: we shall not prosper, if we be false-hearted in any part of Gods
service, Ephesians. 2.15.

Thirdly, we must in all things depend upon God, and seek to him by daily
prayers for a blessing upon our desires, and the means, and our endeavors. For
else Paul may plant, and Apollo may water, but it is God that must give the
increase, 1. Cor. 3.6.

Fourthly, we must be careful to employ the gifts we have, and to practice, as
fast as we hear. For to him, that has for use, shall be given: but from him,
that has gifts, and will not use them, shall be taken away that which he has,
Matthew. 13.11.

Fifthly, we must get an humble heart, and preserve in us the sense of our own
vileness, and a lowly mind, and conceit of our selves, accusing our
every-daies evil ways before the Lord. For Gods promise is to give more grace
to the humble. James 4.7.

Sixthly, it is a great occasion of increase, when a man does Gods work, with
as much cheerfulness as he can. God loves a cheereful giver, and will make
all grace abound to them, that strive to live to be his servants. 2. Cor. 9.7.8.

Seaventhly, You must pray, that your masters, or if you will, Ministers may
have their hearts enlarged, and made fat, and that they may come unto you and
convert you with abundance of the blessings of the Gospel. For if there be
famine, or scarcity, and barrenness in Gods House, you will not thrive well at
home, Romans 15. 29.

Eighthly, we must take heed of all such things as hinder our growth, as namely:

1. Hypocrisy, Impediments of growth.
when men advance a profession of Religion only for carnal ends, and seek
more the praise of men then of God. These men's hearts will be fearfully blasted,

2. Errors in opinion of strange doctrines. 2. Pet. 3.17.18. Hebrews 13. etc.

3. Spiritual pride. 2. Cor. 12.6.7. For God gives grace to the humble. James
4.7.

4. Headstrong affections, as the passions of anger, or the like: these pull
men back, and hinder the growth marvelously. 1. Cor. 3.2.3. Ephesians. 4.30.31.

5. Living in places, where we have not powerful means for our souls, Ephesians.
4.13. For where vision fails, they perish, must needs saint, and be starved
in the famine of the word.

6. Discord with such as fear God. For if we grow, we must grow up in love,
holding communion with the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.15.16.

7. Domestical unquietness, and disorder: for that will hinder not only
prayer, 1. Pet. 3.7. but all other parts of piety.

8 Worldliness. This was the sin did undo Demas.

9. Sinister judgment of our own practices in godliness when we are either
just overmuch, that is, think too highly of what we do; or wicked overmuch,
that is, think too vilely of the grace of God in us, or the good we do: both
these hinder Christians extremely.

10. The love of any particular sin. For if once we dally with any
corruption, grace is dulled, and the spirit of grace grieved and vexed in us.

Now for the fourth point: we may know whether we grow or no, by diverse signs.

First, i^ we be planted near the rivers of water, Signs of growth.
if the Lord make us happy in living in such places where the means of grace
abound, and the ordinances of God flourish in their life and power, Psalm. 1.3.
Ephesians. 4.13. Else if a good tree be planted in a dry heath far from water or
rain, no marvel if it grow not. And when the Lord does make the means
plentiful, he does usually make his grace plentiful in so many as are
ordained to life.

Secondly, and especially if we be conscionable in the use of the means: if
we measure to God in sincerity, in hearing, praying, reading, and receiving the
Sacraments, etc. there may be no doubt, but God will measure to us in the
plenty of his blessings: if we suck the milk of the word with desire, we
shall grow. We need no more doubt whether our souls grow in grace if we can
bring constant affections to the means, than we would whether the bodies of
our children would grow, if they have good nurses, and do suck the breasts
well.

Thirdly, grace grows in us, as humility does grow: God will give more grace
to the humble, Iam. 4.8. And look how we thrive and continue in true
humility, so we thrive in grace: and contrariwise, as pride and conceitednesse
grows in us, so does true grace wither. And the like may be said of meekness,
which is a grace that orders the affections, as humility does the mind.

Fourthly, we may try our growth by our love to the godly, the members of the
mystical body: for the body of Christ increases in the edification of it
self through love. As the love of Gods children grows or decays in us: so
does grace grow or decay, Ephesians. 4.15, 16. This love is the bond of perfectness.
Col. 3.13.

Fifthly, we must try our confidence in God, and the assurance of our faith.
For, as grace grows, so do we grow more established and settled in God, and
the hope of his kingdom. This is to abide in Christ: and thus to trust in the
Lord, has a promise of such a blessing, as that man shall not wither, Ier.
17.7, 8.

Sixthly, we may discern our growth by the decay of taste in sin and the
world. As the violence of temptation, and the admiration of the pleasures and
profits of this life go out of us, by the same degrees does the holy Ghost get
the victory, and the Spirit settles the possession of grace in us, etc.

Seventhly, we may discern it by our teachablenesse, and honoring of
prophesying, when our Teachers according to their lines may be enlarged, and
live without suspicion or censure: when we can believe them and rest in their
testimony above the whole world, 2, Cor. 10.15. 2, These. 1.10.

Eighthly, we may easily discern it by our constancy and frequency in good
works, either of piety, or mercy, or righteousness, either at home, or
abroad. For* to such as have for use, it is certain more is given, Mat. 13.11.

Ninthly, we may know it by the frequency of our communion with God. If the
Lord daily dwell in us, or with us, and reveal himself to us by the signs of
his presence, there is no doubt to be made of our growing. The heart of a
christian is Gods Temple: and you may be sure, all prospers well in the Temple,
when the cloud sits there, or often appears there. Ephesians. 2.20, 21.

Use. The use of this whole doctrine concerning growth, may serve, first, for
humiliation: and so in many things.

First, our hearts should smite us for our ignorance. There are many things of
excellent fruit and praise, which we have not at all labored in; diverse of the
twelve things before.

Secondly, for our deadness of heart, and unprofitablenesse of life, which is
aggravated against us.

Unprofitableness of life aggravated in many respects.
1. When God give us much means. 2. When we are insensible, or at least
incorrigible; know all is not well, and feel our selves to be lashed, and yet
mend not. 3. When we are slothful and weary, will not stir up our selves,
nor receive direction for the making up of what is lacking to our faith, or to
any other gifts; especially when we are weyward, and will go about, rather
than be at the trial of direction or asking the way, Ier. 31.21.
3. Much more to such as are so far from growing, that they fall away, and
decline; lose their first love, and what they have wrought, begin in the
Spirit, and end in the flesh. This much vexes God, and is extremely dangerous
to the parties. Esaias 1.4. Ier. 7.24 and 15.6. 2 Pet. 2.20. But, that this may
not either pearce too far, or fall too deadly or flat upon any that are
guilty, we must know, there is a double declining or apostasy: the one,
Apostasy is twofold.
inward; the other, outward. First, the inward is, when a man's heart is fallen
off from the care of godliness, and the means of it, and regards iniquity
constantly, being possessed of the reign of habitual hypocrisy: and this may
be in men that outwardly frequent the means, and make a show of godliness.
Secondly, the outward declining or Apostasy is, when men outwardly live in
gross sins, or follow scandalous courses, and are at last relapsed to the
violent courses of the world, so as the means of godliness is neglected.
Again, declining is, first, either total: secondly, or in part. First,
total, when we fall off from all godliness, and all the means of it: and so
only they fall, that sin against the holy Ghost. Secondly, in part, is, when
men fall into some sin or error, and not lose all conscience of well-doing,
and such is their Apostasy also, that fall off from the care of some of the
ordinances of God, as, when men use the private, and neglect the public: or
use the public, and neglect the private, etc.

Question. But what shall a man do to help himself, that finds he has
declined, etc.

Answer. He must take unto himself words, and confess his sin to God, and
return to the Lord heartily, he will heal even his backsliding Hose. 14.3,
4, 5.

Use 2. Secondly, for instruction, and so it should persuade with us mightily
to hold on, and never faint in the way, but strive to the perfection of every
good gift of God, not being weary of well-doing, knowing, that it is a shame
still to be children, and that God does require a righteousness of us, that
should exceed the righteousness of all the Papists, and Pharisees, in the
world, and to this end, we should preserve in us this desire after the sincere
milk of the word, and watch against security and slothfulness, the dangerous
moaths of godliness.

Use 3. Thirdly, such may be much encouraged, who have their hearts set upon
growth, and do prosper in Gods work, though otherways they have many
afflictions, or infirmities: yea such as with true hearts do mourn for their
not growing, as they think, may consider of many comforts to uphold themselves
by: as,

1. Our Savior Christ had not all degrees of grace at once, Encouragement for
weak Ch^istians.
but grew in grace by degrees.

2. Though thy gifts be small, and grow in thee like a grain of mustardseed:
yet it may grow to a marvelous increase, Matthew. 13.

3. Though thou have many infirmities, yet thou may bear abundance of fruit:
as the vine, which is the weakest plant, yet is not therefore barren, Isaiah.
27.2.

4. Though thou have little means to help thy self by, yet thou may by the
blessing of God grow: the lilies spin not, and yet are gorgeously clothed,
Matthew. 6.28.

5. If we sow good seed, it is certain the Lord will give increase, 1 Cor.
9.10, 11.

6. Though we sow in tears, we shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5, 6. yea though
we be extremely oppressed and reproached: as the Israelites grew even the more
they were hated and oppressed in Egypt, Mark 4.8.

7. We have great helps: the word is more effectual to the soul, then milk
to the body; and we receive influence from Christ our head, Coloss. ^.19. and
every member of the mystical body makes some supply to further the growth of
the whole body: Ephesians. 6.16.

Verse 3. Because ye have tasted, that the Lord is gracious, or bountiful.


THese words contain the fourth reason to persuade to the desire after the
word, and it is taken from the experience they have had of the goodness of
God, comforting them in the word: If ever they tasted the sweetness of the
word, they must needs have an appetite to it.

In these few words there are diverse points of Doctrine to be observed and
explained: as namely.

First, that God is gracious.

Secondly, that God does graciously sweeten the word to his people: as God does
show his graciousnesse in the word.

Thirdly, that, where there is a true taste of the sweetness of the word,
there the soul grows in grace.

Fourthly, it is but a taste of the sweetness of God which can be bad in this
life.

Fifthly, many live in the church, and yet never taste of the sweetness of God
and his word.

Sixthly, it is a singular shame for such as have felt the sweetness of the
word, to fail in their desire after it.

For the first. Where the Lord is praised for graciousnesse, by the word used
in the original here, it is to occasion in us the admiration of the goodness
of Gods nature. For in this one word are many distinct praises imported: As

Wherein Gods graciousnesse is ^cene.
First, that he is free, and does what he does, freely, without respect of
merit, or desert in men: and this is one thing, which if we find, should much
incite us to regard what he says, or requires of us. By this Argument are
men called upon, Isaiah 55.1.2, 3.

Secondly, that he is kind to his very enemies. For so the word is applied:
Luke 6.35. and questionless it should be a great thing to persuade with a
man, when he comes to the word, to regard it with much affection, if he know,
that God thereby will do good to his very enemies: and that in that ordinance,
God is wont to show the mirror of his mercy, in revealing his love, and
communicating the blessings of his Gospel to such, as come into his presence
with hatred of their own ways.

Thirdly, that he is courteous, and in a special manner kind to, and fond over
his own people with incomprehensible indulgence: the word is rendered
Courteous, Ephesians. 4.32. And all ages must wonder at this kindness of God in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. And thus he delivers his servants from their fears,
Psalm. 34.3, or 4.

Fourthly, that he is bountifully and liberal, and gives plentifully: so the
word is used and given to God, Romans 1.5.

Fifthly, th^^ he is gentle and easy to be entreated, or prevailed withal.
Hence, that his yoke is said to be easy: Matthew. 11.30. where this word is
transtated (...): (...) hereof (...) the word, rendered gentleness: Gal. 5. ^2.
and thus he is said to be marvelous kind in hearing prayer: Psalm. 31.21, 22.
and 34.4. 6, ^5.

Sixthly, that he (...) not upon respect of persons, and thus he regards the
poor: Psalm. 68.10. and will not disdain to teach sinners his way: Psalm. 25.8.

Seventhly, that he is sweet: that is, wonderful comfortable, pleasing, and
filling with delight.

Eighthly, there is one specialty of Gods goodness, to which this word is
applied, and that is, the accepting of the Gentiles to favor, when the Jews
were cut off. Romans 11.

Use. The use of this point is various: For,

First, It should kindle in us admiration: All ages should gaze and wonder at
such matchless good nature, and kindness in God: Ephesians. 2.7.

Secondly, it should break our hearts with sorrow and repentance for our
sins, to think of it, that we offend a God so kind, so good, so bountiful:
Romans 2.4. Hose. 3.5.

Thirdly, it should persuade with men, that never felt this, to taste and see
how good God is, Psalm 34.

Question. What must we do, if we could, or might taste of this sweetness of
Gods nature?

Answer. The Prophet David tells us of two things: Psalm 34. First, What we
must do to taste the goodness of God.
thou must pray unto him, and make him thy refuge in all distress: Secondly,
and thou must put thy trust in him, and then certainly thy face shall be
lightened, and thou shall not be ashamed: and I may add two things more. First,
Thou must love his Word, waiting upon him in his Sanctuary. Secondly, and yield
thy self over to be his servant, and thou can not fail to find this
goodness of the Lord.

Fourthly, it should inflame affection in the godly: they should fall in love
with God. Oh love the Lord, all ye his Saints, Psalm. 31.19, 21, 33. What can
more draw affection, then sweetness of nature?

Fifthly, it should persuade all Gods servants to live by faith, and not through
unbeleefe in the time of affliction, or temptation to dishonor God. Why say
thou, thy way is past over of God? Or why say thou, the Lord has forgotten,
or will not forgive? Esaias, 40.27. and. 49.15, 16. Exodus 34.6, 7.

Sixthly, it should kindle in us a vehement desire to imitate so sacred a
nature, and continually to strive to be like the pattern in God for courtesy,
Ephesians. 4.32. kindness, 2 Cor. 6.6. and all loving behavior, Colos. 2.12. 1 Cor.
13.4. and easy to be entreated, Iam. 3.17. and love to our enemies, Luke
6.35. We should be followers of God, Ephesians. 5.1. we should bear his image
especially herein. Col. 3.10.

Seventhly, How should our hearts be satisfied, as with Manna, when we feel
this sweetness of God to us in particular, either in the word, or prayer, or
in his works? we should even be sick of love, our sleep should be
pleasant to us, and our hearts filled with gladness. What greater felicity
can there be, then that such a God should love us? Psalm. 63.6. Ierem 31.26.
Ca^^ic. 2.5. or 6.

Eighthly, we should be careful, when we have felt this sweetness of the
Lord, to preserve our selves in this communion with God, and abide in his
goodness, as the Apostle uses the Phrase, Romans 11.20.

Lastly, it should much affect with sorrow and shame. all impenitent sinners,
and that in two respects. First, because they have lost their time, and lived
without the sense of this sweetness in God, the Apostle, Tit. 3.5. uses this
Phrase, The bountifulness of God appeared. The word shined as the S^n^e does
in the rising: which imports, that the world was nothing but darkness, till
men found by experience the goodness of God. Secondly, because they have so
long offended a nature of such infinite goodness, this will prove a grievous
aggravation of their sin and misery. For such a goodness so provoked, will
turn into extreme fury: Mercy abused will be turned into unspeakable
fierceness of indignation, as appears Deuteronomy. 29.19,20. and Romans 2.4, 5.

Doct. 2.
The second Doctrine is, That God does graciously sweeten his Word to his
people, or God does show his graciousness especially in his word. Hence it is,
that Gods servants have acknowledged the word to be sweeter then honey and the
honey comb. Psalm. 19.10. and 119.103. and the holy Ghost compares it to
feasts, yea royal feasts, Esaias 25.6. Prove. 9.4. Luke 14.17. and the Apostle
acknowledges a savor of life unto life in the word, 2 Cor. 2.14.

The consideration whereof should teach us diverse duties.

First, to labor to find the word so unto us, to seek this sweetness in the
word: and to that end we must mingle it with faith, else there will be no more
taste in it then in the white of an egg: and besides, we must come to it in
the tediousness of our own vileness. Note.
For we are never fitter to taste of Gods grace, then when we are dejected in
the true feeling o^ our own unworthiness. God will give grace to the humble.
And further, we must get an appetite or affection to the word. For the full
stomach loatheth an hony-combe, but to the hungry soul every little thing is
sweet. Proverbs 27.7. and lastly, we must take heed, that we mar not our
tastes before we come, as they do, that have sweetened their mouths with
wickedness, and spoiled their relish with the pleasures of beloved sins, Job
20.12. Such as live in the delight of secret corruptions, even they that
account stolen waters sweet, may be the guests of Hell, but Gods guests they are
not: only they that overcome eat of the hidden Manna. Rev. 2.

Secondly, when we have found honey, let us eat it. Prove. 20.13. That is, if
the Lord be gracious unto us in his word, let us with all care receive it into
our hearts, and with all affection make use of it. Lose not thy precious
opportunity.

Thirdly, it should teach us in all our griefs and bitterness to make our
recourse to the word to comfort and sweeten our hearts against our fears and
sorrows. For at this feast God wipes away all tears from our eyes, Esaias 35.6,
8.

Fourthly, the sweetness of the word when we feel it, should satisfy us, yea
satisfy us abundantly. We should give so much glory to Gods goodness, as to
make it the abundant satisfaction of our hearts, Psalm. 36.6.

Fifthly, Yea further: we should labor to show this sweet savor of the word in
our conversations, by mercy to the distressed, by gracious communication, by
our contentation, and by all well-doing, that the perfume of Gods grace in us
may allure and affect others, that the very places where we come may savor of
our goodness even after we are gone.

Sixthly, we should be always praising of God for the good things of his
Sanctuary, acknowledging all to come from his free grace without our deserts,
Psalm. 84.4. entertaining his presence with all possible admiration, saying with
the Psalmist, O Lord, how excellent is thy goodness! Psalm. 36.9.

Seventhly, we should pray God to continue his goodness to them, that know
him, and to vouchsafe us the favor to dwell for ever in his house, Psalm 36.11.

Eighthly, and constantly the experience hereof should set us a longing: our
souls should long for the courts of Gods house, and our hearts cry for the
daily bread in Sion, and we should constantly walk from strength to strength,
till we appear^ before God in Sion, Psalm 84; and the rather, because, besides
the sweetness, there is a plentiful reward in keeping Gods word, Psalm 19.20.

Secondly, from hence we may be informed in two especial things.

1. Concerning the happiness of the godly in this life, notwithstanding all
their afflictions and sorrows. Thou see their distresses: but thou see not
their comforts. The stranger does not meddle with their joys. Oh how great is
the goodness of God, in giving his people to drink out of the rivers of the
pleasures in his house, when he makes their eyes to see the light in his light!
Psalm. 36.8, 9. Psalm. 65.4.

2. Concerning the office of Gods Ministers. They are the perfumers of the
world: the Church is the perfuming-pan: and preaching is the fire that heats
it: and the Scriptures are the sweet-waters. Or, the Church is the mortar:
preaching, the pestle: and the promises of God in Christ are the sweet spices;
which, being beaten, yield a heavenly and supernatural smell in the souls of
the godly hearers, 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. But, then, Ministers must take heed they
corrupt not Gods Word; and see to it, that their preaching be in sincerity,
and as of God, and in the sight of God in Christ, and with demonstration of the
truth to men's consciences, 2 Cor. 2.17; else, any Preacher will not serve the
turn. And in both these respects, Ministers have reason to cry out with the
Apostle, Oh! who is sufficient for these things? If every Sermon must leave so
sweet a savor behind it in the hearts of the hearers, and in the nostrils of
God too, who can be (without the special assistance of God) fit for these
things?

Lastly, this may serve for singular reproof and terror to the wicked, and
that in diverse respects. First, for such as are mockers, and call sweet sour,
that is, speak evil of the good word of God: Secondly for the miserable
neglect of that they should account the life of their life. Alas* whither shall
we go? or what is this miserable and wretched life, if we want the sweet
comforts of the word? To dwell without the word, is, to dwell in the parched
places of the wilderness: and this Ministry is the more dangerous in such or
to such as are daily invited, and have all things ready made, and yet will not
inwardly obey Gods calling, nor profit by the means, but find excuses to shift
off the invitation of God. How justly may that curse be inflicted upon them,
these men shall never taste of my supper? Luke 14.17. etc. 24.

Thus much of the second doctrine.

Doct. 3. The third doctrine out of these words may be this, that such as find
a true taste of the sweetness of God in his Word, may conceive hopefully, that
their souls do and shall prosper and grow. There is no doubt to be made of
our growth, if once we come to feel the sweetness of the Word. For the
clearer understanding of this doctrine, I must answer two questions.

Quest. First, what this true taste is.

Secondly, whether this taste may not be in wicked men.

Answ. For the first. A true taste of the sweetness of the Word, and Gods
graciousnesse in it, may be known both by the cause, and by the effects. The
cause of this taste is faith: for, by faith only does the soul taste. A true
taste is scene by the cause and effects of it.
Or that thing that raises so sweet a relish in our hearts, is, a persuasion
in particular of the graciousnesse of God to us, even of that graciousnes which
the Word does discover. The effects of this taste are three. For, first, it
revives the heart, and raises it from the dead, and frames it to be a new
creature; working an unsained change in the heart of man from the world and
sin, to the care of Gods glory, and salvation of their own souls: and thus
it is called A savor of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.15. Secondly, it sesleth in
the heart an estimation of the Word and spiritual things, and the assurance
of Gods favor of all earthly things in the world, Phil. 3.9. Psalm. 84.10.
Thirdly, this taste works a heavenly kind of contentment in the heart: so as
the godly, when they have found this, are abundantly satisfied, they have
enough, Psalm. 36.10. and 95.4.

For the second question concerning wicked men, and their rellishing of the
sweetness of the Word, I say two things. First, that the most wicked men are
without spiritual senses, and find no more taste in God or his Word, than in
the White of an egg: they savor not the things of the Spirit, Romans 8. 1 Cor.
2.13. Of this afterward. But yet it may not be denied, but that some wicked
men may go so far, as to taste of the good Word of God, and of the powers
of the life to come, and of heavenly gifts, as the Apostle grants, Heb. 6.5,
6.

Quest. Now there-hence arises a great question: what should be the
difference between this taste in wicked men, and the true taste in godly men?

Answ. For answer hereunto, diverse differences may be given.

Wherein the taste of wicked men and the godly differ.
First, in the things tasted there is a difference. For, wicked men may have
common graces, yea, and miraculous gifts too, by imposition of hands, (and
these are a great taste given them of the glory of Gods Kingdom) but they
never taste of saving graces; or if a taste of saving graces were granted, yet
they taste as it were of the River running by them, but not of the Fountain;
whereas the godly have the very Spring of grace flowing in them.

Secondly in the time of tasting, This taste in wicked men is but for a season,
it cannot hold long in them: and therefore is their faith and joy said to be
temporary: whereas godly men may keep their taste to their dying days, not
only in the gifts of saving graces, but in the very sense of the sweetness of
Christ, and the word too, etc.

Thirdly, in the manner of tasting. For, wicked men may taste of the Gospel
and Religion by senses, or by a dim kind of contemplation, or by a sudden
illumination, as by a flash of lightning; but they cannot taste with their
hearts clearly by Faith: Or thus, wicked men may, in the general, taste; that
is, know, and believe that the Mystery of Christ is true; but they cannot
taste, or know this Mystery, with particular and sound application, as theirs.

Fourthly, in the grounds of this taste or delight: For a wicked man persuaded
by false reasons, settled in the common hope, or transported with an high
conceit of some temporary and common gifts and graces, may be much delighted
and joyed in the word, and the thought of going to heaven for a time; but he
never rightly applied the promises of grace in Christ, nor does he ever
possess so much as one infallible sign of a child of God.

Fifthly, in the effects and consequents of tasting: for,

1. A wicked man may taste, but he never digests: an evil conscience casts up
the food again, or choakes and poisons it: whereas in godly men their taste
abides in them, and they digest the food they receive: The virtue of it
continues with them.

2. A godly man is transformed, and made another man by this taste, so is not
the wicked man: it is not a savor of life to the wicked.

3. A true taste in the godly, works, as is before noted, a high estimation,
and sound contentment: so as the godly place the felicity of their lives in
this communion with God, and his word: But that can never a wicked man do.

Sixthly, and lastly, wicked men may seem to taste, and yet do not: Many men
profess Religion, and delight in the word, and in Religion, and so religious
duties, who yet never did attain to it, but constantly found a weariness,
secret loathing, and many times a secret and inward ill savor in the word, and
in the duties of Religion: so as the taste is more in their mouths when they
talk with others, then in their hearts when they are before God.

It will not be amiss particularly to clear that place in the Hebrews in all
the three instances of tasting.

First, they are said to taste of heavenly gifts: How far the taste of wicked
men may go.
so they do when they have common graces, as sometimes some kinds of faith,
joy, hatred of some sins, love of Ministers, or some godly praises for some
ends, etc. Or when they have miraculous gifts confirmed by imposition of hands,
or otherwise, as they had in the primitive times; and these gifts are excellent
and heavenly, because they are mighty by the Spirit of God, and came down from
the Father of spirits: but saving graces they cannot have.

Secondly, wicked men may taste of the Spirit and good Word of God, by feeling
some sudden flashes of joy, either out of admiration of the means of
delivering, or from some general conceit of the goodness of Gods praises, Job
23.12. and the happiness of the godly, Psalm. 119.23, 24, 50. But they can get
no such taste of the word, as to desire it as their appointed food constantly,
Psalm. 119.14, 72. Or to make it their greatest delight in affliction; or to
love it above all riches; 1 These. 1.5. or to receive it with much assurance in
the holy Ghost; or to redress their ways by it, Ps. 119. 9, 45, 59. so as the
taste of the word, should put out the taste and relish of sin: For, let
wicked men be affected as much as they will, their taste of sin will remain
in them. I mean the taste of their beloved sins; nor can he deny
himself,and forsake his credit, friends, pleasures, profits, much less life
it self for the Gospels sake Mark 10.29.

Thirdly, wicked men may taste of the powers of the life to come, by joying at
the thoughts that they shall go to heaven, and pleasing themselves in the
contemplation of it. But it is still a false taste, for they have no sound
evidence for their hope, nor do any marks of, a child of God app^are in them,
nor can they allege one sentence of Scripture, rightly understood, for the
means of it.

The use of all this may be threefold. Use.


First, for Trial. All men should seriously try their estates, in respect of
this taste, by pondering upon what is before written concerning the nature and
differences of it.

Secondly, it should work exceeding thankfulness to God, if we have found
this sound and secret taste in the Word; we should every one and for ever, say,
In the Lord will I praise his Word, Psalm. 56.

Thirdly, Here is matter of terror unto wicked men, and that first, to such of
them that never felt any sweetness in the Word. How should they be amazed to
think of it, that God does from Sabbath to Sabbath restrain his blessings
from them, and, as contemning them, to pass by them, and take no inward notice
of them? 2. But especially here is unspeakable terror to such as have had that
taste in the sixth to the Hebrews, if they should ever fall from it, as is
there mentioned. For, if this taste go out of thine heart, take heed of the
sin against the holy Ghost: For at the loss of taste, begins that eternal
ruin of these men. If thou be not warned in time, thou may come to such a
condition, as it will be impossible for thee to be ren^ed by repentance, Heb.
6. 5, 6, 7.

But least this doctrine should be misapplied, as it is sometimes by such as
are distressed with Melancholy or vehement affliction of Spirit; I will a
little more fully clear the secret of that place, about the sin against the
holy Ghost; and therefore wish that these things be observed.

Diverse things noted for clearing the sin against the holy Ghost.
First, that it does not follow necessarily, that whosoever has that taste
there mentioned, shall not be saved: for men may have that taste, and finding
it ineffectuall, go on till they find a true taste: That taste is dangerous,
if men fall away; else there may be good use of those tastes: For, it brings
men near the kingdom of God, and makes preparation for true Grace.

Secondly, that the sin against the holy Ghost cannot be committed but by
such as have been enlightened, and have set themselves to attend upon the Word,
either by solemn profession outwardly before men, or by inward attendance upon
it. Two sorts of men in our times are in danger of this sin, that is,
Hypocritical professors: and those they call the wits of the World, who
afterward fell to all Epicurisme.

Thirdly, that the failing away there mentioned, is not to be understood of
any particular falling into some one, or a few sins; but of an universal
falling away from the care of all godliness, and into such a condition, as to
dislike no sin, as it is sin, and to believe from the heart no part of the
Gospel, nor be afraid to wallow in the sins, which formerly he in a sort
repented.

Fourthly, there is in them a personal hatred of the Son of God; they do
with the Jews, as much as in them lies, crucify him again, loathing him,
and inwardly swelling, or fretting, against the doctrine of Christ, and
striving as far as they dare, in his Ordinances and people, to put him to
shame by scornings and reproaches, or what way else they can, Heb. 6.6. and
Chap. 10.29.

Fifthly, they abhor from their hearts the graces of the Spirit, and loath
them in the godly; despighting the Spirit of grace, Heb. 10.29. so as they
persecute, to their power, the truth; being carried with incurable malice
against it.

And thus of the third Doctrine.

Doct. 4.
The fourth Doctrine that may be gathered out of these words, is; that it is but
a taste of the sweetness of God we can attain to in this life, we cannot
reach unto the thousand part of the joys of Gods presence and favor, in this
world. These are part of his ways, but how little a portion is heard of him!
Job. 26. ult. Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor heart of man perceived
the things, which God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

The comforts we feel in this life, may well be likened to the taste, both
because we have them but in small quantity, and because they are quickly
grown out of sense; they are but of short continuance.

There may be three uses made of this point.

First, it may quiet them that complain out of Scruple of Conscience, that
their joys they have, be not right, because they are so quickly lost; whereas
they must be informed, that the comforts the best men can get in this World,
are but a little (...), given out of the Rivers of Gods plea(...).

Secondly, it should make us the more out of love with this life, and kindle in
us the love of the appearing of Jesus Christ. Why desire we to live so king o^
Earth, where we must drink down continually the bitter (...) and ^o^row; and
can get but now and then the taste of the comforts of a better life? Why long
we not to enjoy those pleasure^ for evermore? Psalm. 17. ult. Yea, we may know
how good it is to be in Heaven, by the taste we have sometimes on Earth. If it
do us such unspeakable ease and joy to (...) of the s^eetnesse o^ God for a
little moment? Oh how great then is that goodness, God has (...) up from
them, that fear him: Psalm. 31.19.

The smalnesse of the quantity, and shortness of the continuance of our taste
of the graciousnesse of God on earth, should make us to use the means of
communion with God, with so much the more servency, and frequency, and humility.

Doct. 5. A fifth doctrine is, that many in the Churches of Christians never so
much as tasted of the sweetness of Gods grace and word, and that may be a
cause why the Apostle speaks with an If, as knowing it was a great question
whether many of them had had experience of the sweetness of the Word.

Question. Now if any ask what should be the cause that many Christians have
so little sense of the sweetness of the word, and Gods graciousnesse and
goodness in the Word.

Answer. I answer that it is:

First, with many so, The causes why so many have little or no taste of the
word.
because they want the ordinances of God in their power and life of them. They
want powerful preaching: some congregations have no preaching at all, and many
that have preaching, have it not in the life and power. The spices of the word
are not beaten to the smell as they should be. 2 Cor. 2.15, 16.

Secondly, In others, because the taste of the pleasures, and profits, and lusts
of the world are in their hearts when they come to the word, and so by the
cares of life all sense of sweetness is beaten out. Mat. 13. Luke 14.24.

Thirdly, It is in the most, because they consider not their misery in
themselves, nor remember their latter end. A man never knows the sweetness of
Christ crucified, till he be pricked in his heart, and afflicted for his sins
and forlorn estate in himself by nature: and till men know how to number
their days; they will never apply their hearts to wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

Fourthly, some men are infected with superstition, and the love of a strange
god. They prepare a table for the troop, and therefore are hungry when Gods
servants eat, and vexed when they sing for joy of heart. They cannot feel the
sweetness of the Gospel, their hearts are so poisoned with secret popery,
Esaias 65.11, 13.

Fifthly, Some men taste not of wisdoms banquet, because they leave not the way
of the foolish. All sense is extinguished by the evil company they keep. Prove.
9.6.

Sixthly, Too many Christians are poisoned with some of the sins mentioned in
the first verse of this Chapter, and that destroys both taste and appetite in
them.

Seventhly, Some are fearfully delivered to a spiritual slumber, the Justice
of God scourging their impenitency and disobedience, that made no use of his
judgments, and the remorses they felt before; and so are in the case of the
Jews, Romans 11.

Eighthly, Because God does for the most part reserve these tastes, as the
only portion of his own people: and therefore never wonder, though the common
multitude attain not to it. Psalm. 36.8, 9.

Lastly, the best Christians are often much restrained in their taste of the
sweetness of Gods favor and presence, because they are not careful enough to
attend upon God in his ordinances: they do not seek God, and strive to find
Gods favor and presence in the means: they hear and pray loosely, with too
much slacknesse and remissness of zeal and attention.

The consideration hereof should serve much to humble and melt the hearts of
such as feel this to be their case: they should be afraid and tremble at the
judgments of God upon them herein, and fear their own case, and by speedy
repentance make their recourse to God in the Name of Christ, to seek a remedy
for their distress.

And to this end,

1. They should gather a Catalogue of all such sins as they know by themselves,
for which they might most fear Gods displeasure; and then go in secret, and
humble themselves in confession of those sins, striving till the Lord be
pleased to give them a soft heart and sensible sorrows. This course will both
mar the relish of sin, and besides, it opens the fountain of grace and
joy in the heart of a man. Hos. 14.3, 5. Mat. 5.6.

2. They should there attend with all possible heed to the Word of the Lord,
hearing it as the Word of God, and not of man; with this sincere covenant of
their hearts, to do whatsoever the Lord commands: and then the Lord will not
long withold himself.

Secondly, the godly that find this sweetness in the Word, should be so much
the more thankful for the gracious entertainment God gives them in his house,
in that he has not, nor does deal so with thousands of Christians, as he
deals with them.

Doct. 6. The last doctrine is, that it is a shame for such Christians as have
felt of the sweetness of the Word, to lose their appetite, or any way to abate
of their company in resorting, and constancy of desire after it, or estimation
of it. This answers to the maine scope, because these words are brought in as a
reason to excite appetite. The remembrance of the good we have found in the
house of God, should make us love it still, though we do not always speed
alike: we should believe that God will return, though he hide his face for a
time. Such Christians then must bear their shame, that have lost their first
love; and repent, lest God take away the Candlestick from them.

Verse 4. To whom coming, as to a living stone, disallowed of men, but chosen
of God, and precious.


HItherto of the exhortation, as it concerns the Word of God. The exhortation,
as it concerns the Son of God, follows, from verse 4. to verse 13: wherein
it is the purpose of the Apostle, to show unto them in the second place the
principal means of holiness, even the original fountain it self, and that
is Christ; to whom they must continually come to seek grace, if ever they will
prosper and grow in godliness.

In the exhortation, as it concerns Christ, three things may be observed.

First, the Proposition: wherein he tells them what they must do, verses, 4.
and 5.

Secondly, the Confirmation of it, and that two ways. First, by testimony of
Scripture, showing what Christ is; which Scripture is both cited and expounded
verses 6, 7, 8. Secondly, by the consideration of their own excellent estate in
Christ; which is set out positively, verse 9. and comparatively, verse 10: or
thus it is confirmed by arguments taken from the praise, first, of Christ,
verses 6, 7, 8. Secondly, of Christians, verses 9, 10.

Thirdly, the conclusion: where he shows the use they should make, both in
what they should avoid, verse 11. and in what they should do, verse 12.

That which in general may be observed, is, that Christ is the maine Fountain
of all grace and holiness. It is he that fills all, in all things, Ephesians. 1. ult.
All the treasures of wisdom and grace be in him, in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily, Col. 2.3, 9. It is he that is made unto us of God, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 10.30. He was long since
acknowledged to be the Lord our righteousness, Ier. 23.6.

The knowledge hereof may both inform, instruct, and comfort us.

First, it may inform us concerning the grievousnesse of our disease. The
nature of man is so far past cure, that unless the Son of God sanctify
himself with unspeakable holiness, we can never be sanctified, John 17.19.
yea, the Word it self is not availeable without the grace of Christ, as it
appears in that seventeenth of John: where both the Word and Christ are
entreated of.

Secondly, it may teach us, first, to ascribe glory to Christ, who in this
respect is most worthy to be acknowledged the Head of all Principalities, but
especially the Head of the Church; from whom comes influence of all grace and
goodness, Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 23. Secondly, it should teach us, above all gettings,
to labor to get Christ crucified into our hearts. It is Christ in us, that
must be our riches, and our hope of glory, Col. 1.27. yea, this will be
unsearchable riches to us: we should determine to know nothing, save Jesus
Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.2. Thirdly, let him that glories, glory in
the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.4, 7. And therefore God forbid I should rejoice in any
thing, but the Cross of Christ; whereby I am crucified to the world, and the
world is crucified to me, Gal. 6.14.

Thirdly, it should be a great comfort to the Godly, both in respect of their
union with him, in regard their Head is so infinite in holiness, ^^ also in
respect of that supply and help that they may continually have from him against
all their infirmities and defects; and lastly, in respect of the hope of the
full confirmation of their holiness in the day of Christ.

And thus of the general Doctrine.

The first thing in the exhortation to be considered, is the Proposition^:
inwhich which, two things are to be marked. First, what Christ is; secondly,
what the Christian must be in respect of Christ.

Christ is diversely described by the Apostle.
There are five things in the description of Christ. First, he is a gracious
Lord: that is imported in the first word; To whom, that is, which gracious
Lord, mentioned in the former verse. Whereby the Apostle applies that to
Christ, which was before spoken of God generally, as he that is God with the
Father, and as that person in whom the Lord shows his graciousnesse to men.
Secondly, he is a living stone. Thirdly, he is in respect of the world, and the
base respect and usage of him, once disallowed of men. Fourthly, he is elect of
God. Fifthly, he is precious.

Now, that which Christians must be and do, that they may receive holiness
from Christ, is, that first, they must come unto him. Secondly, they must be
lively stones. Thirdly, they must be built up in him. Fourthly, they must
become a spiritual house. Fifthly, they must be a holy priesthood, to offer up
spiritual sacrifices unto God, such as may be acceptable in Jesus Christ.
For, it is to be noted, that the word Are built up, may be rendered, Be ye built
up: howsoever it be read, the intent is, to persuade them thereto. Ye are built
up, that is, if you be right, that is a thing must not be wanting: so the sense
is the same.

First, then, of the description of Christ. And therein, the first point of
doctrine that offerethit self to our consideration, is, that Christ is a
gracious Lord. He is a Lord and Master to all true Christians; and such a Lord
and Master as never men served, for wonderful graciousnesse. That he is a Lord
to the faithful, is evident by other Scriptures also, 1 Cor. 1.2. He is said
to be a Lord to all that call upon him in every place. Thus David calls him, My
Lord* Psalm. 110.1. And great Apostles confess themselves to be his servants,
Romans 1.1. I^^^. 1.2 Pet. 1.1. And that he is most gracious, the Apostle shows,
when he tel^, that all Ages have cause to wonder at the mavelous kindness that
God has showed to men in Christ.

Ephesians. 1.7.
The use may be both for information, instruction, and consolation.

First, we may (...) be informed, that Christ is God with the Father. For the
which the Prophet David, Psalm. 34. (whence the words of the for(...) borrowed)
Give to God, the Apostle applies here unto Christ: and the reason of the
application may in the second place inform us, that God is gracious to men
only by Jesus Christ. It is impossible ever to feel or taste of Gods
graciousnesse, but in his Son. And thirdly, we are here told, as it were,
that Christ is God visible. God is made visible and sensible (...) men by Jesus
Christ: This is that mystery of godliness: God is manifested in the flesh.

Secondly, is Christ our Lord and Master? then these things will follow:

1. That we must live and die to Christ, Romans 14.7, 8, 9. we are not our own
men; we must live to him that died for us, 2 Cor. 5. ult. The love of Christ
must constrain us, and all old things must be passed, and all things must
become new unto us. If Christ be our Lord, where is his service? he must rule
us, and rule over us. If we walk in the vanity of our minds, according to the
deceiveable lusts of our old conversation, we have not yet learned Christ, nor
the truth that is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4. And therefore letus (...) look to his
ways, as he that must one day give account of (...) Christ, which will be
judge both of quick and dead Romans 14.

2. That every (...) bow at the name Christ, and every tongue must (...) his
(...), to the glory of God, Philip. 2.1. Romans 14. We must all take motion of
(...) supreme authority, and form in our hearts, all possible reverence toward
him.

3. We must not judge one another. For, what have we to do to judge another
man's servant? He stands or falls to his own Master, Romans 14. 4, 9.

Thirdly, it ought to be the singular joy of our hearts, that we serve so
glorious a Master. Never servants served such a Lord, as it may appear by the
enumeration of diverse particular differences, As:

First, other masters are not wont to die for their vassals: Christ does many
ways excel earthly Lords toward his servants.
Christ shed his blood for us, one drop of whose blood, was more precious then
all the bloods of all the men in the world; and this he did, only to ransom
and redeem us, that we might be a peculiar people unto him, Titus 2.13.

Secondly, never Master had such power to prefer his servants: Christ has
all power in heaven and in earth, Mat. 28. and all that, to enrich us.

Thirdly, we serve the best Master, because we serve him, that is King of
Kings, and Lord of all other Lords, Revel. 19.

Fourthly, in the service of other masters, there is wonderful difference of
places, and many of the servants serve in the lowest, and basest offices,
without hope of any gain, or respect: But in Christ Jesus there is no
difference, bond and free, male and female, Iew^ and Grecian, etc. in Christ
are all one, Col. 3.11.

Fifthly, other Lords may advance their servants to great places, but they
cannot give them gifts to discharge them: but Christ does enrich his servants
with every needful gift for the discharge of their callings, 1 Cor. 1.30. Ephesians.
1. ult.

Sixthly, other servants know, that their Lords may and do die, and so they
leave their servants usually unpreferd: But Christ lives for ever, as the
Author of eternal salvation to them that obey him.

Seventhly, other Lords may take offense, and do often put away their
servants: But whom Christ loves, he loves to the end, so as whether they live,
or die, they are still Christ's, Romans 14.8.

Eighthly, no Lord can give such sure protection to his servants, as Christ
gives to his: No man shall pluck them out of his hands, Efay 4.5, 6. Job. 10.
And whatsoever wrong is done unto them, he takes it as done to himself: and
therefore the afflictions of his servants, are called the afflictions of
Christ, 2 Cor. 1.4.

Ninthly, and lastly, never Lord was so boundless in his favor, Christ makes
his servants his fellows, 1 Cor. 1.9. They sit with him there in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. He is not ashamed to own them as his brethren, Heb. 2.
His servants he makes sons, and heirs too: yea, heirs with himself unto
God, Romans 8. Never man was so fond of his wife, as Christ is of his servants,
Romans 7.4. and all the book of Canticles shows it. Finally, they shall all
mign with him and be partners with him in his glory, after they have labored,
and suffered a little: when he appears in glory, they shall be for ever
glorified with him.

Secondly, The second thing affirmed of Christ, is, that he is said to be a
living stone.

A living stone.]

A stone, and a living stone. The holy Ghost is used in Scripture to liken God
and Christ unto a stone: so Genesis 49. 24. God is said to be the shepherd and
stone of Israel, and Revel. 4.3. God is likened to a jasper stone, and Psalm.
118.22. Christ is said to be the stone, which the builders refused: and so in
many other places.

Christ is said to be a stone, three ways. First, Christ is three ways called
a stone.
For he is either a rock or stone for refuge, because in Christ men may safely
rest against all the surges, and waves of affliction in the sea of this world,
Psalm. 18. Secondly, Or else he is a stone of stumbling, as the Prophet Esaiah
called him long since, Chap. 8.14. And the Apostle Paul acknowledges the same,
Romans 9.33. and this Apostle in verse 6. following, Because wicked men take
occasion from this doctrine of Christ to fall into sin, and mischief, and
because if Christ may not be the means of their salvation, he will be an
occasion of their falling: but in neither of these senses is it taken here.
Thirdly, But Christ is here likened to a foundation stone, (...)
to signify, that it is he, upon whom all the Church must be built. This is
that stone, which was cut out of the mountain without hands, Dan. 2.45. that
hard stone of which the Prophet Zach^ry speaks. Chap. 4.7, 10.

He is said to be a living stone: and some think to liken him thereby to a
flint stone, which being smitten, the sparkles (as if it had fire in it) give
fire and light to other things. It is true, that Christ has life in himself,
and does give the sparkles upon the flames of life and light to other men. But
I think; the stone here does not import so much by any likeness in it,
because it is a corner stone in the building, which usually neither is, nor can
be of flint. But he is said to be a living stone, to distinguish him from
material stones; and by that word living, to show what the metaphor stone
cannot resemble: For though a stone might shadow out the continuance, and
eternity of Christ by the lastingnesse of it; yet life is given here to Christ,
not only because he lives himself, and can do no more, Romans 6.9. But because
he is by effects, life, that is, he makes life in the godly, whereby they
become living stones also.

The maine doctrine here intented, is, that Christ is the only foundation of
the Church. 1 Cor. 7.8.


Ob. David is said to be a stone, and a hard stone of the corner, Psalm. 118.

Sol. David was so only by way of type, his life being somewhat like the state
of Christ, in respect in the oppositions of men, and preferment from God: and
that that place does specially belong to Christ, appears by the application of
Christ himself, Matthew. 21.32.

Ob. But the Apostles are said to be the foundation of the church, Ephesians. 2.20.

Sol. The place is to be understood of the doctrine of the Apostles, which
treats in one maine point of Christ.

Matthew. 16.18.
Ob. But the Church is founded upon Peter.

Sol. The Church is not builded upon Peter, but upon the rock, which was the
confession of Peter, and so the doctrine of Christ: for the text does not say
super banc Petrum, but super banc Petram.

Use. The use may be first, for confutation of the Papists, about their
blasphemous doctrine, in ascribing this glory of being the foundation of the
Church, unto Peter, and so to the Pope: which they do most absurdly: for that
place, Matthew. 16.18. is not understood of Peter's person, but of his confession.
And besides, if it had been true of Peter, by what word of Scripture shall it
be proved, that it is true of the Pope, who is not once named in Scripture,
except he be described as Antichrist? Besides, if the Church be built upon
Peter, or the Pope, then it will follow, we must believe in Peter and the Pope,
else we cannot be founded on them: which is extremely blasphemous: but that
it may be put out of all doubt, let us hear the testimony of Peter himself,
who best knew his own right; and you see in this text, Peter says, Christ is
the living stone, and not he.

This likewise imports the misery of all such, as run after other gods, their
sorrows shall be multiplied. Psalm 16.4. They build in the sand, quite besides
the foundation, and so do the Papists, that put their trust in Saints and
Angels.

But especially this should teach us, as we are here exhorted, to build all
our faith and hope in Christ, and to cleave to him in all uprightness of heart
and life, and the rather, because this stone has seven (...), and most
perfectly viewes all and every part of this building, that every stone be set
right, etc. Zachar. 3.9.

Especially we should rest upon this stone, when we have any great suit to
God: and have occasion, to continue to hold up your hands in prayer, and so we
shall prosper, as it was with Moses, Exodus 17.12.

Lastly, it should be the singular joy of our hearts, when we see the corner
stone cast down, and God begin to build in any place the work of godliness,
and religion: We have more cause to rejoice for that spiritual work, then
the Jews had to shout, when the corner stone of the Temple was brought out to
be laid for a foundation of the building, Zachar. 4.7, 10.

Thirdly, the third thing said of Christ, is, that he was disallowed of men

Disallowed of men.]

This is added of purpose, to prevent scandal, which might arise from the
consideration of the mean entertainment, the Christian Religion found in the
world.

The point is plain, that Christ was disallowed of men: and this is evident in
the stone: The greatest part of the world regarded him not: The Gentiles knew
him not, and the Jews received him not: Though three things in Christ were
admirable; his doctrine; his life; his miracles: yet the Jews believed not in
him: He came unto his own, and his own received him not; Nay, they reviled
him, called him Samaritane, and said, he had a Devil. They preferred a
murderer before him, and their wise men, even the Princes of this world,
crucified the Lord of life and glory. This as it was storied by the
Evangelists, so it was foretold by the Prophets: Esaias. 53. and 49.8. and so we
see, he is still of almost the whole world. The Pagans yet know him not: The
Jews yet renounce him: The Turk receives him but as a Prophet: The Papists
receive him but in part; and wicked men deny him by their lives.

Uses. The first impression this should make in our hearts, is, admiration and
astonishment. This should be mavelous in our eyes, that men refuse the Son
of God: miserable men, their Savior; captives, their Redeemer, and poor men,
such unspeakable riches as is offered in Christ, and that almost all mankind
should be guilty of this sin; so as in comparison, he should be Elect only
of God.

Secondly, since this was foreseen and foretold, we should be confirmed
against scandal, and like never a whit the worse of Christ or Religion, for
the scorns and neglects of the world.

Thirdly, since the world disallowes Christ, we may hence gather, what account
we should make of the world and the men of the world: we have reason to
separate from them that are separated from Christ, and not to love them that
love not the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 16.23.

Fourthly, we may hence see, how little reason we have, to take the counsels
and judgments of carnal men, though our friends, and never so wise in
natural or civil wisdom: their counsels were against Christ, they disallow
Christ, and all Christian courses.

Fifthly, why are we troubled for the reproaches of men, and why do we fear
their revilings? Shall we hear, that Christ was disallowed, and shall we be so
vexed, because we are despised? Nay rather let us resolve to despise the shame
of the world: and to follow the author of our faith, even in this cross also?

Sixthly, we may be hence informed, that indiscretion or sin, is not always
the cause of contempt: For Christ is disallowed, and yet without all spot of
indiscretion or guile.

Seventhly, and chiefly, we should look every one to our selves, that we be
not of the number of those, that disallow Christ.

For Christ is still disallowed of men, and if any ask,

Question. Who are they, that in these days be guilty of disallowing of
Christ?

Answer. I answer, Both wicked men, and godly men too.

Wicked men disallow him, and so do diverse sorts of them, as,

What kind of men disallow Christ.
First, Heretics, that deny his Divinity, or humanity, or his sufficiency, or
authority, or his coming, as did those mockers mentioned, 2 Pet. 3.

Secondly, Schismatics, that divide him, and rend his body mystical, 1 Cor.
1.10.

Thirdly, Pharisees and merit-mongers, that by going about to establish their
own righteousness, deny the righteousness of Jesus Christ, Romans 10.4.

Fourthly, Apostataes, that falling from the fellowship they had with Christ,
would crucify him again, Heb. 6. 2 Pet. 2.

Fifthly, Epicures and profane persons that will sell Christ for a mess of
pottage with Esau, and love their pleasure more then Christ, Heb. 12.16. 2 Timothy
3.

Sixthly, Papists: who therefore hold not the head, because they bring in the
worship of Saints and Angels, Col. 2.19.

Seventhly, Whoremongers and fornicators, who give the members of Christ unto a
harlot, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16.

Eighthly, Revilers: that speak evil of the good way of Christ, and reproach
godly Christians, especially such as despise the Ministers of Christ. for he
that despises them, despises Christ himself, Matthew. 10.

Ninthly, Hypocrites: that profess Christ in their words, but deny him in
their works.

Tenthly, the fearful: that in time of trouble dare not confess him before
men, Matthew. 10.

Eleventhly, All wicked men: Because they neglect their reconciliation with God
in Christ, and will not believe in him, nor repent of their sins: All that
will not be reconciled, when God sends the word of reconciliation unto them,
Esaias 52.11.

Secondly, Godly men sin against Christ, and are guilty of disallowing him.

1. When they neglect the establishing of their hearts in the assurance of
faith. 2. When they faint and wax weary of prayer, and trusting in God in the
time of distress, Luke 18.1, 8. 3. When our hearts wax cold within us, and are
not inflamed with fervent affections after Christ. We neglect him, when we
do not highly esteem him above all earthly treasures, Phil. 3.9.
The fourth thing affirmed of Christ, is, that he is chosen of God.

Chosen of God.]

This is one thing we must carefully know, and effectually believe, concerning
Christ, namely, that he is chosen of God. This was conscionably believed
concerning him, as appears, Esaias 42.1. and 43.10. and 49.2. Mat. 12.18. Christ
chosen of God diversely.
Now, Christ may be said to be chosen of God in diverse respects. First, as he
was from all eternity appointed and ordained of God to be the Medi^tor and
Redeemer of all mankind, 1 Pet. 1.20. Secondly, as he was called peculiarly
of God from the womb by a special Sanctification unto his office, Esaias 49.1.
Thirdly, as he was by solemn rites inaugurated unto the immediate execution of
his office; ^s, by baptism, and the voice from heaven, etc. Math. 3. Fourthly,
as he was approved of God, and declared mightily to be the Son of God, and
the Savior of the world, by the glory done to him of God, notwithstanding the
scorns and oppositions of the world, Esaias 49.7.

The use may be both for Information and Instruction.

For, hence we may be informed concerning diverse things.

First, that Gods work shall prosper, notwithstanding all the scorns or
oppositions of men: God's choice is not hindered, but Christ is separated; and
sanctified, and appointed to the work of redemption, the perverseness of men
notwithstanding. The unbelief of men cannot make the faith or fidelity of God
of none effect, Romans 3.

Secondly, that God does not choose as men do. The mean things of this world
(as the world accounts mean) and the vile things of this world may be dear in
God's sight. For, as it was in the calling of Christ: so is it in the calling
of Christians: such as the world disallowes, may be dear to God, 1 Cor. 1.27,
28.

Thirdly, Hence we may note the free grace of God in the sending and giving
his Son. He is feign to choose for us: we did not choose Christ first, John
15.16.

Fourthly, That to choose Christ, is, with Marie, to choose the better part: it
is to imitate God, and choose like God, to forsake the world, and the wills; and
lufts, and judgments of the wicked men of this world, and to cleave only to
Christ, as our all-sufficient portion and happiness.

Fifthly, That all the enemies of Christ shall be subdued either by conversion
when they come in to worship Christ, or by confusion, when they are broken by
the power of Christ. Even Kings shall submit themselves, and worship him that
is thus abhorred and despised of men, etc. Esaias 49.7.

Sixthly, That it is a singular happiness to be chosen of God: it was the
honor of Christ here, etc. And therefore, Blessed is the man whom God chooses.
Happy is the Christian whom God electeth; Psalm. 65.4. Luke 10.20.

Secondly, It should teach us diverse duties.

First, to observe, and admire, and acknowledge the Lord Jesus, the Chosen of
God, we should with special regard confess unto the glory of God herein,
which the word Behold imports, Esaias 42.1. We should be Gods witnesses
against the world, and all the servants of any strange god, that this Jesus of
Nazareth is that Son of God, and Savior of the world, Esaias 43.10. It is one
maine end of the praises of Christ in this place, To raise up our dull and dead
affections to the highest estimation and admiration of Christ, and his glory
with the Father, etc.

Secondly, We should learn of God, how to make our choice. On the one side is
offered unto us the pleasures and profits of the world, and the inticements of
sin and Satan: and the other, in the Gospel of Christ is set forth and
offered to us as the means of our happiness. Now, it is our part to take to
Christ, and renounce the world, and forgo the pleasures of sin, which are
but for a season: we should utterly refuse the voice of sin, never to be the
guests of such folly, but rather to listen to the voice of wisdom, Proverbs 7.
and 8.

Thirdly, Is Christ chosen of God, that one of a thousand? Then it learnes the
Church to be in love with him, yea, to be sick of love, as is imported,
Canticles 5.8, 9, 10. An ordinary affection should not serve the turn: our
hearts should be singularly inflamed with desire after such a match, found out
and chosen of God for us.

Fourthly, we should not rest here: but, when God has declared his choice,
(as he did by a witness from heaven, even his own voice, Math. 17.5.) we
should then hear Christ, and, as the Prophet says, wait for his law, Esaias
42.4.

Fifthly, Yea, we should so kiss the Son, whom God has declared as King, by
doing our spiritual homage unto him, as that we resolved, both high and low,
the greatest estate as well as the meanest, to serve him with all fear, and
rejoice before him with trembling: we must express our thankfulness by all
possible obedience of heart and life, Psalm. 2.11.

Sixthly, we should follow his Colors, and take his part, and contend for the
truth against all the world, and in particular against Antichrist, that man of
sin, Revel. 17.14.

Seventhly, We should imitate the praises and virtues of this chosen One,
especially in two things: to weet, humility and constancy, as the Prophet Esaias
shows, 42.2, 3, 4.

Lastly: And specially this Chosen, or rather this knowledge of this Chosen of
God, should teach us to rely upon Christ without wavering, with all trust and
confidence, for our reconciliation with God, for the obtaining of knowledge,
comfort, deliverance, preservation, yea, and salvation too: for, this is he
whom God has given for a covenant to all people; and his soul delights in
him: And therefore also we may run boldly to the Throne of grace, and put up
our petitions by Christ. For, we are here assured, that God will deny him
nothing, as these places evidently show: Psalm. 42.6, 7, 8, 16. Psalm. 49.6, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12. Math. 12.17. to 22. But then we must look to it, that we
observe the seasons and opportunity of grace, Esaias 49.8. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Let us
therefore embrace, while God is to be found, and offers us Christ: for, we may
seek when God will not be found, as Es^^ sought the blessing when it was too
late, Heb. 12.15.

And further: this may serve for singular terror to all unbeleevers, that will
not have Christ to rule over them. He is elected already of God, and therefore
will mightily pursue all the enemies of God and the Church, and all those that
disobey him whom God has chosen: he will pursue them both with the terrors
of his Word, his mouth being made like a sharp sword, and with the plagues of
his hand, being made like a polished shaft, Esaias 49.^. He will appear to
wicked men in the day of wrath, as a mighty man, and as a man of war: though
to his own he be as a Lamb, to them he will be as a Giant: they shall not be
able to resist; and though he lift not up his voice in the streets of his
people, yet he will set upon them with roaring, and singular terror, even
with all the signs of furious displeasure: and though for a time he may seem
to put up the contempt of men that disallow him, yet at the length he will not
refrain, and will destroy at once, etc. Esaias. 42.13. 14, 15.

Besides: This doctrine of Christ's chosen, or of Gods choice, should notably
check that unbelief and fearfulness that is too often found even in (...),
in the dear servants of God. When God has published his election of Christ
for the service of our redemption, why does some say, The Lord has forsaken,
and his Lord has forgotten him? Can God forget his people? or will he ever
deny his Chosen? Shall not Christ be regarded in our behalf, who is the
person whom his soul loves? Esaias 49.8, etc. 13, 14, 15, 16.

Precious.]

Christ is precious many ^^yes.
First, in respect of his nature: he is the choicest (...) in heaven and
earth; never such a man: all the creatures in heaven and in earth are inferior
to him. Secondly, In respect of his gifts: he is qualified with all the
treasures of wisdom and grace, above all his fellows, Col. 2.3. Psalm. 45.
Thirdly, In respect of his works: never creature did works of such price, so
useful, so exquisite, so transcendent. Fourthly, In respect of his sufferings:
he paid such a price to God in the ransom of man, as all the world besides
could not raise, or any way make. Fifthly, In respect of effects: he gives the
most precious things: no treasures like those may be had from him: his very
promises are precious, 2 Pet. 1.4.

This may serve, first, to inform us in diverse things: as,

First, Concerning that matchless love of God to us, that gave us his Son who
is so precious, Romans 8.34.

Secondly, Concerning the horrible sin of Judas and the high Priests, that
valewed him but at thirty pieces.

Thirdly, Concerning the most miserable condition of all profane people, and
persons, even whole multitudes of people, that so neglect Christ, that can with
Esau sell him for trifles, pleasures, or profits, even as mean sometimes, as a
mess of pottage, etc. The more glorious Christ is, the more vile is their
sin of neglect, or contempt of Christ. Woe to them, that disallow him then:
Even to all those sorts of men before mentioned ^ Christ will not be a
foundation stone to support them, nor a precious stone to enrich them, but as
the upper and nether millstone to grind them to pieces, or as a rock falling
upon them.

Quest. But what should be the reason, that Christ is in no more request
amongst men?

Answer. First, One cause is man's ignorance, Causes why Christ is no more
precious with men.
both of their own misery out of Christ, as also of the glory of Christ in
himself, and of the privileges man might attain by him, and of the singular
glory to come.

Secondly, Another cause is unbelief. Men have a secret kind of Atheism in
them, and do not believe the report of the servants of Christ out of the Word,
Esaias 53.1, 3.

Thirdly, Another cause is, that the most men look upon the outside of the
Kingdom of Christ, and of the estate of Christians; which, because they find
it covered with afflictions, and seated in a low condition without outward
splendor, they therefore contemn it: Our life is hid with Christ in God,
Colos. 3.3.

Fourthly, But the maine reason is, because men do falsely esteem of other
things, they set so high a price upon their pleasures, profits, lusts, credits,
honors, hopes, etc. that Christ is not remembered nor valued, unless it be at
Judas his rate, and yet many will not value him at so much as thirty pence, but
they will make shipwreck of a good conscience even for a penny, I mean for
extreme small gain, in buying and selling, and such like dealing.

And thus much of the third thing we may be informed of.

The last is, concerning the wealthy estate of all true Christians. How rich
are they, that possess this Mine of treasure, who have his spirit, graces,
righteousness, ordinances, and glory!

And as it may thus inform us, so it should ^each us.

Use 2. First, To account of Christ as most precious, to esteem of him as ever
precious in our eyes, and show it; 1. By seeking to get Christ above all
gettings. Pro. 8.11, 16.
2. By accounting all things but as dust and dung, in comparison of the
excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8. 3. By selling all, to buy this
precious stone, Math. 13. forsaking father and mother, house and land for
Christ's sake, and the Gospels. 4. By keeping our communion with Christ with all
carfulness. 5. By avoiding all the ways, by which Christ is disallowed and
disesteemed. 6. By longing for, and loving his appearing, 2 Timothy 4. hasting to
it, and looking for his coming, 2 Pet. 3.


Secondly, to consecrate our selves, and whatsoever is dear, and precious to
God, and the service of Christ, striving to be a precious people, and peculiar
to God, zealous of good things, and works, Tit. 2.12, 14. 1 Cor. 6.20.

Thirdly, We should live like such, as having attained so precious a treasure.

1. Living by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. 2. Not being the
servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.2, 3. 3. Keeping our selves from all pollution, by
which the Kingdom of God may be defiled, laying up this treasure in a pure
conscience.
Lastly, Ministers, that know, that there is no other foundation but this
living and precious stone, should study by all means to build gold, silver,
and precious stones, and not hay and stubble, striving like skillful
masterbuilders, to make the whole frame some-way answerable to the foundation,
1 Cor. 3.12.

Thus of the description of Christ. Now follows what Christians must do,
that from Christ they may receive virtue for the attaining of holiness of life.

First they must come unto him.

To whom coming.]

Five points in general.
Diverse things may here be noted in the general.

First, that men may come unto Christ, even while they are on earth.

Secondly, that natural men, or naturally men are absent from Christ, or
without Christ.

Thirdly, that without coming to Christ, we can never be sanctified.

Fourthly, that all, that once take taste of the sweetness of Christ in his
ordinances, will come unto him.

Fifthly, that to come to Christ, is a continual work: Christians are still
coming, their life is but a continued journey to Christ, or a daily seeking
out of Christ, etc.

But in particular I especially consider two things.

First, how many ways men come to Christ.

Secondly, in what manner men must approach to Christ.

We come to Christ many (...).
First, we must come to Christ diverse ways.

First and chiefly, by believing in him: we must draw near to Christ by the
assurance of faith, Heb. 16.22.

Secondly, by making him our daily refuge in prayer, using him as our
continual mediator, and advocate, Psalm. 65.12. Ierem. 31.9. carrying all our
petitions to him, in all our distresses making our mo^ne to him, as the Client
does to the Counselor, Esaias 9.6.
or as the oppressed do to the judge.

Thirdly, by the frequenting his ordinances, viz. the Word and Sacraments, thus
to come to his feasts, even to his great Supper, Prove. 9. Luke 14. 17. etc.
Matthew. 22. Thus we come to worship.

Fourthly, by contemplation, remembering him, and setting our affections on him,
thinking on him that (...) at the right hand of God, Col. 3.1.

Fifthly, by receiving his servants, and visiting them in their distresses: He
that receives them, receives Christ, Matthew. 10. and to visit them in prison,
is to come unto Christ, or to visit Christ, Matthew 26.

But the four first ways are especially (...), and the first chiefly.

For the second:

We must come to Christ.

First, speedily: as, the men that suffer shipwreck, quickly haste to the
shore. In what manner we must come to Christ.


Secondly, penitently: going and weeping we must go^, Iorem. 50.4. He calls to
him sinners, and that to repentance, Matthew. 9.13. we must come weary and heavy
laden, Matthew. 11.28. we must return and come, Esaias 25.12. and not, as they
Ier. 7.9, 10. Zachar. 14.1, etc, that came in their sins with Idols in their
hearts: we should come to Christ, as Benhadad did to A^ab, with ropes about
our necks: that is, with all readiness to profess against our selves our own
vile deserts.

Thirdly, confidently: and with persuasion of faith, resting in his goodness,
and casting out fear and doubts, Heb. 10.22. and 11.6. as the Le^^r came to
Christ, Matthew. 8.2. Heb. 4.16.

Fourthly, affectionately: we must come to him, as the love comes to her lover:
so the Church to Christ, Canticles 2.10, 13.

Fifthly, importunately, as the woman of Canaan did; so as we will be set down
with no repulses or delays, Mat. 15. as they with the Palsey-man, Mat. 9.
Hosh. 6.1, 2. and as he teaches us to come to God, Luke 18.1, 2, 3, etc. and
as Job resolves, Chap. 27.2, 3, 7.

Sixthly, orderly: we should do as Job said: we should order our cause before
him, and fill our mouths with arguments, Job. 23.3, 4.

Seventhly, obediently. We should come to Christ, as children to their
fathers, and as the people to their lawgiver, to receive commandments at his
mouth; so as our hearts might answer, eloe, I come to do thy will. Psalm. 40.7.
If we would have God or Christ come to us, we must be such as David promises
for himself, Psalm 101.1, 2, 3, 4.

Eighthly, sincerely. And we must show our sincerity, 1. By forsaking the way
of the foolish, Prove. 9.6, 23, 4. 2. By coming in the truth of our hearts. For
an hypocrite cannot stand before him without flattering lying, dissimulation,
or wavering; not as the Israelites came to God, Psalm. 78. 32, 34. So as Christ
may discern, that we have a true thirst, whatsoever we want, John. 7. 37. 3.
Thirdly, by renouncing all other hopes, as they said of God, Io^. 3.22. 4. By
resolving to cleave to Christ in a perpetual covenant, Ier. 50.5. 5. By
coming to Christ, notwithstanding dangers or difficulties: though it were with
Peter to leap into the Sea, Matthew. 14.29. or with the wisemen to come from the
East, Matthew. 2. and though we find Christ in a prison Matthew. 25. and though it
were to deny our selves, and to take up our Cross daily, Luke 9.24.


Use. The use of all this should be chiefly to persuade with every one of us to
make conscience of this duty to come unto Christ, and the rather considering,

First, the necessity of ^^ here imported, Many are the reasons why we should
come to Christ.
in that without co^^ing to Christ we cannot possibly attain unto sound
reformation of life: without Christ we can do nothing.

Secondly, the encouragements we have to come to him, and these ^^^ many. For,

1. If we consider the invitation of Christ, he calls us to come unto him, we
cannot displease him by coming, but by not coming and neglecting him, Matthew.
11.29. Cant^^. 2.10, 13. Matthew. 22.3. Ioh. 5.40.

2. If we consider the persons invited, or who may come: The simple may come,
Prove. 9.3. The strangers may come, even (...) from (...), Esaias 49.12. and 56.4.
Any that are (...), may come, John. 7.3^. Yea, the basest and meanest may come,
which is signified by that of the Parable, Matthew. 22.
that they by the hedges and highway side are compelled to come in: nor is
there any exceptions at men's sins, but sinners may come, Matthew. 9.13. Yea
such, as are wounded and smitten for their sins, may come, Hos. 6. ^. etc.

Thirdly, if we consider our entertainment when we come. He adopts all that
come to him, John 1.12. He is ravished with affection toward them: we cannot
more please him, than by coming to him, Gant. 4.8, 9. They are sure they shall
not be rejected; John 6.37. Christ will ease them in all their sorrows, Mat.
11.29. He will heal them of all their diseases, of which the bodily cures were
pledges in the Gospel. He will be as Manna from heaven to them: they shall
never hunger, Ioh. 6. yea, he will be life to them; the life of their present
lives, and eternal life: they shall live for ever, John 5.40.

Thus of the first things required in Christians. The second is, They must be
lively stones.
Verse 5. Ye also, as lively stones, be made a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Iosus
Christ.


As lively stones.]

IT is not unusual in Scripture, to compare men to stones: and so both wicked
men and godly men.

Wicked men are likened to stones, first, for their insensiblenesse: and so the
heart of Nabal was like a stone. Secondly, for their silent amazement, when
iniquity shall stop their mouth: thus they were still as a stone, Exodus 15.16.
Thirdly, for their sinking down under Gods judgments: so the Egyptians sunk
into the Sea like a stone, Ex. 15.6. And thus the wicked sink into hell like a
stone. But chiefly in the first sense, for hardness of heart: their hearts by
nature are like a stone. And in the comparison of a building, if they be in the
Church, they are like the stones of the house that had the leprosy, or like
Jerusalem when it was made a heap of stone.

Godly men are like stones too: they are like the stones of Bethel that were
anointed. God is the God of Bethel: and the godly are as those anointed
pillars, consecrated to God, and qualified with the gifts of the holy Ghost.
They are like the Onyx stones given by the Princes, and set on the breast of the
High Priest, in the Ephod. The High Priest is Christ. The Onyx stones are
Christians. The Princes of the Congregation, are the Ministers that consecrate
the souls of men which they have converted to Christ, who wears them on his
breast, and has them always in his heart and eye. They are like to the rich
stones of a Crown lifted up, Zach. 9.16. They are like the stone with the
Book bound to it, Ier. 51.63. They are never without of the Word God. But in
this place they are likened to the stones of the T^mple, which in the Letter
are described, 1 Kings 6.7, 36. and 7.9, 10. and in the Allegory, Esaias 54.11,
12, 13. Sure it is, that the stones of this spiritual Temple, are the pla^e of
Saphires, as is said in Job in another sense, 28.6.

In what respects the godly are likened to stones.
Now the godly are likened to stones in diverse respects. First, they are like
stones to grave upon, and so they are like those stones, which must have the
Law graved upon, set up in mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27.2, 3, 4. What is the mount, but
the world! and what is E^^l, but vanity, or sorrow? and what are those graved
stones, but the godly with the Law of God written in their hearts, the light
whereof shines on the hill of the vanity of this world, and (...) in the
midst of all the so^rovves of this world? Secondly^ they are likestones for
strength and unmovednesse in all the storms of life. The rain pierces not
the stones, nor do afflictions batter the hearts of Gods servants: strength is
attributed to stones in that speech of Job. 6.12. Thirdly, They are like stones
for continuance and durablenesse, they will last for ever: so will their
persons, and so ought the affections of their hearts. Lastly, they are like
stones for a building, and that in two respects.

First if you consider the manner of their calling into the Church: they are
dug out of the quarry of mankind, as stones dug out of the earth, being
in themselves by nature but stones of darkness, such as might never have seen
the light.

Secondly, if you consider their union with Christ, and Christians in one body,
they are like the stone of the house compact in themselves, and upon the
foundation.

Use. The use may be briefly: First, for information: Here is come to pass
that saying that is written, God is able of stones to raise up children unto
Abraham. Secondly, let all the servants of God take pleasure in the stones of
this spiritual Sion, Psalm 102, 15. and let us all learn to be like stones
in the former senses, for the receiving the impression of the law, and for
constancy and durablenesse, and for care to keep our communion with Christ,
and Christians.

Lastly; woe to the multitudes of wicked men, whom God neglects with that heavy
curse, so as a stone is not taken of them to make a stone for the building,
Ierem. 50.26.

Thus they are stones: It is added, they must be lively stones, to signify
wherein they must not be like unto stones: they must not be dull, and
insensible, they must be lively and cheerful, and that for diverse reasons.

First, Because the second Adam is a quickening spirit, Reasons why we ought to
be lively stones.
and they dishonor the workmanship of Christ, if they be not lively, 1 Cor. 15.

Secondly, Because one end of the offering, up of Christ, was, that their
consciences might be purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, they are therefore condemned, according to men in the flesh, that
they might live according to God in the Spirit, 1 Pet. 4.6.

Fourthly, Because we have been alive to sin, and it is a shame to express
less life in the service of God, then we have done in the service of sin.

Fifthly, Because we have lively means, we are fed with living bread, Ioh. 6.
and we live by the power of God, 2 Cor. 13.4. and we have the Spirit of Christ
in us, which is the fountain of life, and has springs of joy in him, Romans
8.9. Ioh. 6. and the Word of God is lively and mighty in operation, Heb. 4.12.
and Christ himself lives in us, Gal. 2.20.

Sixthly, because we profess our selves to be consecrate to God as living
sacrifices, Romans 12.1.

Seventhly, because we have such excellent privileges: we partake of the
divine Nature, and God is a living God; and we have precious promises, 2 Pet.
1.4. and we have plentiful adoption in Christ, and we have a hope of a most
glorious inheritance, which should always put life into us, ^ Pet. 1.3, 4. and
we have a secure estate in the mean time. For to live, is Christ: and to die,
is gain; and whether we live or die, we are Christ's, Romans 14.8. Phil. 1.21.

Use. The use should be therefore for instruction: We should stir up our
s^lves, and strive after this liveliness, and that for the two reasons
imported in this text to omit the rest. For without a ready heart, we shall
make no riddance in matter of sanctification, and holy life, and besides, we
shall extract but a small deal of influence from Christ. For it is here
required, that we should be lively, when we come unto him.

Now this liveliness we should show: First, by contentation in our estate:
Secondly, How we (...) our liveliness.
by patience and cheerfulness in afflictions, Romans 5.2, 3. Thirdly, in the
performance of holy duties with power and life: Thus we should be lively in
prayer, such as will bestirre themselves, and take no denial, as, Philip. 4.5,
6.

Quest. Now if any ask, what is good to quicken us against the deadnes of our
hearts?

What we must do to quicken our hearts.
Answ. I answer: First, faith and assurance makes a man's heart alive, we live
by faith. Secondly, we must go still to Christ, who is the life, and by
prayer still draw the water of life out of his wells of salvation. Thirdly, the
word of God is lively, Heb. 4.12. Fourthly, godly society, and a profitable
fellowship in the Gospel puts life into men, there is a great deal of
provocation to good works in it. Fifthly, we should often meditate of the
gain of godliness, and of the privileges of the promises belonging to the
godly.

Use. This doctrine implies a great deal of reproof also: First, to
Hypocrites, that have a name, that they live, but they are dead, Revel. 3.^.
Secondly, to deelining Christians, that suffer their first love to abate in
them, and can be contented to lose sensibly the power of affections, which
formerly they had. Thirdly, to many drooping Christians, which out of
melancholy, and unbelief, affect a kind of wilful sadness, and heartlesues,
hindering thereby their own assurance, and causing the easy yoke of Christ to
be ill thought of, besides many other inconveniences.

Thus of the second thing.

Be ye built up.]

It may be read either in the Imperative mood, or in the indicative. I think,
the imperative answers more to the scope here, it being the drift to show, what
we must do when we come to Christ.

The third thing then we must do, that we might extract virtue out of Christ
for holiness of life, is, we must be built up; which imports two things.
First, progression in faith: and secondly, repentance. We must not beging
only, (...) say the foundation, but we must still labor to be built up
further, we (...) be ^^ill edified in our most holy faith, Jude 20. verse.

Now, that this may be attainted unto, that we may be built up, the fimilitude
imports diverse things.

Means to build up a Christian.
First, preparation. A man, that will go about the work of godliness, (...)
think he goes about the building of a town, and therefore must cast up his
(...) for (...) charge of it, and get his stuff prepared before hand.

Prove. 24.17. Luke 14. 23.
Secondly, a constant relying upon Christ: if we build, we must build upon the
rock, and not on the sands, Mat. 7. and 16.

Thirdly, the warrant of (...) our actions out of the word of God. When Moses
was to build the tabernacle, he made it just according to the pattern in all
things about it, etc.

Fourthly, a respect of things necessary: w^e must not be entangled with (...)
and doubtful disputations. The building of a Christian must be a (...) palace.
He must build gold, silver, precious stones, be must keep his (...) choice and
necessary things, (...). 8.9. 1 Cor. 3.1 Timoth. 1.4.

Fifthly, Counsel and Direction. Men must endure the hewing, and squar^^^,
(...) 5.17, 18. To this end are Ministers given. Ephesians. 4. 12. The world (...),
A^^^ 20. 32. and so good conference may edi^ie, or (...), Ephesians. 4. 29.

Sixthly, (...) building must have her distractions cast out, ^ Cor. 7. 52.
David could not build (...) Temple, because of his wars, and his ^^rest on
every side.

Seventhly, Order and distinction. Men must not take together a great deal of
stuff, without order, confusedly: This is to build Babel, and not Sion.

Eighthly, Unity with the godly. The building must hold proportion with the
walls, as well as with the foundation, Psalm. 122. 3. 1 Cor. 8. ^. and 13. Romans
15.2. Ephesians. 4.12, 16.

Ninthly, Sobriety in the use of lawful things: All things are lawful, but
all things edify not, 1 Cor. 10.23.

Tenthly, Prayer: for except the Lord build the house, in vain do they labor
that build it, Psalm. 127.1.

Out of all this we may inform our selves concerning the causes of not
profiting in many. The reason why many Christians are not built up, or why they
increase not in godliness, is, that they are guilty of these; or some of these
things implied in these directions.

First, Causes why many are so little edified.
some profit not by reason of their irresolution about the taking up of their
cross in following Christ: They thrust into the profession of Religion, before
they have sitten down to c^st what this profession may cost them, and so in
the evil day fall away, Luke 14.28.

Secondly, some can never thrive, because they place their godliness only in
the frequencie of hearing the Word, and the outward observance of Gods
ordinances: These build in the sands, they lay no sure foundation, Math. 7. 26.

Thirdly, others fail through unbelief, and so either by neglecting the
assurance of Gods savor in Christ, or by misplacing their confidence, trusting
upon their own works, or Saints, or Angels, or the pardons, or penances
granted or enjoined them. These are not built upon the rock, Mat. 16.

Fourthly, others prosper not, because they come not to the light of the
Scriptures, to set whether their works be wrought in God, or no. Ioh. 13. 21.


Fifthly, others are distracted either with unnecessary disputations, Romans
14.1. or with excessive cares of life, Luke 21.34.

Sixthly, others are undone with selfe-conceitednesse, they are stubborn, and
will not be advised, or directed, or reproved.

Seventhly, disorder, or confusednesse in matters of Religion is the cause in
others: This is a wonderful common defect: men do not go to work distinctly
to see their works finished one after another.

Eighthly, others are kept back with personal discords, and jangling. Envy,
or malice, or contention, or misrule, ea^^ out the very heart of godliness.

Ninthly, others are let by intemperancie, in being drowned in the love of
pleasures: They build, they sow, they eat, and drink, and follow pastines,
neglecting the care of better things.

Lastly, neglect of prayer is an usual let and grievous impediment.

A spiritual house.]

This is the fourth thing required of Christians. They must be as a spiritual
house unto Christ: they must be that to Christ, that was signified by the
Tabernacle or the Temple. For, every Christian is the substance of that which
was signified by the Tabernacle.

Christ has a five-fold Tabernacle. For, first, in the Letter, Christ has a
five-fold Tabernacle.
the Tabernacle or Temple at Jerusalem, was the House of God and Christ.
Secondly, the whole world is but the Tent of Christ, who has spread out the
heavens like a curtain, etc. Thirdly, Esaias 40. 22.
the heaven of the Blessed is the Tabernacle of Christ, the place where God and
Christ dwell with the Saints, Revel. ^^. ^. and 13.6. Fourthly, the body of
Christ is a Tabernacle for the Godhead, Col. 2.9. And so it is, that the Word
is said to become flesh, and dwelt amongst us, viz. in his body, as in a
Tabernacle, John 1.14. And thus Christ calls his own body a Temple, John
2.21. Fifthly, the heart of man is the Tabernacle of Christ: and so both the
whole Catholic Church is his Tabernacle, Ephesians. 2.21. or the public assembly
of the Saints, Psalm. 15.1. or else the heart of every particular believer: and
so the power of Christ did rest upon Paul, as in a Tabernacle, 2. Cor. 12.9. so
are we said to be the Temple of God, 2 Cor. 6.17. I take it in the last sense
here.

Every particular believer is like the Tabernacle in diverse respects.

A godly man, like the Tabernacle in diverse respects.
First, in respect of the efficient causes: and so there are diverse
similitudes. For, as the Tabernacle did not build it self, but was the work
of cunning men: so is it with us: our hearts naturally are not Temples of
Christ, but are made so. Secondly, as God raised up skillful men for the
building of the Temple or Tabernacle; so does God raise up Ministers for the
erecting of the Frame of this spiritual House to Christ. Hence they are called
Builders, 1. Cor. 3. And thirdly, as there was difference of degrees, and
Bezaleel and Aholiab were specially inspired of God with skill above the rest:
so has Christ given some to be Apostles, Master Builders; and some Evangelists
and Pastors, and Teachers, for the building up of the Church, till he come
again.

Secondly, in respect of the adjuncts of the Tabernacle: and those were two.
First, moveablenesse: secondly, furniture.

For the first. The Tabernacle, though it were Gods House, had no constant or
certain resting place, till Solomon, at the building of the Temple, took it
into the most holy place; and was taken asunder, and easily dissolved; such are
we: though honored with the presence of Christ, yet our Tabernacle must be
dissolved, and we shall never be at rest, till we be settled in the most holy
place in heaven. 2 Cor. 5.1, 7.

For the second, which is the furniture of the Tabernacle, it must be
considered two ways: either on the inside, or on the outside. First, for the
inside: there were curtains of fine linen, and blue silk, and scarlet, etc.
and it, was furnished with admirable household stuff, as I may, so call it.
Within it was the Mercy-feat, the Table of shewbread, the Manna, the Altar of
incense, and for burnt offerings, the Candlestick, and such like. Secondly,
without, it was all covered with Ramms-skins died red, and Badgers skins upon
them: and what dothall this signify in general, but that the Godly, though
they be outwardly black and tanned with sin and affliction, yet they are
glorious within, and have curtains like the curtains of Solomon; all richly
hanged, as the chambers of Princes, with spiritual tapestry? Cavt. 1.5. And in
particular, for the inside of Christians, how glorious is the place of Christ's
Tabernacle in them: There is the Propitiate, Gods true feat of mercy: whence
also he utters his Oracles, even his divine answers. There is the heavenly
Manna that is hid, Revel. 2. There does Christ spiritually feast it: there he
dines and sups on the table of their hearts: and upon that table stands the
shewbread, inasmuch as the heart of a Christian does preserve a standing
manner of affection to the Saints. There are also both sorts of Al^^^
accordingly; as, faith offers up to God either the redemption or the
intercession of Christ. There also is the great Laver to wash-in, called the
S^^, because in the heart of every Christian, is opened the fountain of grace;
able, like the Sea, to wash them from all their filthiness. There are the
golden Candlesticks, with the lamps of saving knowledge continually (...) in
them and upon the Altar of Christ crucified, and now making intercession, do
they daily sacrifice their own affections; which resemble those sweet odo^^
with which the Tabernacle was perfumed.

The outward coverings of the Tabernacle do assure safety and preservation to
the Godly; and the rather, because the cloud rested upon them, as is affirmed,
Esaias 4.5, 6. Besides, the double covering of slain beasts may signify, that
God has two ways to provide for the Church. The red skins of Ramms may note
Christ crucified, which is that which on the inside of the Tabernacle was
only sewed. The covering of Badgers skins may note, that God will serve
himself of the wicked: their skins shall protect the Church. If Israel want
room, Canaan must die for it.

Now thirdly, the Tabernacle was a type of every believer, if we respect the
end of it. For, the Tabernacle was erected of purpose, as the place of the
presence of God, God's visible House: such are the hearts of Christians: they
are prepared of purpose for the entertainment of Jesus Christ, that by his
Spirit he may live and dwell therein, Galath. 2.20. Col. 1.27. 2 Corin. 12.9. 2
Cor. 13.5.

Use. The use of all may be both for instruction, and consolation.

For instruction; and so it should teach us diverse things.

First, to abhor fornication, seeing our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 21.

Secondly, to keep our selves for being unequally yoked: Because there can be
no communion between light and darkness, the Temple of God, and Idols.

Thirdly, to look to our hearts in respect of inward sins, and to keep the
room clean for the Lord to dwell in, 2 Cor. 7.1.

Fourthly, to stir up our selves to much prayer: if our hearts be the house of
God, let them be a house of prayer also.

Fifthly, let us still lift up our hearts, as everlasting doors for the Lord
of Glory to come in, Psalm. 24.7.

For consolation. Shall we not say as Paul does, We will rejoice in our
infirmities, that the power of Christ may dwell in us? How should we hold up
our head against all tentations and afflictions? Is not the grace of Christ
sufficient for us, 2 Cor. 12.9? And shall we not be confident, that through
Christ we can do all things? Will he forsake the house, upon which his Name is
called? Will he not perfect his own work, and repair his own dwelling
place? Was the Tabernacle safe in the wilderness, while the cloud was upon it?
and are not our hearts safe, while Christ is in them? How are the abject
Gentiles honored, Col. 1.27. whose hearts are so enriched by Christ, that dwells
in them! If the outward Sanctuary were like high Palaces, Psalm. 78.69. what is
the heart of man, the true Tabernacle? and if he established it as the earth,
how much more has he established us in his favor and grace? so that it may
comfort us in respect of honor done to our hearts, and against tentations and
afflictions; and in respect of hope of perseverance, and also in respect of
increase of power and well-doing. He will work our works for us. And it shows
us also the honor cast upon our good works: they have a noble beginning in
respect of Christ, and as they come from him. Howsoever, we ought to be abased
for our own corruptions, that cleave unto them: Yea, how should it wonderfully
establish our hearts in all estates, to think, that Christ is with us
wheresoever we go, not only as our witness, but as our guide and our
protector. If God be with us, who can be against us? As also it is comfortable,
if we consider the comparisons imported in the furniture of the outward
Tabernacle.

And thus much of the fourth thing.

The fifth thing is, We must be a holy Priest-heed unto Christ: which is
amplified both by the labor of it. To offer sacrifice, and by the honor of
it, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.

Here are many things to be noted.

The first is, that Christians are Priests before God, and Jesus Christ: This
is acknowledged in other Scriptures, Revel. 1.5. Exodus 19.6. The meaning is,
that they are like to the Leviticall Priests, and that in many things.

Godly men are Priests in many respects.
First, in respect of separation: they are Gods portion given him out of all
the people: so are the godly all the portion God has in the world. They are
said to be the ransom of the children of Israel, Numbers 8.9.

Secondly, in respect of consecration. The oil of God is upon the godly: and
as it was powered out upon Aaron and his Sons: The oil of grace and gladness
powered out upon Christ, our true Aaron, has run down upon his garments, so
as all his members are Christians, that is, anointed with him, Psalm. 133. 2
Cor. 1.22. 1 Ioh. 2. The holy Ghost is called the anointing in this respect.

Thirdly, in respect of the substance of the ceremonies in their consecration:
for,

First, as it was required in the Law, that the Priests should be without
blemish, Levit. 21.17. so is it required of Christians, Col. 1.22.

Secondly, as the Priests were washed in the great laver of water, Exodus 29.4.
Levit. 8.5, 6. so must Christians be washed in the laver of Regeneration. Ephesians.
5.23. Titus 3.5.

Thirdly, as the Priests had their holy garments, beautiful, and goodly ones,
which they called their Ephods: so does the Queen the Church stand at Christ's
right hand in a Vesture of Ophir, Psalm. 45. Thus Iosuah has change of
garments mystically given him, Zach. 3.4. Those garments are promised to such
as have had a spirit of heaviness, Isaiah 61.3. called garments of salvation,
verse 10. and royal garments, and like the new wedding garments of the Bride,
Isaiah 62.5, 7. Those garments signified either the singular glory, and joy of
Christians, Esaiah 61.3. or the righteousness of Christ imputed, Revel. 19. or
the excellent divine gifts and graces bestowed upon them.

Exodus 29.21.
Fourthly, The Priest must have blood sprinkled upon his ear, and upon his
thumb, and upon his toe, to signify, that our hearing, practice, and
progress, must be all sanctified to us by Christ, and that the maine thing
Christians should express and attend to, should be Christ crucified, and that
Christ by his blood has consecrated them in all these respects, so as their
hearing, and practice, and progress, shall all be blessed unto them.

And thus of the ceremonies of their consecration.

Fourthly, We should be like the Leviticall Priests for knowledge: the Priests
lips should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth,
Malac. 2. And it is true of Christians, that they are a people, in whose heart
is Gods law, Esaias 57.7. Hebr. 8. Ierem. 31.

Fifthly, We should be like the Priests in respect of the work they did. For,

First, It was the Priests office to carry about the Ark of the Lord, when it
was removed, upon their shoulders. What is the Arc to be carried, but the
doctrine of Christ and the Church? Christians must carry about the Word of God,
and hold it forth, in the light, and life of it, as lights that shine in the
dark places of the wilderness of this world, Philip. 2.15.

Secondly, It was their office to blow in the silver trumpets, and that upon
four occasions, as you may see, Number. 10. First, The one was to assemble the
congregation, or the Princes to the tabernacle. Secondly, The other was to give
an ala^^n, when there was any remove of the camp. Thirdly, The third was in
the time of War, when they mustred to battle. Fourthly, The fourth was for
joys sake at the time of solemn feasts, and for thanksgiving to God: and in
all these we should be like the Priests: We should be as trumpets to call one
upon another to go up to the house of the Lord, Esaias 1.2. Secondly, We should
every where proclaim mortality, and signify that the whole host must remove:
we must cry, All flesh is grass, 1 Pet. 1.23. Thirdly, We should also blow
the trumpet of defense, and arm our selves in the spiritual warfare, and call
upon God to save us from our enemies, and stir up one another provoking to
love, and good works, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2. 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. We should
cry alowd like a trumpet, in reproving the transgressions of men, and opposing
the sins of the time, Esaias 58. 1. Ephesians. 5. Lastly, We should trumpet out the
praises of God for all the goodness he has showed unto us, we should blow as
in the new Moon, Psalm. 81.3. But then in all this we must remember, that we
blow with a silver trumpet, that is, with all discretion and sincerity, etc.

Thirdly, A special work of the Priests was to bless the people, and to put
the name of God upon them. The former whereof is prescribed. Numb. 6.22, 23,
24. and so should we all learn the language of Canaan, or the language of
blessing: we must bless and not curse, for we are thereunto called. 1 Pet. 3.9.

Lastly, Their principal work was, to offer sacrifices: of which in the next
words.

The Uses follow. Uses.


First, For reproof: For there are many faults in Christians, whereby they
transgress against their spiritual Priesthood: as,

1. When men are yoaked with unnecessary society with the wicked: for hereby
they forget their separation to God, etc. 2. When men neglect the finishing of
their repentance and assurance, they look not to their anointing. 3. When men
are scandalous of their indiscretions, and faults: they forget, that such as
have any blemish, must not offer the bread of their God, and forget their
washing from their old sins, 2 Pet. 1.7. 4. When men are barren of good
works, or are uncheerfull and dull: they leave off the Priests garments of
innocence and gladness. 5. When the lives and behaviors of men savor of
vanity and worldliness: they remember not the blood of sprinkling. 6. When men
are ignorant and idle, seek not knowledge, or do not teach, and instruct, and
admonish; How do the Priests lips preserve knowledge? or how do they bear
about the Ark of the Lord? 7. When Christians are fearful, and irresolute,
and cold, and not frequent in the praises of God, how do they blow in the
silver trumpet? 8. When Christians are bitter-hearted, and accustomed to
evill-speaking, how do they forget their duty of blessing!
To omit the neglect of sanctifying, till I come to handle it in the next place.

Use. 2. Secondly, For consolation to all godly, and mortified, and inoffensive
Christians: they should be wonderful thankful to God, that has made them
partners of this holy Calling, howsoever the world conceives of it. God
promises it as a great mercy to his children, that they shall be called the
Priests of the Lord, Esaias 61.6. and the Church is thankful for it to God,
Revel. 2.6. and 5.10. And the rather should we rejoice in it, because God has
promised to take us to himself, as his portion and peculiar treasure, Exodus
19. 6. And it is his promise also to satiate the souls of his Priests with
fatness, Ierem. 31.14. And what a privilege is it to have access unto the
Lord, and to stand before God daily? which the Priests not only might, but
were tied to it by their office. But then, for conclusion of this point, let us
all be sure we have our part in the first resurrection, Revel. 20.6. and be
careful to be like the Priests for obedience and sanctity, Exodus 19.5.6. and
to get knowledge plentifully into our hearts, Col. 3.16. and in the cause of
God to blow the trumpets of zeal and resolution, carrying our selves with all
humility and readiness to do good, and so becoming instruments of blessing
to the people. And, which I had almost forgotten, we must remember to be like
the Priests for teaching, and confuting, and reproving, and informing our
Familiars and friends, as we have fitness and occasion.

Thus of the Priesthood of Christians in general. In particular, hence is
further to be considered; first, their work; secondly, their honor. Their
work is, To offer up spiritual sacrifices: their honor is, Acceptance and
high account with God through Jesus Christ.

First, then, of the work of Christian Priests, which is, To offer: secondly,
what they must offer, viz. sacrifices: thirdly, the difference of those
sacrifices from those in the Law of Moses: they are spiritual; which word
notes both the substance of Christian sacrifices, viz. that they are such
sacrifices as were not according to the letter, but according to the mystical
significations of the sacrifices of Moses Law; and withal, the manner how they
must be offered up, viz. spiritually, or after a spiritual manner.

The maine thing here intended, then, is, To avouch, that Christians have their
sacrifices which they must offer, and that in a spiritual manner. Now, for the
clearer opening of this doctrine, two things must be distinctly considered of.
First, what sacrifices can remain to Christians, since the Law of Moses is
abrogated: and secondly, what things are requisite to the offering up of these
sacrifices.

Diverse sorts of sacrifices for Christians.
For the first. There are diverse sorts of sacrifices among Christians. Some are
proper to some Christians only: some are general to all.

The sacrifices that are proper to some Christians, are such as three sorts of
men must offer. First, Ministers: secondly, Martyrs: thirdly, rich men.

First* Ministers have their sacrifices, which they must with all care offer to
God: and their sacrifice is the souls of the hearers. Thus Paul was to offer
up the Gentiles to God, Romans 15.16. And thus it was prophesied, that, in the
time of the Christian Church, the Elect should be brought in as an offering to
God out of all Nations, Esaias 66.20. Ministers sacrifice their people either in
this life, or at the day of judgment. In this life in general, when they
persuade them to their attendance upon the House of God, and breed in them a
care to come before the Lord in ^erusalem, Esaias 66.20. In particular, when they
work repentance and true conversion in their hearts, and when they make them
go home, and mortify their sins, and tender their vowed service to God.

And thus two things are employed for our information. The one concerns
Ministers: the other concerns the hearers. First, Ministers may hence take
notice of it, that there can never be hope they should persuade with all their
hearers: for, sacrifices were here and there once taken out of the whole Herd.
And besides, the hearers may hence see, that they are never so effectually
wrought upon, till they can give themselves over to their Teachers and to God,
to obey in all things, though they persuade them to leave the world, and bind
them to the cords of restraint in many liberties they took to themselves
before* yea, though they let their hearts blood, by piercing their souls with
sorrow for their sins, even to the death of their sins, 2 Cor. 8.5. and
7.15. Secondly, At the day of judgment also, Ministers shall offer up their
hearers to God, so many of them as are found chaste virgins unto Christ, to
whom they had espoused them before in this life, 2 Cor. 11.3. And thus
Ministers, before they dye, must make ready their accounts for the souls of
their people. Heb. 13.7.

And thus of the sacrifices of Ministers.

Ministers have another sacrifice too, viz. the particular texts or portions of
Scripture, which they choose out and divide to the people, as consecrated for
their use. For, diverse think, that that phrase of cutting the Word of God
aright, is borrowed from the Priests manner of dividing the sacrifices; and
especially, from the Priests manner of cutting the little birds. The little
birds is his text chosen out of the rest, and separated for a sacrifice: which
he must so divide, as that the wings be not cut asunder from the body, that is,
he must so divide his text, that no part be separate from a meet respect of the
whole, Levi^. 1.17. and 5.8. 2 Timothy 1.15.

Secondly, The Martyrs likewise have their sacrifices; and that is, a
drinkoffering to the Lord, even their own blood: this part is ready to be
powered out as a drink offering to the Lord for the Church, Phil. 2.17. 2 Timothy
4.6. and though we cannot be all Martyrs, yet we should all deny our own
lives in the vows of our hearts, to perform our covenant with God, if ever we
be called to die for Christ's sake and the Gospel. Mark. 8.34.35.


Thirdly, The sacrifice of rich men is alms, and well-doing, and those
sacrifices they are bound unto, to offer them continually, Heb. 13.16. Phil.
4.18. Pro. 3.9. Alms is as it were the first fruits of all our increase. But
then we must remember that our alms be of goods well gotten: For else God
hates robbery for burnt offering, Isaiah 61.8. And in giving, we must deny
our selves, and not seek our own praises, or plenary merit in it: for it is a
sacrifice clean given ^way from us, and consecrated only to God, and the use
of his spiritual house the Church.

And thus of the sacrifice proper to some Christians.

There are other sacrifices in the Gospel now, that are common to all
Christians. And these are diverse.

For first, Christ is to be offered up daily to God, as the propitiation for
our sins: God has set him forth of purpose in the Gospel, that so many as
believe, may daily run unto him, and in their prayers offer him up to God, as
the reconciliation for all their sins: 1 Ioh. 2.2.
and this is the continual sacrifice of all Christians: Without this, Romans
3.25.
there is the abomination of desolation in the temple of our hearts: This is
the end of all the ceremonious sacrifices; the substance of those shadows.

Those sacrifices served but as rudiments to instruct men, how to lay hold upon
Christ, and to carry him into the presence of God, and laying hands upon his
head to plead their interest in his death; who was offered up, as a whole burnt
sacrifice for their sins. We are Christ's, and Christ is given unto us as our
ransom: we must every day then lay hold upon him, and see him bleed to death
for our sins, and be consumed in the fire of Gods wrath for our sins.

Secondly, A broken and contrite heart is a sacrifice God will not despise, yea
such hearts are the sacrifices God especially calls for from men: He ever loved
them better, then all the outward sacrifices in the Law, Psalm. 51.17. It is the
heart God calls for: and yet not every heart, Prove. 23.26.
but a heart wounded with the knife of mortification, that is, cut, and
bleedeth in it self with godly sorrow for sin, and is broken and contrite
with the daily confession of sin: This is required of all Christians, and this
very thing makes a great deal of difference between Christian and Christian.

Thirdly, Prayer and thanksgiving to God, are Christian and holy Sacrifices, as
many Scriptures show, Psalm. 141.2. Heb. 13.15. Hos. 14.4. Psalm. 51.21.

Fourthly, We must offer our selves, our souls and bodies as a living
sacrifice to God, Romans 12.2. 2 Cor. 8.5. and that,

First, in respect of obedience, devoting our selves unto God, living to him,
and wholly resolved to be at his appointment, Psalm. 40.6. Lo, I come to do
thy will: this is instead of all burnt offerings.

Secondly, in respect of willingness to suffer affliction of what kind soever,
as resolving, that through many afflictions, as through so many flames, we
must ascend up to heaven, as the smoke of the incense, or sacrifice on the
Altar, Acts 14.21. Hence are trials called fiery trials, 1 Pet. 4.12.

Special la^es to be observed in offering up our sacrifices.
Thus of the kinds of sacrifices, which remain unto Christians: The laws about
those sacrifices follow: For there be many things to be observed by
Christians in their sacrifices if they would ever have them acceptable to God,
which the shadows in the old law did evidently signify, as,

First, the sacrifice must be without blemish, Malach. 1.7. which the same
Prophet expounds, Mala^h. 3.11. Our offerings must be pure offerings, we must
tender them in the sincerity of our hearts: Our sacrifices are without fault,
when we judge our selves for the faultiness of them, and desire they might
have no fault.

Secondly, it must be presented before the Lord, and consecrated to him: which
signified, that we must walk in Gods presence, and do all in the sight of God,
devoting all to his glory, Genesis 17.1. Mic. 6.8.

Thirdly, our sacrifices must be daily, some kinds of them: There were
Sacrifices every day in the Temple, and it was an extreme desol^tion, when the
sacrifices ceased: so it must be our every days work to employ ourselves in
some of those spiritual sacrifices, Heb. 13.15.

Fourthly, There must be an Altar to consecrate the gifts, Matthew. 23.19. This
Altar is Christ, who is the only Altar of Christians, Heb. 13.1^. Rev. 8.3. No
service can be acceptable, to God, but as the Apostle here faith, by Jesus
Christ: We must do all in the name of Christ, Col. 3.17.

Fifthly, there must be fire to burn the sacrifice: This fire is holy zeal,
and the power and fervencie of the spirit in doing good duties: The fire on the
Altar, first came down from heaven, to signify, that true zeal is kindled in
heaven, and comes down from above: It is no ordinary humor nor a rash fury:
It is no wild fire: And it was required about this fire, that they should
preserve it, and never let it go out, but put fuel still to it; and so it was
kept for many years: so must we do with our zeal, we must labor by all
means to preserve the fervencie of our hearts, that we never want fire to
burn our sacrifices: Our zeal should be, as the love mentioned, C^^t. 7.10.
that much water could not quench it: Every sacrifice must have fire, Mark 9.

Sixthly, the sacrifices must be salted with salt: so must our Christian
sacrifices, as our Savior Christ shows, Mark 9.49, 50. And thus we must have
the salt of mortification, and the salt of discretion, and we must look to it,
that our salt lose no his faltnes, but that it have a draining power in it, to
extract corruption out of our sacrifices: our words to God and men must be
powdered with salt. Col. 4.6. and so must all our actions.

Seventhly, the Sacrifices must be without leaven, Levit. 2.1^. Leaven in
wickedness, or malice, or sowrenes, or deadnes of heart, or worldly grief: even
whatsoever leaveneth, that is, infecteth or makes the meat offering to be
heavy, or sow^e, 1 Cor. 5.8.

Eighthly, in the same place of Leviticus 2.12. Honey likewise is forbidden to
be mingled with their sacrifices: and by bony may be meant, our beloved sins,
or particular corruptions: we should especially watch against them in the time
of (...) of holy duties, that they mi^gle not themselves with our sacrifices,
by infecting our ^^gitations.

Ninthly, the offering must be waved, and shaken to and fro before the Lord,
Levit. 7.3. And this signified the waving of our lips in prayer to God for his
acceptance: our sacrifices should be soundly tossed to and fro in prayer
before the Lord: Job prayed before he sacrificed, Job 42.

Tenthly, on the Sabbath the sacrifices were to be doubled, to signify, that in
a special manner we should consecrate our selves to piety and mercy on the
Sabbath day.

Eleventhly, our sacrifices must be offered upwith all gladness of heart, and
spiritual delight. Thus Gods people were said to be a free-hearted, and
willing people, Psalm. 47.9. and 110.3. And this was shadowed out, partly by the
oil^ that was poured into the meat offerings, which is expounded to be the oil
of gladness, and partly by the feast they made at the end of their solemn
sacrifices, unto which they invited their friends, to join with them in
rejoicing before the Lord: and it is likely David alludes to this feast, when
he faith, he would take the cup of salvation, and praise the name of the
Lord: For as yet the Lords Supper was not instituted, nor do we read of any use
of a cup in the sacrifices, or Sacraments themselves, Ex. 18.12. 1 Chronicles. 16.1,
2, 3, 4. Psalm. 116.13.

Twelfthly, if we be called to it, we must not deny unto God th^fat of the
kidneis, and the inwards. By the fat was meant the things which are dearest to
us, most beloved, and that most delight us: and if the service of God, and the
Church, and the poor require it, we must deny our selves, and sacrifice what
is most dear to us.

Thirteenthly, the Apostle to the Hebrews, Chap. 13.13. adds, that we must
not leave off well-doing for reproach sake, but be contented to be like Christ,
who suffered without the gate, as scorned of men, and like the sacrifice was
burnt without the camp. Though all men hate us, and speak evil of us, and
cast us out of their companies, yet we must persist in our intention to
sacrifice still to God.

Fourteenthly, in the Sacrifices God had a great respect of mercy, that cruelty
were not showed, as Levit. 22.27. When he enjoined, that the creature must be
seven days under the damme, and that no damme with the young one was to be
slain the same day: Certainly, God abhors, that cruelty should be
exercised under pretense of piety. Cursed be those long prayers, that will
devour widows houses, Matthew. 23.

In one thing we differ from the sacrifices: For the sacrifices were dead, or
consisted of things without life; but we must be living sacrifices; we must do
what we will do while we are alive, and must do it lively, with the affections
that belong to the duties to be done.

Use. The use may be briefly twofold: for partly it should humble us for our
neglect of prayers and thanksgiving, and alms and contrition: We omit the
maine duties of our general calling, when we omit these: It was the abomination
of desolation, when the temple was without sacrifices: and how can it but be
exceeding uncomely with Gods spiritual house that has not sacrifices in it?
We are Christians but in name, when piety and mercy is neglected. But
especially we should be instructed from hence to mind our work, and to strive
to answer our high calling, by a continual care day and night to exercise our
selves herein: the smoke of our incense should daily ascend unto God. The
Apostle Pa^l beseeches the Romans by the mercies of God, to look to their
sanctifying, Romans 12.1. Which shows; it is of wonderful necessity, and would
make us in some measure walk worthy of the Lord. And to the^Hebrewes he bids
them take heed of forgetting these sacrifices, importing that usually our
deficiency in these services, are from forgetfulness: we forget to pray, and
forget to show mercy, even after we have purposed both.

And thus much of the work of a Christian.

Now his honor follows.

Acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.]

Wherein three things may be noted.

First, That howsoever piety, and mercy, and well-doing, find little
acceptance in the world, yet it shall never want honor and great esteem with
God. Pions and merciful Christians shall never fail of the love and favor of
God: Their works are accepted. It is true, that God may change his mind
concerning the Ceremonial Sacrifices: but the acceptance of Christian
Sacrifices is a thing established with God, Heb. 10.9. These offerings shall be
pleasant unto the Lord, Malach. 3.4. They are well-pleasing in his sight, Heb.
13.16. They are a sweet savor unto the Lord, Phil. 4.18. God has a book of
remembrance, Mal. 3.17. And our fruit shall certainly remain, Ioh. 15.16. And
thus Cornelius his prayers and alms came up before the Lord, Acts 10.

Secondly, That it is not enough to do good duties but we must strive so to
do them, that God may accept them, Heb. 12.28. Esaias 1.11, 12.13.14.

Thirdly, That now our best works are made acceptable to God only by Jesus
Christ, Revel. 8.3, 4. It is from the presenting of Christ, that we are found
holy and without blame in Gods sight, Col. 1.22. Therefore we must do all in
the name of the Lord Jesus, Col. 3.17.

Vs^. The use of all should be to teach us, with all care to devote our selves
unto godliness, that thereby we may prove, what this good and acceptable will
of God is. Let us try Gods acceptance; and we shall certainly find, it shall
go well with the just, Romans 12.1, 2. Yea, we should from hence gather much
encouragement to employ our selves in piety and mercy. It is enough if God
accept of us.

Quest. But what should we do, that we may be sure our sacrifices be
accepted of God? How shall we know, when God does accept our service in any
holy duty?

Ans. That a man's conscience may be soundly established in this point of God's
acceptance, we must look to three things.

What we must do, to get our works acceptable to God.
First, that the person be sanctified. None but Priests must approach to offer
sacrifice to God. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Romans 8.8. The
sons of Levi must be purified and refined, as the silver is refined, before
their offering will be pleasing, Mal. 3.3, 4. When the Lord rejected, with so
much disdain, the sacrifices of the Jews, he shows what they should have
done to please him: they should have washed themselves by true repentance, and
put away the evil of their works, Esaias 1.11, 16. Only the works of the
penitent cannot be accepted: if the person be not in favor, the works are
hated. For, they are sanctified by the holy Ghost, Romans 15.16.

Secondly, That the manner of performing our service be right: there are diverse
things in the manner are hateful; and diverse things pleasing. The things
specially hateful, are; first, beloved sins: secondly, hypocrisy: thirdly,
malice: and fourthly, luke-warmnesse. The sacrifice is loathsome, if it be
blind, or lame, or blemished: that is, if men bring to Gods service the love
of any soul sin, the service is loathsome, Malach. 1. So, if men's hearts be
carried away with continual distractions, that service is lost: this is, To
come near to God with our lips, when our hearts are far from him. Hypocrisy
is leaven, as beloved sin is bony; both forbidden. Again, when a man comes
to God's works, and has not forgiven his brother, he keeps the Feast with
some leaven: his Passover is defiled; nor can his own sins be forgiven,
b^c^use he forgives not, Math. 6. 1 Cor. 5.8. Finally, luke-warmnesse is like a
vomit to God, when we are neither hot nor cold. They are lothed like the
Laodiceans, Revel. 3.

There are other things wonderful pleasing to God^ as,

First, When a man does whatsoever he does, in the Name of Christ: this is the
Altar that sanctifies the gift, and the sacrifices are here acceptable through
Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.15. Col. 3.17.

Secondly, When our works are soundly powdered with salt, that is, when we
soundly confess our own unworthiness, and give all glory to God in Jesus
Christ.

Thirdly, When we love mercy and piety, accounting it our delight to do God*s
will, and thinking our selves gr^atly honored, to be admitted to do this
service, Mich. 6.8. 2 Cor. 8.5.

Fourthly, When we can bring faith, that is, a heart well persuaded of God, so
as we can believe all good of him and his mercy. Without faith no man can
please God, Heb. 11.6. and God takes no delight in him that withdraws
himself through unbelief, Heb. 10.36, 37.

Fifthly, When it is our every-dayes work. Sacrifice will please God, if it be
continual, Heb. 13.15.

Thus of the second thing.

Thirdly, We may know, that our sacrifice is accepted, if the Lord burn it to
ashes with fire from heaven. Thus God did put a difference between the
sacrifice of Cain and Abel, by some visible sign: and though we may not limit
God, and expect he should answer us by visible signs, yet God has not left
us without testimony of his favor. For, by his word of promise, and by his
Spirit bearing witness to our spirits, has he manifested even from heaven
his acceptance: and in particular, when the believer stands before the Lord
with his sacrifice duly offered; when the Lord does suddenly fill his heart
with the cloud of his presence; or warm his soul with the joys of the holy
Ghost; what is this but the sign of his acceptance?

Quest. What if we be accepted in our service of God? what great thing is that
to us?

Answ. When God accepts thine offerings, thou may be assured of three things.

First, Tha^ all thy sins be forgiven thee. God has purged away thine
iniquity: he has received an atonement in Jesus Christ, Psalm 65.2, 3.

Secondly, God is exceedingly delighted in them. Thy sacrifice is a sweet smell
unto God: he rejoices over thee with joy, Phil. 4.18.

Thirdly, It is a pledge unto thee, that God will supply all thy necessities
out of the riches of his glory, in Jesus Christ our Savior. Phil. 4.19.

Verse 6. Wherefore also it is contained in the Scripture, Behold, I put in
Sion a chief cornerstone, elect and precious: and he that bele^veth therein,
shall not be ashamed.


HItherto of the proposition of the exhortation. The conformation follows:
where the Apostle gives reasons why we should make our recourse to Christ, to
seek holiness of life from him; and the reasons are two. The first is taken
from the testimony of God, verses 6, 7, 8. The other is taken from the
consideration of the excellent privileges of Christians, unto which they are
brought by Christ, verses 9, 10. The testimony of God is both cited, verse 6.
and expounded, verses 7.8. In the testimony of God, observe; first, where it is
to be found, viz. In Scripture: secondly, how it is there, It is contained
there: thirdly, what is testified. Now, the matter testified concerns either
the giving of Christ for the good of the Church; or the safety of the Christian
that by faith receives Christ.

The giving of Christ is expressed in these words, Behold, I lay in Sion a chief
corner sto^e, elect, precious: the safety and happiness of the Christian that
receives Christ, in these words; And be that believes in him, shall not be
confounded.

First, of the place where this testimony is found, viz. In the Scripture.

What is meant by Scripture, and why it isso called.
By the Scripture, is usually meant all the Books of the old and new Testament,
written after an extraordinary manner by inspiration of the holy ghost. But
here he means it of the Books of the old Testament; but yet so, as the word
does agree to all the Books of both Testaments. Now, this very word gives us
occasion to consider of the nature of these Books, and of their use, and of
their excellency, and of their harmony.

These Books are called Scripture, because they contain in writing, the whole
will of God, necessary to be known of us: they are the Treasures of all truth.
The doctrine, which was before delivered by tradition for 2000. years, was
afterward written down and explained in these Books: so as nothing needful
was left out or omitted.

Secondly, this word imports the excellency of the Bible above all other
books, because it is called Scripture: as if no other writings were worthy to
be mentioned in comparison of these. The Scripture exceeds all others in diverse
respects.

Wherein the Scriptures exceed all other writings.
First, because these vvritings were inspired all of the holy ghost, 2 Timothy
3.17. 2 P^t. 1.21. so were no other vvritings.

Secondly, those vvritings contain a vvisdome far above all that, that can be
had by the Princes and men of this world, the platform of the wisdom that is
in God himself, 1 Cor. 6.7.

Thirdly, they were penned by more excellent men then any other vvritings: the
greatest, vvisest, holiest men; Moses, David, Solomon, the Prophets,
Evangelists, Apostles, etc.

Fourthly, they have such properties, as no other vvritings have: they are more
perfect, pure, deep, and immutable then any man's vvritings: These contain all
things necessary unto faith, and a good life, 2 Timothy 3.17, 18. These vvritings
only are pure, without fault, or error, or any corruption in them, and for
depth and majesty never any vvritings came near them, and for unchangeab^nes,
Heaven and earth must pass away, but a jot of Gods word shall not pass away,
Matthew. 5.24. 1 Pet. 1.23.

Fifthly, if we consider the effects, that must be acknowledged to the praise of
the Scriptures, which can be true of no writings besides, no writings can
describe God so fully to us: no writings do so bring glory to God, no Scripture
but this can convert a soul to God, Heb. 4.12, 13. Other writings may show us
some faults to be avoided, but give no power to subdue them, Psalm. 19.8. These
writings only can minister solid comfort to us in adversity, and these only
can make us wise to salvation, and perfect to every good word and work. The
consideration whereof should work in us a singular love to this book above all
other books in the world, yea above all the treasures in the world, we should
account them with David more sweet then honey, and more precious then gold,
Psalm. 19.11. Psalm. 119.14, 15, 27.

Thirdly, the third thing may be noted from hence, is the harmony of all these
books, they all agree, as if they were but one writing, yea but one sentence,
yea one word: though the books were written by diverse men, yet they agree so
perfectly, that they all sound one thing: for they were all inspired by the
same Spirit of God: which should teach us, when we meet with doubts, or
objections, or scorning contradictions, to condemn our own ignorance, and to
be fully resolved, that there is a sweet harmouy, though we do not see it. And
secondly and especially it should knit our hearts to the Scriptures, we should
be affected as with the most delightful music of the world, or in the world.

Fourthly, The fourth thing concerns the use of Scripture, and so we may note
two things. First, That we must receive no opinions but what can be proved by
Scripture, To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to
these, it is because there is no truth in them, Isaiah 8. Secondly, we may note
hence, that the best men must prove what they teach, by Scripture. If the
Apostles did it, who were men privileged from error, then much more must other
men: we must believe no man, above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6. and he is
accursed, that teaches other things then what is written, Gal. 1.7. though he
were an Angel from heaven. Which should teach us to get proofs into our heads
for all that we believe, and to take heed of receiving traditions even from
good men. For there be traditions on the right hand, as well as on the left,
Ioh 5.30. Acts 17.1. These. 5.21.

Secondly, Thus of the place, where this testimony is: The manner how it is
there, is in the word Contained: It is contained in Scripture.

Contained.] (...)

There is much ado about the word here rendered, Contained, among Interpreters:
The word sounds actively in the Original, as if it were rendered, does
contain; or he contains. But the Translators, and many Interpreters think,
the active is put for the passive: He contains, for, It is contained.

If we read it actively, then the Name of God must be supplied thus: He, that
is, God, contained it ^n Scripture: noting, that as a singular treasure, God
has placed this Testimony in Scripture, concerning Christ, and faith in him:
and sure it is a great treasure, that we may have places in the sure Word of
God, that so plainly testify of Christ, and our happiness in him: we should
take great notice of them, and be much thankful to God for giving us such
sentences so briefly, and yet so plainly and fully to inform us.

Some supply the name of Christ, and so they say, Christ contains, that Is,
excels, as the word may signify: He is had fully and excellently in
Scripture, and in particular in this testimony of Scripture.

The word rendered ( Contained) signifies sometimes barely to be had; sometimes
to be possessed, as Luke 5.9. They were possessed with fear. And so we
possess a great treasure in Scripture, when we have such Testimonies as these.

There is a Nowne derived of this Verb, which is thought by the exactest
Divines, to mean a special Section, or portion; and when it is applied to a
place in Scripture, it signifies such a Scripture as is divided from the rest,
as a principal matter either to be meditated of, or expounded. Such was that
special portion of Scripture, which the Ennuch had to meditate of, and Philip
expounded to him, Acts 8.32. where the word is used. And so whether the word be
used actively or passively, it commends unto us this place of Scripture, and
withal shows us a way, how to enrich our selves, namely by singling out such
choice places throughout the Scripture, as may most fittingly furnish our
thoughts for meditation in the maine matters of Religion.

We may here note, what cause we have of thankfulness to God, for the helps we
have in teaching, seeing we have the Chapter and verse quoted to us, which they
had not in the Primitive Church; and withal we may observe, that one may have
the profit of the Scriptures, though he cannot quote Chapter and verse.

And thus of the second thing concerning this testimony.

Thirdly, the third follows, which is the matter testified, which concerns
either the giving of Christ, or the safety of the Christian in believing in him.

In the words that describe the giving of Christ, observe: First, The wonder of
it in the word ( Behold:) Secondly, The Author of it, God, I lay or put:
Thirdly, The manner of it, He laid him down, as the stone of a foundation in a
building: Fourthly, The place where: In Sion: noting, that this gift of Christ
belongs only to the Church: Fifthly, What Christ was unto the Church, viz. a
chief corner stone, elect, and precious.

Behold.]

This word is used in Scripture, sometimes to note a thing that is usually
known, or ought to be known: so David says, Behold, I was conceived in
sin, Psalm. 51. Sometimes to note, that some great wonder is spoken of, and
must be much attended. In this place it may note both: For it is certain, that
the testimonies of Scriptures concerning Christ, ought to be familiarly known
of us, and this, as an especial one: But I rather think, it is used to note
the wonder of the work here mentioned, and so the word may import diverse
things unto us.

First, It was a mervailous work, that God should give us his own Son to be
our Savior, and the fountain of life to us. Hence it is, that we may observe
throughout the Scripture, that God does set this note of attention and respect,
both upon the general, and upon many particulars that concern Christ, as it
were by the Word to pull us by the ears to make us attend, or to give us a
sign when we should specially listen. Thus God brings out Christ to the
Church, and tells, how he loves him, and has resolved upon it by him to save
both Jews and Gentiles, and wills them to behold him, and wonder at him,
Isaiah 42.1. So when he promises the coming of Christ, Malach. 3.1.
And of the ends of his coming, he makes a proclamation all the world over,
Esaias 55.4.
that he has appointed a Savior unto Sion, Thus he would have us wonder at
the service of the Angels about the time of his birth, Esaias 62.11.
Math. 1.20. Luke 2.9, 10. and at the miracle of his conception, that he should
be borne of a Virgin, Math. 1.21. and at the Wisemen led by a star out of the
East, Math. 2.1, 9. and at the opening of the heavens, when the voice came
down to testify, that Christ was the beloved Son of God, in whom he was
well pleased. Math. 3.16, 17. and at the service, which the Angels did him,
Math. 4.11.
and at his wonderful abasement for our sakes, Math. 21.5. and especially that
he should sacrifice his own body for our sins, 1 John 1.29* Heb. 10.7. and
that he is alive from the dead, and lives for ever, Revel. 1.18 and that he
has opened the secret book of Gods counsel, and made it known to the world,
Revel. 5.5. and that, after such hard times under the reign of Antichrist, he
should recollect such troops of Gospellers, as stood with him on Mount Sion,
Revel. 14.1. It were too long to number up more particulars: Only thus much
we should learn, that the doctrine of Christ is to be received with great
affection, attention, and admiration.

Secondly, This word strikes us like a dart to the heart: for, it imports, that
naturally we are extremely careless and stupid in this great doctrine
concerning Christ and faith in us. For, when God calls for attention, it
implies, that we are mervailous slow of heart to understand, or with affection
to receive the doctrine. Let the use of all be then, to strive with our own
hearts, and to awake from this heaviness and sleepiness, and with all our
souls to praise God, with endless admiration of his goodness to us, in
giving us his Son.

Thus of the wonder of it.

2. The Author of it follows.

I lay, or put.]

God would have us to take special notice of it, that it is he, that was the
Author of this glorious work. He is the vvork-master, the chief
master builder. It is Gods work, and the knowledge of this may serve for
diverse uses.

For first, It should direct our thankfulness, Use.
we should give glory to God, and praise his rich grace. He will not lose his
thanks for Christ. He holds himself much honored, when we praise him for so
great a gift as Christ.

Secondly, It should much strengthen our faith, and make us believe the love of
God, and his willingness to be reconciled. He is the party offended; and if he
were hard to be pleased, he would never have sought out such a project for
reconciliation: Besides, what can God deny us, if he can give us his own
Son? and who is pleased also in his Word to signify so much, and commanded
it by his servants to be told to the parties offending, that he has found out
such a way of perfect peace.

Thirdly, We should hence be comforted in all the straits of godliness: when
the Lord goes about to lay the foundation of grace in our hearts, and to form
Christ in us, we should remember it is the ^ords work, and it shall
prosper; if the Lord will have it go on, who can hinder it? The gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it, when God builds it upon this Rock.

Fourthly, it should teach us in all other distresses to trust upon God, and
never be afraid of the oppositions of men, or the impediments of our
deliverance. For what shall restrain Gods mercy from us? If the Lord can
bring about such a work as this, to found Sion, by laying Christ as the
chief corner stone in her; then we may trust him in less matters. The Lord
will accomplish all the Counsel of his will, and he that has promised, that
all shall work together for the best, will perform it. To this end he pleade^
this work of ^ounding Christ in the womb of a Virgin, of purpose to give
them thereby a sign of deliverance: then, in a temporal affliction it is
easy for him to save us, and deliver us from all our troubles, that can give
us a Savior for all our sins.

Lastly, Ministers that are but under-Masons and Carpenters, must learn to
take all their directions at God, both to see to it, that they lay no other
foundation, then what God has laid, which is Jesus Christ, and in all things
to be faithful in good works, as such as must make their accounts to God.

And thus of the Author.

Thirdly, The time follows.

I lay, or put.]

He ^peakes in the present time, yet means it of a thing to be accomplished
in the time to come. For God laid Christ down, as the corner stone, partly in
his Incarnation, when he sent him into the world in the flesh to take our
nature; and partly he is said to lay down this corner stone, when
spiritually by means he forms Christ in the hearts of men in the visible
Church. Now the Lord speaks in the present time, I do lay, for diverse
reasons. first, To signify, that the care of that business was then in his
head, he was plotting ab^ut it, and did continually mind it. Secondly, To
signify, that howsoever the maine work of the open restoring of the world by
Christ, in the calling of the Gentil^s, was long after to be done, yet God did
spiritually form Christ in the hearts of the remnant, so as at all times he
did more or less further his building. Thirdly, To note the certainty of the
accomplishment of it, he says, He did then do it, to assure them, it should
as certainly be done, as if it were then done: which should teach us to believe
God, and never limit him. When we have his promise, let us reckon upon it: if
God promise us any thing, it is as sure as if we had it.

Thus of the time.

Fourthly, The manner follows, noted in the word Laid.

I lay.

There are many things imported under this similitude, that Christ is laid, as
the Mason lays the chief corner stone in the earth. For it imports,

That Christ is laid as a foundation-stone, imports many things.
First, The divine nature of Christ, that he was before he was incarnate, as
the cornerstone was, before it was laid for a foundation. Christ descended
from heaven, Ephesians. 4.7, 9.

Secondly, The unchangeablenesse of Gods ordinances concerning the giving of
Christ. He has laid him as a foundation, that he would not have taken up
again.

Thirdly, the hiding of the glory of Christ, and of his life. He is of a
singular use to the Church, and the Frame of God's work appears in his
members: but Christ himself is hid with God, Col. 3.3. He is like the stone
hidden in the earth: he is buried in the ground: and therefore we should be
the more patient, if our life be hid also with God.

Fourthly, It may be, by this term the mystery of the birth and conception
of Christ is intimated. God dug the ground of our natures in the womb of
Christ, that he might lay Christ there, etc.

Fifthly, so it may likewise import the sanctification of the humane nature of
Christ; who was qualified, as the stone is squared when it is laid down.

Thus of the manner* The place follows.

In Sion.)

Sion, for certain, was a Fort of the Ieb^sites, built on a hill close to
Jerusalem; which was taken by David, and called the City of David, 2 Samuel 5.7;
the Temple being afterward, built here. The Church of the Jews was called
Sion, because here they assembled: and so afterward it was the title given to
the Church of God, both of Jews and Gentiles, that agree in one faith and true
Religion, Zach. 10.11. And in especial, by Sion is meant the place of the
assembly of the Saints, the Sanctuary. In the twelfth to the Hebrews, verse
22. it is thought to signify the Saints in heaven, even the Congregation of
the first borne. In this place it must need^ mean the Christian Church; in
which, God built the new world, laying the foundation in Christ i^car^ate*
which began in Jerusalem, even at Sion in the Letter.

Now, when the Lord cal^s his Church by this name of Sion, it is to import
diverse things; partly to tell us what we were by nature, and partly to tell us
what we are by his grace and favor.

By nature, what were our assemblies but Forts of Iebusites, in which
multitudes of locusts swarmed? we were Ca^aanites, enemies to God and all true
religion: we were the halt and the blind, mentioned, Mich 4.6, 7; alluding to
that in 2 Samuel 5.6, 7. But, being conquered by David our King, even Christ the
Son of David, we are new fortified for his use, and our estate is fitly
resembled by Sion.

The Church is like Mount Sion in diverse respects.
1. The Church is like Mount Sion for visibility. Christians are like a City
on a hill: they are such as all sorts of men easily take notice of; not that
the men of the world are in love with Christians, but many times out of the
hatred of the truth set they eyes and thoughts upon them, Matthew 5, etc.

Secondly, The godly are like Mount Sion for unremoveablenesse: they that trust
in the Lord, are like a mountain: men may as soon remove a mountain, as remove
them from God, and happiness in God. Psalm. 126.1.

Thirdly, the Church is like Sion in respect of Gods habitation there: God
dwells there: he keeps house there, and in the assemblies thereof he feeds his
people. The Sanctuary is Gods foddering place: it is the City of God, the
mountain of his holiness, the City of the great King, the City of the Lord of
Hosts: God shines there, Psalm. 48.1, 2, 8. Psalm. 50.2. He is known there
familiarly, because his dwelling place is there, Psalm. 76.1, 2. He has chosen
his Church out of all the world: it is the place only which he has desired:
it is his rest for ever, Psalm. 132.13, 14, 15. It is the place of the name of
the Lord of hosts, Esaias 18.7. As David* by an excellency reckoned Sion to be
his City of residence: so God does account of the Church as all he has, as it
were, in the world.

Fourthly, it may be, that the Church is resembled to Sion for the littlenes of
it, in comparison of the world: even in Sion, that is so much despised, will
God lay his cornerstone.

Fifthly, but the principal thing here intended, is, To signify to us, that
God loves his Church above all the world, and that he will give Christ to none
but to the Church. Out of Sion there can be no salvation; and in Sion there is
all happiness to be had.

The consideration hereof may serve us for many uses.

Uses. First, we should hence inform our selves concerning the excellency of
the Church of God above al other Assemblies of men in the world. We should
learn to think of the Assemblies of Christians, as the Sion of God; she is the
Mountain of his holiness, the joy of the whole earth, Psalm. 48.1, 2. the
perfection of beauty, where God shines more than in all the world besides,
Psalm. 50.2. The Moon may be confounded, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord
is pleased to show himself to reign in Sion, and before his Ancients
gloriously, Esaias 24 23. yea the Church of God is an eternal excellency, Esaias
60.15. whereas all other glories will vanish. And besides, we should hence be
informed concerning the necessity of obtaining salvation in the Church. For
this text shows us, that Christ is no where laid but in Sion, and can no where
be found, but in the true Church; In Sion only has God placed salvation for
Israel, his glory: Only the godly are Gods Israel: Only in Israel does God
glory, and only in Sion can Gods Israel find salvation, Isaiah 46. ult.

Secondly, Hence we should especially be moved to an effectual care to make
it so, since that we are in the true Church, and that we are true members of
Sion; and withal we should strive above all things to procure for our selves
the ordinances of God in Sion. It is said of the godly distressed for want of
means, that going they went, and weeping they did go to seek the Lord in Sion
with their faces thitherward, and with a resolution to bind themselves by
covenant to the Lord, to be any thing he would have them to be, only if they
might find favor in his eyes herein, Ier. 50.5.

Quest. Now if you ask me, how the true members of Sion may be known?

Answ. I answer: first generally, that all that are in Sion are not of Sion,
Marks of such as are true members of Sion.
and further, that we must not judge of true Christians by their number. For
God many times takes one of a Tribe, or one of a City, and two of a Tribe, to
bring them to Sion, Ier. 3.14. But yet to answer more directly: Thou must be a
new creature, or thou art no member of Gods true Sion. For of every one in Sion
it must be said, He was borne there, Psalm. 86.5. The gates of Sion are to be
opened only, that a righteous nation may enter in, Esaias 26.1, 2. Men may
deceive themselves, but God will not be deceived: For he has his fire in
Sion, and furnace in Jerusalem: He will try every man, and make his count
only by righteousness, Esaias 31.9. Romans 9. and therefore the sinners in Sion
have reason to be afraid, Esaias 35.14. And if yet we would have signs more
particular, we may try our selves by these that follow.

1 King 19.1, 21 Revel. 14.5.
First, Sion is a Virgin, and all the godly are the Daughters of Sion, and so
the chief Daughter of a chief mother. Now this is a true virtue of a true
member of the Church, that his love is undefiled toward Christ; He is not
enamoured with other things: He will have no other God, but one: He accounts
all things but dross and dung in comparison of Christ: He harbors no beloved
sin, but denies the inticements of it, with detestation and grief that he
should ever be so assaulted.

Secondly, God knows his own in Sion by this sign, that they are they that
mourn in Sion, that are far from making a mock of sin: The Lord himself
is their witness, that their hearts are heavy by reason of their sins, and
they know no grief like to the grief for their sins, Esaias 61.2.

Thirdly, thou may know thy estate by thy subjection to Christ and his
ordinances: For God has set his King in Sion. Now if thy Sovereign be in
heaven, and thou can be willing to be ruled by his ordinances, this will be a
comfortable testimony to thee: as contrariwise, if thou dislike his government,
and would feign cast his yoke from thee, so as this man may not rule over
thee: thou art of the number of the people, but not of Gods people, Psalm. 2.6.

Thus of the second use.

Thirdly, we should be careful to celebrate the praises of God, yea and
therefore careful for all the goodness he shows unto us in Sion: Praise
should wait for him. Psalm. 65.1.
The Lord is great, and greatly to be praised in Sion, the City of our God,
Psalm. 48.1. Psalm. 147.12. Esaias 51.16. All that serve the Lord in Sion, and are
refreshed with the comforts of his presence, should get large hearts both for
admiration, and celebration of his goodness, Psalm. 134. the whole Psalm.
Come, say the godly, Ier. 31.10. let us declare the work of the Lo^d in Sion,
etc.

Fourthly, since Sion is the place where the Lord keeps house, and gives
entertainment to all his followers, we should call one upon another to go up
to the Lord in Sion; we should run thither to the bountifulness of the Lord,
and in all our wants show our selves instructed in this point, by making our
recourse unto Sion, as the place where God is pleased most readily to declare
his shining mercies, Ier. 31.6, 12.

Fifthly, we should be stirred up to much prayer for the accomplishment of the
building of God in Sion; Our hearts should long to see this work prosper: Oh
that the salvation of Israel were come out of Sion^ Psalm. 14.1. For Sions sake
we should not hold our peace, Esaias 62.1. but still beseech the Lord to do good
to Sion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem. Psalm. ^1.20.

Sixthly, We should especially be grieved, if we see that Sion prospers not: Of
all judgments, we should most lament the desolation of Sion. The whole book
of Lamentations is spent upon this subject: We should hang our harpes upon the
willowes, if we remember that Sion lies waste, and there be none to build her
up, Psalm. 137.

Seventhly, the especial use should be for consolation: If the Lord do us
good in Sion, we should account it a mavelous felicity, if the Lord admit us
to be members of the true Church in places where Gods work prospers. The Lord
gives this promise in Esaias, to comfort them against all the mise^ies were
outwardly to f^ll upon them: This work should make amends for all other
troubles: If God build (...) in spiritual things he gives us double for all
outward crosses: we should strive with our own hearts to be exceedingly
affected with the happiness of our own condition on earth, when we know our
interest in Sion: we should live without fear, yea everlasting joy should be
upon our heads, and sorrow and mourning should flee away, Esaias 31.10. and the
rather, if we consider the prerogatives of Sion above all the world besides:
For,

First, the Lord dwells there: It is the Palace of his residence on earth,
Special prerogatives of Si^n and the true members of it.
as has been showed before.

Secondly, the favor of God shines there: He delights in his people, and joys
in all the members of Sion: He rejoices over them with joy, Z^ph. 3. 15, 16,
17 Psalm. 86.2.

Thirdly, in Sion we are loosed from our setters and bonds. It is a place where
the Captives go free: The Lord turns back the captivity of his people, Psalm.
14.7.

Fourthly, in her Palaces God is known for a refuge in all distresses, Psalm.
48.3. There is wonderful safety there: The Lord does mightily preserve and
defend his people; we are safe, if we be members of the true Church, and have
true grace: the greatest adversaries labor in vain, and seeking see, and
marvel, and haste away, Psalm. 48.11.12. They shall certainly be confounded and
turned back that hate Sion, Psalm. 129.5. Upon every place of mount Sion shall
be defense. Sion is a quiet habitation. Esaias 4.5. Esaias 33.20.
God has his year of recompense for the controversies of Sion, and his day of
vengeance, Esa. 34.8.

Fifthly, the Law comes out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem:
There we have directions for our life and for eternal life, Esaias 2.3. It is
Gods foddering place, there he gives us shepherds to feed us, Ier. 3.14.

Sixthly, the inhabitants of Sion have all remission of sins, and the healing of
their infirmities, as the Prophet shows in those words excellently. The
inhabitant thereof shall not say, I am sick: the people that dwell therein
shall be forgiven their iniquity, Esaias 33.24.

Seventhly, all the good news is there to be had: we are naturally Athenians,
we love to tell, and hear news: if we were spiritually so, Oh! how would we
rejoice in Sion! whose spiritual glory is to bring good tidings, Esaias 40.9.
and 41.27. and 52.7. etc.

Eighthly, If the Lord be displeased with Sion, yet it is but for a moment, he
will return in everlasting compassion: It is a sure thing. The Lord will yet
have mercy upon Sion, Psalm. 102.14. He will again comfort Sion, and make his
wilderness like Eden, and his Desert like the garden of the Lord, Isa. 51.3.

Lastly, and specially we should rejoice in Sion, because the Redeemer comes to
Sion, and to them that turn from their transgressions in Jacob, Isay 59.20.
Yea salvation only comes out of Sion, Psalm. 14.7. In Sion only has God
placed salvation for Israel his glory, Esaias 46. ^lt.

And therefore we should labor to walk worthy of so great mercies of God, and
live with all contentment, whatsoever our outward estate be: Every poor
Christian should think themselves abundantly happy: What shall one answer the
messengers of the nations, says the Prophet: Why thus: That the Lord has
founded Sion, and the poor of his people shall trust in it, Esaias 14.32.
Especially, if we consider that of the Psalm, that the Lord has there
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133.3.

Thu^ it should serve for consolation.

Eighthly, It imports and imputes also great reproof: Use 8.
and so to two sorts of men.

First, to the godly themselves, that live not comfortably, and are daily
distressed with unbeleefe, shall any distresses now make Sion droop? The Lord
takes it wonderfully unkindly, that Sion said, God has forsaken me, and my God
has forgotten me, and pleads earnestly to prove that it was false. Esaias 49.1^.
What, says the Prophet Micah, is there no King in thee? why do thou cry
out? Mic. 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And the Prophet Jeremy notes it with
indignation: Behold, says he, the voice of the cry of the daughter of my
people, because of them that dwell in far countries: Is not the Lord in Sion?
Is not her King in her? Ier. 8.19.

Secondly, to careless and carnal Christians. Is the Lord about so great a
work, as founding of Sion, and forming Christ in the hearts of men? Then woe to
them that are at ease in Sion, and can sit still, and securely neglect so great
salvation brought unto them, Amos 6.^.

A corner stone.]

Christ is described by these words, A corner stone, elect and precious. He is
likened to the foundation stone in the corner of the building, by which
similitude diverse Doctrines are imported, as,

First, that Christ is the foundation of all the building of grace and
godliness in the Church, and the only corner stone, Heb. 1.3. Ioh. 5.39.
Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 3. which should both teach us, and inform us: it should teach
us where to begin, when we go about the work of godliness and eternal life.
We must begin at Christ: All the building of true grace must begin at Christ,
and our redemption in him: till we have learned Christ, we have learned
nothing: and it should teach us also to stay our hearts in all estates upon
Christ; we should rest in him, as the building does upon the foundation: And
further it should teach us to ascribe all the praise of the grace or hope we
have received, unto Christ, and the support we have from him: And it may
inform us, concerning the dotage of the Papists, who make Peter the rock and
foundation of the Church: and yet here we have the testimony and doctrine of
Peter himself to the contrary, teaching us to acknowledge no other rock of
foundation, but Christ himself.

Secondly, we here are instructed concerning the union of Jews and Gentiles in
one Christ: The two sides of the building meet all in the corner, and are both
fastened upon this one foundation of Christ crucified.

Thirdly, it is here imported, that Gods building, even in these times of the
Gospel, is not finished, nor will be in this life, till all the elect be
called: He is for the most part employed in laying the foundation, and fastening
tho Elect, as they rise in their several ages, as lively stones upon this
living stone. But the work will not be finished, till we be settled in that
Building made without hands in heaven.

Fourthly, hence we may gather a testimony of the two natures of Christ or in
Christ. He is God, because he must be believed on: and he is man, because he
is part of the Building, and was laid down of God as the cornerstone.

Elect and precious.]

There are two Epithers, by which the corner stone is commended, as meet to be
the only head of the corner. The first is, that it is an Elect one, a choice
one, that one of a thousand, there was not such another to be found in all the
heap of the creatures to make a corner stone of. This is he that is separate
from sinners, and acknowledged to be better and fitter for this work, than the
Angels in heaven. There can be no other name, upon which we may be founded, but
only the happy name of Jesus. And therefore for the use of it, let every knee
bow at the name of Jesus, and let every tongue confess to the glory of God the
Father, that he has been wonderful in his choice. Let us adore him, whom God
has chosen, and given unto us as the foundation of all our happiness,
especially let us learn of God to make our choice of him. Note.
Oh Infidelity, Infidelity, how just is thy woeful destruction for thy
unbelief! Oh man, that might have been for ever happy in this choice! Oh
let us be warned, and save our selves from the common ruin of the world. Let
all this be vile in respect of Christ. Let us ch^se him above all the world.
He is worthy, upon whom all our souls, and all our mind, and all our joy
should be set. God forbid we should rejoice in any thing, but in Christ, and
him crucified. Let us be crucified to the world, so we be loved of Christ. Shall
we wilfully make our selves like the miserable Jews? Shall we choose rather
Barabbas than Jesus; and Belial, rather than Christ? If the daughter of a
beggar should be offered in marriage, whether she would choose of a matchless
Prince, or a base and servile pesant, would we not detest such folly, if she
should neglect the Prince, and choose the pesant? And yet this is our case. God
requires no more of us, but to choose his Son before the world, or satan, or
the flesh, and we are assured of eternal advancement: and yet behold, we choose
not, we defer the time, we court the pesant that will for ever undo us, and
neglect the continual solicitations of the Heir of all things. Lord, put to
our faith, and make us for ever resolute to cleave to the Lord Jesus, and him
alone.

Secondly, he is said to be precious. Of this before: but yet somewhat not^ for
the Use. Is he precious? O then, first, how should we admire the glory of that
building, when the foundation is laid with precious stones? Secondly, this
should beget in us an high estimation of Christ.

Quest. What should we do to attain to this, heartily to account of Christ,
as so excellent above all other things?

Answ. First, we must think much of our misery, and our need of Christ. How we
may get an esteem of Christ above all things.
The true reason, why we are not more joyed in Christ, is, because we are not
soundly ^atechized in the particulars of our misery in our selves; we should
seriously lay that doctrine one time after another upon our hearts, and it will
make us run to Christ with singular affection.

Secondly, we should get Catalogues of the great things purchased by Christ,
and of the wonderful precious promises made unto godliness, both for this
life and that which is to come. This would put all other projects from the
world, or the devil, or the flesh, because there can be nothing in any degree
comparable unto the unsearchable riches is to be had by Christ. Oh the
preferment of a true Christian, if he had studied the premises foundly! If we
could effectually think upon the favor of God, the pardon of all sins, the
inhabitation of the holy Ghost, the gifts of the Spirit, and all other sorts of
spiritual blessings, if there were nothing else to be had by Christ, what can
be equal in value to that immortal inheritance reserved for us in heaven?

Thirdly, we should much think of the dignity of the person of Christ, of whom
it is true, that when God brought out his first begotten Son, he said, Let
all the Angels of heaven worship him; As also of his transcendent preferment to
be carried up to heaven, and there sit at the right hand of the Majesty on
high; a King of all Kings, even such a King, as all the Kings of the earth must
cast down their Crowns at his feet. It is unspeakable stupidity that keep us
from being fired with these things.

Fourthly, we should often contemplate of our interest in Christ, and the
assurance that he is of God given to us: All things are ours, because Christ is
ours, as the Apostle Paul speaks.

Quest. But how should we show that we do account Christ as dear and
precious?

Answ. I answer by diverse things.

First, by longing for his coming again to us, How we manifest our account of
Christ as precious.
mourning for our own absence from him. Then we did indeed soundly show our
love to Christ, when we did feel our hearts affectionately moved with a
vehement desire after him. It is a dull love of Christ that can be content with
his absence.

Secondly, while we are here in this world, we may show the high account we
make of Christ, by joying in him, that is, by taking comfort in the means of
his presence, or in the thoughts of his love to us; when we can prefer our
entertainment in the House of Christ, above our greatest joys on earth.

Thirdly, when in our conversation we can be contented to shun all the baits
of the world and Satan, and in respect of Christ, contemn all those sensual
pleasures, profits or honors that entice us to make shipwreck of faith and a
good conscience. Then we love Christ indeed, when our credits, friends,
riches, yea life it self is not dear unto us for Christ's sake and the Gospel.

Fourthly, when we can renounce our own righteousness and praises, and seek
only to be found clothed with his righteousness.

Fifthly, we signify our respect of Christ, by the very respect we show to the
members of Christ. He loves Christ with all his heart, that loves and
entertaines Christians as the only excellent people of the world.

Hitherto of that part of the testimony which concerns Christ: the other part
that concerns Christians, follows.

He that believes on him, shall not be confounded.]

In which words, the happiness of the Christian which believes in Christ, is
expressed.

There are many points of doctrine may be observed out of these words; as,

First, in general, it is faith that makes the difference among men before
God: men are judged of before God by their faith or unbelief. God, to find out
a worthy man, does not ask what money, or land, or birth, or offices he has;
but what faith he has, Gal. 5.6. He is rich and happy, that believes; and he
is miserable, that believes not, whatsoever his outward estate be. Which
should cause us more soundly to inform our selves, and not to be lifted up in
our selves for any outward things, nor to be dejected, if our faith prosper:
and it should be a great comfort to poor Christians in all their wants, if the
Lord have made them rich in faith. He is a great rich man, that has a strong
faith. And therefore also we should learn to judge of men, not according to
the flesh or these outward things, but ever acknowledge more honor to a
faithful Christian, than to any rich wicked man. And it is a great sign of
our own uprightness of heart, when we can judge of Christians as God judges,
and without dissimulation account them the only excellent Ones.

Secondly, in particular we may here observe the necessity of faith, in
respect both of the favor of God, and the merits of Christ: we cannot please
God, though we be in Sion, without believing, Heb. 11.6. and without faith we
see here, we are not built upon the foundation, and so have no part as yet in
Christ. And therefore we should every one be thoroughly awakened, to examine
our selves whether we have this precious faith or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. and to
keep our own souls with so much attendance hereupon, as to be sure the
Tempter deceive us not in our faith, 1 These. 3.4. And here especially take
heed, that thou dash not thy soul upon the rock either of ignorance, or
presumption: of ignorance, as many do, that to this day know not what a true
faith is; of presumption, as many do, that entertain, without all ground from
Gods promises, a hope to be saved, which they call a strong faith in Christ;
and yet live in their sins without repentance. and here never taste of the
sweetness of spiritual things, nor show the affections of godliness in Gods
service.

Thirdly, note that he says, H^e that beleeve^^, indefinitely, meaning any,
of what nature, or condition, or state of life soever. And therefore when this
Text is quoted, Romans 10.11. and 9.33. he says, in stead of He that,
Whosoever believes: which shows us plainly, that in matter of faith God is
no accepter of persons. No man can say he is exempted. A poor man, a Gentile,
a Barbarian, an unlearned man, a servant, etc. may believe as well as the rich,
learned, free, etc. There is no exception against any calling of life, or any
sex. Faith will make any one a child of God, and a member of Christ. The
several sorts of men are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.26, 28. This is the
large extent of Gods love to the world, that whosoever believes should be
saved, John 3.16. Mark 16. The proclamation is to all that are athirst, they
may be possessed of those treasures of gold without money, Esaias 55. Which should
much embolden us to go unto God with a true heart, in the assurance of faith,
Heb. 10.22. And withal it should cause us to cast out of our hearts all the
waverings and doubts of unbelief, arising from our own condition in
unworthiness.

Fourthly, we may hence note, that faith in Christ was ever required in all
sorts of men. It was required of them in the Prophet Esay's time; and it is
still here required in the Apostles time. Thus Paul, Heb. 11. shows, that
faith was the character of the godly in all ages before the Flood and after the
Flood, before the Law and after the Law: and he proves it by an induction of
particulars in their several ranks. Which again should both serve to take
down carelessness, seeing never man could please God without faith; and
withal it should much persuade us to get and preserve faith, seeing we have
such a cloud of witnesses; and that every godly man in every age of the world
did provide himself of faith, whatsoever he wanted.

Fifthly, observe here the nature of true faith. To believe God in any thing he
says, will not save us, if we believe not in Christ. The object of faith is
Christ: for, though we believe other things, yet either they are not things
that directly concern salvation, or else they are founded upon Christ: nor is
it enough to believe Christ, or to believe that he is sent of God, but we must
believe in him, that is, out of sound judgment we must with all our hearts
embrace the happy news of salvation by Christ, and rely upon him and his
merits only for our own particular salvation. The very comparison here
imported, shows us the nature of faith. Christ is like the foundation of a
house: now, to believe in Christ, is, to fasten our selves in our confidence
upon Christ, as the stone lies upon the foundation. To believe in Christ, is,
to lie upon Christ unmoveably, and not flee out of the Building. And it is to
be noted here, that the Apostle adds these words, in him, to the Text in Esaias,
of purpose to explain the Prophets meaning, and to show what kind of believing
the Prophet intended. Therefore it is apparent, that Pagans cannot be saved,
because they believe neither God nor Christ: no Jews and Turks, because they
believe God, but not Christ; nor the common Protestant, because he only says
he believes, but does not believe indeed; nor the Papist, because he believes
not in Christ, nor places his confidence in him alone, but in his own works,
or in Saints, or Angels, or in Popes pardons and indulgences.

Sixthly, note here the circumstance of time, by which he describes a true
faith. He does not say, He that shall believe, or, He that has believed,
but, He that does believe: which is to show us both what we should do with our
faith, and what in some measure is done by every believer: for we should not
believe at one time only, but at all times, we should every day live by our
faith, Gal. 2.21. Christ lives in us by faith, and so long as we go about
without faith, we make Christ to be in us as it were without life. Note.
To spend one day without faith, is, to bury Christ as it were for so long. Now
the life of Christ must be considered of us two ways: namely, as it is in it
self, and as it is in our sense. For this latter, it is true, when we employ
not our faith, we let Christ die in us in respect of sense. But for the first
way, it is certain, a Christian does always believe, after the life of faith
is once conceived in him. There is no time in which it can be truly said, Now
he believes not. Therefore does the Apostle here say, He that believes. It is
true, that in some particular points or promises, a Christian may fail through
unbelief; but not in the maine point, or promise of salvation by Christ. It is
true also, that a Christian may oftentimes, and usually, want the feeling of
his faith, and go without the joys of the holy Ghost, but yet he wants not
faith: yea, a Christian may violently object against believing, and think he
has not faith, by the temptation of Satan, and the rebellion of that part of
him that is unregenerate; and yet God can dispell all these clouds, and in the
very dunghill of his unbelief and sinfulness, can find out his own part of
faith. In plain terms, there is no time after conversion, but if a Christian
were thoroughly sisted, and put to it, he would be found resolved in that point,
to rest upon the covenant of grace, for all happiness by Christ alone: I say
at all times, in that part of him that is regenerate. Christ can die in no man:
and if faith could die, then should Christ also die in us, seeing he lives in
us by faith. A man may be without faith in the judgment of the world, in his
own judgment; Note.
but never is without faith in the judgment of God. A man may want this or
that faith, but not faith simply; as that faith, Luke 18. to rely upon God
without failing, and to call upon him with continual perseverance, as
resolved, that God will help us in that particular. It is true, If the Son of
man come to search amongst men, he shall scarcely find that faith upon earth;
but yet a true faith in the general, he will find in the breast of every godly
man and woman. Peter's faith did not fail, when he denied his Master. For
Christ had prayed that his faith should not fail, and was heard in that he
prayed.

Shall not be confounded.]

The Prophet Isaiah has it thus: He that believes shall not make haste; and
it may be understood either as a precept. Let him not make haste; or as a
promise, He shall not make haste. Men make haste two ways, either in their
behavior, when they run headlong upon the duties they are to do; or when
through impatience, they will not tarry Gods leisure for their help and
deliverance; but fall to use unlawful means, and take that which comes next
them, without consideration of the lawfulness of it.

Now, the believer must avoid both these, and God will, in some measure,
sanctify and guide the believer thereunto.

The Apostle Paul, Romans 9.33. and 10.11. And the Apostle Peter in this place,
following the Greek translation read it, He that believes shall not be
ashamed, as in the Romans, or confounded, as here.

They swarve not from the meaning of the Prophet. For by this term is
avouched, That the godly that believe, shall never have cause to repent
themselves, or to fly from God to use ill means.

The holy Ghost then in this place is pleased to assure the believer, that he
shall not be confounded.

To be confounded, signifies sometimes to be reproached: so Psalm. 14.6. The
wicked are said to confound the counsel of the godly: that is, they reproached
it. Sometimes it signifies to be daunted, or dismayed. Sometimes to be
disappointed, Psalm. ^27.5.
or broken in their purposes, as Esaias 19.9, 10. Sometimes to be extremely
ashamed, and so it is rendered, Romans 10.11. Sometimes to be put to a Non pl^^,
as Acts 9.22. Sometimes to be driven into amazement or wonder, Acts 2.6.
Sometimes to be brought into such a strait, as one has neither hope, nor
help, 2 Cor. 4.8, 9. Lastly, it signifies to perish utterly, or to be undone,
or damned for ever, and so confusion shall come to all that hate Sion, or serve
graven Images.

It is true, that sometimes to be confounded is taken in the good sense, and
signifies either the affection of wonder as before, Acts 2.6. or else a
spiritual grace in the heart of a Christian, by which his soul mourns, and is
abashed and ashamed with him. And so there may be three reasons, or rather
causes assigned, wherein the godly ought to be confounded.

As first, in repentance for their sins, of which these places entreat, Ezech.
36.32. Ier. 31.19. Ezech. 16 61. and for this cause rebellious offenders must
be noted, and their company shunned, that they may be confounded in themselves
for their sins, 2 These. 3.14. and the Lord complains, that the people were not
ashamed for their sins, Ier. 6.15. Secondly, when God, or Religion, or the
godly are reproached and disgraced: thus Psalm. 44.15, 16. Ier. 51.51. Thirdly,
the people that profess the truth, do err through indiscretion, or give
offense, or live in any grievous evil, Esaias 29.22, 23. Ezra 9.6, 7.

Now because the confusion here mentioned, Means by which God keeps the
believer from being confounded.
is a misery God will turn away from the believer; therefore I will explain
that point, and show how many ways God keeps the believer from being
confounded.

They shall not be confounded.]

This, God will make good unto them both in this life, and in the day of
Judgment: In this life they shall not be confounded, neither in respect of
their outward estate, nor in respect of their spiritual estate.

For their outward estate: whether we respect their condition and credit, or
the means of their preservation: For their credit, God will do one of these
two things: For either God will make them exceeding glorious, and make them
high in praises, as Esaias 49.2, 3. or ^^ the least, though they may pass
through evil reports, yet they shall not be utterly ashamed: God will give
them good report amongst the godly, and will greatly esteem them himself, 2
Cor. 6.8. Heb. 11.2. Faith shall obtain a good report.

And for the means of their preservation: Either first God will save them from
the temptations that fell on the world, so as in the evil time they shall be
provided for, and preserved from distress, as Psalm. 37.19. or else, secondly,
God will not disappoint their trust, but come to their succor and deliver
them, as Psalm. 22.6. and 25.3. and Romans 5.3. or else, thirdly, if God do defer
for a time, he will in the mean time refresh their hearts, and lighten their
faces with the comfort of his favor and presence, as Psalm. 34.6. Or else
fourthly, if the Lord let the affliction yet continue, he will give the^
strength to bear it, and patience and magnani^^ity, so as it shall be no great
burden to them, as it is showed of Christ, Esa. 50.6, 7. so of Paul, Phil.
1.20. 2 Timothy 1.12. Or else fifthly, though they may be many ways distressed,
yet they shall never be forsaken or perplexed, so as to have cause to despair:
They shall not be destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.9. In all these senses, they shall not be
confounded in respect of their outward estate.

And for their spiritual estate they shall not be confounded, and this may be
showed in diverse things: First in respect of illumination, In what things the
believer shall not be confounded.
they shall not abide in darkness, John 12.46. Secondly, in respect of
justification, their sins are not imputed to them, and the Lord so surely
forgives the believer, that the conscience shall be satisfied with that
propitiation is made in the blood of Christ: for, it is not ashamed of the
former evil ways, because it believes, that they enjoy Gods pardon as if
they had never been, Zeph. 3.11. Thirdly, in respect of Adoption, because by
believing they are made the sons of God, Rom 3.25.
and so need not be ashamed at any time of their condition, Ioh. 1.12.
Fourthly, in respect of access unto the presence of God. For by faith he is
privileged, he may go with boldness and confidence into the presence of the
King of Kings; and therefore what should confound them? Ephesians. 3.12. Fifthly, in
respect of the promises of God. For by faith he obtains many rich and
precious promises, each of them like a Well of joy, and a very spring of
contentment, 2 Pet. 1.4. Heb. 11.13, 33, 34. Sixthly, in respect of the hope of
glory. For by faith we have access to this grace, whence we stand and rejoice
in the hope of the glory to come, Romans 4.2.

And for the day of Judgment, it is certain, they shall not be confounded in
two respects: First, they shall have boldness at that day and hour, and
praise before all the world: They that are not ashamed of Christ in this world,
he will not then be ashamed of them. And secondly, they shall be delivered from
eternal confusion and damnation. They shall enjoy everlasting salvation, and
shall not be confounded world without end, Esaias 45.17.

Quest. So that by this which has been said, we may in part know, how to
answer that objection which may be made: For some one may say, The Scripture in
diverse places seems to grant, that Gods servants have been ashamed and
confounded.

Answ. Now for answer hereunto, diverse things must be distinctly considered of.

How far the godly may be confounded.
First, the godly shall not be ashamed, or shamed with everlasting shame, or
they shall not be ashamed at the day of Judgment: though it were granted, they
might be ashamed in this life, Esaias 45.17. in that World, which is without end,
they shall not be ashamed.

Secondly, we may answer with the Prophet Daniel, that shame and confusion
belongs unto the godly, if we respect their deserts, but they are freed from it
by the covenant of grace in Christ, Dan. 9.7.

Thirdly, if we consider of the state of the Church in the public condition of
it, as both good and bad are mingled together: so God may power out terrible
shame and confusion upon visible Churches for their great provocations, as Ier.
9.19. and 17.13.

Fourthly, this promise shows what God will make good to the believer, if the
fault be not in himself: he shall be set in such a condition, as he shall
have no reason to be ashamed, but in all distresses two things shall be
certain: first, that God will come quickly to his succor, Heb. 10.35, 36.
Secondly, that till his deliverance he shall have a fair assurance and evidence
for his hope in God, by his promises: so as if he do not withdraw himself
through unbelief, in rest and quietness he shall be fortified, Esaias 30.19.

Fifthly, if we restrain the sense to the coherence and particular drift of
this place, we may answer three things: First, that he shall not be so
confounded as to be driven to run headlong upon the use of any unlawful
means. Secondly, that he shall not fall down from the foundation, which is
Christ, though he should endure many a sore storm. And thirdly, he shall not
be ashamed in the point of Justification: he shall never repent that he relied
upon Christ, and his merits and righteousness.

Sixthly, it is true, that in some temporal crosses they may be foiled in the
judgment of the world, and in their own sense, as the Prophet confesses,
Psalm. 48.9. and so far as this promise reaches to temporal things, it must
be understood with that common limitation, Esaias 54.4. viz. so far as it is
good for them, they shall be kept from shame, as for poverty, or sickness, or
the like, that is, if it be good for them. But yet if this temporal shame do
fall upon them for their sin^es, repentance will remove it, as is promised,
Joel ^.13, 26.

Lastly, the Lord will give his people double for all their confusion, Esaias
61.7. and therefore it is not to be reckoned as a cross, for which they have
so much recompense made them.

Uses. The use of all this remains then to be considered of, which concerns
first, the godly; secondly, the wicked.

The godly should here learn,

First, to take notice of their privileges above other men in this respect,
etc.

Secondly, to sue out this promise upon all occasions. For since they have a
grant of freedom in this kind, they should seek unto God for the obtaining of
it as they shall find need; when either their crosses press them, or their
hearts fail them: so did David in many places of the Psalms, as Psalm. 31. 1,
17. and 119.116. and in diverse other places.

Thirdly, but they must ever look to it, that they be such as may answer the
conditions of this promise, expressed in this or in other Scriptures; as,

1. They must preserve a constant respect unto Gods commandments, and in all
their ways be sound in Gods statutes; else, Conditions of such as will not be
confounded.
wilful sin and shame will be companions, Psalm. 119.6, 80.

2. They must not be ashamed of Gods truth, and the profession of it, but
witness a good profession before all men, Psalm. 119.46.

3. They must not be too tender in matter of reproach from the world, but
learn of Christ to despise the shame and scorns of men, Heb. 12.2. Esaias 51.6,
7.

4. In this Text they must hold fast their faith, and live by it; it is a
promise to the godly, as he is a believer, and will rely upon Gods mercy in
Jesus Christ: we must be established in the faith.

The wicked may hence gather an argument of singular terror. For this Text
imports, that such as live in their sins without repentance, and have not a
lively faith in Jesus Christ, shall certainly be confounded: and this will more
particularly touch such sorts of men as are distinctly designed out to shame
and confusion.

Quest. Now if any ask who are they shall be ashamed and confounded?

Answ. I answer out of several Scriptures, They shall be ashamed and
confounded,

First, that worship graven Images, and trust upon them, What sorts of men
shall suffer shame and confusion.
Psalm. 97.7. Esaias 42.17.

Secondly, that wish evil, and hate the godly, and rejoice at their misery,
and seek to do them mischief, Psalm 44.7. Psalm 129.5. Esaias 26.11. and 41.11.

Thirdly, that are proud, and deal perversely: for pride is a forerunner of
shame, Prove.

Fourthly, that call not upon the Name of the Lord, that use not prayer, Psalm.
53.5.

Fifthly, that use customary lying: they shall be loathsome, and come to shame,
Prove. 13.5.

Sixthly, that put their trust in men, and not in the Lord, Esaias 20.5.

Seventhly, that are ashamed of Christ and the Gospel in this world, Mark 8.38.

Lastly, that go about to establish their own righteousness, Romans 10.4.

Verses 7, 8. 7. Unto you therefore which believe, it is precious: but unto
them which be disobedient, the stone which the Builders disallowed, the same is
made the Head of the corner:

8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient; unto the which thing they were even
ordained.


IN these words the Apostle expounds or applies the former testimony of
Scripture, which he urges both for the believer, and against the unbele^ver.
The believers he calls upon to take notice of their felicity; assuring them that
that Scripture does avouch, that Christ is an incomparable treasure to them.
Concerning the unbeleevers he speaks terrible things; whom he describes both by
their sin, and by their judgment. The sin is disobedience: their judgment
is to be considered as it is denounced, first, against their Leaders, whom he
calls Builders; and then, against the whole body of unbeleevers. The plague upon
the Builders, is, that the Kingdom of Christ shall be advanced in spite of
their hearts: they shall perish and be confounded, but Christ shall reign and
flourish. The plague upon the body of unbeleevers, is, that Christ shall be to
them a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense; which is amplified by the
consideration of the causes, partly in themselves, which is their stumbling at
the Word, and disobedience; and partly in God, who in his justice has
appointed them thereunto.

Thus of the order of the words.

Now before I come to the full opening of each particular in these two verses, I
may observe diverse things from the coherence and general consideration of all
these words.

First, in that the Apostle does not rest satisfied to allege the Text, but
does withal apply it, it shows the necessity of application. We cannot profit
by the Word, if it be not laid particularly to our hearts: as food does not
nourish, if it be not eaten; nor a medicine cure the disease, if it be not
taken; nor a plaster heal the sore, if it be not laid to it; nor are our
wants supplied by coming to the market, if we do not buy and carry home. Which
should work in us a sound care of application of the Word we hear or read:
and withal it should waken us to a care of observing all the rules that may
further us in applying; which are these and such like.

Rules for the applying of the Word (...).
First, we must be careful to understand rightly the Scriptures we would
apply: this is the very foundation of all application that is profitable, 2
Pet. 3. else we may grow perverse, and wrong both the Word and our own selves.

Ob. But some private man might say, This is hard: how can we learn to know
the clear meaning of the Scripture, and the sense of the Text?

Sol. For answer hereunto, thou must know, that there be diverse rules that may
help thee to understand, or at least, keep thee from wrong and dangerous
mis-application.

First, thou must be wise to sobriety, and not presume to know above what is
meet, nor to meddle with such secrets as should lead thee into knowledges that
belong not to thy calling, or are not evidently revealed in Scripture.

Secondly, thou must have respect unto other Scriptures, to take no sense that
is contrary to other apparent Scriptures.

Thirdly, thou must have respect to the Analogy of faith, to avoid all senses
which oppose any article of faith, or thy faith, Romans 12.3.

Fourthly, thou must avoid all doubtful disputations, and unprofitable
questions, and vain ^anglings, that tend not to edification, and the salvation
of thy soul; and account it as a happiness, to be able to keep thy self free
from intanglements therein. And therefore stand at the door of every opinion,
and before thou let it in, ask this question, What shall my soul be advantaged
by this opinion at the day of Jesus Christ? and if it cannot answer to it
directly, reject it. Psalm, 119.66. David prays God to teach him good judgment
and knowledge.

Fifthly, let the public Ministry of Gods servants be the ordinary rule of thy
interpretation, so long as no sense is taught there contrary to the former
rules, 1 Cor. 14.36. and where thou doubtest, thou must seek the law at the
Priests mouth, and be very fearful in any thing to be wiser than thy Teacher;
I mean, to nourish private opinions, which are not justified by public
doctrine.

Sixthly, pray to God to teach thee, and to give thee his Spirit to lead thee
into all truth: understanding is Gods gift, 2 Timothy 2.7. and he will teach thee
humbly his way, Psalm. 25.

Thus of the first rule: we must first soundly understand the sense of the
Scripture we would apply.

Secondly, thou must bring a mind apt to be taught, willing to be formed, and
to be all that which God would have thee to be: thou can never profit by
application, without a penitent mind; a mind that will part with any sin God
shall discover in thee, and a mind careful to observe the conditions required,
as well as the promise tendered, James 1.21. This is indeed to glorify the Word.

Thirdly, it is an excellent help in application, to follow the guiding of the
holy Ghost in thy heart: thou shall find in all doctrines a difference. Some
things, read or heard, have a special taste put upon them by Gods Spirit, or a
special assurance of them wrought at the time of reading or hearing. Now thou
must be careful to take to thee these truths which the Spirit of God does
cause to shine before thee. Eat that which is good, Esaias 55.2. Try all things,
and keep that which is good, 1 These. 5.20.

Fourthly, know that serious and secret meditation upon the matter thou
hear, is the principal nurse of fruitful application: it is but a flash
can be had without an after and deliberate meditation; and about meditation,
remember these rules:

1. Let it be secret. Rules for meditation.


2. He must let it be full. Give not over till thou have laid the truth up in
thy heart: take heed of that common deceit, Psalm. 119.45. of resting in the
praise or liking of the doctrine: be not a Judge against thine own soul, For,
if the doctrine be worthy of such praise, why dare thou let it slip and run
out? Let not the devil steal it out of thy heart, Mat. 13.20. or the cares of
life choke it, Luke 11.28.

3. Let it be constant, Be at the same point still from day to day, till it be
soundly formed and seated in thy heart. How rich might many Christians have
been* if they had observed this rule! Psalm. 1.2. Psalm. 119.3, 5. Esaias ^6.9.

Fifthly, be wise for thy self: take heed of that error of transposing thy
applications: say not, This is a good point for such and such, till thou have
tried thine own heart, whether it belong not to thee, Psalm. 119.59 Pro. 9.7.

Sixthly, by any means be careful of the seasons of doctrine: be wise to
understand the season. There be many truths, which if thou let pass the
opportunity of informing of thy self, thou may perhaps never have it so
again: and therefore take heed of losing precious things, when thou have the
time and means to attain them, etc.

Thus of the first point.

The second thing is the special duty of Ministers, to apply the Scriptures to
the hearers that belong to their charge: we see the Apostles do it, and for
this purpose has God set apart the ministry of the Word, that by them it
might be applied. God inspired the Scriptures, and the Ministers are to urge
them, and whet them upon the hearts of their hearers for their Instruction,
Reproof or Consolation, 2 Timothy 3.17. They are like the Priests for cutting up,
or dividing of the Sacrifices, 2 Timothy 2.15. And this may serve to justify the
course of godly and painful Ministers, that most study the sound application
of their doctrine; and secretly staineth the pride of those men, that avoid
with scorn, application, vainly affecting the praise of wit and learning.

Thirdly, we may hence note, that all men in the visible Church, have not a
right to the comforts of the Scripture; and it is the Ministers duty to drive
wicked men off from claiming any part in the promises, which are the only
treasure of the Saints, as here we see in these two verses, the Apostle
carefully does. Men must do the works of Jacob, if they would have the
comforts of Jacob, Micah 2.7. A Minister must separate between the clean and
unclean. His word must be like a Fan, that will drive the cha^fe one way,
and the wheat another; and though wicked men brook not thi^, yet God requires
this discretion at the hands of his people. Gods Ministers must not dawbe with
untempered mortar, or give the childrens bread to dogs, or cast holy things to
swine.

Fourthly, they may hence clearly also see, that no other difference may be put
between many, then what faith and unbelief, obedience and disobedience make.
Men must not be known after the flesh.

Fifthly, it is hence also apparent, that all the godly have a common right to
the promises made in Christ. The godly in the Apostle Peter's time had right to
the former consolation, as well as the godly in the Prophet Esaies time: God is
no respecter of persons, Col. 3.11. Thus in general.

Two things are to be observed in particular:

The one concerns the godly, who are comforted. The other concerns the wicked,
who are terrified.

The godly are comforted in these words:

To you therefore which believe, he is precious.

In which words, it is the drift of the Apostle to raise an use for consolation
out of the former Text: whence consider,

First, the persons comforted, viz you that believe.

Secondly, the happiness applied unto them, He is precious.

For the first. It is manifest, that the Apostle directs them to look for faith
in their hearts, if they would have comfort in Gods promises. It is not enough
to know that believers shall be saved, but we must be sure, that men in
particular are believers: we must examine our selves whether we be in the faith
or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. Which should both reprove and direct. It reproves the great
shameful slothfulness of Christians, that suffer the tempter to keep them
without the assurance of faith: some have no faith at all; and the better sort
live in too much doubtfulnesse in the point of the assurance of faith. And
therefore we should be warned and directed to try our faith, and to make it
sure, that we are believers.

Quest. What is it to be a true believer?

What it is to believe, and in how many things it is seen
Ans. It is, to embrace with our hearts the reconciliation and salvation which
by Christ is purchased for us, and by the Gospel is offered to us. Now, that
this point being of such singular weight may be clearly understood, I will
break it open into particulars, or into particular parts or steps of judgment
and practice in the believer.

First, he must acknowledge that by nature he stands bound to observe all the
moral Law.

Secondly, he must see, that he has broken all those holy laws of God, and is
therefore guilty before God of the curses of the Law, and so of eternal
condemnation.

Thirdly, he must know, that God sent his own Son in the flesh to obey the Law,
and satisfy the* justice of God, by making an expiation for man's sins,

Fourthly, he must learn, that God has bound himself by promise, that
whosoever imbraceth the agreements in this new covenant in Christ, shall be
saved.

Fifthly, that when a man does in his own particular discern this gracious
offer of God in the Gospel, and goes to God* and with his heart relieth upon
it, then he does truly believe, and is justified, and shall be saved.

Quest. But many men are persuaded, that God has given Christ for them, and
yet it is evident that they do not believe, because there is no appearance of
any repentance or reformation in them; many say they have a strong faith, and
yet have none. How shall the persuasion of the godly man be distinguished from
this vain presumption in wicked men?

Ans. That persuasion of Gods grace in Christ, which is true, and of the nature
of true faith, does prove it self to be ^ight by many infallible signs.

First, by the renovation of the heart. Marks of a true saving faith.
The knowledge of Gods love in Christ does make the heart of man new; it
cleanses out the old dross, and makes a man hate his sweet and most secret
sins. Faith purifies the heart. Acts 15.

Secondly, by the joy and comfort of the holy Ghost, with which the believers
heart is refreshed from the presence of God, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Thirdly, by the victory of the world. For, the true believer is so satisfied
with Gods goodness in Christ, that he can deny his profits, pleasures, credit,
friends, and the like, for Christ's sake and the Gospel; yea, faith marres the
taste of earthly things, and makes a man able to forsake the love of worldly
things, 1 John 5.5. It will endure the trial of troubles, of afflictions, and
temptations, and persecutions for the Gospels sake, 1 Pet. 1.7. without ^aking
haste to use ill means in the evil day.

Quest. But, how may faith be discerned in such as say they are not persuaded
that they have faith, which sometimes proves to be the case of diverse dear
children of God?

Answ. Their faith may be discerned,

First, by repentance, which cannot be separated from it: the sight, hatred,
confession, and sorrow for their sins, is an argument of true faith, Signs of a
weak but yet a true faith, in weak Christians.
because without faith no man can have true repentance.

Secondly, by their complaining of their unbelief, and desire of faith. I
believe, Lord, help my unbelief, was the voice of him that had true faith.

Thirdly, by their daily renouncing of their own merits, begging favor of
God, only for the merits of Christ.

Fourthly, by the love of the godly: for faith works by love, Gal. 5.

Fifthly, by other marks and signs of Gods children, which can never be had, but
faith is had also: such as are, love of God, and his Word, and of their
enemies, and uprightness of heart, and the spirit of prayer, and the like.

Precious.]

Christ is precious to them that believe, not only in their acco^nt, but by
effect; and so, both because he is great riches unto them, as also because he
is an honor unto them. He is great riches unto them, yea unsearchable riches,
Ephesians. 3.6. All ages ought to wonder at the riches of Gods kindness to the
believers in Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.7. Christ in us is our riches, Col. 1.27. and
thus he enricheth us with the favor of God, his own merits and righteousness,
the grace of the Spirit, and the promises of the Word, and the hope of glory.

The Uses are many.

Uses. First, woe to the rich men of this world that are not rich in God and
Christ, Luke 12.16, 21. Let not the rich man glory in his riches, Ier. 9.24.

Secondly, let the brother of low degree rejoice in that God has thus exalted
him, I^^. 1.9. For godly Christians a^e the richest men in the world: for their
possessions are greatest, because the^ possess Jesus Christ, and his
treasure^, James 2.5. For God is rich to all that call upon him. He cannot be
a poor man that can pray, Romans 10.12. Christ makes amends to the poor
Christian for all his wants.

Thirdly, hence we may gather anoth^r sign to try our faith by* If Christ be
more precious to us than all the world besides, it is certain we are true
believers: For Christ is precious to (...) but believers, Phil. 3.9, 8.

Fourthly, we should strive with all ^hankfulnesse to admire* and praise the
grace of God that has bestowed such riches upon us in Christ, Ephesians. 1.7.

Fifthly, we should hence learn to ^ake more account of our faith, which is
therefore precious, because it applie^ Christ unto us: Hence poor Christians
are said to be rich, because they have faith, and assurance of faith, and he
calls it all riches of full assuranc^, Col. 2.2. 2 Pet. 1.4 Iam. 2.5.

Sixthly, we should live securelesse. Men would promise to live at all hearts
ease, if they were rich enough: why, Christians are exceeding rich, and
possess more treasure than all the wo^ld besides, and therefore should live
henceforth by the faith of the Son of God, which was given to them, Gal. 2.20.

Seventhly, look to it that thou keep Christ, whatsoever thou losest: resolve
to lose father, mother, wife, children, friends, house, lands, yea and life
too, rather than lose Christ, who is so precious.

Eighthly, we should show it, that we account him our greatest riches* and
that we shall do, first, by estee^ing the Gospel that brings us daily
tidings, above gold and silver. Secondly, by often receiving of the Sacraments:
we should account the Word and Sa^raments as Gods Exchequer, whither we always
come to receive more treasure. Thirdly, by making much of them that resemble
his virtues. Fourthly, (...) longing for his appearing.

Thus, as Christ is our riches, Now secondly, he is precious, in that he is an
honor unto us, and so some translate it. Christ then is a singular honor to
every believer, and he is so both in heaven and in earth. First, in heaven he
is an honor to us, because he graceth us before God and the Angels, covering
our nakedness with the rich garment of his own imputed righteousness, and
making daily intercession f^r us to God, and covering our imperfections, and
presenting our works and prayers to God, and giving the Angels a charge to look
carefully to u^. Secondly, And so he is an honor to us on earth, both amongst
the godly, and amongst the wicked: First, He graceth us amongst the godly, by
giving (...) room in their hearts, causing them to love us, and honor us even
for Christ only, whom they discover in us by our love to Christ, and faith in
his name, and imitation of his virtues. Secondly, and he graceth us also
amongst the wic^ed, by protecting and acknowledging us in times of greatest
distress, and by washing out the blemishes which our own indiscretions at any
time brought upon us, and by clearing our innocencies from their unjust
aspersions.

Use.
The Use may be, first for confutation of their folly and madness, that account
it a course of abasement to follow Christ, and leave the vanities of the world.
Godly ^ourses are honorable courses: No man ever lost honor by cleaving to
Christ, and living so as might become the faith and love of Christ. Secondly,
and withal we may hence be informed, that all the honor that is without
Christ, is but obscure baseness: no man can be truly honorable without the
faith of Jesus Christ in his heart. Thirdly, we should hence be resolved to
make more account of the godly, because Christ is to them all honor: they are
the only excellent ones in the world. Fourthly, we should labor also to be an
honor unto Christ, and to the faith and profession of his name and service: we
must remember, that he is our surety to God for us, and has undertaken for our
good behavior, and therefore for that reason we should be careful of our
duties: and besides we see, that the disorders of great men's servants leave an
imputation on their master, and so it is with us and Christ. If we live
righteously, and soberly, and religiously, we honor Christ our Master: but
otherwise if we be scandalous, we dishonor Christ, and therefore had need to
look to our ways. And lastly, we should account Christ sufficient honor to
us, and not regard the scorns and reproaches of the world, but rather with
Moses esteem the reproaches of Christ, greater riches than the treasures of
Egypt.

Thus of the consolation to the godly.

The terror to the unbeleevers is expressed, first, partly by charging upon them
their offense: secondly, and partly by describing their punishment.

Their offense is disobedience.

To them that are disobedient.]

All unbeleevers stand indicted of disobedience, and that in three respects:
Vnbeleeve^s are guilty of disobedience in diverse respects.
For first, they are guilty of Adams disobedience: For by the disobedience of
one man many are made sinners, Romans 5.19. Secondly, they are guilty of
disobedience against the moral Law, which they have broken by innumerable
offenses, and in respect thereof are liable to all the curses of God, Deuteronomy. 28.
Thirdly, they are guilty of disobedience against the Gospel: For there is an
obedience of faith, Romans 1.5. and the Lord complains that they obeyed not the
Gospel, Romans 10.16. and for this disobedience, God will render vengeance in
flaming fire at the day of Judgment, 2 These. 1.8. Now men disobey the Gospel,
not only when they are bewitched to receive false opinions in religion, Gal*
3.1. but also and chiefly when they believe not in Jesus Christ, but live in
their sins without repentance.

Uses. The use should be for humiliation unto impenitent sinners; they should
take notice of their indictment, and make haste to humble themselves before the
Lord, lest sentence come out against them, and there be no remedy: and the
rather, because God will aggravate against them their disobedience. Now, there
are many ways by which a sinner may take notice of the aggravations of his
disobedience; as,

First, by the number of his offenses, Disobedienc^, aggravated.
if he consider that he has made his sins like the hairs of his head. To be
guilty of treason but in one particular, should occasion fear: but he that is
guilty of many treasons, has great reason to be extremely confounded in
himself; and this is thy case.

Secondly, thy disobedience is the more grievous, because thou have received
abundance of blessings from God, who has by them wooed thee to repentance; and
this will heap much upon thee* Romans 2.4. Esaias 1.3.

Thirdly, thou must consider all the means thou have had of amendment; God
has planted thee in his garden the Church, he has commanded his
vine-dres^ers to bestow the pains, and apply the means of growth to thee. If
now thou be not fruitful, this will be pleaded against thee, which art still a
barren fig^tree, Luke 13.6.

Fourthly, it increases thy disobedience, that thou have been guilty of diverse
h^inous and soul evils, as if thou have been a drunkard, a filthy person, a
blasphemer of the Name of God, a man of blood, or the like.

Fifthly, the continuance in sin: thou have long abused the patience of GOD, and
this heaps coals of further indignation against thee, Romans 2.4, 5. and the
rather because thy heart has been to sin for ever: for there is in the heart
of unregenerate men a desire to sin for ever, and it is a grief to them to
think that at any time they should not be able to live in sin still.

Sixthly, thou have offended against thine own vows and covenants, and the
promises thou have made to God, both in baptism and the communion, and in
other passages of thy life.

Seventhly, it increases thy offense, that thou have dealt wickedly in the
land of uprightness, Esaias 26.11. There thou have offended, where thou have had
the example of the godly to show thee a better course. It is ill to sin any
where, though in Babel: but it is worse to transgress in Sion, or Jerusalem,
even in the glorious Churches of Jesus Christ.

Eighthly, thy incorrigiblenesse adds to the heap of sin: though the Lord has
afflicted thee, yet thou have not learned obedience by the things thou have
suffered, but thou have made thy heart like an adamant, so as thou would not
return, Ier. 5.2, 3.

Ninthly, it is yet more, that thou have been so far from reforming thine
own life, that thou have scorned and reproached the good conversation of the
godly, thou have spoken evil of the good way of God.

Thus and many other ways may the sinner charge his own heart, and thereby
prepare himself to return to the Lord, while there is yet hope. For if thou
would return with all thy heart, and take unto thee words, and confess thy
sins, and pray for forgiveness, and mourn before the Lord, and turn away
from thy own wickedness; the Lord would show mercy, and the obedience of
Christ would heal thy disobedience, and God would love thee freely, and the
blood of Christ would cleanse thee from all thy sins, Hos. 14. Esaias 55.7. 1
Ioh. 1.7. and while it is yet to day, the Lord sends to thee, and beseeches
thee to be reconciled, 2 Cor. 5.19, 21. Consider that God has been with thee
all this while, having sent many others to hell for their sins, and there is
hope of forgiveness: the Lord has received great offenders to mercy, as the
Israelites, that often fell away from him, Judges 10. and Mary Magdalene, and
Peter, and David, and the thief upon the Cross: Consider that God has
offered thee thy pardon in the Sacrament: Fear the Lord therefore and his
goodness, and return with all thy heart, and iniquity shall not be thy ruin.

Hitherto of their sin: their punishment follows; and so first upon their
rulers and leaders in these words: The stone which the Builders refused, is
become the Head of the corner.

Which words are taken out of Psalm. 118.22. where they are used by the Prophet
David, and here quoted by the Apostle Peter.

The words have a double sense: for they did concern both David and Christ. As
they concerned David, this was the meaning: that though the Nobles and
Courtiers did despise, and reject, and oppose David; yet such was Gods
providence that the man whom they rejected, God made King of Israel, and the
chief stay and support of that State.

Now, for this sense of the words, diverse things may be noted.

First, that God has raised up great men in the Commonwealth, for this end,
that they might seek the public good, and employ their labors for the
building up and prosperity of the State. Which should both teach great men to
think of their duties, and the accounts they must make to God: a^ also it
should teach the people to pray the more heartily for them, and to obey them in
all lawful things.

Secondly, we may hence gather the imperfection of all humane things. For, in
that earthly Kingdoms need building up still, it shows, that they attain to no
perfection, but at the best are still in progress.

Thirdly, that many times great men wilfully oppose the right, and set
themselves against the righteous, and resist the will of God. Which should
teach us, not to place our confidence in the great men of this world, nor to be
always led by their example in opinions.

Fourthly, that God will find out the wickedness of great men, and bring them
to confusion. God accepts not persons: he hates sin in great men, as well as
in mean men, and will cross and confound their godless and ungodly counsels.

Fifthly, that God takes to himself the power to dispose of earthly Kingdoms,
and to give Kings and Rulers at his own pleasure. It was the Lords doing, and
it was mavelous, that David should become the Head of the corner, Psalm.
118.23. The Lord pleads it as a part of his soveraigtny and prerogative, to set
up Kings. By me Kings reign, Pro. 8. Which should teach Princes, and Judges,
and Nobles, to do homage to God, and acknowledge him for their Sovereign, and
therefore serve him with fear, Ps. 2. And it should teach the people to give
honor, and tribute, and custom, and obedience, for conscience sake to their
Rulers, seeing the power that is* is of God, Romans 13.

Now, as these words were understood in the case of David, so was David herein
a type of Christ: and so the words are to be understood in the case of Christ
also, as our Savior himself applies them, Mat. 21. and as it is evident to be
the meaning of the Apostle here.

And it is the drift of the Apostle, to strengthen weak Christians against the
scandal that might arise from the opposition of the Kingdom of Christ. For it
might trouble and amaze them, to consider how Christ was opposed by the Scribes
and Pharisees, who were the great learned men of the time, and such as were
eminent in the Church; and in the account of the most men, were the chief
persons that took care for Religion and the state of the Church, and did excel
all other sorts, etc.

Now that this scandal might be removed, he shows in these words,

First, that nothing did therein fall out, but what was the lot of David in his
time.

Secondly, that all this was foretold in the old Testament, and therefore might
not seem strange.

Thi^dly, that all those oppositions should be in vain: for God would reject
and confound those opposites, and would prosper and advance the right of Jesus
Christ, without the help of those men.

In the particular consideration of these words, three things must be noted.
First, the persons threatened, viz. the Builders, that is, the Scribes and
Pharisees, and those that under pretense of religion did oppose Christ.
Secondly, the cause of their punishment, viz* the refusing of Christ the
foundation stone. Thirdly, the judgment inflicted upon them, which is twofold:
the one employed, the other expressed. There is a judgment employed, viz. That
though they were by calling, and in the account of the multitude, Builders; yet
God would reject them, and go on with his work, in converting both Jews and
Gentiles without them. The judgment expressed, is, that Christ, whom they so
much hated and opposed, should be in spite of their hearts, and to their
extreme vexation, made King of the Church, and exalted to supreme power over
all things, and the only stay of the whole Church both of Jews and Gentiles.
And herein it is to be noted, both the manner how this shall be done, in the
word, is become, or is made; and also the time, in that he says, It is made.

Builders.]

Quest. A question may be moved here for the sense; viz. how the Scribes and
Pharisees, and such like men can be said to be builders?

How far wicked men may be called Builders.
Answ. For answer hereunto, we must understand, that the Scribes and Pharisees,
and so wicked men that possess eminent places in the Church, may be said to be
builders. First, in the account of the multitude, whatsoever they were indeed;
yet they were so accounted, as builders, and prime men in managing the affairs
of the Church. Secondly, the Scribes and Pharisees may be acknowledged in some
respect as builders indeed: They did God some work. For howsoever they did not
soundly teach Christ, yet they drew the people by their doctrine, to avoid on
the right hand the Stoicall strictness of the Essenes, and on the left hand
the profane irreligiousnesse of the Sadduces. Thirdly, they were builders by
calling: they have the name not so much from what they were, as from what men
in their places had been, or ought to have been: And these are the persons that
oppose Christ, and are thus severely judged of God.

Diverse things may be hence noted.

First, that men may be great in their own opinion, and in the account of the
world, who yet are nothing set by of God: such were these Pharisees, Luke 16.14,
15. And therefore we should labor for a spirit without guile, and not be wise
in our selves, or rest in outward shows, but seek the praise of God: we are
safe if God allow of us, though all the world disallow us.

Secondly, that God will acknowledge freely any good he finds in his very
enemies; as here the Pharisees are not denied the title of Builders, for that
general work they did in encountering the Sadduces and Essenes. And as they are
called Builders, so are the devils called Principalities and Powers, to import
what is any way of praise in them, notwithstanding their horrible fall. Which
should teach us to learn of God, to do likewise toward all our enemies: and
withal it may much comfort us. If God will do thus with his enemies, what
will he do with his own children and servants! how will he honor and reward
them! and if the notorious oppositions of the Pharisees cannot hinder Gods
acknowledgement of that little goodness was in them, how much less shall the
mere frailties of the godly (that will do nothing against the truth, though
they cannot do for the truth what they would) hinder the glorious recompense
of reward and acceptance with God!

Thirdly, we may hence note, that Christ and Religion, and the sincerity of the
Gospel, may be disallowed and opposed by great learned men, by such as are of
great mark in the Church, even by such as were Governors of the Church in name
and title.

Quest. 1. Two questions do easily rise in men's minds, upon the hearing of
this doctrine. The first is, Whence it should be, that learned men, who have
more means to understand the truth than other men, and by their calling more
especially tied to the study of all truth, yet should be drawn to oppose or
reject Christ and the truth?

Answ. I answer, that this may come to pass diversely.

How it comes to pass, that many great and learned men oppose the truth of the
Gospel.
First, sometimes it is because of their ignorance; neither may this seem
strange, that they should be ignorant: for, though they may be very learned in
some parts of study, yet they may be very blockish in some other. Besides, the
natural heart of man does not take any great delight in the study of the
Scriptures: and therefore the answer of Christ was proper, Ye err, not
knowing the Scriptures, or the power of God.

Secondly, in some it is, because of their secret Atheism. Many learned men be
very Atheists in heart; and such were some of the Pharisees: for they neither
knew the Father nor Christ, as he charge them.

Thirdly, some have a spirit of slumber: they have eyes, and yet cannot see, as
in the case of some of those Pharisees: they could not apply the very things
themse^ves spoke. For being asked about the King of the Jews, Mat. 2. they
could answer directly out of the Scriptures, and give such sig^^s of the
Messiah, as did evidently agree to Jesus Christ: and yet these men were so
infatuated, that when God shows them the man to whom their own signs agree,
they cannot allow of him.

Fourthly, in some it is envy. They are so fretted at the credit and fame of
Christ* or such as sincerely preach Christ, that for very envy they strive to
destroy the work of God, and to disparage the progress of the Kingdom of
Christ: they cannot endure to see all the world (as they account it) to follow
Christ.

Fifthly, in others it is ambition, and desire of preeminence, and the quiet
usurpation of the dignities of the Church, that they alone might reign and be
had in request: this no doubt moved the Pharisees, and was the cause why
Diotrephes made such a stir in the Church.

Sixthly, in others it is covetousness and desire of gain* These are they that
account gain to be godliness, as the Apostle speaks: and such were some of the
Pharisees, Luke 16.14.

Seventhly, in others it is a wilful and a malicious hatred of the truth: and
such was it in those Pharisees, that were guilty of the sin against the holy
Ghost.

Quest. 2. But how shall a simple ignorant man stay his heart, and be settled in
the truth, when the wise and learned men of the world oppose it? how can he
tell it is the truth which they reject, who have more learning and wit than he?

Answ. I answer. By what means an ignorant and simple man may stay his heart,
notwithstanding the oppositions of learned and wise men.
A simple and single-hearted Christian may somewhat be helped against the
testimony of those wise men of the world, if he mark but their lives: for
usually by their fruits they may be known, Mat. 7. For commonly, such as oppose
Christ and the Gospel, or the sincerity of the Gospel, are men that may be
apparently detected of profaneness, as our Savior Christ shows by diverse
instances in the Pharisees, Mat. 23.

But because sometimes the messengers of Satan can transform themselves into
Angels of light, therefore I answer secondly, that all the godly have the sure
word of the Prophets and Apostles, which may by the touchstone to try the
opinions of men by; which in the points absolutely necessary to salvation, is
evident, and plain, and infallible to the Law and to the Testimonies: if they
speak not according to these, it is because there is no light in them, Esaias
8.20.

And that they may be sure, let them pray to God to teach them: for he has
promised to teach the humble his way, if a man come to God with an humble mind,
and with desire of reformation of his life, in that he knows God has bound
himself to show him his will, Psalm. 25.9. John 7.17.

Besides, every child of God has the Spirit of God in his heart, who knows
the things of God which indicted the Scriptures, and is the only supreme Judge
of all controversies. He that believes has a witness in himself, the
Spirit working much assurance in his heart, and anointing him with eye salve,
and leading him into all truth. And by this help, the entrance into the
Scriptures gives light to the simple.

Use. The use of the point then, is

First, to inform us concerning that great justice of God, in hiding his truth
from the wise, and revealing it to babes and children, or infants: which our
Savior and Saint Paul take notice of. Mat. 11.15. 1 Cor. 1.18.


Secondly, to confirm us against the sinister judgment of wordly-wise, and
learned men, and in matter of religion not to be swayed by that inducement,
since it is thus plainly told and foretold.

Thirdly, to confute the Papists, that plead unto the ignorant that their
religion is the right, because it is, and has been maintained by such a number
of Popes and Cardinals, which have excelled in lea^^ing and greatness of
place: for here we see, the builders reject the head stone of the corner.

Fourthly, to show us, that whatsoever wicked, wise, great men pretend, yet
their quartell is against Christ and his Kingdom.

Fifthly, to teach us* therefore to pray for our teachers and governors, that
God would guide the^ by his good Spirit, and assist them in their callings, etc.

Sixthly, to be more thankful to God, when the Lord gives us builders, not in
name only, but in deed, that settle about Gods work with all their hearts, and
labor with all faithfulness to promote the Kingdom of Christ.

Hitherto of the persons.

The cause of their punishment is their refusing of Christ.

Refused.]

They refused Christ, they disallowed him, as unfit for the support of the
building: They cast him away as rubbish, they rejected him, or accounted him as
a reprobate.

Christ is refused, or disallowed many ways.

Christ is many ways refused.
First, when the Gospel of Christ is contemned or neglected, that is, when men
neglect or contemn the doctrine of salvation by Christ, and live still in
their sin without repentance, and seek not reconciliation with God through the
blood of Christ.

Secondly, when men go about to establish their own righteousness, and
neglect the righteousness of Christ: and so when men fly to the intercession
of Saints or Angels, and use not the intercession of Christ.

Thirdly, when men follow wicked company, and leave the care of the service of
Christ; this is to choose Barabbas to be given unto them rather than Christ.

Fourthly, we may be guilty of this sin in the time of the use of Christ's
ordinances, as in the Sacraments, when we discern not the Lords body, or in
hearing, or any other ordinances, when we entertain contemplative wickedness,
and so commit spiritual dalliance with strangers before the face of Christ.

Fifthly, when men fall away from the grace of Christ, and so joy with the Jews,
as it were to crucify the Son of God afresh, Heb. 6. and 10. And so he is also
refused, when in time of persecution he is denied before men: Thus Peter
refused him when he denied him.

Sixthly, when his servants are rejected: and so either in general, when
Christians are exposed to public scorn, and made as it were the offscouring
of all things; or in particular, when his Ministers are despised. For he that
despises them, despises him, etc.

Quest. But how do the builders, that is, Churchmen refuse Christ?

How Churchmen, viz. builders may refuse Christ.
Answ. I answer many ways.

First, when they will not preach in his name, when they preach not at all: For
this is to let Christ live as it were in the rubbish still, and not to separate
him out for the building, etc.

Secondly, when in preaching they preach themselves, and not Christ crucified,
leaving the word of Christ, to show their own wit and learning, etc.

Thirdly, when they oppose the sincerity of the Gospel, in the conversion of
the souls of m^n, or in the practice of godly Christians.

Fourthly, when they teach the doctrine of merit of works, or prefer the
traditions of men before the commandments of God, as did the Pharisees.

Use. The use of this doctrine concerning the refusing of Christ may be diverse,
for

First, it may teach us patience, when we are refused in the world: it is no
other thing, then what did befall Christ himself; especially it should
confirm us against the scandal arising from the discountenancing of godly
men, which are crucified by all sorts of people in the world: If Christ himself
were no better used, why should we wonder at it, to see godly Christians so
neglected? And if the most powerful doctrine of Christ were so securely
despised, what wonder is it if the good way of God be now evil spoken of?

Secondly, it may much comfort us, and that especially two manner of ways.

First, by reasoning for the contrary. For if it be a sign of a notorious
wicked man, to let Christ lie like rubbish, or refu^e stuf^e, then is it an
excellent sign of a godly mind to love the Lord Jesus, and to account all
things but dung in comparison of Christ, and his merits and righteousness.

Secondly, by considering the effect of Christ's refusal. For he was refused as
our surety, that we might be received to favor. He was cast off by men as a
reprobate, that we might enjoy the admirable privileges of the Elect of God;
and besides, by enduring this contempt of men, he bare the punishment of all
our neglect and contempt of God, and his holy Commandments.

Thus of the cause. The punishment it self follows.

Is made the Head of the corner.]

Two things are here intended, as punishment to these builders. First, the one
implied. Secondly, the other expressed.

First, that which is implied, is, that God will pass by these workmen, and
reject their service. This I gather from hence, that whereas these builders
would not make use of Christ in the building; it is here repeated, that the
building does go on, and Christ is laid as the Head of the corner, which
imports that God had rejected them. Now God rejects wicked Ministers two ways:
First, one, when he curses or blasteth their gifts, and refuses to be
glorified by them, when he causes the night to come upon their divination, and
puts out their right eyes: Secondly, the other is, when he roots them out by
death, and makes their places spue them out: Note.
The first is here chiefly intended, and so it notes, that it is a great curse
of God upon learned men in the Ministry, when God will not employ them, or
make use of their gifts: A learned man, that either labors not, or proposes
not in his labors Gods glory, is a public and standing Monument of Gods
displeasure for men to stand and gaze at: as it is a great argument of disgrace
done to a Carpenter or Mason to stand by while the house is builded, and they
not entreated or suffered to work, and yet have their tools ready. Oh it is a
mavelous justice of God to see learned, but not godly men pass by, so as
they have not the honor to do any work in the Church for the salvation of the
souls of men! and contrariwise, it should rejoice the hearts of godly
Ministers, that God (as Paul says of himself) will account them faithful to
put them into his service, and to give their labors any success.

Secondly, the expressed punishment is the preferment of Christ, and the
promoting of his Kingdom: He is made the Head of the corner: which words must
be considered either in relation to the builders, or in themselves, as they
concern the exaltation of Christ. First, in relation to the builders, it
imports, that it is a punishment to wicked Ministers that love not the Lord
Jesus, that Christ and his Kingdom should flourish. As it fretted the
Pharisees, so it does and will fret the heart of wicked men, till the day of
Christ; and it is a punishment, because of their envy at it, and because they
find that they have no part in Christ or the happiness of his Kingdom, their
consciences accusing them, and besides, because they are openly crossed in
their oppositions, and so ashamed before men. Which observation may serve for
trial: For it is a certain note of a wicked man, who loves not the Lord
Jesus, that he is crossed, and accounts himself afflicted or ashamed, because
the Kingdom of Christ prospers.

The words in themselves concern the exaltation of Christ, and show how God
raised him out of the heap of rubbish as it were, and carried him up to heaven,
and made him their Head and King. Head, I say, over all things, giving him
power over all things, and in particular in respect of the Angels, head of
principalities and powers; and in respect of men, head of the Church. Nor is it
barely said, he is head, but head of the corner, which is a Metaphor borrowed
from the building; where the holy Ghost intends to show, that he is the only
foundation of the Church, as has been showed in the first verse of this
Chapter. And he is well said to be Head of the corner, because upon Christ meet
(as the two sides meet in the corner stone) both Angels and men; and amongst
men, both the Saints in heaven, and the godly on earth; and amongst men on
earth, both Jews and Gentiles, even all the Elect of all nations, ages, and
conditions in the world.

Uses.
The uses of the exaltation of Christ briefly follow.

First, it should teach us to strive by all means to get into his service, that
is so powerful and able to do so much for his servants.

Secondly, It shows us the end of the oppositions of all wicked men: Christ
shall increase and prosper, and they shall be confounded and perish.

Thirdly, it should especially enforce the necessity of believing in Christ:
we should lie upon him with all our weight, as the building does on the
foundation.

Fourthly, it should comfort us in all distresses, considering what end God
gave to the sufferings of Christ, and so it is urged, Heb. 12.2.

The consideration of the manner and the time follows.

Is become, or is made.]

He does not tell how, but leaves that as granted to be effected without hands,
even by the special providence of God, which gives us occasion to take
special notice of the truth, that in things of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
God is pleased to make his work, or to work sometimes without using any of
the means which the world takes notice of, he neglects all those means which
fall within the expectation, Psalm. 118.20, 21. as here for the proclaiming of
the Messiah, there was not any one order, or rank of men eminent in the world,
which God made use of. But by a way altogether strange to the world, erected
the Christian Monarchy, which should teach us, not to limit God to the means
which is likeliest to us, but to live in all things by faith; and where means
seem to fail, then with Abraham above hope, and under hope, to give glory to
God, and cast our selves and all our care upon God.

Thus of the manner.

The time follows*

In that he said, It is become. Christ was Head of the corner according to the
present time. First, if we consider the type of it, Christ was become head of
the corner, in that David was made King of Israel, as a type of Christ's
Kingdom over the Church. Secondly, Christ was head, in that in the Apostles
time he had received power after his Ascension, over all things, though as yet
the Gentiles were not so fully converted. Thirdly, that he is become the head,
may be taken prophetically. For the Prophets, to express the certainty of a
thing to come, utter it in the words of the present tense. It is so, because it
shall as surely be so, as if it were already done.

VERSE 8. And a stone to stumble at, and a rock of offense, even to them which
stumble at the Word, being disobedient, unto the which thing they were even
ordained.


HItherto of the punishments upon the builders. The punishment upon the whole
body of unbeleevers, is contained in this verse. Wherein note first, the kinds
of punishment: Christ is a rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling.
Secondly, the causes both in themselves, and in God, in the words that follow:

A rock of offense, and a stone of stumbling.]

Since wicked men have refused Christ, and will not believe in him; he, that
may not be a stone of foundation, will prove a stone of stumbling, and a rock
for them to dash on, till they be dashed to pieces: which words import the
fearful judgments of God, spiritually afflicted upon unbeleevers, which is
twofold. First, they shall be given up to scandal; and then secondly to
despair.

Before I open the words particularly, diverse things may be noted in general:

First, that the punishments that light upon particular wicked men, Judgments
inflicted on some particular offenders, belong to all for diverse reasons.
are to be accounted the punishments of the whole body of unbeleevers; as here
despair and taking offense at Christ, it may light upon some particular
offenders only, yet they are punishments belonging to all.

First, because there is no judgment but all wicked men have deserved it.

Secondly, because when God plagues some, he means all, he threatens all.

Thirdly, because no wicked man can be sure for the time to come, that he shall
not fall into them.

Fourthly, because the afflictions of this life are typical to wicked men; as
despair is a typical hell, and so all other judgments are but little hells.

And this doctrine should much amaze impenitent sinners, if they consider, that
any fearful judgment they see fall upon others, may fall upon them; and that
God is as well displeased with their sins, as with the sins of those he so
plagued, as Christ shows, Luke 13.1. to 6.

Secondly, that from one and the same cause, may arise diverse and contrary
effects: as Christ, that is a stone of foundation to the believer, is a stone
of stumbling to the unbeleever. Thus in Luke 2. he was appointed for the
rising and falling of many in Israel: Thus the Gospel of peace is to wicked
men a fire, a sword, a fan: It is a savor of life to the godly, and a savor
of death to the wicked, 2 Cor. 2. as the Sun melts the wax, and hardneth
the clay. This comes to pass by accident, and by the corruption that is in the
hearts of wicked men, and by the fearful judgments of God.

Use. The use should be to teach us therefore not to rest in the having of, the
means of salvation; as the preaching of the Word, etc. for through thy
corruption it may be a means of greater damnation.

Thirdly, that of all judgments in this life, spiritual judgments are the
worst; which appears from hence in this, that when the Lord would declare his
special displeasure upon wicked men, he threatens these in this place as the
most fearful. Now for explication of this point. All judgments in this life
are either spiritual or temporal. By temporal judgments, I mean such as
have their proper effects on the outward man, such as are, poverty, disgrace,
sickness, imprisonment, losses in men's estates, and the like. By spiritual
judgments, I mean such as have their proper effects upon the soul: as for
example; Hardness of heart, the spirit of slumber, desertion, or the absence
of God, the taking away of the gifts of the mind, the withholding of the
Gospel, the delivering of men up to the power of Satan, or to the love of lies,
terrors of despair, or taking of offense; of which latter, in this place.

Spiritual plagues are worse than temporal crosses, for diverse reasons.
Now these spiritual judgments are much worse than any of the former temporal
crosses; first, because these judgments light upon the best part of man, which
is the soul: and by how much the soul is better than the body, by so much it
is worse to be distressed in soul than in body. Secondly, because they
withold from us the best good, which is God or Christ: now, that which
straightens us in the best things, must needs be the worst kind of restraint.
Thirdly, because these crosses are more hardly cured: it is much easier to
heal a sickness in the body, than a disease in the soul. Fourthly, because
these judgments for the most part are inflicted upon the worst offenders: I
say, for the most part; for sometimes the godly themselves may be scourged for
a time, and for just reasons, with some kinds of spiritual judgments.

Use: The use may be (first) for reproof of the madness of multitudes of
people in the world, that can be extremely vexed and grieved for worldly
crosses, yet have no sense or care of spiritual judgments: they how^e upon
their beds, if God take from them corn, or wine, or the fruits of the field;
but never grieve if God take the Gospel from them: they are much troubled if
they lose the favor of their greatest friends; but never mourn because God
has forsaken them: they are very impatient if their bodies be sick, and yet
very quiet if their souls be sick: they would think themselves undone if
they were carried to prison, who yet are not much moved at it, that God should
deliver them up to Satan. Note.
And yet I would not be mistaken: I do not mean to say, that wicked men should
not mourn for wordly or outward crosses. It is true, godly men should not, or
not with great sorrows; but for wicked men, they ought to be extremely grieved
for every outward affliction, because it comes in wrath from God, and is but
the beginning of evils. But then two things must be noted: first, that their
sorrow should be godly, viz. for their sins that brought those judgments, not
for the cross it self; secondly, that they ought to be more troubled for
spiritual judgments than for temporal.

Secondly, this should much comfort godly men and women in all their
afflictions, and it should make them patient, because though God afflicts them
in their bodies or estates, yet he spares their souls, and does not execute
those outward crosses but with much compassion.

Thirdly, it should teach us how to pray in the case of afflictions: if they be
spiritual judgments, we may pray directly for the removeall of them; but for
temporal judgments, we must pray with condition.

And thus of the general o^servations.

Before I enter upon the particular breaking open of the doctrine of this
verse, it will not be amiss ^o show, that this, and such doctrine as this, is
not unprofitable.

Quest. For some one might say, To what end serves this doctrine of Gods
dealing with unbeleevers?

Answ. I answer: it is profitable both for godly men and wicked men. For wicked
men may hence hear and fear, and do no more wickedly, seeing hence they may
discern what they may come to, if they prevent it not by repentance. And for
godly men, they may hence be the more inflamed with the admiration of Gods
goodness, when they shall hear of their own privileges by (...). Such
Scriptures as this, contain the arraignment and trial of the ungodly. Now it
is very profitable for us to stand by, and hear the trial. We know
multitudes of innocent men flock to the Assizes to hear the arraignment of
malefactors, which breeds in them, first, contentment in the observation of the
solemnity and manner of administration of justice: secondly, a fear to offend:
the terror of their sentence frights the heart for many days after: thirdly,
a love of innocence: it makes men love innocence much the better for a long
while after: fourthly, compassion to malefactors: it softens the heart, and
makes men fit to show mercy to these poor condemned men. The like to all this
is bred by the consideration of such doctrines as this.

In the words of this verse then two things are to be noted: first, the kinds
of punishments inflicted upon the body of unbeleevers: secondly, the causes of
it. The kinds are two: first, God will deliver them up to scandal, and then
to despair: to scandal, as Christ is a stone of stumbling: to despair, as
Christ is a rock of offense.

These words are taken out of the Prophet Esaias, chap. 8. where the Lord intends
by them to denounce the reprobation of the Jews, as some think, or rather
foretells the spiritual judgments which shall be inflicted upon them. The
Apostle in this place applies the words to the unbeleevers of his time, among
whom the obstinate Jews were chief, to show, that as the other Scripture was
comfortable to the godly, so were there places that did threaten the wicked:
and that as the former place did prove Christ a stone of foundation for the
godly, so this did show that Christ was a stone in another sense to the wicked.

Christ is a stone of trial to all men in the Church, because the doctrine of
Christ tries men whether they be elected or rejected, good or bad: so Esaias
28.16. Again, Christ is a precious stone to the believer: and thirdly, here a
stone of stumbling to the unbeleevers.

Now that we may know what offense or scandal is, we may be helped by the
Etymology of the original words: For scandal in the original is either
derived of a word that signifies, to halt, or else it notes any thing that
lies in a man's way, a stone, or a piece of wood, against which, he that
runs, stumbleth, and so hurts or hinders himself: It most properly
signifies rest, or a certain crooked piece with a bait upon it in
instruments, by which mice, or wolves, or foxes are taken* and thence the
Church translated the name of scandal, to note the snares by which men are
catched, as beasts are in grins and baits: so the word it seems is used.

So then a scandal is any thing which causes or occasioneth offenses,
Scandal defined and distinguished.
by which a man is made to halt, or is brought into a snare, or made to stand
still, or fall in matter of religion, or salvation: And so the sorcerers were a
stumbling block to Pharaoh, and the false prophets to Ahab, and the lying
signs of Antichrist, to such as love not the truth.

Now all scandal may be thus divided: Scandal is either active or passive,
that is, given or taken: Scandal given, is when the author of the action is
likewise the cause of the hurt that comes by it: Thus Elias sons were
scandalous: thus David by his grievous sins gave offense, 1 Samuel 2.17. 2 Samuel
18.22. etc. and thus Scandal is given either by evil doctrine, first, whether
heretical, secondly, or supersti^ious: or else by wickedness of life, or by
wilful abuse of Christian liberty.

Offense taken is either from our selves or from others: A man may be an
offense, a stumbling block to himself, by dallying with some special beloved
corruption: of which our Savior Christ says* If thine eye offend thee pull it
out, or thy hand, or thy foot, etc. Matthew. 3.29. Scandal taken from others, is
either that they call humane, or that they call diabolical: Scandal taken,
which they call humane, may either be found in godly men, or wicked men: godly
Christians that are weak, may be offended, or hindered in religion diverse
ways: as either by reason of the persecution and oppression of the godly: or
by the heresies or dissentions of men in the Church, or by the flourishing
estate and prosperity of the wicked: as also by the liberty some of the godly
take in things indifferent, for the advancing of the Gospel in case of
necessity: As when Paul, for the gaining of the Gentiles, neglected Moses Law.
This was an offense to many believing Jews and contra, etc.

Wicked men also take offense as here in this text is manifest. Now, the
offense which they call diabolical, is that, when men wilfully and perversely
will provoke themselves to sin freely, because of the examples of the vices
of godly men: as when the drunkenness of Noah, the incest of Lot, the adultery
and murder of David, the perjury of Peter, or the like, is alleged to
maintain themselves in a liberty of sinning: It is the scandal of wicked men,
which is here meant.

Now wicked men make themselves miserable in this case of scandal both ways:
By giving offense, and by taking offense. By giving offense, and so Christ
curses them for offending his little ones, Mat. 18. Wicked men offend them
either by the subtilty of false and corrupt doctrine, or by provocation and
inticement, or by evil example, or by discouraging them with reproaches,
threats or oppositions, or the like: but this kind of offense is not meant
here. It is offense taken, which is noted here as a grievous curse upon them;
and amongst offenses taken, this is their misery, that they gather offense from
what should have been the cause of their holiness and happiness, even from
Christ.

Quest.
Might some one say, What should men be offended at in Christ?

Answ.

Wicked men were offended as Christ in many things. E^a. 53.2. Ioh. 18.36. Mat.
9.10.


The Jews were offended: First, at the vileness of his person, or his mean
condition. Secondly, at the poverty and simplicity of his Disciples. Thirdly,
at the obscurity of his Kingdom, being without wordly pomp and glory.
Fourthly, at his conversation, because he kept company with sinners. Fifthly,
at his doctrine: partly, because he reproved their superstition and hypocrisy
and the traditions of their fathers, and partly because he taught, that
justification could not be had by Moses Law, but must be sought by believing
in him: as also by other particular directions; as, that man must eat of his
flesh, that he was the Son of God, that he was older than Abram, etc. lastly,
at his miracles: for they thought he did it by some Devil.

Thus in our times the Papists, they take offense at the newness of our
Religion, as they pretend; at the freeness of the people that profess it; at
the doctrine of justification by faith alone, etc.

Thus also wicked men in the Church are offended at the small number of such as
are sincere, at the plainness of the preaching of the Gospel, or such like.

Quest. 2. Might some one say, What if wicked men be offended, is that such a
great misery?

Answ. Yes: for it is many times the occasion of their ruin. For we see many
men keep these objections in their hearts till their death, by which they are
hardened from all care of salvation by Christ: at the best it is a notable
hindrance for the time; it frustrates them of the Gospel, and of the communion
of Saints, etc.

^se. The use may be (first) for information: We may hence see what an
infectious sorceresse unbeleefe is: It can make things exceeding good to prove
exceeding evil to them: it can make God, the Word, the Sacraments, and Christ
himself (all good) to be occasions of extreme evil to him. Wicked men are
like spiders, that can suck poison out of the sweetest flowers.

Secondly, this should serve for great humiliation unto all wicked men, that
find themselves stopped or hindered, or cast out of the way by receiving
scandal into their hearts: They should here take notice of it, that it is a
singular curse of God, when God leaves a man to the liberty of admitting
poysonfull objections, and thereby to be hardened against the care for his own
soul in matters of Religion. Men little think of the fearfulness of such
men's cases; which must needs be extremely evil, either if they look upward to
see that God does expose them to this offense, as a way of singular punishment,
or if they look to the effect; whatsoever they can say, yet their poor souls
in the mean time are left destitute of mercy, or the profit and power of it.

Might some one say, How can they help it, Object.
seeing Christ is a stone of stumbling unto them? It seems they cannot avoid
it.

Christ is a stone of stumbling, not actively, but passively: Sol. Note.
he does not make them stumble, but they through their ignorance (walking in
darkness) or through their precipitation, running headlong in things, or
through the poison of some beloved sin, which has altogether corrupted their
taste, do fall at the doctrine of Christ, or turn the precious things of
Christ into poison, by reason of the venom lying in themselves.

Thirdly, such taking offense is a judgment. Weak Christians should be warned
and temper themselves so, as to refrain the weakness of being so apt to be
offended at the liberty of strong Christians; and to this end they should take
heed of doubtful disputations, or ensnaring themselves about the use of
indifferent things. For though God pities them, yet they are much plagued by
their opinions, and intanglements herein. For first, they sin against their
brethren by rash censure, and despising them; and secondly, they wrong their
own souls: for sometimes they are hindered in the Word, and sometimes lose the
benefit of the Sacraments by their ignorant scruples, and sometimes they draw
much trouble and molestation upon them; and lastly, they many times open the
mouths of wicked men to revile them, and exasperate them against the good way
of God. To conclude therefore this use. Since offense is the rod of the wicked,
let not godly men suffer it to rest on their lot.

Fourthly, since wicked men, by the judgment of God, and their own
frowardness, are so apt to receive offense, it should teach the godly to order
themselves so toward them, that they give no offense unto them, I say, give no
offense, so as the fault should be in the godly, but rather they should strive
to overcome this frowardness of wicked men, by all possible care, both to put
them to silence, and by keeping them silent. Now, because there be some
things, wherein regard must not be had of the offense of wicked men, I will
open this point distinctly, and show,

First, in what things the offense of wicked men is not to be regarded.

Secondly, in what things we must take heed we give them not offense, or in
what things we may be guilty of giving offense to them.

Thirdly, what rules may be observed in our carriage, which may silence wicked
men, or compel respect and estimation from them, or at least put them to
silence, etc.

For the first; if wicked men be offended for doing good, Wherein we are not
to regard the offense of wicked men.
we are not to regard their offense: as when the Pharisees were offended at
Christ, he cared not, but said, Let them alone, they are blind, and leaders of
the blind, etc. Matthew. 15.14. And so the Apostles answered, It is better to
obey God than men, Act. 5.29. It is better that scandal arise, than that the
truth should be forsaken. Thus Michaiah cares not for the offense of Ahab, nor
Eliah: and in this case, Levi is not to respect father or mother, brethren or
children, Deuteronomy. 33.9. And so though wicked men be offended, we must preach the
Gospel with all plainness, and not affect wisdom of words, 1 Cor. 1.23. and
we must labor for the meat that perishes not, and must pray unto God, and
use religious exercises in our houses, as Daniel did: we must renew
Justification by our own works, and we must suffer in a good cause, and we
must with strictness avoid the excesses of the time.

In what things we may be guilty of giving offense to wicked men.
Now for the second. We may be guilty of giving offense to the wicked: First,
by scandalous and vicious life: thus David gave offense. Secondly, by
indiscretion in the manner of doing good duties; as if men pray, or fast, or
give alms to be heard or seen of men. Thirdly, by rash zeal; as when men
proclaim to the world a great deal of strictness in things that are not
grounded upon the Word, and yet are tainted openly with known infirmities and
sins: or when men are violent and rash censurers, especially in things they
commit themselves: or when men neglect their calling, and live inordinately,
and are busybodies under pretense of Religion: or when men that have a fair
door opened to do good by preaching the Gospel, will not yield in some
indifferent things, that they may win them; as, woe had been to Paul if he
had not been a Jew with the Jews, that he might gain the Jews thereby: or
necessity lay upon him the preaching of the Gospel, or to preach the Gospel,
though it were clogged at that time with condition of yielding to the Jewish
ceremonies, 1. Cor. 9.

Rules for the preventing of scandal.
Now for the third. There are diverse excellent rules that may much adorn the
lives of Christians in their courage toward the wicked; and so either prevent
scandal, or leave them without excuse, themselves being judges, as they will
confess in the day of visitation. These things then will much advance our
cause before wicked men, to show in our conversation,

First, integrity, and harmelesnesse, and sound care of the practicing of
godliness, Philip. 1.15, 16.

Secondly, submission and obedience unto the King, and his humane ordinances, 1
Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.

Thirdly, reverence and fear, when we entreat of any thing that concerns God
and Religion, 1 Pet. 3.16.

Fourthly, meekness of wisdom, expressing a mind free from conceitednesse,
frowardness, or affectation, Iam. 3.13.

Fifthly, mercy to the poor, and a mind free from the greedy desire of
earthly things, a serious declaration of the contempt of the world, Iam. 1.26.
Mat. 5.16. etc.

Sixthly, quietness and peace; to be showed (first) in studying to be quiet,
and to meddle with our own business: secondly, in making peace amongst
others, Matthew. 5.8.

Seventhly, love to our enemies, being ready to pray for them, or do them any
good.

Lastly, hence may be gathered some matter of consolation for the godly. For
first, if the Lord have kept them from taking offense, he has freed them from
a great and sore spiritual judgment. Secondly, if the wicked should be so
perverse as to take offense when he gives none; yet this may stay him, that
Christ himself was an offense unto them. Thirdly, as it is a great judgment
to be offended at Christ: so it is a great mercy and supernatural grace, when
the Lord makes our hearts able to love the Lord Jesus in all sincerity.

Hitherto of the first kind of punishment: the second is, that Christ shall be
to them A rock of offense, that is, they shall fall upon Christ, as the ship
does upon the rock, and be broken all to pieces: there shall be a desperate
anguish upon their consciences, perceiving themselves to have no right it^
Christ, by the fea^e of which, as men that have suffered shipwreck, they shall
be out of all hope of mercy. Thus he that falls on this stone, shall be
broken, and upon whom it shall fall, he shall be ground to powder, Luke 20.17.

The consciences of wicked men are diversely affected: some are without feeling
of any grievance in the matters of their souls; some have feeling. The
conscience is without feeling, either through a continual security and
sleepiness, which is in all men, or through a fearednesse, by which some men
are grown past feeling. Now those wicked men that have any feeling, in this
text are cast into two sorts; for either they are offended, or they despair.
Christ is to those latter, an occasion of their ruin, they suffer shipwreck
upon Christ, which is joined with singular offense, or pain, or grievance of
their consciences. This rock is like that in the Judges, chap. 6.21. out of
which fire went and consumed them.

The despair that wicked men feel is of two sorts. For either it is a
despair, which rises from their persuasion of their want of help in spiritual
things, or from their want of help in outward things: sometimes they fall into
desperate torments, and griefs, and fears about outward things, either upon
fear of danger, or upon an apprehension that they are utterly undone, or shall
be in matters of the world: this was the despair mentioned, Deuteronomy. 28.66, 67.
and this despair was in Saul, Achitophel and Belshazzer, Dan. 5. and in the
Jews, when they said there was no hope, Ier. 2.25. and this was in the
Egyptians, Babylonians, Tyrians; and their case in the desolation of their
estate by war, mentioned in many chapters of the Prophet Esaias. But this
despair is not meant here: for this is a despair of all help or salvation of
the soul by Christ; conceiving, that they are utterly cast off of God, and
shall perish for ever. Thus Cain and Judas despaired of all mercy in God.

And this despair of salvation and all happiness, is felt either in hell, How
many ways wicked men may despair.
or at the day of judgment, or in this life.

First, it is certain, that the wicked feel an eternal despair in hell,
which increases their torments, because they have no hope of ease or help:
and thus also the devils despair. This despair in hell, is a mere gnawing
the conscience, and tormenting it, which never dies.

Secondly, they also feel despair with singular horror when they come to
appear before Jesus Christ at the last day, when they behold the face of the
Judge, and feel within them a witness that tells them they shall be damned.
This torment will then come upon them, like the pains of a woman in travel;
and their anguish will be so great, that they will cry to the mountains to
cover them from the face of the Judge, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

Thirdly, now the first degree of this despair, Rev. 1.7 and 6, 16.
is felt by diverse wicked men in this life, as it was by Cain and Judas: and of
this he speaks here. And thus wicked men despair, when they think their
sins cannot be forgiven, and that they have no benefit by Christ, and shall
certainly perish for ever.

And this is noted here as a grievous curse of God inflicted upon unbeleevers.
Despair is one of Gods most fearful judgments in this world; which when God
inflicteth, he may be said to rain upon them fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest, Psalm. 11.6. Most fearful is their case, when the wrathful
Arm of God takes hold of them, and he poures out his indignation upon them:
this will make their loins to shake, Psalm. 69.23, 24. They are then like the
raging sea, having no peace within them, Esa. 57. ult. They are brought to the
King of terrors, and their confidence is rooted out, Job 18.11, 14. There they
were in great fear, Psalm. 14.5. They are said to blaspheme God, and gnaw their
tongues, Revel. 16.9, 10.

While Gods Saints sing for joy of heart, they howl for vexation of spirit,
Esa* ^5.14. They could be glad to run into the holes of the rocks, and into
the caves of the earth for fear of the Lord, and the glory of his Majesty,
when he comes thus terribly to shake the earth, Esa. 2.19. Surely, such is the
case of the wicked; and this is the portion of their cup that know not God. And
how terrible this torment is in the heart of a wicked man, may appear, if we
consider but what torment the very godly suffer in their despair, which is
far easier than that of the wicked. David says, the pains of hell compassed
him, Psalm. 18.5, 6. and 116.3. and that Gods terrors did cut him off; and that
he was ready to die, and that, while he suffered Gods terrors, he was
distracted, Psalm. 88.15, 16. as also it may appear by those torments which
the very despair for outward things has put wicked men to, which is far
less grievous than this despair of Gods mercy and eternal salvation: and yet
in that case their pains are compared to the pain of a woman in travel,
Psalm. 48.6.

See more at large of the horrible plight wicked men have been in in this
respect, in the description of the judgments should fall upon the foreign
nations, rendered by the Prophet Esaias in many chapters.

Uses. The use may be, first, for great amazement to wicked men, that now
perhaps laugh and sing in the jollity of their hearts. O let them remember what
God may do to them* What case will they be in, if God bring them once to
despair? And this is the portion of their cup. Oh! if the terror of a King be
as the roaring of a Lion; what then is their case, if God shall reveal his
wrath from heaven upon them for their weighty sins! And the more should they
be affrighted, because despair is but as it were the beginning of evils. They
feel it for a short time on earth, but shall feel it for ever in hell. And
therefore, if it be possible, they should be persuaded in time to repent, that
they may be delivered from this great wrath to come. Oh how easy, in
comparison, might men's repentance be, if they would be warned in time!

Secondly, this doctrine may breed in us a wonderful awfulnesse and fear of
God: when we read of such judgments in Scripture, or behold any poor
wretches tormented with this judgment, it should breed in us not only an
infallible assurance that there is a God, or that there shall be a hell of
woeful torments, or the like; but it should especially make us think of God
with all reverence, and be afraid to displease him: for dominion and fear are
ever with him, Job 25.2. This doctrine should make us resolute to go our ways
and sin no more: the counsel of the wicked should be far from us, seeing
he can thus put out their candle, and make them drink of the wrath of the
Almighty, Job 21.17, 20.

Thirdly, it should work in all of us a care to use all means that we may be
kept from despair,

Quest. What then should we do that we fall not into despair?

Answ. Some things are to be avoided, some things are to be done.

If we would not fall into despair,

Preservatives against despair.
First, we must take heed of wilful unbelief, such as was in the Jews; when
men not only neglect the assurance of salvation brought by Christ, but
contemn it, and strive to put all such cares out of their heads.

Secondly, we must take heed of stumbling. If men feel their hearts to be
ensnared in respect of Christ, and that they are tossed with vile objections,
etc. let them look to themselves, and amend in time: for if Christ be a stone
of stumbling, he may be a rock of offense.

Thirdly, we must take heed of security, and contempt of the knowledge of God's
ways. Despair will work terribly, when it lights upon 2 mind that has
contemned knowledge, and lived in all ease and security, Job 21.1, to 20.

Fourthly, we must take heed of apostasy from the profession of the love of
the truth: for despair is many times a woeful scourge to such kind of
creatures; as the stories record, and experience shows.

Fifthly, we must in general take heed of all gross and presumptuous sins,
especially the sins against the third, sixth, and seventh Commandments: for
usually these sins go before in the desperation; such as are, swearing, and
cursing, and perjury, and murder, and incest, and whoredom, etc. The wicked
flee when no man pursues them: but the righteous are bold as a Lion, Prove.
28.1. and 14.14.

Now (secondly) there are other things which we must do, that we may avoid
despair.

First, we must not smother our doubts in matters of Religion, especially in
the cases of our conscience, but take the pains to ask and seek resolution:
else that which is but doubting at the first, may prove to be despair in the
end. Those lesser sores in men's hearts may fester and rankle within us, till
they prove to this great disease.

Secondly, we must store our heads with the promises of the Gospel, and those
comfortable places of Scripture, as may breed in us a full persuasion of Gods
singular compassion and mercy toward all penitent sinners, and withal do show
us that plentiful redemption in Jesus Christ, and the mavelous efficacy of
his blood to cleanse us from all our sins.

Thirdly, we should above all things, put on the shield of faith; I mean, we
should use all diligence to get the assurance of Gods favor in Christ: for
assurance will preserve us safe from despair. For as unbelief brings it, so
faith preserves us from it.

Fourthly, we should be careful upon all occasions to keep our assizes; and
if we be endangered by any sin, we should make haste to judge our selves,
that we be not condemned of the Lord. For the attendance upon this point makes
all safe: whereas the long neglect of our daily sins, without any humiliation
for them, may turn in the end to the pangs of some miserable despair.

Use 4. Fourthly, hence the godly may comfort themselves, because Christ is to
them a rock to build on, Mat. 16.2 rock for refuge and safety, Psalm. 18.2. a
rock for shadow, Esa. 32.2. And therefore let the Inhabitants of the earth
sing, Esa. 42.11. and withal, if they consider how God shows them, they
should account their other afflictions but light, in comparison of what falls
upon wicked men.

Object. But we read that godly men have been in despair; as David, Job, and
others.

Sol. It is true: but yet there was ever great difference between the despair
of the godly and the wicked, which I will briefly note.

First, they differed in the causes. Special differences between the despair
of the godly and the wicked.
The honors of the wicked proceeded from the curse of God: whereas the
sorrows of the godly proceeded from his mercy.

Secondly, they differed sometimes in the object: for godly men despair of
themselves; wicked men despair of God. It is a grace usual in repentance, to
despair of all happiness from our selves: but now wicked men are out of all
hope of Gods mercy and help.

Thirdly, they differ in the effects. For Cain blasphemes God in his despair,
and says, his punishment is greater than he can bear, or his sins greater
than can be forgiven: but the godly give glory to God, and account him always
just and good. Again, wicked men rage and repent not: but godly men bewail
their sins, and cry mightily to God, Rev. 16.9, 10. Ier. 18.12. Wicked men
be in travel, but they bring forth nothing but wind: they are never the
better when they come out of their affliction, no though they poured out a
prayer to God in the time of distress, Esa. 26.16, 17, 18. Thirdly, the
confidence of the wicked man is swept down as the house of a spider, they have
no hope at all, Job 8.13. and 11. ult. whereas godly men, at the worst, are
supported with some kind of hope, or persuasion of mercy: and therefore usually
they rather ask whether Gods mercy be clean gone, than say it is so, Psalm.
77. and they rather complain, that God hides himself from them, than that God
hates them, Psalm. 88.15.

Fourthly, they differ in the measure too. For God always has respect to the
strength of his children, to lay no more upon them than they are able to bear:
whereas he respects the sin of wicked men, and regards it not, though they
cry out with Cain, they cannot bear it.

Fifthly, God gives issue out of the trial, and returns from his displeasure
in a moment, when he deals with the godly, Esaias 54. whereas wicked men can
have no such hope.

Lastly, seeing despair is such a curse, and is so far from leading men to
Christ, that it makes them suffer shipwreck upon Christ; Ministers, and all
others should take heed of driving the people upon any pretense into this kind
of desperation: let men be taught to despair of themselves, but never to
despair of God.

Hitherto of the kinds of punishments.

The causes follow: first, in themselves: secondly, in God.

In themselves it is their stumbling at the word, and their disobedience.

To them which stumble at the Word.]

There is a diverse reading. The old reading was thus: To them that offend in
the Word; noting either in general, that Gods word, or Christ, does not profit
these men that were guilty of evil speaking, and the gross abuses of the
tongue: or in particular; it should note the sins of the stubborn Jews, who
offended in word, when they blasphemed Christ, and denied him.

But I rather take it as here it is translated: and so it notes the causes why
many men fall into scandal, and from thence into despair; viz. because they
bring ill hearts to the Word of God, they have minds that are rebellious, and
will not be subject to the Gospel, but intertaine it with diseased and
cavilling minds. Those persons are likely not to receive any good by Christ,
that quarrel at the word of Christ. Now that this may not be mistaken or
neglected, I will show, first, what it is not to stumble at the Word, le^t some
weak ones should be dismayed: then secondly, how many ways wicked men stumble
at the Word.

How and wherein men take offense at the Word.
For the first. To be grieved in heart for the reproves of the Word, is not an
offense, but a grace: so we are troubled not with dislike of the Word, but of
our own sins. Secondly, to inquire of the truth, and that which is
delivered, and to try the doctrine, by turning to the Scriptures as the
Bereans did: this is not condemned here; nor is it a stumbling at the Word, to
put a difference between the teaching of Christ, and the teaching of the
Scribes and Pharisees.

Secondly, but men are said to be offended at the Word, when their hearts rise
against it, or they ensnare themselves through their own corruption by
occasion of the Word. To speak distinctly, wicked men are offended at the Word
with a threefold offense: First, with the offense of anger, when they rage and
fret at the Word, or the teachers thereof, because their sins are reproved,
or their miseries foretold. And this offense they show, either when they envy
the success of the Word, Acts. 4.2. or rail and revile Gods Saints, as Ahab
did Michaiah for telling him the truth, or when they mock at the Word, as the
Pharisees did, Luke 16.14. Secondly, with the offense of scandal, when they
take occasion from the doctrine they hear, to fall off from hearing, or from
the true religion, or from the company of the godly. Thus they stumbled at
those hard sayings of Christ, that departed from him for that cause or reason,
Ioh. 6. Thirdly, with the offense diabolical, when men pervert the good word
of God, to inflame themselves the more greedily to sin, making it a doctrine
of liberty, or taking occasion to commit sin from the Law, that rebukes sin.

Uses. The use may be (first) for information, and so two ways. For first, we
may hence see the reason, why many hearers profit not by the Word. It is not
because the Word wants power, but because they stumble at it. They nourish
cavils and objections against it: they oppose reason to faith. Secondly, we may
hence take notice of the difference of a regenerate and unregenerate heart. To
the one the Word is a savor of life, to the other it is a deadly savor, and
full of offense to them. And withal, this may humble wicked men. For this is a
sure truth, that so long as they are offended at the Word, so long they have no
part in Christ: and withal it may comfort all those that love the Word, and
receive it with joy constantly. For that is a means and sign of their
interest in Christ.

Being disobedient.]

These words contain another cause why Christ was no better rellished by them,
and why they found such an ill taste in the word of Christ: it was the
wickedness that was in them: Sin had marred their tastes. Sweet meats have
but an ill relish with those who have corrupt and diseased stomachs; and the
cause is apparent, the ill humors in their stomachs, and nothing in the meats
they eat. But of their disobedience before: and therefore this shall suffice
in this place. And thus of the cause in themselves.

The cause in God follows.

Whereunto they were appointed.]

There is much difference of the reading of the original words in the
translations.

Some read thus: They stumble at the Word, and believe not in him, in whom they
are placed or set; and expound it thus, In whom they live, move, and have their
being: some read, in stead of disobedient, They believed not: but for these
words read them as here. But then their meaning is, that the Jews believed
not, though they were thereunto appointed, that is, though they had the promise
of salvation, and were a people separate thereunto: and so it is an aggravation
of their unbelief.

This sense and reading is not to be despised.

But I take it, as I find it in the translation: and so the sense is, That
these men, whether Jews or Gentiles, that are here spoken of, were appointed to
this misery by the decree of God: and so they are words that express the
substance of this part of Gods decree, which Divines call Reprobation.

And so it is to be observed from hence. That wicked men are appointed from
everlasting, to the enduring of the miseries which are inflicted upon them in
this life or in hell. This is a doctrine which is extremely distasted by flesh
and blood, and proves many times more offensive to the common people, and is
always to be reckoned as strong meat: and therefore that I may fairly get off
this point, I offer two things to your considerations: First, the proofs that
plainly avouch so much, as is here observed. Secondly, I will set down
certain infallible observations, which tend to quiet men's minds, and persuade
them against the seeming difficulty, or absurdity of this truth.

For the first, the Apostle Jude says, Proofs of reprobation.
that the wicked men he treats of were of old ordained to this condemnation,
Jude 4. and the Apostle Peter says, that the ungodly were reserved unto the
day of judgment to be punished, 2 Pet. 2.9. and verse. 12. he says, that they
are natural brute beasts, made to be taken, and destroyed: and it is
manifestly implied, 1 Thessalonians. 5.8. that God has ordained wicked men to wrath:
so Romans 9.22.

Certain observations for the quieting of our minds in the doctrine of
reprobation.
For the second: though this doctrine seem wonderful hard, yet to assure us
there is no hard dealing at all in God, there be many things may confirm us,
and ease our minds, though for the present we cannot understand how this
should be, and perhaps are much troubled about this point; and therefore
seriously consider,

First, for thy self; that if thou have truly repented, and do believe in
Jesus Christ, and have in thee the signs of a child of God; for thy part thou
art free from this danger, and out of all question art in safe estate, and
therefore ought not to grieve, but rejoice with singular praise to God.

Secondly, seeing God has comforted us with many doctrines, and trusted us
with many clear points of knowledge, can we not be contented, that God should
speak darkely to us in one point? especially when we are told beforehand,
that there is an Abyssus, a depth, yea many depths in this doctrine? Shall we
be wayward, because one truth will not sink yet into our heads? We are told
that this is a point unsearchable, Romans 11.32, 33. and the rather, because
weak Christians are not tied to eat strong meat: they may safely let this
doctrine alone.

Thirdly, that no man can know his own reprobation, nor ought to believe so of
himself: but is called upon to use the means by which he may be saved.

Fourthly, we have this oath of God for it, That he desires not the death of
the sinner, but would have all men to repent and be saved.

Fifthly, that whereas Divines make two parts of the decree of reprobation,
Preterition and Predamnation; all Divines are agreed for the latter, that God
did never determine to damn any man for his own pleasure, but the cause of
his perdition was his own sin. And here is reason for it: for God may, to
show his sovereignty, annihilate his creature; but to appoint a reasonable
creature to an estate of endless pain, without respect of his desert, cannot
agree to the unspotted justice of God. And for the other part of passing over,
and forsaking a great part of men for the glory of his justice, the exactest
Divines do not attribute that to the mere will of God, but hold that God did
first look upon those men as sinners, at least in the general corruption
brought in by the fall. For all men have sinned in Adam, and are guilty of high
treason against God.

Sixthly, that sin is no effect of reprobation, but only a consequent: Gods
decree does not force any man to sin, etc.

Seventhly, that whatsoever God has decreed, yet all grant, that God is no way
any author of sin: he does not cause sin in any, but only permits it,
and endures it: and whereas the most that can be objected, is, that God
hardneth whom he will, Romans 9. it is agreed upon in the answer of all sound
Divines, that God does not infuse any wickedness from without in men's hearts:
but whereas their hearts are in themselves by custom in sin hardened, as a
just Judge he gives them over to Satan and his power, who is as it were the
Jayler; but does never restrain them from good, and the means of it.

Eighthly, now may men say, that sin came upon men by reason of the rigor of
Gods Law: for it was impossible to be kept. For this there is a clear answer:
When God gave his Law at first, man was able to keep it; and it came by his
own default, that he was not able to keep it afterward. A man that sends
his servant to the market, and gives him charge to do such and such business
for him; if that servant make himself drunken, and so be unfit to do his
masters business, he is worthy to be punished, because he was fit to do it,
when he was first sent about it.

Ninthly, it is plain in this verse, that those men of whom he here speaks,
are indicted of grievous sin against Christ and the Gospel.

Tenthly, that things may be just, though the reasons of them do not appear
unto us: if it be true of some cases of justice among men, much more in this
case of God's justice.

Lastly, it should much satisfy us, that in the day of Jesus Christ those
mysteries of Religion shall be broken open, and all then shall be made clear
unto us, as clear as the shining of the Sun at noonday.

Thus of the punishment of unbeleevers, and so also of the first argument,
taken from testimony of Scripture.

Verses 9, and 10. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy Nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him
that has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light;

Which in times past were not a people, yet are now the people of God: which
had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.


THese words contain the second argument to persuade Christians to make their
constant recourse unto Christ, and from him to procure virtue to enable them
for holiness of conversation: and it is taken from the consideration of the
excellency of that estate, unto which they were brought by Christ. For the
description whereof, the Apostle singles out two places of Scripture, with
which he makes up a complete narration of their great prerogatives above all
other people, and above that they themselves were in former times. The places
of Scripture he makes use of, are Exodus 9. and Hos. 1.

But before I open the words, two things may be here noted. First, the Apostles
care to prove what he says from the Scripture, whether it be against wicked
men, or for godly men: which shows, that we should much more take heed to
Gods Word, being less than Apostles, especially such an Apostle. Secondly, we
may hence note, that the promises or praises given to the godly in the old
Testament are not envied to Christians in the new Testament. God is no
respecter of persons: but we have free liberty to search the books of God,
and to choose out of all the examples of the suites of godly men, or the
preferments, what we will: and if we make a suite of it to God, he will not
deny it, but show us their mercy.

Now, for the particular opening of these words, we must observe, that it is
the purpose of the Apostle to show briefly the privileges of the godly above
all others: or what themselves were before their conversion.

And the privilege of their estate may be considered either positively in it
self, or comparatively. It is described positively, verse. 9. and comparatively,
verse. 10.

In the ninth verse, there he reckons up a number of prerogatives belonging to
the godly, and withal shows the use they should make of them, or the end why
they were conferred upon them.

The godly excel in diverse respects, if we consider,

First, their election: they are chosen of God.

Secondly, their alliance or kindred: they are a chosen kindred.

Thirdly, their dignity above other men: they are royal Kings.

Fourthly, their function or private employment before God: Priests.

Fifthly, their behavior, or outward conversation: they are holy.

Sixthly, their number: they are a Nation.

Seventhly, their acceptance with God: they are a peculiar people.

First, for Election.

The Apostle looking upon the words in Exodus 19.5, 6, and seeing that they
described the happiness of Christians in this life, does in the Forefront put
to this privilege of their election, as the foundation of all the rest, and
would have Christians much affected with the consideration of this prerogative.

It is one of the chief and prime comforts of a Christian, to consider that he
is elect of God, Psalm. 106.4, 5. 2 Pet. 1.9. elect, I say, both before time,
and in time. Before time, in Gods decree: and in time, when the godly are
singled and called out of the word, and picked out one of a city, and two of a
tribe, in all the ages of the world, and distinguished from other men, by
believing in Jesus Christ. As the Israelites were chosen out of all the nations
of the world; so now the Elect out of all the ages of the world.

Quest. But what is there in the election of a Christian, that should so much
affect him, as to account himself so wonderful happy in that respect?

Answ. There are many things in our election which should much ravish us: as to
consider,

The specialties of Election.
First, when we were chosen, viz. before the foundation of the world from all
eternity. Oh what a favor it is to think, that God had such thought of us be.
fore ever we had any being! Ephesians. 1.4.

Secondly, by whom we were chosen, viz. by God. Men are wont to be affected,
if any of any degree almost do point out them above others, unto any condition
of praise or preferment. To be beloved and in request with any, is a
contentment: but especially if Kings or great persons should choose us out to
set their love upon us, how would we be moved with that! Oh! what comparison
can there be between the greatest men on earth, and the great God in heaven?

Thirdly, to what we were chosen, viz. to a Kingdom and great glory. For
meaner persons to be chosen to any preferment, it would prove a great
contentment; but especially to be advanced to the highest honors: why, God
has chosen and called us to no less an happiness than a Kingdom and glory,
yea his Kingdom and glory in heaven, Mat. 25.34. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, 14.

Fourthly, for how long this choice must last, viz. for ever. To be chosen to a
great office, though it were but for a year, is a great honor in the account
of some men, but especially to enjoy a Kingdom, if it may be for diverse
years, as twenty, thirty, forty, or the like, how would men rejoice that could
attain to such an election? But behold, our happiness is greater. For we have
by our Election an entrance into the everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ.

Fifthly, upon what reason we were chosen, viz. upon Gods free and mere grace
and goodness: he chooses whom he will. It was his good pleasure to choose us
to such a Kingdom: we had it not by descent or desert, Romans 9.18.21. Ephesians.
1.11.

Sixthly, in what manner he chose us, viz. unchangeably. To be chosen to so
great an estate, though it had been but during pleasure, and that pleasure to,
such as might change, had been a great advancement, but Gods purpose remains
according to his choice, Romans 9. and whom he elected, he calls; and whom he
calls, he justifies; and whom he justifies, he glorifies, Romans 8.30. The
foundation of God remains sure, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Lastly, to consider whom he chose, which has a double incitation in it. For
first, the Scripture tells us, Many are called, but few are chosen. Now this
increases our honor, that but a few only can be admitted to the
participation of it. If many had enjoyed it, the commonnesse of it might have
had in it some occasion of lessening the value of it, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. Mat. 20.16.
Secondly, God chose us that were most vile creatures, polluted in blood,
covered with filthiness, fallen from him by vile Apostasy, and our rebellion
in our first parents, and being guilty of many treasons in our own actions.
And this should much move us, that God should set his heart upon such vile
wretches, as we every day are proved to be.

Uses. The use of this may be diverse. But I will only stand upon two uses.
First, the consideration hereof should enforce upon us a care to make our
election sure, 2 Pet. 1.9.

Quest. Now if any ask, By what signs I may know that I am elected of God?

Answ. I answer, There be diverse infallible signs of election: As for example;

First, separation from the world: when God singles us out from the world,
Signs of Election.
it does manifest that he has chosen us from all eternity. Now that this
separation may be proved sure and infallible, we must know,

First, that it is wrought in us by the Gospel, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.

Secondly, That it contains in it a contempt of earthly things, so as our
hearts do unfainedly disclaim all happiness in the things of this world, as
out of true judgment resolving, that all is vanity and vexation of spirit. The
love of God, and the love of the world cannot stand together, 1 Ioh. 2.14.

Thirdly, that it with-drawes us from needless society, or delight in the men
of this world, who follow the lusts of life, and mind only earthly things,
Psalm. 26.

Fourthly, an estimation of spiritual things above all the world.

Secondly, a relying upon Jesus Christ, and the covenants of grace in him, so
as we trust wholly upon him for righteousness, and happiness: Hence it is,
that faith is called the faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1.

Thirdly, the sanctification of the spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. which has in it
both the reformations of those evils, which were wont to prevail over us, and
were most beloved of us, as also the qualifying the heart with such graces as
are supernatural, such as those mentioned in the Catalogue, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7,
8, 9. and such are those graces heretofore mentioned in the sight of salvation.

Fourthly, the testimony of the spirit of Adoption. For every godly man has a
witness in himself, 1 Ioh. 5.10. Romans 8.15. Gods Spirit does assure Gods
Elect that they are elect; and that it does principally by sealing up unto them
the promises of Gods Word, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

Fifthly, by the conformity of Christians unto Christ in affliction: for the
Elect are predestinate to be made like unto Christ in sufferings. Now, because
this sign must be warily explicated, we must understand, that barely to be
afflicted, is not a sign of Election. For so may, and are wicked men, as well
as godly men: but to become like Christ in the suffering, is the sign; which
that it may be more infallible and clear, we must observe in these
sufferings,

First, the kinds, as for example, to be hated and scorned of the world, M^rks
of such as truly suffer with Christ.
and reviled and persecuted, is a token that we are not of the world, because
the world would love his own, Ioh. 25.18, 19.

Secondly, the causes, as if we be hated for goodness, and do not suffer as
evil doers, Ioh. 15.8, 21. Psalm. 38.20. when our afflictions are the
afflictions of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.8, 9. Mat. 5.12.

Thirdly, the effects, that we love obedience by our sufferings, Heb. 5.8. and
be made more holy, and fruitful, and quiet, and meek, and humble by them,
Heb. 15.11. so as we can say, It was good for me that I was afflicted, Psalm.
119.

Fourthly, by the manner, that we be like Christ in silence, Esa. 13.7.
patience, and despising the shame of the cross, Heb. 12.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.21, 22,
23. prayers to God, and submission to Gods will, with strong cries and
fervencie, Heb. 5.7.

Fifthly, by the issue, when God gives a like end to the trial of his
servants, as he did unto the passion of Christ, making all work together for
the best, Romans 8.28.

Sixthly, the entertainment which God gives unto his servants in the means of
communion with God. For when we meet with God familiarly, and continue in his
ordinances, that is an infallible sign and note of Election: as when a man
finds constantly the pleasures of Gods house, Psalm. 65.4. power and much
assurance in hearing the Word, 1 Thessalonians. 1.4, 5. an inward sealing up of the
comforts of the covenant in receiving of the Sacraments, testified by the
secret and sweet refreshing of the heart in the time of receiving, the
conscience being comforted in the forgiveness of sins past, Matthew. 26.28. an
answer and assurance, that God has heard our prayers, and been with us in his
service, Ioh. 15.15, 16. and the like.

Use 2. The second use should be to work in us a care to live so, as may
become the knowledge, remembrance, and assurance of our Election: and so we
shall do,

Rules to live so as becomes the assurance of Election.
First, if we stir up our hearts to a continual praising of God for his rich
and free grace herein, Ephesians. 1.3, 6.

Secondly, if we strive to joy and glory in it continually, Psalm. 106.5, 6.

Thirdly, if we love one another, Ioh. 15.17. and choose as God chooses, Ephesians.
1.4. not despising the poorest Christian, Iam. 2.5.

Fourthly, if we set up the Lord to be our God, to love him with all our heart,
and to serve him, and in all things to show our selves desirous to please him,
and to be resolved to please him, and his truth, and to his glory, etc. Deuteronomy.
26. Esaias 44.1, 5.

Fifthly, if we confirm our selves in a resolution to have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, nor to suffer our selves to be unequally
yoaked: but since God has chosen us out of the world, to keep our selves from
needless society with wicked men.

Sixthly, if we continue in the Word, and be patient in afflictions, and show
contentations in all estates, as knowing that it is our Fathers pleasure to
give us a Kingdom, Luke 12.32. and that all shall work together for the best,
Romans 8.28. and that the very hairs of our heads are numbered, Matt. 10. and
that nothing can be laid to our charge to condemn us, Romans 8.33. and that God
will never cast away his people, whom before he knew, Romans 11.2. because his
foundation remains sure, and he knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Seventhly, if we strive to live without blame and offense, that God may no way
suffer dishonor for our sakes, Ephesians. 1.4.

Thus of the election.

The next thing by which they are commended, is their kindred and generation.

This word generation signifies sometimes an age, or succession of men, or so
many men as live in the world in the age of one man: so one generation passes
and another comes, etc. Eccles. 1. Sometimes it signifies a progeny or
offspring, that is, so many as do descend out of the loins of such a one: as
the generation from Abraham to David, Mat. 1. Sometimes it signifies a kindred
or stock; and so not only carnal but spiritual: and thus wicked men are
said to be an adulterous and untoward generation, Mat. 12.39. faithless and
perverse, Mat. 17.17. and so it is no privilege to be one of that generation:
but we are called upon to save our selves from this untoward generation, Mat.
12.40. so that it is a privilege to be one of this sort or kindred. They are
the generation of vipers, Mat. 3. Now there is another kind of spiritual
alliance, and that is it whereby all Christians are akin one to another
through the blood of Christ, as they all descend of the second Adam: and of
this it is, that the Prophet speaks, Esaias 53.8. when admiredly he faith of
Christ, Who can tell his generation? And thus the godly are begotten of the
best blood in the world, because they are begotten of the blood of Christ, Ioh.
1.13.

The doctrine then is, That godly men are the happiest men in the world, in
respect of their kindred and alliance. None come of so good a kindred as godly
Christians: which may appear by diverse reasons;

First, because they descend of the best blood, Godly Christians come of the
b^st kindred: which ^p^eares by many reasons.
being the generation of Christ the second Adam; and so are better borne than
they that can tell of their great Nobility and Blood, both by the fathers and
mothers side, Ioh. 1.13.

Secondly, because they are a chosen, picked chilren or kindred, all the kindred
culled out of all mankind; and so is no kindred in the world. For in all other
kinreds are all sorts of persons to be found, good and bad, virtuous and
vicious: but of this kindred are none but good.

Thirdly, because the whole kindred is royal; they enjoy all great preferments:
whereas there be few kinreds in the world, but there are some poor in it; but
this generation has not one poor man in it: all the kindred are Kings.

Fourthly, because all are fit for employment: all the kindred are Priests, and
can sacrifice, which was not true of the very Tribe of Levi. There is not one
Christian, but he can perform the work of the Priesthood, and does in his
order.

Fifthly, because there are so many of the kindred. The meanest Christian is
a-kinne to all the Saints in heaven, and to all the godly in earth or on earth:
and there is no kindred in the flesh that can attain to the like number of
kinsfolks in any degree of comparison worth the speaking of.

Sixthly, because they are all accepted into high favor with the King of
Kings. Though a King on earth, out of his love to one person, would do much for
many of his kindred, yet it is never seen that all the kindred universally are
preferred and entertained into special favor with the King: yet so it is with
all the godly: it is true of all, and of every one, that they are his peculiar
treasure.

Seventhly, because all our kindred will do for us; there is none of them but
are able to pleasure us: whereas in carnal kindred, one may be a-kinne to so
great persons, that they will do nothing for them.

Eighthly, because other kindred may and will die, and leave us: but all this
generation lives for ever.

Uses. The consideration whereof may serve for diverse reasons.

First, hence godly Christians may gather comfort against the best of their
kindred in the flesh, whether they be lost by displeasure, or by death: for God
here makes a supply of better kindred. It should not therefore be grievous to
the godly to forsake their fathers house, Psalm. 45.

Secondly, hence we should learn how to esteem of godly Ministers: for hereby
is employed that they are the Fathers and Princes of the Tribes in this holy
Nation.

Thirdly, it should teach us many duties concerning the godly, to whom we are
allied.

First, to study our genealogy, and get the knowledge of as many of our kindred
as we can.

Secondly, to glory in our kindred, to joy in our happiness herein.

Thirdly, to do all good we can to our kindred, even to the household of faith,
for this very reason, because they are our kinsmen in the spirit; and in
particular, we should be ready to do all that for them, which the law of kindred
binds us unto: viz.

First, we should acknowledge them, and not hide our selves from any that is
godly.

Secondly, we should receive one another heartily and willingly, without
grudging or murmuring.

Thirdly, we should defend one another, and be ready in all oppositions to
stand for the godly.

Fourthly, we should show all bowels of mercy, and tender kindness, and pity,
and sympathize in their necessities and miseries.

Fourthly, we should hence learn to be provident to preserve our own
reputation, that we be no way a dishonor and shame to our kindred, but learn
of the wise steward, by lawful means to preserve our credits, and provide for
our selves, though he did it by unlawful: for our Savior noted this defect,
when he said* The children of this world are wiser in their generation, than
the children of the light, Luke 16.8.

Thus much of their kindred or generation.

A royal Priesthood.]

These words contain the two next prerogatives; which have so much connection
one with another, that they are joined together as inseparable.

The Apostle makes a comely and effectual inversion of the words recorded in
Exodus 19. for there they are said to be a Kingdom of Priests, which the
Apostle more plainly expresses in the words, A royal Priesthood.

They are both Kings and Priests, but both with difference from other men of
either of those callings. They are Kings, not profane or civil only, but
sacred Kings: they are Priests, not common or typical Priests, but royal.

The one word tells their dignity to which they are ordained; the other their
office in respect of God.

These words, with those that follow, are in Exodus expounded, or rather
propounded indefinitely to the Israelites, but in this place limited to the
elect only; which shows, that promises and privileges of right belong only
to the elect and chosen of God, etc.

Royal.]

Christians may be said to be Royal in four respects.

Godly men are Royal many ways.
First, comparatively with wicked men: for whatsoever their condition be, yet
if their estate be compared with the miserable condition of all impenitent
sinners, it is a Royal estate, they are like Kings in respect of them.

Secondly, as they are united to his body, who is the greatest King, as members
of Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, Revel. 19.

Thirdly, because they look for a Kingdom. It is their Fathers pleasure to
give them a Kingdom; they shall one day reign, and therefore are Royal.

Fourthly, because for the very present in this life they have the state of
Kings: They have the state of Kings in this life I say. For (first) they
appear clad in purple. The Romans knew who was King* when they saw the man
clad in purple Robes. Christians have royal garments, garments of Salvation;
the righteousness of Christ does cover them, which so soon as they put on,
they are saluted for Kings in heaven. Secondly, they have the attendance of
Kings, a great train and guard about them; no King like any of them, that is
not one of them; for they have the Angels for their guard, and as ministering
Spirits to them, Psalm. 34. and 91. Heb. 1.14. Thirdly, they have the dominion
of Kings, and sovereignty and power of Kings: and so (first) the whole world is
their Kingdom, in which they reign: they are heirs of the world, Romans 4 and
so our Savior faith, They inherit the earth, Matthew. 5. Fourthly, their own
hearts are as a large Kingdom, in which they sit and reign, governing and
ruling over the innumerable thoughts of their minds and affections, and
passions of their hearts: among which they do justice, by daily subduing their
unruly passions and wicked thoughts, which like so many Rebels, exalt
themselves against the obedience should be yielded to Christ the supreme Lord
and Emperor; as also by promoting the weal of all those saving graces which
are placed in their hearts, nourishing and lifting up all good thoughts, and
cherishing all holy desires and good affections; conscience being, by
commission, the chief Judge for their affairs of this whole Kingdom.
Fifthly, it is something royal; and which proves them to be Kings, they have
a regal supremacy. A King is he that judges all, and is judged of none:
such a one also is every spiritual man said to be, 1 Cor. 2. ult. Sixthly,
they prove themselves Kings by the many conquests they make over the world and
satan, sometimes in lesser skirmishes, sometimes in some maine and whole
battles.

Ob. Might some one say, Is this all the Kingdom of a Christian? This is
infinitely below the magnificence and honor of an earthly Kingdom, etc.

Sol. God has done more for the natural man, or for the nature of men, for
providing means for this spiritual Kingdom, than in opening a way for
earthly Kingdoms; which may appear by diverse differences. For,

First, none but great men, and of great means, Differences between spiritual
and earthly Kings.
can attain to the Kingdom of this world: but here the poor may have a
Kingdom as well as the rich. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the Kingdom of heaven.

Secondly, while the father lives, the little child cannot reign: whereas in
this Kingdom, little ones attain to the Kingdom, and safely hold it, Matthew.
18.

Thirdly, this Kingdom is of heaven, whereas the others are only of the earth.

Fourthly, these Kings are all just; there is none unrighteous can possess
these thrones: they are all washed, justified and sanctified: there is not a
drunkard, a railer, a buggerer, and adulterer, a murderer, or any the like
amongst them, which is no privilege belonging to the Kingdom of this world,
Romans 14.17. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Gal. 5.21. The godly are Kings, such as
Melchisedech was, somewhat ob^cure in the world, but they reign in
righteousness, in peace, none like them, Heb. 7.

Fifthly, the godly have received a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. Their
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, Heb. 12.28. but all the Kingdoms of the
world may be, and have been shaken, and will be ruined, and end; whereas the
godly that set out in sovereignty over lesser dominions, and with less pomp,
yet increase so fast, till at length they attain the most glorious Kingdom in
the new heavens, and new earth.

The use of all this may be diverse.

Uses. First, for singular comfort to the godly: what account soever the world
makes of them, yet here they see what God has ordained them unto: it matters
not for the worlds neglect of them; for Gods Kingdom comes not by observation:
and in particular, it should comfort them into two causes: First, in matter of
service; when they come to stand before the Lord, they must know, that they are
honorable in Gods sight. He respects them as so many Kings in his presence.
Secondly, in the mortification of vices; they have received power and authority
as Kings, and therefore no rebellious conversation can so exalt it self, but
it may be subdued. The oil of God is upon them: and what can the greatest
Rebels do against the power of the King?

But secondly, withal here is terror to wicked men. For this is the privilege
only of the godly: and it is certain, that wicked men are in Gods account as
base, as the godly are honorable; they are thrust besides these thrones. And
so are both sorts of wicked men: for not only openly profane men are to be
smitten with this terror, but also hypocrites. It is true indeed, that
hypocrites act the parts of Kings, but they are only such Kings as Players are
upon a stage, they speak of the words, or the words of Kings, but are not so
indeed. For they are by the wiser and better sort accounted as Rogues, and the
scum of the people: even so are wicked men in Gods account; neither will their
outward shows help them. For the Kingdom of God is tried not by words, but
by the power of it, 1 Cor. 4.20. And withal unruly Christians may be hence
checked, such as will not be ruled by their teachers: such were the
Corinthians, they reigned without Paul, and their godly teachers. But the
Apostle wishes they were indeed Kings, or did indeed reign. Why bear thou
the name of a King, and can not rule thy passions?

Thirdly, diverse uses for instructions may be hence gathered: for,

First, we should hence learn to honor poor Christians: they are spiritual
Kings, as well as the kings of the earth: And we know what a stir we would
make to entertain the Kings of this world, Iam. 2.5.

Secondly, we should hence be stirred up in desire after this Kingdom, to
pray for it, that it may come, and that God would count us worthy of such a
Kingdom, Matthew. 6. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5. And to this end we should look to two things:

First, that we seek this Kingdom first above all other things, Mat. 6.

Secondly, that we should refuse no pains nor hardship for the entertainment
of true godliness: This Kingdom of Heaven should suffer violence, and the
violent only will take it by force, Mat. 11.12. It is an easy thing for John
to be a partner in the patience of the brethren, when he is a partner with
them in the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.9. It is no great thing men can
suffer, if we consider it is for a Kingdom: and the want of outward things
should the less trouble us, if God make us so rich in spiritual things.

Thirdly, we should hence especially learn to live in this world like Kings:
and this Christians should show,

First, by declaring their conquest over the passions and desires of their own
hearts. It is a royal quality in a Christian, to be able to show all meekness
of mind, and temper, and sobriety, in being able to deny unto himself what
may not be had without sin or offense. He that winnes the conquest over his
own heart, is greater than he that winnes a City.

Secondly, putting on the Lord Jesus. The righteousness of Christ is the robe
of a Christian: and since all the life of a Christian is a high feast; he
should always put on his robe to distinguish him from all other men: and this
righteousness is both the impured righteousness of Christ, as also the
inherent virtues of Christ.

Thirdly, by serving the public. Kings are the common treasure of the
subjects: they are appointed for the good of many Christians, and should show
that they remember that they are Kings, by devoting themselves to all possible
profitablenesse of conversation.

Fourthly, by their contentation. What should they fear? or what should
discontent them? Has no^ God given them a Kingdom, and great glory?

Fifthly, by subduing carnal and servile fears of men. Why should Christians
fear the faces of great men on earth? are they not spiritual Kings
themselves? and is not the breath in the nostrils of the greatest men on earth?
why art thou then afraid to come before them? etc.

Priesthood.]

The fourth thing, for which Christians are commended, is their Priesthood,
which notes the honor of their employment in things that concern God and his
service, Es^. 61.6. Rev. 1.6, etc.

Now the Priesthood of Christians is a singular privilege, if we (first)
either consider the kinds of Priesthood: or secondly, the specialties of
their calling and employment. First, for the kind: The Priesthood of
Christians is better than the Priesthood of the Levites the sons of Aaron,
because it is a royal Priesthood: they are Priests after the order of
Melchizedeck, as Christ himself was, in which order every Priest was a King;
so were none of the sons, or house of Aaron. Secondly, and for the
specialties of favor imported in the Priesthood of Christians, diverse
prerogatives are included in it: For first, the Priesthood of a Christian
imports separation and consecration to God. The godly of all the people in the
world are the only people that are devoted to God, and chosen out of all the
world as his portion, as the Levites were out of all Israel. Secondly, it
imports neernesse and constancy of communion with God. The Priests lived in
Gods house, and stood always before the Lord, dwelt in his presence, and did
approach nearer to him than all the people else: so do the godly spiritually:
They only dwell in his sight, and enjoy his special presence, and see the
glory of his presence, and have their souls satiated with fatness arising
from the comfort of Gods favorable presence, Ier. 31.14.

Uses. Now the consideration of this excellent Priesthood of Christians should
serve, first, for consolation: secondly, for instruction: and thirdly, for
great reproof.

First, it should much comfort godly and careful Christians to consider, how
near God has placed them to himself, even in his chamber of presence, as it
were: and how meanly soever the world does account of their service, yet they
hence know, that their Priesthood is a royal Priesthood, and the godly
employments of religious men are more honorable, than the greatest employments
of the greatest Monarchs of the earth: and withal it may specially comfort
fearful Christians against one scrup^e; They sometimes are afraid to go into
Gods presence, or they doubt their access, they are so unworthy to come before
the Lord. Why? this word Priesthood should satisfy them: For it imports that
they are privileged by their calling to come before God. The Priests might
enter into the house of the Lord, yea they must do it, it was required of
them: it was a sin if they did it not, and they did not sin by doing it.

Secondly, the Priesthood of Christians should put them in mind of diverse
duties; as,

First, it should work in them a care of knowledge: the Priests should
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth. A godly
Christian should be able to direct others, and hold forth the light of the
Word for the profit of others: and as dumb Ministers are to be disliked, so
are dumb Christians too.

Secondly, it should teach Christians to strive to be of an harmless and
inoffensive disposition. The Priests in the Law of God were men without
blemish: and so should Christians in the Gospel. Phil. 1.2, 15.

Thirdly, we should hence learn to set the Lord always before us, and to
walk before him, seeing it is our office to keep in the Temple, and to be
near the Lord.

Fourthly, it should compel upon us a care of our sacrifice: The maine work
of the Priests was to offer sacrifices: Now our sacrifices are principally
prayers and good works, as more at large is showed on the notes of verse 5.
and in these we must be daily employed: But then we must in all our services
look to the rules of sacrificing, which ^as I ^aid^ I have handled at large
verse. 5. only for the present remember these few things:

First, that their sacrifices are worth nothing, without an Altar to sacrifice
them on: and this Altar is Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.10.

Secondly, that thou must have fire to burn the sacrifice on the Altar; and
this fire is holy affections, Mark. 9.

Thirdly, that in all thy sacrifices thou must keep out leaven: now the
spiritual leaven, that marres thy sacrifices, are, first, malice: secondly,
any notable wickedness: thirdly, evil opinions: fourthly, worldly grief and
passions, which like leaven sowreth the sacrifice.

Thus of the secon^ principal use.

Use 3. This may serve for reproof of diverse sorts of men: as,

First, of the Papists. They have fire but no Altar, and therefore cannot
sacrifice: they have zeal, but not knowledge, as was said in the case of the
Jews, who knew not the righteousness of Christ.

Secondly, of the carnal Protestants. They have an Altar, in that they
profess justification by Christ: but either they have no sacrifice, or no
fire. The rich among them bring not their sacrifice of alms, and all sorts
neglect prayer and good works; or if they do any service to God, there is no
fire to burn the sacrifice: they serve God without zeal and holy affections.

Thirdly, hypocrites are here rebuked. They bring for matter the right
sacrifices sometimes, and they have fire too: but it is strange fire many
times: they have zeal, but it is rash and unwarranted: they do good duties in
an ill manner, or spend their zeal on traditions, either on the left hand, or
on the right.

Fourthly, fearful Christians are here reproved, because when they have
sacrifices, and an Altar, and fire too, yet they believe not the atonement may
come by it, or the acceptance of them from God.

Thus of the fourth point.

An holy Nation.]

The holiness of a Christian is his fifth prerogative, wherein he excels all
other people: and the godly are holy many ways. Some are less principal:
some are more principal.

Christians are holy many ways.
First, they are holy in respect of Gods appointment and calling: God has
decreed them to holiness, Ephesians. 1.4. and created them to good works, Ephesians.
2.10. and called them to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.16.

Secondly, they are holy in their sect or kindred. They are of an holy kindred:
for their Head Christ Jesus is infinitely holy, and their brethren are holy
brethren, Heb. 4.1.

Thirdly, they are holy in their Laws. No people have so holy, just, and exact
Laws: there is no defect or error in them. The word of God is perfect, Psalm.
19. Prove. 8.5, 6.

Fourthly, they are holy in their signs: they wear the badges of
righteousness. The uncircumcised were accounted unholy; and the Jews a holy
nation, because being circumcised, they had the sign of righteousness: so are
Christians holy by Baptism sacramentally.

Fifthly, they are holy in regard of separation from the wicked and the world.
A thing was said to be holy in the Law, which was separated from common uses,
to the use of the Tabernacle: so are the godly holy, because separated from the
unholy.

But chiefly, the godly excel for holiness, if we respect the holiness,

First, of justification: they are holy by the imputation of the perfect
holiness of Christ, and so are they as holy as ever was Adam in Paradise, or
the Angels in heaven.

Secondly, of sanctification: they have holiness in their natures, and they
practice holiness too: and thus they are holy in heart, and by inchoation.
They have grace in all parts, though not in all degrees and they are not
destitute of any saving or heavenly gift, 1 Cor. 9.11. And this kind of
holiness must not be slighted or meanly accounted of: for first, it is a
holiness wro^ght by the holy Ghost. Secondly, it is presented to God by the
intercession of Christ; whereby all imperfections are covered. And thirdly, it
is acknowledged in the covenant of grace, which admits of uprightness and
sincerity instead of perfection, which in the other covenants were required.

Thirdly, they are holy in hope, because they look for perfect holiness in
nature and action, in another world. There is a righteousness which they wait
for, that exceeds all the righteousness that ever was in any man in this
world, Christ Jesus excepted.

But I conceit, it is the holiness of sanctification which is here meant. Now
this holiness consists either of mortification or vivification. Mortification
is employed about the subduing of corruptions; and vivification about
qualifying the heart and life of the believer with holiness. Vivification also
is exercised either about new grace in the heart, or new obedience in the
conversation. I take it the later is here meant: and so the Apostle intends to
say, that no people are like the believing Christians, for the holiness of
their conversation.

Uses. The use of this point may be (first) for great encouragement to the true
Christian, notwithstanding all his infirmities with which he is burdened: and
therefore he should take heed that he be not wicked overmuch, Eccles. 7.
that is, he should not think too vilely of himself: For though he be guilty
of many sins, yet he is truly holy, and that many ways, as was showed
before. God has done great things for him, that has given him a holy head,
and a holy calling, and especially that he has already made him perfectly holy
by justification, and will make him perfectly holy in sanctification in another
world, yea he ought to take reason of comfort for his holiness of
sanctification; as for the reasons before, so the very holiness of his
conversation is much more exact, than is the conversation of the wicked, or
than was his own before his calling.

And withal this should much stir up godly men to the care of sound
holiness in their conversation, and the rather because first they were
redeemed from a vain conversation by the blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.18.
Secondly, they should much thereby advance the profession of true Religion,
Phil. 1.27. Thirdly, because a holy conversation is a good conversation, God
requires nothing of us to do, but it is all fair work, and good for us,
whereas when we have done, the devil, the world, and the flesh work that,
which was extreemly ill for us. Fourthly, we hold our profession before many
witnesses, many eyes are upon us, and the most men are crooked, and perverse, 1 Timothy 6.12. Phil. 2.15. and the best way to silence foolish men, is by
unrebukeablenesse of conversation, 1 Pet. 2.15. Fifthly, our heavenly Father is
hereby glorified, Mat. 5. and 6. Sixthly, it will be a great comfort to us in
adversity, 2 Cor. 1.12. Lastly, great is our reward in heaven. For hereby will
be ministered abundantly an entrance into the glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
2 Pet. 1.11.

But then we must look to diverse rules about our conversation, that it may be
right: for,

First, it must be a good conversation in Christ, 1 Pet. 3.16. Special rules
for the right ordering of us in an holy conversation.


Secondly, it must be a conversation discharged from those ^suall vices, which
are hateful in such as profess the sincerity of the Gospel, and yet common
in the world, such as are lying, wrath, bitterness, rotten communication, or
c^^sed speaking, or the like, Ephesians. 4.25. Col. 3.8. 1 Pet. 1.14.

Thirdly, it must be all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15. we must show
respect to all Gods Commandments, at home, and abr^^ad, in religion, mercy,
righteousness or honesty.

Fourthly, we must show all meekness of wisdom, when we hea^e outward
praise, or do good, or are to express our selves in discourse, or otherwise,
Iam. 3.13. 2 Cor. 1.12.

And that we may attain to this holiness of conversation,

Means for obtaining an holy conversation.
First, we must walk according to the rule of Gods Word, and let that be a
light to our feet, and a lantern unto our paths, Gal. 6.16. Ioh. 3.21.

Secondly, we must set before us the pattern of such Christians, as have most
excelled that way, Phil. 3.17. and walk with the wise.

Thirdly, especially as obedient children, we should learn of our heavenly
Father to fashion our selves according to his nature, and in all conversation
strive to be holy, as he is holy: and as it follows in this verse, we should
study and strive to show forth the virtues, that were eminent in Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 1.15, 16. and 12.10.

Thirdly, in so much as holiness is the prerogative of a Christian, it should
teach all sorts of men to try themselves, whether they have attained true
holiness, or no: so as they be sure their holiness exceed the holiness of
the Scribes and Pharisees: for else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. For a Christian must have that holiness of conversation, which no
wicked man can attain unto. Now that this trial may be done effectually, I
will show wherein the holiness of a true Christian exceeds the holiness,

First, of a mere civil honest man.

Secondly, of the most glorious Hypocrite.

First, for the mere civil honest man: The true Christian exceeds his
righteousness, both in the righteousness of faith, and in the internal
holiness of the heart, and the power of holy affections: but because it is
holiness of conversation, which is especially here meant, I will touch the
differences in conversation; and so,

Differences between the holiness of conversation in civi^l honest men, and
Gods elect.
First, they differ in one maine cause of orderly life. For the holiness of the
godly Christian proceeds from a regenerate heart: whereas the mere civil man
is so naturally, or only by restraining grace: he has not been in the
surnace of mortification for sin.

Secondly, the mere civil honest man glories in this, that he pays every man
his own, and is no adulterer, or drunkard, or the like notorious offender: But
for the most part he is altogether defective in the religious duties of the
first table, especially in the duties of the Sabbath, and the religious duties
he should perform in his family.

Thirdly, the mere civil honest man makes conscience of great offenses, but
cares not to be stained with lesser sins; whereas the true Christian lives
circumspectly, and makes conscience of the least Commandment.

Secondly, now for the hypocrite: Though the difference be hidden, yet it may
be assigned in diverse things, as,

Differences be^weene the hypocrite and Gods elect in the holiness of
conversation.
First, the holiness of the godly Christian flows from a pure conscience, and
faith unfeigned: whereas there is no such repentance, or faith in the hypocrite.

Secondly, the true Christian has his praise of God, but the hypocrite of men,
Romans 2.26.

Thirdly, the true Christian obeyes in all things: the hypocrite but in some,
as here for the most part they may be found tainted with some evil vice.

Fourthly, the true Christian is careful of his conversation in all places and
companies: the hypocrite only, or chiefly, when he is where he thinks he
shall be observed and marked.

Fifthly, the true Christian will not cease bearing fruit, what weather soever
come, Ier. 17.7, 8. But the hypocrite gives over, when hard times come. He is
not like the good ground, that brings forth fruit with patience: The hypocrite
will not hold out till the end, though the times be peaceable till his death.
For the most part, he then bears the burden of his hypocrisy, he cannot die
in peace.

Use. Lastly, this is a terrible doctrine for open and notorious offenders. For
hereby it is apparent they are strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, and
are not of this nation; their language and their works betray them: Drunkards,
Adulterers, Swearers, Liars, Usurers, and such like, cannot inherit, or have
any lot in this heavenly Canaan. For all this nation is holy, and such are not
they, their own consciences being Judges.

Nor is it a pleasing Doctrine to scandalous professors: For such as give
scandal, are either hypocrites, or godly: If they be hypocrites, their
scandalls betray them, and testify to their faces, they have no lot among the
Saints: and if they be godly Christians, that have fallen through weakness,
yet they have cause to be much humbled: For by them the name of God is
blasphemed; and besides many other inconveniences that will pursue their fall,
this is not the least, that hereby they have weakened their evidence, and
wonderfully darkened the marks of their happiness: For if the godly be a holy
nation, how discomfortably have they provided for themselves, and their own
souls, that have so stained their profession and holiness!

An holy nation.]

The sixth prerogative of Christians is imported in this word Nation, The sixth
prerogative is their number.
which shows the number. For though all the wicked are more in number than the
godly: yet such is the glory and greatness of the number of all the godly of
all ages, that if we could behold them on earth, as we shall see them in
heaven, and at the last Judgment, we would wonderfully admire the beauty and
multitude of the Christian Army. All the godly together make a goodly Nation,
and though in largeness of number they do not go beyond the wicked, yet in
the privileges of their number they go far beyond them. They are all one,
and a whole Nation of them, which imports diverse privileges.

First, they are all originally of one blood, borne of the blood of Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, they are all governed by one Ruler: their noble Ruler is of
themselves, there is one heart in them to serve the Lord.

Thirdly, they are all governed by one book of Laws.

Fourthly, they all enjoy the same privileges in the communion of Saints, even
those before contained in this verse.

Fifthly, they all enjoy the love of God: they are his portion. As Israel was
his out of all the world: so the godly are his, and make all but one Nation.

In that all the godly are one Nation, diverse things may from thence be
observed by way of use.

Use. First, it should be very comfortable to all that are truly godly; and so
it should comfort them diverse ways. First, against the fewness of them that
live in one place, and so against the reproach of the world for that reason.
For here they may know that if all the godly were together, there would be no
cause to despise them for their number. Never such a Nation of men, as they*
Secondly, in the case of adversaries, the gates of hell shall not prevail
against them. They are a whole Nation of them, they may be oppressed, but they
can never be utterly rooted out. Thirdly, in respect of their consanguinity
with all the godly: though they differ much in estate or condition, yet
wheresoever, or howsoever they live, they are all countrymen, they are all of
one Nation; the partition wall is broken down. All godly Christians, whether
Jews or Gentiles, are but one Nation. Fourthly, in respect of the government
and protection of Christ over them. Why cryest thou then, O Christian, Is there
no King in Sion?

Secondly, hence some use for instruction may be made. For first, we may here
learn to know no man after the flesh. All other relations are swallowed up in
this relation: when thou art once converted, thou needst not reckon of what
country thou art, or how descended, for thou art now only of the Christian
nation. All godly men should acknowledge no respects more than those are
wrought in them by Christ. Secondly, since Christians are all countrymen, and
seeing they are like the Jews, dispersed up and down the world, they should
therefore be glad one of another, and make much one of another, and defend one
another, and relieve one another by all means of help and comfort.

Thirdly, they should therefore observe the fashions of the godly, and be more
strict to follow the manners of their nation, wheresoever they come.

A peculiar people.]

The acceptance of the words.
The Latins render the words of the original, Populus acquisitionis. In the
Greek it is, (...). The word rendered peculiar, signifies sometimes
conservation or saving, as Heb. 10.39. to the saving or conservation of the
soul: sometimes, purchase, as, the Church was purchased by his blood, Act.
20.28. sometimes, possession or obtaining, as, He ordained us to the obtaining
of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. and the glory of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2.14. Neither do
Interpreters agree about the attributing of what felicity the word imports. For
one would have the sense thus, Populus acquisitionis, that is, the people he
could gain by; intending thereby, that the Apostle should say, that the godly
were the only people that God could get any thing by. Others would have it
thus: A people for obtaining, that is, of heaven: and so the sense is, 1 Thessalonians.
5.9. that they are a people God has set apart to obtain heaven, or to gain
more than any people. Others thus: A people of purchase, that is, such as were
purchased, viz. by the blood of Christ. And so the people of God were purchased
out of the world by the blood of Christ: and the Israelites were typically
redeemed out of Egypt by the blood of the Lamb. The godly are a people bought
at a great price; none ever so dearly ransomed. But I take it as it is here
rendered, A peculiar people: and so the word may intimate a double reason. Doct.
For first they are a peculiar people, because God has every way fashioned
them for himself. Secondly, they are a peculiar people, because they are his
treasure, yea, all his treasure. The godly comprehend all his gettings: they
are as it were all he has. And so Exodus 19. verse. 6. may explain it.

Use. The use may be partly for consolation, and partly for instruction.

First, it should exceedingly comfort the godly, to know their acceptance with
God: they are in high favor with him: they are his very Favorites. And this
should distinctly comfort them diverse ways: as first, that God does make so
much account of them, to love them as any covetous man can love his treasure.
Hence God is said to delight in them, to rejoice over them with joy, and his
mercy to them pleases him. Secondly, it should comfort them in respect of the
suites they may obtain from God. He is rich to all that call upon him. No
King can do so much for his Favorites, as God can and will do for his. Gods
favorites may ask whatsoever they will, and be sure to have it, and therefore
it were a shame for them to be poor. Thirdly, the favorites of earthly
Princes may lose all, and fall into the Kings displeasure, and so be undone for
ever, and go out with singular disgrace and ruin: but Gods Favorites have
this privilege; they shall never lose the favor of God. He will love them to
the end, Job. 13.1. Nothing shall separate them from the love of God in Christ,
Romans 8. ult. God has not appointed any of them to wrath, but to the obtaining
of salvation, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9, 10. And all this should be the more comfortable,
because God respects no persons. Every subject cannot be the Kings Favorite;
nor is every servant, in Ordinary; nor is every one that serves, in the Chamber
of presence, or Privie-Chamber: but in Gods Court all servants are Favorites;
and he has treasure enough to enrich them all, and affection enough to love
them all.

Secondly, diverse instructions may be here gathered: for if we be Gods
Favorites, and his treasure, it should teach us,

First, to live comfortably, even to live by faith, to trust upon Gods favor
for life and salvation; nor need we doubt our pardon, nor question our
preferment.

Secondly, to live humbly, to be ever ready to acknowledge, that it was Gods
free grace that has raised them up from the very dunghill, as it were, to such
high preferment: we must confess that we hold all from him: we must humble our
selves, seeing we have this honor to walk with our God. Pride is one of the
first things destroys the favorites of the world.

Thirdly, to live holily, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, and living
religiously, and soberly, and righteously in this present world: since he has
redeemed us to be a people peculiar to himself, we should be zealous of good
works. An exactness of living is required of such as must live in Princes
presence: and since God has bought us at so dear a rate, we must not live to
our selves, but to him that died for us, 2 Cor. 5.15. Tit. 2.12, 14.

Fourthly, to submit our selves to Gods disposing: we are his treasure: it is
reason he should do with his own what he will; and the rather, because he
will never employ his treasure, but for advantage. He that blamed the evil
servant for not gaining by his talent, will certainly himself gain by all the
ways he imployes his own treasure.

This doctrine should serve also for a double warning to wicked men. First, to
take heed how they wrong Gods people: if they touch his Anointed, they touch
the apple of his eye. He will be sensible and requite it. They are not in a
safe condition that wrong the Favorites of Kings; their backs are as good as
broken; and every man is afraid of them: and it is no less danger to be
injurious to that people which is so dear to God. And withal, this doctrine
should teach us and them, that if they have any desire to get the King of
heavens pardon, or to obtain favor with him: if they have any mind to repent
they should do well to get some of those Favorites to commend their suit to
the King; God will not deny them: The prayers of the righteous avail much,
especially if they be earnest with him.

Hitherto of the enumeration of the particulars of the prerogatives of the
godly: the end of them follows, viz. That they may show the virtues of Christ
that called them.

Virtues.

The original word here translated virtues, is but sparingly used in
Scripture: the Apostle Paul only uses it once, viz. Phil. 4.8. and the
Apostle Peter here: and twice in the next Epistle: The sense as the word is
taken for praises.
neither do Interpreters agree about the translation of it. For many following
the Syriach, render it praises, and not virtues: and so the meaning is, our
privileges are bestowed upon us to this end, that we should show forth the
praises of Christ; and that diverse ways.

First, by embracing these prerogatives themselves. For these do set out much
the praises of Christ: as his love to man, his wisdom and power, that could
redeem a people out of such misery to happiness, and his singular acceptance
with his Father, from whom he obtained such large prerogatives for his
servants.

Secondly, by thanksgiving, when we praise God for Christ, and give praise to
Christ for all his goodness and love to us.

Thirdly, by commending the riches of the love of Christ to us, setting forth
his praise from day to day, as we have occasion by discourse to others.

Fourthly, by living so as that God in Jesus Christ may be glorified in the
wo^ld, especially in the Church.

Now other writers follow the native signification of the word, and translate
it virtues, but with different interpretation. For some by the virtues of
Christ understand the benefits exhibited to us by Christ, and so we are
enriched with the former privileges, that so we might make it appear, ^ow
much we have gained by Jesus Christ: And these benefits of Christ we show
forth by thansgiving to God, daily praising him for them, as also by the word
of exhortation, when we call upon others to seek after them; and lastly, by
carrying our selves so, as may become so great treasure, keeping them with all
care, esteeming them above all gettings, and living as contentedly, as if God
had given us a Kingdom on earth, and ordring our conversation so, as men might
see our care of good works becoming such high preferment.

But I rather follow those Interpreters, that take the word, as it properly
signifies, for the gifts of the mind in Christians bestowed upon them by
Christ, and so it is originally a philosophical word, expressing those
endowments of the mind, which Philosophers in their Ethickes prescribed; and
it is the more sparingly used by the Apostle, because it is too low a word to
express the worth of the rich mercies and graces of Christ: and the Apostle
Paul, Phil. 4.8. when he says, If there be any virtue, etc. means, that if
there were any virtue, in which Philosophers did excel, they should strive not
to come behind those natural men, even in those virtues, such as were
chastity, liberality, temperance, sobriety, magnanimity, truth, justice, and
such like.

Now as the Scripture takes notice of virtue, it belongs to the duties of the
second table, as godliness does to the first: and though virtue considered
morally, has nothing supernatural in it; yet considered as it is propounded
here, it is of singular worthiness to be regarded. For though those virtues
which were in the Philosophers were but natural; yet there were certain
virtues in Christ belonging to the second Table, which as the pattern is given
us in him, could never be found in mere natural men; so that the Apostle
does of purpose separate the consideration of virtues, and in especial call
upon us to get framed in us those virtues, which did most shine in the nature
and conversation of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The division.
Now in all the words four things must be distinctly handled.

First, that every Christian is bound to imitate the special virtues of Jesus
Christ.

Secondly, that it is not enough to have those virtues, but they must show them
forth accordingly.

Thirdly, how those virtues thus showed forth, are still called the virtues of
Christ.

Fourthly, the Periphrasis, by which Christ is described, is to be attended
when he says, The first (...).
It is he that called us. For the first of these, it is apparent, that the
Apostle takes all the godly bound to the imitation of the virtues of Christ.

Note by the way, that it is the virtues of Christ that are to be imitated. For
every thing in Christ is not to be imitated; as,

First, not his infirmities: for though they were unblameable, and without
sin, Five things we are not to (...).
yet they imported weakness: and so, though they be in us, yet we are not to
strive after the attainment of them.

Secondly, not his works of Divinity; as his miracles, curing of men with a
word, walking on the water, fasting forty days, and such like.

Thirdly, not his works of Office; such works as he did in that singular
obedience to that singular commandment of his Father, in dying to redeem the
Church: and so all the works of his Mediator-ship, as he was the Mediator
between God and man.

Fourthly, not his works of obedience, as the son of Abraham, to the Mosaicall
Laws, those that were Ceremonial: for Christ must be considered as the son
of Adam, and not as the son of Abraham. As the son of Adam, he was bound to
the Moral Law, whether as it was first written in men's hearts, or as after it
was taught by tradition, and at length by the Writings of Moses.

Fifthly, we are not bound to follow every action of Christ in indifferent
things, no not in such as had some circumstantiall relation to religious
duties: such as were to sit and preach, or to preach on mountains, or by high
way sides, and in a ship, or to pray all night, or to wear a garment without a
seame, or to sit at the Paschall Supper, and a multitude of such like
instances: such as was the Commandment to his Disciples, to take nothing for
their journey, neither staves, nor scrip, nor money, nor two coats: and so he
preached the Gospel freely himself, and such was his lifting up of his eyes
to heaven in prayer.

They are the virtues of Christ only, which we are bound to follow: and among
these, such as he did chiefly win reputation in, are in this place specially
commended.

It is the duty then of every Christian to study the life of his Savior, and
seek to imitate those things were most eminent in him. Now that this point may
more distinctly be observed, we must consider what those virtues are, and
were, which in Christ did so much excel, and in Scripture we are charged
specially to imitate, and would so much adorn the lives of Christians.

There are nine virtues which did exceedingly excel in Christ, Nine virtues in
Christ, which we must show forth in our lives. 1 Wisdom.
and would marvellously adorn the lives of Christians, if they would walk as
Christ has left them example; which I may reckon in this order.

The first was wisdom and discretion. The people wondered at his gracious
words, and the wisdom that was in him, Luke 4.22. and he requires of his
Disciples, that they should be wise as serpents and innocent as doves, and
they should grow in understanding and wisdom, Col. 2.2, 3. and 3.10.

Now, this wisdom of Christ we should show,

First, by restraining rash zeal and furious sentences upon wicked men, How we
should show it, viz. five ways.
as Christ did, Luke 9.55.

Secondly, by avoiding with discretion the snares which are laid for us by our
adversaries, being advised how we let fall any thing might bring dishonor to
our profession, and needless danger to our estates. This discretion our
Savior Christ showed, when he was tempted with hard and dangerous questions,
as that about Caesar, and the questions of the Lawyers, and Sadduces.

Thirdly, by avoiding in indifferent things what by experience we see is
misliked in others, as when the austerity of John was censured, Christ took
his liberty in the use of the creatures, and convenient company-keeping, Luke
7.33, 34.

Fourthly, by giving place oftentimes to the sudden and violent furies of
wicked men, when they will run on wilfully, till there may be convenient time
to deal with them: so did Christ often avoid the commotions of his adversaries.

Fifthly, by gracious words, and fruitful communication, when we so speak as
becomes the Oracles of God, with all reverence and power, 1 Pet. 4.11. Luke
4.22. It was in particular a singular discretion in Christ, that when he was
asked vain questions, or such as were not so fitly propounded, he answers so
as may most profit, declining the answer that should only feed curiosity, or
the like ill humors.

But yet it manifestly appears by the practice of Christ, What it must not
have in it.
that this wisdom must not have in it either forbearing of just reproves, or
dissimulation, or the omission of necessary duties, or the practice of
unlawful things for fear of men, or a subtilty only to compass great things
for ones self, or a denial of the truth, or such like.

The second thing in Christ was meekness: and this we are charged to learn of
Christ, 2 M^eknesse,
Mat. 11.29. And thus Paul beseeches them by the meekness of Christ, 2 Cor.
10.1.

showed in (...) things.
Now we should show this meekness (first) by restraining the passions of our
hearts, such as are anger, malice, wrath, bitterness, and the like: this way
our Lord Jesus did wonderfully excel. Secondly, by avoiding strife and
contention. Do nothing through strife, says the Apostle, Phil. 2.4. but let
the same mind be in you, that was in Christ. Thus it is a singular praise to
be gentle, Iam. 3.17. Thirdly, by an easy subjection to Gods will to bear the
yoke of God, is to imitate Christ herein, to be easily persuaded or entreated
to do those things which belong to our duty and Christian obedience, Matt.
11.29. Fourthly, by gentle dealing with such as have fallen through infirmity.
This is required of us, Gal. 6.1. And thus did Christ toward Peter after his
fall: he never showed his displeasure, when he saw he was displeased with
himself.

The third virtue is humility or lowliness of mind. This is also required of
us, 3 Humility,
Matt. 11. as a virtue we should imitate in Christ. Now Christ showed his
humility,

which is showed three w^ies.
First, by making himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.8. He abased himself, to
take our nature upon him. He hid for a time, the glory he had with the Father;
and besides, he showed it by avoiding many times applause and fame of the
people. He sought not the honor of men. He suppressed often his own
praises, Ioh. 5.43, 44. And thus we shall do likewise, if our praise be not
of men, but of God, and that we do nothing through vain glory, Phil. 2.4,6.
And as he did not seek the applause of others, so he did not give witness of
himself, Ioh. 5.31. He praised not himself: and we should show our humility
by a low opinion of our selves, thinking better of others, than of our selves,
Phil. 2.4.

Secondly, by making himself equal with them of the lower sort, which is
required of us, Romans 12.16. and was performed by him, when he forced with
Publicans and sinners, and the meanest of the people, magnifying the poor of
this world.

Ob. Might some one say, Yea, this shows the pride of professors now: for they
will not sort nor converse with their neighbors, especially if they be, as
they account them, but guilty of any crime, such as drunkenness, whoredom,
swearing, etc.

Sol. The example of Christ is perversely alleged, to condemn the godly
herein: for they do only profess a resolution to shun all needless society
with open wicked men. Two things may be said about Christ's practice herein:
First, that he conversed with them, not as a companion, but as a Physician. He
came to them, as the Physician does to his Patient, to heal them: and thus it
is not denied, but the company of the worst men may be resorted unto, viz.
when we have a calling and fitness to reclaim them. Secondly, consider well
what these persons were, with whom Christ sometimes kept company. The Publicans
were such as gathered toll or tribute-money for Caesar, and for that reason
were extremely hateful among the Jews, who liked not to be subject to
foreign government: but it is not manifest, that they were men of notorious
evil conversation. It was the stomach of the Jews, not the wickedness of
the men, made Publicans to be so hateful. And whereas it is added, that he
kept company with sinners; it may be answered, that they were penitent sinners,
as our Savior said of them, Mark. 2. It is true, some of them had been
notoriously wicked, as Mary Magdalen, who once had been a most wanton woman,
but was now received to mercy, and had repented with many tears; which though
the Jews acknowledged not, because she was one of Christ's Converts, yet to us
it ought to be evident.

Thirdly, Christ showed his humility by bearing the infirmities of the weak,
unto which we are exhorted, Romans 15.1, 2. and Ephesians. 4.2. and Christ practiced
it daily, by bearing with the strange weaknesses of his Disciples.

Now, these duties of humility we are the more bound unto, more (I say) than
Christ, first, because we are sinful creatures, and ought ever to bear upon
us some part of the shame of our offenses. Secondly, because we are infinitely
inferior to him, in respect of his greatness. If he that was so great by
relation to God, equal to God, and by birth and office, etc. if he (I say)
carry himself so humbly, how little reason have we to stand upon birth, riches,
calling, gifts, or the like? etc.

The fourth virtue that was eminent in Christ, was contempt of the world; 4
Contempt of (...) world,
an admirable thing, that he, who was Heir of all things, could show so little
regard of worldly things: and this he showed,

First, by living in such want of all things, as he affirms, Luke 9.57,58.

Secondly, by refusing the preferments were offered him upon sinful terms;
s^^wed in four things.
whether by the devil, who offered him all the glory of the Kingdoms of the
world; or by men, who would have made him King.

Thirdly, by knowing no man after the flesh, by his neglect of earthly kindred:
his hearers were his father and mother, brothers and sisters: he esteemed of
men according to their spiritual estate in Gods Kingdom, and not according to
their outward estate in the world.

Fourthly, by seeking the things of others more than his own: his life was
wholly devoted to the profiting of others.

Thus should we show our contempt of the world also, by using the world as
though we used it not, 1 Cor. 7.31. by not caring for the things of this life
with distrustful cares, Matthew. 6. by not seeking great things for our selves,
and by looking on the things of others, as well as our own things, Phil. 2.4.
and by acknowledging of spiritual relations with our best affections.

The fifth virtue eminent in Christ was Mercy: 5 M^rcy,
which he showed not only by counsel, persuading his hearers to all sorts of
mercy upon all occasions, but by his practice also, by healing both the souls
and bodies of all sorts of diseases in all sorts of men, going about and doing
good in all places where be came: This is a virtue in many Scriptures much
urged upon Christians, Col. 2.12. Romans 12.1 Tim. 6. Iam. 3.17. and our mercy
should have the same praises his had: First, it should be all sorts of mercy,
to soul and body: showed (...) ways.
Secondly, we should be full of mercy: Thirdly, we should be ready to
communicate and distribute: Fourthly, it should be with pity and bowels of
mercy. All this was in Christ, and is required of us.

The sixth virtue in Christ was patience: This virtue we are charged withal,
Heb. 12.1, 2. 6 Patience,
and urged to it by the example of Christ, And thus we are to learn of him to
be a patient people, both for the matter, that we endure the cross, Luke
9.23. 1 Pet. 4.1. and 2.24. and for the manner, we must suffer as he did:
First, with silence: he was as a lamb dumb before his shearer. to be showed
four ways.
Secondly, with subjection to Gods will: Father, thy will be done: so David, I
should have been patient, because thou did it, Psalm. 39. Thirdly, with long
suffering: Christ bare his cross daily, and so should we. Fourthly, with
willingness: we must take up our cross, Luke 9. Christ despised the shame,
Heb. 12. And the rather should we be formed unto patience in all tribulations,
Three motives.
because we are (first) sinful creatures, and have deserved our crosses; so
did not Christ in his own person: secondly, we suffer not such extreme
things, as Christ did: thirdly, we have reason to be silent in the evil day,
because we have not such wisdom to speak, as Christ had.

The seventh virtue eminent in Christ, was his compassion to his enemies: 7
Compassion to enemies.
which he showed diverse ways; as

First, by praying for them on the cross, when he suffered the extremest
things from them: Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.

Secondly, by restraining reviling and revenge: he rendered not evil for
evil, he reviled not again, 1 Pet. 2.24. Romans 15.3. He would not send fire
from heaven upon them, Luke 9.55.

Thirdly, by doing them all the good he might: He instructed them with
patience: He was the good Samaritane, that healed their wound, and was at cost
with them.

Fourthly, by receiving them with gladness, when they repented, as he did the
thief on the cross.

Fifthly, by mourning for the hardness of their hearts and impenitencie: thus
he weeps over Jerusalem.

All this is required of us: We should pray for them that curse us, Matthew. 5.
we must not render reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 3.9. and 2.14. we should
mourn for them in their miseries: so did David, Psalm. 35.13, 14. and we
should overcome their evil with goodness, as Romans 12.19, 20.

The eighth virtue in Christ, was harmelesnesse and inoffensivenesse: and we
are exhorted to unrebukeablenesse, 8 Inoffensivenes.
and to live without offense, because we are the sons of God, Phil. 2.15. and
Christ requires in us the innocence of doves, and for the same reason compares
the godly to sheep. Where I say we should live without offense, I mean,
without giving offense: For Christ himself, that most innocent Lamb of God,
was rebuked, and reproached, and reviled; and so may the most godly Christians.
It is a blessed thing to be reviled for following goodness, and for the
Gospels sake.

9 Love to the godly.
The last virtue, which I reckon in Christ, was his love to the godly: which we
are required to imitate, Ephesians. 5.7, 8. 1 Ioh. 3. Now there are diverse things we
should learn of Christ in our love to the godly.

First, to love them with a preventing love: for Christ loved us first.

Secondly, to love them though they be our inferiors: so did Christ love us.

Thirdly, to love them notwithstanding their infirmities: Christ loved the
Church, though she be black, Cantic. 1. and full of spots and wrinkles, Ephesians.
5.

Fourthly, to love them fervently: Nothing should be too dear to part with
for them: Christ shed his blood for our sakes, Ephesians. 5.2. 1 Ioh. 3. and withal
we should show the fervency of our love by defending them, as Christ did his
Disciples, and by sympathy in all distresses and temptations, as Christ has a
feeling of our infirmities, Heb. 4.15. so we should be like affectioned one to
another, Romans 12.15.

And thus much of the first point.

The second thing hence to be noted, is, That it is not enough to have the
virtues of Christ, but we must show forth the virtues of Christ. Now we show
forth the virtues of Christ diverse ways:

How many ways we show forth the virtues of Christ.
First, by observing certain public solemnities, as by the use of the
Sacraments. For therein we not only remember the praises of Christ, till he
come again, but also we enter into bond with God for the imitation of the
holiness which was in Christ.

Secondly, by Martyrdom, when we can resolve to suffer the extremest things,
rather than forsake our innocence. This makes men acknowledge the virtue of
Christ in us.

Thirdly, by the power of practice in our conversation; and so to show them
forth, is,

First, to practice them to the life, to make a clear impression of them in
our works: The word here rendered to show forth, signifies to preach; and so
it may note, that we should practice those virtues so clearly, that our lives
might be as so many Sermons upon the life of Christ.

Secondly, to practice them so, as others may observe them: and so it imports,
that upon all occasions in our conversations, which are before other men, we
should be sure not to be wanting in those virtues, when we are provoked to the
contrary vices.

Quest. But may we do things for the show? Is not that Hypocrisy and vain
glory forbidden unto Christians?

Answ. There are some virtues, we can never offend that ways by showing them:
as we can never show too much wisdom: we may be vainglorious in too much
show of our knowledge, we may offend in bringing our zeal too much to the
show; but we can never show too much true patience, or meekness, or moderation
of mind, Phil. 4.5. we may offend in making show of diverse duties of piety in
the first table, as alms, prayer, fasting, Matt. 6. but those virtues here
mentioned may on all occasions be lawfully held out to the best show. But that
I may express my self more distinctly, outward shows are then condemned as
sinful, viz.

First, when sinful things are showed, as carnal passions, and railing, Seven
ways wherein we may offend by outward shows.
in stead of true zeal.

Secondly, when secret duties are done openly, and for show, as when private
prayer and fasting is so performed, as that others may manifestly observe them,
Matt. 6.

Thirdly, when outward shows are purposely affected: affectation and hunting
after applause is condemned.

Fourthly, when care in lesser things is showed, and the care of greater things
is manifestly neglected; this has grievous irritation in it, and is
Pharisaicall, Matthew. 23.

Fifthly, when the things showed are done deceitfully: such was the practice of
Ananias and Sapphira. Act. 5.

Sixthly, when men multiply the use of the means of holiness, but neglect the
practice of it, Esa. 1. Mich. 6.

Seventhly, when we show our gifts of purpose to the contempt and disgrace of
others, Romans 12.16. Iam. 3.10. 1 Cor. 8.3.

The use briefly may be,

First, for humiliation; Use.
and so first unto ungodly men in the Church that profess the service of
Christ, and claim the privileges of Christians, and yet in stead of showing
forth the virtue of Christ, show forth the wickedness of the devil, by their
lewd conversation causing the name of God to be blasphemed by Papists and
Atheists, and all sorts of Heretics and Sectaries, by their whoredoms,
swearing, malice, drunkenness, and the lusts of their father the devil; and
those of all sorts. These are they that carry Christ about in scorn, to be
derided of the enemies of the truth: for when with their words they profess
Christ, by their works they deny him themselves, and cause him to be denied by
others. Were there not a remnant that bear the Image of Christ in sincerity,
who would ever embrace a religion that were professed by men of such wicked
conversation? Secondly, it should exceedingly humble scandalous pro^essers,
that would have the world think better of them than of the former sort, an^
yet become grievous to men by their vile offenses. Thirdly, unfruitful
Christians, which lie in a continual barrenness, whose ground is always
fallow* have but little consolation from hence: for though they are better than
the former, in that they are not openly wicked, yet they fall short of their
duty here, because they do not more effectually show forth the graces of
Christ. And that there may be a healing of this error, they must amend, first,
their ignorance and pray to God to teach them to profit: secondly, their
slothfulness, rowzing up themselves to more zeal of good works, and care to
answer the opportunities of well doing.

Use 2. Secondly, for instruction. All that love the Lord Jesus, should hence
be persuaded to increase in all care of well-doing, and study how to show forth
the light of their works before men; and the rather, because,

Motives to the show of virtue.
First, they have received such singular mercy from the Lord.

Secondly, they shallhereby glorify their heavenly father, and make religion
to be well spoken of, Phil. 2.15,16. 2 Thessalonians. 3.21. and put to silence the
ignorance of the foolish: we should be as tender of the honor of our
profession, as of our own honor.

Thirdly, they shall hereby wonderfully establish their own hearts in the
assurance of their calling and election, 1 Ioh. 1.5,6. 2 Pet. 1.5. to 10. and
much increase their own contentment, and joy in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.58.

Fourthly, they shall have a full and plentiful reward in the day of the Lord,
Romans 2.7,8,9,10,11.

Fifthly, the hearts of their teachers shall be hereby filled with joy, when
they see they have not labored in vain, Phil. 2.16.2 Cor. 3.1,2,3.

Of him that, etc.]

In the third place it may be here considered of, why those virtues, showed
forth by Christians, are yet called the virtues of Christ. For answer
whereunto, we may be informed, Why the virtues in us are called the virtues of
Christ.
that they are the virtues of Christ in diverse respects:

First, because they are such virtues as are had only by such as be in Christ
by effectual calling: for all the wicked are strangers from the life of God.

Secondly, because they are received from the Spirit of Christ: of his fullness
we have all received these graces, Ioh. 1.14. Ephesians. 1.21.

Thirdly, because they are showed forth for his glory. All our gifts and
services are devoted to the glory of Christ: as they are in him, so they are
for him.

Lastly, I think they may be called the virtues of Christ, because they
resemble his virtues: as the picture of a man is called by the name of the man
himself.

And the consideration hereof should the more incite us to the care of these
virtues, seeing we are here to follow no worse a pattern than the example of
the Lord Jesus himself: and withal we should be the more humble, when we have
had and done all we can, seeing we have nothing but what we have received. And
since all should be for his glory, we have reason to say at the best, We are
unprofitable servants. And withal it should comfort us against the sense of
our infirmities, to consider, how weak soever we have been, yet our gifts
are acknowledged for the virtues of Christ himself; and by the benefit of
Christ's intercession, are accepted of God, as if they had been found in the
person of Christ himself.

Thus of the third point.

He that has called you.]

The fourth thing to be noted, is this Periphrasis here given of Christ.
Instead of saying the virtues of Christ, he says the virtues of him that
called you; which he does of purpose to exalt the praise of the gifts of God in
our calling; and partly to show, that we enter upon the possession of the
former prerogatives, the most of them, when we are called by the grace of
Jesus Christ; and partly thereby guiding us to the knowledge of that work of
God, which may assure us of our interest in the former prerogative. All which
shows that we have great reason seriously to study the doctrine of our
calling by Jesus Christ.

Sorts of callings.
Calling is either personal, or natural, or spiritual, or supernatural. The
personal calling is to some office; the natural to the exercise of some
moral virtue: the spiritual or supernatural, is to Christ, calling us to
seek happiness and blessedness in him. This is here meant.

And so the calling of a Christian is to be reckoned among the gifts or
endowments God bestows upon his people: which that we may distinctly
understand according to the order of them, there are seven gifts of God. Seven
gifts of God.


First, vocation; by which he calls men out of the world into the Church.

Secondly, justification; by which he forgives the Called their sins, and
clothes them with the rich Robe of Christ's righteousness.

Thirdly, sanctification; by which he qualifies their nature with all heavenly
gifts necessary for their salvation.

Fourthly, adoption; by which he acknowledges and receives them for his
sons and heirs.

Fifthly, Christian liberty; by which he frees them from all things that might
hold them in bondage, or in a servile condition; as from the rigor and curse
of the Law, from the dominion of sin, from the burden of Moses ceremonies,
and humane traditions, and from those servile fears in Gods service, bred by
the spirit of bondage.

Sixthly, consolation; by which he keeps them in this happy condition: which
he performs three ways.

First, by defending them against all adversaries.

Secondly, by delivering them out of their many troubles in their militant
estate.

Thirdly, by bestowing upon them the gifts of perseverance to the end, and for
ever.

Seventhly, temporal blessings; by which he furnishes them for this present
life.

The six first of these are gifts principal: the last is but accessory. The
three first are the chief gifts: and the three next are such as arise out of
the first.

Now this work of calling men into the Church, is either external or
internal. By the external, men are called into the visible Church:
Distinction of calling.
by the internal, men are called into the invisible Church. And that we may
conceive of this distinctly; in respect of calling, all men may be cast into
four companies.

First, some are not called at all any way by the Gospel; as many of the
Pagans, etc.

Secondly, some are called only externally; as those in Matthew. 20. Many
called, but few chosen.

Thirdly, some are called internally only; as the thief on the Cross.

Fourthly, some are called both internally and externally: so the Elect of God
for the most part and ordinarily.

It is the last sort of men that are understood here.

Now that this work of God calling us, may in the order of working be more
clearly understood, we may conceive it thus:

The first cause is Gods love of men, his kindness and love to men, as the
Apostle calls it, Tit. 3.4. First, Four things in the order of working our
calling.
First, that God conceives in himself a compassionate love of man, lying in
his extreme natural distress.

Secondly, Christ then as Mediator lays the ground of this calling: and so be
does two ways. First, by removing what might hinder the work, as the
displeasure of God, and the curse of the Law; which he did by being made sin
for us, 2 Cor. 5.22. Secondly, by purchasing and bringing to light immortality,
and also the people that should possess it, which purchase he made with his
own blood, Act. 20.28. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.

Thirdly, then God sends the Word of reconciliation, furnishing men with gifts
to preach the Gospel, and souseth their ministry of reconciliation, as the
only ordinary means of calling men, 2 Cor. 5.18,19. Romans 10.14.17.

Fourthly, the Spirit of Christ does inwardly persuade the hearts of men to
receive the Word, and so to be reconciled to God.

Use. The use of this doctrine of our Christian calling, may serve both for
instruction, and for terror: for instruction, and so it may teach,

First, unregenerate men in the Church, as ever they would be saved, to awake
to the care of their calling, Ephesians. 5.14. and to be entreated while they have
the ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.20. and to open when Christ knockes,
Rev. 3.21. taking heed, they be not as the horse or mule, Psalm. 32.9. And that
they may prosper in this work of their calling, they must look to two things:

First, that they be not hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.13.

Secondly, that they despise not prophesying, but account the feet of them that
bring the glad tidings, to be beautiful, Esa. 52.9.

There are four reasons assigned by the Apostle, H^b. 3. etc. why men should
be ruled, when Christ grants them the means:

First, because it is to day; they know not how long they shall have the
means, Heb. 3.7. etc.

Secondly, because of all deceits it is most miserable to be deceived of the
things offered us in the Gospel, verse. 13.

Thirdly, because God is extremely grieved, and provoked by our neglects
herein, verse. 16.

Fourthly, because else we shall fail of the promise of entering into his rest,
Heb. 4.1, 2.

Secondly, godly men should hence learn diverse things.

First, to be diligent above all things to make their calling sure. Now there
be diverse signs of a true effectual calling, such as these: As

Eight signs of an effectual calling.
First, the opening of the heart to receive the Word of God, and to attend the
things which are spoken, Act. 16.14. whereby they are enabled to hear as the
learned, Esa. 51.6.

Secondly, the weariness of heart under the burden of sin, Mat. 11.29. and
9.13.

Thirdly, the answer of the heart to the voice of Christ, consenting to obey,
and to enter into covenant with God, Esa. 1.18, 19.

Fourthly, the taking away of the detestable things, and their abominations
from them, Ezekiel. 11.17, 21. Col. 2.11.

Fifthly, the knitting of the heart to the godly, Ezekiel. 11.^8.

Sixthly, the removing of the stony heart, and the planting of the heart of
flesh, Ez^k. 11.19.

Seventhly, the virtues of Christ, as in the coherence in this text.

Eighthly, in general the truth of our calling appears by the demonstration of
the spirit and power. The holy Ghost quickening the heart to new obedience,
called the manifestation of the spirit, 2. Cor. 2.4, 5. Ephesians. 2.5.

Secondly, it should teach them to strive to walk worthy their calling: for
the manifestation of the spirit was given to profit withal: and we are
therefore called, that we might be to the praise of his rich grace. Now that we
may walk in some measure, as becomes this great gift of God,

Five rules that show us how to walk worthy of our calling.
First, we should be humble, and not wise in our own conceit, though hardness
lie yet upon the heart of some, Romans 11.25, 30, 31. For the wind blows where
it (...), and the spirit of Christ works where and when it pleases him* Job.
3. and we have nothing but what we have received.

Secondly, we should be exceeding thankful to God for his rich grace in our
calling: and the rather,

First, because this is no common favor, but in special grace communicated to
us: For no man comes, but whom the Father draws.

Secondly, because it was done without respect of our own works, without all
desert on our part, 2 Timothy 1.9. For God called us, that were worldly, carnal,
natural, and sinful men, strangers from the life of God, dead in sins,
serving lusts and diverse pleasures, yea such as never sought God; we were
miserable sinners, Ephesians. 2.1, 12. Mat. 13.

Thirdly, because of the means and manner of our calling: God the Father
works his part, and I work, says our Savior. An excellent work, when such
workmen are needful to it: and in this work the ministration of the Spirit
exceeds in glory, 2 Cor. 3.7, 8. and it is a holy calling wherewith he has
called us, 2 Timothy 1.9.

Fourthly, because they are so great happinesses, to which he has called us:
As to the fellowship of his Son, to be sons and heirs with him, 1 Cor. 1.7.
and to a Kingdom, and so great glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 2.14.

Fifthly, because Gods gifts and calling are without repentance: He will never
repent that he has so called us, Romans 11.29. Esa. 54.7, 8, 9, 10. Iam. 1.17.

And thus of the second way, by which we should show our selves desirous to
walk worthy of our calling.

Thirdly, we should show this by well doing; we must be careful to maintain
good works, Tit. 3.8. For we were called that we might serve him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75.

Fourthly, we should therefore live contentedly, when we are assured of the
work of Christ in calling us with such a calling. Jacob should not now be
ashamed, nor his face wax pale, Esa. 29.23, 24.

Fifthly, we should in our particular be careful to rest where we are, in the
doctrine we have learned and been taught, and not be carried about with every
wind of doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 14.

Thus as the uses are common to the godly in general.

Thirdly, Ministers in particular, from the consideration of this doctrine of
our calling by Jesus Christ, should learn to preach Christ, and him crucified,
and to deny the excellency of wisdom, or words, that men's faith may be in
the power of Christ: It is Christ must give them increase: they should learn of
Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2, 4, 5.

One thing by the way I might note concerning the time of our calling: we
should not be curious about that, to know the day or hour when it was, but we
must rest satisfied to know that we are the called of Jesus Christ.

And thus of the uses for instruction.

Use 3. Hence also may be concluded much terror to wicked men, that are not
called, in that this work of calling is the door of all grace communicated to
us. Now wicked men not called, are of two sorts: first, some outwardly refuse
their calling: secondly, some seem to obey it, but it is not effectually: both
are in miserable case, but not both alike: For the later are near the Kingdom
of God many times.

The first sort resist the Holy Ghost, put the Word of Christ from them, refuse
to answer or obey, reject the counsel of God, harden their hearts, and are
therefore extremely miserable: for,

First, they judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life, Act. 13.46. The
misery of such as refuse their calling, showed in eight things.


Secondly, they are in danger to be left and forsaken of God, and have the
means taken from them, Ioh. 12.39.

Thirdly, God will provoke them many times to jealousy, by calling a people to
himself, whom they account foolish, Romans 10.19. especially when they have
rebelled against the means, Ezekiel. 3.6, 7.

Fourthly, God will laugh at the calamity of such men, Prove. 1.26.

Fifthly, and they may be taken away with sudden destruction, Prove. 1.17.

Sixthly, if they call to God, it may be he will not answer hereafter, Pro.
1.28, 29, 30.

Seventhly, if they live in prosperity, that shall destroy them, Prove. 1.31.

Eighthly, the dust of the feet of Gods servants shall witness against them in
the day of Christ, and then they shall be fearfully punished, Mat. 10.

Of the estate of such as have temporary grace.
Now there are another sort of wicked men, that are called externally, and in
some respect internally too, and yet are not right: such as have temporary
grace, do obey their calling after a sort, and for a time; for they assent
unto a part of the Word of God, which they receive with joy: and this is called
a taste of the good word of God: they may also be persuaded to leave diverse
sins, as Herod was, and may be endued with diverse graces of the Spirit,
which they had not before, Heb. 6.4, 5. Now this calling yet is not that
effectual inward calling, which is in Gods Elect. For they receive not the
promise of grace in Christ to them in particular, to rely upon it, not are
they persuaded to forsake all sin, no^ have they any one saving grace, which
is in the godly. Now these men are miserable, because they are not truly
called; and the more, first, because they were near the Kingdom of God, and
yet want it; secondly, because they will be the hardlier drawn to see their
miseries: Harlots and Publicanes may enter into the Kingdom of heaven before
them.

Hitherto of our calling, and so of the positive description of the happiness
of a Christian: the comparative follows in the last words of this verse, and
the whole 10. verse. where the Apostle intends to show them their happiness now
in Christ in comparison of that miserable estate they lived in before: so that
he compares the estate of a Christian in grace with the estate of a Christian
in nature: and this he does, first, in metaphorical terms, in the end of
this verse; and then in plain words, verse. 10. In this verse he compares their
misery to darkness, and their happiness to mavelous light.

Out of darkness.]

From the general consideration of all the words, two things may be observed:

First, that it is (...) even for godly men to be put in mind of the mise^ie
(...). For the consideration hereof may,

The remembrance of our misery past, is profitable in six respects.
First, keep them humble, to remember how vile they have been.

Secondly, quicken them to the reformation of the sin that yet hangs upon
them, Col. 3.5, 6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, work compassion in them toward others that lie yet in their sins,
and teach them to deal meekly with them, Tit. 3.2, 3.

Fourthly, make them more watchful, to look on a nature which has been so
vile,

Fifthly, quicken them to redeem the time they have spent in the service of
sin, 1 Pet. 4.3.

Sixthly, it should (...) the greater price upon our happiness in Christ; and
so is the consideration used here.

Secondly, that a mind that is truly cured of sin, can easily bear the
a(...) of it, as it is past. A man that has been wounded in his arm, will
endure you to gripe him, when he is well healed: a sign he is not well healed,
when he cannot be touched: so is it with sinners.

Thus in general.

The first thing then to be considered of, is the misery of men by nature,
expressed in the word darkness.

Dar^^esse.]

The ^^ceptations of the word Darkness.
The darkness that is in the world, is not all of a sort: For there is (first)
darkness upon the earth, which is nothing but the absence of the light of the
Sun. Secondly, there is darkness upon the outward estates of men in the
world, and that is the darkness of affliction. Now afflictions are called
darkness in diverse respects: As first in respect of the cause, when they fall
upon men by the anger of God. The want of the light of Gods countenance is
miserable darkness: the absence of the Sun cannot make a worse darkness.
Secondly, in respect of the effects, because afflictions darken the outward
glory of man's estate, and withal breed sorrow and anguish, and the clouds and
storms of discomfort and grief; and for the time, deprive the heart of
lightsomnesse and joy. Of both these respects, may the words of the Prophet
Esaias be understood, Esa. 5.30. and 8.22. And so God creates darkness as a
punishment upon all occasions for sin, Esaias 45.7. Afflictions may be compared
to darkness in respect of another effect, and that is the amazement bred in
the heart; by which the afflicted is unable to see a way out of distress, and
unresolved either how to take it, or what means to use for deliverance. Thus
it is a curse upon wicked men that their ways are made dark, Psalm. 35.6.
Thirdly, afflictions are called darkness when they are secret and hidden, and
fall upon men at unawares, when they are not dreamed of, Job 20.26.

And thus of darkness upon men's estates.

Thirdly, there is a darkness falls upon their bodies: and so it is either
blindness, wanting the light of the Sun, or else it is death and the grave.
Death and the grave is called darkness, Job 17.13. and 10.21, 22. Psalm. 88.13.

Fourthly, there is a darkness upon the souls of men: and that is spiritual
blindness, when the soul lives without the knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ
especially. As it respects the will of God in general, it is the darkness of
ignorance and error: and as it respects the promise of grace in Jesus
Christ, it is the darkness of unbelief, Ephesians. 4.

Lastly, there is a darkness shall light upon both souls and bodies of wicked
men in hell: and that is called utter darkness, Mat. 8.12. and 22.15.

So that darkness, as it comprehends in it the misery of wicked men, is either
temporal darkness upon the estates or bodies of men, or spiritual darkness
upon the souls of men, or else eternal darkness in hell.

This darkness also may be considered in the degrees of it. Degrees of
darkness.
For besides the ordinary darkness, there is (first) obfcure darkness, called
also the power of darkness: and such was the darkness of Gentilisme: and such
is that darkness threatened to such as curse father and mother, Prove. 21.20. so
was the darkness, Ier. 2.1, 2. and that our Savior Christ speaks of, Luke
22.53. Such also was that night brought upon the Diviners, Mic. 3.6, 7.
Secondly, there is utter darkness, or eternal darkness in hell, which is the
highest degree of the misery of wicked men.

I take it, it is especially the darkness of ignorance is here meant, though
the other cannot be excluded.

That which is evident to be observed from hence is, That all men that are not
effectually called, live in darkness, and walk on in darkness, Ephesians. 4.17. 1
Ioh. 2.9. Psalm. 82.5. It is a continual night with them: they are like the
Egyptians that could have no Sun to light them, but were covered with
palpable darkness. Neither are they helped, that they enjoy the light of the
Sun: for of all darknesses, that which comes from the absence of the Sun,
is the least, or has least distress in it. If a man lived where he should
never see day, or were borne blind, yet his distress were nothing in
comparison of the darkness, especially spiritual, that lies upon the poor
soul of an unregenerate man, which lies shut up in miserable darkness: which
these men may feel in themselves, by their living without God in the world,
and by the absence of the joys of God, and by their singular uncapablenesse in
the things of the Kingdom of God, and by their strange and absurd errors in
conceiving of matters of Religion, and by their monstrous thoughts and
objections they feel at some times, and disability to conceive of the worth of
eternal things, though the least of them be better than the whole world; and
lastly, by their want of discovering what to do, almost in all the occasions
of life.

Use. The use may be for singular terror to wicked men, if they had hearts to
consider of it, to know that they live in such a condition as no prisoner can
suffer in the worst dungeon of the world; and the rather, if they consider the
aggravation of their distress, in respect of the darkness they live in, or
are likely to live in: as,

First, that they have the Devils as the Rulers of the darkness they live in,
who like cruel Jaylers will see to it, Nine aggravations of the darkness is
in wicked men.
that they be kept still in their dungeon, with all increase of heaviness and
misery, Ephesians. 6.12.

Secondly, that their darkness is also the shadow of death, a most deadly
poysonfull darkness, that daily increases in the infection and annoyance of
it, Esa. 9.2.

Thirdly, that they suffer so many kinds of darkness in the vexations and
discomforts of each of them.

Fourthly, that it is such gross darkness, so thick and palpable, without
any mixture of true light or comfort: if they had but starlight or moonlight,
it were some ease.

Fifthly, that they are neither safe walking nor lying still. If they walk,
they go in singular danger: for they know not whither they go, 1 Ioh. 2.11.
Job 18.5, 6, 7. If they lie still and sleep it out, they are in danger to be
swallowed up eternally.

Sixthly, that this darkness will not hide from God. All they do is manifest
before him, Esa. 29.15.

Seventhly, that it is a continual darkness: it will never be day with them,
so long as they live in that estate without repentance, Job 15.30. All his
days he eats in darkness, Eccles. 5.17.

Eighthly, that they are in danger every hour to be cast into utter darkness,
where will be no ease nor end. He knows not that the day of this darkness is
ready at hand; into which if he fall, he shall never depart out.

Ninthly, that this is the case of every unregenerate man: the whole world of
them lies in darkness, and not one escapes it: their whole earth is without
form, and void, and their heavens have no light in them, Ier. 4.24.

Ob. But we see wicked men have joy and comfort many times.

Sol. They have certain sparks of light, like the light smitten out of the
flint: first, they cannot warm themselves by it, nor see how to direct their
ways: secondly, it will quickly go out: thirdly, howsoever it be for a time
here, yet at length they must lie down in sorrow, Esa. 50.10.

And the consideration hereof should in the second place much reprove the
perverseness of wicked men; and that in diverse respects, and considerations:

First, that they can be silent in darkness, as the phrase is, 1 Samuel 2.9.
that they can live so securely, and never make moan, or humble themselves in
their distress.

Secondly, that they dare, which is worse, many times call darkness light, and
light darkness, and defend it that they are in as great liberty and safety as
the best of them all. Oh woe unto them, because they call darkness light, Esa.
5.20.

Thirdly, that they will not come into the light when the door is opened, and
while there is spiritual means of light. What a thing is this, that light is
come into the world, and the darkness comprehends it not? Ioh. 1.5.

Fourthly, this is their condemnation, that they love darkness more than
light, and prefer their vile condition before the condition of the children
of the light, Ioh. 3.21.

Thirdly, let these poor wretches be instructed, if it be possible,

First, to embrace the means of light.

Secondly, to pray to God to be entreated of them to lighten their darkness.
Does not he justly perish, that may enjoy the light for asking for i^, and yet
will not?

Ob. If any ask, how may they know that they are in darkness?

Ans. I answer,

First, Four signs of spiritual darkness.
by the uncapablenesse and insensiblenesse of the soul in the things of the
Kingdom of God, Ephesians. 4.17. 1 Cor. 2.14.

Secondly, by the works of darkness, by the continual practice of sin
without sound repentance, Romans 13. 1 Ioh. 1.6, 7.

Thirdly, in particular, by the habitual hatred of the godly, because they
follow goodness, 1 Ioh. 2.9, 11.

Fourthly, by the absence of God in the use of his ordinances, who is as the
simne to the godly, Psalm. 84.12.

And thus of the use that concerns the wicked.

Use 2. Godly men should from hence gather increase of consolation in their
hearts, from the consideration of Gods mercy in translating them from the
Kingdom of darkness into the Kingdom of his dear Love, Col. 1.12, 13. they
are the men upon whom God has accomplished the prophecy and promise of his
grace. They are the deaf men that are made to hear the word of the book: and
the blind men, that see out of obscurity and darkness, Esa. 29.18, 19. The
Lord has made darkness light before them, and brought them, being but blind
men, by a way they knew not* Esa. 42.16. The people that sat in darkness have
seen great light, Esa. 9.1. These men are the prisoners that once were in
darkness, and God sent his own Son to the prison door to bid them come
forth, and show themselves, Esa. 49.9.

And their deliverance from darkness should be the more comfortable, if they
consider,

First, what a world of people are yet covered with darkness, Esa. 61.1.

Secondly, that darkness shall never return: They enjoy a day that never
shall have night following.

Ob. But is there not darkness still in godly men, as well as in other men?

Sol. I answer, in some respects there is, and in some respects there is not.
It is true, that in respect of the ignorance yet upon godly men in this life,
they may say, as it is in Job 19.8. God has set darkness in our paths, and
fenced up our ways: or Job 37.19. Teach us what we shall say unto him: for we
cannot order our selves because of darkness: and sometimes in their
afflictions they may say, as aforesaid: But yet notwithstanding there is great
difference between the state of the godly, and the state of the wicked: for

First, the godly are delivered from utter darkness altogether. Six
Differences between the darkness i^ in godly men, and that which is in wicked
men.


Secondly, for their darkness in this life; it is true, they may be subject to
such darkness as clouds may make, or an eclipse, but the night is clean
passed with them, Romans 13.12.

Thirdly, though they have darkness, yet they are not under the power of
darkness, Col. 1.13. He that believes, cannot abide in darkness, but is
getting out, as one made free, and set at liberty, Ioh. 12.46.

Fourthly, their darkness is not a gross and palpable darkness, they can see
their way, and are all taught of God: It is no darkness can ^inder their
salvation.

Fifthly, though their afflictions may increase upon them, yet God will not
forsake them, but will show them great lights: the Lord will be light un^o them
for comfort for the present, and will send them the light of deliverance in due
time, Esa. 50.10. Mich. 7.8. Psalm. 112.4.

Sixthly, they have their Patent drawn and sealed, and delivered them, whereby
they are appointed to enjoy unspeakable light, and an absolute freedom from
all darkness: They are children of light, and are borne to singular
privileges in that respect: the time will come when there shall be no igrance,
no affliction, no discomfort any more.

Thus of their misery, and so of the estate from which they are called.

Now follows to be considered their happiness to which they are called,
expressed by the metaphorical term of light, and commended by the Epitheton of
mavelous.

Light.]

Acceptations of the word Light.
Light is either uncreated or created: the uncreated light is the shining
essence of God, infinitely above the shining light of the Sun: Thus God is
light, and dwells in that unapproachable light, 1 Ioh. 1.6. 1 Timothy 6.16. The
created light is that which is made and begotten by God; whence he is called,
The Father of lights, Iam. 1.17. And this created light is either natural, or
spiritual: natural is the light of the Sun in the firmament: the spiritual
light, since the fall, was all collected, and seated in Christ. As God gathered
the light of the two first days, and placed it in the body of the Sun, as
the original vessel of light: so did the Lord collect, and gather the light
together after man had fallen, and placed it in Christ, that he, as the Sun
of righteousness, might be the fountain of light unto the spiritual world.
And thus Christ is said to be light, Ioh. 8.12. the light of the world, that
lightneth every man that comes into the world, Ioh. 1.9. The beams of this
light in Christ are diffused all abroad upon men: and so the light communicated
from Christ, is either temporal or eternal. Temporal light is either the
blessing of God in Christ, making the outward estates of Gods servants glorious
and prosperous, Job 29.3. Hest. 8.16. or else it is that light that shines upon
the souls of men; which must be distinguished according to the instruments of
conveying or receiving it. The instrument of conveying it is outwardly the Law
and the Gospel, and inwardly the Spirit of Christ. The instrument of receiving
it, in respect of the general will of God, is the understanding; or in respect
of the promise of grace, it is faith. The Law is a light, Prove. 6.23. of the
light of the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. 2 Cor. 4.6. Knowledge is light, Act. 26.18.
and of the light of faith, Ioh. 8.12.

Eternal light is the light of heaven, where the inheritance of the Saints
lies, Col. 1.12. Revel. 18.19.

It is the spiritual light upon the souls of men: the light of knowledge and
faith is here specially meant, which is conveyed and increased by the Gospel.

Doct. The point then hence is clear, That Gods servants (in comparison of
their former condition) are brought into great light. The spiritual light
shines upon every one that is to be converted, Act. 26.18. God has promised
light to every penitent sinner, Job 33.28, 30. Esa. 42.16. and Christ was given
to be the light both of Jews and Gentiles, Esa. 42.7. and 49.6. Hence it is,
that Christians are said to be the children of light, Luke 16.18. Io^. 12.36.
yea, light it self, Ephesians. 5.6. the lights of the world. Phil. 2.15. And thus
they are so, by reason of the light of Jesus Christ, shining in their hearts
through the knowledge and belief of the Gospel. All the world is like unto
Egypt, (...) with darkness: and the godly are like the children of Israel in
Goshen.

Use. The use may be first for instruction to the godly: since they are called
to such light by Christ, they should

First, believe in the light: since they see now what they do, they should
establish their hearts, in the first place, in the assurance of Gods love,
since his shining favor shows it self in the Gospel.

Secondly, they should do the works that belong to the light: they may now
see what to do, and therefore ought not to be idle, but to work while they
have the light, 1 Ioh. 2.8. And to that end they should daily come to the
light, that it may be manifest that their works are wrought in God, Ioh. 3.21.
And they should now abound in all goodness and justice, or righteousness and
truth, Ephesians. 5.8, 9. proving what that acceptable will of God is, verse. 10.

Thirdly, they should therefore cast away the works of darkness, and have no
fellowship with the children of the night, but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.7.
to 14. For what fellowship between light and darkness? 2 Cor. 6.17.

Fourthly, they should, in all difficulties and ignorances, pray to God to show
forth his light and truth, seeing they are called to light, Psalm. 43.3.

Use 2. Secondly, godly men should hence be comforted, and that in diverse
respects. First, though they may have many distresses in their estates, yet
light is risen to their souls; though they may for a season suffer some
eclipse of their comfort, yet light is sown for the righteous, and joy for the
upright in heart, Psalm. 97.11. and the more they should be glad of their
portion in light, when they bebold the daily ruins of ungodly men. The light
of the righteous rejoices, when the lamp of the wicked is put out, Prove.
13.9. In 2 Corin. 4.4, 6. there are three reasons of consolations assigned:
First, the light we have should comfort us, if we consider how many men have
their minds blinded by the god of this world; and of those, many of them
great, wise, and learned men. Secondly, if we consider what darkness we have
lived in: God has done as great a work upon our hearts, as he did when he
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, in the beginning of the world.
Thirdly, if we consider what glorious things are revealed unto us: for by the
Gospel he has caused to shine in our hearts the knowledge of the glory of God,
etc. Finally, it is the more comfortable, in that the Apostle calls this light,
mavelous light; which is now in the next place to be opened.

Mavelous light.]

The spiritual light which shines in the hearts of the godly by the Gospel, is
a mavelous light, either because it is such as the godly do marvel at, or
because it is such as they ought to marvel and wonder at.

When men first enter into the truth, that is, when they are first converted,
In how many respects the light of the godly is mavelous.
Christians being (for the most part) full of affections, as they that have
escaped lately singular danger, and as they that never before saw the Kings
Court, they are frequently stirred up with admiration at the glory of the
Gospel: they wonder at and are vehemently affected with the new discovery of
the riches of Christ, showed them in the preaching of the Gospel: and thus it
is a mavelous light in this sense, Esa. 30.26.

But I rather consider of it in the other sense; It is a mavelous light,
though we should not have the heart to be so affected toward it: it is
mavelous, I say,

First, because it is a light that needed the Mediator to procure it: none but
Christ can give us this light. Other light is free, we pay nothing for it: but
this is carried in the hand of the Mediator to us, and for us, Esa. 42. and 4^.

Secondly, because it comes after so long a night of ignorance and sin:
they must needs account the light precious that have not seen it a long time*
as blind men when they receive fight, Esa. 9.2. Matt. 4.16.

Thirdly, and more, because it is a light commanded to shine out of darkness,
2 Cor. 4.6. That God should call light out of such darkness as wa^ in our
hearts, is mavelous.

Fourthly, in comparison with the times of the Law, and the shadows of the Old
Testament.

Fifthly, because it is a light comes not from any creature, but from God the
Creator. God is our light, Esa. 6.19. And in this respect, this light is like
the light that shone about Paul, Act. 22.6.

Sixthly, because it is a light that shines at the time of the evening of this
world. That the Sun should shine in the day time is no wonder: but that it
should shine in the night, or at evening, were a dreadful wonder: even so it
is in this last age of the vorld, Zech. 14.7.

Seventhly, because it is a knowledge above the reach of reason: it is the
light of faith.

Eighthly, because it shines only to the godly. It is light in Goshen, when
there is no light in Egypt; that was mavelous: and so is it when we see the
light shining all abroad, and many men sit in darkness, even in the same
place, in the same congregation, city or family. When the godly see clearly,
the wicked discern nothing: light is withheld from the wicked.

Ninthly, because it has more force than any other light: for it is the light
of life: it quickens the soul, and enlives it, Ioh. 8.12.

Lastly, because it is an everlasting light: it is such a day, as no night
follows it.

The consideration of all this should work diverse things in us: For, if in all
these senses it be a mavelous light, then

First, we should be marvellously affected with it, and strive to be exceeding
thankful for it. How have we deserved to be cast again into darkness for
our extreme unthankfulness! How have we given God cause to take away the
Candlestick from us! Let us therefore strive after thankfulness and
admiration: and if the Lord do work it in us, let us take heed we lose not
our first love.

Secondly, we should arm our selves for the defense of the light: we should
preserve it as a singular treasure, both in our hearts and in our Churches: we
should with the more resolution resist the works of darkness, standing always
upon our guard, Romans 13.12.

Thirdly, we should strive after all the degrees of the assurance of faith.

Fourthly, we should strive to make our light shine the more excellently, both
for the measure of good works, Malac. 5.16. and for the strict and precise
respect of the exact doing of good duties. Now we have the light so clearly
shining, we may do every thing more exactly than if it were dark, Ephesians.
5.15. Our gifts must not be hid. The light must not be put under a bushel,
Matthew. 5.15. Phil. 2.15. We should now avoid not only greater faults and
falls, but lesser stumblings, 1 Ioh. 2.10, 11. We should do all things to the
life and power of them, and show discretion as well as knowledge.

This doctrine also does imply the grievous misery of wicked men: for if it be
mavelous light into which the godly are called, there is a mavelous
darkness in which wicked men live. The whole creation of God had been but a
confused heap, if God had not set in it the light of the Sun: such a
confused Chaos is the world of men, if the Gospel shine not into their hearts.

Finally, this should much comfort the godly, they are called into mavelous
light in all the senses before named: which should much inflame their hearts,
and they should rebuke their own hearts for not valuing so rich treasure. We
may from hence take occasion to note how little we should trust to the
judgment of flesh and blood in valuing spiritual things, when the very godly
themselves do not so much esteem of them as they should. Whatsoever we
think, yet in Gods account, the light of the Gospel, the light of faith and
knowledge, the light of Gods countenance, etc. is mavelous light. But if the
light of the godly be mavelous in this world, what shall it be in the world
to come, when God and the Lamb shall be their immediate light? Here God lights
us by the means: there God himself will be our everlasting light. Here our
light may be darkened with clouds of affliction and temptation: there shall be
an eternal light without all darkness. Here we have no light, but what is
infused into us: there we shall our selves shine as the Sun in the firmament.

Hitherto of the description in Tropicall terms.

Now it follows in plain words.

VERSE. 10. Which in times past were not a people, yet are now the people of
God: which in times past were not under mercy, but now have obtained mercy.


THe Apostle takes the words of this verse out of the Prophet Hosea, chap.
1.11. where the Lord promises that the number of the children of Israel shall
be as the sand of the sea; and in the place where was it said unto them, Ye are
not my people, it shall be said unto them, Ye are my people. Now the Apostle
applies that sentence to the people to whom he wrote, showing that it was
accomplished in them.

Quest. The question is of whom the Prophet and Apostle spoke.

Ans. Some say of the Israelites in the letter, both because the same chapter
shows that they were cast off, and called Loammi, not Gods people: as also
because the Apostle is thought to write only to the Jews. But the Apostle
Paul, To. 9.24, 25, 26. apparently expounds it of the Gentiles chiefly: and
therefore we must rest in his sense: which by the way shows, that this
Epistle was written to the Elect amongst the Gentiles, as they were strangers
and pilgrims in the world, and not to the provincial Jews only.

The Apostle then, to the singular comfort of Christians in those times,
shows, that now were the Prophesies accomplished concerning the calling of the
Gentiles, which was before a great mystery, hidden from ages and generations,
Col. 1.26. admired by Angels, Ephesians. 3.10. 1 Pet. 1.12.

Before I open the words of this verse in particular, some use would be made of
this great work of calling the Gentiles; and so from the consideration of
their estate, both before and after calling.

And first for the meditation of the estate of the world, Of the calling of the
Gentiles in general.
or the Nations of the world, before Christ preached unto them: note,

First, the horrible infectiousnesse of sin: whole worlds of people are
poisoned with it.

Secondly, the dreadful horror of Gods Justice against sin: which as we may
see plainly in the sufferings of Christ, so also very lively in the desertion
and forsaking of the Gentiles, so many millions of men perishing without pardon
or pity: and therefore it was never safe to follow a multitude in evil, nor to
plead the practice of fathers or forefathers, with such like.

And for the meditation of their calling again in Christ by the Gospel, we
may gather matter,

First, of information; and so (first) that God is not tied to any place. Use.
If Israel after the flesh will not serve him, he will raise up children unto
Abraham from among the Gentiles, Mat. 21.43. Secondly, that the Church of
Christ is now Catholic, of all Nations: and therefore Christ's Kingdom is the
largest Kingdom in the world, and the glory of it must not be restrained to
Rome, or any one place.

Secondly, of consolation: for here we may observe,

First, the infallibility of Gods promises: these promises concern the calling
of the Gentiles as being dead, and were most unlikely, and yet we see them
fulfilled: which should teach us to trust upon God.

Secondly, the wisdom and power of God, working light out of darkness. The
rebellion of the Jews is so far from laying Sion waste, or dissolving
Religion, that it is an occasion of a greater work of God among the Gentiles:
yea when profaneness seems to over-grow all, and the whole world seems to
live in wickedness, yet we know not what times may come for the glory of
Religion among Jews and Gentiles.

Thirdly, Gods wonderful love to his Elect: he will gather them from all the
four winds of heaven. Though they be few in number in comparison, and live
dispersed in every Country, yet God, the great Husbandman, will not want means
to fetch them home into his garner. A husbandman, that had all his field grown
over with weeds, save here and there one grain of corn on a land, would never
be at the pains of gathering and separating: yet God will.

Fourthly, the great encouragement that poor sinners and mean persons have to
come to Christ, and seek God. For here we see, he has showed mercy to the
very abject Gentiles, against whom he had infinite cause of exception: and the
rather should we be encouraged, because wheresoever we live, either in, East
or West, we may sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of
God, Mat. 8.11.

And withal here is matter of instruction: for,

First, we must look to our faith: for God justified the heathen only by
faith, Gal. 3.8.

Secondly, we must not be secure, but must learn to observe all things that
are commanded us, Mat. 28.20. The name of God must be great amongst us, and we
must offer incense, and a pure offering, Malac. 1.11. We must be fruitful,
especially we that live in these latter ages of the world, lest God hasten the
calling of his Nation of the Jews, and cast us off for unbelief and
unfruitfulnesse, Romans 11.

And thus in general of the calling of the Gentiles. In particular in this
verse here is a twofold comparison: first, the one respects what they were to
God: secondly, the other respects what God was to them. They were to God by
nature no people, by grace they are his people: and God withheld from them his
saving mercy by nature, and now by grace they are under mercy. First, of their
being a people to God: And then of Gods mercy to them.

Which in times past were not a people.]

Many sorts of people in Scripture.
The word people is diversely taken: For sometimes it signifies any multitude
or great number of any sort, and so Ants are said to be a people, Prove. 30.25.
and Caterpillars, Joel 2.2, 5. Sometimes it signifies the lower sort of men, as
they are distinguished from the Nobility in any State: and so they are usually
styled the common people. But properly and originally, the word populus was
thought to signify a multitude of citizens in one city, enjoying the right and
communion in society and employments under one Head and Governor.

Now, the holy Ghost in this place affirms, that men that live in their
sins, without faith and repentance, are not a people, though they be never so
many in number, or other prerogatives: and the nations of men living without
God may be said, not to be a people,

Why wicked men are said not to be a people.
Either because they are a people of no note, in no request in respect of true
greatness, as the Jews did vilely esteem of all the uncircumcised:

Or because they were not a peculiar people, or (as the Antithesis shows it)
were not the people of God. Now, till men subject themselves to Gods government
by Jesus Christ, they are not a people. The Empire of the whole world belongs
to God and his son Christ, Psalm. 2.10. Now, all Nations that come not in to
kiss the Son, are no members of the Empire of the Commonwealth of Israel: let
them have what heads or rulers they will, they are but as so many rebels, or
(at the least) as so many strangers from Gods Kingdom; therefore called
strangers and enemies, Col. 1.22. They are neither borne of the blood of
Israel, nor have they any right of inheritance from God, nor live they under
the laws of the Empire, nor are made free denisons: yea, this phrase seems to
import that all men that are not gathered into the number of Gods people are
but a confused heap, and disordred multitude, never happy in respect of any
government: they are brought into no order; and as the Prophet also further
says, they are good for nothing, Ier. 13.10. God regards them not, nor looks
after them as it were: and though they have Laws and a kind of government, yet
their Laws and Customs are vain, Esaias 10.3. altogether insufficient to make
them live happily.

Use. The use may be,

First, for information: and so it may inform us in two things. First, the
vanity and insufficiency of worldly things: riches, power, honor, conquests,
carnal parentage, and the like, avail men nothing unto a blessed life. The
Gentiles had all these in their greatest glory, and yet not worthy to be called
a people. Secondly, we may hence gather the reason of these strange devouring
judgments, which fall upon the world by wars, famine, pestilence, etc. For
inasmuch as worlds of men live without the compass of the obedience to Gods
government, and stand out as so many rebels; the Lord therefore, seeing they
will not be his people, fights against them from heaven, and makes wonderful
havocke among them; as a great King that revengeth himself by the strength of
Armies upon rebels.

Secondly, for instruction: and so we that were sinners of the Gentiles,
should hence learn to acknowledge and praise the free grace of God, who
without our deserts has reckoned us in the Court of his people; we that were
by nature, viz. none of Gods people.

Thirdly, and especially it should set out the misery of all men living in
their sins without repentance: and the rather should we be moved with this
terror,

First, because no place can privilege impenitent sinners: for not only
professed Gentiles, but even wicked Israelites are in Scripture reckoned as no
people. The wicked are accounted as no people, though they live in the Church,
and dwell among Gods people. For what is the chafe to the wheat, though both
lie together? Yea, though men bear the name of Gods people, yet God hates them
never a whit the less for that: and therefore to distinguish them, and show
how little he regards them, he calls them the evil people, Ier. 13.10. the
disobedient and gain-faying people, Romans 10.21. the people of Gomorrah, Esa.
1.10. the people of my curse, Esa. 34.5.

Secondly, because God will show by his fierce wrath, that he does not reckon
of them at all, but will cast them off as a girdle that is good for nothing,
Ier. 13.10. Many places of Scripture show this. All the sinners of the people
shall die, Amos 9.10. God will take away his power from them, even his loving
kindness and mercies, and would not have them much pitied, Ier. 16.5. Behold,
says the same Prophet in another place, the whirlwind of the Lord goes
forth with fury, a continual whirlwind; it shall fall with pain on the head
of the wicked, Ier. 30.23. so Ezekiel. 11.21. Esa. 34.5.

Ob. But when men live in the Church, and are baptized, etc. how may it be
known that they are not Gods people? what signs are there of men that are not
Gods people?

Sol. They are described in diverse Scriptures, where we may find out what
people it is God excepts against.

First, such as can live without God in the world, are not Gods people, Who are
not Gods people.
Ephesians. 2.12. Such as can go whole days, weeks, months, years, without any
hearty care of God, or his glory, or favor. These are evidently not a people.

Secondly, such as are of a stiff neck, such as will not let Gods yoke come
upon them, such as will not obey his voice, but walk in the imaginations and
counsels of their own evil hearts, Ier. 7.23, 24. and 13.10. especially such
as refuse to hear his voice, and are withal gainsayers, and such as are
talkers, whose lips carry about them the infamy of Gods true people, and the
blasphemy of Gods name, Romans 10.21. Ier. 10.13. Ezekiel. 36.3, etc.

Thirdly, it may be discerned by their manner of serving of God: for such as
God rejects from being of his people, may draw near to him with their lips,
but their hearts are far from him, and they do him no service, but as men's
laws fear them to it. A constant habitual alienation of the heart from the
care of Gods presence in Gods ordinances, is a sure sign of persons God
regards not.

Ob. But there are faults in the best men in the world, and therefore why
should such as live in the Church, and profess the true Religion, be cast off
only for living in sin, seeing all are sinners?

Sol. I answer with the words of the holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6. Their spot is
not the spot of Gods people: that spot that is in the wicked, is a spot of
leprosy, and therefore they ought to be put without the camp till they be
cleansed. The sins of the godly are sins of infirmity; and the sins of
the wicked are sins of presumption: The wicked never obey from the heart,
which all the godly do; sin does not reign in them as it does in the wicked.

Thus of their estate by Nature, as they were not a people: their estate by
grace is described in these words, Are now the people of God.

Are now the people of God.]

The difference of reading here, from that of the Prophet is to be noted: for
whereas in the Prophet it is thus, In the place where it was said, ye are not
my people, it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God:
which words are somewhat doubtful: for some might gather, that therefore all
which were not a people should in time be the people of God. The Apostle
therefore applies it so, as that it may appear that the comfort only belongs
to godly Christians; and in stead of the words, Ye shall be called the sons of
the living God, he says, Ye are now the people of God; which in sense differs
not: and the Apostle leapeth to the direct Antithesis, and takes it for
granted, That all Gods people are Gods sons also; unless we conceive that
he borrowed these words out of Hos. 2. ult. which I rather incline unto,
though Interpreters most take to the words, and the first Chapter.

Ye are now the people of God.]

For the sense of the words, we must understand, that men are in Scripture said
to be Gods people three ways:

Men are Gods people three ways.
First, in respect of eternal Predestination, see Romans 11.2. He will not cast
off the people he knew before.

Secondly, in respect of the covenant in the the Law; and so the sons of
Abraham were Gods people, and none other, as many Scriptures show.

Thirdly, in respect of the covenant in the Gospel; and so it is to be taken
here: and all unregenerate men were not a people, and all that believe are Gods
people by the benefit of the covenant of grace in the Gospel.

Now for the coherence I might note,

That they that are not the people of God, may be the people of God, and so
acknowledged of God himself; which should teach us with meekness and patience
to wait when God will turn those that lie in their sins, and despair of no
man, and restrain fierce and perverse censures, concerning the final estate
of other men: but the maine point is, that Gods people are the only people in
the world; None worthy to be called a people in comparison of them: no subject
in any government so happy as Gods people under his government in Christ; and
therefore to be made the people of God here, is reckoned as a condition beyond
all comparison. Now that Gods people excel all other subjects in the world,
may appear many ways:

First, in respect of the love of God that he bears to his people; which has
four matchless praises, that no King on earth can afford to his subjects:
Ier. 31.3.
For first, it is an everlasting love, when all the favor of the Princes on
earth is both mutable, and mortal. Secondly, it is a particular love to each
subject. All the people are loved, and by name, Deuteronomy. 33.3. the Lord counts;
when he reckons his people, he was become their God, Psalm. 87.5, 6. Thirdly,
it is a free love; there was no desert in us: whereas Princes look at somewhat
that may pleasure themselves, even where desert is less. Fourthly, it is a
tender Love; and therefore Gods people are said to be married to their King and
God, Hosh. 2.19. and therefore God is said to account his people to be his
Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9.

Secondly, they are an elect people; which has a twofold consideration in it:
How Gods people excel all other people.
For first, they are elect from all eternity; and so every one of the people
has a particular act of Parliament to assure his right, Romans 11.2. and
secondly, they are elect in time, that is, they are separated and culled out of
all the people of the world, Exodus 33.6.

Thirdly, all Gods people have a general pardon given them for all offenses,
Ierem. 31.34. He saves his people from their sins. And this pardon is
grounded upon a sufficient atonement made by a most faithful high Priest for
them, Heb. 2.17. who also sanctified all this people with his own blood, Heb.
13.12. Christ is given for covenant: he is their surety for them, and their
witness, Esa. 42.6. and 55.5. who also redeemed them with his blood: All, a
people of purchase.

Fourthly, all Gods people are qualified with new gifts, above all the people
in the world; their natures be amended, they are all washed and cleansed from
their filthiness, there is not one vile person amongst them, Ezekiel. 36.25. and
37.23, etc. He has formed them for himself, and his own service, Esa. 43.22.

Fifthly, all Gods subjects are adopted to be Gods sons: and so can no
Prince on earth say of his. They are, as it were, the fruit of his womb, Psalm.
110.3.

Sixthly, the Laws by which they are governed, are the perfectest in the whole
world: For the Law of God is perfect, Psalm. 119.8.

Seventhly, all Gods people live in his presence, and see his glory, Exodus
33.16. Levit. 26.11, 12. Zac. 1.10, 11. Psalm. 95.7. Other Kings have many
subjects they never saw, and few that have the preferment to live in the Kings
presence, or near about him.

Eighthly, God feasts all his subjects, and that often, and in his own
presence, and with the best provision of the world, Esa. 25.8. and 65.13, 14.
Ier. 31.14. Kings would soon consume their treasure, if they should do it
often, or almost once, etc.

Ninthly, no people so graced of their King in hearing requests, and receiving
petitions. For all Gods people may cry and be heard, and at all times, and in
all suits, which no King on earth can grant to all his subjects, and seldom or
never so much as to any one, Esa. 30.19. Ioh. 14. Whatsoever they ask in the
name of Christ shall be granted unto them.

Tenthly, they are the longest lived of any people: As the days of a tree are
the days of my people, says the Lord: they may endure many a storm, but they
are fast rooted still. Mine Elect shall long enjoy the works of their hands,
Esa. 65.22. For first, they only have the promise of a long life in this
world, and it is limited only with that condition, If it be good for them.
And secondly, if that God take away some of his people, and that quickly out of
this world; yet that shortens not their life or dependence upon God: For when
they die a bodily death, they are said to be gathered to his people, or their
people, and there receive eternal life in stead of it. Death does not put them
out of service, or deprive them of the Kings presence, but removes them only
out of one room into another: whereas they stood below stairs before, they
serve now above stairs, and are all of the Presence, and Privie-Chamber to God.

Eleventhly, they are the wealthiest people in the world; none better provided
for: For, first for Spiritual gifts, and rich favors from the King of kings,
they are not destitute of any heavenly gifts, 1 Cor. 1.5. Ephesians. 1.3. And for
outward provision, God has taken all the chief creatures, and bound them to
serve them with provision in whatsoever they want: The heaven, the earth, the
corn, etc. all are bound for the supply of their wants, Hos. 2.21, 22, 23.

Twelfthly, they excel for protection: whether we respect their preservation,
or the revenge is done upon their enemies: for their preservation, though the
earth and the heavens should be shaken, yet God will be the hope of his
people, Joel 3.16. and as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the Lord
about them that fear him; and therefore they cannot be moved, Psalm. 125.1, 2.
and if the rod of the wicked do enter upon them, yet it shall not rest upon
their lot, verse. 3. of the same Psalm. And for vengeance: It is certain, the
Lord will avenge their quarrel upon all their enemies, though they be unable
to right their own wrongs; and because God would have it done thoroughly, he
reserves the work of vengeance to himself, to make the recompense, Heb.
10.30. Romans 12.20.

Uses. The use may be both for consolation and instruction: For it should
exceedingly comfort Gods children, considering what singular happiness they
enjoy by the government of Jesus Christ. Oh! blessed are the people, whose God
is the Lord, Ps. 33.12. and 144.15. Moses admires, a little before his death,
the wonderful felicity of the godly, considered as they are Gods people.
Israel is happy; none like to Gods people, or this people: nor is there any
like unto the God of Jerusalem. For God rides upon the heaven in their help:
the eternal God is their refuge; and underneath are the everlasting Armies. He
will thrust our their enemies before them, and say, Destroy them. Israel alone
shall dwell in safety. The fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and
wine: and his heavens shall drop down deaw. They are a people saved by the
Lord, who is the shield of their help, and the sword of their excellency.
Their enemies shall be found liers to them, Deuteronomy. 33.26. to the end.

And this excellent estate is the more comfortable to be thought upon,

First, because people of any nation may be admitted to this estate, and the
Lord, without respect of persons, will bless them with the blessing of his
people, as the Prophet excellently shows, Esa. 2.19. and 19.24, 25. The
Gentiles have come to rejoice amongst his people, Romans 15.9, 10, 11. They were
hard times, when the Lords dominion was in a manner confined in the Kingdom of
Judah and Israel.

Secondly, because it is so great and glorious a work on Gods part, to make us
his people: for he does as it were plant the heavens, and lay the foundation
of the earth, that he may say unto Sion, Thou art my people, Esaias 51. verse. 16.

Thirdly, because in the hardest times that can befall the godly, the Lord will
have them plead this privilege: and they may go to God, and he will
acknowledge them in all their distresses, and sanctify their afflictions, and
deliver them at the voice of their cry, Esa. 64.9. Zech. 13.19.

Fourthly, because they shall yet enjoy a far more excellent estate in
another world, than now they have, Rev. 21. They are now but as the children of
Israel in Goshen, or in the wilderness.

Use 2. Secondly, diverse things may be hence observed for instruction; as,

First, such as live in the Church, and yet have not the marks of Gods people
on them, should awake, and look about them, and labor to get into the number
of Gods people. These fools among the people, as the Prophet David calls
them, should understand; and these evil neighbors unto Israel, should be
persuaded to learn the ways of Gods people, that so they may be built up in
the midst of Israel, Ier. 12.16. And it should be their daily prayer unto God,
to grant them this one request, namely, to bless them with the favor of his
people, Psalm. 106.3, 4.

Secondly, the penitent sinner, that feels his heart called by the voice of
Christ, should hence be moved to enter into the covenant of God, and speedily
to take the oath of subjection and allegiance, binding himself with all his
heart to God and his divine service, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. Ier. 50.5.

Thirdly, such as have taken the oath, and are acknowledged for true Subjects,
should for the rest of their time study how to carry themselves as becomes the
people of God: and so,

In general they should remember two things;

First, to give ear to Gods Law, and hearken what the Lord will say unto them
from time to time, Psalm. 78.1. Esa. 51.4.

Secondly, to lead a holy life and conversation: for therefore has God severed
them from all nations, that they might be holy to him, Levit. 20.26. All Gods
people are righteous, Esa. 59.21. and 62.12. and Christ has redeemed them from
all iniquity, and purified them, that they might be a peculiar people unto him,
zealous of good works, Tit. 2.14. They must therefore be no more polluted with
their transgressions, nor be fashioned to the lusts of their former ignorance,
Ezekiel. 14.11. and 36.25, etc.

In particular they should,

First, give God thanks for ever, for blessing them with the blessing of his
people, Psalm. 79. ult. Rules for Gods people how to carry themselves to God.


Secondly, they should humble themselves to walk with their God, Mic. 6.8.
being humbled at his feet, to receive his Law, Deuteronomy. 33.3. bowing down with
all reverence to worship him, Psalm. 95.7. For God is a great God above all
gods, and a great King above all kings.

Thirdly, they must avoid needless society with the wicked, 2 Corin. 6.16. and
take heed that they learn not the manners of other nations, Levit. 20.24.

Fourthly, the Law of God must be in their hearts. For they should be a wise
and understanding people above all men: and this is the sign of Gods people,
Esa. 51.7. Deuteronomy. 4.6. And it is Gods covenant to write his Laws in their
hearts, Ier. 31.33.

Fifthly, they must avoid Idols, and keep Gods Sabbath: this God requires
perpetually, Levit. 26.1, 2, 3, 11, 12. and graciously accepts, when he finds
this care, Esa. 56. with protestation against those that will not keep his
Sabbaths, Ier. 17.

Sixthly, they must walk confidently in the trust upon Gods goodness and
covenant with them, as the godly resolved, Mic. 4.5. All people walk in the
name of their god: and therefore we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God
for ever and ever, resolving to cleave to God in a perpetual covenant, Ier.
50.4, 5.

Seventhly, they should approve themselves to be Gods people, by their
language: their language should be a pure language, not speaking lies: a
deceitful tongue should not be found in their mouths; and their words should
be gracious, such as might minister grace to the hearers, Zeph. 3.9, 13. Ephesians.
4. Col. 4.

Eighthly, they should be patient in all adversities, as being of Moses mind,
that it is better to suffer affliction with Gods people, than to enjoy the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.25.

Ninthly, they should obey according to all that God commands them, showing a
respect to all Gods Commandments, seeing they serve God, and not men; and that
all dissimulation will be open before his eyes, Ierem. 11. verse. 4.

And thus of the second way of comparison.

In the last words of the verse, their estate is considered in relation from
God to them. And so, in the state of nature they were not under mercy: but, in
the state of grace, they are now under mercy.

Not under mercy.]

Doct. All the time that men live without repentance for their sins, and
faith in Jesus Christ, they live without the mercy of God. They are not under
mercy: God loves them not, nor regards them: they are children of wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. and the wrath of God abides on them, Ioh. 3.36. Yea, though the Lord be
exceeding merciful in himself, and to the faithful, yet by no means will he
clear the guilty, Exodus 34.6. Number. 14.18. Now this not being under mercy,
imports diverse things:

First, that their sins are not forgiven or pardoned.

Secondly, that their souls are not healed of their original diseases, but
they live still in their blood.

Thirdly, that they are liable unto all sorts of judgments: and those which
are upon them, came from the wrath of God, which hates them, etc.

Fourthly, that they are in danger of eternal condemnation; in general, that
they live and lie under the forfeiture of the covenant of works, and have no
part in Christ, or the covenant of grace.

Use. The use should be therefore to teach wicked men, to take heed how they
presume of Gods mercy: they may deceive themselves, but God will not be mocked,
Gal. 6.7. For such things as they are guilty of, the wrath of God comes upon
the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.5. They that live after the flesh shall
die, Romans 8.13. For the more distinct understanding of this point, four things
would be considered of:

First, that wicked men are exceeding apt to plead Gods mercy, though it belong
not to them; and do not believe that God will deal so with them as they are
threatened.

Secondly, that God directly declared himself, that he will not show mercy or
pity toward diverse sorts of offenders.

Thirdly, that the things men usually object, will not be availeable to deliver
them from Gods wrath.

Fourthly, what sorts of men, in particular, God will not be merciful unto.

For the first: that men are apt to plead Gods mercy when it belongs not to
them, is apparent through the whole course of Scriptures, to have ever been in
the disposition of most wicked. They bless themselves in their hearts, when
their iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Psalm. 36.2. They live at ease, and
put far away the evil day from them, Amos 6.1, 3. They cry Peace, peace,
when sudden destruction is made to come upon them, 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

For the second: that God will not be merciful to many a man that lives in the
visible Church, is manifested by many Scriptures; as, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Ier. 16.5.
Ezekiel. 5.11. and 7.4, 9. and 8.18. Hos. 1.6. and 2.4. and in many other places.

For the third: their excuses and pretenses are all vain: for,

First, if they stand upon their greatness in the world, Excuses of wicked men
refuted.
it is certain that riches will not avail in the day of wrath, Ioh 36, 18,
19, etc.

Secondly, nor will it help them to be borne of godly Ancestors: for rather
than God will be tied to the wicked seed of Abraham, he will raise up children
of the stones to Abraham, Mat. 3.

Thirdly, nor can multitude privilege them. For though hand join in hand, yet
sin shall not go unpunished: and God turns nations of men into hell, Psalm.
9.17.

Fourthly, nor will their outward serving of God serve their turn. It is
bootlesse to cry, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, if men
redress not their ways, Ier. 7.4, 8, 9, 10.

Fifthly, nor will it help them, that some Ministers speak comfortably to
them, and by their preaching they may expect mercy: for God will judge those
Prophets that strengthen the hands of the wicked. The stubborn people were
never a whit the safer, when the Prophet told them they should have peace, and
no evil should come unto them: but the Lord protests, that the whirlwind
of his fury should fall grievously upon the head of the wicked for all that,
Ier. 23.15, 19, 20. that at length they should consider it perfectly: and the
Lord threatens that he will rent the wall of security which the Prophets have
built with untempered mortar, that he will rent it even with the fierce wind
of his fury, and there shall be an overflowing shower in his anger to consume
it, Ezekiel. 13.10. to 15.

Sixthly, neither may the patience of God prove, that he means to show
expected mercy: for though a sinner prolong his days an hundred times, yet it
shall not be well with the wicked; nor ought he to settle his heart the more
freely on his sin, because sometimes it is not speedily executed: for God
will find a time to set his sins in order before him, and then he may tear
him in pieces, and none can deliver him, Eccles. 8.11, 12, 13. Ps. 50.19.

Seventhly, neither will it ease them, that there are so many promises of mercy
in Scripture: for they are limited. And besides, in diverse places where mercy
is promised, the Lord explaines himself, by showing that he will not clear
the wicked, Exodus 34.7. as was alleged before: so Nahum. 1.3. and v. 7.
compared with the 6.

Eighthly, neither will their Baptism help them: for neither circumcision nor
uncircumcision avails any thing, but a new creature, Gal. 6.

Ob. If any say, But though they be not now under mercy, yet hereafter they may
be upon Repentance.

Answ. I answer, that in this they say truly, but yet not safely: for many men
that have promised themselves the late repentance and mercy, have died in their
sins before they could ever repent. And thy times are in Gods hands, thou
know not when, nor how thou shall die: and therefore the surest way is, now
to turn to God with all thy heart, as they were counseled more at large, Joel
2.12, 13.

Now for the fourth, it may awake some sort of offenders the more effectually,
that besides the general threatenings against wicked men, they in particular
are assured that they are not under mercy.

As first, such as show no mercy to men, Iam. 2.13. and such as transgress of
malicious wickedness, Psalm. 59.6. and such as are people of no understanding,
Esa. 7.11. and such as walk after the imaginations of their own wicked
hearts, and will not hearken unto God, Ier. 15.5, 10, 12. and such as bless
themselves in their heart, when they hear the curses of the Law, De^^. 29.19.
and such as steal, murder, commit adultery, and swear falsely, Ier. 7.9. and
many other particulars. Catalogues might be instanced in all the several
Scriptures: the Prophet Malachy puts in such as deal corruptly in tything and
offering, Malach. 1.8, 9.

To conclude; the counsel of the Prophet Jeremy is excellent in this case, who
most effectually speaks thus: Hear ye, give ear, be not proud: for the
Lord has spoken. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he cause darkness,
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness. But
if ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride, and mine
eye run down with tears, Ier. 13.15, 16.

Use 2. Secondly, the consideration of this doctrine may justify the practice
of godly Ministers, that denounce the judgments of God upon their hea^ers,
that live in sin without repentance: It is their duty to show them, that they
are not under mercy; they are required to cry aloud, and to show Gods people
their sins, Esa. 58.1. And the Prophets, that cried Peace, peace, are
extremely threatened of God, so as for not warning the people, the blood of
their souls is required of the Prophets, Ezekiel. 33. verse. 2. to 10.

Use 3. The third use may be therefore for the singular humiliation of wicked
men that live in the assemblies of Christians. Though they have obtained a
place in Gods Church, yet they have not obtained mercy, but live under the
fearful displeasure of God: and this is the more terrible if they consider
three things.

First, that this is the case of multitudes of men in the Church: but a remnant
are under mercy. Which will appear more distinctly, if you draw out of our
assemblies, such as in Scripture are expressly said not to be under mercy: as,

What wicked men in particular are not under mercy.
First, take all such as yet live in their natural Atheism, that mind not God
nor Religion, that only care for earthly things, and show it by a constant
either neglect or contempt of the public assemblies of Christians amongst us:
These cannot obtain mercy, because they refuse to hear Gods voice, and to
seek to the ordinary means of mercy, Isaiah 50.1, 2. Heb. 3.7.

Secondly, draw out then secret offenders, such as sin in the dark, and say,
Who sees us? There are many amongst us, that for ought we know, live
honestly, who yet in secret are polluted with desperate abominations, as,
fearful deceit in their callings, prodigious filthiness of body, or the like.

Thirdly, remove from us likewise open and notorious offenders, such as are
drunkards, outrageous swearers, known adulterers or fornicators, murderers,
railers and extortioners: For to such belongs not Gods mercy or Kingdom, 1
Cor. 6.9.

Fourthly, then separate from us such as are only civilly honest, and not
religious. There are many that are far from gross offenses, either open or
secret, who are not yet under mercy: which is discovered diverse ways; as by
their ignorance. For God will not have mercy upon people that have no
understanding, Esa. 27.11. And by their impenitencie. They never soundly and in
secret confessed their sins to God: they never mourned for their many
corruptions: there is a world of inward wickedness, which they were never
humbled for. And also by their unbelief. They know no way how to be saved by
Christ by effectual believing on his mercy, but think to be saved by their
own good deeds; or else they live in a general security, not looking after
salvation, but thinking it enough, that they are well accounted of amongst men.

Lastly, cast out hypocrites, that only make a show of godliness, and have
not the power of it: that draw near to God with their mouths, but have their
hearts far from him. These in vain worship God. These are Jews outward, but
have not the circumcision of the heart, and therefore their praise is not of
God.

You may easily conceive how small a number will remain, if all these be
deducted out of the societies of Christians.

Secondly, if they withal consider, that if mercy be not obtained, all else is
in vain. It does not profit him to obtain credit, riches, friends in this
world, long life, or ought else, if he obtain not mercy: what shall it
advantage thee to obtain the whole world, if for want of mercy thou lose thine
own soul?

Thirdly, it increases their misery, that they may die in the case they are
in. For either God may take away the means of mercy from them, or may leave
them to so much insensiblenesse, as they may remove themselves from the means
of mercy; or God, being provoked by their long obstinacy, may deliver them up
to a reprobate sense; or God may suddenly take them away by death: and then woe
unto them, it had been better for them they had never been borne.

Quest. But some may ask, What should be the cause that so many obtain not
mercy of God, seeing God is in his own nature so gracious, and they are in so
great need of mercy?

Answ. I answer, that the cause why some obtain not mercy, is,

First, because they seek it not: Why many obtain not mercy.
they be at a great deal of care and pains many times to seek other things,
but they altogether neglect their own mercy, and seek not for it. Now God
stands upon that that he will be sought unto: the house of Israel must know,
that though God be many ways gracious, as is showed at large, Ezekiel. 36.25.
etc. yet for all this he will be sought unto, or else even Israel may want
mercy, verse. 32.

Secondly, others are so far from seeking mercy, that they refuse mercy: when
God in the Gospel daily calls upon them, and beseeches them to be reconciled,
yet they are so busily employed in following foolish vanities, that they
forsake their own mercy, Jonah 2.8. They will not answer when God calls, but
reject his Word, and grieve his good Spirit, and abuse his patience and
bountifulness, and so heap up wrath against the day of wrath.

Thirdly, others seek mercy, but they seek it not aright; they fail in the
manner: as either they seek it coldly and carelessly, praying but for fashion
sake, or with their lips without power of affections. They speak for mercy,
but they do not care for mercy: they neither observe, nor regard whether their
petitions be granted or denied: and this is the condition of the ordinary sort
of men: Or else they seek mercy corruptly without sincerity of of the heart:
as when men pray God to forgive them the sins, which yet they mind not to
leave. Now this is a shameful kind of seeking mercy: For God stands upon it,
that we must forsake our wickedness, or else he will not forgive, Esa. 55.6. 2 Timothy 2.19. Or else lastly, men seek it too late, ^^ Esau sought the blessing
when it was gone, Heb. 12.15. They may call when God will not answer, Pro. 1.
Zachar. 7. And this is the case of some, that put off their repentance until
the latter end.

But have now obtained mercy.]

Doct. The godly are exceeding happy in the obtaining of Gods mercy: All that
are called in Christ Jesus, even all that have truly repented themselves of
their sins, are certainly under mercy, and in that respect, in a mavelous
safe and happy condition.

Three things are distinctly imported in the observation. First, the on^ i^,
that God is merciful. Mercy may be obtained, Jonah 4.2. Psalm. 116.5. and 86.
Secondly, that penitent sinners do obtain mercy, I^^l 2.13. Es^. 55.7.
Thirdly, that such as have obtained Gods mercy, are in a mavelous happy case,
in comparison of what they were before in. It is enough, if we obtained mercy,
whatsoever we obtain not: Hence the phrase, Thou have covered him with thy
mercy.

And our happiness in respect of the interest we have in Gods mercy is the
greater, if we consider either the properties, or the effects of Gods mercy.

There are four admirable properties in the mercy of God, which he shows to
his people:

Four properties of Gods mercy.
First, his mercy is tender mercy, Psalm. 51.1. which he shows in diverse
things: as,

First, that he is full of compassion, in pitying the distresses of his people:
no father can so pity his child, It is tender many ways.
Psalm.103.13. Hence his bowels are said to be troubled for them, or to sound
in him. Where is the sounding of thy bowels? says the Prophet, Esa. 63.15.
Ier. 31.20. The word Misericordiam imports as much: for it sounds misery laid
to the heart. God then is merciful in that he lays our miseries to his heart.

Secondly, that he waits to show mercy, Esa. 30.18. watching for all
opportunities, as it were to prevent us with his blessings.

Thirdly, that he is slow to anger; not easily stirred to displeasure, when he
has showed his favor, Psalm. 103.1. He is a God of judgment that considers
the weaknesses and infirmities of his servants, as knowing whereof they are
made, Esa. 30.18. Psalm. 103.

Fourthly, that if he do see some more prevailing evils in his people, yet he
will spare, as a father spares his only son, Mal. 3.17. And if he do chide,
yet he rebukes his people still with great affection, Ier. 31.19. and he will
quickly give over, and not chide always, Psalm. 103. He is ready to forgive as
soon as they call unto him, Esa. 65.23. and 55, 7. Psalm. 103.

Fifthly, that if he do bring affliction upon his people to humble them, yet
he will not consume them, but will repent him of the evil, Joel. 2.13. Deuteronomy.
32.36. Amos 7.36.

Sixthly, that in showing his love, he is of great kindness, called the
mavelous loving kindness, Psalm. 17.7. hence resembled to marriage kindness,
Hos. 2.19. No husband can be so fond of his wife, as God is of his people: nor
can any man devise such ways to express kindness, as God does to his people.

Seventhly, that his mercy is without all grievance to him. Mercy pleases him,
Mic. 7.18. It breeds, as it were an unspeakable contentment in God himself,
when he has dealth mercifully with his servants.

It is immense.
Secondly, his mercy is immense, unmeasurable: and this is expressed by diverse
forms of speech in the Scripture. Thus God is said to be plenteous in mercy,
Psalm. 86.5. abundant in mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3. rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. His mercy
is great above the heavens, Psalm. 108.5. Gods Word herein has magnified his
name above all things, Psalm. 138.2. He has a multitude of mercies, Psalm. 51.1.
manifold mercies, Nehem. 9.19. They are unsearchable, high as the heaven is
from the earth, Psalm. 103.11. His kindness is said to be mavelous loving
kindness, Psalm. 17.7. Which must needs appear to be so, because he is a
Father of mercies: all mercies in the world flow from him 2 Cor. 1.3. and all
his paths are mercy and truth. Whatsoever he does to his people, is in mercy,
Psalm. 25.6. And therefore the Prophet, that could find similitudes to express
the faithfulness and judgments of God by, yet is feign to give over when he
comes to his special mercy to his chosen, and vents himself by exclamation,
Oh how excellent is thy mercy! Psalm. 36.7, 8.

It is free mercy, and that diverse w^ies.
Thirdly, this mercy is the more admirable, in that it is free: which appears
diverse ways. First, in that it is showed without deserts on our parts: which
the term gracious, every where given to God in Scripture, does import.
Secondly, in that God is tied to no man, nor to any posterity of men: he has
mercy on whom he will have mercy, Romans 9. Thirdly, because it is extended to
all sorts of people. If the rich mercy of God could have been obtained only by
Kings or Apostles, or the like, it had been the less comfortable unto us: but
bond as well as the free, the Barbarian as well as the Grecian, the Gentile as
well as the Jew, the poor as well as the rich, may be possessed hereof. He
does not spend all his mercy on Abraham or David, but he reserveth mercy for
thousands, Exodus 34.6. and will bestow the true mercies of David upon meaner
men, Esa. 55.4. His mercy is over all his works, especially over all his
spiritual works in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 145.9. Fourthly, it appears to be
free, because it can be alone. God can love us, though no body else do: though
Abraham know us not, yet God will be a father unto us, and never leave us nor
forsake us, Esa. 63.15, 16.

Ob. But might some one say, In the second Commandment it is plain, that God
shows mercy to them that keep his Commandments. It seems then, his mercy is
not free, but he has respect to deserts in us.

Sol. First, our keeping of the Commandments is not alleged as the cause of
mercy, but as the sign of mercy. The words show to whom God will show mercy;
not for what cause.

Secondly, when he says he will show mercy, it evidently excludes merit: For
it is mercy that God will bestow such great things upon men for their works;
for there is no proportion between our works, and the goodness we receive
from God: When we have done all, we should account our selves unprofitable
servants.

Ob. But it seems, Gods mercy is caused by merit; for God shows us mercy for
the merits of Christ: If Christ deserve it, then it seems it is not free.

Sol. First, mercy excludes merit in us, though not in Christ. Secondly, it was
mercy that God gave us Christ to merit for us. And thus of the third property
of Gods mercy.

Fourthly, Gods mercy is the more admirable yet, in that it is eternal. Gods
mercy is eternal.
God will not change his Word: He keeps his covenant and mercy with his
servants, 1 King. 8.23. Gods mercies have been from all eternity, Psalm. 25.6.
and he will not take away his mercy from his servants, Psalm. 89.34. but his
mercy and loving kindness shall follow them all the days of their life, Psalm.
23. ult. His mercies are new every morning; he has never done showing of
mercy, Lament. 3.23. Isaiah 33.3. He is still building up his mercies, and will
never leave, till he have finished them in an everlasting frame of unspeakable
glory, Psalm. 89.2. His mercy is everlasting and endures for ever, Psalm.
103.3. and 136. from everlasting to everlasting, Psalm. 103.17. God may forsake
his people for a moment, to their thinking, and in a little wrath he may hide
his face; but with everlasting mercies he will receive them. As he has sworn
that the waters of Noah shall no more cover the earth: so has he sworn he
will no more be wrath with his people. The hills may be removed, and the
mountains may depart, but Gods covenant of peace shall not be removed, says
the Lord, that has mercy on thee, Isaiah 54.7. to 11. If Gods covenant be not
with day and night, and if he have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and
earth; then may he cast away his servants and their ^eed, Ierem. 33.25, 26. But
we see the course of nature is firm, and therefore ought to be more assured of
the firmness of the covenant of Gods mercy to his people.

The effects of mercy follow.

To obtain mercy, is to obtain those benefits which God has promised to his
people, as the fruits of his mercy. Where God shows mercy,

Nine effects of Gods mercy.
First, he will hear their prayers graciously: this is promised, Esa. 30.18,
19. and pleaded by David, Psalm. 4.1.

Secondly, he sanctifies all afflictions, so as whatsoever befalls the godly,
proceeds from mercy, and not justice in God; and shall work for the best, Romans
8.28. It is Gods love that makes him correct, Heb. 12.6, 7.

Thirdly, he heales their natures from the diseases of their minds: for to
show mercy is likewise to cure us, and sanctify us; and God promises it, Hos.
14.3.

Fourthly, he multiplies pardon, Isa. 55.7. It is not grievous to forgive s^n
daily when they seek to him for forgiveness.

Fifthly, he delivers the soul, absolutely, from the pit: they are free from
condemnation, Job 33.27. Psalm. 86.13, etc.

Sixthly, in all dangers and weaknesses his mercy holds them up, even when the
godly say their foot slippeth, Psalm. 94.18.

Seventhly, he guides them in all their ways: He that has mercy on them
(says the Prophet) shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he
guide them, Esa. 49.10. The World is like a wilderness, the wicked are like
wild beasts in a desert; Gods children are so provided for, that God preserves
them, yea and himself finds them out means of singular refreshing all their
days.

Eighthly, he crowns them with blessings, Psalm. 103.4.

Ninthly, he gives them assurance of an immortal inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.

The consideration of this mavelous mercy which the godly have obtained, may
teach us diverse things:

Use 1.
First, with all thankfulness to acknowledge the mercy of God: we should
always mention the loving kindness of God, in all the experiences we have of
the truth of his mercies toward us, Esa. 63.7. We should frame our selves to
an easy discourse of the glory of Gods Kingdom, and talk of his power, Psalm.
145.8, 9, 10. We should be so persuaded of this truth, as freely to say, that
we know that the Lord is gracious and very merciful, Psalm. 116.5. It is a
great sin not to remember the multitudes of Gods mercies, Psalm. 106.7. Oh
that men would therefore indeed praise the Lord for his goodness, etc. Psalm.
107. four times repeated in that Psalm. Christians should glory in it: not in
their riches, strength, wisdom, etc. but in this, that they know God that
exercises mercy, Ier. 9.24.

Secondly, in all our ways heartily to disclaim merits of works, or opinion
of our worthiness or deserts: say still with the Prophet in the Psalm, Not
unto us, not unto us Lord, but to thy Name give the glory, for thy mercy and
truths sake, Psalm. 115.1. The whole frame of our salvation depends upon Gods
grace, not on works, Ephesians. 2. Tit. 3.5.

Thirdly, let us with David resolve to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever,
since our happiness lies in mercy, and since we have the tidings of mercy in
Gods house: there the fountain of this grace is daily opened unto us, and we
may draw water still with joy out of this Well of salvation in the Gospel,
Psalm. ^.7. and 23. ult.

Fourthly, we should learn of God to be merciful: let us strive to comfort
others with showing them mercy, as we have received merry from the Lord. Oh
let us be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful, Luke 6.

Fifthly, we should hence be encouraged and resolved, since we know our
privileges, to go boldly unto the throne of Grace upon all occasions, to
seek mercy to help in the time of need. We have obtained mercy of the Lord,
and therefore may and ought to make use of our privilege, Heb. 4.16.

Use 2.
Secondly, this doctrine of Gods mercy may serve for singular comfort to the
godly, and that both in the case of sin, and in the case of afflictions.

1 Against the disquietnesse of the heart for sin, it should much refresh
them, to remember that they have obtained mercy, yea though innumerable evils
have compassed them about, Psalm. 40.11, 12. and though our offenses are
exceeding grievous, Psalm. 51.1. Exodus 34.6, 7.

2 Secondly, in the case of afflictions, many things should hence comfort us.

1 That howsoever it go with our bodies, yet God has mercy on our souls. 2
That it is mercy that our afflictions are not worse, that we are not consumed,
Lam. 7.22. 3 That in the worst afflictions God does many ways show mercy; his
mercies are new every morning, Lam. 3.23. 4 That though God cause grief, yet
he will have compassion to regard us according to our strength, he will deal
with us in measure, Lament. 3.32. Isaiah 27.7. 5 That he does not afflict
willingly, Lament. 3.33. 6 That all shall work together for the best, Romans
8.28. Deuteronomy. 8.16. 7 God will give a good end, Iam. 5.11. He will lift up from
the gates of death, Psalm. 9.13. God will give thee rest from thy sorrows, and
fears, and hard usage, Isaiah 14.1, 3. Psalm. 57.3. He will send from heaven
to save thee. 8 He will afflict but for a moment, Esa. 54.7.
But in both these cases we must remember,

First, to seek mercy of God, Ezekiel. 36.32.

Secondly, if we be not presently answered, our eyes must look up to God, and
we must wait for his mercies, Psalm. 123.3, 4.

Thirdly, we must check our selves for the doubtfulnesse of our hearts, as
David does, Psalm. 4.7, 8. and 77.10.

Fourthly, because we live too much be sense, we must beseech God not only to
be merciful, but to let his mercy be showed, and come to us, Psalm. 85.8. and
116.77.

Fifthly, we should also beseech God not only to let us feel his mercies, but
to satisfy us also early with his mercies, Psalm. 90 14.

Sixthly, we must look to it that we walk in our integrity, Psalm. 26.11. and
live by rule, Gal. 6.16.

Lastly, howsoever, we must trust in God, and look to it that we rest upon the
Lord, Psalm. 32.10. and 33.18, 22. For God takes pleasure in those which hope in
his mercy, Psalm. 147.11.

Quest. But how may a man that is not yet comforted with Gods mercy, take a
sound course to obtain mercy?

Answ. That men may obtain mercy;

First, they must take unto themselves words, Helps to obtain merry.
and confess their s^nnes to God, and heartily bewail their offenses, Joel
2.13. Hos. 14.3.

Secondly, they must turn from, and forsake their evil ways, and their
unrighteousness inward and outward, Isaiah 55.7.

Thirdly, they must be careful to seek the Lord while he may be sound, Isaiah
55.6.

Fourthly, they must be merciful, and love mercy: for then they shall obtain
mercy, Matt. 5.6.

Fifthly, they must learn the ways of Gods people, and learn them
diligently, Ier. 12.15, 16. They must have pure hands, and a clean heart, and
not lift up their souls to vanity, Psalm. 4.5.

Sixthly, they must hate the evil, and love the good, Amos 5.5.

Seventhly, they must cry unto God daily, Psalm. 86.3.

Eighthly, there must naught of the cursed thing cleave unto their hands, Deuteronomy.
13.17.

Ninthly, when the Lord says, Seek ye my face: their hearts must say, Thy
face (O Lord) will we seek, Psalm. 27.7, 8.

Verse. 11, 12. Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul:

And have your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that they which speak
evil of you, as of evil doers, may by your good works which they shall see,
glorify God in the day of their visitation.


THese words contain the epilogue or conclusion of the whole exhortation, as it
concerns Christians in general, from verse 13 of the former chapter,
hitherto: and it has in it matter both of dehortation and of exhortation, as
answering in the substance to all that he has hitherto entreated of by way of
use. The dehortation is in verse 11; the exhortation, in verse 12: in the one
showing what they should avoid, in the other what they should do. They should
avoid fleshly lusts: and that they should do, is, to live honestly.

In general, we may note, That it is the proper effect of all sorts of
doctrine in Scripture, to make an impression of care in our hearts, about the
reformation of our lives; that it is in vain heard which does not some way
breed in us a hatred of vice, and a love of honesty: This is the use of all
Scripture, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17. Which may serve for trial of such as come to the
Word. They may know whether they be good or evil hearers, by the impression
made upon their hearts by the Word. And it may serve for information, to show
us the excellency of the Word above all other Writings, because there is no
line in Scripture, but some way it tends to the redress of our natures from
sin, and to plant holiness in us: which can be true of no humane Writings.
And withal, it shows the happy estate of the godly, who, though they have
many diseases in their natures, yet they have wonderful store and variety of
medicines in Gods Word, to heal their natures. If, for the diseases of our
bodies, there be but one herb in the whole field that is good for cure, we
have reason to think that God has provided well in nature for us: but how is
his mercy glorious, who in the spiritual field of his Word, has made to grow
as many herbs for cure of all our diseases, as there be sentences in
Scripture! And lastly, it should teach us to use the Scriptures to this end, to
redress our ways by them. And thus in general.

The first part of the epilogue has in it matter of dehortation: where observe,

First, the parties dehorted; who are described by an epithet importing their
privilege above other men, viz. Dearly beloved.

Secondly, the manner of propounding the dehortation, viz. by way of
beseeching: I beseech you.

Thirdly the matter from which he dehorts, viz. fleshly lusts.

Fourthly, the manner how they are to be avoided, viz. abstain from them.

Fifthly, the motives: first, Ye are strangers and pilgrims: secondly, these
lusts are fleshly: thirdly, they fight against the soul.

Dearly beloved.

This term is not used complementally or carelessly, but with great affection
in the Apostle, and with special choice and fitness for the matter entreated
of; which we may observe in the most places, where this lovely epithet is given
to the godly in other Scriptures. God is exceeding choice of his words: he
never mentions the terms of love, but he brings to his children the
affections of love, as I may so say. Men, through custom, use fair complement
of words, when their hearts be not moved: but let our love be without
dissimulation. But let that go. The point here to be plainly observed, is,
That Christians are beloved: of all other people they are most loved. I will
but briefly explicate this. First, God loves them, How many ways Gods people
are the only beloved ones.
and that with infinite and everlasting love, and has manifested it by sending
his own Son to be a propitiation for their sins, 1 Job. 4.9, 10. Secondly,
Christ loves them, which he shows by giving his life for them. Thirdly, the
Angels of heaven love them; which they show by joying in their conversion, and
by their careful attendance about them. Fourthly, the godly, in general, love
them. There is no godly man that knows them, but loves them: for every one
that loves God that begot them, loves every one that is begotten of God; every
one, I say, that he knows, 1 Job. 5.1. Lastly, the godly Teachers love them;
which they show, in that they are not only willing to impart to them the
Gospel, but even their own souls, because their people are dear unto them, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.

Now this love of God, of Christ, of the Angels, Use.
of godly men and Ministers, should serve to support us against the contempt
and hatred of the world. We have a love that is much better than the love of
worldly men can be to us: First, because it is of better persons: and secondly,
because it is of a better kind; for it is more servent, and it is more pure,
and more constant. Worldly men can show no love that has comparison to the
love of God, or Christ, or any of those, for the servencie of it. And if
worldly men love us, it is to draw us unto one evil or other; and besides, it
will not last: for, wicked men will agree with themselves no longer than so
many Curres will agree: they are always contending, hateful, and hating one
another. Secondly, this point should much check the unbelief of Christians,
and their unthankfulness: for many times they are affected as if they were not
beloved of any: whereby they much dishonor the love of God, and of Christ, and
of Christians toward them also; and thereby they flatly contradict the Text,
which says, They are beloved. Thirdly, impenitent sinners should be moved
hereby to become true Christians, because till then they are monstrous hateful
creatures: God loathes them and their works, Ioh. 3.36. Esa. 1.11, etc. And
such vile persons are vile and odious in the eyes of the godly, Psalm. 24.4.
Psalm. 15.

Fourthly, Christians should labor to preserve this love unto themselves, How
Christians may prese^ve this love.
with increase of the comfort of it: and so diverse things would much advantage
them in this love: as,

1 Faith. To live by faith commends them wonderfully to Gods love; as being the
condition mentioned when he sent his Son into the world, Ioh. 3.16. For
without it, it is impossible to please God.

2 Humility would much commend them to the love of the Angels; who rejoice more
in one sinner that is penitent, than in ninety nine just men that need no
repentance.

3 The fruits of wisdom, mentioned, Iam. 3.17. have a mavelous force to win
love among men. To be pure, in respect of sincere Religion, to be gentle and
peaceable, free from passion and contention, to be easy to be entreated, to be
also full of mercy and good works, and all this without judging or hypocrisy;
to be no censurers, nor counterfeits: Oh this is exceeding amiable, if these
things were carefully expressed.

4 And for their Ministers, two things would much increase their love to them.
First, obedience to their doctrine: for this will prevail more than all the
bounty in the world, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. Heb. 13.18. Secondly, to converse without
backbiting, or uncharitable judging of them. By these two, the Philippians and
Thessalonians were highly advanced in the affection of the Apostle: and through
the want of these, the Corinthians lost much in the love of the Apostle.

Thus of the persons dehorted.

The manner of the dehortation follows.

I beseech ye.]

In that the Apostle in the name of God does beseech them, diverse things are
imported: as,

First, the mavelous gentleness and love of God to men: he that may
command, threaten, punish, yea cast off, yet is pleased to beseech men.

Secondly, the dignity and excellency of a clean heart, and honest life; It
is a thing which God (by his servants) does vehemently beg at our hands.

Thirdly, the honor of a Christian; he is spoken to as to a great Prince, as
the two former reasons show him to be.

Fourthly, a rule of direction how to carry our selves toward others in the
case of reformation; we must learn of the Apostle to express a Spirit of
meekness, and love, and humility. Passion and pride work unspeakeable
prejudice and hurt in the care of other men's faults.

Fifthly, with what reverentnesse and earnestness we should speak to God,
when he speaks thus to us.

Thus of the manner of propounding the dehortation.

The matter to be avoided is lusts.

Abstain from fleshly lusts.]

By lusts are sometimes meant gross sins and disorders, which are the fruits
of lust; and so the sins mentioned chapter 4.4. of this Epistle, are called
lusts of the Gentiles.

By lust is sometimes meant corruption of nature: But I think it is taken
neither of these ways here.

By lust is sometimes meant the filthy desire of the heart after bodily
uncleanness, and so called the lusts of uncleanness, Col. 3.5. Romans 1.24.

But by lusts here (I take it) is meant all sorts of evil desires in the heart
of man, and so called worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. And in special these sorts of
lusts are named in Scripture, which Christians should especially avoid.

Lusts to be^ especialy avoided.
First, the lusts of uncleanness: filthy desires.

Secondly, the lusts of covetousness, and worldly cares.

Thirdly, the lusts of vainglory, whether of envy, conceitednesse, or desire
of applause.

Fourthly, the lusts of Epicurisme: those desires after delicious or excessive
fare, or vain apparel.

Fifthly, the lusts of malice and revenge.

These and such like, are the lusts which Christians must forsake.

The use is diverse.

Uses. First, for information: and so it may show us,

1 That outward honesty will not serve the turn: It is not enough to be free
from gross sins. What case then are civil honest men in?

2 That in reformation it is not enough to forsake the evils we have no desire
after, but we must leave our own lusts.

Secondly, for consolation. Here is imported an excellent comfort to the godly
in the case of inward and hateful temptations. When vile things come ento the
mind of the godly, if they dislike them, and do not lust after the^, nor
entertain them with spiritual dalliance, they may be assured, that those
evils shall not be charged upon them: For before a temptation can be a sin, it
must have somewhat of coveting in it. Christ was tempted as we are, and yet
he sinned not, because he liked them not, but rejected them.

Abstain from them.]

The manner how they are to be avoided, is contained in this word abstain:
which does import diverse things;

First, that without departing from iniquity, we cannot have comfort of our
repentance. To come into the company of the godly, to make show of Religion, to
come to Church, or use private means, or barely to confess sin, or to feel
terrors for sin, is not enough, unless we leave sin. Judas, Demas, Cain,
and the wicked Israelites could do the former; yet never repented.

Secondly, that the occasions of lusts will be daily offered to us from the
world, or the devil, or our own corrupted nature. Now it is not an argument
of our misery to have them, but to entertain them.

Uses. The use may be,

1 For information: The true abstinence is to abstain from sin: the other
abstinence from meat, or the like, is but circumstantiall, and not in it self
acceptable to God, Esa. 58.

2 For trial: Those are sound Christians indeed, that abstain from fleshly
lusts.

Quest. But are there not lusts in godly men, as well as in wicked men?

Answ. There may be, but with great difference: for,

1 The godly man may be entangled with evil desires, Three differences of
lusts in godly men and wicked men.
but the wicked man is more: For he burns in lust, yields himself over to his
hearts lusts: He is given up to his lusts, he takes care for the lusts of the
flesh to fulfill them: He serves his lusts, etc. Romans 13.13. and 1.24. Tit.
3.3. Ephesians. 2.3.

2 The godly man, if he be overcome of his lusts for a time, yet he humbles
himself, and judges himself for them, and grieves for them; whereas the
wicked boasts himself of his hearts lusts, and places his contentment in
them, Psalm. 10.3.

3 The godly man, if he be yet overcome, he will break off his iniquity by
repentance; whereas the wicked in his lusts is like the devil. He is
incorrigible, no ill success, or judgment, or reproof can break off his
desire of transgression: yea his lusts are called, The lusts of his father the
devil, Ioh. 8.44.

Thirdly, all godly Christians should learn from hence to be seriously bent to
preserve themselves in the purity of Christian Religion, and to keep their
hearts from these soul annoiances.

Quest. But what should we do to be preserved from lusts?

Answ. First, thou must avoid the occasions of lusts: such as are,

1 Evil company, and therein evil example and evil counsel, Psalm. 1.1.
Helps to avoid lusts.
2 Idleness and solitariness. 3 Excessive desire after,and delight in riches,
1 Timothy 6.9. 4 Ignorance, 1 Pet. 1.14. 5 Intemperance, drunkenness, and
fullness of bread, and deliciousness of fare, and apparel. 6 Hardness of
heart, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
Secondly, we must walk in the Spirit, cherishing all good motions, and pure
imaginations, yielding our hearts over to the government of Gods Spirit, doing
all duties with the powers of our soul, Gal. 1.16.

Thirdly, we must crucify them, if they arise among our selves, with the same
mind was in Christ, and resolve to suffer in the flesh by the sound practice of
mortification.

Fourthly, we must strive after contentation, 1 Timothy 6.

Fifthly, we must get knowledge: for as ignorance brings them in, so knowledge
fills the heart, and dares them out.

Thus of the manner of avoiding them. The motives follow: and the first of them
is,

Ye are strangers and pilgrims.]

A stranger is he that lives in a place that is not his own Country, or
Kingdom, or Nation, whither by right he belongs: so Abraham was a stranger,
Genesis 21.23. and the Israelites in Egypt, Exodus 2.12. Now, a pilgrim is he that
rests not in a place, but travelleth onward from place to place.

Godly men are said to be strangers, and not strangers, in diverse respects. It
is said, they are not strangers in respect of freedom to the City of God, and
the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.29. They are strangers in respect of
their absence from the heavenly Canaan, which is their own home, to which they
were borne by regeneration.

In this world then, all the godly are but strangers and pilgrims; which may
serve,

Use.
First, for reproof even of diverse godly men; and that in diverse respects:

1 For their too much minding of earthly things. Why do our hearts carry us
away after the world, considering it is but an Inn to be in for a little time?

2 For their meddling with other folks business. A stranger only thinks of
his own affairs, and does not interpose himself in the affairs of others:
so should we study to be quiet, and meddle with our own businesses.

3 For discouragement of heart under the sense of our own weaknesses and
weariness in spiritual things: we must expect in such travel much weakness
and weariness.

4 For impatience, either under the crosses of life, cast on us by God (whereas
strangers arm themselves to bear all weathers) or under the scorns and
contempt of the world: whereas we should look for it, that the world should
gaze at us and deride us, as usually men do at strangers. Nor should
Christians be at leisure to stay their journey, by seeking revenge for their
wrongs, or be troubled if they cannot get preferment in the world.

Secondly, for instruction. It should wholly impose upon us the care of
carrying our selves like strangers and pilgrims;

1 By having our conversation without covetousness. 2 By our language,
speaking always as may become the people of God, and heirs of heaven; that
the men of this world may perceive by our speech, that we are not of this
world. 3 By our circumspection and desire to live without offense: as a
stranger is very heedfull of his ways in all places where he comes. 4 By our
daily enquiring after the particular way to heaven. 5 By our thankfulness for
the favors we find while we are in the world, seeing it is a place we are not
to look for much in. 6 By our apparel. If ^^rangers be known by their
garments, then is it a great fault for Christians to be found in the fashions
of this world. 7 By our delight in good company: we should be glad of any that
would go with us to heaven. 8 By our affection homeward: our minds should
still be in heaven.
Nor should godly men be overmuch troubled, that they are strangers here in
this world, and pilgrims, in the condition of travelers: for,

First, they are not strangers in the Commonwealth of Israel, and in the
Kingdom of Christ: though at the same time they are strangers, in respect of
their condition in this world.

Secondly, they are well provided for at their Innes. God provides their
resting places, and no good thing will he withold from them. That God which
commands men to regard strangers, and show them mercy, will himself much more
be careful for his strangers.

Thirdly, their pilgrimage will not be long.

Fourthly, they have good company: all the godly travel their way.

Fifthly, God has appointed them guides: yea, Christ himself will be their
way.

Sixthly, by prayers they may send home continually.

Seventhly, it should much comfort them, to think what a glorious condition
they shall be in, when they come home, in the new Jerusalem.

Thus of the first reason.

Secondly, the lusts must be avoided, because they are fleshly.

Fleshly.]

These lusts are fleshly in diverse respects: Lusts are fleshly in diverse
respect*


First, because they please after the flesh, which is the corrupt nature of
man: they hold no delight, or show of profit, but to the flesh: they are
exceeding noisome, and grievous and foolish to the Spirit.

Secondly, because they reign only in fleshly persons: they be the lusts of
Gentiles, and such as are strangers from the life of God. Godly men complain
of them as an extreme misery, Romans 7.1 Pet. 4.3.

Thirdly, because they arise most from the body, which is but a servant to the
soul: and it is an extreme unmanlinesse, for the soul to be at the command
of her servant the body; which concludes against the lusts of uncleanness,
riotousnesse, drunkenness, vanity of apparel, etc.

Fourthly, because they proceed from the old man, or corruption of nature, or
the flesh, considered as the enemy to God, and man's salvation: and so it is an
argument taken from the hat^^ulnesse of the flesh, and her working in us. The
lusts and desires of the flesh ought to be hateful, and we should suspect and
abstain from the projects of the flesh, if we consider,

1 That the flesh savoureth not the things of God, Romans 8. Eight evil
properties and effects of the flesh.


2 That she opposes all good ways, partly by objecting against them, and
partly by making evil present, when we should perform them.

3 That her wisdom is against God: her fairest reasons are pleaded for things
that are hateful to God: such also are her excuses, and extenuations, and
promises.

4 That if she be followed, she will lead us by degrees into all abominations;
as whoredoms, murders, debates, heresies, etc. these are her fruits, Gal. 5.

5 She will betray us to Satan, that he may by himself set up strong
fortifications in our souls: and her treason is the more dangerous, because
she is a domestical enemy; and by his working in secret, our hearts may
become a very cage or stie of unclean spirits.

6 She has already spoiled the Image of God in us, and made us look most
deformedly.

7 If she once get power* she is most tyrannical: no respect of credit,
profit, no nor salvation it self, can stir: she will be served, whatsoever
come of it.

8 We should abhor her, for the very mischief she does to our posterity: we
cannot look upon our children, but we may see what woeful hurt she has done
by the infection they received in their propagation.

Uses. The use may be,

First, for reproof of such as lay the blame of their faults upon their evil
luck, or evil counsel, or the devil: whereas they ought to lay the fault
upon their o^ne fles^, even their own ill nature. The devil no^ the world
could never hurt us, if the flesh did not betray us by defect, or consent, or
evil action.

Secondly, for information. We may see what we should mortify, and abstain
from. Religion does not bind men to mortify the substance of the flesh, but
the lusts of the flesh: we are not to destroy any faculty of the soul, or in
the soul, or part of the body; but the inordinate appetite and desires of
either; we are not to abstain from the necessary means of life, as house,
lands, diet, apparel, company, etc. but the evil concupiscence about these.

Thirdly, for instruction. It should teach us therefore to restrain the flesh
as much as we can; and therefore we shall with the same labor, restrain the
lusts of the flesh: and to this end,

1 We must with all fear and jealousy watch our own natures, as
mistrusting. 2 We must silence the flesh, and not suffer it to plead for sin.
3 We must by a daily course of mortification, judge the flesh; that so we may
be, as it were, condemned in the flesh. 4 We must keep from it what may pamper
it; as idleness, excess of diet, apparel, recreation, etc.
Which war against the soul.]

These words may be considered either in their coherence, or in themselves: in
their coherence, and so they are the third reason taken from the evil effects
of those lusts. In themselves there are two things to be opened; both what the
soul is, and what this war in the soul is.

The point is clear, that fleshly lusts do much hurt the souls of men; and
so, both the souls of wicked men, and of godly men.

First, of wicked men. These lusts hurt their souls,

1 Because they provoke the wrath of God upon them. The Israelites were not
estranged from their lusts, How these lusts hurt the souls of wicked men,
and therefore the wrath of God came upon them, Psalm. 78.29, 30, 31.

2 Because they make us resemble the devil, Ioh. 8.44.

3 Because they hinder the power of the Word from them: they will never come to
the knowledge of the truth, 2 Timothy 3.6.

4 Because it brings the soul in bondage: so as all the conversation of the
soul is in a manner about those lusts of the flesh, Ephesians. 2.2.

5 Because they make all their prayers abominable, Iam. 4.

6 Because sometimes they are scou^ged with a reprobate mind, being given up to
their lusts, Romans 1.

7 Because they may drown the soul inperdition, 1 Timothy 6.9.

If godly men entertain these inward evils in their thoughts and affections,
many evils will follow.

1 They hinder the Word. as also the souls of godly men.
2 They grieve the good Spirit, by which they are sealed to the day of
redemption. 3 They harden the heart, and blind the understanding. 4 They hinder
good cuties, Gal. 5.17. 5 They wound the soul. 6 They make the mind soul and
loathsome: they defile. 7 They may bring outward judgments upon thee, or inward
terrors of conscience.
Use. The use may be partly to declare the misery of such Christians, as are
fallen away from the acknowledgement of the truth, by intertaining these
loathsome lusts: of whose fearful estate at large, 2 Pet. 2.18. to the end.

Partly it should work in all the godly obedience to the Counsel of the
Apostle here, in abstaining from these lusts, as grievous hurts to the soul,
or their souls: they should put on the Lord Jesus in sincerity, and never more
take care to fulfill these lusts of the flesh, Romans 13.13.

Thus of these words in the coherence: The sense will be more full, if we
consider more at large two things in the words.

First, what the soul is.

Secondly, what this war in the soul is.

Two things have made the inquiry about the soul exceeding difficult. The
first is the nature of the soul. For it is a spiritual essence, and therefore
wonderfullhard to be conceived of. There be three things cannot fully be
conceived of, or defined by man: first, God: secondly, an Angel: and thirdly,
the soul of man. Now besides this transcendencie, as I may call it, of the
soul, the fall of man, and custom in sin, and the remainders of corruption
in the best, have made this doctrine so hard, that wicked men scarce discern
that they have a soul; and godly men are very ignorant, and impotent in
conceiving the condition of the soul.

This word Soul is diversely accepted in Scripture: for it signifies sometimes

The life of man, as Matt. 6.25. Be not careful for your souls, Soul taken
in diverse senses.
what ye shall eat, etc.

Christ: because look what the soul is to the body, that is Christ to the
whole man: so Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my soul in hell, that is,
Christ, Act. 2.25, 29, etc. and 13.35, 36.

The dead bodies, Levit. 19.28.

The whole man: to Genesis 46.26. by a Synecdoche.

But here it signifies that part of man, which is called his spirit.

By the soul then we understand that part of man which is invisible, and
invisibly placed within the body of man. Now the things which are fit for us to
inquire into and know, concerning the nature and excellency of the soul, may
be comprised briefly in this description of the soul.

The soul of man is a substance incorporeall, invisible, and immortal, A
description of the Soul.
created of God, and united to the body, and endued with the admirable
faculties of vegetation, sense and reason, to this end principally, that God
might be of man truly acknowledged, and duly worshipped.

Every branch of this description contains an excellent commendation of the
soul, and should much affect us with admiration of Gods workmanship, and his
love to us in making us such excellent creatures; and withal it should breed
in us the care which the Apostle here calls for, of avoiding all things that
might defile our precious souls.

The soul is the abridgement of the invisible world, as the body is the
abridgement of the visible world: man is rightly said to be a little world. God
made man last; and in man made an Epitome of all the former works: For all
things meet in man, who consists of a substance partly corporeal, and partly
spiritual. For all things which God created besides man, are either such
creatures as are discerned by sense, being bodily, or such creatures as are
removed from sense, being spiritual, as the Angels. Now I say, man may
resemble both sorts of creatures; the visible in his body, and the invisible in
his soul.

Now the former description of the soul of man does commend the soul for
seven things. Seven things very considerable in man's Soul.


First, that it is a substance.

Secondly, that it is incorporeall.

Thirdly, that it is immortal, and cannot die.

Fourthly, that it is created of God immediately.

Fifthly, that it is joined to the body after a wonderful manner.

Sixthly, that it has these excellent faculties.

Seventhly, that hereby man has honor to know God and his works, which all
other creatures in this visible world want.

The first thing then to be enquired after is, what the soul is in respect of
the being of it. And this I must answer, first, by removing from the
consideration of it, what it is not.

First, the soul is not the harmony, or right temper of the harmonies of the
body, as Galen that great Physician is said to affirm; which appears
evidently by these reasons:

1 That then every body, in which the harmonies, or four elements are
tempered, should have a soul in it, and so stones should have souls, yea such
as man has, endued with reason, etc. And therefore simply the soul cannot be
the (...), or temperature of the elements or humors.

2 It is apparent, that the soul governes the excesses which arise from the
humors of the body, as a man that by temper is apt to be angry or heated, yet
has something within him which bridles this anger, notwithstanding the heat of
his body.

3 If the soul were nothing else but the temperament of the humors, then it
were but a mere accident, in that it can be present or absent as the
corruption of the body: but we see that cannot be: For remove the soul from
the body, and it cease to be a living body.

4 By Scripture it is evident, that when the body was formed, the soul, as a
thing distinct from it, was infused into it by God himself, Genesis 2.7.

Secondly, the soul is not a power, force, or faculty infused into the body,
by which it is able to live, or move, or work: For then removing the body from
it, it cannot subsist; whereas we shall prove afterward, that the soul will
subsist without the body, and therefore cannot be an accident in the body, or a
power only of the body. Besides, the soul is the subject of virtues and
vices, of sciences and arts: Now, no accident can be so.

Thirdly, the soul is not the life of man: that is apparent in Scripture, when
a difference is put between the soul and life; Psalm. 49.18.
as, what soul shall be blessed in life? So 2 Samuel 11.11. By thy life, and the
life of thy soul.

The soul then is a substance of it self, put within us by God, distinct from
the body: this may be evidently proved.

The Soul is a substance.
First, God, after he had made the body, is said to breath into it the breath of
life, to note, that his soul was a substance distinct of it self.

Secondly, because it can subsist without the body, as is apparent in the soul
of Abraham, Lazarus and Dives, Luke 16. And of the soul of the thief on the
cross it is said, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Thirdly, God is said to have formed the Spirit in the midst of man; so it is a
substance of it self: Note, he says, in him, not of him.

Fourthly, those words of David and Christ prove it: Into thy hands I commit my
spirit: the body being committed to the earth, there remained a substance
delivered to God.

Fifthly, that place of Ecclesiast. Chap. 12. is most plain; The body returns
to dust, and the Spirit to God that gave it: therefore there is in man a
Spirit, which returns to God.

Sixthly, Paul desires to be desolved, and to be with Christ: so there was a
substance which should enjoy the presence of Christ, Phil. 1.23.

The second thing to be proved is, that the soul is incorporeall. It is joined
to the body, but it is no body; it informs the matter of man which is his
body, but it is without matter it self: it is immateriall: it is wholly a
spiritual substance: It is not a bodily substance, no, not a most subtle, or
pure body, but altogether incorporeall: This is a high doctrine, and shows the
soul to be an admirable kind of sustance. Now that the soul is void of
matter, and is no bodily substance, may be plainly proved, though not easily
explicated.

The soul is not a bodily substance.
First, it is expressly said to be a Spirit: now spirits are not flesh and
bones, or any like bodily substance, Psalm. 31.6. Eccles. 12.7. and Zach. 12.1.
It is reckoned one of the wonders of Gods creation, that he made in man a
spirit.

Secondly, the soul is after the Image of God, and has imprinted upon it the
similitude of the goodness, wisdom, and holiness of God. Now it were not
like God if it were a body, nor were it capeable of such habits which can be
stamped upon mere natural or bodily things.

Thirdly, the soul performs those actions which depend not upon the body,
and are done without bodily instruments; for it understands and wills.

Fourthly, if the soul were a body, then it must be corpus animatum or
inanimatum: but to say it is without life, is sense-lesse, because it enlives
and animates the body: and to say it is animatum, enlived it self, it must
then be so by some other body. All which the same questions might be asked, and
so run into an infinite.

The third thing is, that the soul is invisible. This shows the
transcendencie of the nature of it; and experience in all men proves this: for,
who ever saw a soul?

Obj. The soul of Dives in hell saw the soul of Abraham and Lazarus: and John
saw the souls of those that suffered for the testimony of Jesus, Revel. 20.4.

Sol. These souls were seen by the eyes of understanding, not by the bodily
eyes.

The fourth thing to be proved, is, that the soul is immortal, it cannot die:
The soul is immortal.
when it is once kindled, it will never go out, or be extinct; as the
Sadducees wickedly imagined, and some Athiefts still think the contrary. This
is a point necessary to be known; as for the truth it self, so for the use of
it in our lives. For, to doubt of immortality makes us miserable; and to
believe the souls are mortal, makes men Epicures: Let us eat and drink, for
to morrow we shall die. But to be fully assured of an estate after life, makes
a man careful so avoid sin, lest his soul live for ever miserably; and to
serve God, that he may live for ever happily.

Now things may be said to be immorrall two ways: either absolutely, and in
their own nature; and so God only is immortal: or else they are so by the
will and pleasure of God, and not by their own nature; and so the souls of
men, and so the Angels are immortal.

There have been two sorts of men that have denied the immortality of the
soul: the one were the Sadducees among the Jews, who held that in death the
soul of man is utterly extinct, as the soul of a beast: the other were
certain Arabians, of whom Eusebius and Saint Augustine make mention; who said
that the soul died with the body, Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c 26. Aug. tom. 6. de
haeres. c. 8.3.
and so remained dead till the day of Judgment, and then they revived with the
resurrection of the body.

Now against the first sort may be produced many reasons, as also evident
Scriptures.

The reasons are such as these:

1 The providence and justice of God proves the immortality of the soul. For
here in this life good men have not all their happiness; and evil men live in
prosperity: so there must be another life, where justice must be done.

2 Religion confirms this: for to what end were religion and serving of God,
if the soul died, like the soul of a beast, seeing in this life the most
godly are outwardly in great misery many times? For if S. Paul say, If the dead
rise not, then of all men are we most miserable; it will hold much more
strange, if the soul live not at all after death.

3 The wisdom of God proves it: for else man were not in better case than the
beast, yea, in some cases worse. For, man from his infancy to his death, is
liable to many diseases, subject to cares and griefs, which the beast is free
from: yea, this adds to man's misery, that he knows he must die which the
beast does not. Now, shall man, that was counted like God, be thought to have
no better end than the beast, that did exalt himself so much in the glory of
his beginning?

4 The conscience of malefactors proves this, who fear a judgment after this
life, and an estate of misery.

5 The nature of the soul proves it; for it is simple, and void of all
contrariety, and accidents, and causes of corruption or putrefaction, and is,
besides, the Image of God. Now, no mortal thing can be the image of that which
is immortal.

These reasons make it exceeding probable. But I am of their minds, that
think it may be believed by faith, but not be proved by reason.

The Scripture therefore only makes this point clear, such as these:

First, our Savior proves it out of the Word of God; saying, I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, etc.

Secondly, it is most plain, Mat. 10.28.

Thirdly, eternal life is every where promised to them that believe.

Fourthly, such places as treat of the Resurrection, last Judgment, and the
Glory of heaven, prove it.

Now for the other sort, that confess the life of the soul after the last
Judgment, but deny that the soul lives after death till then, there are
diverse Scriptures against their opinion: As,

First, the former Scriptures. The soul cannot be killed at all, Matthew. 10.
And God was presently the God of Abraham, as then living: and for eternal
life, it is not said, He shall have; but, He has eternal life that believes.

Secondly, Christ said to the these, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise; not at the last day.

Thirdly, To. 8.38. Death cannot separate us from God in Christ, as it would if
the soul were dead, or a-sleepe, and did not enjoy God.

Fourthly, the dead that die in the Lord, are forthwith blessed, Rev. 14.14.

Fifthly, the souls of Abraham and Lazarus were in joy and alive after death;
so was the soul of Dives in hell.

Sixthly, John saw, under the Altar, the souls of them that were slain for
the testimony of Jesus, and they cried with a loud voice, O Lord, how long?
etc. Revel. 6.

Seventhly, the souls of the wicked die not, but are kept in prison, and are
now in prison too, 1 Pet. 3.19.

Before I leave this point of the immortality of the soul; it is profitable,
briefly, to answer certain objections which may be brought out of some words
in the Scriptures: as,

Ob. 1. The soul that sins, shall die, Ezekiel. 18. Therefore it seems the
soul is mortal, or at lest for sin it must die; and the rather, because it
was threatened in Paradise: That day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the
death.

Sol. The Scriptures evidently show, that since the fall, and sin, yet the
soul does not die, as the places before alleged prove: But the answer is,
That this death threatened, or inflicted, is not the destruction of the being
of the soul; but the depriving of it of the grace, and savor, and presence of
God.

Ob. 2. Eccles. 3. It is said that there is one end of the man and of the
beast; As dies the one, so dies the other.

Sol. These are not the words of Solomon, but of the Epicure, who is here, as
in other places of that book, brought in, declaring his mind of things: For,
Solomon himself concludes evidently, that the soul returns unto God that
gave it, as in the last Chapter.

The other objections are the objections of the dreamers, that is, of such as
imagine that the soul lies a-sleepe till the day of Judgment, and perceives
nothing, and is without operation, which is to say, it is dead, seeing life is
nothing else but the continual motion and action of the soul.

Object. 1. It is said that man, when he dies, sleeps; as Christ said of
Lazarus, He sleeps, Ioh. 11. and, Stephen slept in the Lord, Act. 17.

Sol. Other Scriptures add another word, viz. in the grave, or in the dust,
Job 7.21. and Psalm. 78. sleeping in their graves; but it is evident, that the
soul cannot sleep in the grave, but the body only: And Stephen delivered his
Spirit to Christ.

Object. 2. Paul says, that if the body rise not, we are of all men most
miserable: That, it seems, cannot be true, if the soul enjoy blessedness
without the body.

Sol. The immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the body, are
conjoined: For the Soul without the body can be for ever, because it is the
form of the body. Though God for the time do, by his power and race, provide
for the soul in glory, yet it is not at full happiness, till it be joined to
the body again: For without the body it has no use of vegetation, or senses,
but only of reason. But for the Argument of the Apostle, it holds good of that
part of man which is in question, which is the body of man: for the bodies of
godly men are more miserable than other men; kept under and exposed to many
restraints and pains, either by mortification or persecution, which the bodies
of wicked men are not exposed unto.

Ob. 3. It is said of the spirit of Princes, that it returns to his earth,
and in the day of death his thoughts perish: So the soul thinks of nothing
after death, till the day of judgment.

Sol. The place is corruptly alleged, two ways: One in the words, the other
in the sense: for the text does not say, That his spirit returns to his
earth; but thus, His spirit returns, viz. out of his body to God, and he (not
it) returns to the earth, viz. in respect of his body: for the other, these
words, His thoughts perish, must not be understood of his understanding after
death, but of his projects while he lived. For men are exhorted not to trust in
Princes: for they may die, and then all their promises and projects will be of
no use, and come to nothing

Ob. 4. It is said that the dead cannot praise God, Psalm. 87. and 113. and 30.

Sol. That the souls of the godly in heaven do praise God, is manifest, Rev.
5.11, 13, 14. and 19.1. Now the Scriptures cannot be contrary one to another:
and therefore the places in the Psalms must not be taken simply, but only in
some respect. The dead do praise God, but not as the living did in their lives:
their praises cannot provoke other men to believe in God, or serve him, as in
this life they might.

Thus of the immortality of the soul.

The next thing to be inquired after, is about the original of the soul: The
original of the soul.
and about this point in several ages diverse men have breathed diverse and
strange conceits, erring, because they knew not or regarded not the Scriptures.

First, some conceived so highly of the soul, as to think it was no creature,
but uncreated and eternal, without beginning; but this must needs be false,

1 Because then the soul should be God, and infinite too; for God only is
uncreated.

2 Because then the soul had understanding, and thoughts, and willed from
eternity, whereas till it was in our bodies it did not work: and to imagine,
it should be as a dead lump all that while, is monstrously absurd.

Secondly, others have conceived, that when men die, their souls go into the
bodies of other men that be borne; and so our souls heretofore were the souls
of some men that be dead. This was the opinion of diverse of the Philosophers.
And it is apparent, that diverse of the Jews were infected with it: for about
Christ they said, Some, that he was Elias; some, that he was Ieremias; and
some, one of the Prophets; and some, John Baptist. Now they saw that his body
was not theirs, and therefore they thought, that his soul was the soul of
some of them. Now this opinion cannot be true;

1 Because no Scripture gives any notice of it: for in that place the conceit
of the Jews is told with dislike. 2 Because the souls that were delivered out
of the miseries of this life, should be brought from their blessedness into
misery again; which is most absurd.
Thirdly, others have imagined that the Angels should beget our souls, as our
parents beget our bodies: but this is extremely absurd;

1 Because then our souls should be in the Image of Angels, whereas they were
made in the Image of God. 2 Because this was an heresy long since condemned,
and with hatred cast out of the Church.
Fourthly, many Divines, both of ancient and modern Writers, have declared
themselves to be of the mind, that the soul comes from the parents by
generation, per traducem, and that the parents do beget the whole man, which
consists of soul as well as body. Anima non est ex traduce.
Now though it be true, that this opinion has had, and still has great
patrons, and that it may not be denied, but that it is defended with mavelous
great appearance of reason and truth; yet it is rejected, and has been by the
greater part of sound Divines, and by reasons unanswerable: for, if the soul
come from the parents, then it must come either from the body of the parents,
or from their souls. Now it is apparent it cannot come from their bodies,

1 Because a bodily substance cannot beget a spiritual substance; because it
cannot derive from it self that which it has not. 2 Because the soul must
consist of the four elements, of which the body is compounded: but it is
apparent, there are no bodily humors in the soul; for it is not hot, nor
cold, nor moist, nor dry. 3 Because nothing that is mortal, can beget a thing
that is immortal, such as the soul has been proved to be.
Nor can the soul come from the soul of the parents,

First, because if it did, either the whole soul was derived of the parents,
or but a part of it. If the whole soul was derived, then the parents should
die: nor can a part of the soul be derived, because the soul is indivisible:
there can be no partition in an essence which is simple and uncompounded.

Secondly, we know that Angels produce not Angels: nor can the souls of men
produce souls, because they are spirits as the Angels are.

Nor can the soul come from the whole man:

First, because it is evident by experience, that after the parents have done
the work of generation, the first matter lies diverse days in the womb; in
which the parts of the body are secretly formed, before it have life, or a
living and quickening soul: which is an evident demonstration, that from the
parents comes nothing but the bodily substance, which is fashioned by degrees,
to be a mee^e Tabernacle for the soul afterward to be infused into.

Secondly, because if the parents did propagate the soul, they must propagate
such a soul as at that time they had; which cannot be: for then godly parents
should derive a soul to their children, which at the least in part was
regenerate. But this is evidently against all Scripture; all confessing, that
the child is borne infected with original sin.

Thirdly, because it is contrary to the Scriptures; which acknowledge, that the
soul was formed by God himself: which was true both of our first parent Adam,
Genesis 2.7. and of the souls of all his posterity, which are expressly said to be
made by God, Esa. 57.16.

Lastly, it remains then, that the souls come from God. Now, if the souls
come from God, then it must needs be, as God is the material cause, or as he
is the efficient cause.

It is true, that some have imagined, that the soul of man was made of the
substance of God, because it is said, God breathed into man the breath of life,
Genesis 2.7. as if he infused into him somewhat from himself, as a part of his
divine substance. And the Apostle Paul says, Act. 17.18. We are the Progeny of
God: and Saint Peter says, We partake of the divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Now this opinion cannot be true, and was worthily condemned by the Fathers as
heretical: for,

Then man should be God. For, whatsoever God begets from himself, is God: and
therefore we say, Christ is God.

Then some part of Gods nature should be infected with sin and ignorance, and
be damned in hell too; which is wonderful blasphemous to believe.

Now for the places alleged, That in Genesis 2. must be understood figuratively:
for God has not properly breath; but he means, that God after a wonderful
manner did infuse the soul into the body. And for the place in the Acts, we
are said to be the progeny of God^ not in regard of substance, but in respect
of resemblance in gifts, with which man's nature is adorned. And for the place
in Peter, we are said to partake of the divine nature in the same sense,
namely, as we are qualified with gifts; as wisdom, goodness, holiness, in
some kind of likeness of God.

It remains then, that we are of God effectually, God creates the Soul.
because God has created our souls, and formed them in us. This then is the
truth, that God does create the particular soul of every man, and inhere it to
the body, when it is formed and distinguished in the parts thereof. This may be
proved diversely:

First, it is clear, it was so done with the soul of Adam: for his body was
already framed, and then his soul breathed into him. Now, if the soul of Eve,
and of all others, had another manner of beginning than the creation of God, it
would have been mentioned in the Scriptures: but that is no where mentioned.

Secondly, Moses calls God the God of the spirits of all flesh, Number. 16.22. and
27 16.

Thirdly, David says, the Lord fashioneth the hearts of all men alike, Psalm.
33.15. It is Gods work then to create the heart.

Fourthly, Solomon says, Eccles. 12.7. The body returns to the dust, and the
soul to God that gave it: in the dissolution of all things, they return to
the first causes and matter. As the body may be proved originally to be of the
earth, because it returns to dust: so must the soul be of God, because it
returns to God which is said to have given it.

Fifthly, the Prophet Esaias uses this phrase concerning God, and in his name:
The souls which I have made, Esa. 57.16. Do you ask how the soul comes into
the body? The Lord answers, I made it.

Sixthly, the Prophet Ezekiel, showing how man becomes a living creature,
speaks thus: Thus says the Lord to these bones, I will cause a spirit to
enter into them, and they shall live, Ezekiel. 37.5.

Seventhly, the words of the Prophet Zecharie are yet more clear. Thus says
the Lord, the Lord which spreads out the heavens, and foundeth the earth, and
forms the spirit of man in him. Out of these words it may be proved that God
created the soul of every man, and that it is his only work. For first, he
says expressly, God formed the spirit in man. Secondly, this work of God is
compared to two other works, viz. the spreading out of the heaven, and the
laying of the foundation of the earth. Now it is evident that those two things
he did of himself, of nothing, without any means.

Lastly, that place in Heb. 12.9. is most clear. The words are these: We have
had the fathers of our flesh, which chastised us, and we reverenced them: how
much more should we be subject to the Father of our spirits, and live? Where
is a manifest antithesis between the flesh and the spirit; and the fathers of
our flesh, and God the Father of our spirit: we had our flesh from our parents,
and our spirit from God. I might add the reason, taken from the manner of
giving of the soul of Christ: for, he was made in all things like to us, sin
only excepted. Now it is evident, that Christ's soul was not begot by carnal
propagation; and therefore it was created of God.

Ob. 1. Now against this is strongly objected, that if the soul be created
immediately of God, then it is created either pure or sinful; if pure, then
how is it that the soul is guilty of original sin? if impure, then how can
it be avoided but that God must be the author of sin?

Answ. This reason drove diverse of the Fathers in the time of Hierom^^,
especially the Western Fathers, to believe that the soul was propagated from
the Parents: and Saint Augustine is doubtful which opinion to take to, the
inconveniences of each opinion seemed so great.

But other Divines answer this objection in this manner:

First, that the soul is created of God, pure, but joined to a body conceived
in sin: which is no injustice in God, because he delivers the soul, but into
such an estate as man had cast himself into by his own wilful sin,
bringing this corruption not only upon himself, but upon all his posterity,
who fell in him. He by agreement with God, being as the common sort of
mankind, was with him to stand or fall, in that general respect. Nor may it be
doubted, but that the body may work upon the soul: as we see by experience,
when the body is full of choleric humors, it inclines the soul to anger;
and so when the body is burdened with melancholy humors, it evidently makes
sadness even in the very mind, etc.

Another answer may be this: God creates the soul pure; but yet that soul is
guilty of owing though not of doing; debendi, though not agend^: it is charged
with the debt of Adam, as children may be charged with their fathers debts. Now
this is one part of original sin. As for the other of corrupt inclination,
it is to answer modestly, if we say we understand not: being assured of two
things; the one, that God is the Father of spirits; and the other, that all men
are infected with sin from the womb. Both are to be believed, though in this
life we cannot explicate it. And what hurt is it if we be ignorant how sin
entered into our natures, seeing it concerns us to know it is there, and to
learn how to get our natures recovered?

Ob. 2. Other living creatures beget the like to themselves, both in body and
in soul too: and therefore by this doctrine men should be more unable and
unperfect than any living creature. For, if he do beget but only the body, he
does not beget one in specie like to himself.

Answ. Though God create the soul, yet it follows not, but that it may be
truly laid, that man begets a man, and that he is not more unperfect in
generation than any other creature: for,

First, the Virgin Mary did bear Christ-man in her womb: and Christ-man is
said to be of the seed of the Virgin; and yet his soul was created of God, as
has been showed before.

Secondly, though there be some dissimilitude in the generation of man, and of
a beast, yet it does not follow that man is more unperfect. As for instance:
The bea^t begets his young, and brings him forth strong, covered with a hide,
able to feed himself presently, full of leaping and other actions: But man
brings forth an Infant, weak, crying, naked, unable to feed it self. What, is
man therefore more unperfect? No, for the perfection of generation does not
consist of these things, or in these things. For here man excels all other
living creatures in the world in generation, because he is Gods instrument for
the begetting of a body fit to be united to such a soul. God also does hereby
commend the generation of man, and dignifie it, that he is pleased so to work
in man's generation as he does not in any other creature, vouchsafing to give
unto man's generation such an admirable soul to his body. For therefore was the
creation of the first man more excellent than the creation of other creatures,
because God having framed his body of the dust of the earth, did infuse such a
soul into him.

Object. 3. It is a peevish objection that some make, thus: If God create the
soul in all men, then when any is borne of Adultery, God should cooperate
with the adulterer, and so be either the author, or the approver of sin, that
will give the soul to such a wicked generation.

Sol. Some answer thus, That God is not the author or approver, because out of
evil he only works good for his own glory.

Others answer, That God only cooperates with the action, not with the sin
of the action, or the evil of the action, or the evil which is in the will of
the agents.

But the best answer is theirs, that answer by a similitude, thus: The earth
has received her nature and vigor from God, to nourish and bring forth the
seed that is cast into it, without difference, whether the seed be lawfully
taken out of the barn, or stolen by fraud. The stolen grain does not cease to
grow in the earth, nor is it to be expected, that nature should cast out such
seed; and yet the earth does not justify the action of him that stole the
grain: so is it with God that works according to the grounds of nature, and
his own decree and providence. He is not to be blamed for the evil of the
action, when he works according to the rules of nature, and will glorify
himself by raising a frame of good out of that which by men was ill done.

Object. 4. We see, that children resemble the virtues or vices of their
parents; and therefore as from the bodies of their parents they receive a
likeness to them in body, so is it that from their souls they receive this
similitude of their virtues or vices.

Solut. Experience shows, that this is not always true. For many children
have no resemblance in them of their parents qualities. Secondly, where this is
true, it is not because their souls are derived from the souls of their
parents, but they have it from the bodies of their parents: For the soul after
suffers from the sympathy with the body; as by reason of certain humors in
the bodies of parents, that incite wrath, or grief, or lust, or the like, may
come infection to the child, but not from their souls. Thirdly, rather the
argument may be retorted upon them, that in as much as the souls of all
children are not like in qualities to the souls of their parents, that
therefore they receive not their souls from their parents.

Ob. 5. Genesis 9. Lev. 17. The soul is said to be in the blood: Now it is
evident, that the blood is from the parents.

Solut. The soul is in the blood, but how? By the effect of it, which is life:
otherwise the soul is neither devoured in the blood, nor depends upon it in it
self.

Ob. 6. It is said, Genesis 2. That God rested from all his works. Now if he did
daily create new souls, then he rested not from all his works, but continues
creation still.

Solut. The meaning of Moses cannot be, that God rested simply from all
creation. For then it must needs follow too, that the soul of Christ was not
created, but propagated: which cannot be true. But his meaning is, that he
rested from creation of things in specie; he made no more new sorts of things.
That hinders not creation in individuo, which is a work of God, preserving
those sorts he had made at the first, by creating successively a new supply, as
in this case of the souls of men. That God did not rest absolutely, is plain
by the words of our Savior Christ: My Father works hitherto, and I work,
Ioh. 5.

Hitherto of the original of the soul. The union of the soul with the body
follows, which is a consideration of no less difficulty than the former, no
less needful to be known, no less certain. That it is united to the body
so as to make it one man, is apparent by the words of God in the creation: He
breathed into him the breath of lives, and so Adam became a living soul. He
became then a man, or a living creature, distinct from other creatures, upon
his conjunction of the soul with the body. And by this union with the body
does the spirit of man differ from the Angels, who are spirits separate, and
such as exist without relation to a body: whereas the soul of man, in the
creation of it, and the disposition of it also, tends unto this conjunction
with the body, and does not fully exercise it self living without the body;
and that is the reason why man is not absolutely perfect after death in his
soul, till the day of judgment. For though the soul do enjoy an estate free
from sin, or pain, or misery: yet two of the faculties of the soul are
without exercise, till it be united again to the body, viz. the faculties of
vegetation and sense, which cannot be exercised but in the body.

The manner how the soul is united to the body, is full of difficulty to
express: Union of the soul with the body, how.
The question is, whether the soul work upon the body from without, and so is
by that means joined to it; or whether it be placed in the body, and work
there, and from thence. This latter is the truth: for the soul does not work
from without: which I show by a comparison. The light and the eye are joined
together in seeing: But how? The light, from without, extends it self to the
eye, and so is joined to it: so is not the soul joined to the body, but is
seated within the body; which appears so, partly by experience: for we may all
perceive that our thoughts, reason, will, affections, etc. do discover
themselves within us; and it is manifest that God infused the soul, not upon
the body, but into the body, seating it within us.

The soul, then, is within the body, and so joined to it; But how? Divines
have sought out diverse similitudes to express their minds. And first to show
how it is not joined:

First, not as water and the vessel that holds it are joined by contact, or
touching one another: for, the soul is not a bodily substance, and therefore
cannot be joined by touching; nor do the water and vessel make one thing, as
the soul and body do one man; nor do they work together, as the soul and
body do: for the water does all the work thereof in watering or clensing,
without the vessel.

Secondly, not by mixture, as water and wine are mingled together. For things
mingled cea^e to be what they were: for there is no longer water nor wine now
they are mingled; nor is the soul material, to suffer such a mingling.

Thirdly, not as the heat of the fire is united to the water, when the water is
heated: for though the heat be joined to the water as the former, yet it is but
an accidental form; and they are one by accident, not per se.

Thirdly, not as the voice is in the air: for though the voice be dispersed
abroad the air, and does likewise carry something to the understanding,
besides the sound; yet does not this reach to express the union of the soul
with the body. For, the voice is not the form of the air, nor is it conceived
in the air, without the breaking of the air; and besides it presently
vanishes: whereas the soul is a substance, and does not easily depart out of
the body.

Fifthly, nor as the Mariner is in the ship with the Governer, for the
dispatch of his journey: for though the body be as a tabernacle wherein the
soul dwells, yet that similitude does not express this union, because the
soul and body make one thing; whereas the ship and the Mariner do not make one
thing, but are two distinct sorts of things: yea the soul and body are soon,
that by sympathy what one suffers the other feels; whereas the wounding of
the Mariner is not the tearing of the ship, or contrariwise.

There are two similitudes that do more nearly reach this secret.

The first is of Christ. For, as God and man make one Christ, so the soul and
body make one man. But I will not meddle with the breaking open of that
dreadful mystery.

The other is of the light of the Sun in the air: for there are many things in
this comparison, do fitly resemble this divine light; which is our souls as
they are joined to our bodies.

1 This light does fitly resemble the soul, because it is a thing that cannot
be corrupted or divided.

2 This light does so pierce into, and penetrate the air, that they are both
made one, and are not separated: so does the soul the body.

3 The light and the air, though joined together, are not confounded or
mingled together: for, the light remains light, and the air the air; so is
it in this union between the soul and the body.

4 The light is so in the air, that the air being smitten, yet the light is
not touched, nor divided, nor carried about, as the are is: so does the soul
remain unpierced, though the body be wounded, and fall, yea, and die too.

5 As the light is only from the Sun: so is the soul only from God.

6 As the air, without the light, is as it were dead, because it is dark, and
cold, and will putrefie: so is the body without the soul.

7 As no man can show, by what bands the light is fastened to the air: so is it
extremely difficult to show how the soul is fastened to the body.

This similitude, we see, does in many things fit this case, but yet not fully.
For the light is not the essential form of the air: only this comparison
does in many things sati^fie the question, in that it shows, that the soul is
in the body by penetration, or immeation, as they call it: it pierces through
the whole body. Only we must take heed of two things;

First, that we imagine not the soul to be in the body, as in a place, or as
contained of it: For the soul cannot be circumscribed by the measure of a
place: we may not imagine, that the soul is just as big as the body, and no
bigger. For though it be true, that the soul is in the body, and the whole
soul too, yet it is not contained there, as bodies be contained in their
places: for rather the soul sustaineth the body.

Secondly, God is said to be in us: and so is the soul, but not alike. For God
is in us by his virtue, and grace and operation, but not as our former: whereas
the soul is the form of the body, and both make one man.

Quest. But some one will say, Can it not be showed by what band the soul is
tied to the body?

Answ. Some Divines and Philosophers undertake to determine that, and say, that
God has created in the body of a man a certain humor, which is fitted for
this union; and so they say, the soul is united to the body by the vital
spirits, which are of nature mixed, partly corporeal and partly spiritual: For
as those vital spirits do consist for the matter of them, of the radical
heat and moisture in man, so they are corporeal; and as they have an
unexpressable nimblenesse in working, or sparkling in the body; so they draw
near to the nature of the soul; and by these vital spirits thus enlived, are
the soul and body joined together.

Quest. There yet remains another question, and that is, Where the soul
resides in the body? in what place is it centred?

Answ. The most say, that the whole soul is in the whole body, and the whole
soul in every part of the body.

Others say, it is a vain question, seeing the soul is not in the body as in
a place. For it cannot be measured by length, breadth, or depth, but it is in
the body as the essential form is in the matter; which cannot be locally.

Others say, that the soul is seated in one principal place of the body, as
the chief palace and seat of residence, and is in all other parts by diffusion
of virtues, through the instruments thereunto fitted and placed of purpose by
God in the framing of the body: and thus the soul reasons in the head, wills
and affects in the heart, sees in the eyes, etc. The chiefest mansion of the
soul seems to be in the heart, because it is the last that dies in us.

Hitherto of the union of the soul with the body: The faculties of the soul
follow.

There are three faculties, or powers of the soul, by which it works: or
there are three things which the soul effects, viz.

The faculties of the soul.
1 Vegetation: 2 Sense: 3 Reason.
And thus the soul may be considered, either as it works upon, or by the body
only, or as it works in and by it self chiefly. Upon the body, and by
certain instruments in the body, it works vegetation and sense; and by it
self, without the necessity of using the body, it works reason.

1 Vegetation.
The first power then is vegetation, by which the soul works four things
distinctly upon the body.

1 Life: 2 Nourishment: 3 Growth: 4 Procreation.
The first thing then by the vegetative power of the soul, wrought upon the
body, is life; which is in respect of the body nothing else but the kindling
the radical and vital heat in the body, through the conjunction of the soul
with the body, and the continuation of that hea^, until the time appointed of
God for the dissolution of it. So that life is two ways to be considered:
first, either in the breeding of it: secondly, or in the continuance of it. The
breeding of it is in the very first moment of the union of the form with the
matter, and by that instrument of the vital, or radical heat. The continuance
of it, is nothing else but the preservation of the motion and duration of the
working of these vital spirits.

The second thing wrought upon the body by the vegetative power of the soul,
is nourishment: and this power of nourishing is a faculty, by which food taken
into the body by the force of natural heat, is turned into the substance of
the body, for the repairing of that which is consumed in the body. And this is
a work to be admired: For the soul by the use of natural heat is feign to
subdue the nature of the food received, and having melted it, as it were in a
furnace, it casts out what is contrary to the body, and extracts for the use of
the body, so much as is now made like unto it.

The third thing, which the soul works upon the body by the vegetative power,
is growth. And this it does, by employing that part of the food which is now
made like to the body, unto the extension of the body, unto the dimensions
thereof, even to the increase of bigness and force, which increase for the
convenient actions of the body: and this work is done upon the body, but unto
a certain time of man's age, or till about thirty years; and then, because
nature tends not into infiniteness, she gives over this work.

Lastly, procreation is the fourth work of the vegetative faculty of the
soul, by which it raises up seed in the body, and forms in it a mere
substance like unto the body, from whence it comes unto the perpetual
preservation of the sort of the creature. And this is an admirable power. For
hereby living creatures do approach unto eternity, and are made, as it were,
immortal. For though the body die, yet by procreation it is, as it were, kept
alive, and so the kind of creature is perpetuated: for the other two works of
nourishment and growth, only serve for that body in individuo; but this power
of procreating reserves the sort or species from ceasing to be.

Thus of Vegetation: Sense follows.

The second thing the Soul works either upon or by the body, is Sense; 2
Sense.
and by this faculty, a man, in his body, is enabled to discern things without
himself, and accordingly to desire and move to them, which the former
faculties did not reach unto. Now as the soul works sense upon, or by the
body, it must be considered two ways: First, as it works either apprehension:
secondly, or motion.

The apprehendnig senses wrought upon the body by the Soul, are of two sorts:
first, either outward; secondly, or inward.

Outwardly the soul works upon the body five senses, 1 Outward.
or five ways of apprehending things by sense.

The body of a man is enabled by the soul, to discern of things without it
self by outward helps five ways:

viz. By 1 Seeing. viz. By 2 Hearing. viz. By 3 Smelling. viz. By 4 Tasting.
viz. By 5 Feeling.
And these ways of discerning, are not to be contemned: For admirably ought it
to be conceived of Gods wisdom in and toward man, even in these.

For, first by the sight, through the benefit of light, which God has caused
to shine upon his whole creation, man may see what God has wrought: whereas
else, if the light be taken out of the air, or sight from man, the works of
God are buried, as it were, in the dark; yea, the body of a man is, as it
were, but a dungeon without sight; and what the Sun and Moon are in heaven,
that are the eyes in man, shining in his head, as these Stars in the
firmament. The fight is a chief help for all the great employments of life in
all callings: The eyes are as watchmen set on high in their Watchtower, to
discover the coming of enemies. The eyes are also as the true windows of the
soul, by which the Species or forms of things are taken into the soul: For,
God has caused all substance in the World, to cast out beams, as it were,
which have the pictures of the things themselves carried about; and these
coming to the sight, are by it (above all other senses) taken in, and
delivered to the Souls within, the eyes being a looking glass that resemble
the things seen. And this noble sense may put us in mind of Gods knowledge,
if we mark the degrees of seeing. The eye of man discernes at once, a great
share or quantity of things together: The mind of man will take-in a far
greater quantity and number, and yet is finite, for it cannot reach to all
things that God has made at once. Now Gods understanding is infinite, and
beholds all at once.

For the second, the sense of hearing is worthy to be thought on, if we
consider either the benefits come by it, or the manner how it is performed; for
by hearing is let into the soul and body, not only sounds of delight or
wonder, but also sounds of necessity, both for natural life, by letting in
speech and discourse, and for eternal life, by letting in the Word of God.
First, the manner of hearing is admirable: Sound is the breaking of the air,
stirred up by the dashing or collision of sollid bodies, and is spread in the
air, as a stone cast into the water makes and draws from it circles. Thus*
the sound being brought to the ear, the hollow turnings in the ear gather and
hold the sounds, as it were canes: The sound at length rusheth upon a little
bone or gristle like a hammer, which moved smites upon another bone like an
Anvill, by which stroke the spirits in the hearing move, and are stirred up:
and so they take in the sound, and carry it to the brain, the feat of inward
senses.

These two are the most noble outward senses; yet there is great use of the
other three:

Thirdly, for by tasting we discern of meats profitable or hurtful for the
body.

Fourthly, by smelling we receive in those delightful savours God has caused
to arise from diverse of his creatures, and to avoid things by savor noisome to
the body.

Fifthly, and touching, though it be the most stupid sense, yet is it of great
use for the safety of the body. All these senses are as a guard for the body,
and as Intelligencers for the Soul.

2 Inward senses.
Thus of the outward senses. The soul works likewise inward senses upon and
by the body; and the general use of these inward senses, is to receive and lay
up, what is brought unto them by the outward senses; for the outward senses are
like servants, that trade abroad and get together the images of diverse things,
which they carry with them home to the inward senses. Now there are three
inward senses.

1 The common Sense. 2 The Fantasy. 3 The Memory.
And these are lodged in three several rooms or little cells in the brain.

First, the common sense lies in the former part of the head, and contains
all that store, by which all the outward senses are furnished: For spirits
fetch the vigor of each sense from this the common sense. As the lines that
go to the circumference, meet all in the Center: so do all the outward senses
meet in the common sense. And hither likewise are all the forms of things
taken by the outward senses brought, and distinguished.

Secondly, the fantasy is lodged in the middle part of the brain, where, as
in a shop, it takes in the Images of things brought to the common sense, and
there forms them more exactly, and oftentimes makes new after an admirable
manner, by thinking; and then, after it has separated what it likes not, it
delivers the rest over to the memory, which is lodged in the hinder part of the
brain, which is as it were the treasury to keep what the Fantasy as a is
like a fire to keep the brain soft in the degrees thereof, that it may
receive the impression, as hot water the wax fit to be marked.

Thus of the senses. But before I pass from them, it is profitable to note
certain things which befall the senses for the good of the body, and soul;
and that is the binding and loosing of the senses. For God has so tempered the
state of the senses in man, that they should neither always rest, nor always
work. Hence, from their resting comes sleep, and from their working comes
waking, or watching. We make, when the senses are loose; and sleep, when the
soul binds them up: both are thus wrought; when the vegetative power wants
help for concoction of the meat, the natural heat is sent from the senses
to dispatch that work, and then we sleep; and when that is done, the heat
returns to the senses, and tickles them, and so they awake.

But it is to be observed, that though in sleep the common sense, and so the
outward senses are all bound, yet the fantasy and memory do not cease, but
being now freed from the attendance upon the intelligences of them, or the
outward senses, as if they were at more liberty, they are exercised more
freely, and often fall to new forming, and compounding of the images brought in
before by the common sense, and so erect a new frame of things, which are
vented and expressed by dreaming. In which a secret and admirable working of
God by the soul may appear, if we consider the strange things are fashioned
in our imagination in our sleep: yea, the reasonable soul in sleep comes
into this shop of the fantasy, and there does strange works, which, as I
said, are vented in our dreams; in which we find as effectual use of reason,
as we had waking.

Thus of the soul, as it works apprehension. Now follows it to consider,
how the soul works motion upon the body.

It is out of all doubt, that motion in the body is from the soul. For of it
self it is but a dead lump, as it shows it self to be, when the soul is
gone out of it.

Now the soul gives unto the body a threefold motion.

First, the vital motion.

Secondly, the motion of appetite.

Thirdly, the motion from place to place.

The vital motion given to the body by the soul, is wrought two ways, both
by the pulse and by breathing; both of absolute necessity to preserve life in
the body.

The motion of pulse is begun at the heart, which is made continually to beat
by the soul; which beating of the heart begets those sparkles, which we call
vital spirits, arising out of the finest of the blood, which spirits are
carried by the pulse through the arteries, and they shine in the whole body,
according as their passages are more or less open.

Breathing is another strange motion of the soul in the body, by which both
air is fetched in continually for the cooling of natural heat in the heart,
and other members, and the spirits refreshed, and also the gross and more
smoakie spirits are exhaled out of the breast.

Thus of the vital motion.

The motion of appetite is a contrary commanding motion in the creature, by
which he is inclined to take to him such things from without, as he conceives
good and needful for him, and so likewise to avoid things hurtful, and so the
soul begets diverse appetites and desires: as, the desire after food, which we
call hunger and thirst; and the desire after procreation, and the appetites, we
call affections or passions, so far forth as they are seated upon the body,
and exercised by instruments in the body; such as, in general, breed sorrow,
or pleasure, or passivenesse in us; such as are joy, grief, anger, and the
rest, etc.

It were too difficult and too tedious for popular reaching, to show in
particular, and distinctly, how the soul admirably works about each of these.

The motion from place to place is the last: and this is a strong work of the
soul, driving on the body to the motion of the whole, or of some part of the
body. The body cannot remove it self, but it is of the soul that it is
stirred up and down: for when the soul is gone, it can move no longer. And in
vain were appetites or desires given to the creatures, if this motion from
place to place were not given, because without it, it could never compass
things desired.

Hitherto of the working of the soul upon the body, and those strange things
it does in the body, by the faculties of vegetation and sense. It is true, that
those things are done by the souls of brute creatures: but, as their souls
differ exceedingly from the glory and excellency of the souls of men, so are
the effects upon their bodies but certain glimpses of those things which are
done exactly by the souls of men; I mean, in respect of the inward senses of
fantasy and memory: there is in beasts but only a dark shadow of them, in
comparison of what is in men.

Of the faculty of reason in the soul, and wherein it excels.
But for the third faculty of the soul, which is reason; therein men excel
all creatures in this visible world: and it is profitable for us to know what
God has done for us in our souls, generally considered above all other
creatures. And so man excells in respect of his reasonable soul:

1 In that he can conceive of things by the light of understanding, as well as
by sense. This light is admirable, whether we conceive of it as proceeding from
God, who shines upon the soul as the Sun does upon the body: or whether we
believe it to be a light conferred upon the understanding; by which from
within, it discernes things.

2 In that it can conceive of things that never were in the senses; as things
absent, that never were seen: yea things altogether immateriall; as Angels,
and virtues, and vices.

3 In that it can conceive of the nature of God, and discern God from his
works.

4 In that it can conceive of things by a discerning reflection; as it can
conceive of it self, and understand that it does understand.

5 In that it can distinguish between good and evil, truth and falsehood; I
say, of the moral goodness of things: whereas the fantasy can judge only
of so much of the natural goodness of things, as they show to the outward
senses.

6 In the largenes of the extent of our understanding. For the understanding
can, in a small moment of time, go almost over the whole world, and view it
all, as it were at once; whereas the senses are forced in within a narrow
compass.

7 In that it can invent things that never were in being: and thus we see
daily, what strange things, for number and skill, are invented for the use of
the life of man, by art and skill of man's understanding, in every calling of
men.

8 In that the reasonable soul governes, and appoints, and crosses, and
fetters, and alters, and rectifies the other faculties of vegetation and sense;
and in respect thereof can turn, and tame, and rule, and order all sorts of
other creatures.

9 In that, by begetting with strange variety, it can make known what images
are within, whether begotten by the senses, or by the mind it self.

10 In that it is the faculty by which only true blessedness is apprehended
and attained.

11 In that man's understanding is made after a sort, all things. For the
understanding becomes the things understood, in that it does conceive a true
and evident image of the thing to be understood: so that, as man is the Image
of God, so has he in him the images of all things, printed as it were in his
understanding. This is a most dreadful dignity in the souls of men; yea,
herein he resembles God in the creation of the world: for man's reasonable soul
does, as it were, form worlds of things in it self. If any object, that the
sensitive soul has the images of things in it: I answer two things. First,
that the sense can receive only the images of a few things, that is, only of
such things as have color, found, taste, smell, or touchable qualities: but
the mind can beget the images of all things. Secondly, that those images in
the senses, are dull, and dark, and confused, in comparison of the likeness
of things in the mind.

12 In that he has a will, in chosing or refusing things good or evil, that
cannot be compelled. The liberty of the will is inseparable to it, in what it
chooses or refuses: for, it implies a contradiction, that the will should be
constrained.

13 In that it has in it that divine thing which we call conscience, which is
given to the soul as a guardian, as it were, to tend it, from God; the effects
whereof are admirable in us: for it testifies to our actions, it accuses or
excuses, it comforts when we have well done above all outward comforts, and it
terrifieth and scourges the soul with unexpressible afflictions many times
for sin: it is a Judge, witness, and executioner many times in us.

Now, if the soul be thus admirable in any estate (for all these things are
true of the reasonable soul, even in the estate of corruption) then how
excellent was the estate of man in respect of his soul, before the Fall? and
how does it excel in the godly, who have their souls enlightened with the
light of faith, and garnished with saving graces? but especially how shall it
exceed in glory when it shall be presented before God in the Kingdom of heaven?

So that, as the whole man, made in Gods image, is (as it were) the visible God
in this great world: so the soul is as it were a little god in the l^sser
world, which is the body of man.

And thus much of the faculties of the soul.

Now the end of all this follows. The Lord made the soul, The end why the
soul was made.
and endowed it with so excellent a being and so admirable faculties, that so
the Lord might in this visible world have a creature, that would know him and
serve him rightly. The creatures without sense are Gods workmanship, but
discern nothing of God, or themselves, or other things. The creatures with
sense discern other things by sense, but know nothing of God. Now God made
man, as the abridgement of all he had made, and gave him his soul, of purpose
that he might discern God aright, and serve, and worship, and praise him.

Use 1. The consideration of the excellency of the soul, and of the end why
it was created, should stir us up to make conscience of the service, and
knowledge of God: it is as if we had never been, if we answer not this end:
We should be fired to the observation and praise of God, and of his love to
man.

And withal it should make us wonderful careful of our souls, since we see
they are such excellent creatures: Our soul is more worth than all this
visible world besides.

Especially it should fire us to a care of things that concern the blessed
immortality of our souls: we should be forced to all possible care of all such
things* as might be provision for the eternal well-being of our souls.

And in particular the excellency of the soul should dissuade us from fleshly
lusts, and all inward impuritie, by which the soul is defiled or wounded.

Hitherto of the description of the soul. The war against the soul is now
to be considered of: Concerning which I propound these things to be handled:

First, who are the combatants.

Secondly, by what ways and means the soul is assaulted and opposed.

Thirdly, why God would suffer the soul to be thus assaulted.

Fourthly, what reason Christians have to be careful of themselves, and
provide against this war.

Fifthly, by what means we must resist and defend the soul.

Sixthly, what hope there is of victory.

Seventhly, how many ways we may obtain victory.

Eighthly, by what signs we may know that we are not overcome.

And then the use of the whole.

Four kinds of war against the Soul.
For the first, there are four kinds of war, waged against the soul, as it
is encountered by four sorts of adversaries. For both God, and the world, and
the devil, and the flesh, war against the soul of man: briefly of the three
first.

God wars against the soul, either in earnest and in deed, or in show and
appearance, and not as an adversary in deed. In earnest God fights against the
soul, by the threatenings and rebukes of his Word, when he smites and beats
men down by the word of his mouth, Esaias 11. and also by torments of conscience
powered out upon the wicked men; and so he fought against Cain and Judas.
Sometimes, God is but a purative adversary, and does but seem to fight
against them; and so he warreth against his own servants: either by outward
crosses, or by desertion, or by fear and terror; and thus he fought against
Job. And in this case, God is like a Captain training his soldiers, or like a
Fencer teaching his scholar to fight.

The world wars against the soul two ways; by the inticements of profits,
pleasures, honors, evil coun^ell, or example: and by persecution either of
the tongue or hand.

The devil wars against the soul by evil doctrine, or temptations, or
illusions. But none of these three are principally intended here: it is the
flesh that makes war against the soul, that is here meant.

By the flesh is meant the corruption that is in the nature of man, called the
old man, and the Law of the members. By the soul is here meant the spirit, or
regenerate man, the new man, the grace of Christ in the soul. Thus of the
first point, who are the combatants: the flesh is the assaylant; the spirit the
defendant.

For the second point: the flesh incounters and wars against the soul diverse
ways, and by strange kinds of fights: as,

The flesh wars against the soul five ways.
1 By mists of ignorance: it casts mists before the eyes of the soul, that it
might be blinded; for there is a manifest combat between the natural
understanding, and the regenerate mind: carnal reason and saving knowledge
often fights it out within a man.

2 by doubtings and distractions: and so the flesh casts ou^ such questions as
these, as so many darts into the soul; Whether there be a God, or the
Scripture be the Word of God? Whether Christ be the Son of God, and our
Mediator? Whether it be the true Church we are in; or whether our sins be
forgiven, or we be in the state of grace? Whether there shall be any
resurrection, or heaven, or hell, or immortal being of the soul? Against all
these the soul is driven to make often defenses, and drives them out with hard
conflicts.

3 By rebellious denial of obedience to the law of the mind, exalting it self
against the obedience enjoined by Christ to the soul, Romans 7. 2 Cor. 10. and
^asting out resolutions of denial, and thoughts that say they ought not, or
will not obey.

4 By hindering the work of the soul that overcomes the former resolutions,
and will obey: and that it does by making evil present when she should do
good; or by hindering and dulling of the affections of the heart, or by
casting-in of other projects, of purpose to breed distractions in the time of
doing good duties, Romans 7.

5. By lusting, that is, by bringing-in of contrary desires, evil
concupiscences, longings after forbidden things: and in these lusts usually the
flesh combines with the outward adversaries of the soul, the world and the
devil; and kindles the fire of those inordinate desires, by dalliance with the
world, or the devils temptations. And thus of the second point.

The third thing is a question; Why God should suffer the soul to be thus
annoyed by the flesh; saying, He could have made man again in Christ, as he
made Adam in Paradise, and so have utterly abolished the flesh? Why God does
suffer this war.
For answer hereunto, three things may be said: First, that we are bound with
all thankfulness to praise God for that grace he has given us in Christ,
though it be not full perfect; and so ought not to reason with God, why he
gave us not more grace; and the rather, because we look for a time, when we
shall be more happy in that respect, than ever Adam was: and besides, though
grace given us be imperfect in respect of degree, and so less than Adam's
was; yet it is perfect in respect of continuance, and so it is better than
Adam's. Thirdly, there may be diverse reasons assigned, why God did suffer the
flesh to remain in us after calling, for a time, that is, while we war in
this world. For,

1. It shows the greatness of God's power, that can keep us, notwithstanding
such continual danger we are in.

2. By this conflict diverse graces of the Spirit are raised up and exercised,
which else were of little use; as godly sorrow, poverty of spirit, desire of
death: and faith also has much employment about this combat.

3. By this combat all the graces of God's Spirit are proved to be right, and
not counterfeit in the true Christians: for no man can constantly bear arms
against the flesh, but he is a new creature. This combat then serves for the
trial of the gifts and graces of Christians.

4. By this combat we are cured of the horrible disease of self-love and
pride in our selves, and made more to love God, and trust in him; as knowing
that we deserve no favor at his hand, nor can be strong in our own might.

5. It is equal we should war before we triumph; that we should fight in the
battles on earth, before we reign in heaven.

Lastly, it makes heaven and grace more precious in our sight, and breeds in us
a desire to be dissolved, and so warns from the love of this present evil
world.

In the fourth place we must consider, by what means the soul may preserve it
self against the treacheries and assaults of the flesh: and so the means is to
be used either before the conflict, or in the conflict, or after the conflict.

Before the conflict, if we would take a sound course to be preserved against
the danger of the flesh, we must look to these things:

1 We must stand upon our guard, and keep a daily watch over our hearts and
ways, and not be retchlesse to despise our own ways, or never take notice of
our hearts: he lives dangerously, that lives securely: we must take a diligent
view of our own natural dispositions, to be able to discern distinctly,
what it is the flesh usually is prone to, or employed in.

2. We must be sure to commit our selves to God, and by faith lay hold upon
Jesus Christ, and settle our selves in our assurance: for that cuts off many of
the maine advantages of the flesh, especially it quenches all those hellish
darts that arise from doubtings and despair; which is to discern the flesh.

3. We must quicken in us our hope of a better life: for that will show us so
much glory to be had in the service of Christ, as all the motions of the flesh
will seem vain in comparison: we are never allured by the lusts of the
flesh, but when we have forgotten heaven, or are destitute of the lively hope
of it.

4. We must be sober in the use of outward things, 1. Pet. 1.13. and remove
from the flesh those things we observe the flesh to be apt to dally withal:
if the flesh could be divorced from the world, there were little or no danger.

5. We must with all readiness, upon all occasions, entertain all good
motions any way cast into us by Gods Spirit: for as those are set up and
nourished, the flesh is subdued and kept under.

6. We must daily commit our selves and our souls to God by prayer, and
beseech him to keep us, and accordingly to beg strength to avoid those
evils, which by nature we find our selves most prone to, 2. Tim. 1.12.

Now if the flesh, notwithstanding, do on the sudden (either provoked by the
world, or entised by the devil) make assault and lust after evil things; then
in the conflict, our armor must be,

1. Contrary lustings, Gal. 1.17. The Spirit must lust against the flesh, by
raising up holy desires, and loathing of those base affections of the flesh.

2. Prayer: we must crucify them, drag them before the Cross of Christ, and
there accuse them, shame them, judge them, condemn them, and beg virtue from
the death of Christ to kill them.

3. The Word of God. For as Christ beat away the devil, by alleging what was
written: so should we get store of places of Scripture, which we might
allege to our own hearts when we are entised to any sin: and so the
promises of the Gospel would be as shoes to our feet; that neither thorny
care prick, nor vain pleasures defile us: and so those promises are, because
they both show us greater things then fleshly pleasures can be, and withal
show us such treasure in Christ, as may free us from living in care.

Two rules are of excellent use for this purpose.

1. To silence the flesh: When it assaults, not to suffer it to plead much, but
presently resist it.

2. To look to the beginnings of any corruption: not to dally with it, and
give it way upon pretense of safety: for it may strangely provoke, and beyond
expectation, if it be not looked to at first.

After the conflict, we must remember two things.

1. To give thanks to God for the help of his presence, as accounting it a
singular favor to be protected against so vile an enemy.

2. To take heed of our security; so to consider of present deliverance, as to
for more conflicts.

In the frft place it is profitable, considering what reasons Christians have
to be careful of themselves, and attend their souls in respect of the flesh.
For,

1. This combat is a daily combat: the war is never at an end: it is an
adversary that never takes so much as a day of truce.

2. There is no safety or help by running away: for thy adversary is seated
within thee, and thou can not run from thy self.

3. The flesh has might and continual aid from the devil and the world;
which, almost with infinite variety of occasions, ministers obstinacy to the
flesh.

4. For want of care many worthy Champions have been for the time foiled
shamefully; as were Noah, Lot, David, Peter, and others.

5. No Christian can avoid it, but has this combat within him, Gal. 5.17.

And as these or the like reasons may breed care and watchfulness; so has the
true Christian no cause of despair, but rather many arguments of hope of good
success, and daily victories and triumphs over the flesh, if he be watchful.
For,

1. God has provided him of armor against those kinds of assaults: and it is
mighty to preserve and subdue, 2. Cor. 10.3, 4.

2. Christ in his power does rest in us, for this end, to assist us in the
combat, as we cry for help, 2. Cor. 12.10.

3. We fight against an adversary has been often foiled by all sorts of Godly
Christians, and by our selves in diverse particular combats; yea, against an
adversary that has received a deadly wound that cannot be cured: for so the
flesh (the first day of our conversion) was mortified. All that are Christ's
have mortified the flesh with the Insts thereof.

4. We have assurance of victory if we resist, Romans 8.38.

5. An incorruptible Crown is laid up for all that overcome, 2. Tim. 4.7, 8.
Re. 2.

Now, for the seventh point: we obtain victory against the flesh diverse
ways; as,

1. In our justification, when we by faith obtain the pardon of our sins
committed, and a righteousness able to cover us, How many ways we get
victory over our lusts.
notwithstanding all the spite the flesh does us. This is our victory in
Christ, Romans 7.

2. In our sanctification: and so we get victory,

1. When we conquer some sins wholly, so that we never commit them again. 2.
When we turn, and subdue the power of the sins that remain; so as they cannot
reign, though they rebel. 3. We shall have our final and full victory in our
glorification in the day of Christ, when the flesh shall be utterly abolished
for ever.
Now for the eighth point: we may know that we are not at any time
overcomne, by these signs, if we find them in us.

1. If we judge our selves for all known sins; so as there be no sin
arising from the flesh, but we condemn it, Signs to know whether we be
overcomne of our lusts.
and keep our selves as men condemned in the flesh, being grieved at the
rebellion of the flesh in us, Romans 7.1. Pet. 4.7.

2. If we hold fast our assurance of faith: we are safe so long as we keep the
faith, 2. Tim. 4.7.

3. If we go on in our Christian way or course, and do not give over the
practice of known duties against the light of our consciences: if we finish
our course, 2. Tim. 4.7.

Use. The use of all should be,

First, for information; and so two ways: for,

1. It shows the miseries of such persons as never feel this combat, that
have all quiet in them: it is a sign the flesh and the devil rule all, and
there is no sanctified Spirit to resist.

2. It shows the folly of some godly persons, that are troubled as if their
states were not right, because they find such a combat in themselves: whereas
they should rather conclude the contrary, that therefore there is some
workmanship of Christ in them, which is so opposed by the flesh and the devil;
and that it is the case of all the godly to be assaulted with rebellious
thoughts and desires, and other practices of the flesh, reckoned up before.

Secondly, for instruction: and so it should teach Christians, and warn them to
take heed of three things, viz. of security, despair, and fainting: for all
these are mischievous. We may not be secure, since we have such an enemy within
us: nor must we be too much out of hope, or despair of success, for the
reasons before alleged: nor yet must we give way so much as to fainting of
spirit; but pluck up our own hearts, and, with trust in God's grace, resist
still the risings of corruption, till we get a final victory.

VERSE 12. And have your conversation honest amongst the Gentiles; that they
which speak evil of you, as evil doers, may by your good works which they
shall see, glorify God in the day of their visitation.


HItherto of the dehortation. The words of this verse are an exhortation:
wherein consider both what he exhorts to, and by what reasons. The matter he
exhorts to, concerns their outward conversation, which he would have to be
honest and amiable. The reasons are,

First, because the Christians lived among Gentiles, that embraced not the true
Religion.

Secondly, because diverse of these Gentiles were so spiteful against the
Christians, that they would take all occasions to speak evil of them.

Thirdly, because some of them that now did speak evil of them, might
hereafter be converted to the true Religion.

Fourthly, because if they now observe their good works, when they shall be
visited of God, they will much magnify them to the great glory of God.

That which he then exhorts them to, is the care of their conversation; which
he amplifies, by showing what kind of conversation he would have it to be,
viz. A fair or honest conversation.

And have your conversation honest.]

Diverse things may be hence observed:

First, that a sound Christian must show himself to be so by his conversation;
a Christian must show the power of his Religion by his works, and by sound
practice; and that too, amongst men abroad: he must be known by his fruits,
Col. 1.9, 10 Tit. 2.12. and therefore the Apostle beseeches them to prove
before the Gentiles, that they were true Christians, by their works and
conversation.

This reproves their coffeehouse that are vexed because they are not reputed
for sound Christians, and yet show no care of a conscionable behavior in their
dealings and carriage among men; and withal, this may warn all sorts of
Christians to look to themselves, that they be not deceived with vain
shadows in pretenses; for it is not talking and discoursing of Religion will
serve turn, nor the frequenting of the exercises of Religion; nor is it enough
to do secret duties: but they are bound to the good behavior generally in
their carriage amongst men. This is the first point.

Secondly, from the coherence we may note also, that a man must first reform
his heart, and then his life; he must first get a clean heart, freed from
lusts, and then look to his conversation: holiness must be both within and
without. He is an hypocrite, that has a fair conversation, and a foul
heart: neither may he plead the goodness of his heart, that leads a foul
conversation; both must be joined together.

Thirdly, we may hence note, that every Christian must be careful, and look
to it in particular, that his conversation be honest: honesty of life is with
special care to be intended. Now this must be explicated.

The word translated Honest, signifies properly, Fair; and the Translatours^
respecting the matter of our conversation, render it well, Honest; so as
withal, for the manner we add, that it be a fair conversation: so that two
things must be observed in our conversation, the Matter and the Manner. For
the Matter: We must be sure that we be honest: It is a vain thing to think
of being religious, if we fail in honesty; we must not only study the
duties of the first Table, but we must be careful to prove the power of our
Religion in the sound practice of the duties of the second Table: we must live
righteously as well as religiously, Tit. 2.12. we must add virtue to our
faith, 2. Pet 1.5. and withal, we should labor to excel in honesty, to carry
our selves so in all our dealings, that our carriage might allure, through the
fairness of our behavior; we must in the things of honesty, strive for an
alluring carriage. There be diverse things in our outward conversation, which
set a great gloss upon many actions, and certain particular duties which show
exceeding comely in a Christian man's behavior; those the Apostle would have us
to study and be careful of, even all things that are honest, and might win
credit to the profession of Religion, Phil. 4.8.

This then is the question: What are those things which would so adorn the
outward conversation of Christians, and make it fair and amiable? For answer
hereunto, there are Six things which are of singular praise, and much adorn a
Christians conversation, and make it fair.

The first is harmelesnesse; to be free from all courses of injury, and
cruelty, Six things to be looked to, to express a fair conversation.
and oppression, and the like. A hurtful and injurious conversation is a foul
and unseemely conversation.

The second is discretion: when men carry themselves with all due respect of
their words, and the consideration of the time, place, and persons with whom
they converse. A discreet conversation is a wonderful fair conversation:
when as a foolish, vain, rash, conceited, talkative behavior, is extremely
irksome and loathsome, Col. 4.5. Iam. 3.13.

The third is quietness and gentleness: which excels, as it shows it self,
first, by humblenes of mind, thinking meanly of himself, and esteeming others
better than himself, Esaias 4.2. in giving honor going before others, Romans
12.13. Secondly, by peaceablenes, when men study to be quiet, Ephesians. 4.11.12. and
meddle with their own business, and avoid contention by all means, rather
suffering wrong than prove quarelsome, Heb. 12.14. Thirdly, easiness to be
entreated in case of offense taken, and willingness to be guided in things
profitable and good, Iam. 3.17.

The fourth is sobriety: when a man lives so, as he is not blemished, either
with filthiness, or drunkenness, or covetousnes: A man that is unspotted of the
world for any foul crimes, and withal can show a mind not transported with
the greedy desires after earthly things, is much honored, and justly, amongst
men: the worst man cannot but acknowledge the praise of such: So as men show
this in their dealings evidently, Romans 13.13. Iam. 1.26.

The fifth is fidelity and plainness: when men are just and true in all their
dealings, and will keep their words and promises, and abhor the sins of
deceit, and avoid subtilty and worldly wisdom, and show themselves to be
plain men, as it was said of Jacob, that he was a plain man, not like
subti^^ Esau. This ought much to be sought after by Christians, that men may
see their hearts by their words, 2. Cor. 1.12.

The sixth is profitablenes: rendered in the end of this verse, good works. They
lead a fair conversation, that do good, and are helpful to others, and ready
to show any kindness or mercy to any that live near them, or have occasion to
use them. This is an admirable praise.

The use should be, therefore, to teach us to study how to adorn our
conversation with such integrity and virtuous behavior, Use.
as may win praise and reputation to our profession; especially we should at
least shun all those hateful evils, which by experience we find to be
grievous and loathsome, and are to be accounted as blemishes in our
conversings; being things as are in a special manner loathsome, and provoke
ill opinion in others, as being against honesty and that fair conversation
should be found in us: as,

First, the sins of uncleanness, and whoredom, and fornication, and
lasciviousness, and filthy speaking, Romans 13.13. Ephesians. 5.3.4.

Secondly, the sins of drunkenness and riotousnes, Romans 13.13. 1. Pet. 4.3.

Thirdly, the sins of passion, malice, wrath, bitterness, clamor, and evil
speaking, Ephesians. 4.31.

Fourthly, sins of deceit, lying, dissimulation, and hypocrisy.

Fifthly, pride, stateliness, desire of vain glory, Gal. 5.26.

Sixthly, backbiting, co^plaining, censuring, judging, Mat. 7.1. Iam. 4. Gal.
5.13.

Seventhly, idleness and slothfulness, 1. These. 4, 11.12.

Eighthly, to be a busie-body in other men's matters, prying, and inquiring,
and meddling with things that belong not to them, 1. These. 4.11.12. 1. Pet. 4.
To which, add prattling and talkativenesse, 1. Tim. 5.13.

Ninthly, such courses as have appearance of evil in them: such are, the use
of vain apparel, and wilful resorting to persons and places that are of evil
report.

Thus of the matter to which he exhorts. The reasons follow, why they should
be careful of an honest and fair behavior; and first, because they live
among the Gentiles.

Among the Gentiles.]

Those Gentiles were such as lived in their natural idolatry, the nations that
had not received the Christian faith.

Those that think this Epistle was written only to the provincial Jews,
allege the words of this verse to prove it: for, say they, it was written to
such as lived among the Gentiles, and were no Gentiles; and they only were the
Jews.

But this reason is of no force: for those Gentiles, that were converted to the
Christian faith, became Christians, and so were no more Gentiles or Pagans. And
so these words may be understood of all sorts of Christians that lived among
the unconverted Gentiles, whether they were in their natural estate, either
Jews or Pagans.

In that the Christians lived among the Gentiles, and must, by their fair
conversation, be rightly ordered toward those Gentiles, diverse things may be
observed:

First, we may hence note, how hard a thing it is to recover men from a false
religion, though their religion be grossly absurd. In this place, whither the
Gospel came, we see multitudes of men remained Gentiles still, and would not
receive the Christian faith. And this is the more to be noted, if we either
consider the reasons the Gentiles had to remain in their religion, or the
manifest causes they had to moove them to embrace the Christian Religion. For,
for their own religion, they might easily observe these things amongst many
other: First, their palpable and sottish idolatry, in worshipping so many gods,
and those so accounted to be gods, being many of them apparently but
senseless creatures; as, the Sun, Moon, and Stars; others of them but dead
men, and others of them such, as of whom there was not the least color or
appearance of Divinity. Secondly, the most notorious wickedness of life, which
did every where abound in all the nations that were Pagans, Romans 1. Thirdly,
that they followed a religion that gave them no hope of a better life after
death, nor could describe any estate worth the desiring. Fourthly, there was no
agreement among them what should be the chief good while they lived; but men
were carried according to the sensual desires of their own hearts.

On the other side, for the Christian Religion, they saw that the doctrine of
it was every where prooved by miracles; and that their own Oracles, in every
place where the Gospel came, were put to silence. Besides, they might observe,
that the Christian Religion did teach the most absolute way for holiness of
life, and that the Christians did live the most unrebukeably of all others, yea
did with gladness dye in the defense of their religion: and further, the
Christian Religion did show them the glory of heaven, and discovered that
certain estate of most blessed immortality.

Quest. But, may some one say, what might be the motives to the Gentiles, to
make them continue so obstinate?

Ans. There were, chiefly, five things which caused this obstinacy in the
Gentiles. The first was the tradition of their fathers and forefathers: thy
would not forsake that religion, which for so many hundred years their
Ancestors had professed, 1. Pet. 1.18. Secondly, the God of this world did
mightily labor to blind their eyes, that they might not understand the
Gospel, 2. Cor. 4.4. Thirdly, they saw that the Christian Religion was
persecuted in all places, both by reproaches and martyrdom. Fourthly, they
would not receive the Christian Religion, because there were but few that
professed it, and that their wise men and great men of the world, for the most
part, did reject it, 1. Cor. 1. The last and chief reason was the love of
their sins, which they saw they must forgo if they embraced the Christian
Religion. It was true also, that the wickedness of some hypocrites that crept
in among Christians, did make the way of God evil spoken of, and many Gentiles
to blaspheme, Romans 2. I might add, that the doctrine of Christ's Passion, was a
scandal unto many Gentiles, who accounted it as a foolish thing, to believe
him as a Savior, that could not save himself from so ignominious a death;
being willingly ignorant of the necessity of that oblation of Christ, as the
Surety and Sacrifice for our sins.

It is profitable to consider of the obstinacy of these Gentiles, together with
their motives: for, first we may see that they stood upon the same grounds in
effect, upon which the Papists do rest at this day; for the Papists maine
allegations are, the traditions of Fathers and Forefathers, together with the
multitudes of people that follow their Religion; but especially the
consideration of the woeful estate of for^orne men, should teach us with the
more thankfulness to celebrate the praise of Gods mercy to us, that did subdue
our natures, and draw us out of blindness and wickedness, into the true
Religion, and into the kingdom of Jesus Christ. And Ministers should hence
learn with patience to do their work, and not to be discouraged, though
multitudes of people be not brought to the obedience of Christ. They must not
look to speed better than the Apostles, who in all places left thousands of
people that would not regard them nor their Ministeries, 2. Tim. 2.25, 26.

Lastly, we should learn even of wicked men, how we should entertain the
truth; for if it be so hard a matter to get men to change their minds when
they hold gross errors and falsehood, how ought we to stick to the truth when
we have received it, and not receive any other doctrine, though an Angel from
heaven should teach us otherwise than is written in the Word of God? Gal. 1.7.

Doct. 2. We may hence also note, that God is pleased to suffer his children
in this life to live amongst wicked men. A godly man can live no where, but
there are some wicked living there; the Tares will grow up with the Wheat.
There may be diverse reasons assigned of this, why God does not gather his
people altogether from the places where wicked men dwell: as first, God does
hereby try his people whether they will forsake the inticements of the wicked,
and cleave to him and his truth; the more by-waies there are, the more praise
to him that keeps the right way. Secondly, God does by the wicked many times
refine and purify his servants; by reason of the wicked, he both keeps them
clean, and if they gather any filth, by them he washes them. Wicked men are
many times God's Laundresses to godly men: for, if God appoint them to chasten
his servants; they will do it thoroughly, both by reproaches and other ways.
Thirdly, the Kingdom of Christ must be set up among wicked men, because
amongst them are many of God's Elect, which are in due time to be converted
from their wickedness. Fourthly, hereby the power of Christ is magnified, that
can set up and maintain his Scepter in the midst of his enemies. Fifthly, by
this course God's patience is prolonged; for God is pleased, for the godlie's
sakes, to forbear those destroying judgments which else would fall upon the
wicked.

The use should be, to teach us to bear with patience the inconveniences which
befall us in our places and callings, by reason of the neighborhood of wicked
men, as knowing that it is the condition of all the godly, and has always
been so, and is so in all places; and therefore to resolve with our selves,
rather to learn how to carry our selves fairly and honestly among them, than
through impatience without calling, to shift our places, or without charity, to
make any schism or rent in the Church. Secondly, since on earth it will be no
better with us in respect of our habitation; we should therefore learn the
more to desire to be in heaven, where all the people shall be righteous: since
there is so much unrighteousness in this Wourld, we should long for these new
heavens and new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. We should be the more
thankful, if God ease us, in any degree, of the molestations of wicked men,
either ridding out manifest Idolaters, Pagans, or Papists, or restrayning those
that are with us from unquietness, and tumult, and daily slander, or
comforting us with a large fellowship of the godly. Fourthly, it should teach
us circumspection, seeing the days are evil, both to hold forth our own
light in the midst of their darkness, and to take heed that we trust not every
man, nor believe every thing: a holy reservednesse will become this Doctrine.
Fifthly, the zeal of Gods house should the more overcome us to strive to win
men to God, and provoke them, as we have occasion and ability, to the love of
God, and the true Religion. Sixthly, we should cleave the faster to the society
of the godly, and strive together, and contend for the faith, seeing that we
are always in the midst of our enemies. Lastly, it may be a great comfort to
such as can quiet themselves well toward wicked men, that can keep their way,
and be still upright and undefiled, that can also keep peace, and win love
from their very enemies, that can do valiantly in the winning men to the
liking of Religion for their sakes. To be good among the good, is not
singular; but to be evil among the good, is abominable; and so is it an
admirable praise to be good among the evil.

Doct. 3. That in some cases the conversation of a Christian may extend it
self even to wicked men. Someone will say, We are forbidden conversation with
them, how then can we converse with them? Ans. First, our conversation may
reach unto them by fame or report; so the Christians conversed among the
Gentiles, in that what they did, was discoursed of among the Gentiles. But this
is not all; for in some cases we may go among them lawfully, even into their
presence and company; In what cases it is lawful to converse with wicked men.
as first, in case of negotiation in things of necessity, as trade, public
service, or the like. Secondly, in case of natural or civil obligation to
them; as children, wives, servants, subjects, may not withdraw their attendance
or service from them, but may and must converse with them. Thirdly in case of
Religion, men that intend to admonish, confute, persuade or win them to the
love of Religion, may for that end converse with them. But then two cautions
must be observed; first, that the party that would so converse with them, must
be able to admonish or confute, etc. Secondly, such an end must not be made a
pretense, only to cover needelesse society with them. Lastly, a difference
must be put between the open enemies of God, and such as give some hope of
inclination to Religion, though yet they be not manifestly religious. There are
some persons that are inoffensive, so as they are not guily of any gross and
open crime, and seem to favor Religion and the exercises thereof, and do
desire the society of the godly, and take no pleasure in evil company; now we
must beware that we judge not rashly of these, to account them as Gentiles, and
such as are without; and with these we may hold more sure society.

Doct. 4. It may be lastly hence observed, That to convince or win the
Gentiles, honesty of conversation is chiefly to be respected; honesty, I say,
not Religion. To show the practice of religious duties before them, is a way to
irritate them: they must be beaten with their own weapons, and overcome in
the things they profess to be good. The way to amaze them that are without,
is to show that religion forms in us such things as they confess to be good,
yet cannot come to, or not in such a manner or degree: such as are faithfulness,
chastity, meekenes, wisdom, taciturnity, mercy, or the like. The use should
be therefore to teach godly Christians, in the places where they live, to
look to this point: not only to live without offense, but to strive to excel
in the virtues that concern outward honesty of life. And to this end it were
excellent, if Christians would mark, in what things the men of the world,
where they live, do strive to excel; and not rest satisfied, till they can
make all sorts of men discern, that Religion has made them even in those
things to go beyond them. And thus they should not suffer themselves to be
put down by Papists or any carnal persons, in works of mercy, or truth in
their words and promises, or quietness of disposition, or magnanimity, or the
like; and the rather, because their praise is of God: whereas carnal men have
only the praise of men. And besides, the true Christian shall have a
recompense of reward in heaven, Ephesians. 6.8. whereas the Pharisee has his
reward only in this life. And further, we should be more careful to win
praise to our God and the true Religion, than they are to get applause to
themselves, or a strange god. And we are in the light, they are in darkness: it
were a shame they should do their work better in the dark than we in the
light, Romans 13. Thus of the first reason. The second reason why they should be
careful of their conversation, is, because the Gentiles are apt to speak evil
of the Christians, as evil doers.

That where as they speak evil of you, as of evil doers.]

From hence three things may be observed:

First, that it has been the lot of godly men to be evil spoken of and
traduced: as we see the Christian Churches in the primitive times were exposed
to the infamous reports of the Gentiles. Two things would be here explained:
First, that it has always been so: And then the causes of it. For the first,
that it has always been so, is clear by instances of all times: before the
Law, under the Law, and in the time of the Gospel.

1. Before the Law.

Ismael scoffs at Isaac ^ and Joseph's brethren scorn and revile him. Job was
accused as an Hypocrite by his own friends, and scorned by the basest of the
people, Job. 30.1. So was it with Moses and the Israelites, Heb. 11.26.

2. Under the Law.

David was slandered by many, Psalm. 31.12. The abjects tare his name, and
ceased not, Psalm. 35.15. the drunkards sang of him, Psalm. 69.13. he was a
reproach of men, a byword, a proverb, etc. So in the Prophet Esays time, Esaias
8.18. and 59.16. and 51.8.

Jeremy complains, that they consulted how to devise devices against him, and
to smite him with the tongue.

3. Under the Gospel.

1. Look to the Author and finisher of our faith, Christ Jesus: he was charged
with gluttony, Mat. 11.18. blasphemy, Mat. 26.65. madness, Ioh. 10.20. to be a
deceiver, Ioh. 7.22. and to have a devil, and work by the prince of devils. 2.
The Apostles were made a spectacle to men and Angels, and accounted as the
off-scowring of all things, 1. Cor. 4.9, 10, 13. 3. Yea it is foretold to be
the case of all Christians, Mat. 5.12. Gal. 4.29.
The causes of those reproaches follow.

First, in wicked men: it is their natural hatred of the truth and goodness, 1.
Ioh. 2. and 3.

Secondly, in the devil: it is his policy, hereby, 1. To keep men from
embracing a religion that is so traduced, Acts 28. Causes why godly me^ are
evil spoken of.
2. To discourage and hinder the weak Christian, and to make him fearful in
the way of God. 3. To pull back certain men which were going toward the
Kingdom of God.


Thirdly, in Gods will: hereby to try the constancy of his servants ^ and to
make them live more watchfully.

Fourthly, in Christians themselves: it is

Sometimes long of hypocrites that break out into scandalous courses, and so
make the way of God evil spoken of.

Sometimes it is the indiscretion and weaknesses of some Christians, which
first set wicked men aworke.

But chiefly it is their goodness, because they will not run with the wicked
into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. 4.5. Psalm. 38.1. Ioh. 3.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. The second thing may be noted from hence, is, That to speak evil of
the godly is a property of wicked men, of men not yet visited of God. Such as
dishonor godly Christians, did never endeavor to glorify God himself, 1 Cor.
6.9.10. Psalm. 15. Romans 1.29, 30. and therefore their tongues that are given to
reviling of the godly, are said to be set on fire from hell, Iam. 3.

Doct. 3. The third thing is, That to speak evil of the good, is a vice that
all wicked men are guilty of: as here he supposes it to be the sin of all
the Gentiles, so of all men by nature, Romans ^.12, 13.

It follows that I should show the uses may be made of the three doctrines
together: but first a question may be asked; and that is,

Quest. Whether may not evil be spoken of godly men at all, and in no case? I
answer, Evil may not at all be spoken of them in these cases following:

First, in things that are hidden thou may not judge them; as, thou may not
meddle with them for the thoughts and intents of their hearts, In what cases it
is hurtful to speak evil of godly men.
1 Cor. 4.5.

Secondly, in things doubtful, of which there is no proof: for in such cases
all men must speak and judge the best.

Thirdly, in things indifferent they may not be censured, either for their
judgment, or practice, Romans 14.

Fourthly, things secret, though evil, yet may not be carried about or
discovered: for he that reveals a secret, goes about as a slanderer.

Fifthly, they must not be evil spoken of for mere frailties and infirmities:
for love must cover a multitude of those evils; and their nakedness herein
must be covered.

Sixthly, they must not be evil spoken of behind their backs for any evils,
unless it be when they are incorrigible, or may infect others; or otherwise,
that their sins be spoken of for some manifest glory of God: Backbiting is
directly condemned.

Seventhly, not for any faults for which they have truly repented.

Eighthly, not in any case so as to judge them with a final sentence: to
pronounce absolutely of their estates, that they are hypocrites, or shall be
damned.

Lastly, evil must never be spoken of them for weldoing: no man may dare to
call good evil.

Otherwise in things that are apparently evil, they may be reproved by
Magistrates, or Ministers, or Parents, or Masters: yea and by any that is able
to admonish, so as their sins be not spoken of with hatred or mere desire
to disgrace them.

The uses of all this are for instruction: and so both to wicked men and godly
men. And so it is needful to be attended, because all of us either do
reproach, or are reproached.

Wicked men should be warned, if it be possible, to repent of this sin and
forbear it; and that for many reasons:

First, if they consider Gods commandment, which forbids all excesses of
this kind, Reasons against evil speaking.
Psalm. 33.13. Tit. 3.1.

Secondly, if they consider the causes of their evil speaking; which, as was
showed before, is the malice of their own hearts against the truth, and the
especial working of the devil, who is the fire of hell, that sets their
tongues aworke, Iam. 3.

Thirdly, if they consider that this is the devils special sin, to be an
accuser of the brethren, and from thence has his name in other languages: And
will thou make a devil of thy self; or discover such a divellish property in
this nature?

Fourthly, if they consider the effect of this sin of reproaching and
slandering the godly, either to the godly, or to themselves.

First, to the godly: what mischief do they? Evil words are compared to
swords and razors.

It is a kind of murder: it is as hateful as if they did cut or pierce their
bodies: and besides, to what grievous contempts and indignities many times
do thou bring them by thy lies and slanders?

Secondly, to thy se^f: consider what thou bringst by speaking evil of the
godly.

1. Though thou do it never so secretly behind their backs, yet it is
overheard, and will come out: how would thou be ashamed, if he of whom thou
speak stood behind thee when thou did slander him? O man, consider, though
the godly man never hear thee, yet God does hear it, and all thou say,
thou must bear thy shame for it.

2. Observe what interpretation God makes of it: he calls this sin blasphemy:
for so the word is in the original, Col. 3.8. to note thereby, that he is
vexed at this sin of vilifying his people, as if it were the reproaching of
himself.

3. Consider what a shame it will be to thee when God shall clear the
innocence of his servants: how will thou be confounded when they are justified?

4. Consider what hurt it does thy self and others; it is a great means to set
you further off from the Kingdom of God and to harden your hearts against the
cares of your own reformation and salvation: Evil words corrupt good manners.
Thou losest so much even of natural honesty, as thou admittest of evil in thy
tongue.

5. Consider the punishment from the Lord. This is a sin that God has
grievously threatened, as these places show: Psalm. 50.20. and 109.29. Esaias. 51.
18. Psalm. 31.18. Esaias 41.11, 12.1. Pet. 4.4, 5.

And as it is evil to speak evil of those that are godly, as it appears by
these reasons: so it is monstrous to be guilty of speaking evil in any of the
cases following: as,

1. To speak evil of the absent, that cannot defend themselves. In what cases
in particular it is odious to speak evil.
2. To speak evil of such as God has humbled and afflicted, and do judge
themselves for their sins. 3. To speak evil of such as have been friendly to
us, and showed their loving respect of us, and done us good. 4. To speak evil
of our superiors; as godly Magistrates, and good Ministers. 5. To speak evil
of such as are nearly linked unto us; as of our parents: and so it is monstrous
uncomely, when wives speak evil of their husbands; and contrariwise. 6. To
speak evil of any simply for godliness sake. 7. To speak evil of others, and
yet be guilty of the same offenses themselves. 8. And so it is monstrous, when
men speak evil of such behind their backs, to whom they speak fair before
their faces: this hooding of hatred and cursing with lying lips is abominable.
So then this doctrine against evill-speaking does in a special manner light
upon such persons as are guilty of any of those ways of evil-speaking. And
thus of the uses that concern wicked men.

Secondly, godly men be also instructed from hence. For, since this doctrine
tells them, that it has been the lot of godly men in all ages, to be evil
spoken of in all places where they live, they should thereby be made careful
to order themselves aright, in bearing reproaches in a right manner; as
resolved to prepare for the trial of this affliction, if they be not scourged
with it: for as the devil, when he gave over to tempt Christ, is said to cease
but for a season; so if wicked men hold their tongues, we must not think they
will be quiet always: for till God turn their hearts, they are apt to speak
evil.

Now, that a godly man may be rightly ordered in respect of reproaches, he
must look to three things.

Helps against reproaches to ^eare them.
First, he must be sure he be free from this evil himself, that he help not
the wicked against the righteous, and by his own intemperance raise evil
fames, by reason of which Religion is evill-spoken of: for railing, cursing,
slandering, censuring, and the like, will make the very godly look like wicked
ones, yea like the devil himself. Shall it be accounted a Paganish offense,
and shall a godly Christian be guilty of it? Especially such Christians should
be extremely abased for their evil natures, that raise evil reports of other
Christians, in cases where wicked men themselves are silent.

Secondly, that he carry himself in a holy manner when he is reproached: and
so he must remember two things.

1. That he render not reviling for reviling; but if he find himself stirred,
with David to go to God, and betake himself to prayer, Psalm. 109.4.1. Pet. 3.9.

2. That he strive to confute them by real apologies: and so he does, if he
endeavor to put them to silence by his good works, and a careful course of
conversation.

Thirdly, because the godliest men may have their passions, and may be stirred
up with such indignations (as appears, Ier. 8.18, 21,) he must labor to sense
his own heart with store of arguments, that may make him patient and
comfortable under this cross: and thus it should comfort him to consider,

1. That no reproaches can make him vile in God's sight: how vile soever he
seem to be unto men, yet in God's eyes he is honorable, Esaias 43.4.

2. That thou art but as an evil doer, not an evil doer. It is not miserable,
To be as an evil doer: but it is miserable, To be an evil doer, 2. Cor. 6.8,
9.

3. This is not to resist unto blood, Heb. 12.3. This is a far less cross
than has been laid upon many of the best servants of God: they have lost their
lives in the defense of pure Religion.

4. That howsoever it go with thee in this life, yet in the Day of Jesus Christ
thy innocence shall be cleared, and thy faith and sincerity shall be found
unto praise, and honor, and glory: thou shall have abundant praise in that
Day, 1. Pet. 1.7.

Thus of the use that concerns either wicked men, or godly men. There is yet a
use that concerns all men: and that is, To take heed o^ receiving evil reports
against the godly: for seeing it is so usual for ill-minded men to devise and
divulge evil reports of them, all men should be wary, and take heed of
receiving the evil speeches that are bruited or spoken of any in the business
of godliness. The receiving of false reports is forbidden in Scripture, as
well as the devising or divulging of them, Exodus 23.1. And it is made a sign
of a wicked disposition, To give heed to false lips: and that man is himself a
liar, that harkneth to a naughty tongue, Pro. 17.4. And therefore God will
plague in hell, not only liars, but such as love lies, Rev. 22.8. And a good
man is said to have this property, that he will not receive an ill report
against his neighbor, Psalm. 15. And by receiving evil reports, a man becomes
accessory to the slander, and guilty of it: for as it is true, that the
receiver of evil-gotten goods is accessory to the theft; so is it in the case
of slander, and somewhat worse: for there may be thieves, though there be no
receivers; but there can be no slanderers, without some to receive the slander.
Neither is there any great difference between the talebearer and the
tale-hearer: for the talebearer has the devil in his tongue, and the
tale-hearer has the devil in his ear.

Quest. But what should we do to avoid tale-bearers, or if we do hear
reproaches or slanders of other men?

Answ. As the North wind drives away the rain; so must thy angry countenance
do the slaundering tongue: thou must not any way show any liking of his
discourse, but the contrary: yea, and further, thou must, as far as thou art
able, make an apology for the godly man that is evil spoken of. And the
tongue of a godly wise man should be in this sense healthful, because it
should be ready to heal that wound which the talebearer has made in the name
of his neighbor, Prove. 12.18. and 25.23.

Thus of the second reason.

The third and fourth reasons are contained in these last words, viz. That they
may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of
visitation. The reasons are, because God may visit them: and if he do, they
will glorify God upon the remembrance of your good works.

But here I purpose to handle the words as they lie in the order of reading
them: and so I have four things to consider of. First, of good works;
secondly, of the beholding of good works; thirdly, of the glorifying of God;
fourthly, of the day of visitation.

Good works.]

Diverse observations are implied here.

First, that Religion sets men to work: there is labor in godliness. He
must work that will be truly godly or religious. God entertaines no servants,
but he sets them to work: they are called to labor all the days of their
life. We must work out our salvation: without working we cannot be saved,
though our works be not the cause of salvation. This point proves, that the
Gospel is not a doctrine of liberty: religion does call men to working, not to
live as they lift, but as he lists that died for them, and requires their
service.

And secondly, this doctrine shows who is a true Christian. For as the
Scripture is wont to describe a profane man, by saying, that he is a worker of
iniquity: so does it avouch, that he is a godly man, that works truth and
righteousness, Psalm. 5. Prove. 14.23. Ioh. 3.21. Psalm. 106.2. To be a worker of
iniquity, imports three things: First, gross known sin; secondly, a daily
custom in the practice of it; and thirdly, an estimation of sin as the means
of our happy life. The wicked man lives by sin, as the labourer does by his
trade. So here, that man that will labor, and that constantly, about the
works of a holy life, making it his every days care to do Gods will, and
accounts it the happiness of his life to do good duties, that man is a godly
man. It is not talking of Religion will serve the turn, nor the shows of it,
but he must work, and endure the labor of godliness, Iam. 1.25. Act. 10.36.
And further, this should teach Christians often to remember their holy calling,
and examine themselves what works they have done, as such servants as desire
to give a good account to their Master; and the rather, because no servants can
have fairer work: it is all good work: and servants were so engaged to their
masters, nor did owe more service; and because never was there a master that
gave better wages than God does to his servants. And therefore let every
Christian be daily careful to look to his work, that when his Master comes,
he may find him so doing. Thus of the first point.

Doct. 2. Secondly, that works do specially commend us to the good opinions of
men: it is our works must justify us before men: by good works we must
win testimony to our sincere religion from men. Faith justifies us before
God, and proves us to be true Christians; as works do before men prove us to
be so. And therefore we should strive, by well doing, to win as much credit as
we can to our Religion among men, Iam. 3.13.

Doct. 3. Thirdly, that the foundest way of confuting our Adversaries, is by
our works: we must make real apologies: we must put them to silence by
well-doing. Now, in that he calls the good works done by them, their good
works, I might note diverse things.

1 The necessity of good works: they must have works of their own: the good
works done by others avail not them, nor justify them.

2 The goodness of God, that vouchsafes to call those works their works,
when yet they were wrought by him, as having had their beginning from his grace
and Spirit, Esa. 26.12.

3 It is true, that they only can do good works; good works are only
theirs: a wicked man cannot do good works, because his person is hateful to
God, and his nature altogether impotent; and though he may do some actions,
which for the matter of them are good, yet he pollutes them with his sins, of
which he has not repented; and cannot bring them forth complete for matter,
manner, and end, Tit. 1. ult. Mat. 6.

But it is the goodness of works which I specially intend to entreat of in this
place. Good works.]

The goodness of men's works may be diversely considered; either according to
the differences of works good, from such as are not so, or according to the
forms of good works, or according to the time of doing works, or according
to the uses works are put to. Wherein works are good.


For the first. Some men's works are neither good nor seem to be so; as are
the apparent sins of men. Some men's works seem good, but are not; as the
alms, and prayer, and fasting of the Pharisees. Some men's works are good, but
seem not so, at least in the eyes of some men: and so the religious duties of
godly Christians seemed to be vain practices of Sectaries and innovators, Act.
28. and so Paul's zeal and knowledge seemed madness to Festus, Act. 26. Some
works seem good, and are so: such are the open good works of the godly in
the judgment of godly men guided by charity.

For the second. If works be tried by their form, then those works are good
works which are done with correspondencie to the revealed will of God in his
Word they must be commended in the Word, and done according to the directions
of the Word; so that all works done besides or above the Law of God, are
sinful and naught: and the doing of the works of supererogation, or those
works they call Counsels, fall to the ground. And yet we confess, there were
some works good, which were not commanded in Scripture; as Phine^^ his work in
slaying the fornicators; and Mary's work in anointing Christ unto the burial
(for so it is called a good work, Mat. 26.10.) and Abraham's work in
sacrificing his son, and the like: these were good works, and had no^ warrant
from Scripture, but were warranted by extraordinary calling thereto: and so
they differ from the works of superstitious persons, done without warrant
ordinary or extraordinary.

For the third. The time of doing some works, adds much to the consideration of
their goodness: as for instance; The charitable and religious works done by
men before their conversion are not to be reckoned good works, because the
person that does them is not reconciled to God, and lives polluted in his sins.
Likewise the works of our calling, done in the week-daies, are good works; but
done on the Sabbath day, are evil works. So works done too late are not
good; as their prayers that would not answer when God called them, Prove. 1.

For the fourth* If the uses of works be respected, the outward works of
wicked men, that for the matter of them are required in the Word, may be said
to be good works, beca^e they are good for men unto whom they are done: as the
alms of a Pharisee is a good work, in that it is good for the relief of the
poor, though it be not good in the sight of God; as failing of the right end,
which is, Gods glory. Thus of the acceptance of the terms. The good works
here mentioned, are such as are good in Gods sight, as being done in obedience
to Gods will, and by persons that are godly.

Now concerning those good works, I propound diverse things profitable to be
considered of.

First, the rules of good works, which do tell us what must be had, before a
work can be a good work.

Secondly, the kinds of good works, or what works we may account in the
nature of good works; how many sorts of good works there are.

Thirdly, I would answer a question or two, needful to be considered of, about
good works; and in the last place, the uses of all.

For the first of those. There are many rules to be observed, before we can do
works that God will account good. And those rules are absolutely necessary,
and they are these:

First, the person must be reconciled unto God in Jesus Christ, Rules to be
observed in doing good works.
or else all he does will be abominable in Gods sight. He must be turned in
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 2.10. He must be pure, or else his work is not right but
polluted, Tit. 1. ult. Prove. 21.8. The people that do good works, must be
purified unto God, being redeemed by Jesus Christ, and so made a peculiar
people, Tit. 2.14. He must be purged, and sanctified, and so prepared to good
works, 2 Timothy 2.21.

Secondly, his works must be warranted and required and prescribed in the Word
of God: he must walk by rule: his pattern must be found in the Scripture,
Gal. 6.14. he must come to the light of the Word, that his works may be
manifest that they are wrought in God, Ioh. 3.21. The Scripture is given by
inspiration of God to this end, that the man of God might be perfectly directed
unto every work that is good, 1 Timothy 3.16, 17.

Thirdly, he must propound a right end in doing his works: or else though the
matter be good, yet the work is polluted, as was showed before in the instance
of the alms of the Pharisees: and this right end is not the praise of men
only, or to merit thereby, but the glory of God chiefly, in the discharge of
our obedience to God, and the edification of our neighbor.

Fourthly, the works must be done in the name of Jesus Christ. We must rely
upon the merits and intercession of Christ Jesus, as that which can cause our
works to be pleasing to God, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever it is we do in word or in
deed, all must be done in the name of Christ, or it is done in vain. Without
faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. Now our works are done in
faith, first, when we believe and know they are warranted by the Word, Ioh.
3.21. Secondly, when we believe Gods promises concerning the reward of
well-doing, Heb. 11.6. Thirdly, when we fly to Jesus Christ to cover the
imperfection of our works from the sight of God: and so in that place, Col.
3.17. and fourthly, when our belief of Gods goodness to us, makes us careful
to do all the good we can.

Fifthly, his works must be done with repentance for his sins, and the judging
of himself for the evil of his best works. By repentance, I mean not the
first work of a sincere turning to God, for that is comprehended in the first
rule: but the preservation of himself in his uprightness, and the daily
judging of himself for his frailties. For if a godly man after his calling
fall into presumptuous sins, his works done all the time he lives in beloved
sins, without the renewing of his repentance, are polluted, Esa. 1.

Sixthly, his works must be done willingly, not grudgingly or of constraint,
or only to avoid shame or punishment: God loves a cheerful giver. That alms
that is given with an ill will, or forced from men by the laws or otherwise,
is not accounted a work of mercy in Gods sight: to do mercy, is not enough to
make it a good work pleasing to God, but to love mercy* Mic. 6.8. and to come
into Gods presence to do his service, is not pleasing, unless we humble our
selves to walk with our God.

Seventhly, his works must be finished: to intend it, or promise it, or begin
it, will not serve turn: as in the case of mercy, to promise to contribute, or
to begin for a day or a week, is not sufficient, unless we do it constantly,
2 Cor. 8. and 9. So it is in repentance: it is then a good work, when it is
finished, not when a man has had some remorse, or uttered a word or two of
confession, or prayed for a day or two: but when a man having repented, repents
still, till he have soundly humbled himself for his sins, and reformed his
ways, Ier. 31.19, 20. So it is in general in any work God sets us to do,
Ioh. 4.3, 4.

Eighthly, his works must be his own fruit, such as belong to him in his
place and calling. As in the calling of the Ministry, his good work is, to
preach the Gospel with all frequencie, and diligence, and power, etc. So in the
Magistrate, to do the works of justice: so in other callings, every man must
look to the duties of his own place: and so it is in our general callings;
as Christians, we must do those which are meet for repentance, which not only
concern a penitent life, but such as have a due respect unto the performing the
things we are called to in our repentance, Luke 4.44. Act. 6.20. Every tree
must not only bear fruit, but his own fruit, proper to his kind: as the proper
fruit of rich men is mercy: and if they had never so many praises otherwise,
that they were courteous, wise, just, chaste, etc. yet if they be not
merciful, their works are not good works.

Ninthly, his works must be full before God. It was an objection against the
Church of Sardis, that her works were not perfect (or full) before God; and
therefore she is threatened, if she repent not, to feel the heavy hand of God,
Rev. ^.1, 2. No^, as I conceive, a man's works are not full, when he is not
careful of every good work, which he knows concerns him; as for instance:
if a man pray, and yet be not careful of hearing the Word, his prayers are
abomination to God, because his works are not full. There be some duties which
he makes no conscience to obey in, though he know they be required: he that
turns away his ears from hearing the Law, his prayers are abominable, Pro.
28.9. If a man would be never so careful about Gods service, and yet make no
conscience of the works of mercy required of him, his sacrifice is not
accepted, Hos. 6.6, 7, etc. Thus the long prayers of the Pharisees will not be
regarded if they devour widows houses, Mat. 23. and so on the other side, if
a man were never so merciful a man, if he were not also a religious man in the
things of Gods service, his works would not abide trial before God: they were
not good, because they were not full. And for this reason the works of civil
honest men are not good: such were Paul's works, Phil. 3.6. which he accounts
but dross and dung in comparison (verse. 8.) of such as these.

Thus of the rules of good works: the kinds follow.

The vulgar commonly when they hear of good works, think of nothing but
alms and hospitality or other courses of showing mercy. Now though it be true,
that works of mercy be good works, yet they are but one sort of good works;
whereas the Christian is bound to be ready to every good work, 1 Timothy 3.17. and
therefore it will be profitable to inform our selves of the many ways by
which we may do good works: for thereby such Christians as are not able to
give alms, may see a way how to enrich themselves in well-doing other ways.
These then are the sorts of good works:

Kinds of good works.
First, to believe is a good work, yea it is instead of many good works, yea
in some sense it is to us instead of the works of the whole Law; as it is a
means to lay hold on all the good works that ever Christ Jesus did. To put on
the lord Jesus, is a good work in a high degree: and so every act of faith in
all the passages of a man's life, is a good work: for this is the work of God,
to believe, as our Savior shows, when he gives that for answer for such as
asked what they must do, to do the works of God, Ioh. 6.28. Romans 13.12, 13,
14. This is clearly acknowledged in these other Scriptures, 1 These. 1.3. 2 These
1.11.

Secondly, all works of piety are good works; all works of worship, that is,
such works by which a man does service to God, are all in the number of good
works: and so to pray, to fast, to hear the Word, to receive the Sacraments,
etc. are good works; for godliness has the promises of this life, and of the
life to come: and therefore it is profitable to all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. And
these works must needs be accounted good works, for they are dear works: the
blood of Christ was poured out, that we might be cleansed from dead works to
serve the living God, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, all works of repentance: all that a Christian does about his
humiliation or reformation, are evangelically good works; as, if he confess
his sins, and do execution upon his sins; if he make satisfaction for his
trespasses to men; if he reform himself, or his household, or his charge:
these and the like are all good works, 2 Chronicles. 19.3.

Fourthly, to suffer for a good cause, is reckoned in the number of good
works; as to forsake father or mother, house or land, wife or children,
liberty or life, for Christ's sake and the Gospels, it is in the number of those
good things that shall have a good reward, Mat. 19.29. Ier. 31.16. Ruth. 2.11,
12.

Fifthly, works of men's particular callings, whether in the Commonwealth, or
Church, or family, or any vocation or trade of life: so, works of Justice are
good works; and to obey Magistrates, is called well-doing, verse. 14. of this
chapter: so to preach the Gospel, is a good work, 1 Timothy ^.1. So in the
family, for parents to bring up their children well is a good work, 1 Timothy
5.10. yea the labors of servants in the family are such works as shall have
reward of God, as well as works of piety, Esa. 6. Col. 3.

Sixthly, works of mercy are good works, whether it be spiritual mercy to
instruct, admoni^h, or reprove, or comfort, Psalm. 140. or whether it be outward
mercy, in giving, lending, visiting, defending the poor, or the like. All
confess these to be good works, Act. 9.16. But that alms may be a good
work, these three rules must be observed: First, that it be given of goods
well gotten, else no good works. Secondly, that he that gives it have a good
eye, Esa. 16.8.
to distribute where there is need: for to keep a good house, and to entertain
russians, and drunkards, and gamesters, is not a good work, nor hospetality,
because here is not a good eye. Thirdly, alms mu^t be given to a good end, not
for the praise of men, or to merit thereby, Mat. 6. Thus of the kinds of good
works.

The questions follow.

Quest. 1. How can any works done by any man in this life be accounted good,
seeing there is none that lives and sins not? yea all our works, even the
works of the most righteous, are as a menstruous cloth, Esa. 64.6.

For ans^er hereunto, I say, It is true, that if God look upon the best works
of the most godly in this life, and examine them by the rigor of his covenan^,
which he called, His covenant of works, then no flesh living can have comfort
of his works, but all will appear loathsome as a menstruous gar^ent. But the
works of the believing Christians are otherways to be considered of: for,

First, they are tried by the covenant of grace, How a godly man may comfort
(...) in his works.
by the benefit of which covenant he is delivered from the rigorous perfection
of the Law, and his uprightnes is accepted instead of perfection: he is now no
more under the Law, but by Gods grace and acceptance, his works are taken as
if they had been perfect.

Secondly, he has the benefit of Christ's intercession, who presents his
works before God, covering the evil of them, and tendering them to God, who
accepts them for the love he bears to his Son. And thus we read in
Scripture, that Christ presents the prayers of the Saints.

Besides, that the Christian may not think too vilely of his works, but be
comforted in the Lord concerning them, let him further consider these things:

First, that his good works have the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is in him,
for the fountain of them, 1 Cor. 12.11. Esa. 26.12.

Secondly, that the blood of Jesus Christ was shed, not only for his
justification, but also for his sanctification, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, that though his works are not good effectu, yet they are good
affectu, they are good in desire: his desire was to have them as good as God
himself did require. And this God is pleased to accept, as if the work were
perfectly done.

Quest. 2. What are works good for, in that they are called good works?

Answ. I answer, first, affirmatively: they are good,

What works are good for.
1 To testify our thankfulness to God for all his benefits, in respect of
which we are debte^s unto God, Romans 8.12. 2 To assure the truth of our faith,
as the fruits of faith, Mat. 7.17. 1 Timothy 1.19. James 2. 3 To witness our
election, and to make our calling sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. 4 To discharge our duty of
obedience, unto which we are bound even in the covenant of grace. 5 To further
the edification of our brethren, whom we help both by example, and by
well-doing to them. 6 To win wicked men to a better estimation of our
Religion, and to stop their mouths, as here, so verse. 15. 7 To glorify God,
as is in this place mentioned. 8 They are good to make us capable of rewards
from God in heaven, Heb. 10.36. Romans 2.7, 8. yea and in this life too, 2 Timothy
4.8.
Secondly, I say, they are not good,

1 To justify us before God, as it is at large proved by the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Romans and Galatians; only they are good to justify us before
men, Iam. 2.

2 Not to merit or deserve heaven by them: men's evil works do merit
punishment: (for the wages of sin is death:) but our good works cannot
merit, both because the Scripture denies it expressly, Ephesians. 2.8. as also (to
omit other reasons) because the nature of merit casts away our works: for
there must be three things in a work that must merit. First, it must be a free
work, that was not due by any debt: whereas our works are a part of ou^ duty;
and we owe more to God, than we can do, Luke 17.9. Romans 11.35. Secondly, the
work that should merit, must be profitable to him of whom we would merit; but
no goodness of ours can reach to God to profit him, Psalm. 16.3. Job 22.2.
Thirdly, the work that must merit, must be of equal value with the thing that
is given for it; but neither our sufferings, nor our deeds in this life can be
worthy of the glory that is to be revealed, Romans 8.18. and therefore is
eternal life called, The gift of God, Romans 6.2^.

The uses follow, and are especially for instruction: for this doctrine of good
works should teach us,

First, to take notice of this doctrine, and as we are careful to believe, so
to be careful to maintain good works; and hereby to confute the malicious
Papists, that falsely charge us to deny and disgrace good works, Tit. 3.8, 14.

Secondly, every man should be ready to do good works, yea to every good
work: since they are required of God, and are so many ways good, and serve us
for such excellent uses: yea we should be zealous of good works, wonderful
eager and desirous to enrich our selves that way, Tit. 3.1. and 2.14. yea we
should hereby show that we are indeed wise Christians, and well skilled in the
use of our Religion, Iam. 3.13. and not men only, but women also should be
forward in good works, 1 Timothy 2.10. It is their best apparel: which should be
a special motive to them that are so careful of their attire. And indeed good
works are to be desired and labored for, as the best apparel of any
Christian; yea, they are his armor too, Romans 13.13. yea, they are a principal
way for his enriching and preferment, 1 Timothy 2.20. so as it is a great curse
upon a Christian, to have no mind to do good works, to be reprobate to every
good work, Tit. 1. ult.

Thirdly, since there are so many things necessary to the constitution of a
good work; Christians should (in stead of prying into the lives of others)
every one try his own works, and turn often to the light, that it may be
(indeed) manifest that his works are wrought in God, Gal. 6.4. for one day
every man's works shall be tried in the fire, when times of trial, by great
afflictions, either upon men's Consciences or otherwise, come; that man's works
that never seem glorious and praise worthy, will be rejected and cast away,
even by our selves, as vile and unprofitable. Besides, at the best, in our
prosperity, if the most of our works be tried by the fire of these rules of
Gods Word, it is much to be doubted that our works will burn, though upon our
repentance for the evil that cleaves to our best works, our selves may be
saved in the day of the Lord. Let Christians therefore be careful, that they
lose not the things which they have wrought.

Now a Christian may lose his works diverse ways: How a man may lose his
works.


First, if he be but a Christian in show, he may, nay he shall lose all he
does. The Pharisees lost all their works, because they were done in hypocrisy.

Secondly, the Christian that has some kinds of heavenly gifts, and temporary
graces, by falling away in the time of temptation loses all that he had
wrought before. God requires patient continuance in well-doing, Romans ^.8.

Thirdly, the true Christian may lose what he wrought, if he do his works
without respect of these Rules: If it be not manifest that his works are
wrought in God, they are lost to him, so many of his works as are so wrought:
Besides, he loses the comfort of all that he has wrought, and the sense of
it, if he fall into gross sin after calling, for so long time as he
continues in sin without repentance.

Thus of good works.

Which they shall behold.]

It is manifest from hence, that good works may, and ought to be so done, as
that men may see them. It is not true that all good works must be hid from the
view and beholding of other men. This may seem strange, because the Pharisees
were blamed for doing their works to be seen of men: but yet it may be easily
and plentifully proved. I will first prove it, and then explain it. For
proof, our Savior Christ requires that the light of men's good works should
shine, that men may see their good works, Mat. 5.16. Christians in respect of
their practice, should be as shining lights in the midst of a froward and
crooked generation, Phil. 2.15, 16. They must maintain good works, Tit. 2.8.
They must show their faith by their works, and so they are justified before
men, by the works which they behold, Iam. 2. They are the express words of S.
James also, in his third chapter, verse. 13. Let him show by good conversation,
his works. And the Apostle Paul says, If there be any praise, think on those
things that may get praise, Phil. 4.8. Yea some Christians are charged to be
patterns of good works, Tit. 2.7.

Now for explication of this point, I would consider (first) what works may
be showed; and then (secondly) what works may not be showed.

For the first, I will only (now) instance in the Apostles catalogue in the
second of Titus.

What works may be showed.
Old men may safely show sobriety, gravity, temperance, soundness of their
faith, love, and patience.

Old women may safely carry themselves in a holy behavior, and be teachers of
good things, especially to the younger women.

Young women must show their sobriety, love, and obedience to their husbands;
discretion, chastity, care of their children and household affairs.

Young men may show, that they be sober-minded.

Ministers offend not, by teaching incorrupt doctrine with gravity and
sincerity, nor when in conference they speak soundly, and things that cannot
be justly taxed.

Servants offend not, by showing obedience to their masters, and all good
faithfulness, and desire to please them well in all things.

For the second: the show is condemned in diverse sorts of works: as,

What works ought not to be showed.
1 Secret duties, of what kind soever, must not be done to the beholding of
others: thus, to pray or fast, that others may see or hear, is not lawful,
Mat. 6.

2 Such works as are done deceitfully, are justly taxed for the show of them:
as when Ananias and Sapphira will make a show of bounty, which was not
performed as they pretended, Act. 5.

3 All works that are done with affectation, when the praise of men is simply
and only sought, are Pharisaicall, and ill done.

4 All the works that are done about the use of the means of godliness, if
practice be not joined with them, are rejected of God, and the show of them is
condemned. Thus to make a show of hearing Sermons, reading the Scriptures,
frequent and long prayers, strict observing of the Lords day, and the like,
when there is not a sound care of a holy life, are not good works, n^r is the
show of them commended, Esa. 1. Mic. 6.

5 To show care of lesser duties, and live in the careless and manifest
neglect of greater and more necessary duties, is likewise Pharisaicall, and
condemned, Mat. 23.

Thus of the beholding of good works.

They may glorify God.]

To glorify God, is, in the etymology of the word, to make God glorious. Now
the glory of God is the excellency of God above all things, as is by way of
exposition added, Esa. 35.2.

The question then is, How can God be made glorious or excellent, seeing his
excellency is as infinite as his nature is; and to that which is infinite
nothing can be added?

For the resolving of this question, we must understand, that if Gods nature be
considered in it self, it is so excellent, as nothing can be conceived or
done, that should bring glory to it. But when the Scripture speaks of
glorifying of God, it means it of such an excellency, as (to our capacity) by
reflection, and resemblance, some way expresses the similitude of Gods
excellency, which we call his glory.

And so God is glorified by himself or by us.

How God is glorified by himself.
God has made diverse impressions of his own excellency, and set it out by
way of image or similitude: as,

First, in the divine nature of Christ. For Christ, as the Son of God, is
said to be the splendour and brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.2.

Secondly in the humane nature of Christ. For in his humane nature did the
Godhead dwell, and shine as the candle in the lanthorn: and so the glory of
God appears amongst men: for when Christ was incarnate, and came to dwell
amongst men, they saw his glory as the glory of the only begotten Son of
God, Job. 1.14.

Thirdly, in his works: for the invisible things of God (as his power and
wisdom in the excellency of them) are made visible unto our observation in
the creation and government of the world: in the great book of the creatures
is the glory of God written in great letters, Romans 1. Thus the heavens declare
the glory of God, Psalm. 19.1. And in this great book the glory of the Lord is
said to endure for ever, and the Lord will always rejoice in this impression
of his glory in his works, Psalm. 104.31. and as all the works of God are his
glory, in that they do some way set out his excellency; so especially miracles
are in a high degree resemblances of Gods glory, and therefore are these works
of wonder called the glory of God. Thus the power of God in raising Christ, is
called his Glory, Romans 6.4. and so the mavelous works mentioned, Psalm. 97.4,
5, 6. so Christ in working the miracle in Canaan of Galile is said to show his
glory, Ioh. 2.11. And as works of miracles are called the glory of God,
because God has in them stamped some lively resemblance of his excellency: so
also works of special justice done upon Gods enemies are called his glory
also, as the se places show, Exodus 14.14. Number. 14.21. Esa. 13.3. So also Gods
mighty working in delivering his servants, is called his glory also, Psalm.
105.5, 6. and 57.6. and 85.9.

Fourthly, in man God has imprinted his glory, and so in all sorts of mankind:
they are called the glory of God in respect of their resemblance of Gods
sovereignty: man is as it were a visible God in this visible world, and in
respect of his superiority over the creatures, resembles God, 1 Cor. 11.17.
And as God has imprinted his glory upon all men in general, so in a special
manner upon some men: as,

1 Upon such men as shine in the outward dignity and preeminence of their
places in this world above other men; their glory is said to be Gods glory, 1 Chronicles. 29.11, 12.

2 Upon such men as are endued with the grace of God, and the virtues of Jesus
Christ: these bear Gods Image, and are therefore called his glory, Esa. 46.13.
2 Cor. 3.18. Psalm. 90.17.

3 In a more principal manner, upon such as be received up to glory in heaven.
Thus God will be glorified in his Saints at the day of Judgment, 2 These. 1.10.
This is that glory of God, which the godly do hope for with so much joy, Romans
5.2.

Fifthly, in certain visible signs and testimonies of his presence. Thus the
consuming fire on mount Sinah, is called the glory of God, Exodus 24.6, 16, 17.
So also the cloud that filled the Temple, Exodus 40.34. and the cloud that rose
upon the Tabernacle in the wilderness. And so the signs of Gods presence in
heaven, are in a special respect called his glory. Thus Stephen saw the glory
of God, and Jesus standing at his right hand, Act. 7.55. Thus we are said to
appear before the presence of his glory, Jude 24.

Sixthly, in his Word: and so the Word of God is the glory of God, either in
general, as it describes the excellence of Gods nature in his properties or
attributes, Psalm. 26.8. Or in special, the Gospel is called his glory, as it
sets out the goodness of God, after a matchless manner, relieving for lorne
mankind, Esa. 6.1. And thus that part of the Word of God that does describe
Gods mercy, is called his glory, Exodus 33.18, 19.22. Ephesians. 2.16. Thus also
that way of showing mercy, by bringing in the infinite righteousness of his
own Son, is called the glory of the Lord, Esa. 40.5.

Thus God glorifieth himself.

Secondly, God is said to be glorified by us. Man may make God glorious* but
that he cannot do by adding any glory to Gods nature: and therefore we must
search out to find by the Scripture, what ways man may glorify God; and so
we may be said to glorify God, or to make God glorious three ways:

How God is glorified of us in general.
First, by knowledge, when we conceive of God after a glorious manner; thus we
make him glorious in our own hearts, and this is a chief way of making God
glorious: and this is one way by which the Gentiles glorify God: and this God
stands upon, so as he accounts not himself to be known aright till we
conceive of him, at least, as more excellent than all things. Seeing we can
add no glory to Gods nature, we should strive to make him glorious in our
own minds and hearts. And we may by the way see, what cause we have to be
smitten with shame and horror to think of it, how we have dishonored God by
mean thoughts of him. And hereby we may also see how far man can be said to
have the true knowledge of God in him; yea, there is some comfort in it too to
a Christian, that humbles himself to walk with his God: for though at the
best he come far short of conceiving of God as he is, yet God accounts
himself to be made glorious by us, when we get so far as to conceive of him
above all creatures; and that is, when he comes into our hearts as a King of
glory, far above all that glory can be found in earthly Princes, Psalm. 14.7,
9. And thus we make him glorious, not when we barely judge him to be more
excellent than all things, but when our hearts are carried after the
apprehension of him, so as we love him above all, and fear him above all, etc.
And thus we make God glorious in our hearts by knowing him.

Secondly, by acknowledgment, when in words or works we do ascribe
excellency unto God; and to glorify him, is to acknowledge his glory; or as
the phrase in Scripture is, To give him glory; and so there be diverse special
ways, by which we are said in Scripture to glorify God: as,

How God is glorified of us in particular.
First, when in words we magnify God, and speak of his praises, and confess
that he is worthy to receive honor, and glory, and might, and majesty: so
Rev. 4.11. Psalm. 29. and 86.9.

Secondly, when men confess that all the glory they have above other men in
gifts or dignity, was given them by God: So David glorifies God, 1 Chronicles.
29.11, 12. And thus we make God the father of glory, as he is called, Ephesians. 1.17.

Thirdly, when men that are guilty of sins that cannot be proved against
them, yet feeling themselves to be pursued by God, do confess to Gods glory
and their own shame, their secret offenses: Thus Achan gave glory to God, Josh.
7.19. And thus the penitent sinner glorifies God, when he cares not to abase
himself in the acknowledgement of his own vileness, that God may be
magnified in any of his attributes or ordinances by it, Ier. 13.16. Mal. 2.2.

Fourthly, when the praise of God, or the advancement of his Kingdom, is made
the end of all our actions: This is to do all to his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Fifthly, when we believe Gods promises, and wait for the performance of them,
though we see no means likely for their accomplishment: Thus Abraham gave
glory to God, Romans 4.

Sixthly, when we publicly acknowledge true religion, or any special truth
of God, when it is generally opposed by the most men: Thus the Centurion gave
glory to God, Luke 23.47.

Seventhly, when men suffer in the quarrel of Gods truth, and true Religion:
So 1 Pet. 4.16.

Eighthly, when on the Sabbath men devote themselves only to Gods work, doing
it with more joy and care, than they should do their own work on the week
days, refusing to profane the Sabbath of the Lord by speaking their own
words, or doing their own wills: Thus Esa. 58.13.

Ninthly, when men do in particular give thanks to God for benefits or
deliverances, acknowledging Gods special hand therein: Thus the Leper gave
glory to God, Luke 17.18. so Psalm. 113.4.

Tenthly, by loving, praising, admiring, and esteeming of Jesus Christ above
all men: for when we glorify the Son we glorify the Father, Ioh. 1.14. and
11.4.

Eleventhly, when we account of and honor godly men, above all other sorts of
men in the world; and so these Gentiles do glorify God, in that they praise
the Christians above all men, whom before they reviled: This is one way by
which the Gentiles glorified God.

Thus of the second way of glorifying God, which is, by acknowledging his glory.

The third way of glorifying God, is by effect, when men make others to
glorify God, conceiving more gloriously of him, or in praising God and his
ways: Thus the professed subjection of Christians to the Gospel makes other
men glorify God, 2 Cor. 9.13. So the fruits of righteousness are to the glory
of God, Phil. 1.10. So here the good works of Christians do make new Converts
glorify God: so every Christian that is Gods planting, is a tree of
righteousness that God may be glorified, Esa. 61.3. So are all Christians to
the praise of the glory of Gods grace, as they are either qualified or
privileged by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.7.

Use. The uses of all should be especially for instruction and humiliation: it
should humble us, if we mark the former doctrine, in that it discovers many
deficiences in us: for besides that it shows, that the whole world of
unregenerate men lies in wickedness, and that as they have all sinned, so
they are all deprived of the glory of God, and altogether delinquent in each
part of making God glorious; I say, that besides the discovery of the general
and extreme corruption of wicked men, it does touch to the quick upon diverse
persons, even the godly themselves. To give instance

In the first way of making God glorious. How meanly and dully do we, for the
most part, conceive of God! How far short are our hearts of those
descriptions of God made in his Word! What strange thoughts come into our
minds at some times! Oh how have we dishonored the most high in our unworthy
conceptions of his Justice, Power, Eternity, Wisdom, and Mercy!

For the second way of glorifying God. What heart could stand before his holy
presence, if he should examine us in justice.

1 For our language. What man is he that has not cause to mourn for his want
of language daily, in expressing of the praises of God! When did we make his
praise glorious? have our mouths been filled with his praise all the day long?

2 For our extreme unthankfulness, when we meet with God himself: we have
been healed with the nine Lepers; but which of us have returned to give glory
to God, in the sound acknowledgment of his goodness to us? It is required we
should in all things give thanks, and yet we have scarce used one word of
praise for a thousand benefits.

3 Our slight acknowledgments of sin, our backwardness to search our ways,
our carelessness when we know diverse grievous faults by our selves, either
avoiding Gods presence, and making confession for fashions ^ake, neither out of
true grief for our sins: and in a special manner do we fail in those
cases of trespass or sin that com^ to the knowledge of others. Do we
knowledge our sins one to another? Oh how hard it is to bring us to be easy
to give glory to God herein!

What man is he that lives, and has not failed of the glory of God about the
Sabbath? Do we delight in Gods work? Have we consecrated that day as glorious
to the Lord? Have not our minds run upon our own ways? After what an
unspeakable manner have we slighted God in his Ordinances?

Lastly, what shall we answer to the Lord for our neglects of Jesus Christ?
Have we glorified the Son? or rather have we not shameful wants still in our
faith? Which of us can say that he lives by the faith of the Son of God? And
are not our affections to the Lord Jesus extremely dull and adverse? Where is
the longing desire after him, and the fervent love of his appearing?

And for the last way of glorifying God by effect: How unprofitably and
unfruitfully do the most of us live? Who has praised God in our behalf? Whom
have we won to the love of God and the truth? Where are our witnesses that
might testify, that our good works have caused them to glorify God?

But especially, woe be to scandalous Christians, that have either caused
wicked men to blaspheme, or Gods little ones to take offense, and conceive ill
of the good way of God: if they repent not, it had been better for them they
had never been borne.

And as for wicked men that are openly so (to give a touch of them and their
estate) they have reason to repent in sackcloth and ashes, if their eyes were
but open to see what terror is implied in this doctrine, and how God will
avenge himself upon them, both for their not glorifying of him, and for
changing his glory, and for the opposing of his glory.

1 In not glorifying God: they have spent their days without God: they have
either not conceived of him at all, or in a most mean and vile manner: they
have not honored him in his ordinances, or in his Sabbaths: they never loved
the Lord Jesus in their hearts, etc.

2 In changing the glory of God, they have done shamefully. Some of them have
turned Gods glory into the similitude of an Ox or a Calfe that eareth hay.
Some of them have given his praise to Images, and the works of their hands.
Some of them have fixed the glory of their affections upon riches, pleasures,
and favor of men. Some of them have made their belly their god: and some have
given their bodies to harlots.

Thirdly, in opposing Gods glory, they have likewise offended grievously; they
have spoken evil of the good way of God; they have abused his servants, and so
despised him; they have set themselves against his Sabbaths, etc. to omit that
they have opposed Gods glory in their hearts, by setting up Idols there, and by
allowing and striving to maintain Atheistical conceits against God.

The second use should be therefore to beget in us a care to use all means to
dispose of, and fit our selves, that we might make God glorious, and so amend
and redress our ways herein; and that we may the more effectually be
wrought upon herein, I will consider of two things: First, I will briefly show
the reasons should stir us to all possible care and diligence herein.
Secondly, I would show how we may distinctly attain to the glorifying of God
in all the three ways before mentioned.

For the first. Diverse considerations should move us to the care of magnifying
or glorifying of God by all the ways we can.

Motives to the care of glorifying God.
First, it is a great honor that God does unto us, to account himself to
receive glory any way from our endeavors. Shall the creature be admitted in
any sense to that glory, to make his Creator, to make him (I say) in his
excellency or glory? God does account himself to receive a new Being, as it
were, by those inward conceptions of his glory, and by those outward honors
done unto him. Shall the King of glory vouchsafe to dwell in our hearts? and
shall we not be exceedingly desirous to entertain him?

Secondly, not to glorify God is to sin grievously: it is not arbitrary, but
most dangerous to allow our selves, either in inward neglects of God, or in
outward unfruitfulnesse. Shall we attribute so much every day to the creatures
we deal with? and shall we know or acknowledge so little of the Creator? It
cannot be safe to slight God.

Thirdly, it is one of the first things that breaks out in the new Converts:
so soon as any of the Gentiles are visited of God, in the same day they
glorify him, by conceiving gloriously of him, and by magnifying God in
himself, and his servants, and service, etc. And therefore without singular
danger of losing our evidence of our calling, we must attend to this Doctrine,
how hard soever it seem.

Fourthly, we are bought with a price and are Gods, and therefore now both in
soul and body we should be wholly devoted to his glory, 1 Cor. 6 ult. as God
has glorified us in our creation, and the many treasures he has given us in
Jesus Christ, and we hope the accomplishment of ma^chlesse glory in heaven: and
shall we not be zealous for the glory of the Lord? Many glorious things be
spoken of us through his grace: and shall we think or speak meanly of God?

Fifthly, the Lord our God exceeds all things in glory, and therefore we
should extol his praise above the heavens, and the whole earth should show it
self to be full of his glory.

Sixthly, he is our heavenly Father: and can we think too well of him, or do
too much to win him praise? Matthew. 5.16.

Lastly, think with our selves, What make we in Gods Vineyard or Orchard? If
we be trees of his planting, ought we not to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, that the Lord may be glorified? Esaias 61.3.

Thus of some motives. The maine care should be to learn what to do, that
God might be made glorious by us: and so we should distinctly consider how to
make him glorious in our selves or in others.

In our selves we should learn how to make him glorious, first, in our hearts
by a glorious conception of him in our minds: secondly, in our words and works,
by acknowledgement.

The first question then is, what should we do that we might conceive more
gloriously of God? For answer hereunto, we must look to our hearts in diverse
particulars: for, that we may conceive of God according to his excellency, we
must proceed by these degrees.

1. We must strive to bring God into our minds: Helps to glorify God.
for naturally we live without God. And we may observe, that at the best we
are wonderful prone to forget God: and therefore we must learn how to bring
our hearts to the meditation of God. For not to think of God, or forget him,
is a grievous offense, as well as to think of him after a base manner.

2. It is not enough to bring God into our thoughts, but we must then be
wonderful careful that we bring not in an Idol of our own forming in stead
of God: we must learn how to think of God as he is described to us in his
Word: for fearful Idolatry may be committed in the heart of a man, as well as
in his outward adoration; and therefore we must learn soundly to conceive
aright of the nature of God.

3. When we have God there in his own likeness, we must enlarge his room in
our hearts: For the true knowledge of God comes in but by sparkles; and God
will be magnified. We must make him great, and enlarge the thoughts of God
when we conceive of him. This is that that is so often required in Scripture,
under the term of magnifying God.

4. When we have attained to this, to think of God, with an ability to make
him great in our hearts, then we must yet proceed to the establishment of this
conception of God: for else the thoughts of God will pass through our heads
like lightning, and be gone: and therefore we must be careful to establish
the thoughts of God in us.

5 We must then labor to clothe the thoughts of God with glory and majesty:
this is that which is here intended; we must not only make him in our hearts,
and nourish the sparkles of his knowledge, but we must make him glorious also.

6 Yea yet farther, when God is conceived of according to his excellency, we
must love the Lord thus conceived of, our hearts must cleave unto him, and
esteem him above all things. So that here are six distinct things to be
heeded of such as will conceive of God aright. Now how these things may be
attained to by us, follows to be considered of.

Now for the first: to bring God into our minds, two things are of excellent
use;

By what means God may be brought into our minds.
First, the enforcing of our selves to consider of Gods works, and so to
strive still to read in that great book of the creatures.

Secondly, the exercising our selves daily in the Word of God: Without these
two helps carefully used, experience shows, that God never comes into men's
thoughts. And by the way, here may be framed an answer to that sorrowful
complaint of many Christians, that they cannot meditate. Now if they would be
taught to meditate, or would at any time have their thoughts set aworke, let
them lay before them either of these books of God, either the great Book of
the creatures, or little book of the Scriptures; and so praying God to direct
them, take those things that easily offer themselves from thence. The other way
of meditating without book, as I know not whether it be absolutely required,
so can it not be so fruitfully performed, nor so comfortably. But to return,
the viewing of Gods workmanship in his creatures, and of his wisdom and rule
in his Word, will help us in the first point, which is, to bring God into our
minds.

For the second: that we may not mistake, but conceive of God aright, we must
look to diverse things carefully.

Helps to conceive aright of God.
First, we must resist and subdue, and no way harbor or favor any
atheistical conceits against the doctrine of Gods nature or providence. If we
find our minds entangled with any such, we must labor to get them cured: for
till our hearts be whole of such diseases, we are disabled from any true
conception of God.

Secondly, we must in thinking of God, then cast out all likenesses: we must
not conceive of him in the likeness of any man or other creature, but get
above all similitudes, and there rest in the adoration of him that is not like
any of those things: we must have no Images of God, neither in our Churches,
nor in our heads, Command. 2. Deuteronomy. 4. Esa. 40.

Thirdly, we must learn distinctly the attributes of Gods praises in the
Scripture, and conceive of him as he is there commended to us: I mean, we
should, as we are able, when we think of God, think of him as he is
omnipotent, most wise, most just, most merciful, etc. It is an excellent
praise of the diligence of a Christian, to accustom himself to conceive of
God according to descriptions made of him in his attributes in his Word.

Fourthly, it may much help us, if we conceive of God as dwelling in the
humane nature of Christ, for thereby it may somewhat arise in our minds, if we
be prone to conceive of likenesses: Mark it carefully, we may ^ot set before
our minds Christ-man, and so worship without any more ado: but if we conceive
of the man-Christ, and then worship that Godhead that dwells in him, we do
right; and besides attain unto a point farther, which is, to conceive of God
in Christ.

Thus of the right conceiving of Gods nature.

The third thing which we must labor for, is, to magnify God in our hearts,
to make him great, to conceive largely, with full thoughts of God: and to this
I add also, to conceive gloriously of him, to clothe our thoughts of God with
a shining excellency above any thing else we think of. Now that God may be
magnified, and thought on after a glorious manner, these things must be done.

We must with all attendance and reverence wait upon the presence of God in his
house, for that is the place where his glory dwells, Psalm. 27.8. How God is
to be magnif^ed in our hearts, and by what means.
And God has magnified his Word above all his name, Psalm. 138.2. And the use
of the Gospel is said to be the Gospel of the glory of the blessed God, because
it does with the liveliest impressions make a man's heart to discern Gods
excellency, Mic. 5.4. 1 Timothy 1.11.

Secondly, the meditation of the wonderful works of God recorded in
Scripture, or observed by experience, is good to br^ed great and glorious
thoughts of God. For as the sight of the miracles of Christ, wrought this in
the hearts of the people, Matthew. 15.31. Luke 7.16. so the contemplation of such
great works may work the same effect in us: and the same effect also may the
thoughts of the works of Gods special justice or mercy have, Ezekiel. 38.23.
Esa. 13.13. especially the consideration of those works of favor or
deliverance, by which God has declared his special goodness unto us, Genesis
19.19. 1 Chronicles. 17.24. David also clotheth the thoughts of God with glory and
greatness in his heart, by thinking of the monuments of Gods wonderful Power
and Wisdom in the heavens, earth, and seas, etc. Psalm. 104.1. etc. yea by
thinking of his own forming and making in the womb, Psalm. 139.15.

Thirdly, we must pray earnestly to God (with Moses) and beg this of God
that he would show us his glory. Thus also of the third thing.

The next thing is, The thoughts of Gods glory ^^o ways established.
to learn how to establish the thought of Gods glory in us: and this is done
especially two ways. First, by striving to set God always before us, as David
did, Psalm. 16.8. Secondly, by remembering God in all our ways, doing all our
works unto the glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Lastly, to make us in love with God thus conceived of according to his glory,
the through meditation of his mercies to us is of singular use, to think either
of the variety of them, or of the special respect God has had of us above
many others, and the frequencie of his mercies, that he shows us mercy daily:
but above all to consider that his mercies are free; to think how vile we are,
upon whom God looks with such grace and goodness. Thus the blessed Virgin
taught her self to magnify God, and to love his name, Luke 1.46, 48.

Thus of making God glorious in our hearts by knowledge.

Now for the second, which is to make him glorious by acknowledgement. The
particular ways how that may be done have been reckoned before in the
explication of the doctrine, only we must labor by prayer to fashion our
selves to that work, that God in any of those particulars does require of us:
and that is the most special help which I know thereunto. But by the way let
me warn thee to look to two things: First, that in any course of glorifying
God, Note.
which is to be done by thy words, thou be careful to avoid hypocrisy; and be
sure that thy heart be lifted up, and affected according to the glory of God: A
double caveat in glorifying God.
for the Lord abhorres to be glorified with thy lips if thy heart be far
from him, Esa. 29.13. And the next is, that thou presume not in any case to
make the pretense of Gods glory a covering for any wickedness: as the
Pharisees that would hide their devouring of widows houses under the praise of
long prayer: or those in the Prophet Esay's time, that would persecure godly
men, and molest them with Church Censures, and say, Let the Lord be glorified,
Esa. 66.5. Thus of making God glorious in our selves.

Lastly, that we may make God glorious in the hearts of other men, Four things
must be done by us to make others glorify God.
and cause them to speak of his praises, we must carefully look to four
things:

1 That when we speak of God or his truth, we do it with all possible
reverence and fear; that we be careful, in all our discourses of Religion,
instructions, admonitions, reproves, confutations, or the like, to treat of
these things with all meekness and reverence: God has given us a commandment
of purpose to restrain the taking up of his Name in vain.

2 That we strive by all means to live unspotted and inoffensive in life, that
if any perverse men did seek occasion against us, yet they might find none;
and to this end, striving to avoid those things distinctly, which we perceive,
by the miserable example of others, do vex and provoke men to speak or think
evil; such as are idleness, frowardness, deceit, conceitednesse, and the
like, Phil. 2.15.

3 That we show forth the virtues of Christ. It is a singular means to stir
up others to glorify God, if they might perceive in us the sound habit of such
Christian virtues, as are not to be found in other sorts of men; such as are
humility, lowliness, contempt of the world, subjection to Gods will, love of
the godly, and the like. The most of us have but the bare names of these: there
is not a real demonstration of them. Christian virtues, set forth to the life,
are amiable, and will compel men to conceive and speak gloriously of God and
his truth.

4 That we be helpful upon all occasions to others, ready to every good work,
and hearty in all works of mercy: it is our good works must make men speak
well of us, and our God, and Religion.

Hitherto of the doctrine of glorifying God.

In the day of visitation.]

Men are said to visit diversely.
This word Visitation is in Scripture attributed both to men and to God. To men
in such cases as these: as first, to shepherds; who when they did specially
survey their ^^ocke, with intent to redress what was amiss, were said to
visit them, Ier. 23.2. As also to such men as had the gathering of tribute:
when they came to exact their tribute, to the great vexation of the people,
they were said to visit them. So the word rendered Exactors, Esa. 60.17. in the
Original is Visitors or Visitations. Thirdly, to visit was a term given to
the Bishops and Apostles in the Primitive Church, that went about through the
Churches, to take notice of the estate of the Churches, and to reform what was
amiss, Act. 15.36. And so the original word here used is translated a
Bishopric. Act. 1.20. agreeable to the Hebrew word used Ps. 109.8. Finally, to
visit is reckoned among the works of courtesy or mercy, Iam. 1.27. The Hebrew
word in the old Testament signifies oftentimes to muster or number up the
people: as 1 Chro. 21.6. But in this place visitation is not referred to men,
but to God.

Now God is said to visit, not only men, but other creatures: so he visited
the earth, God does also visit many ways. 1 The creatures.
graven Images, the vessels of the Temple, and Leviathan. He visits the earth,
when he makes it in an especial manner fruitful, Psalm. 65.9. He visited
Images when he brake them to pieces, and confounded them. He visited the
vessels of the Temple, by causing them to be brought back again into the
Temple, Ier. 27.22. He visited Leviathan the devil, by restraining his power,
and disappointing his malice, Esa. 27.1. But, most usually, Gods visitation is
spoken of in Scripture, as it concerns men. And so God holds two sorts of
visitations: the one is the visitation of all men; the other of some men only.

But especially men: and so either as ^e visits all men in general:
The visitation called the visitation of all men, concerns either life or
death. In respect of life, God is said to visit all men, in that he does by his
daily providence, both give and preserve life till the appointed time: so Job
10.12. And in respect of death, God keeps his visitation, when he causes men
to die an ordinary death at the time thereunto appointed: so Number. 16.29. But it
is not the common visitation is here meant.

or some men in special.
Gods special visitation of some men, is when in a special providence he
takes notice of certain men, and comes among them to work the redress of sin:
and that is here meant. And this visitation must be considered, either
according to the kinds of it, or according to the time of it, here called, The
day of visitation.

For the kinds: God does visit men either with the visitation of justice, God
visits men two ways especially.
or with the visitation of mercy; in wrath or in grace: and the former words of
this Text are true of either of these kinds. For if God visit wicked men by
his special judgments, they will then give glory to God, and commend godly
Christians; whom before, against their consciences, they spoke evil of: which
they will also do much more, if God visit them with his grace, and convert
them.

First then, of the visitation of justice: and so the point to be here observed
is, In justice.
That though God may spare wicked men long, and seem to wink at their faults,
yet he will find a day to visit them for their sins: he will hold a visitation
for their sakes: he will discover their wickedness, and avenge himself on
them, Psalm. 50.20. Eccl. 8. Ps. 37.13. Job 18.20. As they have had their days
of sinning: so will he have his day of visiting; and that not only at that day
of the universal visitation in the end of the world, but even in this life
also.

Use. And this doctrine should especially humble wicked men, and awake them out
of their security; and the rather, if they consider seriously of diverse things
about this day of their visitation:

First, that it shall certainly come upon them, Romans 2.5.

Secondly, that when it does come, it will be a mavelous fearful time with
them: for,

1 God will then discover their sins, and make their wickedness manifest in
the hatefulness of it, Lam. 4.22.

2 God will inflict sore punishments upon them: he will be avenged on them.
The day of their visitation will be the day of their calamity, Ier. 46.21.

3 The punishments determined cannot be resisted: there will be no help, Esa.
10.3. and 29.6. and 26.14.

4 God will not then respect their strength, but their sin. He will
recompense them according to all that they have done, Ier. 50.29, 31.

5 If they escape one judgment, another will light upon them, Ier. 48.44.

6 God will give them the repulse in all they do: even in his service he will
not accept them, Ier. 14.10.

7 It will be a time of great perplexity, and counsel will perish from the
prudent, Mic. 7.3, 4. Ier. 49.7, 8.

8 God will declare himself to be in a special manner against them, Ier.
50.29, 31. Hos. 9.7.

Quest. But what sort of men are in danger of such a fearful visitation?

Answ. All men that live in any gross sin against their knowledge: such as
are the sins of blood, whoredom, deceit, swearing, profanation of the Lords
day, reproaching of Gods people, and the like, Ier. 5.9.29. and 9.9. especially
where all or any of these things be found in them.

First, extreme security in sinning: What kind of men in particular are in
danger of this kind of visitation.
God will surely visit such as are settled in their lees, Zeph. 1.12.

Secondly, such as place their felicity in offending: such as love to wander,
Ier. 14.10. such as do evil with both hands earnestly, as the Prophets phrase
is, Mic. 7.3, 4.

Thirdly, such as continue and persist in wicked courses: such as cast out
wickedness as a fountain casts out water, as the Prophet speaks, Ier. 6.6.

Fourthly, especially when men are shameless and impudent in offending, Ier.
6.15. and 8.12.

Use 2. And therefore men should be instructed and take notice of their
condition and danger, and foresee this day, and use all means to prevent it:
for if men would turn unto God speedily, and repent with sound sorrows for
their sins, the Lord would perhaps be entreated, and forgive the punishment of
their sins Ier. 6.6.

Thus of the visitation of justice. The visitation of mercy follows.

God visits in mercy; and so either in temporal things, as in the case of
blessings, or in case of afflictions.
The visitation of mercy is, when God comes amongst men, to show some special
mercy: and so he visits either about temporal or about spiritual things. In
temporal things he visits either in the case of blessings or afflictions. In
respect of temporal blessings, he visited Sarah, ( Genesis 21.1.) when he gave
her a son. In respect of afflictions, God visits (first) when he sends such
crosses as do try the innocence and sincerity of his servants: so Psalm.
17.3. Secondly, when he lets his people know that he takes special notice of
their distresses and sorrows: so Exodus 4.3. Thirdly, when he sends his
servants special deliverances: and so to visit is to deliver.

Thus of the visitation in temporal things, which is not here meant.

God visits in spiritual things diversely.
The visitation in spiritual things, is the gracious providence of God,
revealing his mavelous and everlasting mercies unto his Elect: and so he
visits man either by Christ, or by the Gospel: He visited his people when he
sent his Son to redeem them, Luke 1.68, 78. and 7.16. And so he does when he
sends his Gospel by his servants to this end, to reconcile the world to
himself in Christ: and thus God visited the world, when he sent his Apostles
unto all Nations, preaching the Gospel. And thus he does visit a Nation, when
he sends the Gospel thither; or a Congregation, when by the preaching of the
Gospel, he gathers a people to himself. There is also a personal and
particular visitation, when God singles out this or that man from the rest, and
converts him. And so in this place, to visit the Gentiles, is to gather out of
the Gentiles a people to his Name, as in the case of this Apostle is said, Act.
15.14. Which place may well expound this: So that the day of visitation, if we
respect whole congregations, is the time when God sends them the powerful
preaching of the Gospel, and does thereby muster and press a people to
himself. And if we respect particular persons, it is the day when God
effectually calls them, and converts them.

Six things may be observed here concerning this visitation of grace.

Doct. 1. First, that till God do visit wicked men with his grace from heaven,
there will be no sound reformation in them. Their natural conscience, the
shame and punishment of men, with the Laws of Princes or Churches, may
restrain somewhat of the excess of sin; but it is Gods visitation only that
can work a sound and through reformation. There is little hope these Gentiles,
which speak evil of Christians, will ever cease till the day of this
visitation: and the reason is plain, because the laws and punishments of men
cannot give a new nature to the offenders, which God in his visitation does.

Use. The use is therefore to confirm the patience of the Saints. They have
endured and must endure the evil words of wicked men: and if any be weary of
their injuries, they must pray earnestly for their conversion. The wolf does
not always devour, nor the fox always deceive, nor the dog always bark:
but yet so long as they keep their natures, they will occasionally discover
themselves. And therefore also Christians should learn discretion, not to
trust worldly men over-farre, upon new pretenses.

Doct. 2. Secondly, hence we may note, that God has his time wherein he will
certainly visit his people: he has his day of visitation. All that God has
given unto Jesus Christ shall be gathered in Gods due time. That which was
believed concerning the gathering of the Israelites out of Egypt into Canaan,
that God would surely visit them, and bring them out, Genesis 50.24, 25. is much
more certainly to be believed of the spiritual gathering of the elect out of
this world, into the Canaan of God. And the reason is, because their conversion
d^pends upon Gods eternal decree: and the foundation of God remains (...),
and he knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. and not one of them shall be lacking
in the season of their calling, Ier. 23.3, 4. The use may be for the
confirmation of our faith, concerning the calling of such Jews, Gentiles or
Christians, as yet sit in darkness and want the means of their calling. God
has his day, and he will provide for the calling of all his Elect, how
unlikely soever the work seem to us.

Doct. 3. We may hence note, that when God has visited a man with his grace,
he is suddenly become another man, he is wonderfully altered from that which he
was before.

Use. The use should be for trial: No Christians can have comfort that they
are visited with the grace of God, if old things be not past with them, and all
things become new. For every man that is visited with true grace, Signs of
such as are truly visited in mercy with true grace.


First, has a new Master: He will no longer serve any strange Lord; for he
has covenanted firmly with God to work righteousness, Romans 6.16, 18.

Secondly, has new acquaintance: He has a new Lord.
He that was wont to walk only in the way of the wicked, is now a companion
only with them that fear God: all his delight is in them, Psalm. 16. and 26.
New acquaintance.


Thirdly, has a new language: he speaks not as he was wont to do. For first,
his Mother Tongue he has utterly forgotten: He cannot curse, and lie, A new
language.
and swear, and rail, and speak bawdily, as he was wont to do, which the
coherence shows here. Secondly, in diverse things he is furnished on a sudden
with language he could never speak before, as in the gift of prayer, he can
now speak to God, and discourse with him, that before was dumb, and opened
not his mouth, Zeph. 3.9.

Fourthly, he has a new heart, Zech. 36.27. A new heart.
Which appears in what he has not, which was wont to be in his heart; and in
what he has, which was never there before. And for the first branch, there is
not in him any of these things following: by the way understand, that these
things are not in him as they were wont to be (that is) they reign not, or
they lie adying: and so,

1 There is not guile there; his spirit is without guile, Special signs of a
new heart.
Psalm. 32.2. which he shows, in that he avoids lesser sins as well as
greater, is good in secret as well as in company, and serves God in his spirit
as well as his body, It has no guile.
and is more desirous to be good than to seem so.

2 There is not malice and passion there, Esa. 11. It is void of malice.
His outrageous and boisterous passions are subdued: of a Lion he is become a
Lamb.

3 There is not covetousnes or the love of the world there, It is void of
covetousness.
1 Ioh. 2.14. Iam. 4.3. he uses the world, but he admires it not. His taste
in earthly things is lost, he savours them not as he was wont to do, Romans 8.5.

And as in these things he is new, so in the furniture of his heart he is in
many things new: for,

First, he has a new mind; he is renewed in the spirit of his mind: A new
mind.
which appears (first) by his capablenesse in spiritual things. He that
lately could not perceive the things of God, 1 Cor. 2.14. now hears as the
learned: he sees in a mirror: he looks and wonders. The veil is taken away,
that before covered him, 2 Cor. 3. Secondly, by the transcendencie of the
things he knows: he can now look upon the very Sun: he knows God, and
Jesus Christ, and the glory to come, and the excellent things given of God,
which the heart of the natural man never perceived, Ioh. 17.3. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10.
Thirdly, by the instrument by which he understands: he sees by faith and not
by reason in many things: he is fully assured in diverse mysteries, where sense
and reason can give-in no evidence.

Secondly, he has new affections: I will instance but in two of them; New
affections.
sorrow and love. He is another man in his sorrows: which appears both in the
causes, and in the remedies of his sorrows. For the causes, he was wont never
to be sorry for any thing but his crosses: now he is seldom sorry for any
thing but his sin. And for the remedies, he was wont to drive away his
sorrows with time, sleep, merry company: but now nothing but good words from
God will ease him. His love may be tried by the objects: and so whom he can
love truly, or whom he does love vehemently. He can love his very enemies,
which he could never do before. And he does love Jesus Christ, though he
never saw him, 1 Pet. 1.9. and so fervently, as he accounts all things in the
world, which he was wont so much to dote upon, but as loss and dung, in
comparison of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3,8,9.

A new behavior discovered diverse ways.
Fifthly, he has a new behavior with him: he is wonderfully altered in his
carriages: which appears in diverse things; First, in respect of the rule of
his life: he walks by rule, Gal. 6.16. He comes daily to the light, to see
whether his works be wrought in God, Ioh. 3.21. This is a sign given by our
Savior Christ in that place. He is careful to order his behavior by the
warrant of the word, Phil. 2.15,16. Secondly, in respect of the means he uses
for the ordering of his conversation. And so he takes presently hold on Gods
Sabbath: he is careful to keep the Sabbath, honoring that day above all
others, and esteeming and desiring it for the employment thereof. Thus the Lord
of the Sabbath says, that it is a sign by which he knows the people,
whether they be truly sanctified or not, Exodus 31.13. Esa. 56.2.6. Thirdly, in
respect of the things he imploies himself in, he chooses the things that
please God, Esa. 56.4. his desire is now in all his ways to do such things as
might be acceptable to God: whereas before he was most careful to please men,
or to satisfy his own lusts. Fourthly, in respect of the manner of his
conversation. In which four things especially shine: first, humility. He
shows that the great opinion of himself is taken down in him: he is lowly
and meek, which he has learned of Christ, Mat. 11.29. Secondly,
affectionatenesse. He loves the name of the Lord, and to be the Lords servant,
Esa. 56.6. He does good duties with good affections. Thirdly, contempt of the
world. He can deny his profit, pleasure, ease, credit, or the like. He is no
more worldly or eaten up with the cares of this life: He does not esteem of
earthly things as he was wont to do, and shows it in his carriage. Fourthly,
sincerity. For now he has respect to all the Commandments of God: he desires
to be sanctified throughout: he is not mended in many things, as Herod was, but
is, in some degree, mended in all things: and besides, he is careful of his
ways in all places and companies: he will obey absent as well as present,
Psalm. 2.12. and there is no occasion of offense in him, 1 Ioh. 2.8. He is
wonderful wary and carfull to provide, that he may not be an offense to any
body: and withal, he is not found to strive more for credit than for
goodness; or more ready to judge others than to condemn himself, Iam. 3.17.

If this description be thoroughly weighed, it will be found to contain the
most lively and essential things that distinguish true converts from all other
men. Nor may the force of any of these be weakened, because many that seem true
Christians, do show the contrary to some of these: for many that seem just to
men, are an obomination to God; and besides, these things may be in the weak
Christian in some weak measure, though not so exactly.

Thus of the third doctrine.

Doct. 4. We may hence note, That there is a peculiar time for the keeping of
this visitation of grace. All the times of men's lives are not times of
visitation: there is a special day of visitation, called in Scripture, The day
of salvation, the accepted time, the due time, the season of Gods grace, 2 Cor.
6.2. That this point may be opened, first we may consider of the acceptance of
this word Day. Many sorts of days noted in Scripture.
It usually notes a natural day, that is, the space of four and twenty
hours. Sometimes it notes the artificial day of twelve hours, from the
morning to the evening: so, Ioh. 11.9. Sometimes it notes time generally: as in
such Scriptures as say, In those days; the meaning is, In those times.
Sometimes it notes some peculiar season for the doing or suffering of some
notable thing: as the special time when God plagues wicked men, is called
their day, Psalm.37.13. Io^ 18.20. So the time when Christ declared himself
openly to be the Messiah, is called his day, Ioh. 8.46. So it is here taken for
that special part of our time of life, wherein God is pleased to offer and
bestow his grace upon us to salvation. Now this cannot be the whole space of a
man's life: Note.
for it is evident, that many men, for a long time of their life, have not at
all been visited of God in this visitation of grace: they have fate in
darkness, and in the shadow of death: and this time is called night, Romans
13.13. Again, others are threatened with the utter loss of Gods favor, if
they observe not a season, as Heb. 3.6, etc. Luke 19.41, 42. Yea lome men have
lived beyond this season; and for not observing it, were cast away, Prove. 1.24,
28. The very term here used, shows it: for when he says, The day of
visitation, he manifestly, by the Metaphor of visiting, proves a limitation of
the time: for all the year is not the time of visitation among men; but some
certain season only.

Quest. But how may we know when this season of grace is?

Answ. How the day and season of grace may be known.
It is then when God sends the Gospel to us in the powerful preaching of it:
when the light comes, then comes this day: when the doctrine of salvation is
come, then the day of salvation is come, and God offers his grace then to all
within the compass of that light. God keeps his visitation at all times, and
in all places, when the Word of the Kingdom is powerfully preached: the time
of the continuance of the means is the day here meant, in a general
consideration. But if we look upon particular persons in places where the
means is, then it is very hard precisely to measure the time when God does
visit, or how long he will offer his grace to them: Note.
only this is certain, that when God strikes the hearts of particular men with
remorse,or some special discerning or affections in matters of Religion, and
so brings them near the Kingdom of God; if they trifle out this time, and
receive this general grace in vain, they may be cast into a reprobate mind,
and into incurable hardness of heart: and so God shuts the kingdom of God
against them, while it is yet open to others, Mat. 3.12. Esa. 6.10. compared
with Mat. 13.14, 15.

Use. The use is for the confutation, especially of the madness of many men,
that so securely procrastinate and put off the time of their repentance, as if
they might repent at any time; never considering that the means of repentance
may be taken utterly from them, or that they may be cast into a reprobate
sense, or that death may suddenly prevent them, or that the times are only in
Gods hand: it is he that appoints, and begins, and ends this day of visitation
at his own pleasure; yea he does not allow to all men, in every place, the
like space of time for the continuance of the means. Against such as presume
on late repentance.
This day lasts, in some places, to some men many years: whereas in other
places the Kingdom of God is taken away from them in a short time; as when the
Apostles in the Acts were driven from some Cities, after they had been in some
places but a year or two; in others, but a month or two; in others, but a day
or two.

If men object that the these on the Cross did delay, First objection
answered.
and yet found the visitation of grace at his last end; I answer four things.
First, that the these was by an unexpected death prevented of a great part of
that time he might have lived by the course of nature: and therefore his
example cannot patronize their resolution, that think they may safely put over
all till their last end, and yet suppose they may live the full age of the life
of man. Secondly, what can the example of one only man help them, seeing
thousands have perished at their latter end, going away without any repentance
or grace? Why rather, do they not fear, seeing so many millions of men are not
visited in their later end? yea, at the very time, the other these repented
not: so that that example can show no more, than that it is possible that a man
should find grace at the end: Note.
it does not show, that it is probable or usual. Thirdly, they should show the
promise of grace, not such men as wilfully neglect the present means, and put
all off to their latter end. What can be concluded from an example, when Gods
promise cannot be showed? If any object that they have a promise (for the
Scripture says, that At what time soever a sinner repents himself from the
bottom of his heart, God will forgive him;) I answer, that this sentence does
contain no such promise: for it only promises forgiveness to them that
repent at any time, Second objection answered.
but it does not promise that men may repent at any time when they will.
Besides, the words in the Prophet Ezekiel are only, In the day that he
turns; which import nothing to prove that a man may repent in any part of his
life when he will. Fourthly, the conversion of the these was without means,
miraculously, by the divinity of Christ, and is recorded among the works of
wonder; such as were, The raising of the dead, the trembling of the earth, the
darkning of the Sun, and the like: and if men dare not be so foolish as to
expect that at their pleasures these other wonders should be done, then neither
may they in that of so late conversion without means.

Third objection confuted.
If others say that men were hired into the vineyard at the eleventh hour, and
were allowed and rewarded as well as they that went in at the third hour; I
answer, that the drift of the parable is only to show, that men that had the
means later than other men may yet be saved: it cannot be stretched to so
large a sense. Besides, being a Parable, it may illustate, but cannot prove
without some other Scripture, to which it serves as an illustration. But my
special answer is this, that those men were never hired before the eleventh
hour: they went in so soon as any came to hire them. And so it is true that
if men have lived till extreme old age, and never had the means till then,
they may have as much hope as they that had the means in their youth: but that
will not warrant the presumption of such, Note.
as being called the third hour, will not go in till the eleventh hour.

Use 2. And therefore the second use should be for instruction, to persuade all
that mind their own good, to walk and work while they have the light, while
it is yet to day, before the shadows of the evening be stretched out, as our
Savior exhorts in the Gospel. We should bestirre our selves to make all the
profit we can of the present means God affords us: for the night may many
ways come upon us ere we be aware. For first, who knows how soon the night
of death may come upon any of us? and then if we have no oil in our lamps, it
will be too late to go to seek. Secondly, the night of restraint may come
upon us: the means may be taken away: we are not sure how long the
Candlestick may continue before it be removed. God may take away good
shepherds, and suffer idle shepherds to succeed in the room of them. Besides,
a mighty storm of cruel persecution may surprise us. Thirdly, the night of
temptation may come, and so, for the time, frustrate the life of the means:
for either God may hide himself from us, and then the Sun will be set to us,
even at noone day; or God may hide the power of the Word from us, even when it
is of power to others, as David imports, Psalm. 119. when he says, Lord hide
not thy Commandments from me: or the Lord may restrain the spirits of his
servants that speak unto us; for the hearts of the Apostles themselves were
not always enlarged in the like manner toward the people, as is imported, 2
Cor. 6.11.

Thus of the fourth doctrine.

Doct. 5. We may further hence note concerning the time of this visitation;
that not only there is a season, but withal, that it is but a short time in
comparison; therefore here called, The day of visitation. Now a day is one of
the least measures of time: and this arises not only from the brevity of man's
life, and the infinite mutations that befall the outward conditions of men, and
the extreme malice the devil and the world bear to the Gospel, but also from
the will of God, who will offer his grace in so special a manner, but for a
short season. Neither is the Lord bound to give account to us of his so doing,
Note.
since we have more reason to admire his mercy that will offer us his grace at
all, than to murmr because it is not offered always: yet this shortness of
the season does the more magnify Gods power, that can so quickly conquer, and
set up the Kingdom of Christ, and gather his elect. And some cause may be
taken from the rebellion of wicked men, who when they despise holy things, and
use them vile, the Lord, to show the account he makes of those treasures,
removes them from them. Thus the Jews lost their glory, Act. 13. When a people
grow obstinate, and will not be wrought upon, that God, that commands us not
to give holy things to dogs, does himself also many times remove his Word,
for the unprofitablenesse and unworthiness of the people.

Use. The use should be so much the more strongly to enforce the care of
speedy profiting by the means, while it is yet called Today, as the Apostle
urges it at large in the third and fourth chapters to the Hebrews. And
withal, it should teach us to bewail the stupidity and carelessness of the
multitude, that in these times of peace and spiritual plenty, have no care to
make any provision for their souls: over whom we may lament, as Christ did
over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. etc. And the shortness of the time should teach
Ministers to labor more diligently: they that are the stewards of the manifold
graces of God should be instant in season, and out of season, and with all
authority beseech, rebuke, and correct; knowing that their time is short and
uncertain.

Doct. 6. We may here note, that the day when God visits a man with his grace,
is a glorious day: The Apostle speaks of it, as of the most happy time of the
life of man: and so was it ever accounted by the godly, Esa. 24.22, 23. And it
must needs appear to be a day of singular happiness, if we consider what that
day brings forth instantly unto the man or woman visited of God. For,

First, in that day God reveals in some measure his love to the visited: which
is the more admirable a benefit, because Gods love is a free love, What
glorious things the day of visitation brings forth.
and it is everlasting, and is also immense.

Secondly, in that day he gives that particular person unto Christ, and gives
Christ unto him, with all his merits, Ioh. 10. and 17.

Thirdly, in that he justifies him, both forgiving him all his sins, and
clothing him with the righteousness of Christ.

Fourthly, in that day he adopts him to be his own child, that was before the
child of wrath, Romans 8.16.

Fifthly, in that day he gives him a new nature, and creates and fashions in
him the Image of Jesus Christ: and so reveals Christ in him* Colos. 3.10.
Galat. 2.20.

Sixthly, in that day he gives him the holy Ghost, never to depart out of his
heart, Gal. 4.7.

Seventhly, in that day he makes him free: so as he is enrolled amongst the
living, and acknowledged particularly of God amongst the Saints. He is written
in the writing of the house of Israel, and is free from all the misery and
bondage he was in before, or was in danger of: and he is henceforwards free of
the house and presence of God: He may feed at his Table, and eat the food of
life. He has access with boldness at all times into the presence of God with
any suites. He is also free to the Communion of Saints, and is restored to the
free and lawful use of the creatures in general, Psalm. 87.5. Esa. 4.4. Romans
8.1. Gal. 1.6. Esa. 25.8. Mark. 11.24. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. Mat. 5.5.

Eighthly, he sets a guard of Angels about him, to attend him all the days of
his life, Heb. 1.14. Psalm. 34.

Ninthly, in that day he is received into Gods protection, in respect of
afflictions: which protection contains in it four things; First, the
withholding of many crosses which do fall upon others. God spares him, as a
man would spare his only son, Mal. 3.17. Secondly, the bounding of the
cross, so as God appoints the measure, which is ever with the respect of the
strength of the party, Esaias 27.7, 8. Thirdly, the sanctification of the cross,
so as all shall work for the best, Romans 8.28. Fourthly, deliverance out of
trouble in due time, Psalm. 34.17.

Tenthly, he assures and estates upon him the evidence of an inheritance that
is immortal, undefiled, that withers not, reserved for him in heaven, 1 Pet.
1.3.

Use.
The use should be chiefly to move godly men to the exact study of those
things, and to all possible thankfulness for Gods visitation: and they should
with much joy remember the very time (if it may be) when God did so visit them:
and if the men of this world keep commemoration yearly of the days of their
birth or marriage, how much more cause has a Christian to preserve in
himself, and to speak of it to the praise of God, the very day and season
when God did first reveal his grace unto him? Note.
Let none mistake me. I mean it not of all Christians: for many Christians did
never observe or know distinctly the very first day of their conversion, being
not called either by ordinary means, or not in such a sensible manner as some
others were, or stood for a time in temporary grace: yet unto all the counsel
is profitable, that taking a day in the sense as it is here, they should often
think of with gladness the season of their conversion, or at least magnify God
for the thing it self, that they are converted.

And besides, all such as enjoy the means of grace, and yet have not felt this
visitation of God, should be much allured to the care of attending upon the
means, and be made desirous to receive the grace of God, and that effectually:
it should much move them that God has now sent them the means, and keeps his
public visitation; and that God stands not upon desert, nor does he make
exception of them, but offers his grace unto all, and desires not the death of
any sinner, yea beseeches them to be reconciled; and to that end has
committed the Word of reconciliation to his servants, with express
commandment that they should be instant, and with all patience instruct men,
and call upon them, and persuade them to save their souls.

Doct. 7. We may yet further from hence observe, That before calling the very
Elect of God may be as bad as any other; as here till God visited those elect
Gentiles, they were railers as well as others: so were the former sins
mentioned 1 Cor. 6.9. found in the very Elect, as the eleventh verse shows.
This appears by the example of Manasses, Mary Magdalene, Paul, and the theife
on the Cross: see further, Tit. 3.3. And the reasons may be easily assigned.
For first, the very Elect before calling, have the same corruption of nature
that other men have; and so all have sinned, and are deprived of the glory of
God: so as there is not one of them does good, no not one. Secondly, they have
the same occasions to sin from the Devil and the world. Thirdly, and were
their natures somewhat better than other men's, yet they would have bin leavened
as they were a part of the lump of infected mankind.

Use 1.
This may both inform us and teach us in diverse things. It may inform us in
three things, ( viz.) about our election and our justification, and about the
Gospel as the means of our vocation. For election, this point proves it must
be free, seeing there was no goodness in the very elect more than in the
reprobate in the estate of nature. And for Justification, the Apostle Paul
uses the consideration of this doctrine in the third Chapter to the Romans, to
prove it cannot be by works. And for the Gospel, we may here see the mighty
power of it: it may well be called the Arm of the Lord, and his power to
salvation, that can thus mightily and suddenly change men.

And it should teach us also diverse things, as it concerns either ourselves,
Use 2.
or other men, or God.

1. For our selves: it should teach us to walk both more humbly all our days,
seeing we have been vile as well as others; and also more watchfully, seeing
we carry about us a nature that has been so rebellious against God: and
besides, we should resist the beginnings of sin in us, as having known by
experience whither sin will lead us, if we give way to it, and dally with it.

2 For others not yet called: it should teach us both compassion of their
misery (it having been our own case) and a care to show all meekness to
all men, in waiting for their conversion, and patience in bearing their wrongs.

3 For God: how can we ever sufficiently love him that has showed such love to
us, even when we were his enemies?

Yea, wicked men that are smitten with terrors for the heinousness of their
sins, should hence confirm themselves against despair, seeing they may
hence learn, that as great offenders as they, have been converted and saved.
2 Timothy 1.15.

There is one thing that from hence men must take heed that they do not
learn; that is, that they abuse not these examples to confirm themselves in
sin: for there is matter to daunt them, and fright them from this
presumption. For first, not all that have lived licentiously, Note.
but some few only have been saved, the rest perished in their own
wickedness. Secondly, of those that were saved, none were saved without
amendment of life and regeneration: and therefore so long as thou live in thy
sin, so long their example fits thee not.

The last Doctrine that may from hence be made, is in particular concerning
the sin of speaking evil of the godly,and the point is, Doct. 8.
That Gods gracious visitation does cure that disease exactly. He will never
rail any more, that is truly gathered unto God in his day of visitation. It is
possible, Christians may speak evil one of another in particular, and it is
lamentable when they do so; but that is upon supposall of particular faults in
those of whom they speak evil. But that a man should speak evil of godly
men in general, because they are godly, with desire he might find them evil
doers, is a vice not found in such as are truly called. Note.
And therefore let such as are guilty of that sin of speaking evil of good
Christians, because they follow goodness, know, That their day of visitation
is not yet come.

Verse 13. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake:
whether to the King, as superior.


FRom the thirteenth Verse of the first Chapter, to the ninth Verse of the
third Chapter, is contained matter of exhortation: and the exhortation is
either general or special. The general exhortation concerns all Christians,
and has been set down from the thirteenth Verse of the first Chapter, to the
end of the eleventh Verse of this second Chapter. Now those words, and those
that follow, to the ninth Verse of the next Chapter, contain special
exhortations which concern some Christians only; namely, subjects, servants,
wives, and husbands. Of the duty of subjects he entreats from Verse 13. to
Verse 18. Of the duty of servants, from Verse 18. to the end of this Chapter;
of the duty of wives, in the seven first Verses of the third Chapter: and of
the duty of husbands in the eighth Verse of that Chapter.

So that the Apostle having taught all Christians before how to behave
themselves in their general calling, he now undertakes to teach some sorts of
Christians in particular, how to order themselves in their particular callings;
and so he teaches them in some things that concern the Politickes, and in
some things that concern the Oeconomickes. Unto order in a Common wealth
belongs the duty of Subjects: and unto household government belongs the duty of
Servants, Wives, and Husbands.

From the coherence, and the general consideration of the whole exhortation,
diverse things may be noted before I break open the particulars of the Text.

1 The Word of God must be the warrant of all the actions of our life: it not
only gives order about the businesses of Religion, but it prescribes matter of
obedience in all our conversation; it tells us what to do in our houses, and
in the Common wealth, as well as what to do at Church, which shows us the
perfection of the Scripture. Theology is the Mistress of all Sciences: it
perfects the sound knowledge of the Ethics, Politickes, or Oeconomickes, and
it should teach therefore in our callings, whether general or particular, to
seek warrant from the Word, which warrant we may find either expressed
particularly, or else employed in general directions: and withal we should
take heed that we make not more sins in any estate of life than are made in
Scripture, and so not affright or disquiet our selves with vain fears that way.

2 The Apostle would have Christians in a special manner careful that they
offend not the laws of the Princes of this world; this appears, in that he
enjoines them the duties of subjects first, and in that they do teach them the
duty of submission, both in this and other Scriptures, with great force and
violence (as it were) of arguments: which shows that they were wonderful
desirous to charge and instruct the Christians so, that if it were possible,
they might not offend that way: and the reasons are diverse and many, why
Christians should be above all men careful to keep the laws of Princes:
first, because by breaking the laws of men they sin against God. Secondly,
because evil minded men have in all ages watched godly Christians, to see
whether they could find any fault by them in the matters of the kingdom.
Thirdly, because if earthly Princes be provoked, it may cause a general
trouble of the Churches; the offenders many times suffer not alone, but many
others upon displeasure raised by them. Fourthly, because if earthly Princes
be good, the careful obedience of their Subjects may encourage them to be
great helps to Religion, even to be Nursing-fathers and Nursing-mothers to the
Churches, 1 Timothy 2.2. Fifthly, because perverseness and contempt, and careless
neglect of the laws of Princes many times proves scandalous, and We must not
offend them that are without, 1 Cor. 10.2. Col. 4.5. Many that were somewhat
inclined to embrace the sincerity of the Gospel, have been cast back, and
profess that therefore they abhor such people, because they observe their
disobedience against humane government, either through indiscretion, or nice
scruples, or perverse wilfulness.

The use may be to reprove the carelessness of many Christians this way, and
that for diverse offenses: as first, for sluggishnesse, in not studying the
Laws of the Countries where they live. Some Christians have a secret jealousy
against the Laws of men, and do in heart think meanly of them; and unless
the equity of the Law stare them in the face, they do, without any further
consideration, securely cast aside the care of it, and rush into the breach of
it. Secondly, diverse Christians do much sin against the holy desire and
direction of the Apostles, in the intemperancy of their words, when in ordinary
discourse they speak with much scorn of the observation of the Laws of men,
which they understand not. A Christian that will not study to be quiet in
respect of the Laws of men, is a singular plague to the Church where he lives.

Doct. 3. We may hence note, that it is necessary for Ministers often to teach
their hearers their duty to Magistrates, and to show the power that Princes
have to make Laws to govern them by. And this is fit to be noted, because of
the strange weakness and perverseness of some Christians, that are much
offended with their Teachers, if they fall upon doctrine of this nature, with
any application to the times, they mistrust them, or censure them to be
temporizers, and to speak out of flattery or wilfulness, or the like
corruption of conscience. I speak not now of such Ministers as plead the
rights of Princes only for their own ends, or in such a manner as they
discover an apparent hatred of godliness it self (for these are worthy to be
blamed;) but even of such Ministers as prove the rights of Christian Princes
with compassion, and love, and meekness, without provoking or reviling
terms: even these, I say, are mistrusted and censured* though we hear and
see in other Scriptures, that they are bound to prove and defend the authority
of the Magistrate in any thing wherein it is unjustly questioned.

Doct. 4. It is necessary we should first be taught our duty to God, and
those things that concern a religious life; and then our duty to man, and in
particular, to Magistrates. This the Apostle intimates, in that he first
instructs them as Christians, and then, as Subjects: and there is apparent
reason; first, in respect of God; secondly, in respect of themselves; and
thirdly, in respect of the Magistrate.

First, in respect of God: for we are first and chiefly bound to God: our first
covenant is made with God; and we are more beholding to God, than to all the
world besides: and therefore again to respect his glory, and obedience to him
in the first and chief place.

Secondly, in respect of our selves and our own profit, we must study God's
Laws as well as the Laws of men; yea, with our first and chief cares, and
accordingly yield obedience: because though by keeping the Laws of men we may
live quietly and safely, and with much reputation, yet all this will not
protect us against the breach of Gods Law: but the hand of God may pursue us
while we live, and we may be damned in hell when we die, for want of a
religious life.

Thirdly, in respect of the Magistrate; he shall have the better Subjects by
it. Good Christians are the best Subjects; and the knowledge of Religion and
Gods Word makes men obey, not for fear or custom, but for conscience sake,
and for fear of God's displeasure. And besides, it makes men humble and
charitable: humble not to think themselves too good to obey; and charitable,
in not suspecting the meaning of Princes further than they must needs. And it
restraines the excessive pronesse of men's natures, that are (without Religion)
apt to speak evil of those that are in authority; and chiefly, because true
Religion will make men pray heartily to God for their Governors: and God
himself does spare, or bless them the rather, for the prayers of the
righteous.

The use should be to inform and teach all sorts of men to take heed of
separating what God has joined together. It is an extreme folly to give unto
Caesar what is due to Caesar, and not to give unto God what is due to God: and
so it were to give unto God what is due to God (if men could do it) and not to
give to Caesar what is due to Caesar. The respect of God's Laws should make us
more careful to observe man's Laws. And contrariwise, it is a fearful case
that many live in, that think they have done enough, if they live in obedience
in respect of the authority that rules them in the places they live in: they
would be much troubled if the Magistrate should be offended with them, but
are never troubled though they provoke God to his face: and they are
maliciously foolish, that would have the Laws of men obeyed, when they are
against the Laws of God; or would have men so rest in observing the just Laws
of men, as not to be so forward and busy about the duties of Religion.

Further, a question may be here asked, Why the duty of Magistrates is not
here set down, as well as the duties of Subjects? I answer, that in those
times of the Apostles, the Magistrates were without; so far from being
Christians, that they did, for the most part, persecute that way: and therefore
they do avoid meddling, or undertaking to teach them that would not learn, but
rather be incensed against such Teachers. Besides, if this and other Scriptures
of the New Testament be marked, we shall find, that the duty of Inferiors is
both more often, and more fully taught, than the duty of Superiors: for in
that new and tender world, great care was to be had, that, under pretense of
Religion, civil obedience, either in the family or Commonwealth, were not
neglected. And it is a truth to be known at all times, that God would not have
Inferiors too skillful in the duty of Superiors, that they might first learn
to show duty, before they called for duty from their Superiors. That may be
one reason why the duty of Masters is not here handled, and in other places of
the Epistles but briefly: for many times the description of the duty of
Superiors is used but as a glass by the Inferiors, to pry into the faults of
those that rule them; and so grow careless, and wilfully stubborn, under
pretense of the faults of their Superiors. But some one might say, that by
this means, if the Magistrates did turn Christians, they were left without
rules of direction, and so they should not know what to do.

Answ. That inconvenience was long before prevented, because the duty of
Magistrates is fully taught in the Old Testament, which unto a godly mind is
of as great authority as the New. Thus of the coherence and general
consideration of all the words. The duty of Subjects follows to be
particularly considered of.

Submit.]

Concerning Subjects, here are five things to be considered of:

First, the proposition of Doctrine, in these words; Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man for the Lords sake.

Secondly, the exposition of it in one case, and that is, the persons to whom
they were to be subject; to all sorts of Governors, to Kings, or any other
Governors.

Thirdly, the confirmation by reason. Ver. 14, 15.

Fourthly, the answer of an Objection, Ver. 16.

Fifthly, the conclusion, Verse. 17.

In the Proposition consider, 1 The duty to be done: Submit. 2 The persons must
do it: your selves. 3 The things to which they must be subject: Ordinances:
where is a double extent, ( viz) to every ordinance, and though they be
ordinances of men. 4 The manner or motive, For the Lords sake.


Submit.]

The duty is to submit unto Magistrates, Romans 13.1, 2. For Explication, two
things are to be considered, Why we must submit? and, How we must submit?

For the first, we must submit; 1 Because God is the Author of Magistracy, Genesis
9.6. Deuteronomy. 16.18. Pro. 8.15. Dan. 2.21. Ioh. 19.11. Romans 13.1, 4, 6.

Object. The Devil is said to be the Prince of this world, and he claims
all the kingdoms of the earth, Ioh. 12.31. Mat. 4.8, 9.

Sol. He is the Prince of this world by malicious usurpation, not by any right.
2 He is so in relation to wicked men, he is their king, but not of others. 3 He
speaks like himself, that is, like the father of lies, when he claims all
the kingdoms of the earth: for no part of the world is his, because The earth
is the Lords, and all that therein is.

Object. But God was angry with the Israelites for their asking of a King; and
therefore it seems it was not his ordinance that there should be Kings.

Sol. He was not angry with them for desiring Governors, for they had
Governors before sent of God, and the very King they had afterward, God gave
them him, Hos. 13.8. but he was angry for the cause of their request. Their
faith and hope was in a manner spent, and they conceived more hope in a King,
than in God that had been such a King to them so many years. 2 Men must be
subject, because God has taken men's consciences bound to subjection, Romans 13.
3 Because Kings are heads of the people, and therefore as members, it is
agreeable that they should submit, and be ruled and guided. 4 In respect of
the benefit men receive by Magistrates, both in outward things, and in matters
of Religion. For outward things, men enjoy public peace and quietness, and
protection by the help of the power of the Magistrate: And for matters of
Religion, earthly Commonwealths are as it were Innes to lodge the Church in,
and Princes power affords protection, so as Christians may more safely follow
their calling; and if they be godly Kings, they are the very nurses of
Religion. And thus of the reasons.

For the second, this Submission has in it six things: the first is, What
Submission has in it, viz. six things.
obedience to their laws and commandments, Tit. 3.1. The second is honor;
Romans 13.7. for they are principalities and powers: as the Angels shine in
heaven, so do Princes on earth. Yea, they are called gods: and so in two
respects; first, as they are Gods Deputies and Viceroyes: God executes a part
of his Kingdom by Kings. Secondly, as they bear the image of God, and his
authority and sovereignty. Now we must perform this honor by reverence, and
by fear of them, and by judging the best of them and their actions, without
conceiving suspicions of them, or receiving evil reports against them, or
daring to speak evil of those dignities and Rulers of the people: and by all
thankfulness for the good we receive by them, acknowledging to the full all
their praises. The third is loyalty, by which we resolve and endeavor to the
uttermost of our powers, to maintain and preserve the persons, rights,
prerogatives, crowns and dignities of Princes. If we must lay down our lives
one for another, then much more for our King and Country. The fourth is piety:
we must pray for them with all manner of prayer, we must make supplications
for Gods blessing upon them, and deprecations for the removing evils from them:
and if they should sin, and God be wroth with them, we should stand up in
the gap, and make intercession for them, and we should give thanks for all the
mercies the Lord shows unto them, 2 Timothy 2.1. The fifth is maintenance: tribute
must be paid, Romans 13.7. Christ himself submitted herein. The last is
subjection to their punishments, Romans 13.4. yea, to their injuries, as David,
Christ, and the Apostles did submit themselves to the injurious dealing of
Saul, Pilate, and the Tyrants, when perhaps they could have made resistance.

Use 1. The use may be first, for terror to the seditious: great has been the
vengeance of God upon Traitors; the earth swallowed up Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram for their rebellion: Absolon was hanged up by the hair between heaven
and earth, as unworthy both of heaven and earth. The words of our Savior
Christ are in an high degree true in this case, He that takes ^up the sword,
shall perish by the sword. And S. Paul says, They shall be damned that resist
the power.

Secondly, it should much humble the better sort of men, for diverse (...) that
are too common; such as are the receiving of evil reports and speaking evil
with too frequent intemperancy, grudging at the payment of tribute and
taxations, evil surmises of the actions of Princes, and the aptness ^o f^vour
themselves in the liberty of doubting, concerning obedience to them in things
indifferent.

Thirdly, all good Christians should be persuaded to make conscience of this
submission, and to that end they should be at the pains to study this
Doctrine, and withal pray to God to direct them and keep them in his fear
and obedience herein: and besides, they should be sure that they meddle not
with the changers, or with the seditious, Pro. 24.22.

Your selves.]

These words may note either the manner of our submission, or the matter: the
manner, thus, Submit your selves: that is, yield obedience uncompelled, do it
of your selves, stay not till you be forced to do it: and so the Apostle
should thereby import, that our submission even to men should be performed
willingly, and so we should willingly and cheerfully obey their laws, honor
and defend their persons, pray for them to God, yield them tribute; yea, we
should without murmuring submit our selves to their punishments, yea,
cheerfully bear their injuries; and so it removes grudging and force from our
submission. But I rather understand the words to note the matter to be
submitted, and that is our selves; not our goods only for tribute or custom,
but our persons also must be at the Princes service; our very bodies must be
submitted both to do the labor tha^ belongs to the beating of any office for
the public good, and to the enduring of any punishment, by the laws to be
inflicted upon the body; and to the employing of the body and life in defense
of the true Religion, and of the King^ person, law and desire, in war or
otherwise. This is manifest by the frequent wars in the Old Testament, both
required and performed: nor may any say, that Christians in the New Testament
are not charged in the business of war; for,

First, It was Christ's maine intendment to form a spiritual Kingdom to God:
he left the state of earthly Kingdoms to the condition they were in before.

Secondly, when the Apostles do in the general require the submission of
Christians to their Magistrates, without exception of their obedience in war
or otherwise, it is manifest that they leave them to the laws of nature, and
the laws of God before.

Thirdly, even in the New Testament this is employed by John Baptist's answer to
the soldiers, Luke 3.14. and the praises of those worthy warriors, Heb.
11.33, 34 (In which place also is a manifest proof for subjection, even in our
bodies, to the sentences of Magistrates, whether just or unjust.) And the
Magistrate's sword, Romans 13.4. is not only a sword of justice upon malefactors
in his own land, but of revenge on the enemies of God, or the Church, or
Commonwealth abroad. And for that saying of our Savior to Peter, He that
takes the sword, shall perish with the sword, Mat. 26.52. it is spoken of him
to whom of the Lord it is not delivered; that is, of him that has not
authority from God, as Magistrates have to command others to take the sword:
and it was spoken to Peter, a Pastor of souls, Put up again thy sword into
his place. That material sword was not for him to use.

Thirdly, note, that it is indefinitely propounded* Your selves; that is, all
of all sorts, no man can be exempted from subjection to Princes. Christians
must obey as well as Pagans, strangers as well as home-borne, while they are
within their gates. All the doubt is, whether Churchmen are to be subject to
secular Princes. The Papists deny it: but we affirm it, and have reason so to
do. First, because the precept is general without exception. Secondly,
because the Apostle says, Romans 13.1. that Every soul must be subject: and
therefore if Churchmen have souls, they must be subject to the higher
Powers. Thirdly, because Princes have executed their authority over C^urch-men,
whereof we have manifest examples in the Word: as, David appointed the orders
and offices of the Levites. Solomon put down Abiathar from the Priesthood.
Josiah burned the very bones of the Priests upon their Altars, and also purged
the Temple, and restored the Passover. Christ himself was subject to the
authority of Princes: he gave tribute, and appeared at their Tribunal. Paul
was subject, and appeared before the Magistrates, and used their power when he
appealed to Caesar, 3. These. 2. Fourthly, there is manifest reason for it: for
if Churchmen be citizens or members of the Commonwealth, then they must be
subject to the Rulers and Laws of the Commonwealth. Fifthly, the doctrine of
the purest times since the Apostles, is agreeable hereunto: for Chrysostom
upon the thirteenth to the Romans, avouches it, that Priests and Monks, yea,
Apostles, Evangelists, and Prophets, must be subject to secular Powers. And
Bernard reasons out of that place th^s: If every soul must be subject, then
yours also that are Churchmen: who has ex^epted you from this All? Siquis
tentat excipere, con^tur decipere. Agnoscit dominum suum and ^^er^.
If any man go about to except you, he goes about to deceive you. And Pope
Gregory acknowledges the Emperor Maurice as Lord of him and the Clergy.

They object, that the ecclesiastical government is greater than the secular,
jure divino: and therefore Churchmen ought not to be subject, because the
Superior ought not to be subject to the Inferior.

Ans. The ecclesiastical government is superior to the secular government,
and it is inferior to it: it is superior, in respect of the rule over
themselves in the things of the kingdom of heaven, by means appointed of
Christ, viz. the Word and Sacraments, etc. but it is inferior, in respect of
civil subjection in the obedience or submission that concerns body and goods.
The Prince must be subject to the Church in matters of faith and godliness;
and the Church subject to the Prince in matters of this life, and civil
subjection. How far Princes have power in cases ecclesiastical, will be
showed afterward.

They object, that diverse Councels do except the Clergy from the Bar and
Tribunal of Princes; and diverse Popes have discharged the Clergy of such
subjection.

Answ. Councels and Popes cannot decree against the Word of God: besides, they
judge and determine in their own case; for what were the Popes or Councels but
Clergymen? Moreover, the Popes assumed a power to themselves, which was never
given them: for they were so far off from having power to free their Clergy,
that they had no power to free themselves, 2. These. 2.7.

They object again, and say, that it is absurd the sheep should rule and judge
the shepherd: Princes are but sheep, and Priests are the shepherds.

Answ. Magistrates are not sheep in all things, but in spiritual things, in
matters of faith; and so Ministers are shepherds to feed their souls: but in
civil things, the Magistrate is the shepherd, and the Clergymen sheep,
because citizens or subjects.

But they say, that Clergymen are freed by privilege from the Emperors, and
by the Laws of the Empire.

Ans. If that be so, then their privilege is, Iure humano, not divixo.
Secondly, they plead a false privilege: for in things in question they were
never privileged; that is, in matter of obedience to the Law, or in matter of
punishment in things criminal. Thirdly, if it were so, then they are subject
to Princes: for he that grants a privilege, is greater than he to whom it is
granted. But the last and best answer is, that Princes can grant no such
privilege. Can a father free his son that he shall not honor him? or a
husband free his wife that she shall not be subject to him? No more can a
Prince free his subjects from obedience or subjection, because the subject is
tied by the Law of nature and by Gods Law, which Princes cannot undo.

Thus of the third point.

Fourthly, when he says, Submit your selves, he does not require them to
submit those things to the pleasure of the Magistrate which are not theirs.
Every godly Christian has some things which are not his own, but Gods, and
those he must not subject to the will of Princes: as his Religion, his Faith,
the Word of God, the Sacraments, his prayers: for those are none of Caesar's,
and therefore must not be given to Caesar.

Thus of who, or what must be submitted.

To every ordinance of man.]

There are two senses given of these words: some understand them of Magistrates
themselves; some of the Laws of Magistrates. It is not easy to tell how to
restrain the text to either of these; for both are true, and the former
included in the latter, and the latter employed in the former: and therefore I
purpose to handle the words according to the sense in both respects.

First then, we must be subject to every ordinance of man; that is, to all
sorts of Magistrates. And the Apostle seems to expound it when he says,
Whether it be to the King, or to the governors, as importing that they were
the ordinances he spoke of before. Now concerning Magistrates as they are here
entreated of, these things are to be noted.

First, that Magistrates are an ordinance of men; and so they are in diverse
respects, because magistracy is a thing proper to men. Secondly, in respect of
the end, because it is ordained for the good of men. Thirdly, because the
choice of the kind of Magistrates has been for the most part left unto men:
for God has not tied all nations to a kind of government, but left them for
the most part free: and therefore some governed by Kings, some by Emperors,
some by Consuls, some by Dukes, some by Princes or Earls, or the like.
Fourthly, because in the New Testament Christ did not at all employ himself in
settling any order for the corporal government of his Church in this world, it
being specially his intent for the raising of his spiritual kingdom, and the
ordering of the government that concerned the souls of men and their full
subjection. Only we must take heed of one sin here, and that is, that we
conceive not the Magistrates are man's ordinance, as if man appointed or
ordained, or invented them, for that is contrary to express Scripture, that
calls all those earthly powers Gods ordinance: they are by divine institution,
Romans 13.1, 2, 3. Pro. 8.15. 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Dan. 4.14, 22.

Ob. Hos. 8.4. it is said, They made them a King, but not by me.

Sol. God disclaimes not the ordinance: for he himself had appointed Jeroboam
to be King (of whom the Prophet speaks;) but he disclaimes the manner or the
choice of him as it was done by the Prophet, which chose him in a mutiny, and
without respect to Gods will.

Ob. Nimrod was the first that brought in Magistracy, and he is taxed for it in
Genesis 10.9.

Ans. The words are, Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord. Now these
word^ have been interpreted either properly thus: He was a hunter of beasts
before the Lord, that is, which beasts he would sacrifice before the Lord; or
meta^horically, that he was the first that set up Monarchies of the thraldom,
appointing Laws and a form of Government: A^^^ Ezra.
and this he did by instinct from God, for the protection of the Church and
Commonwealth, against the injuries of those that dwelt near them.

Secondly, say that he is in these words condemned as a hunter, that is, a
tyrant, as the word is taken, Lament. 3.5. Ierem. 16.16. Ezech. 32.30. and c.
and that it is added, Before the Lord, to note, that he did oppress men by
manifest violence openly, shaking off all fear even of God himself; yet it
follows not, that his power was not of God: the manner of getting it was
evil, but the power was good.

Thirdly, it will not follow that Magistracy is evil, or not of God, because
it had an ill beginning, if it were granted, that it did begin in Nimrod: For
so the translation of Joseph into Egypt, and the Kingdom of Saul, and
Jeroboam, etc. should be evil, and not of God: for they had ill beginnings.

But lastly, I answer, that Nimrod was not the first beginner of authority, or
power, or government, though he were of that kind of Governors; for there
was a hunter both Ecclesiastical and Civil before; yea and there were Cities
in the world before, therefore there must needs be government and Governors:
Cain built a City, yea and God himself ordained Magistracy after the flood,
when he said: By man shall his blood be shed, Genes. 9.6. In short, Nimrod was
the author of the Babylonicall tyrannical Monarchy; not the author of the
Magistracy, or civil authority over others.

Object. Many Kingdoms and Officers are gotten by evil means.

Solut. So many men get goods by usury, or robbery; yet the things are of God.

Object. But we see, that Magistrates are chief, and set up by men.

Solut. So the fruits of the earth are gotten in by the labor and care of men,
are they not therefore of God? Ministers are chosen of men, is not their
calling therefore of God? Second causes do not exclude the first.

To conclude, the Magistracy is the ordinance of men subjectively, 1 Subjective.
as it is enjoyed or borne by men; and objectively, as it is employed amongst
men, 2 Objective.
and in respect of the end, as it is for the good of men. 3 (...).
But the true word Creation or Ordinance shows it is Gods work, or
institution, 4 (...).
or appointment.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that we are bound to submit our selves to the
ordinances, that is, to the office, or calling, or authority: he does not
mention the persons so much as the calling; because oftentimes there is found
in the persons vices, and some causes of not obeying: but in such again, we
must not consider the person, but the ordinance, or calling it self.

Thirdly, we must submit our selves to their ordinances, that is, to all sorts
of Magistrates. Now all Magistrates may be distinguished, either in respect of
1 Jurisdiction, 2 or Religion, 3 or Objects, 4 or Affairs, 5 or Office, 6 or
Adjuncts, 7 or Dignity. First, in respect of Jurisdiction: some are superior,
that they have none above them but God; as Emperor, King, Dictator, Senate,
etc. or inferior, which is appointed by the superior; as are all inferior
Governors and Officers. Secondly, in respect of Religion; some are believers,
as David: some infidels, and so are either such as persecute Religion, as
Herod, Julian; or tolerate it, as Trajane. Thirdly, in respect of Objects, some
are Togati, Governors; some are Armati, Marshall men. Fourthly, in respect of
Business, some are Councillors, some Senators, some Judges, etc. Fifthly, in
respect of Office, some are (...). Lawgivers; some are (...), Law-keepers, as
Justices and the like. Sixthly, in respect of Adjuncts, some are lawful and
just, and good Magistrates, who come by their power by lawful election or
succession, and do exercise it well: others are are unlawful or bad
Magistrates, as having (in respect of the manner) attained their places by
unlawful means, or do exercise their authority with cruelty or partiality,
or the like. Seventhly, in respect of Dignity: some have dignity and not
authority; as such as enjoy the titles of Dukes, Earls, Lords, Knights,
Esquires, or Gentlemen: some have dignity and authority also, as such of any of
the former kind, or the like, as are likewise called to any office of rule and
government, or service. Now we must be subject not alone to the King or
Superior, but to governors under them, as the Text shows. We must be subject
to Prince that are Infidels, as well as to Christian Princes; for such were the
Magistrates for the most part when the Apostles writ: So we must be subject to
unworthy, or vicious, or tyrannous Princes, as well as to godly, and virtuous,
and loving Princes, which the word here translated Ordinance, imports: for it
signifies creation. And so Magistracy is a creation in diverse respects; First,
because God was the author of it, as he was of the world. Secondly, because
Magistrates are raised beyond expectation. Thirdly, because many times God, as
a righteous Judge, suffers many m^n to get into high places of honor and
authority, that have no worthiness, or fitness, or stuff in them, more than
he would have to rule or furnish it self: even to such Magistrates also must
we submit. Only for the last distinction, there is a difference for such as
excel only for titles of dignity, and have not authority: we must
reverence and show as civil respect unto them, as belongs to their places: but
we are not bound to submit our selves to them by way of obedience; for that is
due only to such as have authority as well as dignity.

Thus of subjection to Magistrates: subjection to the laws of Magistrates
follows.

Concerning the laws and ordinances of Magistrates, two things may hence be
gathered.

First, that we must subject our selves to such laws and ordinances as men
that are in authority do make: we are bound to this subjection, even to men's
laws: that we are bound, the very words of the Text prove: howsoever, or in
what respect we are bound, is to be distinctly considered. For man's laws do
not bind as God's laws do: for God's laws do bind not only the outward
man, but the inward man also, even the very consciences more distinctly and
particularly. The laws of men bind only the outward man properly: for God
reserveth the conscience of man only to his own command. Now whereas the
Apostle says, Romans 13.5. We must obey Magistrates not only for fear, but
for conscience, it is thus to be understood: First, that men are not only
driven to obedience of Magistrates for fear of punishment, but even by their
own conscience, ever testifying that they ought to obey them. Secondly, that
the conscience is bound to obey Magistrates by the virtue of God's
Commandment, that requires this obedience of men, not simply in respect of the
laws of men.

Secondly, that we are bound to obey every ordinance of man, that is, all sorts
of laws made by men. This needs explication: for it is evident by diverse
examples in Scripture, of godly men that have refused to obey in some cases:
and the Apostles have left a rule, Acts 5. that in some cases it is better to
obey God than man. And therefore I would consider of it distinctly, in what
things they have no authority to command, and in what things they have
authority.

For the first. In some cases Magistrates have not authority: and if they do
command, we are not bound to obey. For every Magistrate stands bound himself
to look to it, that he transgress not in these cases: In what things the
Magist^ate is not to be obeyed.
He is bound to the law of nature as he is a man, and to the law of God as he
is a Christian, and to the fundamental laws of the Kingdom as he is a
Prince or Magistrate: so that he must make no laws or ordinances against any
of these Laws, especially he may command nothing forbidden in God's Word, nor
forbid any thing that is commanded in God's Word: some instances will be given
afterward.

For the second. In what things they may make laws, In what things they are to
be obeyed.
there is no question in these cases I now maintain: as if they make laws in
mere civil things for the good of the Commonwealth, there is no doubt but
we must obey: the express words of the Text require our submission; and so i^
they make laws to enjoyne their subjection to do such things as are commanded
by God in Scripture, or to forbid the doing of such things as are expressly
condemned in God's Word.

There are other cases that have been by men of diseased minds doubted of: but
yet subm^ssion is by the Word of God required in them, as well as in other
cases. For instance: Men ought to submit themselves in these cases following;
as first in civil things, if men's laws be in some sort injurious, as in
matter of men's goods. A Prince makes laws to lay too heavy taxations upon the
subject, yet the subject must submit: and therefore the ten Tribes did sinfully
to refuse Rehoboam, and rebel against him for that reason. If any object that
Naboth did not yield to Ahab when he desired his Vineyard; I answer first,
that some difference must be put between the occasions of Princes, I mean
their desires, and their laws: the inordinate desires of Princes are not
always necessary to be fulfilled. Secondly, Naboth was tied by the Law of God
to keep his inheritance: for God had tied every man to keep his ancient
inheritance, and to marry within his Tribe, that so it might be clearly
manifest of what stock the Messiah should come, Lev. 25.23. Number. 36.7, 9. But
this was an ordinance peculiar to the Jewish government.

Secondly, in Church Matters the Magistrate may command, and the Subject must
obey. Now because many questions are moved about the Magistrates authority in
Church-affaires, and about Churchmen, therefore I will here proceed
distinctly, and show first what they cannot do about Religion, and then what
they may do.

These things they cannot do, that is, they have no power or authority to
meddle in them: as,

First, In what matters ecclesiasti^^ll ^he Magistrate has no power.
the civil Magistrate has no power nor authority to execute the office of the
Church-Minister: he may not preach in the Church, or administer the Sacraments,
or execute the censures of the Church, Heb. 5.5. 1 Cor. 7.10. The presumption
of Jeroboam and Uzziah herein was punished, 1 Kings 13. 2 Chronicles. 26.

Secondly, he has no power to make laws that shall bind men to believe his
devices, as matters of faith and doctrine: for these things depend upon the
will of God, not of Princes.

Thirdly, he has not power to bring in any idolatrous service into the
Church, as a part of Gods worship, Esaias 29.13. Mat. 15.19. And therefore
Jeroboam was condemned for the Calves, and Ahab for Baal, and Ahaz for the
Altar of Damascus, and all the Kings for the high places.

Fourthly, he has no power to set up a Ministry in the Church, that for the
substance of the calling was not instituted by Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. Heb.
5.5. All Ministers of the Gospel have their mission from Christ.

In what things he has power ecclesiastical.
Thus of what they cannot do: what they can and ought to do follows. For it
is certain, that in many things the Magistrates authority may and ought to be
extended in spiritual things for the good of the subject: and therefore, in
respect of Religion, they are said to be nursing fathers and nursing mothers.
The Apostle says, Romans 13.5. of the Magistrate, He is the Minister of God for
thy good. Now the good of the Subject is not only a civil good, done civilly;
but done spiritually, a spiritual good, which is the greatest good of the
Subject, and therefore to be most sought for by the Prince. And as in respect
of their civil good he must provide that justice may flourish in the
Commonwealth: so in respect of their spiritual good, he must provide that
Religion may flourish in the Church: and to this end,

First, he may and ought by his laws to enjoyne the profession of the true
Religion, and the confession of faith according to the Word of God.

Secondly, he may and ought to provide to the uttermost of his power, that the
Churches may be furnished with able Ministers, and that they likewise may have
power to call and ordain other Ministers, and dispose, or depose, as may be
best for the good of the Church.

Thirdly, he may and ought to provide by his laws and order, that the Word of
God may be sincerely and purely taught, and the Sacraments rightly administered,
and the censures of the Church executed according to the Word.

Fourthly, he may and ought by his laws to forbid, and accordingly to punish
blasphemies, heresies, idolatry, sacrilege, and the like.

Now that the godly Princes have had power in these and the like cases about
Religion is plain: Moses by the appointment of God gave order to Aaron and the
people in the business of Religion: Joshua appoints circumcision, Josh. 5.
proclaims the law of God, Josh. 8. renewes the covenant with God, Josh. 24.
David disposes of the officers about the Tabernacle, 1 Chro. 23. and brings
home the Arc, 2 King. 6. Solomon dedicated the Temple: Asa the King made such
a law as this, that whosoever would not seek the God of Israel should die:
Ezechias brake down the brazen Serpent, 2 Kings 18. commanded the Priests to
cleanse the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29. and to celebrate the Pas^over; and commanded
the Levites to help the Priests, because the Priests were not then clean, 2 Chronicles. ^0. Josias destroyed the Idols, sent his Princes to see to the restoring
of the House of God, appointed the Priests to their Ministeries in the Temple,
etc. 2 Chronicles. 34. and 35. And whatsoever power the Princes had in the Old
Testament, the same power Christian Princes have in the New Testament. Many
testimonies might more be added. Solomon deposed Abiathar: Iehosaphat sent his
Princes to see that the Priests and Levites did teach the Law of God in their
cities: But these may suffice.

Quest. But may the Magistrate lawfully make or appoint any orders to bind the
Subjects about the worship of God?

Ans. The Magistrate may and ought to determine the circumstances of Gods
worship, which are not determined in the Word: he may not appoint any more
duties as a worship to God, but as a keeper of the first Table. He may give
order for the circumstances in or about the doing of religious duties in the
Church: as, he may appoint the time, place, and outward form of prayer,
administration of the Sacraments, fasting, alms, or the like. These things
must not be done tumultuously, or confusedly, but in order, and that order the
Magistrate may prescribe.

Actions about Gods w^rsh^^ of two sorts.
All actions about Gods worship are of two sorts: some differ not from the
worship it self, but are things that God especially looks at in his worship,
such as is the purity and san^tity of the heart: some belong to the worship of
God, as he^ps and instruments for the better pe^forming or declaring of that
worship. The first sort of actions must be prescribed only by God: who only
can give what he requires; and of this sort whatsoever is not commanded, is
forbidden: no man may add, or take away, or change in these things. The second
sort are not all of a kind neither. Quoad (...). Quoad (...).
For some are necessary in respect of the being of them; as that there should
be Churches, marriages, or that the Sacraments should be administered, etc. and
these also must be instituted of God only: but some are contingents, and
belong to the manner, how or when, as may best agree to the condition of each
particular Church. Now these last God has left to the Church, and so to the
Christian Magistrate to dispose of, so as God's truth, Christian simplicity, or
public edification be not hindered or violated.

Quest. But here might some one say, In these things the matter was appointed
of God: the Magistrate meddles only with the manner or the circumstances. But
may Magistrates by their own authority, bring into the Church things that for
matter or manner were never appointed by God, and so enjoyne their own
inventions to be observed by the subject?

Ans. Inventions of men are of diverse sorts: for,

First, some are impious and contrary to the Word of God in their own nature;
such as are, The invocation of Saints, Whether any inventions of men ought to
be obeyed.
selling of Masses and Indulgences, the forbidding of marriage and meats,
making of Images, consecration of Altars, the use of holy water, prayer for the
dead, monastical vows, worship of relics, the exalting of one Bishop to be
over all the world, and such like: these may not be commanded: they are the
leaven of Pharisees, and will spoil all, and therefore may not be brought in
by any authority.

Secondly, other inventions of men there are that concern only things that in
their own nature are indifferent, neither commanded nor forbidden of God: in
these the Magistrate has power to command, but yet not an absolute power: for
he may offend in commanding, and subjects may offend in obeying. And therefore
I distinguish thus: If the Magistrate command things indifferent in their own
nature to be used, Gal. 5. Mat. 15. Command. 2.
and profess that he requires them with opinion of worship, holiness, or
merit, or necessity to salvation, then the Magistrate sins in so commanding,
and the subject sins in obeying: but if the Magistrate command things to be
used which in their own nature are indifferent, and profess to disclaim the
opinion of holiness, worship, merit, or necessity, then it is lawful to obey
his commandments in such cases. So then, traditions brought in with an opinion
of necessity, etc. are unlawful: but traditions brought in for order and
decorum, are lawful, 1 Cor. 14.40. and this is apparent. For if God have left
the ordering of things indifferent to men, why may not Magistrates appoint that
order? And if Christians may take in or bring up customs in the time of God's
worship, why may not the Magistrate do it by his authority? If Christians may
make an order for what garments women should wear on their heads in the time
of God's worship, why may not the Magistrate make an order, what garments
Ministers should wear in the time of God's worship? If subjects may of their
own heads appoint a feast of their own making, at the time of God's feast, as
they did their love feasts in the Primitive Church, and withal appointed the
action or gesture of kiss^ng one another; why may not the Magistrate by his
authority bring in an action or gesture, it being such a gesture as God has
neither commanded nor forbidden? Finally, if in things indifferent a private
man may use things indifferent of his own head, why may he not use them which
the Magistrate commands, and when he commands him? and if he may refuse to
use some things only because of his own will, why may he not refuse them
when the Magistrate forbids him?

But that this point may be more clear, I will set down a Catalogue of
inventions of men used for religious ends and uses, without any commandment of
God, and that both before the Law, and under the Law, and under the Gospel.

First, before the Law we read of these things.

The laying of the hand under the thigh in swearing, Genes. 24. etc.

Jacobs pillar erected, as a religious monument, Genes. 28.18.

Secondly, under the Law we read of these instances.

The Altar of the two Tribes and an half, Ios. 22.10. and 27.30.

David's dancing and playing on all sorts of instruments and songs before the
Arc, 1 Chronicles. 13.8. and 15.16. and 2 Samuel 6.14.

David's wearing of a linen Ephod, the garment of the Levites, 1 Chr. 15.27.

David's appointing of the offices of the Levites, and his bringing in of the
new order of singing men into the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 24. and 25.

The use of sackcloth and ashes in fasting.

Solomon built another Altar besides the Altar of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 7.7.

Hezekias kept the Passover at a time not appointed by the Law, and the people
kept it seven days longer, 2 Chronicles. 30.2, 3, 27.

About the celebration of the Passover it is manifest, that the godly Jews
brought in of their own heads,

1. The gesture of sitting, which Christ himself also used.

2. The solemn use of the cup, of which mention is made also, that Christ used
it, Luke 22.17.

The Rechabites abstinence not only from wine, (according to the Law of the
Nazarites,) but from husbandry and houses, Ierem. 35.

The Jews had every where Synagogues which were not commanded by the Law, Luke
7.5.

Mardocheus appointed the feasts of Pur or lots.

Judas Maccabeus appointed the feast of Tabernacles, which our Savior graced
with his presence.

Thirdly, under the Gospel.

Our Savior Christ approved the gesture of sitting, and the Cup at the
Passover, the Jewish Synagogues, and the feast of Tabernacles.

The Apostle Paul used the Jewish ceremonies, when they were no more the
ordinances of God; as Circumcision, shaving the head, purifying, vowing,
contributing, yea sacrificing, Acts 21.

Abstaining from meat sacrificed to Idols. The observation of the Jewish
Sabbath. The women's coverings, 1 Cor. 11. The Love Feasts. The holy kiss.
Quest. But here might some one say, Things indifferent in their own nature,
in the uses of them not inconvenient, may be commanded by the Magistrate, and
subjects must obey; but what if the Magistrate command some things to be
observed, as are very inconvenient and burdensome, though they be not
unlawful?

Ans. Things inconvenient, even in matters of Religion, may be commanded in
some cases: as when it is to redeem a far worse inconvenience. For of two
evils of punishments, the Magistrate may take the less, as well as any other
private man. And if that subjects to prevent worse inconveniences, may use
inconvenient ceremonies, then may the Magistrate, to prevent worse
inconveniences, command inconvenient ceremonies. If the Apostles may use the
inconvenient Jewish ceremonies, Circumcision was a burden, Acts 5 10* and
these burdens (...) necessary things, v. 28. and they were (...) to do well
if they observe them, v. 29.
then the Apostles may injoyne for a time the use of inconvenient ceremonies:
as they did make ordinances about things which yet they called burdens, Acts
16. And Moses may make an ordinance about the use of a bill of divorcement,
which yet was a grievous inconvenience to redeem a worse inconvenience. But if
Magistrates do appoint inconvenient things, and burden the Church with them,
when there would be no great inconvenience to the Church if such things were
not, then such Magistrates must give their account to Christ for so doing; but
yet the people are bound to obey still, because we cannot be freed from our
subjection laid upon us by God, except it appear to us, that they command not
only an inconvenience, but a sin, as all sound Divines confess.

But that this point may be distinctly understood, let us survey the
inconveniences amongst us usually pretended, and then enquire whether such
things may be, viz.

There be five things are thought each of them to make the inventions of men
very inconvenient and burdensome, and so not to be used: as, Pretended
inconveniences by hum^ne Laws surveyed.


First, if there be no necessary use of them.

Secondly, if they swarve from some pattern may be had of such things in
Scripture.

Thirdly, if they be things have been or are abused to superstition.

Fourthly, if they have signification put upon them by men.

Fifthly, if they be scandalous in the use of them.

For the first: It is manifest that there was no necessary use of the Jewish
ceremonies: For, now the substance and body was come, there was no need of
those shadows, and yet they were used by the Apostles.

For the second; in ceremonial and circumstantiall things, it is not always a
sin to swarve from examples in Scripture. It does not follow that Christ did
sit at the Lords Supper, and therefore it is unlawful to kneel: For I can
show that godly men have swarved from the show of patterns, that did serve to
bind stronglier than that example, or such like can do. As for example: The
godly Jews did sit at the Sacrament, when yet the gesture imported in the Law
was standing. And this sitting at the Passover was manifestly an invention of
man: For it was no where commanded. Yea and the Christians that now object the
example of Christ in the gesture, yet do not hold themselves tied to follow
the example of Christ neither in diverse circumstances about the Sa^rament; as,
that it was received at night, in a chamber, after supper, in unleavened bread,
only by Ministers, not by women, etc. nor in the matter of gesture in other
things, as, that he sat and prayed: and yet none of them pleads that it is
necessary for our imitation. And further it may clearly be showed, that the
commandment of God about circumstantiall and ceremonial things, might in some
cases be transgressed without sin: which shows that those precepts did
never in Gods intendment bind the conscience absolutely, as moral precepts in
things substantial did. As that every man should be circumcised the eighth
day, was Gods commandment: yet the children of Israel were not circumcised for
forty years in the wilderness, Iosuah 5.5, 6, 7, 9. The law was, that None
should eat of the shewbread but the Priests: yet David did eat and was
blameless, Mat. 12.^. The Priests in the Temple did work or profane the
Sabbath, as it is translated, Mat. 12.5. and yet were innocent. It was the law
that None must sacrifice any where, but on the one and only Altar of the Lord:
yet Solomon sacrificed on another altar, for the reason mentioned in that Text,
2 Chronicles. 7.7. 1 Kings 8.64. In Hezechias his time they kept the Passover
neither at the time, nor in the ceremonial manner, as was required in the Law;
and yet they sinned not, 2 Chronicles. 30.2, 3, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 27. To abstain
from meats sacrificed to idols, was enjoined by the Apostles, Acts 15. and yet
that did restrain Christian liberty, being a thing indifferent: and afterward
to eat meat sacrificed to idols, swerved from the pattern of that ordinance.

For the third. It is also manifest, that things that were abused to
superstition and idolatry, had notwithstanding a lawful use when their abuse
was removed from them. Acts 15.1.
As for instance: The Jewish ceremonies, especially Circumcision, were
notoriously abused by the perverse Jews, who held very corrupt opinions about
them; and yet the Apostle Paul did not make any doubt to use them. Again, the
meat sacrificed to idols, when it comes out of the idols temple, is pronounced
to be clean, and not polluted, by the Apostle Paul. Besides, it is manifest,
our Temples, Bells, Chalices, and such like, have been abused by idolaters,
and yet there is not any question made of the lawful use of them by Divines on
either side.

That this point may be a little more understood, we must confess that in the
time of Moses Law, whatsoever thing had been upon or about the idol, was
infected and made unclean by the idol: but withal we must understand that
the idol, even in those times, did never pollute all things that were of that
sort which were before it: it did pollute that very thing in individuo, not all
in specie of the same sort. And further, we must now know, that the idol is
nothing, and can infect nothing of it self out of the idolaters use; and so,
that those laws about pollution of idols are ceased: for the Apostle Paul
shows that the very meat that was sacrificed to idols or devils, out of the
idols temple, was not polluted, but was lawful to be used. It was not near an
execrable thing, as was the Babylonish garment in the time of the Law in
Achan's possession. Jacob erected a Pillar, as a monument that concerned the
true God; and yet it is manifest that the Gentiles have most idolatrously
abused themselves in that course of erecting Pillars, Lev. 26.1.

For the fourth point. Such ceremonies as had signification put upon them, were
notwithstanding lawful, as is manifest by the consideration of most of those
ceremonies mentioned before: the Altar by Jordan, the Cup used at the Passover,
the Cover on the heads of women, and the love feasts with the holy kiss: and
so had all the Jewish ceremonies.

Now for the last thing, which makes things indifferent, with us scandadalous:
we are not left without witness from the Scriptures in such cases; but that
ceremonies known to be scandalous, were notwithstanding used. For it is
manifest concerning the Jewish ceremonies, that they were scandalous in the
usage to the Gentiles, and in the omitting to the Jews, Acts 21. 21, 22, 27,
28. Gal. 2.3, 9, 12. But that this point of scandal may be distinctly
understood, diverse rules are to be considered of.

First, Rules about taking and giving scandal at humane ceremonies.
that the angring or bare displeasing of other men, is not the offense or
scandal condemned in Scripture, as not only the words in the Original show,
but all sound Divines grant. A scandal is a stumbling block, that occasions a
man to fall from grace in the profession of it, into sin or error.

Secondly, that to give offense by doing any thing which is simply evil in it
self (as David did by his adultery and murder) this is out of all question
abominable.

Thirdly, that the offense of Aliens is to be regarded, that is, we must not
do any thing by which men that are not yet converted, may be hardened from
the liking of Religion: and so offense must not be given either to the Jew, or
to the Grecian, 1 Cor. 10.31.

Fourthly, that when the authority of the Magistrate or Church has determined
concerning the use of things indifferent, we are not now left free, nor are
bound to look at the scandal of particular persons; but must make conscience
of it, that we offend not the Church, by working a greater hu^t or loss to
the Church, than the particular hurt of private persons can extend unto. In
such cases as this the Apostles rule holds: If any man seem to be
contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. And
we are bound in this Text of the Apostle Peter, to obey the humane ordinances
of men in authority; from which obligation other men's offense cannot free us.
And the Apostle charge us to look to it, that we offend not the Church in
prescribed ordinances,and that we be careful not to offend private men in free
ceremonies.

Fifthly, that where ceremonies are left free and indifferent, and have no
commandment to restrain their use, or enjoyne it, there are men to redeem
the offense of their brethren with no other price, than the loss of liberty in
things indifferent. The Apostle Paul faith rather than he will offend his
brother, he will never eat flesh while he lives, 1 Cor. 10.8.13. He does not
say, He will never preach the Gospel while he lives, or never receive the
Sacraments while he lives: a necessity lay upon him to preach the Gospel,
and to yield to the use of all lawful things to get his liberty, whosoever be
offended.

Sixthly, that where the person that takes offense is wilfully ignorant, and by
all means avoids instruction, and will not have the patience to be taught,
such offense is not to be regarded. Thus our Savior Christ teaches
confidently his doctrine of eating his flesh, though the Capernaites were
offended: and some of his Disciples turned Apostates about it, being such
persons as would not abide the exposition of his meaning, John 6.52.

Seventhly, the like is to be said of such persons as take offense out of envy
or malice, as the man in the Parable that envied Christ's bounty, or the
Pharisees that out of malice were offended at Christ, Mat. 20.15. Mat. 15.14. 1
Pet. 2.8.

Eighthly, that in things that have proved scandalous, yet we are not bound to
lose our liberty, till the weak brother declare his offense. Meat sacrificed
to idols was offensive to many in all countries, yet the Apostles rule is, Eat,
and make no question, unless one say, This is meat sacrificed to idols, 1 Cor.
10.25, 28.

Thus of the five things that make things indifferent to become inconvenient,
and yet not unlawful. I might add some other things; as that a man may
practice and use such ceremonies for the advancing of the substantial part of
Gods worship, as he himself has every where preached against, Acts 22.21.
and in some cases has refused to do, Gal. 2.5, 24. Again, that such
inconvenient ceremonies may be imposed upon such persons and Churches as never
received them before, Acts 15.19, 38. and 21.25.

Quest. The last question is, Whether we must submit unto Magistrates, when
they command unlawful things?

Ans. A great difference is to be put between things commanded by
Magistrates, concerning the lawfulness of which was doubt, and such things
concerning which the Subject is assured, that they are unlawful. It is clear,
that if I know the Magistrate commands a thing unlawful, I must not do it,
because in that case I am bound to obey God, and not men: but suspicion or
doubting of the lawfulness of things, is no discharge for obedience. It is
true, that in things indifferent, which I may do or not do, I must be fully
persuaded; and whatsoever is not of faith is sin: but I suppose, that the
Inferior is not discharged from his obedience in any case, but when he knows
the Magistrate commands a sin. Infinite confusion would follow in the family,
and Commonwealth, and Churches, if the conjectures and suspicions of the
Inferiors might warrant their refusal of subjection.

Secondly, though I must in things unlawful refuse to obey, yet I must look
to the manner of refusal: I must take heed that I be not guilty of that sin
of speaking evil of dignities, 2 Pet. 2. Jude 8. Which prohibition was given
them when the Magistrates were wicked men, and did command unlawful things.

Thus of the doctrine and explication of these things that concern man's
ordinances, and their authority in the extent of them. The uses follow.

Use. The use may be for reproof; and so both of those that offend in the
excess, and of those that offend in the defect.

First, some men attribute too much to the ordinances of men, and that diverse
ways: as when they account men's ordinances (in the observation of them) to be
a worship to God, or to be meritorious, or to be necessary to salvation, or in
themselves simply to bind consciences: and also when more care is had for the
keeping of men's ordinances than of Gods Commandments: or when Gods service is
hindered, or transgressed, or neglected for men's traditions.

Secondly, some men offend in the defect: as,

1. Such Christians as deny obedience to the ordinances of men in the
indifferent or only inconvenient things.

2. Such Christians as in the manner show no scruple, nor fear, nor trouble of
mind for breaking Gods express Law, in requiring obedience to Magistrates,
while they are ignorant whether it be a sin or no to obey; and yet on the
other side are extremely fearful and troubled in themselves, to vary from the
advice or example of such men as they account godly, or fathers to them or
others in Religion, and so are more fearful to break men's traditions than
Gods Commandments. Tradition is ill, as well when it comes from good men, as
when it comes from bad men.

3. The Jesuits, that maintain that horrid doctrine of deposing, or
murdering of Princes; so far are they from obeying them. Persons rather to
be confuted by strokes than by arguments, as men that offend not only against
the Laws of God, but the Laws of Nations, and the Law of Nature.

Hitherto of the things to which they must submit themselves, viz. to every
ordinance of man. The motive or manner follows.

For the Lords sake.]

These words do import both the cause and the manner of submission: they must
submit for the Lords sake: and so,

First, there are diverse things in God, which should move Christians to all
possible care of pleasing and obeying their Magistrates: as, First, Gods and
men's Magistrates were ordained of God, and therefore for his sake that set them
up we should obey them. Secondly, Gods Commandments: God has required our
submission, and therefore for the respect of the duty we owe to God, we
should obey them. Thirdly, Gods Image: Magistrates are little Gods in the
world, they resemble Gods sovereignty, or Majesty, and therefore because they
are like God, we should obey them even for so much of the similitude of God as
we may behold in them or their authority. Fourthly, Gods mercies: we are
infinitely bound unto God, and therefore for his sake, even for the love we
bear to him we should do this which he requires. Fifthly, Gods glory: God
shall get much honor, and his religion will be well spoken of, if Christians
live obediently: and contrariwise, if Christians be not obedient, God may be
much dishonored thereby, and great storms of affliction may be brought upon
the Church by the wrath of Princes. Sixthly, the judgments of God, because
they must give account to God for their behavior toward Magistrates, as well
as for their behavior toward God himself.

Secondly, these words may note the manner of obedience: we must obey Princes
for Gods sake: not only for conscience sake, but even as if we did obey God
himself, and with a due respect unto God; and so it may make also a
limitation. We must so obey man, as we still have respect unto God, so as
nothing be done against the Word or pleasure of God.

Use. The use should be therefore for instruction, to teach us to look
carefully to our selves in our submission, and so to obey,

First, from the heart, because God is entitled to this service.

Secondly, with fear, because God will be an avenger of disobedience and
resisting of the powers.

Thi^dly, though our subjection should be to our loss, or discredit, or
danger, or hurt any way; yet for the Lords sake we should do it. There is
motive enough in God, though there were not worthiness in the Magistrate, or
recompense to us.

Again, it serves to show the hatefulness of those transgressors that resist
the power, and will not make conscience of it to submit themselves to the
ordinances of Magistrates. For this is to resist God himself, this is (...):
and God will certainly be a revenger of this disobedience, it being his own
cause as well as the Magistrates.

Besides, it serves to inform us concerning the admirable power and wisdom of
God, in effecting the subjection of man, to authority of Magistrates. All men
naturally affect to excel, and like not superiority in other men. And besides,
it is needful that one man should govern and keep in order millions of men,
disposed as before. Now this well points at the cause of this order and
su^jection, which is the respect of God. God naturally has planted in the
hearts of men a fear to rebel or disobey, even for fear of God himself more
than Princes: and besides, God has made man to see by experience, that he does
defend the persons and rights of Kings, by revenging the disobedience of men:
this natural conscience keeps under natural men. Now though the Apostle
would have godly men to obey for the same reason, yer it i^ upon an higher
ground: for godly men are instructed by the Word of God to obey Princes; yea,
herein differ^ the obedience of the godly from the wicked, that the godly man
obeyes for the mere love he bears to God,and the wicked only for fear of
vengeance from God: so both obey for an higher reason than the respect of
Princes themselves, even for the Lords sake: the one for the love of God and
the care of his glory, the other for fear of his punishments and judgments.

Lastly, it shows men must so acknowledge the glory of Princes, as that
especially we have respect unto the glory of God, who is King of Kings: we must
obey Kings in the land, so as God be not disobeyed.

Thus of the Proposition, the Exposition followe^.

The Apostle labors to clear this doctrine from diverse scruples might be
conceived by Christians, whether they arise from the diversity of the sorts of
Magistrates, or from their soveraigntie. For the sorts; he shows they must
obey Magistrates of all sorts, both superior and inferior; the highest and
those which are subordinate to them, both Kings and Governors also for their
soveraigntie. He teaches them to observe the supremacy of Kings and Monarchs.

In general, we may learn from the Apostles care, to prevent mistaking
herein, that he accounts it a pernicious thing to err about the authority of
Princes and their Gover^ours. And experience shows it to be pernicious
sometimes to the persons of Kings, who are often by treason murdered upon
wicked and erroneous grounds; and sometimes to the subjects, who draw upon
themselves not only fearful sins, but miserable punishment also, by erring
herein: sometimes it is pernicious to religion it self, and religious causes,
giving not only scandal, but procuring desolation in the Churches through
errors, sometimes on the left hand, and sometimes on the right hand.

Whether to the King.]

It may be questioned, whom the Apostle means by the word King? Such as
understand the Epistle to be written to the Jews, may perhaps conceive that
the Kings that ruled by deputation in Judea should be meant, such as were
Herod and Agrippa. But in as much as the Jews were scattered through the
Provinces, and those provincial Jews were most in quiet: and in as much as
for the reasons before given, it is likely that the Epistle was written to all
Christians, both Jews and Gentiles; therefore by the King he meant Caesar.
And then a more scruple arises, for the Romans hated the name of a King, and
Caesar was an Emperor: to which diverse things may be answered.

First, that though the present Governor was an Emperor, yet the Apostle
knowing that the most monarchies in the world would rest in the title of King
in all ages, therefore he uses that title that may concern the most of the
Elect in all ages.

Secondly, that though amongst the Romans the title of King was not used; yet
the Grecians, in whose language he writ, did familiarly use the word which we
translate King. (...).


Thirdly, the Apostle might have respect unto the signification of the word, as
unto a word which was most effectual to note the highest dignity among men.
For it notes him that is the stay or foundation of the people, or the
Commonwealth: and though ambitious men sought new titles as higher, yet the
Apostle knew that this was most majesticall and honorable: for the term of
Emperor, in the signification of it, may agree to any subordinate ruler, who
governes or commands other men.

Fourthly, it may be that the Apostle, knowing the hypocrisy of those
Emperors (who only disclaimed the name of Kings to avoid the hatred of the
people, and yet sought the full right of Kings, and so to destroy the liberty
of the people) gives the name they sought in substance, though not in term.
Where by the way we may note, Hypocrisy.
how hateful hypocrisy is to God, and how vain it is. God will unmaske even
Kings, if they d^ssemble with him: He that tries the hearts and reins
judges according to truth, and will not be deceived with pretenses. Though men
durst not charge Caesar to affect the Kingdom, yet God dares, and will require
at his hands the ambition of his heart. And if God will not bear with
dissimulation in Kings, much less will he bear it in meaner men: he hates
hypocrisy and fained pretenses, and painted shows wheresoever he finds it,
which should teach us all to labor for a plain and upright heart in all
things, to direct our words and carriage, according to the true intent of our
hearts. For besides that God will plague men for their dissimulation, which
cannot be hid from him, it falls out usually, that such as use dissembling are
perpetually suspected (all their fair pretenses notwithstanding) as those
Caesar's were.

Lastly, the Apostle may name Kings, to prevent rebellion in the subjects,
which either should fear such as affected the title, or live under such as
professed themselves to be Kings; and so the meaning is, that he would have
them obey even Kings, how hateful soever naturally that kind of government
did seem unto them.

It may be that the Apostle mentions Kings, as the last kind of government;
a Monarchy being in many respects the most excellent form of government, as
being such a form of government as comes nearest to the similitude of God, who
is not only one in nature, but in government also; and is most agreeable to
nature, which does affect unity, as well in the body politic, as in the body
natural. But I let this pass as a question belonging rather to the Politics
than to Divinity, to be discussed at large.

Thus conjecturally of the reason, why the Apostle uses this term.

Concerning Kings, I propound these things to be considered of.

First, the original of Kings.

Secondly, the excellency of Kings: both these tend to work in man the care
of obedience to them and their Laws.

Thirdly, the indefinite manner of propounding the term, showing that this
submission belongs to all Kings.

Fourthly, the uses of all.

For the first. It is not unprofitable to consider how men came by degrees,
Original of Kings.
at length to subject themselves to this government of Kings.

First, man by the instinct of God, and by the nature given him, Homo natura
est animal politicum.
tends to society. Of all creatures man is unaptest to live alone. Man's
language shows that he was made to society: and man's disposition shows that
it likes not any estate that must be removed from the knowledge and
conversation of other men. He that can live without society, is either better
than a man, as is God; or worse than a man, as is a beast.

The first kind of society was oeconomicall, as household society: Diverse
kinds of societies.
where was first a society between man and wife; and thence by propagation
grew the society to a full household, by the coming in of children and
servants. And hence was the first form of government; where the father of the
family was the Head and Ruler.

The second kind of society was a Village or Town, which contained in it the
government of diverse houses or families: and this was occasioned either by
increase of posterity, or for prevention of harms, or out of necessity for
supply of necessaries. At the first, a Village or Town contained (as is
thought) only the several branches of the same family, that is, when men
lived so long, such as were descended of their blood, and were ruled by the
chief and first of their blood. Afterward, strangers of other families that
were fewer in number mingled with them, to avoid the danger of wild beasts, or
the injuries of other men: yea, one of the words used for a village is derived
from a word that signifies a Fountain, and so imports, Pagus a (...).
that necessity drew men to dwell together, that so they might enjoy the
benefit of nature for water, which in the Countries first planted was not
universally to be had, but one Well must serve diverse households: and so the
Springs of water was one cause to bring men to this kind of society and
dwelling together.

The third kind of society was a City, which consisted of the people of many
Villages: and into this society men came both for commodity and necessity. For
commodity, as namely for trades, and the education of children, and the
exercise of Religion, and the administration of justice: for necessity, that so
they might be strengthened against their enemies; and to this end they walled
and ditched about their Cities: as also to keep in offenders that they might
not flee, and to keep out such as were banished that they might not return:
and in this society first began the government of Kings. For from the beginning
it is thought, that every City had a King, as a Monarch to rule and defend it,
as appears in Genesis, There was a King of Sodom and Gomorrah: and so every
of the other Cities had their different Kings.

Fourthly, when men increased so fast that one City could not hold the people
which lived in it, then began Countries and Provinces: and at length the whole
Nation consisting of many Cities became subject to one King: and afterward by
conquest or marriage, diverse Nations yielded obedience to one King.

Now the ends why humane societies became subject to Kings and to superior
Powers, were the Commonweal and the benefit of the people so united: for
power was given to Kings, that so men might be protected in the practice of
virtue, that peace might be preserved among the Inhabitants, that the common
privileges might be maintained, that courses for raising of riches and trades
might be held. Each man did look to his own wealth, but the King was to look
to the Commonwealth.

And thus much of the Original of Kings. Their excellency above other men
follows.

The excellency of Kings above others.
Secondly, it must needs appear that Kings are of all men most excellent, in
respect of their outward condition and calling;

1. Because God himself was a King, and is delighted to rank himself among
men of that degree.

2. Because their creation is from God: they are a special sort of men raised
in a peculiar manner to their places by God, who pleads it as his glory that
Kings reign by him, Prove. 8. Romans 13.

3. Because God has communicated to Kings the image of his own Majesty, and
printed in the natures of men a natural form of Kings, as the Vicegerents to
God himself.

4. Because a divine sentence is in the mouth of the King, as Solomon faith:
their judgment is God's judgment: and God would have the people to believe
that what they say in judgment, God himself says it.

5. Because they have a power above all other men; of which when I come to
treat of the word Superior.

6. Because they take accounts of all other men, but give accounts only to God.

7. Because they have the treasure of honor: they give all the honor which is
possessed by any of their subjects, and so do they all offices of honor and
government in their Dominions.

8. Because they are the Basis, or the foundation, or stay of all their
subjects; who are maintained in Religion, Justice and Peace, by their means.

And thus of their excellency.

Thirdly, it is to be noted that the word is set down indefinitely: and so it
shows that this honor belongs to all Kings in the substance of it, whether
he be a King of one City, or many; whether he be a Jew or Gentile, a Christian
or Pagan, Heretical or Orthodoxall, Caesar or Herod, young or old, virtuous or
vicious.

Use. Fourthly, the use should be therefore from hence, to enforce upon our
hearts an increase of care and conscience, in acknowledging the honor and
right of Kings, and in loyal and sincere observance and obedience to their
Laws. It should not seem grievous to men to be held under the yoke of
obedience, and to be subject to others that are but men as well as themselves.

There are many things may encourage the hearts of subjects, without grievance
to bear the superiority of Princes, and not to be discontented: for,

First, Kings have nothing but what they have received.

Secondly, if Kings do wrong, they must give account to God for all the wrongs
that they have done.

Thirdly, God has charged Princes to be careful of their subjects: he has
given them laws though they be Kings.

Fourthly, Princes subjects are first bound to God: and therefore they are not
tied to Princes in any thing contrary to Gods Word.

Fifthly, though the outward man be subjected to the power of Princes, yet
their consciences are free: in spirit they are subject only to the God of
spirits.

Sixthly, the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, and he turns them
as he pleases, Prove. 21.

Seventhly, though God has set up Kings, yet he has not put down himself,
but he rules in all these things: he is King of heaven, Dan. 4.34. and he is
King of all the earth, Psalm. 47.8. He is a King immortal, 1 Timothy 1.12.

Eighthly, whereas thousands of subjects cannot attain to the sight of the
King, nor obtain any particular suit from him, nor can the King provide for
them in particular: yet may they go to God and Jesus Christ, who is King of
righteousness and peace; they may get great suits in heaven, and shall be
provided for in all needful things, Psalm. 23.1. and 5.3. and 48.15. and 74.12.
and 80.2. Esaias 49.10. Mat. 2.6. Revel. 7.17.

Lastly, though they be subjects now in respect of earthly Princes: yet in
respect of God they are anointed to be Kings themselves, and shall receive a
Kingdom better than all the kingdoms of the earth. The Princes of this world
are but mortal Kings; but every godly man is a King immortal, he partakes
the title of God himself. God is a King immortal by nature, 1 Timothy 1.12.
and he is a King immortal by adoption and grace: and besides, the poorest
subject that is a true Christian, entertaineth the King of glory every day,
Psalm. 24, 7, 9.

As superior. [(...)]

The word signifies one that has above the havings of other men: and so the
King has more than all his subjects, not only in matter of maintenance, but
also in matter of authority and supremacy: this his having in supremacy is
here meant.

That the King is supreme, is so manifest by this text as it needs no proof:
Princes are called therefore in the Old Testament, Heads of the Tribes, or of
the people, to signify that they were not only higher in place, but had
sovereign and supreme authority over all the people.

This supremacy of Kings gives them authority in all causes both
ecclesia^ticall and civil, and over all persons, Churchmen as well as
Laymen, as has been proved at large before in the former parts of this verse.

The use is therefore to coufute the damnable pleadings of the Popes of Rome
and their adherents, that claim to have the right of supremacy above the
Kings and Princes of the world. There are diverse manifest arguments to
overthrow the supremacy of the Pope.

First, this express text, that acknowledges the Kings to be superior; this
was the Doctrine in the Apostles times.

Secondly^ it is more to be noted, that Peter himself, who by the opinion of
the Papists had the height of place in the Church, that even Peter (I say) is
so far from claiming this to himself, that he directs Christians to
acknowledge supremacy only as the right of Kings, yea and flatly forbids
dominion in the Clergy, 1 Pet. 5.5.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ at large beats down this primacie, or supremacy
in his Apostles and all Churchmen, showing that they had not authority as the
Kings of the earth had; it must not be so with them: and much less had they
authority over the Kings of the earth, Matthew. 20.25. Luke 22.25.

Fourthly, every soul must be subject to the higher powers. If every soul,
then Churchmen if they have souls must be subject, and therefore may not
rule, Romans 13.1.

Fifthly, Christ and the Apostles never claimed any such supremacy, but showed
the contrary by their doctrine and practice.

Sixthly, it is made the express mark of that man of sin, that he lifts up
himself above all that is called God, that is, above Magistrates, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

This has been the constant Doctrine of the ancient Fathers.

Origin Homil. 7. in Isai. faith, He that is called to a Bishopric is not
called to principality, but to the service of the Church.

Tertullian lib. ad Scapul. faith, We reverence the Emperor, as a man second
to God, and the only one that is less than God; and also, Tertullian de Ido.
Capite 18.

Nazianzen orat. ad subdit. and Imperat. All men must be subject to higher
powers.

The express testimonies of Chrysostom and Bernard upon Romans 1 3. have been
quoted before, read Bernard. de consid. lib. 2. Capite 4. Hilar. ad Anx.
Chrysostom. homil. 42. in Joan. Ambrose in 2 Timothy 2.4.

Secondly, this should confirm every good subject to acknowledge and maintain
the Kings supremacy, and willingly to bind himself thereunto by oath: For
the oath of supremacy is the bond of this subjection, and this oath men must
take without equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation; Bernard.
Epist. 170.
yea it should bind in them the same resolution was in Saint Bernard: who
faith thus, If all the world would conspire against me, to make me complot any
thing against the Kings Majesty, yet I would fear God, and not dare to offend
the King ordained of God.

Or unto governors.]

By governors, he either means all other sorts of Magistracy besides a
Monarchy, or else such Magistrates as in a Kingdom have commission from the
King to hear and determine causes, or any way to rule and exercise any Laws
of the King: and it is the Apostles meaning that Christians should be subject
to all sorts of Magistrates, of what form or dignity soever, from the highest
to the lowest, so as it should be no more lawful for them to disobey an
inferior Magistrate, than to disobey the King: so far forth as the inferior
Magistrate has authority, and does proceed according to his commission in
lawful things. This point needs not to be further handled, having been
entreated of in the general doctrine in submission to all Magistrates before.

And thus of the exposition: the confirmation follows.
Verse 14. Or unto governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.


THe Apostle in this verse and the next confirms the exhortation, partly by
reasons, and partly by answearing an Objection: the reasons are in this verse
and the next, and the prolepsis, verse 16.

The reasons may be referred to two heads; the one taken from the calling of
Magistrates, verse 14. and the other from the will of God, verse 15. The
calling of Magistrates is considered two ways: First, either in the author of
it, and so they are sent of God. Secondly, or in respect of the end of it,
which is partly the punishment of the wicked, and partly the praise of them
that do well.

As they that are sent of him.]

Of him, either may be referred to the King, or to the Lord: If it be referred
to the King, then it shows that all inferior Magistrates receive all their
authority from the King; they have no more authority than other subjects, but
as it is bestowed upon them by the King: and withal it shows a secret in all
well governed Monarchies, which is, that the King reserves the giving of
honors and offices to himself, which more obliges the Underofficers and
Magistrates to him; and he is thereby the better acquainted with the State of
the Kingdom. But I am rather of the mind of those Interpreters that refer it
to the Lord. And so the sense and doctrine is, That both the Kings and the
Governors are sent of God: it is God that prefers them, whatsoever the second
causes be. Though election or succession seem to make a King, and Kings make
Governors, yet have we been taught that none of these come to their places
without the providence of God, Prove. 8.15. Now God keeps this business in his
own hands to see to the calling of Magistrates, because of the service by them
he can execute: For a great part of his Kingdom is managed by their
deputation. By them God scourges the sins of the wicked, yea of the whole
world, either by suffering them to be public miseries, or by guiding them to
punish offenders by the sword of justice: and by them he many times brings many
common blessings upon worlds of people, as the next words show.

Uses. The uses are diverse, some particular, some general: In particular it
should teach us,

First, by prayer to seek Magistrates of God: subjects might get great
blessings of this kind, if they would pray hard for them. For God it is that
sends Magistrates.

Secondly, with patience to bear the wrongs of evil Magistrates, seeing there
is a hand of God in it.

Thirdly, with thankfulness to give the praise to God for good Magistrates,
seeing it was he that sent them as a common blessing.

Fourth^y, in all suits about the lives, or duties, or successions of
Magistrates to trust unto God: For though we know not where to be provided in
earth, yet God can send one from heaven as it were. The word sent imports, that
God can raise him up beyond expectation.

In general it should stir us up in all things done by outward means in
this world, to strive for the skill to find out, and acknowledge Gods hand and
providence in it, seeing in these things which are apparently done by means
for the most part, yet Gods providence is in it.

Thus of the Author of their calling: the end follows.

For the punishment of evil doers.]

Diverse things may be noted from hence.

First, that in all Commonwealths in the world there will be evil doers:
though there be a King and Governors, and Gods Commandments lie hard upon
men's consciences, yet there will be evil doers. And the point shows the
horrible strength of the poison of natural corruption, which no Laws of God
nor man, nor experience of evil, nor example can restrain or dry up: and
withal it shows their solly and weakness that will forsake Christian
assemblies for the wickeds sakes; whereas the Apostle improves, that even in
Christian Commonwealths there will be this part of a Magistrates virtue to
punish the evil doers, such as are known to be so: and therefore such curious
persons must go out of the world, if they will go from evil doers. And
withal it should breed in men a greater care to look to themselves, that they
be not infected by them: since there is no society of men in which this
plague-fore of sin runs not, we must redeem the time, because the days
are evil. And further, it should breed in us a loathing of this wicked world,
of this present evil world, and a desire of heaven; since we shall never live
in a place where the people will be all righteous, till we come to heaven. And
finally, it confutes their folly, that from the vitiousnesse of some men,
conclude the faultiness either of the doctrine, laws, or government.

Secondly, that evil doers must be punished, Romans 15. and great reason: for
first, evil doers in any society are infectious: many may be defiled by them.
Secondly, they work much disquietnesse, and trouble humane societies. Thirdly,
if they escape without punishment, they may bring down the judgments of God
upon the place where they live.

Uses. Which may serve for terror to other offenders. First, the very sight of
Magistrates should affright them, considering that God sent those very
Magistrates to punish them. It imports that though they escape the hands of
men, they shall not escape the hands of God. Secondly, it should teach men if
they would live out of the danger of the Magistrates punishment, to take heed
they be not evil doers.

Quest. Now if you ask who are evil doers:

Who are branded for evil doers.
Ans. I answer: Such as live in notorious offenses, such as are swearers,
drunkards, whore-mongers, railers, thieves, idle persons, murderers,
Sabbath Breakers, sowers of discord, and the like. The original word does
point at some special sort of offenders: For, naming evil doers, such
especially must not escape, as

1. Invent evil where it is not. 2. Or sin not out of ignorance, but
wilfully. 3. Or are leaders of other men to evil. 4. Or make a trade of
offending by custom in sin. 5. Or study how to do mischief, gathering
together, as things might further their evil courses.
All this may be included in the word (...).

3. Thirdly, there are from hence many to be blamed, that speak evil of such
as take any course to reform abuses.

4. Fourthly, Magistrates must look to their calling and Gods Commandment, to
see abuses amended, or else they must account to God for it.

3. The third doctrine which may be noted from hence is, That all evil doers
are to be punished without respect of persons; they are to look upon men's
works, and not on their persons: great men must be punished if they be evil
doers as well as poor men, many men as well as one man: yea, if good men do
evil, they must bear the punishment of their sin, Christians as well as
Pagans.

4. That evil doers are not accounted safe members of any society, and
therefore are distinguished from good subjects, as not fit to be of that order.

5. That such as transgress the laws of men are accounted by the Apostle
evil doers, as well as such as transgress the Laws of God: for he here
speaks especially of such as are evil doers in respect of humane ordinances,
which may be a warning to such as securely live in the transgression of the
commandments of Christian Magistrates: and withal, it may impair the honor
of their condition that live in the breach of the Laws of God without
repentance: For if it be so hateful a thing to be a breaker of the laws of
men; in what case are they in that have so grossly broken the Laws of God?

6. That punishment of evil doers is in the power of the Magistrate: private
men cannot reform public abuses, they may pray for reformation, they are not
to execute it but by authority.

7. That there are diverse evils which men cannot punish: for the Magistrate can
only punish evil doers, that is, such as offend in word or deed: evil
thinkers they cannot meddle withal. Which may warn Magistrates to be wary
how they punish men only upon suspicion, or presumption, without proof that
they are evil doers: and withal, it shows that God has reserved the
judgment of men's works also to himself. For God hares the sins of the heart
as well as the sins of life: and therefore since for these evils men answer
not to men, they must provide to answer before God.

8. That a Magistrate that punishes sins does but execute the commission he
received from God: he was sent of God to that end, and therefore may comfort
himself in the Lord, how ill soever his execution of justice be spoken of
among men.

Thus of the punishment of evil doers.

The second end of the sending of Magistrates is for the praise of them that
doewell.

For the praise of them that do well.]

By such as do well, he means such as in public societies live without
offense, and carry themselves honestly in their places; especially such as are
profitable, and do good to others, whether it be to the minds of men, by
instructing or reproving; or to the bodies or estates of men, by works of
mercy or righteousness: and among these he means especially such as

1. Are Inventers of good, the first Authors of the public good. 2. That do
good daily and frequently. 3. That study how they may do all the good they
can, and do employ all the helps and furtherances of good they can.
Here may many things be noted from hence.

First, that all that are members of public societies, are bound to be
careful to do good to others; and to live so that the Church and Commonwealth
may be the better for them. Which should much humble such Christians as live
and do little or no good, and should quicken in all sorts of good Christians a
desire to serve the public: we are not set here to do good to our selves
only, but also to others.

Secondly, that in this world it is not to be expected from men, that all that
do well or deserve well should be rewarded by them: he says, For the
praise, not, For the reward; as importing, that many a man may deserve well,
that shall never have recompense from men. And this arises partly from the
corruption of Magistrates, that are not careful to dispose preferments or
recompense to such as are worthy, and partly from the insufficiency of any
earthly greatness to do it. For great men can reward all their servants or
friends: but no King can give the honor or preferment that is due to all his
subjects that deserve well. Which should teach us partly to do good without
hope of reward from men, and partly to quicken our hearts to the admiration of
the reward that God gives in heaven: we should provide to be his subjects, and
then we are sure to have a full reward of well-doing in heaven.

Thirdly, that to be praised, or to have a good report among men is a great
blessing of God: and therefore in the Old Testament, blessing and praise i^
expressed by one word, Prove. 28.20. And this may appear to be so, 1. Because
God himself seeks praise from his creatures, and accounts himself honored
by it, Psalm. 50.23. Ephesians. 1.6, 12, 14. 2. Because praise is a part of the
glory of God shining upon a man. 3. Because it is in Scripture preferred before
things of great price, as great riches, Prove. 22.1. and precious ointment,
Eccles. 7, etc. 4. Because it so much refreshes a man's heart, it makes his
bones full, Prove. 15.35. 5. Because an ill name is noted as an extreme curse,
Job 18.17. and in many other places.


Uses. The use is, first, to comfort godly men, and to make them thankful if
God give them a good report here: but especially it should comfort them to
think of the praise they shall have at the last day. For if it be a blessing
to be praised of men, what is it to be praised of God? If it be such a comfort
to be praised by a Magistrate before the Country, what is it to be praised of
Christ before all the world at the greatest and last Assizes? If praises be
good in this world, where there is mutual vaunting, and they may be
blemished; what is it to have praise in that day that shall last for ever
unstained? If it be such a comfort to be praised of a Magistrate for some one
good deed, what shall it be to be praised of Christ for all that ever was good
in thoughts, words, or works?

Secondly, it should teach men to seek a good report, and to do all things
that might have a good report, Phil. 4.9. As a man may seek riches, so he may
seek and desire a good name, Prove. 22^.

But the praise of men is then unlawful and unlawfully sought,

Wherein it is unlawful to seek the praise of men.
First, when men do things only to be seen of men, and have no better
respects than applause, Mat. 6. 1 Thessalonians. 2.6.

Secondly, when a man praises himself with his own mouth, Prove. 27.2.

Thirdly, when it is challenged of others, and men will not stay till God give
them a good report, Ioh. 8.49,50.

Fourthly, when men seek praise only for the show of goodness, and are not
good in deed.

Fifthly, when men seek praise of men, but seek not the praise of God, or the
praise that comes from God only, which is tried in this, that they will not
do duties that God only cares for, or that are disgraced in the world, Romans
2.28. Ioh. 5.44 and 12.42, 43.

Otherwise it is lawful to seek praise: and there is an infallible sign to
know whether praise be not ill for ^s, and that is, if praise make us more
humble and more careful of sound holiness, and do refine us: then praise is
lawful and a great blessing, when it is like the refining pot, it melts us and
makes us better, Prove. 27.21.

Further, if praise be so great a blessing, then an evil name must needs be a
great curse, when it is for evil doing: and if it be so evil to be dispraised
of men, what shall it be to be dispraised of God, not for one, but many sins;
not before a few,but before all the world; when it shall be not to mend a ^^n
(as the Magistrates reproof may be) but to his eternal confusion?

Thus of the third Doctrine.

Doct. 4. It may hence be noted, that the best men need praise, and therefore
God provides that they shall be praised: even such as do well need to be
commended. 2 Cor. 12.11.
And this may appear both by the comfort they take, if they be commended,
Prove. 15.30. and by their earnest desires to clear themselves if they be
dispraised, as we see in David, Christ himself, and the Apostles, especially
the Apostle Paul.

Use. And therefore the use should be to teach men to acknowledge the good
things done by others, and to give them praises, especially if they be godly
and humble men: it may do them much good, and greatly both comfort them and
encourage them. This made the Apostle Paul so rejoice in the Philippines, Phil.
3. ult. It was no flattery. It is flattery in some other men, if they do
commend others for their own ends, or with selfe-praises, or without daring to
reprove their faults, or to get praise to themselves, or for any other corrupt
end, especially when our praises are to such as are public instruments of good
in Church or Commonwealth. And it is a course of singular use to be held in
private families, if such as do well might have praise, as well as such as do
evil dispraise.

Use. 2. Secondly, it may much condemn the corruption of heart, which appears
in many men in this point in sinning against the just praises of others, either
by speaking evil of them, and blemishing their good names (which is to steal
their riches from them): or by withholding due praise (which is to withhold the
good from the owner thereof.) It should much affright such as are guilty of
this fault, that our Savior Christ measures our love to God, by our readiness
to praise for the works of God done by another, Ioh. 5.41, 42. It is a sign
that men love not God, when they love not goodness in others, which sure they
do not if they commend it not.

Doct. 5. Well doing ought to be esteemed wheresoever it is found, in a subject
as well as a Prince, in a servant as well as a Master; in all estates and
conditions of men. For God does so, as may appear, Ephesians. 6.7, 8. and grace
and goodness is alike precious, wheresoever it is in the like degree: which
serves to rebuke that secret corruption in the natures of men, that are apt to
observe and praise good things in greater persons, but withhold the
encouragement is due to other men, only because they are poor, and because
they are worser, Iam. 2.1, 2, 3. You may now by this doctrine try whether they
be good themselves: For it is a sign of goodness, to observe and love
goodness wheresoever he sees it, in a servant as well as in a friend, and in
a poor Christian as well as a rich.

Doct. 6. It may be yet further observed, that if men would be praised they
must do well: praise is only due to well-doing, Romans 2.10. 2 Timothy 2. 20, 21.
1 Thessalonians. 4.4. Romans 13.5. And therefore it is a poor praise that men raise to
themselves for other things: all that same which is raised for any thing but
well-doing, is external and vain: and therefore they are greatly deceived,
that rest in the report that is raised from their wit, or beauty, or birth, or
preferment, or sumptuous buildings, or the like. Those may cause a great fame,
but only well-doing can cause a good fame. Secondly, it shows that
hypocrites, that have gotten reputation only because they are thought to be
good, have but built in the sands. Ioh. 5.36, 37.
For when in time it shall appear that their own works do not praise them,
they shall find that the praise of men will not last. It is not saying well
that works a durable good name, but doing well. It is but complementing at the
best, to profess and promise great care of practice and praising,and yet be
barren and unfruitful.

Use. 3. Thirdly, this shows the great corruption of their nature, that so
unquietly seek after praise, and complain how much they be neglected, and yet
their own consciences know how idle and unprofitable they are, and which is
worse, that they not only do not well, but manifestly do evil, and sin
daily in pride and envy, in passion and wilfulness, or other open
transgressions. This thirst after respect above others, is a sign of a great
strength of hypocrisy, when they are more desirous to be thought good than
indeed to be so, and more careful of the praise of men than of God.

Fourthly, they sin shamefully that praise the wicked, and justify him that
God condemns: but Sal^mon has set a note upon those persons, that they are
naught themselves: For he says, that they that break the Law praise the
wicked, Prove. 28.4. and 24.25. Psalm. 10.3.

Fifthly, they are yet worse that glory in their shame, that seek praise for
the excess of wickedness committed by them, either against God or men: as
they do that would be commended for their cost bestowed on Idols, or for their
worshipping of Saints or Angels, or for their revenges and wrongs done to men,
or for their mightiness to hold out in drinking wine, or for their filthy acts
of any kind, or for their excesses in strange apparel, or for the raising of
themselves by unlawful means, or for their deliciousness in their fare, or
the like. As those glory in their shame, so their end is damnation, Phil. 3.18.

Lastly, this doctrine should beget in men a great desire to live profitably,
and to do good, and in a special manner to apply themselves to such works as
are most praiseworthy.

Quest. Here then arises a question, What things in particular do most
advantage a man's just praises?

Answ. The answer is, that there are diverse things will make a man to be much
praised: as,

Helps to get praise from men.
First, to honor God: he has promised to honor those that honor him, Prove.
8.17. Now to honor God is to seek his Kingdom first, and to confess his
name before men, though it be in evil times.

Secondly, humility and a lowly carriage with meekness. For the humble shall
be exalted, and the proud brought low, Luke 1.14, 20.

Thirdly, mercy to the poor. This made the Macedonians famous in the
Churches, especially to show it liberally and readily, 2 Cor. 8.

Fourthly, diligence and exact carfulness to discharge the labors of our
particular calling with all faithfulness: this made the good woman famous,
mentioned, Prove. 31.27, 28, 29, 30, 31. especially if wisdom and providence be
joined with diligence.

Fifthly, to live in peace, and study to be quiet, and meddle with our own
business, and to be a peacemaker, wins a great deal of praise, 1 Thessalonians.
4.11. Matthew. 5.9.

Sixthly, to be exactly just in men's dealings, and true in his words and
contracts, this will make men abound with blessings. The word is praises, as it
is in other places translated, Prove. 28.20.

Seventhly, to be courtous is to be amiable, so as it be done without
affectation, and not directed for thy own ends, and not done with
dissimulation.

Eighthly, to do good to our enemies, to be not only ready to forgive, but
to pray for them, and forbear to wrong when it might be executed, and to show
all willingness to overcome their evil with goodness, Romans 12. 20, 21.

Ninthly, a care in all things strictly to submit our selves to the just Laws
of men, avoiding transgression for conscience sake, as the coherence in this
place shows.

And thus of the sixth Doctrine.

Doct. 7. It may yet further be observed from hence, that God does require
Magistrates in a special manner to look unto it, that they do all they can
to praise and encourage godly men, and such as do good in the countries where
they live, Romans 13.5. This is the end of their calling, Job 29.25. This will
prove heavy one day for those profane Magistrates, that in the places of their
abode disgrace none more than such as are godly, and countenance none more than
such as are most dissolute and lewd of life. The judgments of the Lord will be
terrible against these unrighteous men.

Lastly, the Antithesis is here to be noted. For when he says, that such as
do well should be praised; he does not say, that such as do evil should be
dispraised: and this may be considered of, either in the case of private
persons, or in the case of Magistrates. For private persons, they are bound to
the good behavior, in respect of the evil of others many ways. First, till
their evils are known, not to mistrust or condemn others. Secondly, when
their evils are known, if they be secret, they must not be revealed: if they
be open, and the persons be good men, they must do what they can to cover
them; and if they be evil men, they must not speak of their dispraises
without a great respect of glorifying God by it: and besides, they must not
venture so far to judge of the final estate of any man for any evils, till the
end come. In the case of superiors it is true, they may use dispraise, but it
must be as a medicine which must be applied with many cautions, and the
ingredients must be Gods word, and not their own.

Verse 15. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing you may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men.


IN these words is contained the second argument taken from the will of God.
God is specially desirous that Christians should do all the good they can, and
in particular should be careful to obey the Magistrates, because by that
means,they may confute such ill-minded men as are apt to speak evil of
religion: so that the words contain a choice rule prescribed unto Christians,
to be carefully observed.

In which rule consider,

First, the authority of it, So is the will of God!

Secondly, the matter of it, well-doing.

Thirdly, the end, which is the silencing of wicked men.

For.]

This word For seems to give a reason (not of what went next before in the
former verse, but) of the exhortation to Christians as they are subjects,
showing the happy effect of well-doing in general, and in particular of their
submission to Magistrates, and how orderly and profitably their life should be,
as they are good subjects and serviceable to the Commonwealth.

For so is the will of God.]

The will of God is diversely accepted in Scriptures: for though God's will
indeed be but one, yet for our infirmities sake it is considered of with
distinction: and so it is either personal or essential. There is a will of
God that is personal, restrained to some of the persons: so the Father wills
the obedience and death of the Son, and Christ obeyes that will of his
Father, Ioh. 6.38, 39, 40. Mat. 26.39, 42. But it is the essential will of God
here meant: the former is the will of God ad intra; and this the will of God ad
extra, as they say in schools.

The essential will of God is taken sometimes for the faculty of willing,
sometimes for the act of willing, sometimes for the thing willed, and sometimes
for the sign by which that will is declared; as, his Word is his will. So here
by his essential will, God wills both good and evil. Good is the object of
God's will properly, and of it self. Evil is the object of the will of God,
but only under some respect of good. Evil is either of punishment, or of
sin. Evil of punishment God wills, and is the Author of, Psalm. 115.3. as the
just Judge of the world: and punishment of it self is a good thing, as it is a
work of justice. Evil of sin God only wills to permit, Acts 14.16. but it
is not God's willing of evil is here meant.

As the will of God concerns us in matter of good, it may be considered either
evangelically or legally. Evangelically his will gives order what shall be done
with us: and so he wills the salvation of his Elect, Ephesians. 1.11. Ioh. 6.40.
Legally his will gives order what shall be done by us: and so he wills our
sanctification in all the rules of it, and in every part, Col. 1.10.

By the will of God in this place then he means the Word of God, as it
contains the revelation of what God would have done by his servants in the
cases specified in this Text.

Many things may be observed out of these words.

Doct. 1. First, we may take notice of the two only Springs of all things to
be known in Religion, in these words, viz. God and his will; God and the word
of God. God is principium essendi, the Author of their being: and the will or
word of God is principium cognoscendi,the fountain of the knowledge of them.

Doct. 2. God does will all that which is to be done by his servants in any
part of their obedience, or in any case of their lives: as here the course they
are to take either toward the Magistrate, or toward their enemies, God wills it,
that is, he does in himself approve, or determine, or appoint, and by his Word
he does warrant and require it. And the same is true of all the well-doings of
godly men, God wills them: which I observe for these uses.

Uses. First, it may be a great comfort to a Christian, when he knows he
has done what God would have him to do: for then he may be sure God will
not forget his labor, and work of love and obedience, Heb. 6.8. The Hebrew
that signifies will, signifies pleasure and delight: and when it is given to
God, it notes that what he wills he takes pleasure in; as in Esaias 62.4.
Hophzibah, My will is in her, or, My delight is in him: God takes great delight
when we do his will. Every careful Christian is his Hophzibah. And besides,
if God do will, we should do so. God will defend and protect us in our ways:
that may support us against all the crosses or oppositions that may be like to
befall us. And that made the Apostles place in every Epistle, that.They were
Apostles by the will of God. And so such godly Christians as obey the humane
ordinances of men in these times of quarrel and contention, must comfort
themselves with this, that Thus was the will of God that they should so obey:
and that must support them against the contrary wills of men otherwise minded,
how well soever reputed of; and make them bring their own hearts into
obedience to that which God would have them to do, etc.

Doct. 3. The word of God is the willing of God, and so called here: and God's
word may be said to be his will in two respects, either because of the form,
or in respect of the matter. In respect of the form, it may be called his
will, because it is digested in form of a Testament; and Christ the Wisdom of
God has set it in such form, as if it were his last Will and Testament; as in
some respects it is: Or else chiefly, because what God does express or require
in the Scriptures, is agreeable to the very nature and will of God, he does in
himself will it, as well as in his Word promise or require it. Which shows a
great difference between the laws of Princes and the Laws of God: For many
times the laws of Princes agree not with the natures and hearts of Princes;
whereas God's word is always agreeable to God's will: and withal this should
the more quicken to obedience, because by conforming our selves to God's word,
we conform our selves to God's nature. And further, it may comfort us in the
hope of strength to be enabled to do God's will, and what he requires, because
he wills what we should do: For God's will causes an impression upon the
creature, it gives assistance, it will see it done, he will work our works for
us; God's word is a Word of power, it works what it wills, which men's laws
cannot do. When we know God wills such a thing in his Word to be done, we
should conceive that he does not only show us by that place what is to be
done, but also what assistance we shall have to do it.

Doct. 4. The will of God is the rule of our actions, what he wills we must
do, and so it is urged here by the Apostle; and therefore it should teach us
to labor to understand what his will is, since all is lost that is not
conformed to this rule, Ephesians. 5.10. We must get us to the Law and to the
Testimonies. For whatsoever is not directed from thence, has no light in it,
Esaias 8.20. Secondly, we must go to God, and pray him to teach us to do his
will, since he has enrolled it in his Word, Psalm. 143.10. Thirdly, if this
doctrine were thoroughly digested, unruly, froward, and wilful Christians would
make more conscience of their passionate and incorrigible courses. Let them
look to it in time, they must give account to him that so has prescribed
rules by his will, that he will not admit of courses carried only by their
wills. Fourthly, inferiors must look to the warrant of their actions: it is
not the will of man, but the will of God can justify them to do well, 1 Pet.
4.2. Lastly, if his will rule us, then we must take heed of that fault of
making the laws of our wills the causes of his will, as they do that think
God must will to do nothing with wicked men, unless his will be confined to
certain rules which they conceive in their wills.

Doct. 5. That the bare signification of Gods will should be argument enough
to persuade a godly Chistian to do any thing, though it be to deny himself,
or to go a course which is cross to his own desires. The knowledge of God's
will alone does compel a godly mind to obey. It is not the Majesty, or the
rewards of God, but God's will which alone suffices to guide him: which may
try the obedience of man by the motives. For only the sound Christian will
obey simply for the commandment sake, and must teach us to stick to it: the
bare will of God must rule us, though there were never so many men
contrary-minded.

Use. The use is for trial of hypocrites: the true Christian lays down all
his own courses, as soon as ever he hears the sound of Gods will.

Doct. 6. The practice of a Christian must be conformed just according to the
pattern: so is the will of God; it must be just so as the will of God is: so
from the manner as well as from the matter. Which should teach us three things;

First, to walk circumspectly, seeing we must look so precisely to the
manner, as well as to the matter of Gods will, Ephesians. 5.15.

Secondly, we must therefore increase in the knowledge of his will, Col. 1.10.
for the more things are to be done, or the more exactly God wills us to do,
the more care we must have to increase our knowledge, and study his will,
since all must be just so as he wills to have it.

Thirdly, we should be stirred up to pray for our selves, and one for
another, seeing it is such a hard thing to live a Christian life, and to please
God. Mark with what force of words the Apostle prayed about this point, Heb.
13.20, 21.

Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that
great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,

Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that
which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen.

Quest. But can a Christian be so exact as to answer the pattern, to do just
so as God wills him?

Ans. 1. He may for the substance of the obedience, though not for all the
degrees or circumstances.

2. He may do it in desire: he must set his pattern before him, as that he
desires to follow, and strives as well as he can, and is vexed because he
cannot do it: and with God if we have always done as much as well as we did
desire to do, he accepts the desire for the deed: but it is certain of the
most of us in the most things, that we have neither done the things right, nor
brought the desiring to do them: and therefore it is just with God, if we
lose what we have wrought.

Doct. 7. That in some cases God would have us take notice of his will in more
especial manner, he has certain special wills: there are some things that he
does as it were more stand upon than other things: and these special wills of
God we must heedfully take notice of: as for instance, 1 Thessalonians. 4. a^out
avoiding fornication, this is the will of God, he means his special chief
will: so about thanksgiving, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. where the Apostle urges the will
of God as a thing that God would above many other things have done. Above all
things give thanks: for this is the will of God, etc. So our Savior Christ
notes in his own occasions, an especial will of God, Ioh. 6. 39*41. So here
God does in a special manner will us to obey Magistrates, and to silence
wicked men by well-doing.

Use. The use should be, to teach us to mark what things God does specially
require of us, and to apply our selves to his will, that the Lord may take
pleasure in us, and say of each of us as he did of Cyrus, He is the man of my
will: which is here explained. He is the man that executes my counsel, Esaias
46.11. It was David's singular glory, that he would do all Gods will:
whatsoever special service God had to do, David was ready to execute it, Acts
13. For herein lies the trial of a sound Christian, he does the will of his
heavenly Father, and ^ests not in talking of Religion only, and professing it,
Mat. 7.21. Romans 2.11. 1 Ioh. 2.17. And in particular, in this text we see there
be two things that God would feign have us do to silence wicked men, and stop
their mouths: First, he would have us so to behave our selves, that we keep
out of their danger in respect of the laws of Magistrates. Secondly, and then
to live such a discreet and profitable life, that they may see that we differ
from all other sorts of men in the goodness of our conversation. If we would
do what might be specially pleasing to God, we must be careful of these two
things.

Doct. 8. Lastly, we may here note that the will of God may be known
effectually, though it be not known distinctly. The Apostle is sure this is
the will of God; and yet there is no book, chapter, nor verse quoted, nor can
any particular place be alleged that these precise words do express God's
will: but in as much as the meaning is to be found in the scope of many places
of Scripture, therefore it may be well so called. The will of God.

Thus of the authority of this rule. The matter of it follows, which is
well-doing.

With well-doing. (...)]

The word is not the same with that in the former verse: for here it is a
participle of the present time, and notes the continual custom of well-doing,
and gives us to understand, that if ever we would effectually silence wicked
men, we must be continually exercised in well-doing. Our good works (though
of great excellency) yet work but a sudden blaze: the effect of them will be
quickly ended, or soon put out, and then will wicked men return to their old
course of reproaching, if they be not daily confuted by the still fresh and new
fruits of a Christian: we must be full of new and good fruits, Iam. 3.17. and
never weary of well-doing.

The sense of the word then is this, as if it were rendered thus: This is the
will of God, that they are daily exercised in doing good, should put to silence
foolish men: for the original word does note the person as well as the good
done, which affords another doctrine.

Doct. 2. God would have good men that are full of good fruits to enter into
the lists against wicked men, to vanquish and silence them; which implies that
God would not have formal Christians or hypocrites to meddle with the quarrel
of Religion: for they will spoil all in the end, when their hollownesse and
hypocrisy is discovered: they will make foolish men raise and blaspheme worse
than before. Such are fit to plead for, and defend Religion, as be manfull and
full of good works. And therefore the weaks Christians should not be over-busie
and fiery in meddling with wicked men, or putting themselves forward to defend
sincerity, till their works could plead for them: before we set on to be great
talkers for Religion, we should provide good store of good works, by which we
might demonstrate the truth and power of godliness in us.

Of well-doing in it self, I have entreated before: only before I pass from
it, me thinks it is lamentable that our hearts can be no more fired to the
care of it. Oh that we were once brought but to consent from the heart, with
confirmed purpose, to set up a course by our lives to win glory to our
Religion! We see how feign God would have us do so: and it would plague wicked
men that would feign rail at us: nothing would more confute them. And besides,
other Scriptures show no life abounds more with steadfastness and contentment
than a life fruitfully spent: especially how can we be still thus careless,
if we remember the great recompense of reward in another world? Oh this
formality and outward show, and serving God for fashion! how deeply is it
seated in men's manners! It is likely the most of you that hear this doctrine
will say it is good, and perhaps some one or two of you will be a little touched
with a kind of consultation in your selves which way you might do well: but
alas, alas! out and alas! Oh that I could get words to gore your very Souls
with smarting pain, that this Doctrine might be written in your very flesh,
for a thousand to one you will go the most of you away, and not redress your
ways. Religion shall not be honored by you more than before: cursed be that
worldly dross or spiritual security that will thus rob and spoil your
souls, and keep Religion without her true gloss and bea^ty, and shining
glory.

I might here also note, that submission to the ordinances of men is one part
of a Christian man's well doing, and a special ornament of the sincere
profession of religion, because it is the discharge of the duty enjoined us by
God, and so is a part of the obedience due to God himself; to keep their
ordinances is to obey Gods commandment. Secondly, because such a conscionable
submission to man's Laws, makes the religious works of Christians to be the
more unrebukable in the eyes of wicked men, and therefore they are to be warned
of their rashness that say, that conformity to men's laws is evil doing, when
God says it is well doing: they say it is a sin, God says it is a good
work. It is nearer to the truth, and safer to say, that not conforming is a
sin, because it is a breach of Gods express commandment in the former verse:
and therefore also godly Christians, whether Ministers or private persons, that
obey the laws of men simply out of conscience of Gods Commandments, and not
for corrupt ends, may comfort themselves, that the good God does like of what
they do, because it is his will that so they should do, and he says they do
well; though some good men are contraryminded, and out of weakness censure
them as evil doers. Then it is employed here that the conscionable conformity
of godly Christians shall be rewarded in Heaven; for all well-doing shall be
rewarded in Heaven: but submission to humane Ordinances is well-doing, and
therefore shall be rewarded in Heaven. Paul is crowned in Heaven for his
holding to the Jewish ceremonies* to win the Jews, and further the liberty of
his Ministry.

Thus of the matter required. The end follows.

That you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men.]

The word here rendered, To put to silence, is diversely accepted, or the force
of it is showed by diverse terms in several Scriptures. Sometimes it is
translated, to still a thing that is tumultuous and raging: and so the sea was
silenced or made still, Mark 4.39. Sometimes it is translated, To make
speechless or dumb, so Mat. 22.12. Sometimes, To confute, so as they have not
a word to answer, so Mat. 22.34. Sometimes, To muzzle, or tie up the mouth: so
1 Cor. 9.9. 1 Timothy 5.18. and so it signifies properly: and so well-doing is
intended here as a means to muzzle the mouths of wicked men.

The word here rendered, Foolish men, signifies properly men without a mind, or
men that have not use of their understanding, and so are either natural
fools, or mad men.

The Doctrines that may be gathered from hence are many: For it may be
evidently collected from hence,

Doct. 1. That wicked men do usually in all places speak evil of godly men,
they are prone to it, they do it usually. The holy Ghost here supposes it to
be done as the usual course in all ages and conditions of the Christian
Church: and no marvel: For it has been in all ages past the condition of
godly men to be evil spoken of and slandered. God, children were as signs and
wonders, Esaias 8. And whosoever refraineth himself from evil makes himself a
prey, Esaias 59.15. The throats of wicked men are the ordinary burying places for
the names of the Righteous, Romans 3. And this is the more to be heeded, if we
mark in Scriptures either persons reproaching, or the persons reproached, or
the matter of the reproach, or the manner. For the persons reproaching, we
shall read sometimes that men are reproached by such as are of the same
Religion with them, Psalm. 50.16. Esaias 8.18. Cant. 1.6. Yea, sometimes that
godly men are reproached by such as are of their own house and kindred, as
Isaak was by Ismael, and Joseph by his brethren: the parents are against the
children, and the children are against the parents: and a man's enemies are
those of his own house. And for the persons reproached we shall find them to
be the most eminent and godly persons; as Job, cap. 30.1. Moses, Heb. 11.26.
David, Psalm. 35.15. Jeremiah, c. 18.18 the Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9, 10, 13. yea,
the Lord Jesus Christ himself, Heb. 12.3. And for the matter objected, we
shall find the godly men have been reproached with the most vile slanders
that almost might be. I may spare other testimonies now, seeing Christ himself
was charged with gluttony, blasphemy, sedition, deceit, diabolical working,
and to have a devil in him: and he supposes it to be the case of Christians,
to be spoken against with all manner of evill-saying, Mat. 5.12. And for the
manner two things may be noted:

First, that many times wicked men set themselves to study and invent, without
all color of occasion, mischievous things to reproach godly men withal: thus
they devised devices against Jeremiah.

Secondly, that when they have evil reports afoot, they pursue them, and
divulge them with all possible forwardness and malice: thus the abjects tare
David's name and ceased not, Psalm. 35.15. and ill-minded men cease not, till
that good men may be every where evil spoken of, Acts 28.

The reason of this strange kind of ill humor in wicked men is twofold:
First, there is their natural hatred of goodness; it is not because of the
sin of godly men, but simply because they follow goodness. There is a natural
antipathy between a good life and a bad man, 1 Job. 3.13.14.1 Pet. 4.5. Psalm.
38.20. Secondly, the other is because it is one of the rules of the devil, To
be an accuser of the brethren and good livers: and the works of their father
the devil they will do, Job. 8.44.

The use is diverse: for,

Uses. First, it should inform men not to think it strange when they see such
things come to pass: for no other trial in this point of reproach befalls
godly men, but what has accompanied the condition of all godly men almost in
all ages.

Secondly, godly men should be the more stirred up to prepare apologies, and in
all places where they come, to contend for the truth, and strive together to
preserve the reputation of one another, Prove. 12.18.

Thirdly, godly men should arm themselves and prepare for reproaches, and
accordingly stir up their hearts with comforts out of the word of God,
against the time of evil and trials.

Fourthly, they should be made for that reason the more careful of all their
carriage, that they give not occasion to people that are so apt to speak evil
of them, as was urged out of verse 12. of this chapter.

Fifthly, all men should look to their ears, and take heed what and how they
hear reports. It is an ill sign of a vicious nature, to be apt to believe
scandalous reports of godly men, Prove. 17.4. And God will plague men in hell
not only ^or making, but for loving lies, though they be made by other men,
Revel. 22.8. And therefore as the North Wind drives away the rain, so should
their angry countenance drive away the showers of reproach that fall from
backbiting tongues, Prove. 25.23.

Thus of the first point.

Doct. 2. It may be hence also noted, that reproaches are to be avoided as
much as lies in us. God would have us do all we may to live so, that we
might not be reproached, Psalm. 39.8. Phil. 2.15. We must strive to be
unrebukable: And the reasons are, first, because every Christian is not able to
bear rep^oaches, when he shall find himself to be slandered. David shows
himself very unquiet when he was slandered, especially in some cases, as
diverse Psalm^s show: and Jeremy falls into desperate extrem^ties about them.
Ier. 8.18, 21.
Secondly, because reproaches and slanders have diverse ill effect^ for they are
like swords and razors, and a man should avoid the wounds of ^words and razors
as much as he can. Thirdly, and be^^des, some kinds of slanders do keep
many men off from embracing Religion: as the Jews would not receive Paul's
doctrine, because that way was every where ill spoken of. And further, many
times in the best minds, that are persuaded the things objected are untruths,
the reproaches leave a kind of stain, and work a kind of suspicion, and
lessen the estimation of the person traduced. Fourthly, it is to be avoided,
because it is so easily diffused: slanders will run strangely. A whole
Country, yea the whole Kingdom will be in a short space filled with the
slanders: which must needs come to many persons that are destitute of all
apology for the innocent. And lastly, the showers of slanders that are cast
upon godly men many times are but forerunners of grievous storms of
perfecution.

And therefore they do very foolishly that desire to be reproached, and by
their indiscretions irritate the tongues of wicked men against them. It is a
gross folly in some Christians, that will of purpose do things that be
cross to the course of the world in things indifferent, thereby to proclaim a
wilful opposition to the world.

And therefore also we should be very thankful to God, when he gives us any
breathing times from reproaches and slanders, by all good means to keep
wicked men quiet if it may be.

Doct. 3. It may here be further noted, that it is a hateful thing to be an
ignorant and foolish man in spiritual things: they are mentioned here with a
kind of grievous scorn. Many reasons make this point evident. For first, the
sacrifices offered for the ignorances of the people, showed them that it was a
vile thing to be ignorant, Heb. 9.7. Secondly, the very nature of ignorance
shows it to be a vile thing; for is it not a hateful thing to us to be
blind in our bodies? how much more is it to have the eyes of our minds out?
Thirdly, because it argues that a man has not the Spirit of God in him; for
Gods Spirit is given to men that they might know the things of God: and
therefore when a man cannot know the things of God, it is a sign that he wants
Gods Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.12, 14. Fourthly, because when God would of purpose
plague a man with a special or horrible curse upon his soul, this is it, to
give him up to a sottish spirit, Job. 12.40. with Esaias 6.10. Fifthly, it may
appear by the effects of this sottishness, when we respect the sins it
breeds, or the punishment it brings upon the ignorant persons for sin. It is
certain that ignorance is the mother of vice and corruption: an ignorant
person may quickly make himself guilty of a world of sins: yea there is no
sin so grossly absurd or abominable, but this kind of men may commit it,
and without sense or care too. The Prophet Isaiah opens the dotage of
Idolaters, and shows the root of it to be their blockish ignorance, Esaias
44.18, 20. As ignorant persons may be made wilful Idolaters, and that easily:
so may they be whoremongers, Prove. 7.22. drunkards, etc. yea, they would at
some times kill Christ himself, if he come in their way, Luke 23.34. Vide
Ephesians. 4.17, 18.
We see into what sins ignorant persons fall, into such as whoredom,
Sodomitry, buggery, stealing, murder, drunkenness, swearing, and yet see not
their danger, but like brute beasts are senseless; and for the offenses in
respect of punishment they are fearful, whether we respect this life or
another world. In this life their ignorance deprives them of the sight of all
those things that have true glory or comfort in them. To live in ignorance is
worse for the wicked, than it is for the body to live in a dungeon: besides,
all their best works are lost, all they do is abominable, Hosh. 6.7. Psalm.
14.1, 2. and it is in vain to plead their good minds and meanings: For
without knowledge the mind is not good, Prove. 19.2. and if they were never so
zealous, yet they lose their labor, Romans 10.2. And further, this sottishness
brings many a curse upon men; yea, when it is general it brings fearful
public plagues, Esaias 1.3, etc. and 5.13. Hosh. 4.1, 2. and which is worst of
all, after all the miseries of this life they must go down to hell, they are
utterly undone for ever; this is the place of all them that know not God, Job
18. ult. and Hosh. 4.6.

Uses. The use may be, first, for to show the lamentable estate of multitudes
of Christians that frequent our assemblies, and yet are still extreme sots in
regard of spiritual things: they favor nothing but the things of the flesh,
and relish nothing but what flows from fleshly wisdom. Ask the Labourer of
his work, or the Artificer of matters of trade, or the Husbandman of the
fruits of the ground, or the Gentleman of his pleasures or the news of the
world, or the Scholar of humane learning, and you shall have an answer many
times to admiration: but ask of Heaven and heavenly things, except a few
general sayings, they can say nothing but froth or error, they are as
blockish as if they had never heard of the Gospel. How many Masters are there
in Israel, and yet know not the things that concern sound regeneration and a
true sanctified life! David calls himself a beast in respect of the remainders
of ignorance in some things, being excellently qualified with true knowledge.
Oh how brutish then must these persons account themselves to be! What heart can
stand before the serious thoughts of the damnation of multitudes, that now sit
with us in the House of God, even for this very sin of ignorance? Hosh. 4.6.

And the more lamentable is it to observe the unspeakable avertnesse that is in
man, that of all sorts, though they be warned, yet some will on still and die
without wisdom, Job 4.20. and which is yet more, in places where men have the
means plentifully, yet what number does the god of this world keep in
blindness, so as they live and dye very sots, even in those places where they
have ^ad line upon line, and precept upon precept, and yet the people no more
instructed than the child new weaned from the breast? Esaias 28.9. Yea, the more
fearful is the estate of diverse, that they do not only want knowledge, but
they reject it and blaspheme it, as if it were not only unnecessary, but
hateful: they love darkness more than light, and therefore their damnation
sleeps not, Job. 3.19. Job 21.14.

But on the other side, so many as have their hearts touched from God, let them
be warned to avoid ignorance as they would avoid the death of their souls;
let it be hateful to them to be babies in understanding, 1 Cor. 14.20. Ephesians.
5.16. and learn of Solomon above all things to get understanding, Prove. 4.7.
and to that end to pray with David, That God would give him understanding that
he might live, Psalm. 119.144. And when men have the light, they should walk
in the light: and when God gives the instructions, they should take heed that
they be not as the horse or mule, to learn nothing but what they are forced
unto; but rather with all diligence and readiness to wait daily at the gates
of wisdom, Psalm. 32.8, 9.

But if men be still senseless and wilful, then I say to them as the Apostle
said, if the hatefulness of their ignorance will not appear; Let him that is
ignorant be ignorant still, 1 Cor. 14.38.

Doct. 4. It may be likewise noted, that in the language of God, unregenerate
men are fools, or rather mad men, men without minds, Romans 1.3. Tit. 3.3.

And that this point may be more clear, I would consider of the signs of a
spiritual mad man or fool. And that this point also may be clea^ed, you must
remember, there are two sorts of men are said literally to be without minds:
the one is natural fools, and their disease is called moria: the other is
furious mad men, and their disease is called mania: both suffer alienation of
mind, they want their minds or the right use of them: and so there are two
sorts of men which spiritually want minds: some are resembled by fools, and
some by mad men.

A spiritual fool may be known especially by two signs; First, Signs of
spiritual folly. Prove. 17.16.
by his mindlesnesse: he has no thoughts nor words about the kingdom of
heaven; he is altogether careless and senseless, he sits still without any
regard of it, as some children that are mopish and heed nothing, or some that
are sick of a kind of melancholy, that will neither speak nor eat; these
lose time and will not buy it, Ephesians. 5.16. Secondly, by his sottishness: this
sort differs from the former; for these will talk and be doing, and many
times very busy, but it is without any spiritual sense or discerning, their
words and works are all idle and sottish, and cross to the word of God: and
these are discovered by diverse signs diversely; as,

First, the wisdom of God seems foolishness to them: let heavenly things be
spoken of with never so great wisdom and power of words, yet these sots have
one senseless objection or other, in respect of which they reject all they
hear; and being led by their sensuality or their carnal reason, Prove. 23.9.1
Cor. 1. and 2. go no further; but in these cases think they are in their own
conceit wiser than any man that can give a better reason and proof.

Secondly, they discover it by senslesnesse and incorrigiblenesse, when they
are pursued by the hand of God many times round about, Ier. 5.3, 4. Though God
should seem to bring all to the first Chaos, yet they understand not: you
cannot heat into their heads the hatred of their sins, or the cares of a
better life, Ier. 22.20, 21, 22. Isai. 42.27. This Apathy is only in mad men
and fools, Prove. 17.10, and 27.22.

Thirdly, they discover it by their continual entertainment of the innumerable
enormities of their thoughts, which arising from their heart in the dark, they
play withal with as much earnestness and attendance, as if they were some
needful and profitable things. This customary daily entertainment of vain
thoughts is a sign of a spiritual sot, Romans 1.21.

Fourthly, they discover it by their continual grasping at shadows, that is,
their doting upon earthly things with strange cares, and pains, and jollity,
without any sound endeavor to provide for their souls and eternal salvation,
Psalm. 49.10. Luke 12.16. to 21. Ier. 17.11.

Fifthly, some of them discover their sottishness by following the service of
idols, which they worship in stead of the living God: this is called
brutishness, Deuteronomy. 32.6, 16, 17. Esaias 44.19, 20. O what a number of these sots
are there in the world, if the worshippers of idols, of Romish and Paganish
idols were summed up!

Sixthly, others discover it by making clean the outside of the cup and
platter, but never regard the filthiness of the inside: such are they that are
only careful of the show of their actions before men, while their inside is
full of ravening and wickedness. These our Savior calls fools or sots,
because he that made that which is without, made that which is within also,
Luke 11.39, 40.

Seventhly, some of them discover themselves, by suffering themselves to be
bu^^etted and abused, and yet are content to be used so still: and such are
they that will suffer themselves to be abused by false teachers, so they be of
their own humor, though they devour them in their estates, and bring them
into bondage in their minds, though they take of them, and exalt themselves
insolently among them, 2 Cor. 11.19, 20.

Eighthly, they discover it by building the hopes of the salvation of their
souls upon most vain and insufficient grounds: they build on the sands, they
trust upon an universal mercy of God and the example of the most, and upon the
bare use of Gods ordinances, without any power of faith, or practice in their
hearts or lives: and therefore in time of tribulations their hope is as the
giving up of the ghost: all is ruined, and their souls are desolate, Mat.
7.26. They will be at no pains to be assured of their salvation and religion,
but go on without any particular regard of their own way to heaven, Prove.
14.8.

A spiritual fool then is discovered, first, by his mindlesnesse; secondly,
by his uncapablenesse and contempt of heavenly doctrine; thirdly,by his
incorrigiblenesse; fourthly, by the vanity of his thoughts; fifthly, by his
dotages about earthly things; sixthly, by his idolatry; seventhly,by his
hypocritical tricks; eighthly, by suffering the injuries of false teachers;
and lastly, by the vain grounds of his hope and faith.

The spiritual mad man follows to be described: and so these sorts of men
following are convicted of madness in the Scripture;

Signs of spiritual madness.
First, the Atheist. He is a man void of reason that denies principles: and
such an one is he that faith in his heart, There is no God, as he that denies
the providence of God, Psalm. 14.1. and 94.8.

Secondly, the swearer. The fools or mad men blaspheme Gods name, Psalm. 74*18.
He were a mad man that would daily rail at the King to his face; and such are
blasphemers.

Thirdly, the persecuter. The Apostle speaking of men that resist the truth, as
Iannes and Iambres resisted Moses, says, that their madness shall be
manifested to all men: so that he particularly calls tesisting of the truth
madness, 2 Timothy 3.9.

Fourthly, the idle person. He is a mad man that will eat his own flesh: but
such a one is the slothful person, because he brings poverty upon himself
like an armed man, or else destroys the health of his body by his laziness,
or brings misery upon his wife and children, or because his soul is eaten up
with rust, and the canker of his negligence, Eccles. 4.5.

Fifthly, the wilful offender. He is a mad man, that when he hears of some
imminent danger, yet will not avoid it; such a one is every gross offender,
that hearing of the judgments God will bring upon him for such sins, or
perceiving that the wrath of God is broken out upon others for the like
offenses, yet will madly go on without fear. The prudent man fears and
departs from evil, but he is a fool or mad man that rages and is
confident, Prove. 14.16. Ierem. 5.21, 22.

Sixthly, the senseless pra^er. We discern him to be a mad man, that talking
continually faulters in his words, and utters sentences that are unperfect
without sense or coherence: such persons in religion are those prating fools
Solomon speaks of, that are full of words, and void of sound judgment: as the
legs of the lame are not equal, so is a parable in a fools mouth. As you
discern a lame man by this, that his legs are one longer than another, so you
may discover a spiritual mad man by his discourse about the high points of
religion, for his words agree not together, his sentences are senseless and
unequal. A fool has no delight to get sound understanding in these things,
and yet is wonderful forward to utter his mind, though he discover nothing
but his ignorance and folly, Prove. 18.2. and 26.7.

Seventhly, the Epicure or voluptuous person. He is a mad man, that is never
merry but when he has done some mischief: and such are all they that make a
sport of sin, Prove. 10.23. and 14.9. and 15.22.

Eighthly, the railer. He is a mad man that will go up and down a Town or a
City, and set fire on the houses of other men as he goes: and therefore is the
railer called a fool, because in his lips there is a burning fire: he
devoures the reputation of good men every where where he comes. The Apostle
James calls it, The fire of hell, Iam. 2. Prove. 16.27. Jude 10. And thus he is a
mad man that hates other men for doing good, as the Pharisees did Christ for
healing on the Sabbath Day; for which they were said to be mad, Luke 6.11.

Ninthly, the Apostate or backslider in Religion. Thus the Galatians were
bewitched with madness, that had begun in the Spirit and would end in the
flesh; that had forsaken the glorious ornaments and privileges of the Gospel,
so trust upon beggarly rudiments, that for^ooke the precious merits of Christ's
righteousness, to trust to the stained clouts of their own unrighteousness,
Gal. 3.1, 3.

Tenthly, the unthankful and injurious person. He is a mad man that will
strike his friend that provokes him not: and so are all Nabals: their folly is
with them that use their friends as Nabal did David, 1 Samuel 25.25.

Eleventhly, the contentious person. He is a mad man that lays snares to
catch himself,and will speak things that force strokes upon himself: so is
every unquiet, intemperate busie-body. A fools lips, says Solomon, enter into
contention, and his mouth calls for strokes. A fools mouth is his
destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul, Pro. 18.6,7. Eccl. 10.12.
Pro. 14.3.

Twelfthly, the implacable person. Such men as are so furious, there is no
appeasing of them, but they are like a Bear robbed of her welps, Prove. 17.12.
They are mad men that will hear no reason. A stone is heavy, and sand is
weighty, but a fools wrath is heavier than them both, Prove. 27.3.

Thirteenthly, all men that abuse their prosperity to the greater liberty of
sin and injury. They are mad men that cannot be ruled, unless they be kept
fasting. A man distracted, if you let him have his belly filled, will trouble
the whole house: so a wicked man, if he enjoy prosperity and success, will
disquiet the whole town where he lives. There are four things, says Solomon,
disquiet the earth, and one of them is a fool with his belly filled, that is,
a wicked man when he prospers and has what he will, Prove. 30.22.

Uses. The use of all may be, first, to show the misery of all unregenerate
men, that live in a continual phrenzie, or de^ect of all spiritual
understanding. It is a woeful judgment to have our reason taken from us in
natural things; but much more in spiritual: for upon this ground it
manifestly follows,

1. That they lose all the benefit of spiritual instruction: all the
Ordinances of God, during the time of this folly or madness, are merely in
vain to them. Their phrenzie makes them not only to want sense, but withal
to despise all Gods counsels, Prove. 1.7.

2. That they shame themselves in all their dealings: for when a fool walks
by the way, he says to every one that he is a fool, Eccles. 10.3. And thus
they will undo themselves soul and body, if they hold on. A mad man if he
govern his estate will soon ruin it, Job 5.3.

3. That they live shut up from all the sound comforts of life, as fools and
mad men: they are shut up in darkness, Eccles. 2.14. God uses them as we use
mad men: for though he let them go up and down the world, and so they have a
larger room to walk in than ordinarily our mad men have, yet God has chained
them (though insensibly): the world is but a house of darkness to their
minds: the saving light and all the fruits of it are withheld from them.

4. That they are in great danger to dye of their phrenzie, and to perish for
lack of wisdom, Prove. 22.23. Job 36.12.

And therefore in the second place this may serve for instruction unto
unregenerate men to apply their hearts to wisdom, and embrace the counsel of
God that offers them knowledge and grace, as is urged in many places, as Prove.
1.20, 24. and 8.5. and 9.4. and the rather, because if they be wilful and
reject knowledge, God may be provoked to forsake them for ever, Prove. 1.24. and
28.31. and 26.10, Job 5.3.

Thirdly, it shows the wonderful mercy of God in saving sinners: for what
were we all by nature, but a generation of fools and mad men? And therefore it
shows the riches of his mercy, and the freeness of it: the riches, in that he
glorifies such unworthy creatures; and the freeness of it, in that they are
utterly disabled for deserving any thing at his hands. For what can fools and
mad men do, that they should merit any thing at Gods hands?

Fourthly, it should teach godly men, both with patience to bear their wrongs
seeing they are distracted, and with discretion to avoid them, and to have as
little to do with them as may be: For what should the sons of God do with
the sons of Belial? And if they abuse them in words, to learn not to answer
a fool in his folly, Prove. 26.4.

Fifthly, all this description of folly and madness may strike some kind of
amazement and sorrow into the hearts of godly men. For, as they are
unregenerate in part, there are left some dregs of this phrenzie and folly here
in them. And hence it is that we find in Scripture folly charged upon them. It
is true, that sometimes they are said to be fools by the world for things they
do wisely in; and so the Apostles were fools for Christ's sake, 1 Cor. 4.10.
and Paul ironically calls himself a fool, 2 Cor. 11.1. Sometimes they are
called fools, not because they are so, but because that they do hate some
kind of likeness to folly, 2 Cor. 11.17. but yet withal it is true, that
seriously godly men are said to be abased in themselves for very folly and
madness which they see in themselves, and so we shall find every godly man
called beasts by themselves, and sometimes by God himself: and so it is folly
and madness in any,

Wherein godly men sometimes show folly.
1. To hate reproof, Proverbs 12.1. It is there said to be a brutish thing.

2. To be censurers of their friends rashly: so Jobs friends are charged with
folly, Job 42.8.

3. To be pertinacious in defending their i^^oc^ncy, striving to make
themselves seem juster than they are: this was Jobs madness, cap. 42.3. and
34.35.

4. To neglect knowledge, and to be careless to use the means for
instruction, and the understanding of holy things, Pro. 30.2.3. This made Agur
say, that he was more brutish than any man, and that he had not the
understanding of a man in him. So much of ignorance as is left in us, so much
of folly and madness is in us.

5. To fret and be unadvisedly angry and froward: for anger rests in the bosom
of fools only, Eccles. 7.10. Pro. 24.29. Teasty and hasty persons not only
have folly, but exalt it.

6. To be indiscreet in words, or insufficient to speak with God or men, as
becomes the matter, or to carry our selves indiscreetly: this made David loath
himself so, Psalm. 38.5.

7. To be vexed and impatient, and full of fretting in adversity. Godly men
play many mad tricks this way; one while fretting at the prosperity of their
adversaries, and another while murmuring in their hearts at their own
condition, or plotting courses how to conform themselves to the world, and so
to report of their repentance. This made David call himself a beast, Psalm.
73.3, 13, 14, 15, 21, 22.

8. After one has had experience of Gods gracious providence, and protection
of God, to fall to trust upon outward things. Thus it was madness in David,
after so many trials of Gods power, for him to stand about to number the
people, and to rest upon the strength and multitude of his subjects, 2 Samuel,
24.10.

9. To be slow of heart to believe and treasure up the promises of God, and the
proofs of Scripture, that should comfort us, and warrant the ^^^th of our
salvation in Christ, Luke 24.25.

10. To speak proudly or wickedly, and with provocation to others, especially
to wicked men, or if they themselves be wicked men, Pro. 30.32, 33.

11. All dotages about earthly things are in a great degree madness. For godly
men, that are heirs of the promises, and of the kingdom of heaven, to yield
themselves over to the inticements and lusts after worldly things, is
mavelous folly and madness, especially in them who have tasted and known
better things, to neglect their glory, which is their souls, (for so David
calls his soul Psalm. 3^. ult.) and to serve the sensual desires of their
flesh is miserable folly.

12. All sinful courses are foolish courses, and to deal sinfully is to deal
madly, Psalm. 69.5.

The last use of this doctrine may be to show the vanity and insufficiency of
all humane wit and learning, and moral indowments, in comparison of heavenly
and spiritual knowledge and understanding. For if all unregeneratemen be
foolish men, then it will follow that a man may be a great wise man in this
world, and endued with all the ornaments of humane learning, etc. and yet at
the ^ame time in Gods fight be accounted but as a natural fool or a mad man,
in respect of his want of the true wisdom from above, to discern things that
are excellent, that is, spiritual things.

Thus of the fourth doctrine.

Doct. 5. It is a hard task to overcome and cure ignorance: Ignorant men,
especially those that are bent against godliness, are wonderfully unteachable;
God himself is feign here to devise a strange way to silence them. Solomon
observed, that these men are wiser than any man that can give a reason. And if
a fool be brayed in a mortar, yet his folly will not depart from him: and a
reproof will enter more into a wise man, than 100. stripes into a fool: yea
it is here to be noted, that it is hard to silence them from their reproaches
and follies.

The reasons are,

Why it is so hard to cure ignorance, and silence ignorant men.
First, because it is natural to them to be hateful, and hating others: and it
is a hard task to overcome a natural disposition in man, Titus 3.3.

Secondly, because the unregenerate mind of man is full of objections, and the
Devil suffers many heads of purpose: he prompts them, and supplies them with
cavils.

Thirdly, because many withold the truth in unrighteousness, they do
willingly misprison the truth, they desire not information, they love darkness
and lies, and therefore are loath to have what might satisfy them, and resist
the power of the truth, and willingly strive to neglect doctrine in public,
and Apologies in private.

Fourthly, because they encourage one another in an evil way, they observe
that the great men of the world, and many that are in reputation for wisdom
and learning, are scorners as well as they: yea it mightily confirms them, to
hear many times in the very pulpits showers of reproaches, which ambitious and
malicious temporizers pour out to strengthen the hands of the wicked, and
discourage the hearts of the righteous: they think they may revile securely,
because they hear that way every where evil spoken of: that cause and
language is the cause and language of the multitude.

Fifthly, because many ignorant persons, when they are confuted, yet are so
foolish that they will wilfully persist in their objections, upon this
pretense, that though they cannot reply against the answer, yet they think if
such and such were there, that have more experience and learning, they would
confirm and make good what they say.

Sixthly, because malice has no ears, they hate the truth and godly men, and
therefore are utterly unwilling to abate any thing of the disgraces of the
truth, or godly persons. If it be not as they say, yet their malice would feign
have it so; and if it may disgrace the godly, they care not whether it be true
or no.

Seventhly, because many times God gives them over to such a reprobate sense,
that through custom, and evil thoughts, and evil surmises, they think verily
they do not much amiss to oppose and hate such persons. This was the case of
such as reviled and persecuted the Apostles, they thought they did God good
service, as Christ prophesied of them.

The Uses of this doctrine follow.

Uses. First therefore we should not wonder if we see this daily come to pass,
that men of all sorts should reproach^ the good way of God so unjustly, so
foolishly, so pertinaciously.

Secondly, it shows that godly men had need to be circumspect, and to watch
their words and works with all exactness; and that they which will confute
ignorant men must strive to be very able and thoroughly furnished with wisdom
of words, and abundance of good works.

Thirdly, it shows that ignorant persons are in a lamentable case, that are so
inwrapped in the snares and cords of their own folly, that so willingly and
wilfully run toward the gates of death and ruin, that are so hardly cured of
this spiritual blindness.

Fourthly, it imports that study, self-willed, perverse Christians, that cannot
be diverted, or advised, are to be reckoned in the rank of these fools, what
show soever they make of a better estate.

Fifthly, it does comfortably import, that when one is teachable, and hates
reproaching, and will do or say nothing against the truth, and is not pleased
with his ignorance, but judges himself for it, and uses the means to get
the knowledge and love of the truth, that such a person is escaped from the
congregation of these fools, and is in some measure enlightened with true
wisdom from above.

Sixthly, it may warn all that love their own souls, hereafter to take heed,
and with care to avoid wilfulness and self-conceitednesse. Let men take heed
they be not wise in themselves, but strive to frame themselves to be true
workers of wisdom, and withal to take heed of a multitude of words: he that
cannot be silent, cannot be wise of godly.

And thus of the fifth doctrine.

Doct. 6. Sixthly, we may here note, that well-doing is the best way to confure
wicked and unreasonable men. A sound and fruitful life is the likeliest and
surest way to still them: if any thing will do it, it is the best way for
diverse reasons.

1. Because we see here it is a course of Gods choosing, and he says, it will
even muzzle them, and bind up their mouths, and he will give success to the
obedience of his own commandments.

2. Because by a conversation full of good works we do not only confute them
our selves, but we make others able to answer for us in all places.

3. Because if a man undertake to answer them by words, he is in danger to be
provoked to speak unadvisedly, and so many prove like those fools whom he
reproves, Pro. 26.5.

4. Because the natural conscience of the wicked is as it were feared to take
notice of a good conversation, and will struggle and resist within the wicked
man, so as he cannot so securely vent his reproaches.

5. Because it is a way that brings most peace and comfort to ones own heart.
If he deal with them by words, his heart may afterward smite him for some
absurdity or other he has committed: whereas he is safe that fights against
them by his good works.

6. Because it is the surest way of revenge, to overcome their evil with
goodness, especially if thou can get but the advantages to do good to them
that reproach thee Romans 12.18, 19.

Use. The sound consideration of this truth should subdue in us that overeager
desire of answering such as wrong us by bitter words, or works of revenge; yea
it should compel upon us a consultation, whether it be best to deal with them
at all by words. Gods way is by works; and thou must get a great deal of
temperance and wisdom if thou think thy self able to confute them thoroughly
by words. It is true also, that in some cases we may resort to the Magistrate
to punish them that abuse us: but yet still this counsel of God, that bids us
silence them by well-doing, should intimate, that other courses must be used,
with much caution, and without rashness or confidence in them.

Secondly, this may reprove that unquietness and impatience which is found in
some Christians, when they are reproached and wronged: they are much vexed at
the indignities offered to them, and think it strange that wicked men should
not cease traducing of their names; whereas perhaps, if they examine
themselves, they may find that they have not used the means to still them,
they have not muzzled these dogs, and therefore no wonder if they bark and bite
too: and muzz'ed we see here they will not be, but by their good works. And
therefore if they be barren and unfruitful, they must take notice of the fault
in themselves.

There are other things that may be noted out of these words: but I will only
touch them; as,

Doct. 7. That only foolish men do reproach godly men. Such as revile and
censure many, are usually either openly carnal men, as they were drunkards
that reproached David, and abjects, Psalm. 35.15. and 69.13. They were either
fools, or the children of fools, but viler they were than the earth, that had
Job in derision, cap. 30.1,8. men that ran into excess of riot, as the
Apostle writes, 1 Pet. 4.5. or else hypocrites, that have nothing in them but
words and empty shows. Or if at any time there be a sin found in godly men,
it is in such as are but babes, and look like carnal men, and have a great
deal of their natural folly and madness unsubdued in them, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3.
But for the most part it is a fault found only in wicked men.

Doct. 8. That it is a great pain to a wicked man to be restrained from
reproaches. He is as much vexed when he cannot or dare not speak evil of
godly men, as a dog or an ox is when he is muzzled.

Doct. 9. That the good life of godly men may silence wicked men, and yet not
make them leave their wickedness. He does not say, that by well-doing they may
win ignorant and foolish men. It is true, that sometimes a good conversation
may win them, as 1 Pet. 3.1, 2. and before verse ^2. yet ordinarily they will
do wickedly, even in the land of uprightness, Esaias 26.10.

Verse 16. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God.


IN the two former verses he confirms the exhortation by reasons: in this he
answers an objection. The objection seems to be that Christians are made free
by Christ, and therefore are not to be, tied with the bonds of humane
ordinances or subjection to men. The Apostle answers, that it is true that
Christians are made freemen; but so as they must not use their freedom as a
cloak of maliciousness, and the liberty of sinning either against God or men:
for they are still Gods servants, and bound to do what he would have them to
do, and so consequently to obey Magistrates, since God requires them so to do.

So that in this verse he entreats of Christian liberty. And so first he grants
the use of it, or the right of it in these words, As free. Secondly, ^ee
removes the abuse of it in these words, Not using your liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness. And thirdly, he gives a reason of his removal, Because they
are the servants of God still.

In the first part you must consider what he grants, viz. that they are
free. Secondly, how far he grants it, viz. that they are as free.

Free.]

Freedom is either civil or spiritual. Civil freedom is when a servant is
manumitted or made free, that was an apprentice or bond-slave before: and so
when a stranger is admitted to the right of a City, or a Commonwealth, or the
like The spiritual freedom is that estate which Christians do enjoy by Gods
favor in Christ after their calling. It is a spiritual manumission or
freedom that is here meant: and this is called Christian liberty, partly
because it is a freedom that we have only by Christ, and partly because it
is a freedom now only enjoyed by Christians, and no other men in the world.

Christian liberty is one of the great gifts or endowments bestowed upon the
Church by Christ. It is not amiss to reckon up all the gifts in order, that
the relation which this gift has to the rest may appear. The gifts then that
Christ has bestowed upon Christians are these:

Special gifts of Christ, bestowed on the godly.
First, their ransom paid unto God for their redemption.

Secondly, their vocation by the Gospel, calling them out of the world into
the Church.

Thirdly, the holy Ghost, which he sends into their hearts.

Fourthly, their justification, imputing his own righteousness, and procuring
forgiveness of all their sins.

Fifthly, their sanctification, by which he gives them new natures.

Sixthly, their adoption, by which they are made the sons of God.

Seventhly, their Christian liberty, by which they are freed from all former
bondage, and enjoy great privileges: this is a fruit of their adoption.

Eighthly, consolation, refreshing their hearts in all estates, especially by
the comforts of his Word.

Ninthly, the gift of perseverance, by which they are kept from falling away.

Lastly, an immortal and undefiled inheritance in heaven after they are dead.

Christian liberty is either the liberty of grace in this life, or the liberty
of glory after this life. The liberty of glory concerns either the soul or
the body. The glory or liberty of the soul is the freeing of it from all sin
and misery, and the setting of it in the possession of that blessed immortality
in heaven. The liberty of the body is the freeing of it from the bonds of death
and bowels of the earth, by enduing it with a glorious resurrection: part of
which freedom they enjoy even in the grave. Quanquam humantur, non tamen
damnantur.
For though they be buried, yet they are not damned to hell there, but rest in
hope of their final deliverance; and with this liberty of glory, both soul
and body are made heirs of heaven, Romans 8.21.

It is the liberty of grace is here meant. And that this part of the Christian
happiness may the better appear, I will consider, first, what he is freed
from, and secondly, what he is freed to.

For the first, there are diverse things he is freed from: as,

First, from the rigor of the moral Law: From what a Christian is made free.
he is delivered from the most rigid and severe execution of absolute and
perfect obedience; so as being now under grace, he is not bound to fulfill the
Law perfectly, but may be accepted of God if he obey it in the uprightness and
sincerity of his heart, though he have many frailties and infirmities. God has
now tempered that rigor of exaction, which he justly stood upon in his first
agreement with man in Paradise, and did with terror again proclaim in giving
his Law in Sinai: so as now in Christ our yoke is easy, and our burden light,
Matthew. 11.29. Romans 6.14. Christ our surety has fulfilled that (...), or exact
righteousness of the Law for us, Romans 8.3. Gal. 4.24, 26. Heb. 12.18. Romans
7.6. etc.

Secondly, for the execution and condemnation into which the Law for our sins
has cast us, our expiation being made in the blood of Christ, who was made
(...), a curse for us, that we might be justified from these things, from
which by the Law of Moses we could never be absolved, Romans 8.1. Gal. 3.13.

Thirdly, from the tyranny and damnation of sin that dwells in us, Electi sunt
liberi a damnatione legis, and a dominatione regis peccati.
the force of it being mortified by the spirit of Christ, and so weakened, that
though it may rebel, yet it cannot rage and rule as it did before, Romans 6.14.
Ioh. 8.34. 2 Cor. 3.17. Romans 6.6, 18.

Fourthly, from bondage under devils: those spiritual wickednesses that had
their strong holds in the hearts of every man by nature, and ruled effectually
in all the children of disobedience, who had possession in our hearts, and kept
us in their power as most cruel Jaylers, Ephesians. 2.2, 4. by Christ they are
thrown out of possession: they may tempt still, but the gates of hell shall
never prevail again over the godly, Col. 2.15.

Fifthly, from the Laws of Moses. The ceremonial and judicial Laws, which
Laws were a yoke that neither the Jews nor their fathers were ever able to
bear, Acts 15.10. The ceremonial Laws were a very seal of our condemnation,
a handwriting against us, wherein men many ways acknowledge their
guiltiness: besides, they were extremely burdensome, in respect of the rules
of them, and the strict observation required from them. Our deliverance from
these laws these places prove, Acts 15.1 Cor. 9.1, 19. 2 Cor. 3.17. Heb. 9.10.
Col. 2.17.

There were four respects which the ceremonial Law had, or four uses. First,
these ceremonies as I said before did signify our sin-guiltinesse, and were as
an obligation and handwriting against us, Col. 2.14. Secondly, they were a
badge to distinguish the Jews from all other nations, Genesis 17.13, 14. Thirdly,
they were shadows and typical adumbrations of Christ and his benefits, Heb.
9.9, 10. and 10.1, 4. Fourthly, they were as a Tutor or Schoolmasters to
instruct and keep them under in the minority of the Church, Gal. 4.1, 2.

Now all these uses are abolished by Christ: For our condemnation is taken away
by Christ, and so the handwriting is cancelled, Col. 2.14. and the Gentiles
and Jews are made all one people, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. and Christ the substance
and body is come, and therefore the shadows must vanish, Col. 2.17. and the
heir is as it were now at age, and therefore needs not Tutors and Governors,
Gal. 4.1, 2, 3.

As for the freedom of Christians from the Judicial Laws, that must be
understood with a distinction: for so many of the Judicial Laws as did agree
with the common political law of Nature are in force: only so much of the
Judicial Law as did only concern the singular and particular policy of the
Jews is abolished. Where the reason of the Law is universal the Law binds
all, where the respect and reason of the Law is fitted only to the condition
of that people, there the Law is^abolished.

Sixthly, from servile fear, unto which we are and were in bondage by Nature,
and so we are freed from the servile fears of the grave, of men, of death:
there was a spirit of bondage in us by nature, we durst not come into Gods
presence, and legal terrors did lie at the door of our hearts, to drive us
to despair of mercy or acceptance. But when Faith came, then the spirit of
bondage went away, and the hearts of Christians are emboldened with spiritual
liberty and firm confidence, taking delight in the Law of God, in the inner
man, Romans 8.15. Luke 1.74. And there was likewise in us by Nature, a fear of
the reproach and rage of men and the oppositions and scorns of the world, from
which Gods children are so delivered, that many times they have contemned the
uttermost fury of Tyrants, as Daniel and his companions, and the Martyrs, and
the Patriarchs, and Moses, etc. and from the fear of death. We were all in
bondage to it all our life; but now Christ has delivered us by destroying him
that had the power of death, Heb. 2.14, 15.

This of the first point what we are forced from.

Now for the second, what we are free to; and therein are diverse comfortable
considerations.

To what a godly man is made free.
First, we are free to the favor and fellowship of God the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost, 1 Ioh. 1.3, 7. 1 Cor. 1.9. Ioh. 17, 21. 2 Pet.
1.4. 1 Ioh. 5.24.

Secondly, we are free to the Communion of Saints, we are fellow Citizens with
the Saints, we are written in the writing of the house of Israel, and
acknowledged as members of the Congregation of the firstborn: This is an
Article of our Faith, Ephesians. 2.20. and 3.6. and 4.4, 5. Heb. 12.18, etc.

Thirdly, we are free to all the promises of Grace, those rich and precious
promises; we may safely imply they are ours, 2 Pet. 1.4. Ephesians. 3.6.

Fourthly, we are free of Gods chamber of Presence: we may go in when we will,
and ask what we will, and it shall be done unto us; we are free to put up as
many petitions and suits as we will; we are free to the Throne of Grace, Heb.
4.16. Ephesians. ^.12. and so in general we are free in the whole House of God,
even to the use of all his ordinances, Ioh. 6.36.

Fifthly, we are free in respect of things indifferent: and all things are
indifferent, that are neither commanded nor forbidden in the Word of God; all
the restraints that in the time of the old Testament lay upon any creature, are
now taken off, so as all the creatures of God are good and lawful: All things
are pure to the pure, Titus 1.15. 1. Tim. 4.4. Romans 14. so are days, meats,
garments, etc. So as now, Christians may use them or omit them freely: Note
what I say; use, as well as omit: For, some are so singular, or simple, as to
think Christian liberty does only make reference to omit, but not to use
meats, garments, days, or indifferent ceremonies; whereas they restrain
Christian liberty, that forbid the use of those indifferent things, as well as
they that dislike the omitting; only, in using, men must take heed, as has
been showed before, of the opinion of merit, worship or necessity to holiness
or salvation, which is that which is condemned by the Apostles.

Uses. The Use may be, first, for humiliation to wicked men: for hereby is
employed, that they are in great bondage, and not free; for howsoever it is
true, that every wicked man in Christian Churches, is freed from that yoke of
Moses laws: yet in all the rest, they are in danger still and bondage. They
stand bound by the covenant of works, to the absolute keeping of the Law,
because none have the benefit of the new covenant, till they be in the same;
and so all their saylings of the perfect fulfilling of the Law, are imputed to
them, and they are under the execration, and all the curses of the Law. They
are i^ bondage to the tyranny of their own sins, and have the devil
entrenched in strong holds in their souls. They would be troubled to know,
that the devil did possess their bodies; and yet do not consider, that the
devil does certainly possess their souls: every wicked man is possessed.
Besides, they are in bondage by these servile fears: they dare not set their
hearts in Gods sight. It is a death to them: nor dare they for Religions sake
displease men: and the fear of death is like a continual death to them, and
for all this they are never helped, till their hearts be turned to God.

Secondly, we may hence gather the difference between the liberty of the New
Testament, and that in the Old. In the old Testament godly men were free from
the rigor and curse of the Law, and from the dominion of sin, and power of
the devils, and from servile fear only in the new Testament there are these
three things added.

1. That the doctrine of liberty in the former things is more clear, and more
generally revealed. 2. That we are freed from the Mosaicall Laws. 3. That we
have liberty in things indifferent.
A third Use may be for instruction, to teach men to try their interest to
this freedom. For such men only are made free, that believe in Christ, Ioh.
1.12. and resolve to continue in the Word, Ioh. 8.31. and are weary and heavy
laden, Mat. 11.29. and are thoroughly turned to God, 2. Cor. 3.16, 17.

Lastly, our Christian liberty may be a great comfort to our hearts, if we
consider seriously the great miseries we are freed from, and the great
privileges we are freed to; and the rather, because our freedom proceeds from
the reader mercy of God, Luke 1.78. and was purchased at a dear rate by Christ,
1. Pet. 1.18. and the Patent of it is sealed by the holy Ghost, Ephesians. 1. 13. and
also because it is granted to none, but to the sons of God.

As free

These words restrain the grant of our liberty, and show, that though we be
made truly free by God* yet in diverse respects we are but as free, rather like
freemen, then so indeed: and so we are but as free, In what respects we are but
as free.


First, in respect of others: for by the judgment of others no freeman can be
known infallibly, but only in the conjecture of charity.

Secondly, in respect of our selves: and so we are but as free,

1. In respect of the rigor of the Law: For most Christians through ignorance
and unbelief, live under the bondage of Legal perfection, and so discern not,
that uprightness in the Gospel is accepted in stead of perfection.

2. In respect of the malediction of the Law, and so, many Christians are but
as free, First, because they doubt of Gods savor. Secondly, because though the
curse be removed, yet the things that are cursed, are not removed: for the
matter of affliction is still the same, in respect of which, our life may be
said to be hid with God, Col. 3.3.

3. In respect of the power of sin. For though the dominion of sin be taken
off: yet sin rebels in the most godly, and many times prevails in a great
degree through their security or infirmities, Romans 7.

Fourthly, in respect of things indifferent, whether we respect God or our
selves: God has freed us in respect of right, but restrained us in respect of
use, by a threefold commandment, viz. of faith, of charity, and of obedience
to Magistrates. The commandment of faith binds us not to use our liberty,
unless we be fully persuaded of our right that is in things we may either do,
or omit at our own pleasures, Romans 14.6. The commandment of charity in things
we may either do or omit at our pleasure, bind, us not to use our liberty, when
the weak brother will be offended.

The commandment of obedience binds us to submit the use of things
indifferent, to the commandment of the Magistrate; so as if the Magistate make
ordinances about the use, or restraint of things indifferent, God has bid us
to obey those ordinances: and so, though we be free still in respect of our
right, yet we are not now free in respect of the uses of them.

Again, many Christians bind themselves, where God binds not; sometimes by
thinking things indifferent to be unlawful, and sometimes by thinking
themselves free to leave them, but not to use them.

Lastly, servile fears do much darken the glory of Christian liberty in the
hearts of many Christians, whilst through ignorance, or wilful unbelief, they
trouble themselves with conceits, that God does not accept their service; or
when they admit too much respect and fear of the displeasure of men; or when
they use not the means to bear the fear of death in themselves.

Use. And therefore the Use should be, to teach Christians so to study the
Doctrine of Christian liberty, and so to attend the informing and reforming of
their own hearts, that they may no longer restrain their own liberty in any
part of it: and withal since in some things we are not fully freed in this
life, they should the more earnestly stir up themselves to hope for, and long
for that glorious and perfect liberty in heaven, purchased by Jesus Christ.

Not using your liberty, as a cloak of maliciousness.]

In these words, the Apostle removes the abuse of their liberty. The word
rendered maliciousness, (...).
signifies usually any wickedness generally or in general. His drift is to warn
them, that they should not any way abuse their liberty, and make it any way a
pretense, cover, colo^r, or means of sin, or malice.

Men may use their liberty, and the doctrine of it, as a cloak of wickedness,
taking the word in the general sense five ways.

Men may use their liverties as a cloak of maliciousness five ways.
First, when men reject their liberty, and spurn at it, and trample it under
feet, as if it were a doctrine of sinning, or made a means of sin. Thus he
that would not eat, did reject those ceremonial meats, as very badges of
wickedness, and did by that sign judge of such as did use them, to be
hypocrites, Romans 14.3. as we see now many Christians do reject and spurn at
the ceremonies imposed, and do judge all that use them, to be but formal
Christians and hypocrites, and such as persuade to the use of them, to use such
persuasions, but as cloakes for their ambition and hope of preferment, how
godly soever they be, or how sure soever they be of their lawful use of their
Christian liberty therein: and so this is one way of abusing our liberty, when
we throw it away as if it were a very cloak of maliciousness.

Secondly, when men make a show that they are freemen, and yet are in bondage
to sin and the world still: and thus do all hypocrites sin that have a form
of godliness, but deny the power of it, 2. Pet. 2. 19. 20.
that seem as if they were godly and devout to Jesus, and yet have never
repented of their sins, nor forsaken the world: such are they,

1. That seem outwardly godly, and yet live in some horrible secret
abomination, as either whoredom, or the sins of deceit, or any vile
affections, Matthew. 23.27, 28.

2. That do profess Religion, and yet live as unreformed in the course of
their conversation: such are they, Isaiah 1. verses 13.16.

3. That though they are not scandalous or injurious to others, yet they are in
bondage to the world, and are entangled either with the cares or losses of
life, as the conforming themselves to the vanities, and excesses, and fashions
of the time make apparent.

Thirdly, when men rest in the outward show of liberty, and think it is
enough: but this will turn to wickedness. It was the manner when servants
were manumitted and made free they went with hats, whereas before while they
were bondmen and prentices they were bare-headed. Some think the Apostle
alludes to this: and then the sense were, that he would not have them rest in
the bare show of free men, as if it were enough to wear a free man's hat; but
they must fall to their trades, and so set up in godliness, as they that did
employ all their labor, and stock, and credit, to grow wealthy in spiritual
treasures: else if men rested in the outward sign of free men, and were idle
and unprofitable, this would be occasion of much wickedness: for,

1. To show our selves in the habit of free men is not that which God requires,
if we employ not the portion of gifts he has given us; nay, God will require
this unfruitfulnesse at our hands as a great offense: the show without
substance is painted wickedness.

2. This resting in the outward form of godliness may breed a dangerous
habit of hypocrisy.

3. Their natural corruptions f^ll hang upon them: and then this show of
liberty is but a cloak to hide them.

Fourthly, when men take liberty to sin under pretense of their Christian
liberty. God has freed us in Christianity from the ceremonial Law, not from
the moral: for though he has delivered us from the malediction and reign of
the moral Law, yet he never freed us from the obedience of the same, Romans
6.15. Jude 3. And it is manifest, that Christian liberty can give no toleration
to sin: for Christ died to free us from sin, and not to let us loose to
sin more freely: we were freed from sin that we might be servants to
righteousness, Romans 6.18. Besides, God hares sin by nature, and not by
precept only; and therefore God himself can give no liberty to sin: God
himself cannot dispensewith the breach of the Laws that be moral in
themselves: and such Laws as be moral in themselves, I account to be all
the ten Commandments, but the fourth. The fourth Commandment is moral by
precept, not by nature; and so the Lord of the Sabbath may dispense with the
literal breach of the Sabbath: but the other nine are simply indispensable.
That Abraham was commanded to kill his son, was but a Commandment of trial.
And when God willed the Israelites to take the jewels of the Egyptians, he did
not will them to (...): for God himself was chief Lord of all the earth and
all things therein, the Egyptians were but his stewards.

Fifthly, when men use Religion and their liberty in Christ, of purpose to hide
and cloak themselves in the practice of known sins, as when Simeon and Levi
pretended the necessity of circumcision to hide their murdrous intents: and
Herod pretends his coming to Christ to worship him, and yet intends to kill
him: and the Pharisees use and make long prayers, for a pretense to cover their
devouring of widows houses, Luke 20.47. And so under pretense of giving to the
Priest they free children from releeving their parents, Matthew. 35. And so when
men preach Christ only to get living, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. And so when men enter into
profession of Religion, only to advantage themselves in wicked purposes, as to
satisfy their lusts, or further their own carnal desires.

Thus liberty is abused as a cloak of wickedness. Now more particularly,
liberty is abused many times as a cloak of malici^usnesse, when Christian
liberty especially in things indifferent, is pretended, and made a cloak to
cover vile malice, or ill affections toward their brethren.

Now Christian liberty may be made a cloak of malice in things indifferent,
which lie under the commandment of the Magistrate, and that two ways:

How Christian liberty is made a cloak of malice in things indifferent.
First, when the authority of the Magistrate is pretended, urged, and used as a
means to empty men's malice upon their brethren, when they hate them not
because they break men's laws, but because they keep Gods Laws.

Secondly, and so also on the other hand, Christian liberty is abused as a
cloak of maliciousness, when under pretense of liberty by Christ, men refuse
to obey the Christian Magistrate in things indifferent: and this is the maine
thing intended by the Apostle in the words of this verse.

For having exhorted them to submit themselves to the Ordinances of men, he
brings in these words (as was showed before) to answer their objection, that
might pretend that they were freed by Christ from all ceremonies, or ordinances
in things indifferent: The Apostle answers, that that were to make their
liberty in Christ to be a cloak for their maliciousness, that is, for their
ill-affectednesse toward the Magistrate. Where note by the way, that upon all
pretenses to withdraw obedience from the laws of Magistrates in things
indifferent, is in Gods account a sin of malice; partly, because God reckons
it as hateful as malice, and partly because it slowes usually from a heart
that is not well-affected unto the Magistrate, but some way is wanting in that
hearty respect ought to be borne to the Magistrate.

Secondly, in things indifferent that are left free to use or not to use, and
so Christian liberty is abused when it is urged to defend such things as are
scandalous, or offend such as are weak: and this is that which the Apostles in
other Scripture so much urge, when they write of offending the weak brother.

Thirdly, in things indifferent, whether free or under the Ordinances of men.
There be cases wherein Christian liberty may be vilely abused: As,

1. When things indifferent are urged as matters of necessity, and with opinion
of holiness and merit, Gal 5.1, 2.

2. When Christians do bite and devour one another by quarrelling, censuring,
backbiting one another, and make divisions about these things; this is a
reciprocal abuse about these things of Christian liberty and zeal ill spent,
seeing brotherly love is the fulfilling of the Law, etc. Gal. 5.13, 14, 15. and
the Kingdom of God stands not in garments, gestures, meat and drink; but in
righteousness, power, and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

As the servants of God.]

These words are the reason, why Christians must not neglect their obedience
unto the Magistrate, nor abuse their liberty to licentiousness or
maliciousness: For though they be free by Jesus Christ, yet they are
entertained by God still in the nature of servants, and so are bound to do
what he commands, and he does command them to submit themselves to the
ordinances of the Magistrate.

For matter of Doctrine two things may be here noted.

Doct. 1. God entertaines none by Jesus Christ, but he takes them bound to be
his servants. All Gods people are Gods servants. And thus it is with men not
only in the New Testament, but was so always before: Thus Abraham, Job,
Moses, and David, are called Gods servants.

Use. The use should be for instruction diversely.

First, seeing we are Gods servants, we should make conscience of it to do
his work: he has by the Gospel hired us to that end, to employ our selves
in the works of righteousness, mercy and piety, Tit. 2.12.

Secondly, since we belong to God who is so great a Master, How we must serve
God.
we should not only do his work, but do it in such a manner as becomes the
servants of the King of all kings. Gods servants should serve him;

1. Reverently, and with fear and trembling: we must humble our selves to
walk with God, Psalm. 2.11. Mic. 6.7.

2. Zealously: we should be zealous about this work, and so we should do
it readily. It is a shame for us to be dull, and careless, and prone to shifts
and excuses: the Centurions servants go when he bids them, and come when he
calls for them, and do this when he requires it; and our zeal should be shown
by our cheerfulness and willingness. Romans 12.45. Heb. 9.14.
Gods people should be a willing people, and our hearts should be full of
desires above all things to approve our selves to God: we should make it
appear that we not only are his servants, but love to be his servants, Isai
56.7. and in matters of his worship, or the means thereof, the zeal of his
House should eat us up.

3. Wisely and discreetly. Kings get the wisest men they can light upon to
serve before them: and therefore the King of all kings will not be served with
fools. Since we serve God, we should be circumspect, and be sure we
understand what the will of God is, Ephesians. 5.15, 16. And therefore we have
need to pray with David, that God would give us true understanding hearts to
search his Law, Psalm. 119.124.

4. Sincerely, Josh. 24.14. And this sincerity in Gods work we should show five
ways. First, in seeking none but him, Deuteronomy. 6.13. We must not be the servants
of men, 1 Cor. 7.23. to satisfy men's humors, or stand upon their liking or
disliking. We may not serve Mammon in our own lusts. No man can serve two
masters. God refuses us for his servants if we serve riches, Luke 16.13.
Secondly, we should show our sincerity in obeying him in all things: there is
no work he requires that we should think our selves too good to do it: we must
not dare to neglect any thing he requires. They are none of Gods servants that
will do only what they list in Religion. Thirdly, we should show it in doing
all things that may be best for his advantage, seeking his glory in all things,
1 Cor. 10.31. We must not seek our own praise or profit, but his whom we
serve. Fourthly, by doing his will indeed without dissimulation, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.
Fifthly, in newness of Spirit, bringing new hearts to his work, not trusting
the old man to do any work for God, Romans 7.6.

5. We must do his work constantly. A servant is not he that does a days
work and so is gone; but he that works all the year; nor has God any
servants that he hires not by life. He has none from year to year, Psalm.
119.17. We must finish his work, and never give over till we fulfill the
task appointed us, Luke 1.74. Rev. 7.17.

6. We must serve him with our spirits: God is a Spirit, and will be served in
spirit and truth. If he may not have the service of our hearts, he rejects the
service of our bodies: we must serve him with all our hearts and all our
souls, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Phil. 3.3.

7. Confidently. Servants to ill or poor masters, are feign to trust them for
diet and wages: how much more should we rely upon God, and commit our selves
wholly to him, taking no care but only to do his work, leaving all the rest
to him? Esaias 43.11.

8. With one shoulder, or with one consent: they must agree one with another,
Zeph. 3.9.

9. With all modesty, Acts 20.19. without pride, or self-conceit, or
conceitednesse; acknowledging that when we have done all, we are unprofitable
servants, Luke 17.10. and with sorrow for our failings, Acts 20. Luke 15.29.
and the rather, because God can find faults in his best servants, Job 4.18.

Use 3. Thirdly, since Gods people are Gods servants they should learn in all
places to stand for the honor and glory of their Master, and not suffer God to
be dishonored by the servants of a strange god.

Lastly, since all Gods people are his servants, and do his work, it serves
for the discovery of the miserable condition of multitudes in the visible
Church, who are hereby proved not to be Gods people, because they are not Gods
servants. And so these sorts of men following are rejected as none of Gods
people, because they are none of his servants.

Who are rejected from the number of Gods servants.
First, all profane persons, that ask what profit it is to serve God, Job 21.
15. Malac. 3.15. and serve their own lusts, Matthew. 24 49.

Secondly, all worldlings, that work about nothing more than the things of
this life, Luke 16.13.

Thirdly, all unprofitable Christians, that live and do no good, will do no
work, but spend their days in spiritual idleness and unfruitfulnesse,
making no conscience of the means or opportunities of well-doing, Matt. 25.26,
28.

Fourthly, all backward and dull Christians, to whom it seems evil to serve
the Lord, that account all religious duties to be tedious and irksome, and
never from their hearts consent to obey: Deuteronomy. 28.47.
but do what they do upon compulsion from the laws of men, or fear of
shame, etc. They are Gods servants no otherwise than the devil is. For the
devil is forced to do God some work sometimes, but it is always against his
will that God has any glory by it.

Fifthly, all ignorant Christians, that are so far from doing good works,
that they understand not Gods will, nor are careful to redeem the time that
they might get knowledge.

Sixthly, all hypocrites, that have the form of godliness, but deny the power
thereof, promise to do much work, but do it not. These (especially so many
of them as know their Masters will and do it not) shall one day feel the
weight of Gods hand.

Seventhly, all quarrelsome and contentious Christians, that make division, and
cause offenses contrary to the doctrine of Gods word. These the Apostle says,
serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own belly, and by smooth pretenses deceive
the simple, Romans 16.18.

Use. 4. Lastly, since Gods people are Gods servants, they are to be much
reproved, that take liberty to judge and censure other men for infirmities, or
things doubtful or indifferent: for what have they to do to judge another
servant? They are Gods servants, and must make their reckoning to him, and
therefore stand or fall to their own Master.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, we may hence learn that it is an excellent freedom to be
Gods servant. They are all freemen that serve God, as the coherence shows. No
freemen can enjoy better privileges than Gods servants do: and never were
there any servants that enjoyed such prerogatives as Gods servants do. And
this may appear many ways: for,

First, all sorts of men are Gods servants. Prerogatives of Gods servants.
All his subjects are his servants, Psalm. 135.14. yea all his sons are
servants: yea Christ himself, Esaias 42. all his elect are servants, yea his
friends are his servants: so Abraham that had the honor to be the friend of
God, accounted it no disparagement to be Gods servant: the Kings of the earth
accounted it to be the best part of their title, to be Gods servants, Psalm.
36.1. All which proves that it is a most free and honorable estate to be
servant unto God: else those eminent persons would never have sought them out
such a service. And this is the more evident, because God accepts not of
persons, but the poorest Christian may be as well entertained of God as any of
those States, Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11.

Secondly, Gods service may become any freeman in the world, if we consider
what kind of entertainment God gives his servants. For,

First, all his work is fair work. It is no disgrace for any man to do it;
and he requires no more of the meanest servant he has, than he does of the
greatest Prince on earth, after he has retained him to be his servant.

Secondly, if it fall out that they endure any hardship, or be put to bear any
inconvenience, it is no more than what the Master himself does, or has
endured, Matthew. 10.25.

Thirdly, and that the difficulty of this work may not dismay thee, he powers
out his own spirit upon his servants, Joel 2.29. and guides them so that in
effect he does all their work for them, Esaiah 26. Psalm. 90.

Fourthly, when they endeavor themselves to do his work in sincerity, he
accepts their service mavelous graciously, he is so well pleased with them
that his countenance does shine upon them, Psalm. 31.16. yea he boasts of their
service, Job 1.8. and 2.3.

Fifthly, if through ignorance or infirmity they miss it sometimes, and so
mar his work, if they but come to him and confess it, he is ready and easy
to forgive, and plenteous in mercy, Psalm. 86.4, 5. Esaias 44.20, 21. Mal. 3.17.

Sixthly, no men are kept and entertained more comfortably than they are: he
does not only find them food, but gives them gladness of heart; where a
thousand of other men that have means enough have so many sorrows among, that
they bear their names as a very curse, Esaias 65.13, 14.

Seventhly, if by wilful ignorance or carelessness they offend him, yet he
will correct in measure, Ier. 30.10, 11. and will quickly repent himself of
his judgment concerning them, Psalm. 135.14. He never puts away any servants,
Esaias 41.8, 9. If they should at any time run away and be lost, he will never
cease seeking them till he find them, and bring them home again, Psalm. 119.
ult.

Eighthly, he gives great wages, none like him: all his servants have a great
reward, Psalm. 19.11. And in the end he bestows upon them great inheritances,
besides what free-holds he bestows upon them in this life, Psalm. 126. 22. 1
Pet. 1.3.

Ninthly, he takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, Psalm. 35.27. It
is a joy to him when they do well and thrive.

Tenthly, besides what they get for themselves, they get great suits for others
also: they beg many a pardon, and obtain any of them, yea great suits, Job
40.5. Ioh. 15.15, 16.

Eleventhly, when any thing ailes them, his merciful kindness is a wonderful
comfort to them, Psalm. 119.70. And if they should fall into danger in respect
of the debts of other men, God becomes surety for them, and sees all
discharged, Psalm. 119. verse 122.

Twelfthly, no men have such protections. Their adversaries are sure to come to
confusion: the men that strive with them shall certainly perish, Esaias 41.11,
12, etc. The hand of the Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his
indignation toward his and their enemies, Esaias 66.14.

Thirteenthly, they shall not lose what they have wrought, but God will
establish their work: he will never forget them, and their works shall be had
in everlasting remembrance, Esaias 44.20. Psalm. 90.16, 17.

Lastly, God does not only thus extraordinarily provide for his servants, but
he takes order and provides also for the seed of his servants, which few or
none of worldly masters do, Psalm. 69.37.

Uses. The use should be threefold:

First, it should teach Christians to live with contentation, and in all things
to give thanks, and to say always with David, O Lord, thou have dealt well
with thy servant, according to thy Word, Psalm. 119.65.

Secondly, it should make them take great delight to do his work: they should
love to be servants to such a Master, Esaias 56.6.

Thirdly, they should every where speak of Gods praises that entertaines them
so graciously: they should open their mouths all the day long with the praises
of such a Master, Psalm. 134.1. and 135.1.

Verse 17. Honor all men: love the brotherhood: fear God: honor the King.


THese words are the conclusion of his exhortation to subjects. Wherein the
Apostle does not only repeat the substance of a subjects duty to his
Sovereign; but withal, does summarily commend unto them the description of an
absolute Subject or Citizen in all his relations, and tells them in a few words,
what would make a Christian living in humane societies, eminent for exactness
of his behavior: for he in these words forms him in his carriage to all men,
to good men, to God and to the King. And so his charge enjoynes,

First, courresie to all men.

Secondly, charity to godly men.

Thirdly, piety to God.

Fourthly, loyalty to the King.

Honor all men.]

The first thing that the Apostle would have a Christian that lives in humane
societies look to, is a right behavior of himself toward all men, that is,
toward the multitude in general; not because that is his greatest care, or the
greatest part of his care and duty, but because the greatest offense many times
arises from the neglect of his outward carriage toward all sorts of men, and
because Christians are usually faulty in not watching over their ways herein.

By all men he means the general body of societies where we live, even all
sorts of men, good and bad; whether religious or profane, friends or enemies,
acquaintance or strangers. Nor ought they to be scrupulous of giving honor to
wicked men: for though many men or women in the places where we live, may and
ought to be contemned for the wickedness of their lives; yet there are none
so vile, but there are some grounds of honor in them, either in respect of
some remainder of Gods Image in them, some gifts worthy praise, or some place
of eminence or authority, or some outward blessings in which they excel
others; as riches, birth, strength, valor, or the like.

Now Christians have diverse ways, by which they may express this general
honor to all sorts of men.

First, in their salutation. By what ways we may express our honoring of men.
It is a very comely thing in Christians to salute willingly, and in words and
in gesture to show civil respect, even to wicked men: Abraham's behavior
toward the Hittites may shame the most Christians, Genesis 23.7, 12, etc. Yea the
very Hittites themselves may teach them good manners in this kind.

Secondly, in their communication: and so it is an excellent rule given by
Solomon, that a man should consider to speak what is acceptable, and avoid
what may irritate, Prove. 10.12, 13. and 15.23.

Thirdly, in their conversation: and so they should show a worthy respect of
such among whom they live, if they look to these rules:

1. To avoid those persons or things may bring trouble, or wrongs, or offense
to the multitude. And this they shall do, if they strive to live without
offense themselves, 1 Cor. 10.30. and do shame the company in respect of
tale-bearers, Prove. 15.3. and 20.19. Levit. 19.16. and such as cause divisions
and offenses amongst men, Romans 16.17. and that they do not vilify any rashly,
either by reproaching them for outward defects; and so they must not curse the
deaf, Levit. 19.14. or by peremptoty judging of the final estate of the
souls of men, especially about doubtful or indifferent actions of men, 1 Cor.
5.10. Iam. ^.17.

2. To show all meekness and gentleness to all men, striving to be soft and
amiable in all their occasions of conversing, Tit. 3.1, 2. Iam. 3.17. studying
to be quiet, and to meddle with their own business, 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. following
peace toward all men, Heb. 12.14. Romans 12.19.

Only in this general respective behavior toward all sorts of men,
Christians must look to two rules:

First, the one is, that they never justify the wicked nor condemn the
righteous, Prove. 17.15.

Secondly, the other is that by needless society they make not themselves
companions with open evil doers, Psalm. 1.1.

Love the Brotherhood.]

The second thing requisite to the framing of a complete citizen or subject, is
the soundness of his affection or carriage toward such as be religious in
the Commonweal where he lives. The brotherhood is the society or company of
so many as are true Christians in the place of a man's abode or acquaintance:
that which is required is that howsoever we should show a general respect of
all sorts of men, to carry our selves fairly toward them; yet we should in a
special manner set our love upon such as be religious persons, and should
show upon all occasions that we do honor and affect them as heartily and as
tenderly, as if they were our very brethren in the flesh, or rather more
stricter, in that they are allied unto us in a far greater and better bond than
that natural consanguinity. This is that which is also earnestly required and
urged in other Scriptures, as Romans 10.12. Heb. 13.1. 1 Pet. 1.22. Ioh. 13.34.
Ephesians. 2.5.

Now this love to the godly of our acquaintance we should show diverse ways:

First, by making choice of them as the only companions of our lives, How we
show our love to the brotherhood.
Phil. 1.5. All our delight should be in them, Psalm. 16.3. And so we should
receive them and entreat them as Christ received us to glory, that is, freely,
and with all heartinesse of affection, thinking nothing too dear for them,
Romans 15.7. 1 Pet. 4.9. This is the noblest kind of hospitality: no fellowship
like the brotherly society of true Christians, so it be without dissimulation,
and constant, Romans 12.10. 1 Pet. 4.5.

Secondly, by employing our gifts the best that we can for their good, 1 Pet.
4.10. Now our gifts are either spiritual or outward gifts. First, spiritual
gifts are knowledge, utterance, prayer, or the like. Now these are given to
profit withal, not our selves only, but others, 1 Cor. 12. Thus Christians
should help others with what they have learned when they meet together, Prove.
15.7. 1 Cor. 14.26. Col. 3.16. And thus they must help one another by prayer,
whether they be absent or present, 2 Cor. 1.11. Secondly, outward gifts are
riches, friends, authority, and the like: and these should be employed
especially for the good of the brethren, Psalm. 16.3. Gal. 6.10. Phil. 2.4. And
all this we should do with all faithfulness, 3 Ioh. 3.5. and with all
compassion, putting under our shoulders to bear their burdens, Gal. 2.6. Now
their burdens are either inward temptations, or outward afflictions: in both
these we should help to bear their burdens. If they be burdened with
infirmities or temptations, we should bear their burdens by laying their
griefs to our hearts, and by striving to comfort them; and if their sorrows be
for wrongs done us, we should let them see how easily we can forgive them. If
it be outward afflictions that burden them, we bear their burdens when we
sorrow with them that sorrow, and are ready to the uttermost of our power to
advise them, or releeve and help them.

Thirdly, we should show our special love to them, by striving together with
them in the cause and quarrel of Religion, striving by all means to be of
one opinion and affection with them in matters of Religion, and to the
uttermost of our power to defend them by word and deed, according to our
callings and occasions, Phil. 1.27. 1 Cor. 1.10. Phil. 2.3.

Uses. The use may be first, for the discovery of the notable wickedness of
multitudes of Christians, that are so far from loving godly men in the places
where they live, that of all other men they most dislike them, and show it by
reproaching them, by traducing them, by avoiding their society, by diverse
hatreds of them, and by many injurious causes against them. And this is the
condition of multitudes of Christians that embrace any fellowship with other
sorts of men, though never so vile, and stand in direct opposition to the
godly: yea so blind are the most, that they almost think they do God good
service, if they could rid the country of them, Esaias 65.5. The misery of such
men is manifestly described in diverse Scriptures, and by this sign they are
discovered to be no Christians indeed, 1 Ioh. 2.9. but rather of the race of
Cain, or Ismael, 1 Ioh. 3.20. Gal. 4.29. and therefore most hateful to God, 1
Ioh. 3.15.

Secondly, we may hence gather a sign of such as are in the state of salvation
actually. For if we love the brotherhood we shall be saved, as the Apostle is
peremptory, 1 Ioh. 3.14. and the more apparent will be the sign, if we love
all the godly, and for godliness sake, both which the word brotherhood imports.

Thus of the first doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, I might hence observe also, that all the godly are
brethren: and so they are in diverse respects;

In what respects godly men are brethren.
First, in respect of profession: they have all one faith, and wear one and
the same livery of Baptism, and serve all one Lord, Ephesians. 4.4.

Secondly, they have all one Father, Mat. 2.10. one God begat them.

Thirdly, they have all one mother, the Church.

Fourthly, they must needs be brethren, they are so like one another: they are
all fashioned in the image of God, and are all like the Father.

Use. 1. The use should be, first, for instruction; and so to teach Christians
to take heed of judging and censuring one another, Romans 14.10. of offending and
grieving one another, Romans 14.13, 21. of contentions and schism one from
another, 1 Cor. 1.10. of going to law one with another, 1 Cor. 6.1, 2, etc. to
verse 8. of coozening and defrauding one another, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. of accepting of
persons, to prefer a rich man before a poor believer, Iam. 2.1, 2. of
detracting one from another, or grudging or complaining one of another, Iam.
4.11. so also, Matthew. 23.8. of all dissimulation and guilefull courses, Romans
12.9.

All these things ought to be avoided in our carriage toward godly men,
because they are our brethren. Have we not all one Father? why then do we
transgress even more against our brethren? Thus Mal. 2.10.

And secondly, it should teach us diverse things to be done or sought after; as
for instance:

1. It should teach us unity, to live together with all concord, because we are
brethren: For how comely a thing is it for brethren to live together in unity?
Psalm. 133.1.

2. It should teach us mercy, and that both spiritual and corporal, as was in
part showed before: they are brethren, and therefore if thou be converted
strengthen them, Luke 22.32. If they trespass against thee, and confess it,
forgive them, Mat. 18. If they fall by temptation into any sin of infirmity
hate them not, but reprove them plainly, Lev. 19.17. If they offend more
freely, separate from them, but yet hope the best as of a brother: reject them
not as enemies, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. And if they be in any outward adversity,
remember that a brother was borne for the day of adversity, Prove. 17.17. And
therefore if thy brother be impoverished, let him be releeved to the uttermost
of thy power, Lev. 25.35.

3. All just and faithful dealing should we show one toward another, because
we are brethren: yea, none of us should allow himself liberty, so much as to
imagine evil against his brother, Zach. 7.9, 10.

Thirdly, Superiors also should learn here not to be tyrannical, or
hardhearted, or proud, or arrogant in their carriage toward their inferiors:
for they rule their brethren, not their slaves. Deuteronomy. 17.19. Phil. 10. Nor yet
should inferiors for this reason grow careless or disobedient: for the
Apostle shows that that were an abuse of this doctrine, 1 Timothy 6.1, 2.

Use. 4. Fourthly, all poor Christians that are true Christians, have much
cause to rejoice, Iam. 1.9. for they have a great kindred. All the Godly are
their brethren, yea, the Apostles, Acts 15.23. yea, the godly Kings, Psalm.
122.8. yea, the Angels, Rev. 19.10. yea, Christ himself is not ashamed to call
them brethren, Romans 8.29. Heb. 2.10. Mat. 12.49. I might add, that wicked men
should take heed how they oppose godly men: there are a great kindred of them;
and they never prospered that wronged them: yea, some great Ones have bin fain
to humble themselves, and to lick the very dust of their feet sometimes* that
they might be reconciled to them, Esaias 60.14. Mat. 7.17.

And thus of the second part of the Apostles Charge. The third part forms the
Christian, in respect of piety to God.

Fear God.]

Piety to God consists either in knowing him, or in worshipping of him: and the
right knowledge of God, is conceived in the godly, not for contemplations sake
only, but for practice, 1. Ioh. 2.3, 4. And all the use of our knowledge, in
respect of practice toward God, is comprehended in his worship.

This worship is a religious honor we give to God; I say, religious honor, to
distinguish it from that civil honor which in general we give to all men, or
inspeciall, to some men, either for their graces, as to the godly; or for their
authority, as to Kings and Superiors.

This worship of God is either internal, or external. The internal, is the
worship of the heart: the external, is the worship of the body. The internal,
is the very life and soul of the external; without which, the external is
but a dead and contemptible carcass.

The fear of God, here commanded, belongs to the inward worship: and so it is
to be noted, that the Apostle, when he would charge Christians about piety and
devotion to God, does not enjoyne them to come to Church, to hear the Word,
receive the Sacraments, or pray, though these be elsewhere required; but
especially requires, that they look to the heart within, that the true fear
of God be preserved in them, and that especially for two causes. First, The
Apostle does especially urge the inwar^ worship of God.
because men may do that which belongs externally to the outward worship, and
yet be still but hypocrites and wicked men, as is manifest in the case of the
Jews, Esaias 1. and of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. Secondly, because if they be
rightly formed in the inward devotion of the heart, that will constrain them
to the care of the outward worship: he would have them then to be sure of the
fear of God in their hearts.

The fear of God is sometimes taken generally for the whole worship of God:
sometimes more especially for one part of the inward worship of God; and so I
think it is to be taken here.

The fear of God, what it is. It is twofold.
The fear of God is either filial or servile: the one is found only in the
godly; the other* in the wicked. A servile fear is the terror which wicked men
conceive concerning God only, as a Judge; whereby they only fear God, in
respect of his power and will to punish for sin: and it is therefore servile,
because it is in them without any love to God, or trust in God, and would not
be at all, if his punishments be removed. It is the filial fear is here
meant: this fear of God is here peremptorily required of Christians, as it is
in other Scriptures, Psalm. 2.11. and 38.8 Prove. 3.7. Esaias 8.13.

^his filial fear to God, is an affection which Gods children bear to God,
whereby they reverence his glorious nature and presence, and withal carefully
honor him in his Word and Works; being afraid of nothing more, than that
they should despise him that has been so wonderful good unto them.

That this definition of the true and filial fear of God may be rightly
understood and formed in us, we must kno^, that there are six distinct things
we should fear and stand in awe of in God.

First, his Majesty and glorious Nature. We cannot rightly think of the
transcendent excellency of Gods Nature and supreme Majesty, Six things in God
we are to stand in awe of.
as King of all kings, but it will make us abase our selves as dust and ashes
in his sight, Genesis 18. If we fear Kings for their Majesty, how should we
tremble before the King of kings! If the glory of Angels have have so amazed
the best men, how should we be amazed at the glory of God!

Secondly, his justice, and singular care to punish sin, should make the
hearts of men afraid; and woe to men, if they fear not: for, according to their
fear, is his anger, Psalm. 90.

Thirdly, his goodness is to be dreaded of all that love God: and this is the
proper fear of Gods Elect. To fear God for his justice, may be after a sort in
wicked men: but to fear God for his goodness, is only found in true Converts,
Hos. 3.5.

Fourthly, his Word is to be feared, because it is so holy, and pure, and
perfect, and mighty in operation: this trembling at Gods Word, God does not
only require, but accept very graciously, Esaias 66.3. And so godly men do
tremble as much at Gods Word as at his blows.

Fifthly, his mighty works and mavelous acts are to be exceedingly
reverenced, of what kind soever, Revel. 15.3, 4.

Lastly, if God would never punish sin, nor chide men for it by his Word, yet
the very offense of God ought to be feared, and is in some measure by all godly
Christians.

Uses. The Use may be diverse: First; we should be hence incited to seek the
true fear of God, and to labor to fashion our hearts to it: it being a
special part of the Apostles charge, we should specially respect it. And it
is not unprofitable to consider some motives that might beget in us an earnest
desire after it, and care for this true, pious, and filial fear^of God.

First, if we respect our selves, we should strive to be such as fear God:
Motives to get the fear of God.
For if we were never so good subjects to Princes, or never so courteous, and
faire-dealing men in our carriage toward all sorts: yet if we did not fear
God, we were but vile creatures, that had not the qualities of a man in us. For
to fear God and keep his commandments is the whole property of a man, Eccles.
12.13. And the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom: He is not a complete
man, that does not fear God: that is all in all, Job 28.28.

Secondly, if we consider what God is: He is our Master: and therefore where
is his fear? Mal. 1.6. He is our praise, our good God, he works fruitful
things and wonderful, and shall we not fear him? Ier. 5.22. Deuteronomy. 10.20.

Thirdly, if we consider but the benefits will come unto us, if we be religious
persons, and truly fear God: Great is the Lords mercy toward them that fear
him, Psalm. 103.11. whether we respect this life, or a better life, whether we
look for temporal or spiritual things. For temporal things, such as fear
God, have a promise of great prosperity, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Eccles. 8. 13. If any
thing be welcome, as prosperity in this world, it is Religion, and the fear of
God: For to him that fears God, is promised wealth and riches, Psalm. 112.1,
3. and honor, and long life, Pro. 10.27. and 22.4. protection from the pride
of men, and the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31.19. and strong confidence, Pro.
14.26. and they shall want nothing, Psalm. 34.9. And for spiritual things, the
secrets of the Lord are with them that fear God, and he will show them his
covenant, Psalm. 25.14. and the Sun of Righteousness shall rise unto them that
fear God, and there shall be covering under his wings, and they shall go
forth and grow as fat calves, Mal. 4.2. and the Angels of the Lord shall pitch
their tents round about them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7.

And for eternal things: there is a book of revelation to such as fear God,
where God keeps the records of them, and all the good they say or do, Mal.
3.16. and at the day of Judgment they shall have a great reward, Revel. 11.18.
Great are the privileges of such as fear God in this life: but who is able to
express how great the goodness is (as the Psalmist says) which God has laid
up for them that fear him? Psalm. 31.19. And if it should so fall out, that God
should not see it fit to give us any great estates in this world: yet a little
is better with the fear of God, than great treasures, and those troubles
therewith, which the sin of man, or the wrath of God will bring in with them.

But if we would have these benefits, we must be sure that we do indeed and
truly fear God. For there are many men in the visible Church, that bear the
name of Gods people, which yet God protests against, as such as do not fear
him indeed: as,

First, they that pity not men in affliction, fear not God, Job 6.14.

Secondly, What kinds of men do not fear God.
they that oppress their neighbors by any cavil or unjust dealing, as by
usury, or the like, fear not God, Levit. 25.17.36.

Thirdly, they that make no conscience to pay their tithes, or at least, will
not give first fruits, or free will offerings; such as will pay no more for
religious uses than they are forced unto, these fear not God, Deuteronomy. 14.23.
Mal. 1.

Fourthly, they that account it a burden, and a course of no profit to serve
God, or to be so religious, Mal. 3.14, 15. Ios. 24.14.

Fifthly, they that make no conscience of secret sins, or hypocrisy in Gods
worship: these fear not God, because they set not the Lord always before
them, nor fear to omit or do such things as the world cannot take notice of.

Sixthly, they that meddle with the seditious, or changers, how forward soever
they seem in religion: yet such as are set to be so inclinable to be led by
changers, have not the true fear of God in them, Pro. 24.21.

Seventhly, they that live in any known sin, and make no conscience to
depart from iniquity, Prove. 3.7. and 14.2. Such are they that are mentioned in
the Catalogue, Mal. 3.5. Sorcerers, Adulterers, etc. especially the men that
bless themselves in their hearts, when they are guilty of hateful sins,
Psalm. 26.1, 2, 4.

On the other side, such as truly fear God may be known by these signs:

Signs of Gods fear.
First, they make conscience to obey God in their lives, and keep his
ordinances, Deuteronomy. 6.2. They show that they fear him by serving of him.

Secondly, they do believe God, and his servants speaking to them in his name.
This was a sign the Israelites feared God, because they believed God, and his,
servant Moses, Exodus 14.31.

Thirdly, they that truly fear God do depart from evil, and dare not live,
or allow themselves in any known sin, whether it be sin in opinion, or in
life. In opinion: they that fear God, will give him glory, though it be to
change for the opinions not only they, but all the world have held, Revel.
14.7. And so in practice, he that truly fears God, hates all sin in some
measure. It is a foul sign one does not fear God, when he will not forsake
his errors or faults, though he be convinced of them.

Fourthly, they that make a conscience of it to obey God in all soundness of
practice in their conversation, and so not only in worshipping him with
reverence, Psalm. 5.8. but in striving to do all the good duties God requires,
Psalm. 5.8. And that this sign may be applied effectually, we may try our
selves by our obedience to God, whether our fear of him be right, or no;

First, if we obey in secret, and dare not leave undone such things as no man
can charge us withal, and do withal strive against and resist the very
hypocrisy of the heart, and stand infeare of Gods offense for the evil^ are
found in our very thoughts: this will prove us to fear God soundly in truth
and uprightness of heart, Ios. 24.14. Col. 3.22. When we set the Lord always
before us, and with desire to approve our selves to him, it is an excellent
sign.

Secondly, when we hear the Word of God, and are told what to avoid or do,
we are then tried whether we fear God soundly or no. For, if we dare not
delay, but make Conscience of it, to practice Gods will as fast as we know it,
it is a good sign: but otherwise, it is a foul sign, that many Christians
that make a fair show, are not found, because they are not afraid to live in
the sins God reproves by his Word, nor to leave still unperformed the
precepts, counsels, and directions are given them from day to day. The Religion
of many that seem to be of the better sort, is a mere formality, as this very
sign proves, Psalm. 86.11. Isaiah 50.10.

Thirdly, a great guess may be had at men's fear of God, by their care and
conscience they make of their obedience in their particular calling. A man may
have comfort, that his fear of God and profession of Religion is right, if he
hate idleness, lying, covetousness, deceit, frowardness, and unjust dealing
in his calling. For though to deal justly with all men be no infallible sign
of the true fear of God, yet it is a probable one; and where it is not, there
can be no true fear of God. Thus Magistrates must prove that they fear God, 2 Chronicles. 19.27. Exodus 18.21. and thus every man in his place; yea, if women would
have the reputation to be such as fear God, they must let their works praise
them. If they be idle, froward, undutifull, busybodies, and careless of
their domestical duties, Pro. 31.30.
what fear of God can be in them?

Fourthly, it will be manifest that our obedience flows from the true fear of
God, if we will obey against our profit, or ease, or credit, or our own carnal
reasons or affections. Hereby the Lord said he knew that Abraham feared him,
because he spared not his own son, Genesis 22.12.

And thus of the fear of God. The last part of the charge concerns our
loyalty to the King.

Honor the King.]

The Apostle intends in these words, but briefly, to urge the practice of their
duty, urged in the exhortation, Ver. 13. fave that the terms have something in
them of explication of that doctrine, and something for confirmation; for, we
must honor the King,

1. In our hearts. 2. In our words. 3. In our works.
First, we must honor him in our hearts, and show it two ways.

1. We must not curse the King, no not in secret, no not in our thoughts: we
must not entertain impatient and vile thoughts of the King, but, from our
hearts, esteem him for his greatness, authority, and gifts.

2. When the King commands any thing that seems to others or to us harsh,
inconvenient, or doubtful, we must honor the King by interpreting his Laws
in the best sense. If love must not think evil, but hope all things of all
sorts of men, then much more of Kings. It were greatly to be longed for, that
this note might enter into the breasts of some men; Note.
they would then be afraid to charge so much evil of the Kings ordinances, not
only when they might find a fairer sense, but oftentimes expressly against the
intent and meaning of the ordinance.

Secondly, we must honor the King in our words three ways.

1. By reverent speeches to him, and of him. 2. By a thankful acknowledgement
of the good is in him, and we receive by him. 3. By praying to God with all
manner of prayer for him, 1. Tim. 2.1.
Thirdly we must honor him in our works:

1. By paying him tributes and customs.

2. By submitting and yielding to his ordinances; preferring the obedience
thereunto before the censures or contrary opinions of what men soever. And this
is the maine thing intended verse the 13. of this Chapter. And therefore I will
omit the larger handling of this point in this place.

Verse 18. Servants, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to
the good and gentle, but also to the froward.


HItherto of the duties of subjects, and so of the exhortation as it is
political, and concerns the Commonwealth.

Now the Apostle proceeds to give directions oeconomicall, that concern the
family, or household government: Before I consider of the particular
exhortations, some thing would be said in general concerning a family.

A family is the society of diverse men dwelling together in one house for
preservation and happiness: What a family is.
Where three things are to be explicated: First, what the persons are, that
take upon them to constitute this society: Secondly, what is the difference
between this society, and their humane societies: Thirdly, what is the end of
this society.

First, the persons that constitute a family or families society, are to be
considered, either as the family is perfect, or unperfect.

1. A perfect family consists of a triple society: first, the one between
man and wife: secondly, the other between parents and children: thirdly, and
the third between Masters and servants.

2. The unperfect is, when any of these societies are wanting, as when there
are not either children, or servants, or wives, or husbands in it: The Apostles
directions here do form only an unperfect family: For he gives not directions
about parents and children.

Secondly, the difference of this society from others is, in those words,
[dwelling together in one house:] For thereby is imported, that this is the
first society of all others, and the foundation of all the rest. For a City
comprehends many families, a Country many Cities, a Monarchy many Nations,
and the World many Monarchies.

Thirdly, the end of a fraternity is preservation and happiness: and so, to
speak distinctly, Three things required to make a society happy.
there are three things requisite to make this society happy, and to preserve
it so: namely, first, commodity: secondly, delight: and thirdly, Religion. Unto
commodity is requisite possession of goods, and the mutual lawful labor of
the persons in the family: unto delight is requisite quietness and love: unto
Religion is required the constant and right serving of God. If commodity be
wanting, the family cannot be at all: If delight be wanting, it cannot be
well: and if religion be wanting, it cannot be for ever.

Thus of a family in general: and two things may be in general noted from the
Apostles charge about the family. First, that God himself does bind all sorts
of persons, as strictly to the good behavior in their own houses, or toward
one another, as he does toward those in his house. Secondly, that the
conscience is bound, immediately from God, to nourish all good duties. And this
is proved by the fifth Commandment, and Pro. 14.13. with many other places of
Scripture.

There may be diverse reasons assigned, why God gives Commandment to bind us
to domestical duties.

We are bound of God to the care of domestical duties, for diverse reasons,
First, from his own right. For, though there be many Administrators, as, of a
Church, a Commonwealth, a Family, etc. yet there is but one Lord: God is the
Head of this society, as well as of any other, 1. Cor. 12.

Secondly, because this is the first society God brought into the world; and
therefore he would have it honored, and carefully preserved to the end of the
world. The first society in Paradise, was this: and Religion was professed for
many hundred years by this society only, even till the people came out of Egypt.

Thirdly, because the persons we live withal in the family, are the nearest
companions of our lives: and therefore we should live with all due respect one
of another.

Fourthly, because the family is the Seminary both of Church and Commonwealth.

Fifthly, because the family is the most usual place for us to practice our
Religion in: what we learn at Church, is for the most part to be practiced at
home. Many have little occasion of practice abroad.

Sixthly, because the comfort and contentment of man's life lies much in this.
How are the lives of many men made uncomfortable, by disordered servants,
wicked children, idle, froward, vicious wives? God gave the woman, at the
first, as a special help to man; to show, that at home the chief help of his
life was to be had.

Use. The Use should be therefore to teach Christians, in their several places
in the family, to make conscience of their dealing; both to know it, and to do
it, as ever they would have God to come to them, and dwell with them, Psalm.
10.1, 2. and as they desire to be no hypocrites in Religion: for, such as make
no conscience of doing their duties in the family, whether themselves, wives,
servants, or children, are not sound Christians, they are but hypocrites. They
are not complete Christians, that are not good at home as well as abroad: they
walk not in a perfect way, Psalm. 101.2. And besides, till domestical
disorders be redressed, the family will never be established, Pro. 14.3.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that Inferiors in the family, are either only,
Why inferiors in a family are first and especially charged with their duties.
or first, or with most words charged about their duties; as here, servants,
and not masters; and servants and wives, with many words: and there may be
diverse reasons assigned of it.

1. To preserve order. God has subjected the Inferiors to the Superiors; and
the Superior in a family, is Gods Image: the Lord is therefore careful to
preserve his authority. The Superiors receive laws from God, but not from
their Inferiors. The Inferiors are to learn their duty, without prescribing
laws to their Superiors.

2. Because the disorders of Inferiors are, for the most part, most dangerous
to the troubling of the family, because the businesses of the family are done
by their hands, the Superior providing for the common good by common
instruments. If the Master of the family be never so godly-wise, yet
oftentimes the family may be destroyed by wicked servants, and vicious wives,
Pro. 14.1.

3. Because faults in the Inferiors are most scandalous against Religion,
especially where the family is unequally yoked; as, if the Head of the family
be an unbeleever, and the Members believers: disorder in the believers is most
extremely scandalous.

4. Because if the Head of the family be disord^ed, the orderly behavior of
the Inferiors may bring him into order, and win him both to Religion, and good
order at home. A conversation with fear, in wives, may win their husbands, as
chap. 3.1, 2. of this Epistle.

5. Because God would hereby show, that the Inferiors must always do their
duties, before they look after the duties of Superiors: they must be first
served.

6. By this course the Apostles did labor to entice the Gentiles to Religion,
by letting them see how careful they were to breed goodness and love in their
wives, servants, and children: and the Apostles did wisely in so doing, because
it is a greater gain to Religion, to gain one master, than many servants,
because such a master may do more good.

The Use should be therefore to interest the obligation upon the consciences of
wives, servants, and children: and even the more they see that God says unto
them, the more they should be careful of their duties; and ever the more
desirous they see the Lord to be to have them live without offense, the more
abominable they should account it to dare to offend still: and if they have not
masters or husbands, they should strive to be good themselves, before they
complain of the fault of their Superiors; and should think with themselves,
If I were a better wife or servant, I should find my husband or servant better
to me. Thus in the general.

The first thing then the Apostle gives in charge, concerns servants, from
verse 18. to the end of this chapter: where observe,

First, the proposition, enjoining servants to be subject to their masters,
verse 18.

Secondly, the exposition, showing both how they should be subject, viz. with
all fear; and to what masters, viz. not only to the good, but to the froward,
verse 18.

Thirdly, the confirmation of it, by three reasons, viz. from the
consideration, 1. Of the acceptance of such subjection with God, verse 19.20.
2. Of their calling, verse 21. 3. Of the example of Christ: which is urged, 1.
For the use of servants, verses 22.23. 2. For the use of all Christians by
digression, verses 24.25.



First then of the proposition: where we are to consider, first, the persons
charged, Servants: secondly the duty imposed, be subject: thirdly, the persons
to whom they owe it, to your Masters.

Servants.]

Two things are to be inquired into about servants.

First, the original of their est^^e: and secondly, the bond that ties them to
this subjection.

There are servants of God; servants of sin, servants of men: It is the
servants of men, that are here meant. Servants of men are not all of one sort
neither:

For first, such as apply themselves to satisfy the unreasonable humors of
men, Servants of men are of diverse sorts.
are said to be servants of men, and condemned, 1. Cor. 7.23.

Secondly, such as make themselves beholding to other men through their pride,
are forced many times to become their servants. Thus the borrower is a servant
to the lender, Pro. 22.7.

Thirdly, such as employ their estates or bodies for the honor, or
preservation of their superiors, are said to be servants: thus subjects serve
Princes, 1. Sam. 8.17.

Fourthly, such as employ their labors, and spend themselves for the common
good, are said to be servants: thus Ministers are the peoples servants 2. Cor.
4.5. 1. Cor. 9.19.

But none of these are here meant: These servants are domestical servants,
such as are under the yoke of particular Masters in a family.

Those servants in the Apostles time were of two sorts: some were bond
servants, such as were bought and sold in the markets, over whom the Masters
had absolute and perpetual power: some were hired servants, that did serve by
covenant and contract, as servants do now for the most part with us.

Concerning these, it may be inquired, how it comes to pass, that men, that by
creation have the same nature with other men, should in their condition be
abased to so low and mean estate, as to serve them, that are in nature alike
to them? This seems to be a grievous inequality; and therefore first to be
searched into for the original and causes of it.

It is out of doubt, that before the Fall, if man had stayed in his Innocence,
there had been no servitude, because all men had been made after the Image of
God, both for holiness and glory; and so had been on earth, as the Saints
shall be in Heaven.

The first cause then of subjection and servitude, was the confusion, For what
causes servitude came in.
and sin of our first parents brought upon the world, the earth being cursed
for man's sake: A necessity of toylesome ^^bour lay upon men; and so from the
advantages, or disadvantages of particular men's estates, did ar^se the freer,
or harder condition of some men. Besides, this sin had so confounded the very
dispositions of men, that through the inequality of natural temper, or care of
education, some men are made more fit to govern, and others to be governed.

Secondly, as a monument of Gods Justice: it is observed, that some whole
nations of men have been in their very natural inclination only disposed to
bondage, being destitute of all gifts to rule, or govern, as it is noted by
the Mu^covites and some other nations, who for the most part at this day are
servants, yea slaves by nature.

Thirdly, in other nations many men become servants, not by nature, but by
necessity, as being taken in mercy: and thus among the Latins came up the name
of servants, being servi, because they were servati, preserved from slaughter
in war: and mancipia, because they were manu capta, things tak^^ by force of
arms.

Fourthly, the horrible sins sometimes of the Ancestors brings beggary, and
so servitude upon their posterity; as the sin of Came made Canaan a servant of
servants, Genesis 9.25. So does treason, whoredom, riotousnesse, and prodigality
of many parents, undo their whole posterity, and leave them in a necessity of
serving.

Fifthly, wicked children, for their disobedience to their parents, are many
times brought not only to be servants, but as was noted before of Came, to be
servants of servants, Prove. 17.2.

Sixthly, many men are brought to a morsel of bread by their own disorder and
wickedness of life; sometimes open sins, sometimes secret sins bringing this
curse of God upon them: For men became servants, only to gain by their service
the knowledge, or state of some science, art, or trade, as many apprentices do.

Seventhly, sometimes God by his hand does abase some men only, as a trial,
if they fall into poverty, and so to the necessity of working for others, by no
sinful courses of their own, but by the inevitable hand of God, as by
pyracie, shipwreck, fire, thieves, or the like: and these are so humbled,
either to warn others, and show the power of God, or to bring them to
repentance: or else for trial of Gods grace in them.

Eighthly, some men are brought to this misery by the cruelty, and unjust
dealing of other men: and so that power the Masters took over their bondmen to
dispose of their very lives, was not of God or Nature, but merely an
oppression. For why should they have power to take away life, that could not
give it? And so, many a man is brought to poverty and servitude, by oppression
and cruel Landlords, or by the fraudulent dealings of other men, that falsify
their trust, or coozen them in bargaining.

Now, the servants brought to this condition by any of these means, must be
subject to their Masters: and this is of divine institution. For God himself
has bound them to it by the first commandment; and so the subjection of
servants is a moral, and perpetual ordinance.

Uses. The Use of all this may be diverse: For,

First, it should teach all sorts of men, the more to hate and flee from sin,
which has brought these miseries upon such multitudes of men.

Secondly, it should teach Masters to use their servants respectively: For
though they be servants, yet they are men made after the Image of God, and they
are the best part of their possession. For other things they possess, are
without life, and servants are the living instruments of their commodities.
Th^s wise and godly me^ in Scripture were wont to account it the best part of
their possessions, Genesis 12.16. and 32.5. Eccles. 2.7.
that they had men servants, or maid servants.

Thirdly, it should teach servants especially two things; the one is humility:
they should run a race fitted to their condition, they should conquer pride
and aspiring, remembering that God has abased them. The other is, they should
keep themselves in their places and callings, and not shake off the y^oke by
running away, etc. seeing God has taken them bound to serve: But the former is
most proper to this place; Seeing they are but servants, they should be content
with such diet, apparel, labor, and usage, as is convenient to their
condition.

Fourthly, it may serve for great humiliation to such servants as are wicked
men. These are of three sorts: some of them were brought to this condition by
their own wickedness of life: some of them are wicked servants too, as well
as wicked men: some are tolerable, and sometimes profitable servants, though
evil men: all are in ill case. For this is but the beginning of evil to them,
if they repent not; For if they live in their sins, as they serve men now,
they shall serve devils hereafter; and so their bondage shall be invested upon
them without end.

Quest. But seeing many godly men and women may be servants; how may a godly
Christian comfort himself in this estate of abasement?

Ans. Though it be an outward misery to be a servant: yet there are many
consolations to sweeten the bitterness of this abasement.

First, because extremities of bondage are removed from servants with us for
the most part, How a godly servant may comfort himself in that estate.
so as their service is but for a time, and voluntary too, to hire themselves
to whom they will; and Masters have not power of their lives.

Secondly, because their calling is acknowledged for a lawful calling by God.

Thirdly, because God has bound Masters by his Word to use them well, and the
laws of Princes provide punishments for unreasonable Masters.

Fourthly, because Christ has redeemed them from the spiritual bondage of
serving the Law, and the devil, and Gods Justice: so as he is Christ's freeman.

Fifthly, because though his body be subject, yet his soul is free, and not
subject to any mortal creature.

Sixthly, because their Masters are their brethren in Religion.

Seventhly, because God has provided by his unchangeable Law, that one day in
seven they shall rest from their labor.

Eighthly, before God there is neither bond nor free: but all are one in
Christ, Gal. 3.28. Col. 31.11.

Ninthly, because all the benefits of Religion, whether inward or outward,
belong to servants, as well as to Masters, 1. Cor. 12.13.

Tenthly, because the very work that servants do in their particular calling,
is accepted of God, as obedience to him, as well as the performing of the
duties of Religion; God accepts their daily labor, as well as he does praying,
hearing the Word, receiving the Sacraments, reading the Scriptures, fasting, or
the like, Ephesians. 6.6.

Eleventhly, because they are freed in that condition from many cares: seeing
they have now nothing to do in effect, but to obey in what is appointed (...);
which is a great ease to a mind that desires to see what he has to do to
please God, seeing now only one thing is necessary, which is, to obey in what
he is commanded and directed.

Twelfthly, because he shall not only have wages from men, but from God also,
E^hes. 6.8.

Lastly, bec^^^e there shall be no servants in heaven, but in Gods Kingdom
they are as free as their Masters, and therefore should not think much of a
little hardness, or harshnesse in this life.

Thus of the original of servants.

Secondly, we may hence note, that servants are bound by God himself, in his
Word; unto their subjection. The Word of God does belong to the calling of
Servants, as well as to any other calling. God has included them within the
doctrine of Scripture, as well as any other men; partly to show that they have
right to the Scripture, as well as others; and partly to show that the power of
binding servants is from God. And God has taken it upon him, by his Word, to
teach Servants as well as other men; and that for two reasons. The one is,
because Servants belong to the Kingdom of Christ and his Church, as well as
other Christians, and therefore must be taught as well as they. Secondly, the
other is, because usually Masters are negligent in teaching them, and therefore
God provides that by his Word they shall be taught. Men have some care in
teaching their children, but little of their servants; and therefore God, to
show that he is no respecter of persons, gives order to his Ministers to see
them instructed.

The Use may be diverse.

Uses. First, Masters must learn from hence their duty: For, when they see
that God takes care to teach their servants, they should not be so proud or
careless as to neglect their instruction: Yea it shows also, that if they
would have them taught, or reproved, or encouraged, they must do it with Gods
Word, and with their own: yea, it also shows the folly and wickedness of
diverse Masters, that cannot abide their servants should hear Sermons, or much
read the Scriptures; when they do not only wickedly, in restraining their
servants from the means of their Salvation, or comfort, but do foolishly also
hinder them of that means which should especially make them good servants.

Secondly, Servants may hereby be instructed, or informed, and taught.
Informed, that though neither Master nor Minister will teach them, yet they are
not excused, because they are bound to learn from Gods Word their duties: And
taught from hence they must be, to do their duties to their Masters, not for
fear, or reward, but for conscience sake, because God has bound them to his
subjection.

Thirdly Ministers should learn, and from hence be awakened, to take notice of
their charge, both to catechize in special, and to teach servants in general,
as well as others their hearers. If it be a part of the Commission of great
Apostles, to instruct servants as well as other Christians, then what accounts
can they give to God, if it be found that they have had no care of instructing
the servants of their parishes, and charges?

Doct. 3. Thirdly, the indefinite propounding of the word Servants, shows,
that all sorts of servants are equally bound to subjection; hired servants are
as strictly bound, as bond-servants: The servants of Princes are not free from
the duty of servants, more than other servants: and ^o likewise poor men's
servants must be subject and obedient to their Masters, with as much reverence
and fear, as servants to great men. Old servants are tied to as much duty, as
such as come new to serve. Religious servants are bound to as much subjection
and obedience as Pagans, or rather their bond is the stronger, because Religion
should rather make them better servants. And so there is no difference of
sexes; men servants are bound as well as women servants: neither does birth,
office, gifts, or means, privilege any servant from the strictness of the
bond of subjection.

Be subject.]

The duty then required of servants, is subjection: servants must be subject.
It is not enough to wear their masters Cloth, and to hire themselves to their
masters: they must make conscience of it, to perform constant and humble
subjection to their masters. And so they must be subject to their masters three
ways:

Servants must be subject three ways.
First, to their commandments: and so they must obey them, and yield themselves
to them, to be ruled and directed by them in all things, Ephesians. 6.5. Colos. 3.22.

Secondly, to their rebukes and corrections. For if children need rebukes and
corrections, then do servants also, Pro. 13.1 and 15.5. Servants will not
always be corrected by words, and therefore need blows, Pro. 29.19. Genesis
16.6. yea they must patiently suffer correction, though it be inflicted
unjustly, as appears in the verses following this Text.

Thirdly, to their restraints. Servants must be subject to the appointment of
their masters, even in the things wherein they restrain them; as for instance,
in their diet. It is a sinful humor in them, not to be content with such diet
as their masters appoint them, though it be worse than the diet of their
masters, or the diet of the children of the family. So likewise in their
company: they must avoid all company that may be any way offensive to their
masters; and so likewise in their apparel, in such cases where servants are to
be apparelled by their masters; as also in respect of their going out of the
house in the day time, when they have not leave: but much more abominable it is
to be out of their masters houses in the night, without their leave.

And as their subjection must be performed in all these cases: so the
indefinite manner of propounding it, shows, both that they must be subject in
all things and in all the ways of showing subjection: for the manner of it,
they must be subject in all things, so as to bear with their masters: for it
is a sinful rebellion to cross, or disobey, or leave undone any thing that is
required of them to do. And besides, it shows that they must be subject in
their very hearts, and in their words, and in their countenance and gesture, as
well as in the work to be done by them.

Use. The use may concern both servants, and the parents of such servants, and
the masters that rule them.

Servants should hence, from their hearts, learn to yield themselves over to
their masters, with all good conscience to perform the subjection required:
yea, such servants as hear this doctrine, may try their hearts, whether they
be indeed good servants or no: for a good servant, that makes conscience of his
duty, when he hears the doctrine, does from his heart consent to it, and will
strive to fashion himself according to it. Now the servants that desire to be
such as is required, may attain to it, if they observe these rules:

Helps for servants to yield subjection.
First, they must carefully study the doctrine of servants duties. Servants
oftentimes fail through mere ignorance, because they do not lay before their
minds what God requires of them.

Secondly, they must often judge themselves for their faults wherein they have
displeased their masters, or neglected their duties: therefore many servants
mend not, because either they will not see their faults, or do not humble
themselves in secret for them.

Thirdly, they must often meditate on the motives that may persuade them to
subjection. And so there are five things that might bow their hearts, and breed
in them a conscience of their duties. First, the Commandment of God: it is
Gods will they should bear themselves thus humbly and obediently toward their
masters. Secondly, the promise annexed to Gods Commandment should move them:
God will reward their work, Ephesians. 6.8. Col. 3.24. And in particular, inasmuch as
their service is required in the fifth Commandment, therefore if they be good
servants, God will bless them with long life. Thirdly, the threatening, if they
be not good servants, but bear themselves naughtily and stubbornly, they
shall not only receive shame and punishment from men, but God will plague them
for the wrongs they do to their masters, even for all the grief wherewith they
have vexed them, and for all the losses they have brought to their masters,
Col. 3. ult. Fourthly, the examples of such as have born themselves full well
in Scripture, should much move them; the piety of Abraham's servant, Genesis 24.
and the painfulnesse and faithfulness of Jacob, Genesis 31.38, etc. and the
readiness of the Centurions servant, Mat. 8. yea, it should much move them,
that Christ Jesus himself was in the form of a servant, Phil. 2. Fifthly, the
care of the Religion they profess should much move them if they be careless,
and proud, and stubborn, the Name of God, and the doctrine of Religion, may be
blasphemed, 1 Timothy 6.1. And if they be humble, and careful, and faithful,
they may adorn the doctrine of the Gospel, as the Apostle shows, Tit. 2.9, 10.

Use 2. Such parents as put their children forth to service, must take heed,
that they spoil them not by giving ear to the complaints of their masters, or
by allowing them any way in stubborn and disobedient courses.

Thirdly, if masters would have their servants to please them by their
subjection, they then must learn how to rule and govern them, not only by
teaching and charging them what to do, but also by over-seeing them, whereby
many faults may be prevented; and accordingly by seasonable reproving them,
and correcting of them betimes for the more wilful offenses; so studying to
carry themselves gently toward them, as that they lose not their authority by
too much love of their own ease and quietness: else it is just, that their
servants should prove a continual vexation to them, Pro. 30.22. and 29.19.

To your Masters.]

The parties to whom they owe subjection, are their masters: where three things
may be observed;

First, that though servants are under subjection, yet it is not to all men, or
to other men, but only to their masters: which may warn men to take heed that
they abuse not other men's servants, or speak basely of them. For though in
respect of their masters, they are servants; yet in respect of them, they are
as free as themselves. And in particular, it should teach diverse to meddle
less with other men's servants by way of complaint to their masters. It was
Salomons rule; Accuse not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee, and thou
be found guilty, Pro. 3.10. He gives two reasons of his advice: The one is,
that his complaining may so vex the servants over whom he has no jurisdiction,
that it may cause them in their impatience to vex him with their reproaches of
him; which an ingenuous mind should strive to avoid. The other is, that in
such complaints most an end there is much mis-taking, when men meddle with such
things as belong to other men's families: and then it is a soul shame to be
found faulty. To conclude this point, we should remember that of the Apostle;
What have thou to do to judge another man's servant? he stands or falls to
his own master, Romans 14.

Secondly, that all masters have authority over their servants: though the
master be a poor man, or an ignorant man, or a cruel man, or a froward man,
or a hard man, yet the servant must be subject to him, and bear himself as
reverently and obedient, as if he were the richest, or wisest, or worthiest
master in the world; and the reason is, because the subjection is due, not to
the masters riches, or gifts, or greatness, but to the authority which God
has given him as a master: and therefore servants must look to this point;
and the rather, because it will be the greater trial of their snbjection and
singleness of heart, when neither fear, nor reward, nor any outward respect
does compel or constrain them, but simply the conscience of Gods Commandment,
and the masters authority.

Thirdly, we may here inquire, how masters come by this authority over
servants: by nature they have it not, and therefore must have it by law. The
laws of men cannot make one man a servant, and another a master: therefore it
is by the Law of God. Since it is by the Law of God; if we have recourse to the
ten Commandments, The original of masters.
we shall find that it is the fifth Commandment which gives masters this
authority and honor; the exhortations of the Apostle being but interpretations
of that Law. And that this point may be cleared, two things must be searched
into: first, what sorts of men are called fathers and mothers there; and
secondly, why they are so called in the Commandment, seeing the most sorts of
them, in the usual life of man, have other titles.

The name father given to diverse sorts.
For the first. This term Father we shall find in Scripture to be given,
first, to such as begat us, Heb. 12.9. Secondly, to Ancestors, Ioh. 6.18.
Thirdly, to Tutors: so Students are called Children of the Prophets. Fourthly,
to such as beget us in respect of grace, as to our Ministers, 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal.
4.19. Fifthly, to Magistrates, Genesis 41.43. 1 King. 24.12. Ezra. 1.5. Sixthly, to
Elders in age, 1 Timothy 5.1. Seventhly, to the Inventors or Authors of any
science, art, or trade, Genesis 4.20. Lastly, it is given to masters: so Naamans
servants called him Father, 2 King. 5.13. And from hence, masters were wont to
be called Patr^s familias, as Magistrates were called Patres patriae.

For the second. Magistrates, Tutors, Ministers, Masters, and all Superiors,
are called Fathers, first, because the father was the first degree of
superiority, and the fountain and seminary of all society. Secondly, God of
purpose preserves this title in all superiority, thereby to sweeten subjection
to inferiors, and to make them think the several dangers, burdens, labors,
and subjections in each condition, to be not only tolerable, but meet to be
borns, because they endure them under parents as it were: and so such
superiority, for that reason, should not be resisted or envyed. Thirdly, that
thereby superiors may be put in mind of their duty, to avoid insolency,
cruelty, oppression, and the too much respect of themselves; God charging them
by this title, to remember that their inferiors are to them, by Gods
Ordinance, as their children.

Thus of the proposition of the duties of servants.

The exposition follows: and so, first, he shows the manner how they must be
subject, viz.

With all fear.]

Servants must subject themselves to their masters in all fear: which being
put down indefinitely, must be understood both in respect of God, and in
respect of their Masters.

Servants must show their fear of God in their places, diverse ways:

First, by avoiding such sins as are contrary to the will and commandment of
God in their general life; How many ways servants show the fear of God in
their (...).
such as are, swearing, lying, slandering, hatred of the godly, drunkenness,
whoredom, and the like, Psalm. 101.3, 4, 5.

Secondly, by carfulness to do good service, as well as their masters; not
only by spending the Sabbath in the duties of Religion, but in redeeming the
time in the week-dayes (as may be without hindrance of their work, or offense
to their masters) to employ themselves in prayer, reading, conference, etc. and
the reason is, because as servants must do their masters work as they are
servants: so they stand bound in the common obligation, to do Gods service as
they are men; and no man but is subject to the Law of God, who has given all
his commandments to servants, as well as to masters.

Thirdly, by doing their masters work out of conscience, respecting the will
and commandments of God; and therefore serving their masters with all
faithfulness, as if the service were to be done to God himself, or to Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.23.

Fourthly, by praying for their masters, and for the good success of their
labors for their masters commodity: thus Abraham's servant is commended for his
practice of the fear of God, and left for an example to all servants to do
likewise, Genesis 24.

Fifthly, by doing their masters work without eye-service, being as careful
and as diligent when their masters are absent, as when they are present; as
remembering that the Lord sees them, though their masters do not, Col. 3.22.

The fear then toward their masters, they may show diverse ways.

First, by avoiding what may displease their masters; such as is, answering
again, Tit. 2.10. contention with their fellows, and all unquietnes, Phil.
2.4. fullennesse, Prove. 29.19. and all unfaithfulness, showed either by
pu^loining in the least things, Tit. 2.10. or carelessness in disappointing the
trust committed to them; as also, masterfulnesse, pride, and haughty
behavior, when they will not abide it to be told or directed, or doing what
they list, not what they be appointed.

Secondly, by reverent behavior to be showed by lowliness of countenance, by
giving titles of honor and respect, John 13.13. by standing before them when
they sit, Luke 17. by avoiding rude behavior, or saucy familiarity, as
accounting them in heart worthy of all honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. One point of which
reverence is, that servants should not presume to deliver their opinions easily
in their masters presence, unless it be required, or may be gathered by
argument from the less, Job 32.6, 7.

Thirdly, by their secrecy in all the affairs of their masters, especially
they should take heed of discovering their masters infirmities to others abroad
out of the family.

Fourthly, by avoiding inquisitivenesse, to meddle only with their own
business; the servant knows not what his master does, Ioh. 15.15.

Fifthly, by doing their work with all faithfulness and diligence, in absence
as well as presence; that when the master comes, he may find them so doing,
Mat. 24. Thus of the manner of the duty; the persons to whom they must thus
submit themselves follow: and so they must be subject with all fear, not only
to the good, but also to the froward.

To the good and gentle.]

For the sense: we must enquire who are good masters, and who gentle.

Good masters are discerned by diverse signs.

First, they seek not only painful and skillful, but religious servants,
Signs of good masters.
Psalm. 101.1, 6, 7.

Secondly, they not only license, but teach their servants to keep Gods
Sabbaths, and to worship him, Commandment 4. Genesis 18.19.

Thirdly, they will not command their servants to do any thing that is
sinful, or to lie as snares, or defraud others for their profit.

Fourthly, that receive their servants, especially such as are religious, as
their brethren.

Fifthly, that are overseers as well of the manners of their servants, as of
their labors, being as careful that their servants be no worse to themselves,
than to their masters.

Sixthly, that use their servants well, not only praising them for well doing,
but always rewarding their service with liberal wages; and when they part
from them, not suffering them to go from them empty, without portion, etc.

Masters show their gentleness also diverse ways: as,

First, when they use their authority moderately, or are not haughty or
violent toward their servants.

Secondly, when they pass by their infirmities, and take not notice of all the
ill they say or do, Eccles. 7.22.

Thirdly, when their servants offend, they chide them with good words, and not
revile them.

But also to the froward.]

Froward masters are such as are bitter to their servants, hard to please, that
are apt to find fault, that use their servants hardly in words, or deeds, but
chiefly such as are choleric, and passionate, and peevish in their carriage
toward their servants.

So that four Doctrines may be noted from these words, and from the coherence.

Doct. 1. First, that God takes notice of the faults of Superiors, as well as
he requires duties of inferiors: he sees frowardness in masters, as well as
disobedience in servants; and the reason is, both because God is no respecter
of persons, and also because he gives his law to all men. And therefore
superiors must make conscience of their duties: for though in all things they
are not to give accounts to their inferiors, yet they must give accounts of
all they do to God, Col. 3.24.

Doct. 2. That God sees and dislikes such faults, as the laws of man take not
notice of. If a master should kill his hired servant, men's laws would take
hold of him: but if he be never so froward with him, he may escape men's laws.
But though the laws of men punish not frowardness, yet God will. So we see in
the exposition of Christ given unto diverse commandments, Mat. 5. man failed in
killing, adultery, purity, etc. not once thinking of anger, lust, filthy
speaking, reviling, etc. yet God forbids even these things also: which serves
to reprove the folly of such, as justify themselves for very just men, because
they offend not the laws of men; but never consider that God can find a world
of faults in them, that men's laws cannot; because God sees the heart, and by
his laws requires obedience of the inward man, and condemns all swerving from
the right temper of heart and carriage: And therefore we should all look to
our ways, to approve our selves not only to men but to God; and so to confess
the imperfections of men's laws, as to admire the perfection of Gods Word.

Doct. 3. That frowardness is a vice to be avoided of all sorts of men: It is
not only uncomely in servants, but in masters too, and so consequently in all
sorts of men; and it is to be avoided for many reasons.

First, if we consider the nature of the vice either in it self, or by
comparison. Reasons (...) froward^^^^.
It is of it self a kind of madness: A froward person, during the fit, is in
some degree a mad person: besides, they are very foolish and absurd. The mouth
of the righteous, says (...), brings forth wisdom, but the froward tongue
shall be cut out. In which words note the opposition: The righteous mouth
brings forth wisdom, but the froward mouth brings forth ^oolish things, and
therefore shall be cut out, Prove. ^0.31. Could froward and peevish persons
remember and consider what passes from them in these ^its, they would be
wonderfully ashamed of themselves. Again, consider how contrary froward^esse
i^to Gods nature: he says of his words, that there is no frowardness in
them, Prove. 8.8. to note, that frowardness is a thing altogether contrary to
God (...) persons in their froward fits, are not like God, but r^ther like the
devil.

Secondly, if we consider the (...) of this peevishness and frowardness
either in man or woman, we shall find that this ill humor is bred of vile
causes: sometimes it comes of drunkenness, as is noted, Prove. 23.33. always
it proceeds from ignorance and want of wit and discretion, Pro. 2.11, 12. and
usually it arises of idleness and want of constant employment, and of pride,
arrogance and stomach, Pro. 8.13. It sometimes arises from jealousy and
suspicion, and sometimes it is raised by idle and vile hypocrisy, while they
strive more for reputation to be thought good, than indeed to be such either as
they would seem to be, or should be.

Thirdly, if we consider the effects of frowardness. For those are vile,
whether we respect the froward persons themselves, or others, or God. First,
for themselves: It is a vice most unprofitable. For it is like a disease full
of anguish and unquietness, it eats up their own hearts, troubles their
minds, and robs them of all contentment: besides, it breeds a grievous
indisposition in them to all good duties both to God and men, and brings upon
them many mischiefs; It dares annoy their friends: For they that are wise will
make no friendship with the froward: and insuch as are tied to them, that they
must needs converse with them, it much alienateth their inward love an^
respect of them. And therefore Solomon says well, He that has a froward heart
finds no good; and he that has a perverse tongue falls into mischief,
Pro. 17.10. And again, Thorns and snares are in the mouths of the froward,
Pro. 22.5. Secondly, to others, their peevishness is a great vexation and
^u^den: Hence came the proverb, The lips of the righteous know what is
acceptable, that is, a godly, patient, discreet man, is exceeding pleasing to
others in his words and carriage: but the mouth of the wicked speaks
frowardness, that is, a sinful, peevish, foolish person, is in his words and
carriage exceeding troublesome and unpleasing; for so the Antithesis imports.
Besides, it breeds discord: Prove. 10.32. Prove. 16.28.
a froward mouth sows discord. Yea, it many times drives such as converse
with such persons, into perplexities and amazedness, that they know not what
to do to free themselves from their perverseness, according to that of
Solomon; The way of a man is perverse and strange: but as for the pure, his
work is right, Prove. 21.8. And therefore David, when he was to order his
family, is specially careful, that no froward person dwell with him: for where
frowardness is, there is confusion, and every evil work, Ier. 3.16. Thirdly,
if we respect God: It is a fearful thing, which Solomon says, Those which are
of a froward heart, are an abomination to the Lord; but such as are upright in
the way, are his delight, Prove. 11.20.

Fourthly, if we consider the condition of the parties, that are over-growne
with this disease of peevishness and frowardness: It is a terrible censure
that God himself gives of such for the most part, that they are wicked
persons, Prove. 6.12. He that walks with a froward mouth, is called a naughty
person, and a wicked man: and though in charity we may hope of men, that they
are not altogether destitute of true grace; yet as the Apostle said of envy
and strife, so may we say of frowardness, that such as are guilty of it
usually, are but as carnal; at the best, but babes in Christ, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2,
3. To conclude, Better is the poor that walks in his uprightness, than he
that is perverse in his lips, though he be rich, Prove. 28.6.

Use. The Use should be for admonition, and instruction to such masters,
husbands, wives, or others, that find themselves guilty of this hateful vice,
to labor by all means to get themselves cured of it, remembering the counsel
of the holy Ghost, Put away from thee a froward mouth, and perverse lips put
far from thee, Prove. 4.14. And to this end they must observe these rules:

First, they must become fools, that they may be wise: Helps against
frowardness.
they must begin the cure at the denial of themselves, and their vain
conceits. For if they trust to their own discretion, and natural gifts, they
will never mend: For natural gifts can never make that which is crooked
straight, Eccl. 1.15.

Secondly, they must strive to breed in their hearts the sound fear of God,
and his displeasure for their frowardness. For the fear of God will take
down their pride, and cause them to abhor all peevish and froward ways,
Prove. 8.13.

Thirdly, they must constantly judge themselves for their offenses herein, and
that both by daily confessing their frowardness to God in secret, and also by
acknowledging their faults herein unto such as are guided by them.

Fourthly, they must especially fly to Jesus Christ, whose office is to make
crooked things straight, Isa. 40.5. and 42.16. Luke 3.5.

The last thing to be noted out of this verse, is, that no faults in the
superiors can free the inferiors from their subjection, for matter or manner;
as here servants must be subject, yea with all fear, to froward masters: so
afterward wives must be subject to their husbands, and with all fear too,
though they be unbeleevers, or carnal men.

Thus of the exposition: the confirmation follows.
Verses 19. and 20. For this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully.

For what glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, you shall take
it patiently? but if when ye do well, and suffer for it, you take it
patiently; this is acceptable with God.


THe Apostle applies the reasons to that part of the exposition which might be
most doubted, and so gives three reasons why servants should be subject even to
evil masters. The first is taken from the acceptance of such subjection with
God, verses 19. and 20. The second is taken from their calling, verse 21. The
third, from the example of Christ afterward.

The argument from acceptance is laid down, verse 19. and avouched, and made
good, verse 20.

In the ninteenth verse then, it is the drift of the Apostle to show that
though masters should be so froward, as to beat their servants causelessly, yet
they should be subject, and endure it for conscience sake unto God, because
this is a Christian man's case, and a great praise, when out of conscience to
God he does his duty, and suffers wrongfully. The reason is so intended for the
particular case of servants so abused, as it holds in all cases of injury for
conscience sake.

In this verse then, the Apostle intreates of suffering: and we may note four
things about suffering. First, what is to be suffered, grief. Secondly, how is
it to be suffered, viz. wrongfully and with enduring. Thirdly, the cause of
suffering it, conscience toward God. Fourthly the effect, which is praise and
acceptance.

Doct. 1. In this world all sorts of men are liable to suffer grief: For though
the Apostle in the scope intends to speak of servants suffering grief, yet
the Argument with the uses concern all sorts of men. In this world then we
must look for grief: and how can it be otherwise, since first there are such
mines in our own nature made by sin, and so many abominations round (...) us
to Gods dishonor? Secondly, the creatures which we are to use in this world,
are empty and vain: and so occasion much vexation in the users, that are
disappointed by them. All is vanity and vexation of spirit, says the wise man.
Thirdly, we are liable to so many crosses and losses; every day has his
grief and his cross, which must be taken up, Mat. 6. ^lt. Luke 9.14.
Fourthly, how can we be long without grief, that live in a world so full of
sin, and devils, and divellish men? Fifthly, our own bodies often grieve us,
being liable to so many pains and diseases. What should I say? Our own houses
are full of causes of grief, if the disorders of masters, husbands, wives,
servants, children be considered of; and therefore we should be weary of the
world, and long for heaven: we shall never be long together without grief,
till we come thither.

Doct. 2. We must not only endure grief, but many times suffer it wrongfully:
Besides all the grief befalls men otherwise, the world is full of wrong and
injury, and the ways of doing wrong are so many, as cannot easily be reckoned.
Who can recount what wrongs are done daily by deceit, violence, oppression,
lying, false witness, slanderings, and other base indignities? Which should
teach us not to think it strange, if wrongs befall us: and withal it imports,
that woe shall be to all them that do wrong. That God that discovers them that
do wrong, will repay them according to all the wrong they have done.

Doct. 3. It may be here noted too, that usually they suffer most wrong, that
are most careful to do their duties: which arises partly from that fearful
Ataxie in men's natures, that are fallen into such distemperature of disposition;
and partly, from that natural malice ungodly men bear to them that are good:
and partly, such as are indeed godly, will not use such means of revenge, as
others will do; and partly, because the Laws of men do not reach to a
sufficient way of correcting and reforming such indignities: and especially it
proceeds from the pride, and unthankfulness, and discontentments, which reign
in the hearts of froward and corrupt minded persons. And from hence we may
gather the necessity of Gods general Judgment, because in this world it is
ill many times with good men, and there is no remedy, seeing their wrongs are
not righted here. It must needs be that there will be a time appointed of God,
for the redress and revenge of all wrongs. Secondly, it should the more
encourage such as suffer wrong, to endure it patiently, seeing it is the lot of
the best. Thirdly, wrong should not measure the goodness o^ men's cases, or the
badnesse of it, by the things they suffer. For many times they suffer
wrongfully.

Doct. 4. That God takes notice of the wrongs that are done to the meanest,
even the wrongs that Masters do to their servants: and so other Scriptures
show, that if the poorest be oppressed or defrauded, God will require it at
the hands of them that oppress or defraud them, be they never so mighty or
rich in the world. And so, if the weakest Christian be wronged by scandal, or
otherwise, it were better for those that give the scandal, or do the wrong,
that a millstone were hanged about their necks, and they cast into the sea. And
for that cause the Scriptures show, that God takes great notice of the wrongs
done to widows and orphans* that have little meanest to help or protect
themselves; and there is reason for it: for the meanest Christians are Gods
servants, and belong to him, and therefore he must protect them. And besides,
Gods Law is so powerful, that it condemns wrongs of all sorts to all men.
And further, there is a cry in oppression or wrong, that goes up to heaven,
which will not cease, till God hear it: which as it may be a comfort to such
as are wronged, that they have so great a Patron as God is; so it should warn
all Superiors to look to their behavior: for though man do not punish them,
yet God will.

Doct. 5. That barely to suffer grief is not a praise, but to suffer it in a
right manner: and for the manner, this likewise tells us of two things: first,
that we suffer not as evil doers, justly; and secondly, that we endure it,
that is, continue with patience to abide it, especially when o^^ward and
lawful redress may not be had in the world. And therefore Papists are no
Martyrs though they lose their lives, when it is for treason. Nor are wives to
be regarded, if they complain of their husbands, that they are bitter to
them, love them not so entirely, when they suffer this for their pride, or
wilful hardiness, or lasciviousness, or frowardness, or contention, or
wastefulnesse, or the like. Nor are those servants to be moned, that suffer
blows justly for their disobedience, or wilful negligence, or unfaithfulness.

Doct. 6. That whereas wrongs cannot be redressed by a lawful means on
earth, they must be endured without using unlawful means, and leave the
injuries to the judgment of God. Which condemns servants, that being hardly
used, run away from their Masters, as Hagar did from Sarah; or else, with
wicked murmuring and reviling, back-bite their masters: and so it condemns the
wicked practice of our Gentry, in righting their wrongs by their own private
revenges; which case is abominable. First, because their wrongs may be righted
by the Magistrate. Secondly, because the desired revenge is far above the
injuries: for they seek satisfaction in blood, for a supposed wrong in
reputation. Thirdly, because it is a course directly against the Laws of God,
and of Kings, and has been condemned in all well governed States. Fourthly,
because it is never sought but by fools: for it is a wise man's honor and
reputation, to pass by an offense; but every fool will be meddling or
quarrelling, says Solomon, Fifthly, because oftentimes it proves damnable to
one of the parties; who being slain in the act of malice, must needs be damned
for ever; besides, the curse of God brought upon the murderer, making his life
miserable, and oftentimes his end fearful.

Doct. 7. That it is conscience or mere necessity that makes any man suffer.
Men endure not wrong by nature, but either by necessity, because they cannot
right it; or else for conscience sake, because God has so required it. Which
should warn Supe^iours to take heed that they do no wrong: for the persons
wronged, if they want conscience, may so remember the wrong, as sometimes to
find a desperate way of revenge, to the mischief of the wrong doer, though
the party wronged do evil in so doing, as follows in the next doctrine.

Doct. 8. Inferiors being wronged even in blows by the Superior, ought not
to resist, but endure it: servants may not resist the correction of their
masters, nor strike again; that is horrible, and egregiou^ly sinful. Which
shows the grievous pride and naughtiness of diverse servants, that boast or
threaten that they will take no blows: their resolution shows they are void
of knowledge in the fear or conscience of Gods will. And so it is alike
sinful in children, wives, or subjects, to resist, or return blow^s for
blows, or evil for evil: neither does this embolden masters or other
superiors to do wrong, because (as was heard before) they shall receive of God
according to all the wrongs they have done.

Doct. 9. To suffer grief and wrong is profi^able: for besides that it is all
^^^ite to them when it makes them more humble, and takes away their sin* it
makes them judge themselves before God for the sins they are guilty of, and
weanes them from the world, and breeds a greater desire of heaven, and the like
fruits. Besides all these, this Text tells us of one commodity more, that is;
praise or thanks: it is an honorable thing, to suffer wrongfully: it winnes
them a great deal, not only of compassion, but also of reputation among men.
As it makes the evil more hateful: so does it procure love to him that
suffers wrongfully. It is a virtue worthy thanks, yea, the coherence with the
next verse seems to import, that God will give him thanks that suffers wrong,
if he endure it patiently: not that God is bound to do so, or that such
suffering merits any such thanks of God: but God is so good and compassionate,
and he likes this virtue so well, that he is pleased to crown this patience
with that high degree of liking it. It is thank-worthy, not because it deserves
thanks, but because it declares the party to be such and so worthy in Gods
gracious acceptance, that he will of his own grace yield him that
encouragement.

Thus of the Doctrines that may be particularly gathered out of the words of
this verse.

Before I leave the verse, there are diverse things to be considered of about
Conscience. For where this verse mentions conscience toward God, it gives us
occasion to think what that conscience should be, and to inform our selves
in diverse things about it.

There are many reasons may be assigned, why men should be carefully instructed
about Conscience: Reasons why men ought to be instructed about conscience.
it is a necessary doctrine: for first, we see by experience, that of most
things that concern us, men know least about Conscience; many men knowing
little more of it, than the bare use of the word Conscience. Secondly, men
through this ignorance do many notorious injuries and abuses to their
conscience, by resisting the motions of conscience, not knowing what to make of
them, and by smothering the scruples of conscience, and by deading the
conscience, or else by vexing them, and many other ways. Thirdly, God has
given men a great charge about the keeping of their consciences, which he
placed in their souls as a great treasure; and God would have it respected and
looked to with as much care as any thing he has given us, 1 Timothy 1.19.
Fourthly, God does require that men should get grace and goodness into their
consciences, as well as into their hearts, or words, or lives; which they can
never do, if they be not taught. Fifthly, Gods Word in all the directions and
precepts of it, does bind and oblige men's consciences to see to the obedience
of them: now what can conscience do, if men know not what belongs to their
consciences, and the natures and works of conscience? But above all things, it
should awaken men to study the knowledge of conscience, yea, of their own
consciences, if they consider that the conscience of every man is one of the
principal books shall be opened at the last day, for evidence, before the
Tribunal Seat of Christ: and therefore men were best to look about them in
this world, to see to it, what is written in this book; for it is indeleble,
and will stand upon record, either for them or against them at that day.

Now concerning conscience, diverse things are to be considered:

First, what conscience is. Secondly, what the work of conscience is. Thirdly,
what the prerogatives of conscience are. Fourthly, the kinds or sorts of
consciences. Last of all, what it is that binds the conscience: which is to be
inquired into, because men are enjoined to suffer wrongs patiently for
conscience sake, even servants from their Masters.
For the first. To know what conscience is, we must look both to the Etymology
of the word, What conscience is.
and to the definition of the thing. The word Conscience imports a knowledge
with another: Conscie^^^^^, quasi cum alia scientia: Conscience, that is,
science conjoined: and the reason is, because conscience is a thing in us, that
knows what we have done, and therein joins with some other thing that knows
it too. Some of our actions conscience sees within, and the Angels and men see
them without: but for our secret thoughts, Romans 2.15. and 9.1.
conscience is only joined with God, or with our own minds as they are
joined with God. Conscience is a thing within us, which God has placed there
of purpose to be his witness or (...) to discover all we think or do: and as
it is joined with the mind of man, it is the knowledge of what we know, or the
thinking of what we think. To think of other things, is the understanding or
mind* but to think what we think, is the conscience of a man. Or else
conscience may be called so, because it is a concluding science; Consci^ntia,
quasi c^^^ludens scientia: and the reason of the term in that sense may be
thus, because, look what discourse conscience has with God or the mind of
man, it u^tereth it by way of a Syllogism, which they call a practical
Syllogism. As for instance, if the conscience speak within to a murderer, it
speaks by Syllogism thus: Every murderer is in a fearful case; but thou
art a murderer, therefore thou art in a fearful case. Now, that that reason,
which concludes thus in him, is his conscience, is most apparent: For the mind
gives only the first part of the Syllogism, which is, that a murderer is in a
fearful case: or that the mind sees either by the natural principles planted
in it, or by the Scriptures. The other branch the conscience takes out of the
memory, that is, that thou have committed murder. Now the concluding of both,
and applying them to the murderer, is the proper work of conscience, and
conscience is that within us, that so concluds upon our actions.

Now for the definition of conscience, omitting the diversity of frames given
by diverse men, I express that which I take to be the cleerer, and fullest to
show us what it is. Conscience is a divine faculty in the soul of all
reasonable creatures, applying the principles or propositions of their mind,
in their particular actions, either with them or against them.

I say, it is a faculty, to note that it is more then the act or the habit of
the mind, judging or determining. For acts and habits may be lost, but
conscience cannot. Besides, the Scriptures show that conscience does act, as it
excuses or accuses, and therefore must be a faculty it self, and not the act
of a faculty. I say, a faculty in the soul, because I dare not assign it or
confine it to any part of the soul, as they do, that make it a part of the
understanding; for the understanding has no parts properly: and to make it a
part Analogically, is not to be borne in a definition, as Logicians know.

I say moreover, it is in all reasonable creatures; to note, that beasts, that
have only a sensitive soul, have no conscience. And whereas God also is no
creature; therefore he has no conscience. For God being holiness it self,
needs no faculties to govern himself by, nor any conscience to witness or
prompt him. And I say it is in all, that none might imagine, that some men have
a conscience, and some have none: For every man has a conscience, either good
or bad.

Secondly, the proper work of conscience is imported in the other words of the
definition, The proper work of Conscience.
viz. applying the principles of the mind. For the understanding whereof, we
must know, that there are certain notions or frames of truth planted in the
minds of all men, being infused by God as a natural law in their minds,
showing what is good or evil, and those principles are increased in the minds
of such as have the benefit of the Scripture more or less, These principles in
the mind, show a keeper they call Synteresis.
according to the degree of their knowledge. Now that which conscience does, is
this: it repaires to these forms of truth or light in the mind, and takes
such of them as concern the business in hand, and with the force of them
either comforts or affrights men, according as the occasion is.

Note, that I say, it is a divine faculty: I wanted a fit term to express my
meaning for that I would ^^ter: I say, that it is a wonderful special faculty
in us: it is a most celestial gift. Conscience is so of God, and in man, that
it is a kind of middle thing between God and man: less then God, and yet
above man.

So then, Conscience concludes about a man's own actions: for if conscience
trouble it self about other men's actions, it is either the weakness, or the
error of conscience: and I add particular actions, because conscience never
imployes it self properly about generals: and lastly, I add for the success,
or end; it is either with a man, or against him, to note, that conscience is
such an Arbiter between God and us, that sometimes it speaks for God against
us, and sometimes for us to God.

But that we may be more distinctly informed about conscience; I therefore come
to the second point, which is, to consider what conscience can do, or how it
is employed in us: How consci^^ce is employed in us.
and conscience is employed both for God and for man: which work I will
consider first apart, and then jointly.

For God then. Conscience works diversely, and has many offices under God, and
for God: for it is Gods special spy set in the heart of man to watch him,
Chir^graphia De^.
and his intelligencer and notary to set down what man has done: it is Gods
handwriting, the Law of God written in our hearts, or rather works by the
help of that body of the Law written by the finger of God upon the tables of
men's hearts: it is a co-witnesse with God, Romans 9.1. It is also Gods
Lieutenant, and a great commander placed within us, that severely requires
homage and service to be done to God, and especially diverts man from ill,
directing him in the careful manner of serving of God: for God will not accept
any service that conscience does not order, 2 Timothy 1.3. It is a taster for God,
in point of doctrine of Religion; for all doctrines must be brought to the
conscience to be tried, whether they be of God, or no, 2 Cor. 4.2. And
finally, it makes a man endure grief, and suffer wrong for God and his glory,
as this Text imports. For man, conscience is many ways employed: as first, it
is employed in viewing and surveying the things of man, especially the hidden
things of man: and here the power of conscience is wonderful. For other
creatures may see the things without them, but have no power to see the things
within them: only man, he has a knowledge reflexed. The eye of a man too can
see other things, but without a glass it cannot see it self. But now
conscience can discern it self, and the whole actions of man; and so it
differs from science, or the knowledge of the mind: for to know other things,
is science; but to know our selves is conscience. The soul then by conscience
knows it self: it views the thoughts, memory, affections of the soul, and can
tell what we think, desire, love, fear, hate, etc. Secondly, in matters of
Religion, conscience is specially employed: for instance, both in the Word and
the Sacraments. For the Wo^d: the mystery of faith, even all the grounds of
Religion, they are laid up, and are in the keeping of conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9.
And in Baptism, where as God makes a covenant with us, and likewise requires a
restipulation or promise on our part, conscience is herein employed; and
without conscience, God will do nothing in the business. It was the form in
the Primitive times, that the party which was to be baptized, was to be
examined before God, whether he did believe: the question was, Credis? Do
thou believe? And he was to answer, Credo. I do believe.

Now, this answer God would not take, unless the conscience would say, that
he did believe as he said: this is the answer. A good conscience is
mentioned, 1 Pet. 3.21. Again, a good conscience serves in all the offices of
our life or affairs, even in all things to be a witness; if we do that which
conscience thinks well, to comfort us; and if we do that which conscience
thinks ill, to discourage us, Romans 2.15. and 9.1. Yea, conscience is the guide
of our lives. We are here pilgrims and strangers, far from our home, and in
journey continually: now God has set consciences in us to be our guides, that
in all things we are to do, we may be directed and encouraged by conscience,
taking the direction and warrant of conscience as a special ground of our
actions; so as to do cont^ary to what conscience bids us, is a sin: for it
does not only witness about what is past, but it directs us about what is to
come, as now to be done.

But the principal work of conscience, whether we respect God or man, is to
keep court in the heart of man. There is in man Forum Conscientia, a Court of
Conscience: a secret Tribunal is set up in the heart of man, and therein fits
conscience, and arraigneth, accuses, brings witness, sentenceth, and does
execution. Now concerning the judgment of conscience, keeping an Assise in the
heart of man, two things are to be considered: first, the law by which
conscience judges: secondly, the manner of the proceeding in judgment.

For the first: Conscience judges of the actions of men, by virtue of certain
principles (as I said before) which it finds in the understanding, gathered
either from the law of nature, or from experience of Gods providence, or from
the Scriptures.

Now the manner how it proceeds in judgment, is in form of reasoning, as I
said before: for in the mind the conscience finds as it were a book of law
written, which is in the keeping of the faculty; they call it in schools,
Synt^resis: from hence the conscience takes the ground of reasoning; and from
the memory it takes evidence of the fact, or state of the man that is
arraigned, and then by it self it judiciously concludes and passes sentence:
and so it proceeds whether it condemn or absolve. In the judgment of
condemnation, it proceeds thus: First, it cites or calls for the soul to be
tried: then it accuses in this form, out of the body of the law kept in the
mind, it takes the conclusion it means to works upon, and then uses the
memory to testify of the fact; as for instance: Every murderer is an offender;
thou art a murderer, therefore thou art proved to be an offender. Then comes
the sentence in the same order: He that commits murder without repentance,
shall be damned: thou committest murder without repentance, and therefore art a
damned creature. So likewise it proceeds in absolving. For evidence, it
proceeds thus: He that has such and such marks, as, godly sorrow, the love or
fear of God, etc. he is a child of God; but thou have these marks, therefore
thou art a child of God: and then it goes to sentence; He that is the child
of God, shall be saved: but thou art proved to be the child of God, therefore
thou shall be saved. Nor does it rest in the sentence, but immediately does it
self begin the execution: for laying hold upon the guilty person, it presently
buffets him, and terrifies him, and pricks him at the very heart, and gnawes
him many times with unspeakable torments and tortures. And so contrariwise, in
the sentence of absolution, it proceeds with comfort, settleth and quieteth the
heart of the absolved, and many times makes it able with joy to stand undaunted
against all the powers of hell, and the world: of which more afterward, when I
come to entreat of the sorts of conscience.

Observe by the way the difference between the court of conscience within us,
and men's courts of Justice without us. For in men's courts they proceed secundum
allegatae and probata, according to allegation and proofs: but God has
appointed another judgment in the heart of man: there God judges not
according to allegation and proofs, but according to conscience, and has
associated to every man a notary of his own, and a witness of his own, which
he produces out of his very bosom: so as man shall be made to confess what
he has done, though all the world excuse him, and shall have comfortable
testimony in himself, though all the world beside accuse him.

The glory of the power of conscience appears by the third point, and that is
the prerogatives and properties of conscience in a man for,

Pr^r^gatives or p^^pert^^s of conscience.
1. It keeps court in the heart of a man, without limitation of time it will
call a man to answer and hear judgment at any time; it is not limited to any
terms, nor can the sentence be delaied: it has power to examine, testify, and
give sentence at any time of the year at pleasure, nor will it admit any
appeal to any creature.

2. It is subject properly only to God: no earthly Prince can command the
conscience of a man, as will more appear afterward.

3. It keeps continual residence in the heart of man: it is always with him,
at home and abroad: it observes and watches him in all places, in the Church,
at his table, in his bed, day and night: it never leaves him.

4. God has subjected man to the obedience of conscience, if it command
erroneously, if it be in things indifferent; as in the case of meats and days:
in the Apostles time, if the conscience doubted or forbade the use of them,
which yet in themselves might be used, the man was bound to follow his
conscience, though the conscience erred, and so sinned in doubting or
forbidding, Romans 14.14.23.

5. Yea, so much honor does God give unto the conscience, that he suffers his
own most holy Spirit to bring in evidence in the court of conscience: for so
we read, that the Spirit of Adoption does bear witness before our spirits,
that is, before the conscience, that we are the sons of God, Romans 8.15.

6. It is a great prerogative, that God has granted immortality unto
conscience: Conscience never dies, no not when we die. Every man's conscience
shall be found no lier at the day of Judgment, and in so great request with
Christ, as that dreadful Judgment shall be guided according to the evidence
and verdict of conscience, Romans 2.15, 16.

For the fourth point. Conscience is not all of a sort in all men: some have
good consciences, Kinds of conscience.
and some have ill consciences: and both these kinds of consciences must be
considered of.

Conscience considered as good, comes to be so either by creation, or by
renovation. By creation, Adam had his conscience good: but by the first sin,
conscience became evil in him and all his posterity; so as all men naturally
have evil consciences: and no men have their consciences good, but as they are
renewed.

The difference between a good conscience by creation and renovation, is this;
that by creation, conscience was perfectly good from the first moment it was
infused, till the fall, and did discover it self by excusing and comforting
always: for Adams conscience till his fall, could accuse him of nothing. But
by renovation, conscience is good for the time of this life, but imperfectly,
and increases in good men by degrees: and so, because man is renewed but in
part, it is a part of the goodness of the conscience to accuse for sin,
especially if it be presumptuous after calling, as well as to excuse from
faults, while the man keeps his uprightness. That a good conscience should
only excuse, is true (in this world) only of conscience, as it was good by
creation.

Now concerning the goodness or badnesse of conscience, these seven things are
to be considered of.

First, that all men's consciences by nature are evil. Secondly, the difference
of evil in men's consciences. Thirdly, the signs of an evil conscience.
Fourthly, the hurt of an evil conscience. Fifthly, the means how evil
consciences may be made good. Sixthly, the signs of a good conscience.
Seventhly, the great happiness of the man that has a good conscience.
For the first, that all men's consciences are by nature evil, is manifest,
because all have sinned in Adam, and lost their original righteousness in all
the faculties of the soul: and so every man in his natural condition, is in
every point unclean, and to the impure all things are impure, even their
consciences are polluted, says the Apostle, Tit. 1.15.

Difference of evil in men's consciences.
For the second: evil is not in the same degree in all men's consciences, but
after a different manner in diverse men: for,

First, in most men we see that conscience is so feeble, and works so little,
that it seems to be but a small spark, or like a bubble, which rises now and
then, and presently vanishes.

Now the reason why conscience stirs so little in the most men, is not to be
taken from the nature of conscience, (for that can work all works mentioned
before) but from diverse things in man. For first, Adams sin, as it deprived
all men's consciences of original righteousness, which was the life of the
conscience; so it brought such a depravation and evil disease upon the
conscience, that it was never healed, nor cured in the natural man to this
day: but the weakness arising from the infection, holds him down still.
Secondly, the general ignorance and darkness which is in the world, is one
great cause why conscience lies so miserably weak, and neglected. For it
cannot work for want of light. For in the mind it finds only a few natural
principles, or some general truths of religion, which are altogether
insufficient to direct in the particular occasions of men's lives. Thirdly,
besides, the law of nature is corrupted in man; and so those principles are
very muddy and uncertain, and the generals of Religion are poisoned with
secret objections gathered from the controversies of so many false religions.
Fourthly, further it is manifest, that the cares and pleasures of life oppress
conscience in many, and in them conscience stirs not, not because it cannot
stir, but because there is no leisure to hear what it says; men are so
violently carried to the pleasures and business of this world. As a man that
runs in a race, many times runs with such violence, that he cannot hear what
is said unto him by some that he passes by, though it were counsel that might
direct him in the right way of the race: so is it with men that haste to be
rich: conscience often calls to them, to take heed of going out of the way, by
deceit, or lying, or oppression, or the like; but they pursue riches so
violently, that they cannot hear the voice of conscience. And so is it with
the voluptuous person, and with the most men that live in any habitual
gainful sin. Fifthly, yea this weakness comes upon the conscience of some by
custom of sins, that are not sins of gain, or pleasure, as the sins of
negligence, sloathfulnesse, passion, or the like, in which men are wilfully
confirmed, and will not regard the checks of their own conscience. Finally,
one great reason why the most of us feel so little of conscience, is, the
evil hearing of the Word of God: for the Word of God powerfully preached,
would awake the conscience, but that most men set themselves to neglect it, by
a willing and wilful entertainment of distractions, and in voluntary
forgetting of what they have heard; and so hoodwinking themselves, it is no
wonder they cannot see.

Secondly, some men's conscience is stark dead, it stirs not at all. The
conscience is compared to a part of the body, that is not only without sense
and rotten, but is feared with an hot iron: and this is the case only of some
notorious either Heretics, or malefactors, that have lived a long time
wilfully in some monstrous wickedness, either known, or secret, 1 Timothy 4.2.
This seared conscience is either joined with a greediness to commit special
wickedness, or with a reprobate mind, that is so horrible stupid, that it
judges evil to be good, or, at the best, not dangerously hurtful, Ephesians.
4.18. Romans 1.28.

Thirdly, in some men the evil of conscience lies in this, that it is over
busy, and sins too much: and so in two sorts of men; first, the
superstitious; or secondly, the desperate. The superstitious person is many
times disquieted by his conscience in doing well, or when he does that which is
not unlawful, as the Popish Priest is troubled for coming to our Churches; or
the Christian that is carried with preposterous zeal, is troubled for obeying
the Magistrate in using his liberty in things indifferent: in the desperate,
the evil of Conscience is the horrible tormenting of them beyond the bounds of
the offense of Conscience, and that in two things. First, in that it presents
the wrath of God to them, without the hope of mercy in Christ, as did the
Conscience of Cain. Secondly, in that it drives them to do that against
themselves, which is desperately wicked, as to make away themselves, as the
desperate Conscience of Judas and Achitophel did.

Fourthly, in some men there was a temporary goodness in the Conscience, of
which they made shipwreck, and so utterly lost the goodness they had for a
time. And thus many hypocrites do, that for a time get the form of Religion
even into their Consciences, but afterward falling into the immoderate love of
the world, or the lust of some particular sin, fall clean away from
Religion, and so lose the goodness which they had, 1 Timothy 1.19.

Thus of the differences of evil in the Consciences of diverse men: the signs
of an evil Conscience follow. But before I give the signs, we must take
notice of a distinction, and that is, that the Conscience may have evil in it,
and not be an evil Conscience. Conscience in this life in men regenerate is
renewed and restored but in part, and so may err sometimes, and in some cases,
Note.
and yet be no evil Conscience. As for instance in certain weak Christians
in the Primitive Church (who yet were godly men) the Apostle shows, Romans 14.
that some Christians for Conscience sake did refuse certain meats and days:
the Conscience erred in judging those meats and days to be unlawful to be
observed and used; and yet he calls them that were so led by an erring
Conscience, he calls them, I say* brethren. But when we speak of an evil
Conscience, we mean Conscience unregenerate. As a man may have sin in him,
and yet be a good man: so may Conscience have blindness in it, and yet be a
good Conscience.

The signs of an unregenerate Conscience may be gathered from the differences
of evil Consciences.

The signs then of an unregenerate still Conscience are these:

First, The signs of an evil Conscience (...).
when it is quiet in the committing, and after the committing of known sin,
whether open or secret. For open sins; as for drunkenness, swearing, lying,
profanation of the Sabbath, and the like: the Conscience cannot be good, when
these or the like open wickednesses are committed: and so when it is quiet,
notwithstanding secret whoredom, or filthiness of any kind, or continual
wickedness in the thoughts or desires, that Conscience that can abide a soul
heart is a wicked Conscience.

Secondly, when it excuses for doing notorious evils: and so they have evil
Consciences that could trouble and persecute, even to the death, godly men, and
yet think they did God good service, John 16.2.

The signs of an unregenerate stirring Conscience are these:

First, Signs of an ill stirring Conscience.
when the Conscience serves only to tell ill news, when it serves to tell a
man only of his loss by Adam, or the Law, but never comfort him by
bringing^in any evidence of Gods favor in Christ. That Conscience that
terrifies without Christ* that is, without mixing any of the comforts of the
Gospel in Christ, is an evil Conscience: the special property of a good
Conscience is to excuse and comfort; and therefore that Conscience that does
only accuse is an evil Conscience.

Secondly, when the Conscience flees from the presence of God, as did Adams
Conscience after the Fall: and this the Conscience discovers, when it dares not
stand before the discovery of the Law of God, not dares abide a powerful
Minister, that speaks to the Conscience of the hearers, and ransacks them.

Thirdly, when the Conscience languisheth about questions that tend not to
edification, and raises the strength of zeal, and all the power of it, about
things that are less necessary either unto faith or practice. And this was the
case of the Pharisees Conscience, that spent all their zeal about less
matters, and neglected the waightier things of the Law. And this is the case of
all such Christians that are zealous with a fiery zeal about circumstances, or
the estates and businesses of others, and neglect the maine things of
substance, that concern their own sanctification, assurance, or salvation.

Fourthly, when the Conscience is for men, and not for God; when the motive
that raises and incourageth it, is the praise of men, and not the praise of
God. This also was the case of the Consciences of the Pharisees: for the
Conscience in them was busy, and did require good duties, but the respect was
still the praise of men; whereas a good Conscience is for God above all.

Fifthly, when it will accuse only for gross evils, and those known to
others, and not for less and secret sins to be repented of.

Sixthly, when it will accuse only in the time of adversity; as in the case of
Joseph's brethren.

Thus of the signs of an evil Conscience.

Hurt of an evil conscience.
The misery that the men have that have an evil Conscience follows: and they
are miserable, whether they have a waking or a sleeping Conscience. The misery
that comes from a waking Conscience is evil, and may be two ways discerned:
first, by the terms by which it is called and resembled in Scripture:
secondly, by the effects which it works really upon a man. For the first. An
evil Conscience that is awake, is in Scripture compared to a sting or prick
wounding the heart of a man. It is likened also to a dog or a bloud-hound that
lies at the door; and, having fresh sent, howleth and barketh after the
malefactor, Genesis 4. It is likened, as some think, by David, Psalm. 51.4. to an
evil contentious wife, that is ever before a man chiding and brauling: and as
a moth secretly eats the garment, so does an evil Conscience eat up the heart
of a man, when others little see it, Prove 25. It is like a dart, strangely shot
into a man's body, Psalm 38. and it is compared to the boiling of the
tumultuous sea, Esaias 57. and it is called a worm that dies not, but lies
gnawing and eating upon the heart of a man, Esaias 66. Mark 9. So that a man
that has an evil Conscience, is like a man that is stung by a serpent, or
followed by a bloud-hound, or vexed by a continuallcontrarious wife, or that is
hourly shot through with darts, or that has a living worm ever gnawing at
his heart. But that this may be more distinctly understood, we must take
notice of four effects of an evil Conscience usually.

Four ill effects of an ill conscience.
The first is shame. He that has an evil Conscience is betrayed by his own
blushing many times, when his offense is secret: yea, a man feels an inward
shame in his own heart, disgracing and abusing him, though he make no outward
show of it. For though sometimes an innocent person, upon the fullness of an
aspersion, may conceive shame, as David did. Psalm. 44.15. yet it is usually the
effect of an ill Conscience.

The second is pain and anguish of heart, arising from the gnawing and stings
of Conscience mentioned before; which so continually burdens the heart, that it
takes away all contentment in any thing, and keeps the heart in an habitual
disconsolation: and though the disease of melancholy may breed a sadness like
unto it, yet is there manifest difference betwixt this affliction of spirit,
and melancholy; for the melancholic person usually can assign no certain
reason of that sadness: whereas Conscience, when it stings, a ^^gnes the cause
of it to be such and such things, which bring no^ only the shame of men, but
the wrath of God. Besides, melancholic sadness may be eased by physic: but
this sorrow is not cured by any means, but such as are spiritual.

The third is a strange kind of fear, breaking the heart of a man, and so
subduing his courage, that he is not able to sustain himself against the
impressions of vain causes of fear. A trembling heart is the effect of an ill
conscience, Deuteronomy. 28.65. Thus wicked men are said in Scripture to fear when no
man pursues them, Pro. 28.1. and to be so faint-hearted, as the sound of a
shaken leaf shall make them fly, as it were from a sword, Levit. 26.36. and as
it is in Job, The sound of fear is always in his ears: yea the terrors of
conscience sometime so enrage upon the offender, that no torments are like unto
their terrors; which sometimes are so great, that they are hardly able to
sustain themselves, but discover their horrible restlesnesse, by the grievous
distempers of the body, or failing of their senses; being for the time, as Job
says, brought under the king of terrors, Job 18.14. What a woeful case
Belshazzar was in, you may read Dan. 5.9. These terrors are the fancies the
Gentiles so much dreamed of.

The fourth is desperation. An evil Conscience in sin many times brings them
to hellish despair of all mercy and pardon: thus Cain rages and blasphemeth
like a frantic man. And these effects of an evil Conscience are so much the
more great,

1. Because the Conscience can lash a man without noise: Aggravations of the
misery of an ill Conscience.
it can secretly inflict torments, when no eyes shall pity him.

2. Because there is no escape from Conscience: a man can neither drive it
away, nor run from it: it cleaves to the offender inseparably. From a tyrant or
ill master some men run away: but from an ill Conscience there is no flying.

3. Because Conscience it self is a thousand witnesses to prove the fault,
though never so secret: and the offender is (...) condemned of himself, and
goes up and down with a heavy sentence upon him in his bosom, though all the
world should account him innocent.

4. Because an evil Conscience is such a damnable disease; and the grief
raised by Conscience is such and so lasting, that the grieved dies before the
grief can be removed: yea, so violent is the confusion which despair brings
into the thoughts, that, out of the grievous mistaking and impatience, many
times the offender makes away himself, as Saul, Achitophel, and Judas did, and
many in our times do.

5. Because death it self does not abate the torments of an evil Conscience:
but the living worm gnawes them even in hell for ever, and with so much
strength and power there, that one said wittily, Hell were not hell if it were
not for the gnawing of this never-dying and never-ceasing worm.

6. Because unto the making up of the complete misery of the impenitent sinner,
the sentence of Conscience, and the testimony of it shall be heard and admitted
at the last day before the Tribunal of Christ. For though an evil conscience
shall never disgrace for some effects, as for that of working despair of
mercy: yet for the maine body of the proceedings of Conscience, it shall be not
only allowed, but justified by the voice of Christ, to the eternal shame and
confusion of the offender.

And though it be true, that the worst of the effects before mentioned arise
from a stirring Conscience, yet is not the man safe that has a still
Conscience, if it be evil. For first, he is in continual danger of the
awaking of that conscience of his, that now is asleep. What ease can that man's
heart be at, if he had all pleasures round about him, if he were tied to a
Bear, or Lion, or mad Dog, though he were then asleep? for he may awake every
moment, and then where is he? The stillness of an ill conscience is but like
the sleep of a frantic man. Secondly, there can be no true peace unto the man
that lies in sin without repentance: Isa. 57. There is no peace to the
wicked, says my God. Though he be friends with himself for a time, yet God
is not friends with him, nor is sin and Satan at peace with him, though there
be an uncertain truce for a time. Thirdly, the danger of a still conscience is
the greater: for the terrors of a troubled conscience may prepare a man for
Christ, and compel a man to seek help from Christ; but in the case of a
still conscience, there are these two usual miseries: the one, that men take a
still conscience to be a good conscience: and the other is, that a man runs
only blindefolded so long, till death and hell may seize upon him. Thus of the
effects of an evil conscience: the means how conscience may be made good
follow.

That an evil conscience may be made good, two things must be looked into:
first, that we get a right medicine to heal it: secondly, that we take a
right course in application of the medicine. What must be done to make an ill
conscience good.
First, the medicine for the curing of an ill conscience, is only the blood of
Christ: the disease of conscience is of so high a nature, as all the medicines
in the world are insufficient, nothing but sprinkling it with blood will serve
the turn, and it must be no other blood than the blood of the immaculate Lamb
of God, as the Apostle shows, Heb. 9.14. The reason of this is, because
conscience will never be quiet, till it see a way how Gods anger may be
pacified, and sin abolished, which cannot be done any way but by the blood of
Christ, which was powered out as a sacrifice for sin.

Now unto the right application of this medicine, four things are requisite.
First, the light of knowledge. Secondly, the washing of regeneration. Thirdly,
the assurance of faith. Fourthly, the warmth of love. First, knowledge; a man
must have both Legal and Evangelicall: for they must know by the law, what
sins lie upon the conscience, and trouble it; and they must know by the
Gospel, what a propitiation is made by Christ for sins. And for the second,
an evil conscience will never be gotten off, unless our hearts be sprinkled
and washed from the filth and power of the sins which did lie upon the
conscience, Heb. 10.22. 1 Timothy 1.5. Now unto such removing of such sins from
the heart, two things are requisite: First, that by particular confession we
do, as it were, scratch off the filth of those sins that soul the heart,
and trouble the conscience. Secondly, and then that we wash our hearts, and
daily rinse them with the tears of true repentance and humiliation before God
for those sins. Thirdly, assurance of faith is necessary to the cure of an
ill conscience, because faith is the hand that lays on the medicine. A man
must apply the sufferings of Christ to himself, and believe that Christ did
satisfy for those sins that lie upon the conscience, and must accordingly
all to besprinkle the conscience with that blood of Christ, and then of an
evil conscience it will presently become good: but men must look to one
thing, and that is, that their faith be unfeigned. For conscience will not be
satisfied with the profession of faith: they must believe indeed, and with
their hearts, and with sound application of the promises of the Gospel
concerning the blood of Christ, or else conscience will not be answered, Heb.
10.22. 1 Timothy 1.5. Fourthly, the heat of love must be added: a man must so apply
the blood of Christ, as that his own blood be heated in him, affection with
both toward God, and Christ, and Christians.

Christian love does put, as it were, natural heat into the conscience, and
makes it (now receiving life by faith) to bestirre it self in all the works,
either of service to God, or duty to men, 1 Timothy 1.5. Heb. 9.24. knowledge
bringing it light, mortification making it clean, faith curing it, and putting
life into it, by sprinkling it with the blood of Christ, and love infusing or
rather inflaming it with the heat of life. All these things are requisite,
though I stand not upon the precise order of the working of every one of these.

Thus how conscience may be made good. Now I might add a direction or two,
how conscience may do her work aright, that is, a good conscience, and not
do ill offices in the soul. Two things, I say, Two things for the guiding of
conscience.
are of great use for the guiding of a good conscience. First, that in all her
proceedings she must follow the warrant of Gods word. Secondly, that she do
not mistake in judging of particular actions, she must be sufficiently
informed about our Christian liberty: for unless the conscience discern that
we are freed from the malediction of the law, and from the rigorous perfection
of obedience, and have restored unto us a free use of all things indifferent,
and the like; she may be over-busie and troublesome, disquieting the heart,
and restraining the joys should refresh and support a man.

Thus of the means how conscience may be made good: the signs of a good
conscience follow.

First, by the opposition it makes against the remainders of sin in the
godly. It maintains a constant combating against the law of the members,
Signs of a good conscience.
having at command the law of the mind. It does not only resist gross evils,
but even the most secret corruptions in the heart of man. This Paul discerned
in himself, Romans 7. of doing God service.

Secondly, by the manner of exacting of obedience: for a good conscience,

First, does incline a man to do good duties, not by compulsion; but a man
shall find that he does them by force of an internal principle in himself.

Secondly, it cannot abide dead works: a good conscience abhors all cold, and
careless, or lukewarm, or counterfeit serving of God: Acts 23.1.
it puts life into all good dutes: it exacteth attendance upon God in doing
them, Heb. 9.14.

Thirdly, it more respects God, than all the world, or the man himself; and
therefore will compel a man to obey against profit, and pleasure, and liking
of the world, 2 Cor. 1.12.

Fourthly, it requires an universal obedience: it would have all Gods
commandments respected: and therefore Paul says, I desired in all things to
live honestly, Heb. 13.18. The allowing of one sin, shows the depravation of
the conscience, if it be a known sin, and still tolerated. As one dead fly
will spoil a box of precious ointment, I say, one dead fly, though many
living flies may light upon a box of ointment, and do it no great hurt: so a
godly man may have many infirmities, and yet his conscience be sound: but if
there be one corruption that lives and dies there, that is, such a corruption
as is known and allowed, and does by custom continue there, it will destroy
the soundness of the best conscience of the world, and does usually argue a
conscience that is not good.

Fifthly, a good conscience does require obedience always: thus Paul pleads, I
have served God till this day. It does not command for God by fits, but
constantly, Acts 23.1.

A third sign is, that a good conscience is always toward God, it still
desires to be before God, it seeks Gods presence, it reckons that day to be
lost, and that it did not live (as it were) when it found not the Lord, or had
no fellowship or conversation with God. A good conscience is like a good
Angel, it is always looking into the face of God, Acts 23.1.

Thus of the signs,

Benefits of a good conscience.
The benefits of a good conscience are many and great: for,

First, it is the best companion a man has all the days of his life: it is
ever with him, and speaks good unto him, and comforts him. A man that has no
company needs not to be alone; for he may converse with much delight with his
own conscience; and it is the surest friend a man can have; for it will
neither hurt him by flattery, nor forsake him for any carnal respects; and
being an internal agent, is out of the watch of all outward hindrances, and
is always a messenger of good things to a man, and fits him and fills him with
peace, that passes all the understanding of all men that want a good
conscience.

Secondly, it gives a man assurance of the best treasures; it makes a man
certain of his salvation: for a good conscience will not be quiet, till it
know the love of God, and the promises of grace in Christ: and the assurance
that conscience gives, is a better assurance than any man can have for his
lands, or any estate on earth, because it is so highly honored, that Gods own
Spirit does not disdain at any time to witness with it, and to it, Romans 8.15,
16.

Thirdly, by reason of that new acquaintance and affinity it has with the holy
Ghost, it brings us into a familiar friendship with God, as being an immediate
Agent with the holy Ghost in all things that concern us; for Gods Spirit
treates with the conscience, and the conscience treates with the Soul.

Fourthly, it is a continual bulwark against the devil, and all his fiery
darts, whether he tempt us to sin, or to fear and doubting: for, so soon as
the temptation is cast in; a good-conscience by her reasoning presently throws
it out, reserving principles both of precept and promise always in a
readiness to that end: so as by contrarious reasoning within us, it both
hinders us from yielding to sin and supports us against all doubts and fears,
Prove. 28.1.

Fifthly, against all afflictions, and disgraces, and reproaches of the world, a
good conscience still comforts a man, and makes him rejoice by the force of the
testimony thereof, 2 Cor. 1.14. So as it is most true, that a good conscience
is a continual feast; he never fares ill that has a good conscience, Psalm.
7.8. Acts 24.16. Romans 9.10.

Sixthly, and the greater is the comfort of a good conscience, because it will
comfort us, and stand by us, and for us, when all other comforts fail. It will
never leave us in sickness, or in death; and so is better than a thousand
friends, or wives, or children: yea, it will go with us to the Judgment feat
of Christ, with this assurance, that as a good conscience speaks to us now, so
will Christ speak to us at that day, Romans 2.16.

Thus of the sorts or kinds of consciences.

The last point is about the bond of conscience, what it is that can bind a
man's conscience: and the doubt arises from this, and other Texts: because here
a servant is bound in conscience to submit himself to a froward master, both
to his command, and to his punishments; and other Scriptures speak of his
obedience to superiors for conscience sake. For answer hereunto, we must know,
How far conscience may be bound.
that God and his law have power simply and absolutely to bind conscience,
that is, to urge it to require obedience of a man, or to accuse if he obey not,
or to excuse if he obey. As for the authority of masters, or other superiors,
it cannot reach to the conscience properly for they have no power to command or
punish conscience; but that which ties conscience to submit unto them, is the
commandment of God in his Word, in this and such like places. And therefore
hence we may learn the difference between the power of men's laws, and the
power of Gods Word: which difference will further appear distinctly in many
things.

First, men may make many laws, either ecclesiastical or civil, which bind
not at all, yea, which we are bound not to keep; as, if they command a thing
contrary to the Word of God: and in that case it is better to obey God than
men, and conscience is first bound to God, Acts 5. Dan. 3. Now, all Gods laws
bind.

Secondly, if such as are next above us in authority, command us any things
contrary to the laws of the supreme Magistrate, to whom they and we are bound,
we are not tied to obey.

Thirdly, men's laws can only bind us to outward working or suffering; they
cannot make laws, or inflict punishment upon the hearts or minds of men:
whereas Gods laws enjoyne obedience upon the inward man, as well as the
outward; and eternal punishment as well as temporary.

Fourthly, the best laws of men where they bind most, bind not by any
immediate power of their own, but by fear of Gods Word, that enjoynes us to
obey their lawful authority.

Fifthly, men's laws ever bind with limitation, that is, with respect of the
end of the law, and the person of the lawmakers, and the offense of others: and
hereupon Divines say, if men's laws be omitted, so as the end of the laws be
not hindered, that is, that the Commonwealth be not damnified, or other
particular ends crossed, or offense be not given as much as in us lies, or the
lawgiver be not despised or contemned, the conscience may not accuse a man of
sin.

Sixthly, some laws of men are merely penal; note that I say, merely penal,
that is, they are made about matters of less importance, and not uttered
precisely in commanding terms; or so uttered, that the Commonwealth is
accounted by the lawgiver to be sufficiently provided for, if the penalty be
inflicted. Now, he that is ready to pay the fine, or the penalty, and does not
transgress, but in some case of necessary respect, he is not to be charged
with sin before God.

And thus of conscience, and of the laying down of the first reason.

The avouching of it follows in verse, 20.

Verse 20. For what glory is it, if when you be buffeted for your faults, you
shall take it patiently? But if when you do well, and suffer for it, you take
it patiently; this is acceptable with God.


WHere the Apostle makes it good, that the best praise is, to suffer
wrongfully; First, by affirming that it is no true glory for a man to suffer
for his faults, and endure it. Secondly, by showing that to suffer patiently
for well doing, is a thing very acceptable to God. That it is no true glory for
a man to suffer for his faults, that he endure it patiently, he expresses in
these words: What glory is it, if when ye be buffeted for your faults, you
take it patiently?

Out of which words diverse doctrines may be briefly noted*

Doct. 1. First, that men of all sorts do naturally affect glory, (...), or
reputation, and are guided by it in their actions or sufferings, even the
meanest sort of men set before themselves something, which they glory in, and
according to which they order themselves; as here servants, even of the worst
sort too, yea, such as are faulty, and so disliked, and corrected, yet will not
be without something to glory in: and that is, as is here supposed to be,
their patience in abiding blows. And this arises in man, partly out of
corruption of nature and pride, that seeks to cover their faults with some
thing they account to be of praise, and partly out of the force of some
remainder of goodness in their natures, that are not destitute of all desire
of virtuous actions. Use.
Which may serve for Use to all men in their carriage one toward another, to
avoid, as much as may be, the dishonouring and disgracing one of another: for
no person is so mean, but he finds himself stung by disgrace. And it may
teach superiors to use praise and glory, as a means to provoke and excite
inferiors to obedience and care, as being a motive that will work universally
upon all natures.

Doct. 2. Usually men account that to be glory, which is not: vainglory is
taken for true glory by most men: thus men mistake that place, Their glory.

In Idols and Pictures, Hos. 10.5.

In Epicurisme and shameful lusts, Wherein vaineglory is seen.
Phil. 3.19.

In the increase of means and power to sin, Hos. 4.6, 7.

In the gifts and power of other men, 1 Cor. 3.21.

In Russian-like pride, or vain and strange apparel, 1 Cor. 11.14.1 Pet. 3.5.
1 Timothy 2.9, 10.

In mischief and malicious practices against the godly, Psalm. 52.1 and 94.4.

In fraudulent bargains, Pro. 20.23.

In a man's own gifts of nature, as wit, strength, memory, etc. Ier. 9.23.

In the common graces of Religion, as knowledge, zeal, etc. Romans 2.27. 1 Cor.
4.7.

In the praise sought and given by himself, Ioh. 7.10. and 8.54. 2 Cor. 10.18.

In the merit of his own works, Romans 4.2.

In the praise of men more then of God.

In strife, 1 These. 2.6.
contention, and provocation of others, James 3.14. Gal. 5.26. Phil. 2.3.

In the falls of other men, that are divided from them in judgment, 1 Cor. 5.6.

In earthly things, as houses, riches, beauty, honor, pleasures, etc. 1 Pet.
1. 24. Isa. 48.16.

So here some men account it their glory to suffer patiently, though they be
guilty, and have deserved all they suffer.

And therefore we should be warned, and directed in studying that which is true
glory. And if any ask what were indeed glorious: I answer, that spiritual
riches are the best glory, and therefore our souls are called our glory by an
excellency, Psalm. 3.4. The best glory is within, Psalm. 45.14.

And in particular, it is true glory,

To be righteous and merciful, Prove. 21.21.

Wherein true glory consists.
To be humble and fear God, Prove. 22.4.

To know God, Ier. 9.23.

To live so sincerely, as we may have the testimony of a good conscience, 2
Cor. 1.12.

To be exalted of God to the privileges and hope of his children, Iam. 1.9.

To have interest in the cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

To be abased, and truly humbled for our sins, James 1.9.

To abound in labors and sufferings for the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11. and 22.12.

To defer anger, and pass by a trespass, Prove. 19.11.

To suffer without fainting for Religion, Ephesians. 3.13.

So here to do well and suffer for it, and endure it patiently, this is a
glory with God,

(...). Sinning.]

Doct. 3. The words may be rendered thus: What glory is it, if sinning and
buffeted, ye take it patiently? The word rendered Sinning, signifies properly
to err from the way, or miss the mark: and so it shows us the nature of
sin, which swarveth from the direction of Gods Word, that agrees not to the
way there appointed. Where God has appointed a way, not to walk in it, or to
go besides it, is sin: and in what things God has not in his Word appointed
a way, there men have liberty, and they are to be reckoned indifferent; and
there are a world of such things.

Doct. 4. We may further note from the word sinning, that where servants
displease, disobey, and vex their masters, and will not do as they are bidden,
they sin: The holy Ghost uses the same word, to censure the fault of a
servant toward his master, which is used to censure the fault of any man
toward God.

Doct. 5. Servants that will not be corrected by words, may be corrected by
blows, they may be buffeted, Prove. 29.17, 19.

Doct. 6. Men many times inflict shameful and sudden punishments for
trespasses against them: as here they buffet their servants. And therefore how
just is it, if God for sins against him power out exquisite shame and
confusion upon wicked men that are impenitent?

Doct. 7. To suffer for our faults, and not take it patiently, is a detestable
and hateful vice in the judgment of all sorts of men.

Doct. 8. It is no true glory to be patient, when a man suffers for his faults:
not but that patience is a duty, and praiseworthy in all sufferings; but it is
no glory comparatively with theirs that suffer and are not faulty: and besides,
it is no glory at all, so long as the fault is not repented of, while it
remains a fault: and so it does, whilst men do not judge themselves for it,
and reform it: it is no true praise to endure punishments. For patience
arises either out of a natural defect of sense or judgment, or else it is
forced by fear of men, or is directed to vain ends, as the applauses of men,
or the extenuating or hiding of their faults, or the like.

Thus of the first part of the verse: out of the latter part diverse things may
be also observed, etc.

Doct. 1. Such is this evil world, that a man may suffer evil for doing well.

Doct. 2. We must not be weary of well doing, though we suffer for it.

Doct. 3. To suffer for well-doing may befall any sort of men, as here it is
supposed to be the case of servants.

Doct. 4. It is by accident, and not from the nature of well-doing, or any
necessity that is absolute, that men suffer for well-doing: it does not
necessarily follow, that men must suffer always, or all sorts of men, for
goodness. It may befall them; it does not follow that it must befall them: and
therefore the Apostle says, If you suffer.

Doct. 5. To suffer for well-doing patiently is wonderful glorious, and
acceptable before God.

Doct. 6. Many things may be gracious with men, that are no whit regarded with
God.

Doct. 7. To suffer for well-doing, when it is not patiently taken, is not
thank-worthy with God: though the cause men suffer for be good, yet they lose
their praise, when they use ill means to be delivered, or carry themselves
impatiently.

Doct. 8. To know that God favors us, or accepts of what we do, will make a
man endure strange things; as here servants, that were used many times little
better than beasts, yet endure it, because it is at all times acceptable to God.

Doct. 9. Lastly, it would here be noted, that to suffer for any kind of
weldoing is acceptable before God: though a man do not suffer for Religion,
but for the duties of his particular calling, (as the case was here) yet every
such suffering is gracious before God.

Ver. 21. For hereunto ye are called: for Christ also suffered for us, leaving
us an example, that ye also should follow his steps.


Diverse ways of suffering.
THus of the first reason taken from Gods acceptance: the same reason follows
in the beginning of this Verse, and that is taken from their calling: and for
these words, For thereunto were ye called, the sense is, that unto patient
suffering for well-doing they were tied by their calling, if need did require.
Now God calls men to suffering diverse ways. First, by his decree: for he has
here destinated men to be made like to his Son, in suffering unjustly; they
were ordained to afflictions, Romans 8.29. 1 These. 3.3. Secondly, (...) his Word
or Law we are called to it, because the Word of God does require, that we
should take up our cross and suffer for the truth, as many Scriptures show.
Thirdly, by the work of Gods grace, when he make us again new men in Jesus
Christ: for by the same calling that he calls us to be Saints, he calls us to
suffer for sanctity; and this seems to be intended specially here. Fourthly,
God calls us to suffer by his special gift: for as he has given us to
believe, so has he given us to suffer for his sake. Now God by every gift does
really call us to the execution and use of it, when there is occasion. Fifthly,
Servants and other Inferiors are called to suffer correction, though it should
be unjust, even by their particular Calling. Sixthly, the coherence shows, that
the example of Christ suffering unjustly is a pattern that calls us also to
suffer, and so to walk in his steps. This last, and the third way of Calling,
are especially meant in this place: and so from thence diverse things may be
briefly noted by way of doctrine. For of our effectual Calling I have at large
entreated, both in the former chapter, and the tenth verse of this chapter.

First, all Gods people or servants become his by Calling: it is the way by
which God hires servants, and makes a people to himself: for by nature even
the Elect are not a people, but live in darkness, dead in sin, sensual and
carnal as other men; and re-creation is such a link in the chain of
salvation, as cannot be wanting, Romans 8.30. And therefore men should labor to
make their Calling sure, as ever they would have comfort that they are Gods
servants or people.

Secondly, God works great things many times without any great toil, or power
of instruments; as here, To convert a man, is but to call him; To make him
live, is but to bid him live. Thus God can call up generations of men out of
the heap of dead and forlorn mankind. Thus the dead shall be raised at the
last Day by the voice of the Son of God: which should teach us to live by
faith in all estates, and rest upon Gods power, by which we are kept to
salvation.

Thirdly, Gods Calling accepts not the persons of men, it puts no difference:
all are called alike, as to honor, so to labor and danger. The Apostle
puts-in all Christians, by this Calling, to suffer, if need require, as well as
servants. So with God there is neither circumcision nor uncircumcision, Jew nor
Gentile, bond nor free: but all are one in Christ, Col. ^.11. Which should be a
mavelous comfort to Christians that are meaner than others in the world, to
think on it, that God requires as hard work of the richest, as he does of
them; and makes as great account of a poor Christian, as of the mightiest
Monarch. And it should teach Christians humility, and not to strive so much for
precedence; but rather, if men will excel others, it should be in service and
sufferings.

Fourthly, all men are not called: he says here. Ye are called; as importing,
that it was a special honor done to them. Many have not the means of
Calling; and many refuse their Calling, when they have the means. Which shows
the woeful estates of worlds of men, unto whom the voice of God by his Word in
the Spirit comes not.

Fifthly, the Calling of God does propound conditions, upon which his election
in time does depend: for many are called, but few chosen upon their Calling;
and the reason is, because they yielded not to the conditions of their Calling.
God calls men to a new Covenant, and requires, first, the belief of all things
promised on his part: secondly, sanctity and holiness of life; thus they are
said to be Saints by Calling, 1 Cor. 1.1. thirdly, to suffer for well-doing, if
there be occasion; so here. Now upon the Conscience and consent of the heart
unto these conditions does God make his choice, or acknowledge men: and
therefore hereby men's hearts must be tried, or men must try their hearts and
estates, whether they be effectually called or no.

Sixthly, men are bound to take notice of, and to learn and obey the will of
God revealed in his Word, though it be hard to find out: as here the Apostle
faith, They were called to suffer; which is a thing that is not easy to prove
by express Scripture, but must be found out as it lies enwrapped in
consequences in diverse places of Scripture. For if the laws of men bind and
oblige us to punishment, though we know them not, because we ought to take
notice of them: much more must we study the Laws of God, though they be many
in number, and hard to find out without much labor, and many helps.

Seventhly, our general Calling does bind us to a careful observation of our
particular Calling: as here, their Calling in Religion to be Gods servants, did
bind them to look to their duty as men's servants, yea, and to be subject to
their corrections, though unjust. And therefore those Christians are far out
of the way, that neglect their particular Calling, and the charge God has
delivered them, upon sentence of Religion, and their general Calling.

Eighthly, the maine doctrine in them, or in the scope of them, is, that God
calls his servants, all of them, to suffer for the truth. He shows them
heaven, and the salvation of their souls, and bestows rich treasure upon
their hearts; but withal tells them, he looks they should arm themselves
with a resolution to suffer what may befall them for well-doing. Our Savior
Christ told his Disciples plainly, that they must think of taking up the
Cross daily, before they come to wearing of the Crown. And therefore they do
foolishly that undertake the profession of Religion, before they have set down
to know what it will cost them.

Thus of the second reason.

The third reason is taken from the example of Christ, who suffered greater
wrongs than can be befall servants, or any other sort of men: and this doctrine
of Christ's suffering he handles at large from verse 21. to the end of the
chapter. Which doctrine of Christ's suffering is fitted partly to the case of
servants, and partly to the use of all Christians.

Concerning the Passion five things are in all these verses noted.

First, who suffered: Christ suffered, ver. 21.

Secondly, the end of his suffering, viz. to leave us an example, etc. verse 21.

Thirdly, the manner how he suffered, set out,

1. Negatively: and so he suffered, first, without sin, verse 22. secondly,
without reviling, ver 23. 2. Affirmatively: and so he commits himself to him
that judges righteously.
Fourthly, the matter what he suffered, viz. our sins in his own body on the
tree, ver. 24.

Fifthly, the effect of his sufferings, 1. In respect of us: and so his
sufferings serve To kill our sins. Verse 24. To make us alive to
righteousness. Verse 24. To heal our natures. Verse 24.
2. In respect of himself: and so they procured his exaltation, to be
Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, ver. 25.


Thus of the order.

Even Christ suffered.]

The first thing to be considered in the Apostles description of the Passion of
the person who suffered, is, that it is named here with special Emphasis, Even
Christ, or Christ also. Christ is the surname of our Savior, as Jesus was his
proper name. Jesus is a name only given him in the New Testament: but Christ
was his name in both Testaments, and signifies Anointed, being a Greek word, as
Messiah does in the Hebrew. And so it is a name importing his office of
Mediator; as being thereby proclaimed to be the substance of the ceremonial
types, even the supreme Doctor, or Prophet, Priest and King of the Church: for
these three sorts of men were anointed in the Old Testament, and were types of
Christ's anointing.

It is true, that we do not read that our Savior was himself anointed with
oil, because his anointing consisted in the substance of that shadow. For the
shadow signifies two things: first, ordination to the office; secondly, the
pouring out of gifts by the holy Ghost, for the exornation of the office.

Now whereas Christ is Mediator in both natures, his anointing must be
distinguished according to his natures. The whole person was anointed, but yet
differently in respect of his natures: for gifts could not be poured out upon
his divine nature; yet, as the Son of God, the second person in Trinity, he
was anointed, in respect of ordination to the office of Mediator: and as the
Son of man he was anointed, in respect of the pouring out of the gifts of the
holy Ghost upon that nature in measure, as the Psalmist says, above his
fellows, Psalm. 45.

The first doctrine about the Passion is here briefly contained in these three
words of the Apostle, Even Christ suffered; which is a doctrine full of
excellent Uses: for thence,

First, we may see how vile the error was of those Heretics they called
Patri-passianus; who taught that God the Father suffered: whereas in this and
other Scriptures we are taught that it was only Christ, the second Person in
Trinity, that suffered. The ground of their error was, that there was but one
Person in the Deity, which in heaven was called the Father; in earth, the
Son; in the powers of the creatures, the holy Ghost: and thence they affirm
the same things of the Father they did of the Son, that he was visible,
mortal and immortal, passible and impassible; passible on earth, and
impassible in heaven. But we have learned from the Prophets and Apostles to
believe three Persons, and so to acknowledge, that the second Person suffered
only, and that in his humane nature.

Secondly, we may hence learn, that Christ was subject to the Law after a
peculiar manner, so as no other man was subject: for he did not only fulfill
the Law by a most perfect obedience, but he suffered the malediction and curse
of the Law also. Some men are subject to the malediction of the Law only: and
so are all the wicked reprobates that obey it not. Some men are subject to the
Commandments of the Law, and not to the malediction: and so our first parents
were while they continued in their innocence, because God did not require them
to suffer, so long as they obeyed the Law: and so all godly men in Christ, are
under the Law, in respect of obedience, but not in respect of malediction: only
Christ is subject to the malediction, and obedience of the Law, as our surety.

Thirdly, hence we learn a plain demonstration of the truth of the humane
nature of Christ: He had not a fantastical body, but a true body, because he
did verily suffer in the flesh, as follows afterward.

Fourthly, hence we may be informed of the excessively vile disposition of the
world, in that it is so set on wickedness, that the very Savior of the world,
if he come into the world, shall suffer from the world.

Fifthly, we may hence learn, that Christ suffered willingly, and of his own
accord. For in that he that is God suffered, it shows he had power to preserve
himself so, as all the world could not have forced him to suffer: and
therefore we have cause so much the more to admire his love to us, that
suffered for our sakes, as the next point will show.

Sixthly, we may hence learn to know how abominable sin is, that makes the
Son of God suffer miserable things, if he become a surety for sin.

Seventhly, we may hence learn to know the inevitable destruction, and
fearful perdition of impenitent sinners. For if God spared not his own Son,
that was but a surety for sin, and did none himself: will he ever spare
them that are principals and monstrous offenders?

Eighthly, did even Christ suffer? then we should evermore arm our selves with
the same mind, and provide to suffer in the flesh, 1 Pet. 4.1. It is a shame
for us to expect, or desire a life of ease and prosperity, seeing the Prince of
our salvation was consecrated through afflictions, Heb. 2.10. and 12.3. And the
more should we be confirmed to suffer in willingness in this life, because God
has predestined us to be conformed to the image of his Son in sufferings,
Romans 8.29.

Lastly, in that it was Christ that suffered, we may hence gather comfort to
our selves in his passion, all the days of our life, because his sufferings
must needs be of infinite merit, being the sufferings of him that is God as
well as man.

Thus of the Person suffering.

The persons for whom he suffered, follow.

For us.]

The sufferings of Christ were not casual, such as befell him for no use; nor
were they deserved by himself. For he never offended God, nor did he seek
his own peculiar good in them, but he suffered all he did, for our sakes, Isa.
53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions: the chastisement of our peace was
laid upon him; and verse 8. He was plagued for the transgression of Gods
people: and as the Apostle says, he was delivered to death for our sins, and
rose again for our justification, Romans 4.25. He was sacrificed for us, 1 Cor.
5.7. He gave himself for us, Ephesians. 5.2.

Now he suffered for us in diverse respects, as,

First, to make satisfaction unto the justice of God for our sins, Christ
suffered for us in diverse respects.
and to appease the wrath of God toward us, as the former places show: His
sufferings were a sacrifice for sin: He bare the curses of the Law which were
due to us, Gal. 3.10. And thus he paid our ransom, and pacified God,
especially in his death and burial: He nailed the handwriting that was
against us, to his cross, Col. 2.15. And as Jonas was cast into the bowels of
the sea, to still the raging of it, so was Christ cast into the bowels of the
earth; to make the seas of Gods wrath quiet for us.

Secondly, he suffered, as to make satisfaction for our sins, so together
with that satisfaction to remove from us the many miseries might have fallen
upon us for our sins. Thus he was judged and condemned at the bar of
Pilate, that we might be acquirted at the bar of God: He endured all sorts of
pains and torments in soul and body, that we might be delivered from
eternal torments in hell: He died, that he might deliver us from death and
the fear of it, and from him which had the power of death, which is the
devil, Heb. 2.13. He was crucified, that he might abolish the power of sin
in us, Romans 6.10.

Thirdly, he suffered for us, that so by his sufferings he might merit the
supply of our wants, and the possession of happiness: He suffered to make us
blessed. Thus he died, to ratify the eternal counsel, Heb. 9.15.16.17. He
was poor, to make us rich, 2 Cor. 8.9. He was bound, to make us free: He was
unclothed, to cover our nakedness: He was forsaken of God for a time, that we
might be received to everlasting mercy: He was crowned with a crown of
thorns, that he might merit for us a crown of glory: He found no mercy from
the Priests and Jews, that we might find sure mercy with God: He was cast out
of the earthly Jerusalem, and suffered without the gates, that he might provide
a place for us in the heavenly Jerusalem.

Fourthly, he suffered for us in this, that he suffered, that so he might have
a sympathy of our sufferings, and have a feeiing of our miseries: He suffered
being tempted, that he might be able to secure us being tempted, Heb. 2.17, 18.
and 4.15.

The consideration hereof may serve for diverse uses.

Uses. First, it should breed in us an admiration of the love of Christ to us,
that could ever be willing to become surety for us, and suffer for us,
especially considering what we were, viz. unjust men, 1 Pet. 3.18. wicked men,
Romans 5.6. enemies to him, Romans 5.8, 10. That one should die for a good or
righteous man, or for one that is a common good for or to other men, is very
rare: But it might be Jonathan might die for David, or a subject be willing to
die for a good Prince about no man would die for his enemies, as Christ died
for us.

Secondly, it should work in us sorrow and hearty grief for our sins: we
should now mourn as heartily for piercing Christ by our sins, as if we had
lost an only child, etc. We complain of the Jews, and Judas, and Pilate for
abusing him: but the truth is, it was thy sins, and my sins, that brought
him to suffer for them; our debt was laid upon him: We that are principals, are
escaped; and he that was our surety, has paid for it, even to the uttermost
fa^thing. And if there were no other reason to show how little reason Christ
had no suffer for us; even this were sufficient, that our hearts are so hard as
we cannot be grieved to remember his sorrows for our sins.

Thirdly, it should especially work in us a hatred of our sins, and a fall
and final resolution to sin no more, but to consecrate our whole life unto
him, and to his service, that has suffered for us, and by suffering, said so
dear a price. Shall we not live to him that died for us? Or do we so little
care for his sorrow, as by new sins we would, as much as in us lies,
crucify again the Son of God? Take heed of despising the blood of Christ,
lest you sin so long till there be no more sacrifice for sin, 2 Cor. 5.15.
Heb. 6.

Fourthly, we should strive to be disposed, as the Apostle Paul was, to glory
in the cross and sufferings of Christ above all things, seeing his sufferings
were for us, to satisfy and merit for us. It must needs be an estate of
wonderful safety and felicity, that is purchased by such variety of sufferings
of the Son of God. As the world despises us, so we should with singular and
secret rejoicing despise and contemn the world, having such interest in the
cross of Christ, Gal. 6.14.

Lastly, it should work in us a most hearty willingness to suffer any thing
for Christ and the Gospel, that has suffered such extreme things for us: it
should not be grievous to us to forsake father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or house, or lands, or our own lives for his sake, or for the
Gospel, Mark 10.29.

Thus of the second thing in the doctrine of the passion of Christ.

The third thing is the use of it, and that is, to be an example unto us, that
we might walk in his steps.

Leaving us an example.]

The end then of the sufferings of Christ, is to be an example to us to learn
by. The word rendered an example, is a metaphor taken from Scriveners, or
Painters, and signifies properly a copy or pattern, or portraiture of a thing
exactly drawn out. We are then set to school to learn by example: Christ's
sufferings are as a writing-schoole, where the copies are most exactly drawn.

Before I come to the particulars we should bear for Christ in his suffering,
diverse things may be briefly noted out of the words, especially about
examples.

Doct. 1. God would have us learn by examples, as well as by precept: and
thence it is the Scripture is so stored with all sorts of examples.

Doct. 2. Such as give good example of well-doing, are as a common treasure;
many may learn good by them. Good examples are like common schools, and the
better, because they are free-schooles, we may learn from example without
cost. Though thou could not show all the means thou desire, yet to give a
good example of sound life and holiness, is a great treasure in the Church: It
does not only make Religion well spoken of, but it profits many, to teach their
well-doing: and therefore such as shine by the light of good example, should be
much made of in every place: and they sin fearfully that wrong them, etc.

Doct. 3. It requires a special goodness to be fit to be an example to
others, which the metaphor imports: for every man that can write, yet cannot
set copies for other men to write by: so every good Christian is not able to
teach by example to the life, but with great imperfection: some had more need
to be learners than to be teachers, and therefore should not be overhasty to
show their gifts.

Doct. 4. Good examples are very scarce in the world, and therefore Christ is
feign to leave us one of his own: the skillful practice of Gods Word is so
rare, that it is very hard to find a man whom we would set before us as a
pattern to imitate.

Doct. 5. There was very great need of Christ's example to teach us by. The
world is so generally fallen away from the care of obedience, and the doctrine
of well-doing is entertained so dully, as a very matter of for me and for
outward show; and the examples of the godly are so imperfect, that it was
necessary, after so many hundreds of years, in which sound practice was
neglected, that the Christian world should be fired with the incitations of so
exquisite a pattern of obedience, as Christ's was.

Doct. 6. Christ's example is to be imitated by degrees. God does not look we
should follow the copy exactly at the first: which similitude imports a great
deal of encouragement to the weak, but willing Christian; and withal shows
the doubtful estate of such Christians, as in a short time and with little
labor think they have learned the substance of all Christianity.

Doct. 7. In that he says, Leaving us an example, it imports, that many good
works tarry behind the godly in the world. For though it be true that their
works follow them to heaven, yet it is true also, they are left behind. They
follow them to heaven, in respect of Gods remembrance and acknowledgement of
them, and they tarry behind them, in respect of the example of them, and the
praisefull memory of them amongst men. Well-doing cannot be lost, which withal
imports, that it is a great honor and comfort, when a man goes out of the
world, to leave the memory and pattern of good works behind him: and it is a
fearful thing for such men as go out of the world to leave an ill report
behind them, and die an example of evil doers: though those could leave a
great estate in worldly things, yet are they most accursed, because they leave
behind them such an ill sent and savor, by reason of their filthy, or vain,
or worldly kind of living.

Doct. 8. It is more than a step to heaven; we are here required to follow
Christ's steps, importing, it is a long journey, and we are to make many steps.

Doct. 9. The more good any does, the nearer they come to heaven: every good
work is, as it were, a step nearer to heaven: and therefore as we desire to be
with the Lord, so should we hasten and finish our work; nothing will bring us
sooner to heaven: whereas if we be barren and unfruitful, either we shall
never come there, or it will be a great while first.

Doct. 10. The way to heaven is a very hard way to hit; it is marked out by
steps: if we step awry, we are in great danger, either of fouling our selves,
or losing our way. It is like to his way that is to pass over a brook, or
through thorns, or through miery ways, where are placed steps, or a print of
some footing before, which is hard to hit, and dangerous to miss. And
therefore men must look to themselves, after they have undertaken profession
of the care of a better life: for the similitude imports, that men must never
look off their way, and they must not go over rashly or hastily, nor must
they listen to strange noises, nor must they look to go that way with much
company, nor is it safe for them to have distractions or cares in their heads:
all which parts of the similitude let men apply to themselves.

Doct. 11. He that lives so as he has the commandment of God, and the example
of Christ for a warrant of his actions, is in a sure way, and is safe, and in
the right way to heaven. They that walk by rule, and are careful to tread
right in the steps marked out in the way, shall have peace, and much comfort
and assurance, Gal. 6.16.

Doct. 12. If we be not skillful enough to teach others by our example, yet if
we be willing to learn goodness from such as give us good example, we may be
happy. Some Christians are examples to others, as, 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.7. 1
These. 1.7, 8. Other Christians learn, both in matters of faith and life, from
them, as those places show: and this Text imports, that if we but follow
example, we please God.

Thus of the doctrines out of these words.

It remains that we consider more specially of the copy or example here left
us to follow. God teaches us many things by examples, and to that end he has
given us diverse sorts of examples to learn by.

And so God is pleased to raise up in the world examples, sometimes of his
Power, sometimes of his Justice, sometimes of his Holiness. Examples or
monuments of Gods Power are those strange works of wonder which God does at
some times, to show his Almightinesse and Sovereignty; such was that, John 9.1.
to make a man, blind from his birth, to see. Examples of his Justice he has
given us in all Ages: so Numb. 5.21. Ezekiel. 5.15. Heb. 4. 11. Jude 7.1 Cor. 10.
Examples and patterns of his Holiness he has given us, partly in his adopted
sons, and partly in his natural Son, and his Son by the grace of personal
union: thus he gave us Job and the Prophets for examples of patience in
suffering, Iam. 5.10. thns Timothy and Titus are charged to be patterns of good
works, 1 Timothy 4.12. Tit. 2.7. But it is the example of Christ which is here
urged as the best pattern of all others.

Quest. Now the special question is, What must we distinctly learn from the
sufferings of Christ?

Ans. There are many things wherein Christ has set us an example in his
sufferings, which we may and ought to learn from him; as,

First, his sufferings should make us willing to resolve to suffer, Ten things
for us to follow in the example of Christ's sufferings.
if God call us to it: it should teach us to stand upon our guard, and look
for war; as resolved, It is meet we suffer with him, if we mean to reign
with him, 2 Timothy 2.11.

Secondly, when he was tempted or troubled in Spirit, he left us an example for
the manner of the fight, and which way we should make resistance, and overcome;
and that is, by the Word of God and prayer: for he beat the Devil away by
Scripture, Mat. 4. And in all his special agonies we still hear him praying,
and making his moan to his Father.

Thirdly, he left us a pattern of matchless humility, and told us, if ever we
would learn any thing of him, we should learn of him to be lowly and meek;
who, being the Son of God, was abased to take upon him the form of a
servant, and in worlds of occasions to deny himself, and his own greatness
and reputation, Mat. 11.29. Phil. 2.6, 7.

Fourthly, we may learn from his suffering condition the contempt of the
world. Why should we seek great things for our selves, when our Lord and
Savior was in some cases worse provided for than the birds of the air, and
foxes of the field, as not having a place where to lay his head? And therefore
he suffered without the City, to teach us that we also have here no abiding
City, but should cast all our cares upon providing for our eternal habitation
in heaven, Heb. 13.11, 12.

Fifthly, we should learn obedience from him toward our heavenly Father.
Christ obeyes his Father, even in hard commandments, against his credit, ease,
liberty, yea life it self: and therefore we should learn to desire to go and
do likewise.

Sixthly, he left us an example of loving one another, and gave a special
charge we should prove our selves to be his, and to be like him indeed, as his
true Disciples, by loving one another, John 13. Ephesians. 5.2.

Seventhly, we should learn patience of him when we do suffer, though strange
things should befall us. What though we should be betrayed or forsaken of our
friends in our just cause, or suffer injuries, or be falsely accused even of
heinous crimes, or most basely used, even to be buffetted, derided, spetted on,
or to see vile wretches and gross offenders preferred before us, or lose all
we have, to our very garments? etc. yet none of these things should be grievous
to us, because all these things befell our Lord and Master in a worse measure
and manner than they can befall us: yea, we should be patient, though it were
to lose our lives, as ^e did.

Eighthly, he left us also an example of hope in suffering: for when he
suffered shame and misery in this life, he looked upon the joy and crown in
another world; thereby teaching us, with whole arguments to sense our selves
against all the scorns and miseries of this world, Heb. 12.3.

Ninthly, he left us a pattern of mercy, who made himself poor to make us
rich: and therefore how much more should we, out of our abundance, yield some
supply to others wants? 2 Cor. 8.

Lastly, the mortification and crucifying of the old man is to be learned from
the Passion of Christ, Romans 6. For look how Christ was used, so should we use
our sins: he was crucified, and so should we crucify our sins, piercing
the heart of them by confession and godly sorrow, and so hanging them up upon
the Cross till they be dead.

Thus we see that Christ has set us a large copy, and that many things are to
be learned from his example.

Quest. But does Christ's example bind us to imitation in all things?

Answ. In many things it does bind, but in all things it does not bind. There
are diverse things that Christ did, which to leave undone by us, it no sin: In
what things Christ's example binds not.
as the works of his power and omnipotency are not imitable; and so also the
works of his office, as Mediator, are peculiar to himself, and cannot be done
by us. Besides a world of indifferent actions of his, diverse of which are
recorded; yet all men grant they do not bind us to exact imitation, though
they be things we have power to do. He sat and preached: he received the
Sacrament in a private chamber at night, and gave it only to Clergymen, and
used unleavened bread, etc.

Quest. But what rules are then left to ground our practice upon? and how far
are our consciences bound by examples, and so by the example of Christ?

How far examples bind conscience.
Answ. Examples, and so the example of Christ, bind us in the things he did,
which were required by the moral Law, or the Word of God. For an example is
but the illustration of a precept: it is but like the seal to a blank, if
there be no precept. Secondly, in other things which Christ did, not required
by the Law, we are so far forth tied to follow his practice, as he has for
those specialties given himself a precept: as here we are bound to suffer from
others, and for others, if need require, by the force of Christ's example; but
so as it is specified, that his example binds in this and other things. But
where the Scripture does not make use of his example, there we are not bo^nd in
things indifferent i^ their own nature, to follow any example out of necessity.

Verse 22.23. Who did no sin, neither was there guile found in his mouth: Who
when he was reviled, reviled not again: when be suffered, be threatened not,
but committed it to him that judges righteously.


HItherto of the end of Christ's suffering: the manner follows, set down both
negatively and affirmatively. Negatively, He suffered without sin, in this
verse; and without reviling, in the next verse. Affirmatively, He committed
himself and his cause to him that judges righteously.

He did no sin: (...).]

The words of this verse do commend the innocence of this our Savior: which
does much increase the price and value of his sufferings. He suffered for the
sins of others, that never committed any sin himself in thought, word, or
deed: and as he was innocent in all the course of his life, so did he bear
his sufferings without fault, and carried himself so, as no man could find
any just occasion against him.

The first thing affirmed of Christ to show his innocence, is, that he did no
sin. In the Original it is expressed by a word of great force, which
signifies to make, or frame, or fashion with art, or to make sin; and it may
be rend^ed (as I conceive) more fitly, He (...)-sin.

To make sin, being a phrase somewhat unusual, the sense is to be (...) red
into. Now a man may be said to make sin many ways*

A man is said to make sin many ways.
First, when a man (...) and commits a sin never heard of before. Thus Onan
made that sin of filthiness. Thus the Sodomites and Gentilish men and women
made sins of lust. Thus drunkards make strange kinds of drinkings. Thus the
(...) of our times (...) the sins of strange apparel. And thus the Papists
make that horrible sin of murdering of (...). And thus swearers now make their
monstrous oaths.

Secondly, when a man sins, having not so much as temptation to sin in
himself, or pronenesse of nature to sin: and so he sins that sins
wilfully, and not by infirmity, or weakness of nature. Thus Adam made the
first sin: for he had no corruption of nature to entice him, or incline him,
nor could any temptation from without compel him; but he sinned wilfully. Thus
those men of blood make sin, that kill their brethren in cold blood. And so
many whoremongers and drunkards make sin, when they are not enticed, but
entice themselves, and strive by all means to fire and force themselves to
wickedness. And thus swearers, and usurers, and such like, make sin.

Thirdly, when a man commits such a sin as other men condemn by the very
light of nature, though he do it by corrupt inclination, or though it be
sin which others commit: so to make sin, is to be a malefactor, or one that
is guilty of any gross sin.

Fourthly, when a man studies mischief, and sins not suddenly, but imagines,
and devises, and forecasts, and plots how to compass his sin: and thus all
wicked men make sin, because they sin not suddenly, or by mere frailty,
but do study iniquity: every wicked man is a great student, Psalm. 36.4.

Fifthly, when a man causes others to sin by evil counsel, or example, or
compulsion: Thus Tyrants made sin, that forced men to deny the faith: and
thus they make sin, that make their neighbors drunk: and thus Stage-plaiers
and Minstrels make sin, that call and provoke others to licentiousness and
wantonness: and thus superiors make sin, when by their evil example, or
negligence in not punishing offenses, they tempt others to sin.

Sixthly, when a man makes a trade of sinning: and thus men are said in
Scripture to be workers of iniquity, which is a Periphrasis of wicked men. Now
he that is said to make a trade of sin, or to be a worker of iniquity;
first, is one that makes it his daily custom to follow his sinful course of
life, or that follows sin as the tradesman does his trade. Secondly, that
cannot live without his sin, that accounts his sin the life of his life,
that had as liefe be dead as restrained of his sin: as the tradesman
accounts himself undone if his trade be destroyed.

Seventhly, when a man calls good evil, and evil good; when a man makes that
to be a sin which is no sin. Thus they make sin, that call those things
sin, which God by his Law never called sin: and thus men make sin both
out of superstition on the left hand, and out of rash zeal on the right hand:
thus also profane persons make godliness and a body conversation to be
Schisms, and truth to be Heresy: thus the Jews called Paul's religious course
Heresy, when he by that way, which they called Heresy, worshipped the God of
his fathers: and the Professors of Christian Religion they called a Sect, Acts.
2^. Isa. 5.20. Thus Lawyers many times make sins, when they make a good cause
bad, and a bad cause good.

Eighthly, when a man by slander casts foul aspersions upon other men that are
innocent, speaking evil with any manner of evil report of such as live
religiously. And this art of making sin, the slanderer learned of the devil,
that accuser of the brethren. Thus many godly persons are many (...) by wicked
reports made gross offenders in the common acceptance of the world* and in
the rumors speed abroad of them in many places. Thus they made Christ and the
Apostles grievous sinners, and a spectacle to men and Angels.

Ninthly, when a man in adversity devises (...) to get out of trouble, or
deliver himself from the cross is laid upon him. And this sense may in some
sort be applied to the case of our Savior, who never used ill means to
deliver himself, though he suffered extreme things.

Lastly, in a general sense, every man that is guilty of sin, may be said to
make sin. And so it is commonly by way of removal said of Christ, that he
made no sin, that is, that he was never guilty of any offense against God or
man.

Thus of the sense of the words.

Diverse Doctrines may be gathered out of these words: but because one is
principal, I will but touch the rest.

Doct. 1. Men's sins are of men's making: man made sin, God made none.

Doct. 2. It is a hateful thing to be a maker of sin. As it was most
glorious for God to make a world of creatures: so it is most ignominious for
man to make a world of sins.

Doct. 3. Christ made no sin. This is the chief Doctrine, and plain in the
Text: He was not only free from the first and worst kinds of making of sin,
mentioned before, but he was free from all sin in all estates of his life, he
knew no sin, he did none iniquity: he was that just One by an excellency.

Quest. But how came it to pass, that the man Jesus had no sin, seeing all
other men bring sin with them into the world, and daily sin?

Answ. He was sanctified from the womb, being conceived by the holy Ghost, How
Christ had no sin.
which no other are: so as both original sin was stopped from flowing in
upon him in his conception; and besides, he was qualified with perfect
holiness from the womb: and therefore is called that holy thing borne of the
Virgin, Luke 1.35.

And it was necessary his humane nature should be so holy, and that he should
do no sin, because his humane nature was to be a tabernacle for the Deity to
dwell in, Col. 2.9. and besides, from his very humane nature, as well as from
his Deity, must flow unto us life, and all good things; and therefore he must
needs be undefiled: The manhood of Christ is as the conduit, and the Godhead
as the spring of grace unto us. Besides, his sufferings could not be
availeable, if he were not innocent himself.

The Uses follow: and so,

Uses. First, we see the difference between the two Adams: the first made
sin, and infected all the world with it: the other made no sin, but
redeemed all the world from it. The first Adam, as he had power not to sin,
so he had power to sin: but the second Adam had not only a power not to
sin, but also no power to sin; not only, as they say in Schools, Posse non
peccare; but also, Non posse peccare.

Secondly, we may hence see in what a woeful damnity against goodness the
world stands; when this most innocent Man, that never did any sin, that never
offended God or man in all his life; when he. I say, comes into the world, how
is he despised and rejected of men! Who looked after him, unless it were for
his miracles? few honored him for his holiness. How is the world set on
wickedness, that it should account him without form or handsomeness, that
shone before God and Angels in such a spotless innocence? Oh what wit had the
rulers of this world, that condemned him as a malefactor, that had no spot in
him from the crown of the head to the soale of the foot, that never did man
wrong, or sinned against God? Isa. 49.7. and 53.2, 3, 4.

Thirdly, we may hence see cause to wonder at the love of Christ to us. Oh how
is it (...) of such a world of sins, that yet himself never knew sin? What
heart of man can sufficiently admire his love unto us, that can abase himself
to be made sin for us, that never did sin himself?

Fourthly, is it not hence also most manifest, that impenitent sinners shall
not be spared or pitied of God? Did not God spare his own Son that never
offended in all his life? and shall he spare them that never left offending of
him? Oh what madness has besotted men so, as with stubborn wilfulness still
to trust upon an unknown mercy in God, yea such a mercy as God could never
conceive in the case of his Son, that was not to him as they are in any
respect! Were these men but thoroughly beaten from this sinful plea of mercy in
God, they would repent of their sins in time, and seek true mercy from God,
which never is withheld from penitent sinners.

Lastly, Did our Savior Christ suffer so patiently such extreme things, that
never deserved any evil in himself? What a shame is it for us to be so
unquiet, and dejected, or so froward, or so unsettled, when any crosses or
afflictions fall upon us, who yet have deserved at Gods hands to suffer a
thousand times more, and worse things than those that do befall us?

In his mouth was found no guile.]

We read in the Scripture of guile in the spirit, when we have false hearts,
and guile in the hands by false weights and balances, and guile in the mouth
in deceitful words.

Guile in words is committed many ways:

First, by lying; when men speak what they think not. Guile in words many
ways.


Secondly, by flattering; when men praise others after a corrupt manner, or for
corrupt ends.

Thirdly, by backbiting; when men censure others behind their backs, of malice,
or whisper evil against others, Psalm. 41.7.

Fourthly, by wresting the words of others to their hurt, Psalm. 56.11. and
52.1, 2.

Fifthly, by withholding the just praises of others, or Apology.

Sixthly, by fearfulness in evil times; when men will not stand for the
truth, or speak against their Consciences.

Seventhly, by disgraceful jests, Ephesians. 5.4.

Eighthly, by telling the truth of malice, 1 Samuel 22.9, 10.

Ninthly, by boasting of a false gift, Pro. 27.1.

Tenthly, by hypocrisy and dissimulation, and that diverse ways; as,

1. When men speak fair to men's faces, but reproach them behind their backs,
or flatter them merely, Guile in Hypocrisy many ways.
to catch them and entangle them in their talk, as the Pharisees often tempted
Christ. 2. That reproves sin in others, and yet commits it himself, Romans
2.19. 3. That colors sin under pretense of Religion, Mark 12.40. 4. That
professes Religion in words, and yet denies it in his heart. 5. That hides
his sin by denial or excuses, to avoid shame and punishment. 6. That gives
good words to men in affliction, but relieves them not, 1 John 3.17, 18.
None of these, nor any other ways of guile were found in Christ, though they
called him a deceiver, and sought all occasions against him.

Thus of the sense: the doctrines follow.

Doct. 1. Guile in words is a vice that wonderfully dishonours a man: it was a
fault would give great advantage to the enemies of the truth. As it is a sin
which is in a special manner hateful to God, Psalm. 5.7. so it is shameful
amongst men: and therefore as any man would enjoy good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile, Psalm. 34.13.

Doct. 2. When he says, that they found no guile in his mouth, it imports,
that they sought it. And so we learn, that the godly are so hated of the
wicked, that they seek occasion against them: when they see not, or hear not
of any faults in them, they search, and inquire, and lie in wait to see if
they can catch their foot-slippings at any time: yea they mark their words, to
see whether they can find any falsehood or hurt in them. And therefore
Christians should watch themselves and their words the more carefully, and
strive so much the more to show themselves plain men in their words and
dealing, that they may speak what they think at all times.

Doct. 3. The third doctrine which falls in this text is, that in Christ was
found no guile: he could never be taken in the sin of flattering, lying,
coozening, backbiting, or any dissimulation, or hypocritical or deceitful
speeches; and therefore the use may be,

Use 1. First, to show the fearful estate of such as use lying and deceit,
and hypocritical courses in the dealings with men in their trades, or other
occasions of life. There was no guile in Christ; and therefore it is probable,
they are not true Christians, because they are not herein made like unto
Christ: yea deceit and guile is made a sign of a wicked man, Psalm. 36.1, 3.
And therefore such as are given to the sins of deceit and hypocritical dealing,
are in a miserable case, especially such as cover their deceit with smooth
words, Ier. 9.8. Pro. 26.24.etc. 2. And such as make a trade of it, give their
tongues to evil, and frame deceit, and bind their tongues to lies, and teach
their tongues to speak evil lies. Ier. 9.5. 3. And such as will deceive their
neighbors, their brethren, or such as are harmless, Ier. 9.5. Psalm. 35.20.

Use 2. Again, this pattern in Christ may comfort the plaine-dealing and
plaine-meaning man, and plaine-speaking Christian, that has no tricks and
methods, and subtilty in his words or carriage, but is a plain man like Jacob:
this is made a sign of a godly man, Zeph. 3.13. of a happy man, Psalm. 15.2. of
a true Israelite, John 1.47.

Being reviled.]

Hitherto has been showed that Christ suffered without sin: now the Apostle
shows that he suffered without reviling or threatening, which praise is
increased in this, that he reviled not when he was reviled, nor threatened at
the very time when he suffered extreme injuries.

Reviling is a sin condemned in the sixth Commandment, What reviling is.
and is committed by bitter and disgraceful words against any other without
desire of doing good: and so men revile when they disgrace others by false
accusations, as when they called Christ a deceiver, and said he had a Devil,
or was a glutton, or an enemy to Caesar, or a blasphemer, or the like. Again,
it is reviling when the very terms used are base and ignominious, if they be
used only out of passion: as to call men, made after the image of God, by the
names of beasts, or the like. Again, when we upbraid others with such
deformities or infirmities as God has laid upon them; as to mock a man for his
deafness, or lamenesse, or ill sight, or the like, Lev. 19.14. Besides, when
men reproach others with such words for any thing they fail in, as express
more disgrace than the fault deserves; as for some mistaking to call a man
fool, Mat. 5. yea it is reviling when the faults of others are charged upon
them without a calling,or desire of their amendment: and so it is reviling to
upbraid any with the sins they have repented of.

And thus what reviling is.

Doct. 1. Reviling is a hateful sin: that appears from hence, that it is
accounted a great suffering to suffer reviling. And our Savior accounts it
murder in his exposition upon the sixth Commandment. Mat. 5. and therefore
bitter words are compared to arrows and swords, which are (...) of murder:
and reviling godly men is termed blasphemy in sun (...) the Original: it
grows out of a bitter root, and is the very (...) naughty disposition, or
maliciousness, Heb. 12.14, 15. (...) altogether contrary to the Spirit of God,
which is a Spirit of mockenesse. And if a godly man suddenly fall into bitter
words, it makes the holy Ghost stir within him, Ephesians. 4.30. and evil words
corrupt(...) Thou losest so much of thy honesty as thou usest of reviling.

Use. The use is therefore, first, to persuade all that are godly to avoid this
sin, and at home and abroad to revile no man upon any occasion, Tit. 3.2. and
the rather, because they are heirs of blessing, 1 Pet. ^.9. and have the
example, not only of the godly in Scripture, but of Christ himself, as it is
here urged.

Secondly, it serves to reprove and shame all such as are guilty of (...) full
a sin: especially,

1. Such as have a mouth full of cursing and bitterness; Who are guilty of
reviling.
such as are many Masters and Mistresses, or Dames, that cannot speak to their
servants, but it is with reviling terms; their usual speech to them is to
find (...) with reproach: and so in any sort of men that are thus bitter(...),
Romans 3.14. Iam. 3.9. it is the sign of an ^^regenerate heart.

2. Such as are given to it to complain of their neighbors in all places,
evill-minded men, that know little other discourse, but by way of finding
fault, or reproaching this or that man: and they cease (...) have filled town
and country with reproaches and slanders, Iam. 5.9.

3. Such as revile innocent men, and speak evil of the just and godly, whom
they ought to praise and honor.

4. Such as revile men for this very reason, because they are good. It is
monstrous ill to revile a good man, but a^ominable vile to revile goodness and
religion it self, to scoff and reproach preaching, and hearing of sermons,
and praying, etc. Woe is to them that thus call good evil: and the worst is,
when they set up, instead of those things, the praises of drunkenness, good
fellowship, and lascivious meetings, and (...) disorders, and so call bitter
sweet, and evil good.

5. Such as rail at such as are in authority, and speak evil of dignities,
Esaias 5.20.
Jude ^. 2 Pet. 2.10.

6. Such as revile their very parents, and speak evil of such as God and
nature have so nearly bound them to. And so is it monstrous vile for (...) to
traduce their husbands, and by backbiting to destroy their (...); as it is
monstrous for the people (...) revile their (...) that are godly and painful
men.

7. Such as revile Christ, as the Jews did: (of which afterward) and such are
they that revile God, as (...), and (...) kind, as well as Pagans and (...),
that speak reproachfully of this doctrine.

Thus of the sin of reviling.

Doct. 2. Christ himself was reviled: He that was ^o (...) and innocent: He
that did so much good in every place: He that had power to be revenged on such
as did revile him. This is the more (...) if we also consider by whom he was
reviled, even by such as had their birth, breath, and being, and all from him:
yea he was reviled of all sorts of men; Jews, (...) Rulers, the people,
learned men, and unlearned. And this was the more to be wondered at too, if we
consider with what kind of reviling he was (...), and that was with most
hateful (...), as deceiving, working by the Devil, blasphemy, sedition,
treason, etc. The Use follows.

Use. Was Christ reviled? Then it is most manifest that the world hates
goodness incurably: if that just One cannot escape reproach and slanders, then
may not any godly persons promise to themselves peace that ways. Therefore
carnal friends of such as suffer reproach for Religion many times say, It must
needs be they are faulty some way, or at least are not discreet: whereas this
instance of our Savior shows, that wordly-minded men will reproach such as
are godly, though they were never so discreet or innocent. Besides, this should
teach us patience under such indignities and wrongs: Christ was reviled, and
shall we be so troubled and disquieted?

Christ did not revile again.]

And the reason was, partly because reviling is a sin, and partly because he
suffered as our surety, though he had deserved no such shame, and we had: and
therefore holds his peace, not only from reviling, but many times from just
apology, confessing our guiltiness by his silence. The practice of our
Savior is here reported for our learning, that all Christians might hence be
warned, not to render reviling for reviling, 1 Pet. 3.9.

Motives to patience.
There are many reasons to persuade us to patience, and not to render reviling
for reviling. First, the reproaches of unreasonable men cannot take away thy
innocence. Secondly, better men than we have been as vilely abused. Thirdly,
as David said, God may bless thee for their cursing, and honor thee for their
disgracing of thee. Fourthly, because we are heirs of blessing; and therefore
such foul language as cursing and reviling should not be found in our mouths.
Fifthly, though thou deserve not those reproaches from men, yet thou art not
innocent before God. Sixthly, herein thou shall be conformed to the Pattern and
Image of the Lord Jesus Christ, not only in suffering wrongfully, but in
forbearing reviling for Conscience sake.

He threatened not.]

To threaten those that wrong us is usually a blemish and a fault: First,
because usually it arises of passion, and desire of revenge. Secondly, because
oftentimes it is joined with lying, when such things are threatened as for
matter or degree cannot be done, or are not intended to be done. Thirdly,
because by threatening so passionately we do injury to God, to whom vengeance
belongs. This condemns the usual practice of all sorts of men, that sin
fearfully in the customary practice of thwarting, upon all occasions of
discontent and displeasure. Who is he that suffers now, and in his heart or
words threatens not? Especially, how exceeding common is this sin in the most
families where parents and masters can hardly tell how to speak of the faults
of servants and children, but it is with foolish and passionate threatening,
contrary to the express prohibition, Ephesians. 6.9. Masters use not threatenings.
But all such as would have the comfort of a sound conversation, and desire to
carry themselves as Christ has left us a pattern, must strive to break off
this wretched habit of threatening: and if they be oppressed by Superiors, or
wronged by the incurable faults of Inferiors, they must learn of Christ to
commit all to him that judges righteously; which is the affirmative part of
the manner of Christ's suffering.

But committed himself to him that judges righteously.]

From these words diverse things may be observed.

Doct. 1. First, that in case of wrongs from other men, it is not always
needful or convenient to complain to the Magistrate for redress. Christ here
commits his cause to God, but complains not: nay, though he were wronged
almost continually, and with grievous wrongs, yet we read not that ever he
complained against them that did him wrong.

Here two things are to be enquired after.

First, in what cases it is not fit to complain to men.

Secondly, in what cases it may be lawful and fit.

In these cases following it is not fit to complain to the Magistrate.

First, In what cases it is not fit to complain unto the Magistrate.
where redress of the wrongs may be had by private and peaceful courses, 1
Cor. 6.

Secondly, where the laws of men do not provide punishment: some wrongs are
offenses, and yet not punishable by men's laws.

Thirdly, where the offense is committed of mere frailty or ignorance.

Fourthly, where the offense is grounded upon mere surmises, which in the
judgment of charity ought not to be conceived, 1 Cor. 13.

Fifthly, where the injury is less, and the party trespassing does acknowledge
the wrong: in this case the rule of Christ holds; If thy brother say, It
repents me, thou must forgive him, Luke 17.4.

Sixthly, where by the suit religion will receive greater damage by the
scandal, than the party suffers by the wrong; as in the case of the
Corinthians, where a brother went to law with a brother before Judges that were
Infidels.

Seventhly, where the Magistrates have declared themselves to be enemies to
justice and just men; as here in the case of Christ it was boot less to
complain, because all the Rulers were his professed enemies.

Contrariwise, in these and such like cases following men may lawfully seek
justice from men in authority.

First, where the offense is grievous, and against the laws of God and men. In
what cases men may lanfully seek redress from the Magistrate.


Secondly, where the offender persists in evill-doing, without repentance.

Thirdly, where the offense is against God and Religion, as well as against the
party wronged.

Fourthly, where such wrongs are usually punishable.

Fifthly, where the party complaining is bound to complain by his office,
either by charge or oath: provided, that the party complaining, first, love his
enemies; and secondly, prosecute with continual respect to Gods glory; and
thirdly, use the benefit of the Law with charity and mercy, without cruelty or
extremity.

Thus of the first Doctrine.

Doct. 2. The malice of wicked men against the godly is so great, that when
they begin to oppose them, though it be but in their name, they will never
cease opposition, if they have power, till they have their lives too. Thus I
gather from hence, that our Savior, being reviled, does not only commit his
cause to God, but commits himself to God, as expecting the increase of their
oppositions, till they have put him to death. This is the reason why God
indites every man that hates his brother, of murder, 1 John 3.15. And David so
often complains of his enemies that slandred him, that they also sought his
life, yea his soul; as if they were desirous not only to kill his body, but
damn his soul also.

Doct. 3. We may here also note, that God is to be conceived of according to
the occasion: seeing we cannot comprehend God wholly as he is, we ought to
raise up such conceptions in our hearts of the glory of God, as may with honor
answer the occasion that presently concerns us: as here in the case of wrongs,
God is conceived as a righteous Judge: in the case of death he is called the
God of the spirits of all flesh: in the case of prayer he is called a God that
delights to hear prayer: in the case of infirmities, a God that takes away
iniquity, and passes by transgression: That God is a Judge, is terrible to
wicked men, and that in many respects.
and in cases of great difficulty he is conceived of as Almighty, and so forth.

Doct. 4. It is evident from hence, that God is a Judge: and this point is both
terrible to the wicked, and comfortable to the godly. It is terrible to the
wicked many ways: First, because he is Judge of all the world; all must be
judged by him, Genesis 18.25. Heb. 12.23. 1 Samuel 2.10. He is not a Judge of some
one circuit, as Judges amongst men are. Secondly, because he is a Judge that
needs no evidence be brought in: for he knows all causes, and is witness
himself, Ier. 29.23. and so Judges among men are not. Thirdly, because he
judges for all offenses: he tries the hearts and the reins, as well as the
words and works of men, Psalm. 7.9, 11. Earthly Judges try malefactors but in
one or some few cases. Fourthly, because he has Armies of executioners: he
can call to the heavens, or speak to the earth, and have hosts of servants to
do his will, and execute his judgments, Dan. 7.9. 10. Psalm. 50.4, 22. so as
none can deliver out of his hands. Fifthly, because he is Judge himself, Psalm.
50.6. and 75.8. He does not do justice by Deputies, but will hear all cases
himself. Sixthly, because his judgment is the last and highest judgment; and
therefore there lies no appeal from it. Seventhly, because he can bring men
to judgment without any warning: he stands before the door, and often
seizes upon the offender, without serving any writ, or giving him any summons,
James 5.9. And therefore wicked men do very foolishly, that ruffle here in the
world, and lift up their horns so high, and speak with such a stiff neck,
and walk on in their sins and injuries so securely, Psalm. 75.5, 6, 7, 8.

God is comfortable to godly men.
Again, if God be Judge, it is comfortable to penitent sinners: First, because
repentance will alter the judgment, if it be after the fact, and before the
sentence, even in such offenses as deserve everlasting death, as appears in
the case of David and the Ninivites, and is notified to the world, Act. 17.31.
whereas earthly Judges must proceed in their judgment, whether the parties be
penitent or no. Again, it is the more comfortable, that God is Judge, because
all parties wronged or grieved may have access to God, and put up their
supplications at any time; he is ready to be found, and willing to hear: which
is seldom true of earthly Judges. Thirdly, because godly men know their
sentence already, God has acquitted them by his Word, and by his Son, and by
his Spirit, and therefore they need not fear his last judgment.

Doct. 5. God will judge righteously: Gods judgment is a most righteous
judgment, Psalm. 9. 8. Romans 2.5. 2 Timothy 4.8. He is the righteous Judge by an
excellency, because there is no Judge but misseth it some way: only Gods
judgment is always righteous; and it must needs be so for many reasons:

How Go^ (...) rig^t^o^^^y
First, because he judges the high as well as the low, Job 21.22.

Secondly, because his judgment extends to every offender in the world, Jude
15. Earthly Judges may punish some malefactors, but they leave thousands of men
that are as great as they, I mean as great offenders as they: as for other
reasons, it is because they cannot apprehend them.

Thirdly, because he judges for the breach of most righteous Laws.

Fourthly, because he will take no gifts, Job 36.18, 19.

Fifthly, because he hates heartily what he condemns severely: so the day of
judgment is called, A day of wrath, Romans 2.5. whereas man may censure other
men for such faults as they themselves commit, or at least are not moved to the
sentence simply out of the disliking of the fault.

Sixthly, because he is not deceived with shows and outward appearances, but
his judgment is according to truth, Romans 2.2.

Seventhly, because it is general, according to men's works, 2 Cor. 5.10.

Eighthly, because in the day of his judgment he will specially honor the
righteous, Romans 2.7, etc.

Ninthly, because when a man can have no justice from men, he shall be sure to
have justice from God: and this is especially here intended.

Tenthly, because he does not judge rashly: but as we see after wonderful
patience, and the many days men have had of sinning, he appoints his day of
judging.

Uses. The Uses may be diverse: for,

First, it shows the woeful case of wicked men that forget God, and in the
hardness of their hearts run on in sin, and so heap up wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2.4, 5.

Secondly, it should teach all men that have any care of themselves, to deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live godly, and righteously, and
soberly in this present world, Tit. 2.12, 13.

Thirdly, it should be a singular comfort to all such as suffer wrongs and
injuries in this world, whether in their names, or bodies, or states, or any
way; let them but be patient, God will do them justice, as these places show,
2 These. 1.5. Psalm. 4.5. Iam. 5.6, 7, 8. Jude 15.

Doct. 6. It is the duty of Gods servants in all distresses to commit
themselves and their causes to God and to his righteous providence and
judgment. This the example of Christ here shows us, and there is reason for
it. First, because God requires we should do so, as these places show, Psalm.
37.5, 6. Prove. 16.3. 1 Pet. 4. ult. Secondly, because it is not in man to
direct his own way, Ier. 10.23. Thirdly, because God never disappointed the
trust of them that committed themselves to him, Nabum 1.7. Pro. 16.3.

The Use should be to teach us, Use.
as we would show our selves to bear the image of Christ, and to be true
Christians, to practice this duty, in all cases of wrong, danger, affliction,
or temptation: But then withal, when we have committed our cause to God, we
must remember these rules:

First, never to use ill means to get out of distress, Esaias 28.16. Rules in
committing our cause to God.


Secondly, not to limit God, but to let him do whatsoever pleases him.

Thirdly, not to be impatient, or troubled, but quiet our selves in God, and
wait and trust in him; and if we find any difficulties, we must then roll
our way upon the Lord, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 37.5, 6, 7.

Fourthly, we must acknowledge him in all our ways, and give him glory, when
he does us justice, Pro. 3.6.

Verse 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree; that we
being delivered from sin, should live in righteousness; by whose stripes you
were healed.


HItherto of the manner of the suffering of Christ. Now follows in the fifth
place the matter he suffered, viz. He bare our sins, amplified by showing
how, and that three ways: first, his own self: secondly, in his body:
thirdly, on the tree.

He bare our sins.]

Christ may be said to bear our sins in two respects chiefly. First, In
what respects Christ bare our sins.
because he did undergo the imputation of all our sins; our faults were
charged upon him, as our surety: He was made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. He stood
before Gods justice in our room. Secondly, because he suffered the
malediction due to our sins by the Law: He bare our sins, in being made a
sacrifice for sin: He became indebted unto the justice of God, as our surety,
to bear the curses of the Law, which our sins deserved, Esaias 53.5, 8. Ga^.
3.10. And as this is true in general of all the wrath of God, and the fearful
things due to our sins: so if we mark the story of Christ's sufferings, we
may observe, how the sins of our first parents, and our own, light heavily
upon his back, God suffering our sins to be charged upon him in a special
fitness of the judgment to our sins: and that we may note, both in the
circumstances of our sinning, and in the sorts of sins.

Christ's sufferings ^itted to the circumstances of sin.
For the circumstances: The first Adam sins in a garden; the second Adam
suffers fearfully for sin in a garden: The second Adam suffers on a tree, and
so bears the sin of the first Adam, eating the forbidden fruit of a tree.
For the sorts of sin: Why was Christ betrayed by Judas, denied by Peter,
forsaken by all his Disciples, refused by the Priests and people, but because
we had betrayed, denied, forsaken, and refused God in Paradise? And many of us
are now guilty of the same or the like sins in the course of our lives. He
was charged to be a seducer, to satisfy for our being seduced: for our evil
words, and sinful excuses, he was silent: because we and our first Parents
have preferred the Devil before God, therefore was a malefactor preferred
before him. Why was he mocked, buffered, and spit upon, but to bear the shame
was due unto us for our filthiness, and vile conversation? Why drank he gall,
but to pay for our sinful pleasures? Why suffered he reviling and scoffing,
but to satisfy for our sinful words? Many other things might be observed.

The consideration whereof should serve for many Uses: and so it should teach
us diverse duties; as,

Uses. First, since he has borne our sins in the imputation of them, and the
malediction due unto them, we should be most ready and willing to bear his
cross, as accounting it a great shame to be unwilling to suffer a little, and
for a little while, for his sake, that has borne such strange things for us:
we should be content to forsake all for his sake.

Secondly, it should grieve us at the heart for our sins, considering the
fearful imputation of our faults charged upon him, and the bitter things he
suffered, to make amends to Gods justice for our wickedness, Zach. 12.10.

Thirdly, has Christ borne our sins? and can we find in our hearts to
sin any more? shall he again be charged with our faults? shall we again
crucify him? Romans 6.6. Heb. 10.24. etc. and as follows in the next words of
this Text.

Fourthly, Oh how should we love the Lord Jesus; that holy One, that bare the
imputation of such base crimes, and endured such grievous things for us, before
we ever knew him, or cared for him; even for us that were enemies to him!
Deserve they not to be accursed, that love not the Lord Jesus? 1 Pet. 1.9. ^
Cor. 16.22.

Fifthly, we should therefore eat the Passover with sour herbs; we should
remember his grievous sufferings with hearty affection, and melting of soul
before the Lord, when we come before him to celebrate the memory of his Passion
in the Sacrament.

Sixthly, we should no more stagger or waver in faith, but with all peace and
joy in believing, rest upon the propiriation made by Christ for our sins: we
should therefore confidently believe the pardon of all our sins, because he
has borne ou^ iniquities. 1 John 2.1. Romans 3.26.
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.

Seventhly, we should never more be afraid of death and hell: for our debt
being paid by the surety, the handwriting that was against us, is now
cancelled, Col. 2.15. and there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus, Romans 8.1. Heb. 2.14.

Eighthly, we should not be so much troubled to be unjustly traduced, seeing
Christ beyond all example, suffered most unspeakable ignominy, bearing the
i^putation of the sins of all the Elect.

Ninthly, seeing he has been made in the similitude of sinful flesh, and
suffered for sin in the flesh, we should strive to be made the
righteousness of God in him; and as he has borne our sins, so should we
strive to bear his virtues.

Who his own self.]

It is emphaticall that the Apostle says, He bare our sins his own self:
for there be two things which are here imported. First, that he had no
partners: there were none with him: He bare all himself, Esaias 59.16. He trod
the wine press alone, Esaias 63.3, 5. And therefore it is a vile dishonor to
Christ to ascribe any part of satisfaction to our selves, or to any Saint or
Angel. Secondly, it imports, that therefore his suffering is of infinite value,
in that he bare all his own self in person, who was God and man. Then it will
follow, that he has made a sufficient propitiation for all the world, 2 John
2.1, 2.

In his body.]

Quest. Why, did he not suffer in his soul?

Answ. Yes: for so says the Scripture, He made his soul a sacrifice for sin,
Esaias 53.10. and the Son of man came to give his soul a ransom for many, Mat.
20.28. Mark^ 10.45. This was shadowed out by the Holocaust, or whole
burnt-offering: for it noted that the whole man should suffer. So in the
Sacrament, the breaking of the bread is not referred so properly to his body;
for there was not a bone broken of him, says the holy text: but fitly to his
soul, which was broken with sorrows and heaviness for our sakes: So that by
the body he means synechdochically whole Christ; but yet the body is named,
because that was the outward sacrifice that was offered for our sins on the
tree.

Christ then bare our sins in his body. What may we learn from thence?

First, we see a manifest difference betwixt Christ's Priesthood, and theirs in
the Law. For they offered the bodies of beasts or fowls, but Christ offered
his own body.

Secondly, we may take comfort in the assurance, that he is the Savior of our
bodies as well as our souls.

Thirdly, seeing such grievous things befell the body of Christ, why seek we
so much ease for our bodies? why pamper we our flesh so? and why are we so
impatient in the pains of our bodies, and remember not what Christ suffered in
his body?

Fourthly, we should therefore esteem his body to be a precious body above all
bodies, seeing it was laid down as a price for our sins: yea we should long
to see that glorious body of his, that we might admire it, and adore it, and
embrace it; and in the mean time love and delight in the Lords Supper, that
exhibiteth the body of Christ spiritually unto us, rejoicing in such meetings
above the joy of all carnal people, before any other things.

Fifthly, we should therefore take heed of sinning against our bodies, b^^ make
conscience to serve God both in body and Spirit, and say with David and Christ,
Lord, a body thou have given me: for I come to do thy will.

Sixthly, what cursed monsters are swearers, that rear the body of our Lord
with their cursed oaths, and rake their nails in his wounds with their
blasphemies?

On the tree.]

The original word signifies sometimes a staff, Mat. 26.47. sometimes a pair
of stocks, Acts 16.24. sometimes a tree growing, Rev. 2.11. usually wood, ^
Cor. 3.12. here, a Gallows made of wood.

Christ bare our sins on the tree, because he did in a special manner suffer
bitter extremities on the tree, which he suffered as our Surety, and for our
sins: for,

Reasons why Christ suffered on a tree.
First, to die on a tree was by a special Law of God made a curse, and so is
every one that hangs on a tree Gal. 3.13.

Secondly, he was debarred of the benefit of ordinary natural comforts: for he
lived in pain three hours in the d^rke, and had not the light of the Sun.

Thirdly, in that darkness he was put to the most fearful conflict with the
Devils, which at that time did with their utmost fury assault him, and sight
against him, Col. 3.25.

Fourthly, he endured most grievous pains and torments of body, and the
effusion of his most precious blood.

Fifthly, he was reckoned amongst the wicked in his death, and therefore hanged
between two malefactors, Esaias 53.9.

Sixthly, he was reviled by the base multitude, and mocked and derided by the
chief Priests and Scribes, Mat. 27.39. to 45.

Seventhly, God his Father poured out upon him the fearful vials of his wrath,
in withdrawing for a time the sense of his favor, Mat. 27.46.

Eighthly, his whole body was offered up on the tree, as a Sacrifice for the
sins of the world, and the substance of all the Sacrifices in the Law.

Uses. We have therefore cause to rejoice in the cross of Christ above all
things; for on the tree he freed us from the curses of the Law, and purchased
for us the blessings promised to Abraham, as the father of the faithful, Gal.
3.13, 14. and besides, by suffering so shameful a death he has sanctified all
sorts of ways of inflicting death upon the godly; so as now they may with
comfort in a good cause, or after repentance for their faults, even suffer that
death on a tree with joy. And we should the more praise God for his favor, if
he suffer any of us to die of any other more easy or more honorable death.
And then we may again see the hatefulness of sin, in that God, punishing our
sins in the person of his own Son, does not omit the very circumstances of
abasement; his justice exacting not only death, but that painful and
ignominious death on the tree. Lastly, hence we may see how little cause there
is for Christians to plead merit, if they think how fearfully sin has angered
God; and withal, how senseless the best of us are, when we hear, read, or
think of these sufferings of Christ: they may rather see cause for ever to
abhor the doctrine of merit, seeing hereby we proclaim our selves to be
worthy of the very merits of Christ, that can be so little affected with the
thought of his sufferings.

Thus of the matter of Christ's sufferings.

The effects follow: and the effects, in respect of us, are named to be three:
first, the death of sin; secondly, the life of grace; thirdly, the healing of
our natures.

That we being dead to sin.]

Men die diverse ways.
Men may be said to die diverse ways:

First, in respect of nature; when the Frame of nature is dissolved by the
p^^ting of the soul from the body.

Secondly, in respect of God; when God is departed from men with his grace, and
righteousness, and favor: thus wicked men are spiritually dead, Ephesians. 2.1. and
4.17. 1 Timothy 5.6.

(...), in respect of the world; when a man is overwhelmed with crosses, (...)
as are (...) wit^ (...) in his reputation, he is said to be dead, and his life
to be hid under (...), being despised and (...) as (...) m^n o^t of ^inde, Col.
^.3. Esaias 26.19.

Fourthly, in respect of sin: and so men either are dead for sin, as
malefactors; or dead in sin, as all wicked men; or dead to sin, as the
godly here. To take the soul from the body is the death of all men: To take
God from the soul is the death of all wicked men: To take sin from the soul
is the death of all godly men. To be dead to sin then is to be mortified in
respect of sin.

Sin is said to be dead, either in appearance or in deed. In appearance only it
is dead in such as have their sins only restrained for a time, e^^her by Gods
own strong hand, or else by themselves kept down for certain hypocritical
ends, or else for want of occasion or temptation to stir the sin: thus sin
was dead in Paul, when he was unregenerate, and revived when the Law came, Romans
7.9. Sin is dead indeed in godly men, but with a difference: for though in this
life they be wholly rid of many sins, yet some corruptions are not wholly
removed; yet are they dead to them in the inchoation of it, their sins lie a
dying: but in the life to come they shall be wholly and fully delivered from
all sin.

Thus of the sense.

There be many Doctrines may be hence observed: as,

Doct. 1. First, it is evidently here implied, that all men by nature, and out
of Christ, are alive to sin, or live to sin: and in sinning they may be said to
live, or be alive, or live to it, in diverse respects;

1. Because all the parts of their life are full of sin: Natural men a^e said
to be alive to sin in diverse respects
sin infecteth their persons and their works.

2. Because they are in bondage to sin, so as all their life they are at the
command of sin: they are servants of sin, Romans 6.

3. Because they account sin to be the life of their lives: they could not
esteem life but for the hope of liberty and power of sinning. It were a death
to them to live restrained of sin, as appears, when either by punishment, or
for other ends, they are found to cease sinning.

4. Because they do not destroy sin, in letting it live: they are guilty of
the life of sin in them, because they will not use the means to subdue and
mortify sin that dwells in them, but let it alone unresisted.

5. Because they have most life, or are most lively, when they have most
liberty to sin.

6. Because they continue in sin: they spend not an hour, but it is in
sin: yea they so sin now, that they desire to spend everlasting life in
sin.

Use. And so from hence by way of use men may discern whether they live in sin
or not: for he that is a servant to his corruptions, and esteems them as the
happiness of his life, and resists them not, and has a desire to sin ever, i^
(without doubt) alive in sin, and dead to righteousness. And so contrariwise,
where these things cannot be found, there the person is not alive to sin.

Doct. 2. Hence is implied also, that to live in sin is but miserable living;
and therefore those whom God loves, he chang^th from that condition, and
makes them die to sin. Now this may be showed out of other Scriptures briefly:
for,

1. Sin infects a man, and all he goes about: it stains his very conscience,
Great is the misery of such as live in sin.
and like the leprosy will pollute his clothes, his flesh, his house, and
whatsoever he touches almost, Titus 1.15. It makes all things impure.

2. To harbor sin is to harbor the devil too, who alwaye^ takes possession
of the soul that is given over to sin: so as the heart of the sinner is the
Fortress of the Devil, Ephesians. 2.^. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor. 10.5. Ephesians. 4.26.

3. While a man lives in sin he is in danger to be crossed and (...) in every
thing he does: he shall have no portion from God, nor inheritance from the
Almighty, Job 31.2. Good things will be restrained from him, Esaias 59.2. and he
may find himself cursed in every thing he sets his hand unto, Deuteronomy. 28.16,
17, 18, etc. his very blessings may be cursed, Mal. 2.2. his very table may be
a snare. For certainly God will be revenged of the sinful man that is alive in
sin, Nah. 1.2, 3, 6.

4. His soul is dead within him while he is alive, Ephesians. 2.2. 1 Timothy 5.6. And
how can it be otherwise, when God, which is his life, is departed from him? and
with God all spiritual blessings are gone from his soul too.

The end of this life is to die miserably, Romans 8.10. and 6.2^. Gal. 6. and to
perish for ever with the Devil and his Angels, Revel. 21.8. Mat. 25.45.

And in a special m^ner it is a miserable living to be lively and joviall (as
they call it) in sin: such men are worse than the general sort of sinners. For
these wretched men, that are so lively in sin, have a most miserable heart in
them, a heart like an Adamant, like a very stone within them, are senseless
and brutish like the very beasts that perish, Psalm. 49. ult. Besides, in many
of these God scourges sin with sin, and gives them up to such a reprobate
mind, that their wickedness oftentimes exceeds the wickedness of the wicked,
Ier. 5. Romans 1.26, 28. And further, many times strange punishments light upon
those workers of iniquity, Job 31.3. To which may be added, that oftentimes
such wretched creatures conclude in most woeful and hellish terrors; so as they
howl for vexation of spirit, while Gods servants sing for joy of heart, Esaias
65.13, 14. Rev. 6.15, 16.

But in general of all that live in sin it is manifestly here implied, that
they have no part in Christ: Christ, in respect of them, and as they are in
their present condition, died in vain.

Use. The consideration whereof should awaken men from that heavy sleep in
sin, unto an earnest care to live righteously: it should warn men every where
to repent, Ephesians. 5.14. and the rather, because this very patience of God, in
bearing thus long with them, and the mercy offered them in the Gospel, will
increase to greater wrath and condemnation, if men will not be warned, Romans
2.4, 5. 2 These. 1.8, 9.

Doct. 3. Hence also it is clear, that Gods Elect, before their Calling, have
lived in sin as well as others, Ephesians. 2.3. Tit. 3.3. Col. 3.6. Which is fit to
be noted for diverse uses. For first, it sets out the rich mercy of God, and his
free grace in election; and manifestly shows that we merit not the blessing,
Ephesians. 2.3, 4, etc. And secondly, it should teach the godly diverse duties; as
first, not to be proud or high-minded, but rather, remembering what they were,
to make them the more humble all their days. Secondly, to despair of no man,
but rather to show all meekness toward all men, 2 Timothy 2.25. Tit. 3.2, 3.
Thirdly, to cleave fast unto Christ, in whose only propitiation they can be
saved from their sins, 1 John 2.1, 2. God forbid we should rejoice in any thing
more than in Christ, and him crucified, Gal. 6.16. Lastly, we should think it
more than enough that we have heretofore lived in sin: we should henceforth
resolve to spend that little time that remains in a careful obedience unto
Gods will, ceasing from sin, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2, 3.

Thus of the Doctrines implied in the Text. The Doctrines that may be gathered
more expressly follow.

Doct. 1. None but mortified Christians are true Christians. It is manifest
that none have part in Christ, but such as are dead to sin; such men only does
Christ acknowledge: for he is a Redeemer to none but such as turn from
transgress^^n in Jacob, Esaias 59.20. All that are in Christ are new creatures:
their old things are past, and all things are new, 2 Cor. 5.17. None are
Christ's but such as bear the similitude of his death in their dying to sin,
Romans 6. Men lose their Baptism, if they be not baptized into the death of
Christ. Such men as place their happiness in worldly things are not the right
seed, but such only as are borne by promise, that is, that received life by
the promises of grace and a better life, Romans 9.8. Christ was sent to preach
glad tidings to such as mourn in Sion, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3. The mourners in
Jerusalem were the only men that were marked for God, Ezekiel. 9. Christ will
have no Disciples but such as will deny themselves, Luke 9. and are not
fashioned according to this world, Romans 12.2. And this should teach men to have
mortified Christians in greater honor, and to esteem highly of such as will
not be corrupted with the excess of the times, and do show by a sound
conversation, that they are weaned from the lust after earthly things, and are
consesecrated to God and his service. We should honor and acknowledge such
above all other men in the world, yea, in the Church. It should ^lso compel
upon us a care of a mortified life, and a daily resisting of sin and the
Devil, and striving to be made like to Christ.

Finally, if the count must be made by mortification, there will then be but a
short count upon earth. For look into Christian Churches, and cast out, first,
all open profane persons, such as are drunkards, fornicators, swearers,
murderers, railers against goodness, such as serve vanity, and show it by
strange apparel, and such like men: secondly, all open idolaters, and
superstitious persons, and such as hold damnable opinions: thirdly, all civil
honest men, such as have only the praise of men for a harmless conversation
in the world, but have no taste of religion, or conscience of zeal for Gods
glory: fourthly, all open worldlings, that mind not heavenly things, and
savor nothing but the things of this world: and lastly, all hypocrites, that
make a show of mortification, and yet are not mortified: and then suppose how
small a number will be left in every place, to be reckoned in this lift of true
Christians.

Doct. 2. Mortification is the very first step of grace, and the entrance into
all power of godliness. Till our sins be soundly crucified and dead, no work
of Religion that is acceptable to God can be done: and therefore John Baptist,
and Christ, and the Apostles call for repentance, as the first thing that opens
a way into the kingdom of heaven, because else sin unrepented, like a prison,
will infect all we do, Esaias 1.13. to 16. Besides, the heart of man being
naturally like a stone or iron, till it be softened no impression of grace can
be fastened upon it: and if the ground of our hearts be not well plowed up, the
seed of the Word cannot but be lost, Ier. 4.4. The seed cast upon the high way
will be picked up by the fowls of the air, and not grow: or if any seed or
plant of grace did grow for a while in the heart, yet the weeds of sin would
overgrow and choke all, as is evident in seed sown i^ thorny ground, or
plants set in ground that is not dug and weeded. And f^^ther, while the
person is evil, the work will be vile and abominable. An evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit.

And therefore this shows, that such Christians as leap into the profession
of Religion so easily, and think it is no more but to give-ov^r ill courses,
and fall to the practice of good duties, are deceived: for if by ^ound
mortification their sins past be not bewailed, and they soundly humbled, either
their sins will after a while grow and revive again, or else the conscience of
these sins will secretly throughout their lives torment them; or else the
Devil on a sudden may seize upon them with de^paire, having so manifest a
reason against them, that they did never practice mortific^tion for their sins.
Besides, lamentable experience shows, in those places where Christians are not
soundly formed at first in the exercise of mortification, they lead their
lives in a dull course of profession, and have not the experience of the life
and power of Religion in themselves for the joys of it, or toward others in
the practice of it. The mourners in Sion, and such as are brokenhearted, are
the most glorious and the most fruitful Christians, Is. 61.1, 2, 3, 4. and
continue in the greatest power of Religion. And further, it may be noted in the
best of those, that their separation from the love of the world is most really
performed, as has appeared, when in any special works of men, or for the
help of the Church of God, they are called upon to show their zeal by their
bounty: in such cases one poor Macedonian would shame a hundred of those rich
Corinthians. 2 Cor. 8.

Doct. 3. True repentance for sin does in diverse respects kill a man, it
strikes him dead: to repent is to be a dead man, not only in respect of the
world, which casts off a man that will not run in the excesses of the time, as
a dead man indeed, Col. 3.3. but in respect of themselves. For first, by the
assise a man must keep upon himself he will be found dead by sentence, when he
judges himself before the Lord: he stands as a man condemned in the flesh, he
sentenceth himself to eternal death for his deserts, by confessing what he
meriteth, 1 Pet. 4.6. Now a condemned man is reckoned for a dead man in Law.
Secondly, repentance destroys the senses, and affections, and conceits, and
reason, that were wont to be alive in men; it dissolves the very frame of the
old conversation. The word rendered dead, signifies to undo what was done about
the life of man, (...)
to unmake him, as I may say, so as all the old things pass away, and all
becomes new, 2 Cor. 5.17. Romans 6.6. 1 John 3.8. In the new Convert there is not
left the savor, sent, lust, or affections after sin, and the sinful profits
and pleasures of the world: he does not find that inflammation or inticement he
was wont to feel from evil example, or the glory of the world, or evil
compa^y, or the things before he most esteemed and delighted in. Thus he is
dead to himself, because he denies himself; and could be well contented to
forget that ever he had been such as he was before. Thirdly, in some of Gods
children their repentance is performed with such grief and sorrow, as brings
their life almost to the buriers, as is noted, Job 33.19, 20, 21. Fourthly,
they may be said to be dead in repenting, because repentance is never fully
finished till their natural death; sin sticks so fast, as they have daily
cause of mortification in some degree, and it will never be gotten wholly out,
till they be indeed dead men, though in the mean time God accepts of their
first repentance, as if it were perfect.

This Doctrine serves effectually to discover the estate of multitudes of
Christians not to be right: as they

That do nothing at all about their sins.

That excuse their sins, and hide them, and favo^r them, and cast the fault
upon others, Pro. 28.13. Genesis 3. Job 20.11, 12, 13.

That bless themselves in their hearts, when their iniquity is found worthy to
be hated, Psalm. 36.2.

That haunt with such persons as may make them sin more.

That say, It is no profit to walk humbly before the Lord, Mal. 3.14. and
rather bless the proud.

That hate and revile such as are mortified.

That are dead rather in faith and good works, and find a deadly savor in
the Word.

That have sense and savor only in the things of the flesh.

Secondly, this should teach all that mind their own salvation to look
carefully to the truth of their mortification, and not to think it is such a
slight and easy work; but to consider, that in repenting for sin they must
never cease, till they be like Christ dying for sin; and that is in the sense
before given. So our bearing of the similitude of Christ's death in our
repentance, notes diverse particular things in our repentance; as,

1. That our sorrows be voluntary, not enforced; he gave his life, Diverse
things in Christ's death that ought to be in our repentance.
it was not taken from him: we must not tarry till the Devil fire us with the
terrors of despair. 2. That we be pained at the very heart for our sins; so
was Christ: it must be a hearty grief. 3. That we show forth the fruits of
our repentance: so he suffered openly. 4. That he suffered by degrees, and
ceased not till he died: so must we by degrees resist sin, and never cease
until it be quite abolished.
Hence also we may know whether we have truly repented. It is a sign of true
mortification, when

1. A man has seriously condemned himself before God for his sin. 2. When he
feels the wonted violence of affections after sin, Signs of true
mortification.
and the world to be deaded, and his heart grown dull and out of taste in
matters of sin and the world. He is crucified that has his lusts and
affections crucified, Gal. 5.24. 3. That he is weary of life is self, by
reason of the remainders of sin in his flesh, Romans 7. 4. That has felt as
sensible sorrows for his sins, as he was wont to do for his crosses:
sorrows, I say, that are voluntary, and for sin as it is sin.
Do^t. 4. The Passion of Christ is the best medicine to kill sin in us: he died
that we might die to sin. There is a virtue in the death of Christ to kill sin,
Romans 6. Now the death of Christ may be said to kill sin,

First, in respect of the guilt of sin: Christ in his death paid all that was
needful for satisfaction, and ^o destroyed the imputation of it, and stilled
the clamor of it. It cannot cry against us in heaven, because God is fully
satisfied, and the bond discharged and cancelled: the plea of our sins died in
the Passion of Christ.

Secondly, in respect of the hatefulness of it, or the demonstration of the
hatefulness of it. The Passion of Christ gives all men occasion to see how
unworthy sin is to live, that made him die, when it was only imputed to him,
and not done by him.

Thirdly, in respect of the power of it in us actually. There is a secret
virtue in the wounds of Christ to wound sin, and in the death of Christ to kill
sin: and therefore the Scripture speaks not only of the merit, but of the
virtue of his death, Romans 6. Phil. 3. which virtue is secretly derived unto the
penitent sinner, by the ordinances of Christ, his Word, Prayer, and Sacraments.

Uses. The Use should be for trial: men may know whether as yet they have any
part in the death of Christ, by inquiring whether they be dead in their sins.
First, they have no interest in the merit of his death, that have not
experience of the virtue of his death in killing their corruptions. Secondly,
for instruction. When godly men find any corruption begin to be too strong for
them, they must fly to Christ for this medicine; and then there is no sin so
strong in them, but by constant prayer to Christ for the virtue of his death
will be subdued, if they pray in faith. Prayer gets the medicine, and faith
applies it to the disease.

Doct. 5. True mortification does not encounter one sin only, but sins in the
plural number, and indefinitely. It notes, that in true repentance there is a
respect had to amendment of all sins. To amend only one or two faults is not
true repentance: for he that is truly dead, is dead to sins: there is no sin
but the true Convert desires and endeavors to be rid of it, so far as he
knows it to be a sin. Her^d did mend in some things, but yet was not sound,
because in one sin he minded no repentance. And this point does give an
infallible rule of trial of men's estates in Christ: for no wicked man on earth
does so much as in true desire forsake all sin. There be some corruptions he
knows that he would upon no conditions part with. To desire and endeavor to
be rid of all sins is an infallible mark of a child of God.

Doct. 6. Mortification makes a man dead only to sins: it does not make him of
a dead and lumpish disposition in doing good duties, Heb. 9.14. nor does it
require that it should destroy his nature or natural temper, or the parts of
his body, but his sin only: nor does it kill his contentment in the creatures
of God, and the use of lawful things; nor does it destroy his liberty in
lawful delights and recreations, it kills his sin only.

Might live unto righteousness.]

These words contain the second effect of Christ's death and passion, viz. the
raising of us unto a righteous life: his death makes us live, and live
righteously.

Diverse Doctrines may be hence observed.

The happiness of such as live spiritually.
Doct. 1. First, that men truly mortified shall live happily. These dead men
will live: there is no danger in great sorrow, and the other works of
mortification. It kills sin, but the soul lives by that means. He is sure to
live that is dead to his sins, Romans 8.13. Esaias 26.19. 1 Pet. 4.6. Ezekiel. 18.
Hos. 14.2. The reasons are, first, because God has promised comfort to such as
mourn for sin, Mat. 5.4. Pro. 14.10. Secondly, Christ has a special charge
given him to look to those mourners, that they miscarry not, Esaias 61.1, 2, 3.
Thirdly, they are freed from eternal death, they cannot be condemned, 1 Cor.
11.31, 32. Job 33.27, 28. Fourthly, because the fruit of the lips is peace to
these, they are ever after interessed in the comforts of the Word, Esaias 57. 15,
18. Fifthly, the nature of godly sorrow is only to tend to repentance: it is
worldly sorrow that tends to death, 2 Cor. 7.10. Sixthly, they that are
conformed to the similitude of Christ's death by mortification, shall be
conformed to Christ's life by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 6.5, 8, 11.

Uses. The Use may be, first, for confutation of such as think that
mortification is a way full of danger, and makes many men come to great
extremities; whereas they may here see there is no danger in it. Hellish
terrors, and despair, and some kind of diseases may make strange effects in
some men; but never was any hurt by godly sorrow for sin, if we will believe
the Scriptures: and therefore it should encourage men to fall to work soundly
about searching their ways, and confessing their sins, and judging themselves
in secret for their sins, James 4.7. 2 Cor. 7.10, 11. But here men must look
to some few rules: First, that they see the warrant of the course in the Word,
and know the places that require these duties: that they lay up such promises
made to the duties of mortification, as may uphold their hearts in the practice
of them. Thirdly, that they refuse not consolation; but when they have found
true humiliation for their sins, and comfort from God in his ordinances, that
they turn their sorrow into joy, and their prayers into thanksgiving, and
spend their days always rejoicing in the Lord.

Doct. 2. It is not enough to die to sin, unless we also live to
righteousness: it is not enough to forsake our sins, but we must spend our
days in good works: we are so charged to cease to do evil, as withal we
are charged to learn to do well, Esaias 1.16. we must bring forth fruits worthy
amendment of life, as well as confess our sins, Matthew. 3.8. A man will cut
down his fig tree for want of good fruit, though it bear no ill fruit, Luke
13.6. It will not please any husbandman that his land bear no thorns, not
briers, not weeds, if it bear him not good grain. It is not enough for a
servant, that he do his Master no hurt, but he must ^ee to it, that he do his
Masters work.

For first, obedience and good fruits are required at our hands in the Law of
God, besides the prohibition of sin. Secondly, Christ dyed to this end, that
we might live righteously, as well as die to sin. Thirdly, because all the
gifts of the Spirit, bestowed on us in our regeneration, are given to profit
withal, not to lay them up in a napkin, 1 Cor. 12. Fourthly, because we shall
be judged at the last day according to our works, Romans 2.6.

Use. And therefore this shows the dangerous folly of such carnal people, as
think, if they come to Church, and live civilly, and do nobody no wrong, they
are out of all question in a right course.

And besides, it should awake careless and sluggish Christians, to look to
their gifts, and remember what accounts they will give to God for their
unprofitablenesse and unfruitfulnesse, 2 Pet. 1.8.

Doct. 3. It is from hence evident, that the only living, is to live
righteously: He is worthy to be said to live, that lives to righteousness: a
religious life is the best life: And these are the reasons,

First, because it is the most honorable life: For to live to righteousness,
makes a man highly in the favor of God, A religious ^s^ is the best li^e, for
6. reasons.
Psa. 11.7. Prove. 15.9. and it shows that a man is borne of God, 1 Ioh. 2.29.
and besides, it helps a man to the best, and most blessed memorial, Prove.
10.7. and the fruits of righteousness are the best means of glorifying God,
Phil. 1.11. And therefore Solomon said well, that the righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor, Pro. 12.26. And David says. They are the only
excellent Ones, Ps. 16. whereas every wicked man is loathsome; and a sinful
life is a shameful life, Prove. 1^.5. etc. 14.34.

Secondly, because it is the most profitable life, and the most gainful: for
blessings are upon the head of the righteous, Pro. 10.6. The wicked works a
deceit^ull work: but to him that ^oweth righteousness shall be a sure reward;
Pro. 11.18. And righteousness is both the best riches, and the most durable,
Pro. 8.18, 19, 20. And it has the promise of this life, as well as the life to
come, 1 Timothy 6. Job 8 6. And the profit of righteousness will help a man when
he is to die; when the treasures of the wicked will profit nothing, Pro. 10.2.
Yea, a good man lacks not an inheritance for his childrens children: and the
wealth of the sinner is many times laid up for the juit.

Thy rely, because it is the safest and quietest life: He that walks
uprightly, walks surely, Prove. 10.19. and the fruit of righteousness is
peace, Iam. 3.18. For Gods promise is, that no evil shall happen to the just;
whereas the wicked shall be filled with mischief, Pro. 12.21. And Gods
blessing makes them rich, and he mingles no sorrow with it, Pro. 10.21. and
15.6. And righteousness is reckoned as an impenetrable a^mour, 2 Cor. ^.7. And
God does mark every one that does righteousness, and solaceth his heart, Esaias
64.5. And the very doing of good, is sweetness to the ^ou^e, Pro. 13.19. And
whereas there is no peace to the wicked, the righteous is at peace with God,
with Angels, with the creatures, and with all godly men.

Fourthly, because it is the most durable life: for the fear of the Lord
prolongeth the days; but the years of the wicked shall be shortened, Pro. 10.
27.30. The way of righteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof is no
death, Pro. 12.28. As a whirl-winde, so is the wicked seen no more: but the
righteous is an everlasting foundation, Prove. 10.25.

Fifthly, because it is a life that ends the best of all men's lives: for the
wicked is driven away in his wickedness: but the righteous has hope in his
death, and great hope too, having the promises of a better life, and so much
glory, as the eye of mortal man never saw, nor ear of man heard, nor came
into the heart of a natural man, Pro. 14.32. 1 Timothy 6. 1 Cor. 2.9.

Sixthly, because righteousness is more proper to the soul. What is riches, or
honor, or any outward thing to the soul of man? or what shall it profit a man
to provide the whole world to be his estate, if he provide not grace for his
soul? Riches profit but the outward estates of a man: whereas righteousness
profits the man himself. And therefore Adams loss was greater in losing his
innocence, than in losing of Paradise. What can it profit a man to have all
other things good about him, if he be not good himself?

Use. The Use should be, first, for trial. Men should thoroughly search
themselves whether they be indeed righteous men; and the more carefully should
they search, because the most righteous on earth have their many ignorances and
frailties. There is no man but sins daily, and in many things. And besides,
a man may attain to some kind of righteousness, and yet not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; as there is a generation that are pure in their own eyes,
and yet are not cleansed from their sins. And the Pharisees had a
righteousness that had many praises; they gave alms, and fasted, and prayed
long prayers, and did that which was warrantable, in respect of the Law
outwardly; and yet if our righteousness exceed not the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven.

Quest. But how may a man know all his infirmities, notwithstanding he be
truly righteous, and have such a righteousness as does exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees?

Ans. For answer hereunto I will cast the signs of a righteous man into two
ranks. First, such as describe him in himself; secondly, such as describe him
in the difference from Pharisaicall righteousness.

Signs that describe a righteous m^n in hims^l^e.
The signs that describe him in himself, either appear upon him in his
infancy, or in his ripe age.

In the very infancy of the just man, even when God first changes his heart,
and cleanses him, and raises him up to live righteously, there be diverse
things by which he may discern the truth of his sanctification; as,

First, by the dissolving of the stoninesse of his heart. When God comes
effectually to cleanse a man, he takes away the stony heart out of the body,
and gives him a heart of flesh: he may feel his heart melt within him,
especially when he stands before the Lord, when the Lord is fashioning of him
for himself by his Ordinances, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. He has a new heart that has
not a stony heart.

Secondly, by the rising of the day star in his heart. The Father of lights,
when he renueth the heart of a man, causes a sudden and heavenly light, as it
were a star, to shine in the understanding; by virtue of which men see more
into the mysteries of Religion in that first moment, than they did all the
days of their life before. This is that new spirit the Prophet speaks of; He
that sat in darkness before, now sees a great light: he sees and wonders at
divine things in Religion, whereas before he was a ^ot, and understood nothing
with any power or life; and by the comforts of this light he can hear as the
learned, understands doctrine in a moment, which before was altogether harsh
and dark unto him, 2 Pet. 1.19. Ezekiel. 36.28. Psalm. 119.130. Mat. 4.16. Esaias 50
4.

Thirdly, by his vehement desire to righteousness, or after righteousness,
Mat. 5.5. Which he shows many ways; as, by the loathing of himself for his
want of righteousness, and for all his ways that were not good, Ezekiel. 36.35.
and by his estimation of righteousness above riches and all worldly things,
Psalm. 3.8, 9. and by his affectionate enquiry after directions for
righteousness; Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? Act. 2.37. and
by his longing after the Word of truth, by which he may learn righteousness.

Fourthly, by his estimation of righteousness in others: he honors them that
fear the Lord, as the only Noble Ones: all his delight is in them, and he
loves them, and longs after them for righteousness sake.

Fifthly, by the covenant he makes in his heart about righteousness: he not
only consents to obey, Esaias 1.19. but hires himself as a servant to
righteousness; resolving to live to righteousness, and spend not an hour in
a day, but a life in the service of righteousness, Romans 6.13, 18.

And as the righteous man grows more strong, and better acquainted with God
and his Ordinances, and the works of righteousness, other signs break-out
upon him, which do infallibly prove the happiness of his condition; such as
are,

First, Six other signs of righteousness, as it grows.
vexation in his soul at the wickedness and unrighteousness of others, 2
Pet. 2.8.

Secondly, rejoicing with joy unspeakable and glorious, when he feels the
comforts of Gods presence, and begins to see some evidence of Gods love to him
in Christ, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Thirdly, the personal and passionate love of the Lord Jesus Christ, the
fountain of righteousness, though he never saw him in the flesh, esteeming
him above all persons and things, 1 Pet. 1.9. Phil. 3.8, 9. longing after his
coming, with great ^rivings of affections, 2 Cor. 5. 2 Timothy 4.8, etc.

Fourthly, flourishing like a Palm Tree, when he is planted in the house of the
Lord, and enjoyes powerful means in the house of his God, growing like the
Willowes by the watercourse, Psalm. 92.12, 13. and 1.3.

Fifthly, resolution to suffer any thing for righteousness sake, Mat. 5.12. so
as he will forsake father or mother, house or lands, yea life it self, rather
than forsake the truth, and the good way of God, Mat. 16.23. Mark 10.29.

Sixthly, he lives by faith: The just lives by faith. In all estates of life he
cas^eth his cares and himself upon God, trusting on the merits of Jesus
Christ; and is in nothing careful, but patien^ly waits upon God, Gal. 2.2.
Heb. 10.38. Gal. 3.11.

And thus he is described in himself.

Now his righteousness is distinguished from the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, by diverse signs and marks; as,

First, How the righteousness of a godly m^n disfers from that of the Scribes
and Pharisees.
in the ends of it. His righteousness is not intended for the praises of men:
for his praise is of God, Romans 2.26. He does not his work, to be seen of men,
Mat. 6.1, etc. He had rather be righteous, than seem so.

Secondly, in the parts of it. The Pharisees righteousness is outward: his is
inward also. The very thoughts of the righteous are right, Pro. 12.5. He
strives to get a clean heart, as well as clean hands; and is as well grieved
for evil thoughts, and lusts, and desires within, as for evil words or works:
whereas the Pharisee is but like a painted sepulcher, all full of rottennes and
filth within: his soul desires evil, when he dares not practice it in his
life, Pro. 21.10. Again, the Pharisee makes conscience of great commandments,
but not of the least. He refraines whoredom, murder, perjurie, swearing by
God, sacrilege, etc. but makes no conscience of filthy speaking, anger,
swearing by that which is not God, or by lesser oaths, deceit, covetousness,
or the like: whereas a righteous man indeed makes conscience even of the least
comm^ndements, Mat 5.19.20. Again, a Pharisee may be good abroad, but is not
usually so at home: but he that is truly righteous, is so at home, as well as
abroad: he becomes a good husband, master, father, friend, etc. as well as a
^^od man. Finally, the righteous man has respect to all Gods Comman^ements;
whereas the Pharisee, in some one or other of the commandments, lives in the
breach of it wilfully, and without out desire of r^formation; some in
covetousness and extortion; some in lust and filthiness.

Thirdly, in the degrees or measure of righteousness. The Pharisee is careful
of some few works, of which he seeks glory: but the righteousness of the
just man, is as the waves of the sea: he is industrious to increase in all
well-doing, and to be filled with the fruits of righteousness every day, Esaias
48.18.

Fourthly, in the continuance of righteousness. The just man does
righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106.2. Luke 1.75. his desire is for ever to
be employed in good works: whereas the Pharis^^s righteousness is but by
fits, and as the morning deaw; and if trouble come for righteousness, he falls
away, and forsakes his righteousness, etc.

And thus of the Use for trial.

Use 2. Secondly, the excellent living of such as live righteously, may greatly
reprove such as cannot be stirred with these things to a conscionable care of
forsaking their sins, and of living righteously.

Quest. What should be the cause that such men as hear so much of the
excellent estate of righteous men, are not persuaded to convert, and embrace
that kind of life?

Answ. The cause is diverse in diverse men: as,

Why so many do not embrace a righteous life.
First, in some it is long of certain corruptions, that discover themselves
about the hearing of the doctrine of righteousness. For either men's hearts are
like a beaten path in the highway, that the sound of doctrine cannot enter
into their understanding, Mat. 13. Or else they understand not with application
to themselves, but think only how the doctrine may fit others, Luke 13.1, 2.
Or else they meet with some hard condition that they are not willing to
observe, as the rich young Pharisee did; or some other harsh doctrine, as they
account it, which does so vex and offend them, that they fall clean off from
the respect of Christ and holiness; as, Job. 6.59.66. Or else they have some
vile opinions, that let them in the time of hearing; as to think, that one is
not bound to do as the rules of Scripture do require; or that, if one be not
a gross offender, God will not impute less faults; contrary to our Saviors
doctrine, Mat. 5.18, 19, 20. Or else their hearts break, that is, they let the
doctrine run out, and never think of it when they are gotten out of the
Church, Heb. 2.1. Or else they have resisted the light of the truth so long,
that God has now delivered them over to a spirit of slumber, lest they should
convert, and he should heal them, Mat. 13.15, 16. Isa. 6.10.

Secondly, in some the world is the cause of it. For either they are entangled
with the examples of the multitude, especially of the wise Ones and great Ones
of the world, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. Or else they are affrighted with the evil
reports with which the good way of God is disgraced in the world, Act. 28.22.
Or else they are ensnared with respect of their carnal friends; they are loath
to displease father, or mother, or sisters, or brothers, or any they have great
hopes from, or dependence upon, Mat. 10.35, 37. 1 Pet. 4.2. Or else they have
so much business to do, and so many cares about their worldly affairs, they
cannot be at leisure ^o long as to think, they cannot bring their lives into
order, Mat. 13.22. Luke 17. Or else they live at hearts-ease, and prosper in
their estate, and so desire not to alter their course of life: and so their
prosperity destroys them, Pr^. 1.32.

Thirdly, in some men the cause is, the lust after some particular wickedness
of life, in which they live either secretly, or openly, which sin is the very
Idol of their hearts, and hinders a good resolution.

Fourthly, in some the cause is conceitednesse; they are pure in their own
cic^, and yet are not cleansed: they rest in the outward profession of
religion, and the fear of godliness, and regard not the sound power of it in
their lives.

Lastly, in all unregenerate men there are three causes, why they are not
persuaded to a religious life: First, the one is the forgetfulness of their
death: therefore their filthiness is still in their skirts, because they
remember not their latter end, Lam. 1.9. Secondly, the other is, that they are
dead in sin: What should hinder the conversion of multitudes at once, but that
we preach to congregations of dead men? Thirdly, the devil works effectually
in all the children of disobedience, striving to hide the Gospel from them, and
the glory of a righteous life, that so they might perish, 1 Cor. 4.4. And thus
of the second Use.

Use 3. Thirdly, such as consent to obey, and feel themselves raised from
death to life, and are now desirous to spend their days in a religious and
righteous course of life, must observe all such rules as may further them and
establish them in an orderly and fruitful conversation. He that would live in
righteousness, must think on these directions following, as the very gates of
righteousness.

First, he must give over all needless conversation with vain persons, Helps
unto righteousness.
and profane men: he must shun their company, as he would such as have the
plague running upon them: he must not come near them, as is urged, Pro.
14.15. For what fellowship can be between righteousness and unrighteousness?
2 Cor. 6.14. Depart from me, ye evil doers, says David: for I will keep the
commandments of my God, Psalm. 119.115.

Secondly, he must redeem time: he must buy time from his worldly occasions,
and settle such an order in his worldly estate, or outward estate, that he may
provide to serve the Lord without distraction, abstayning from all things that
may entangle him, or interrupt him, Ephesians. 5.16. 1 Cor. 7.29, 35. and 9.28. 2 Timothy 2.4. He must provide to him time for Gods service, and for commerce and
fellowship with the godly, and for works of mercy.

Thirdly, he must be wise for himself: that is, he must in all the means he
uses for or in religion, especially apply what he can for his own use; and
study himself, and to understand his own way, and provide whatsoever he do,
for his justification, and sanctification, and final salvation, Pr^. 9. 12.
and 14.8. And to this end he must meddle with his own business, and take heed
of being a busie-body in other men's matters, so much as in his thoughts, 1
These. 4.11, 12. And he must also avoid vain janglings, and doubtful
disputations in religion, and quarrels that tend not to his edification, but to
show wit or science, Tit. 3.9.1 Tim. 6.20.2 Tim. 2.23. And he must keep his eye
straight upon the mark, to proceed directly and distinctly in building himself
up in knowledge and grace, not losing his time, or going about; but keeping a
straight path to supply what he wants, and grow in what he has, Pro 4.25. Ier.
31.32. He must take heed of uncertain running, but be sure to take accounts
of himself for all his courses, to see that he go very straight toward the
mark: and finally, he must not respect company, to go the pase of other men,
but run as if he alone were to obtain, striving to excel, 1 Cor. 9.24. and
14*12.

Fourthly he must esteem the Word above all treasures, Psalm. 119.72. Mat. 1^.
and take hold of the instruction thereof, as that must be the very life of his
life, Pro. 4.1^. (For by the Word does God sanctify us, and make us righteous,
Ioh. 17.) And he must order his whole course of life so, as that he may see the
means of all his actions from the Word: he must live by the rules of
Scripture, that will live righteously, Gal. 6.16. Now that he may do thus, he
must look to diverse things: First, that he place no confidence in the flesh,
neither trusting upon his own wit, nor carnal reason, nor gifts, nor yet
yielding himself to be a servant to any man's humor, Phil. 3.3. 1 ^or. 7.23.
or opinions, or example, or commandment. Secondly, he must provide to live
so, as he suffer not a famine of the powerful preaching of the Word: he must
labor for the meat that perishes not, Ioh. 6.27. and so exercise himself in
the Word morning and evening, that the Word may dwell plenteously in him, Psalm.
1.2. Col. 3.16. Thirdly, he must take heed of adding any more sins, or
duties, than are discovered in the Word, and of detracting from any thing that
is forbidden, or required there, Psalm. 30.6. detesting conceitednesse and
singularity, having his conversation in all meekness of wisdom, Iam. 3.13.

Fifthly, he must daily lift up his heart to God, to seek a way of him, whose
glory it is to teach to profit, and who gives his Spirit to lead men in the
paths of righteousness, Psalm. 23. Esaias 48.17.

Sixthly, he must remember the Sabbath day, to sanctify it: For this will be
both the means and the signs of his sanctification and true righteousness:
It is the market day for the soul, Esaias 58.13, 14. Exodus 31.13, etc.

Seventhly, he must haste to the coming of Christ, he must dispatch his work
as fast as he can: and to this end he must cast about to find out ways of
well-doing, and when he has any projects or opportunities of well-doing, he
must not delay, but with heart and readiness finish his work. This is to
seek righteousness, and to haste to it, Esaias 16.5. Amos 5.14. Thus he must
observe to do, as the phrase was, Deuteronomy. 5.22.

Eighthly, it will be a great help unto him if he get into the way of good
men, and walk with the wise, sorting himself with discreet and sincere
Christians, Pro. 2.20.

Ninthly, he must keep his heart with all diligence: for thereout comes life:
He must carefully resist the beginnings of sin within, and avoid those secret
and spiritual dalliances of the soul with inward corruptions and temptations,
and withal take heed of secret hypocrisy, in suffering his heart to be absent
when God is to be served, Pro. 4.23. For thereby he may lose what he works,
if his spirit be not without that guile.

Tenthly, all that know the happiness of a righteous life, should strive to
amend those defects which are found even in the better sort of people, that so
their life at length may answer to the end of Christ's death: and therefore we
should examine our selves thoroughly.

Defects of a righteous life of two sorts.
The defects and faylings found in the lives of righteous men, may be referred
to two heads. First, for either they fail in the parts of righteousness.
Secondly, or in the manner of well-doing.

First in the parts of it.
In the parts of righteousness there are great failings, whether we respect
the first or second table. I will briefly touch the principal defects, which
are observed and complained of in Christians in both tables.

And (...) in respect of the f^rst table:
In the first table, men fail either in the knowledge of God, or in the
affections to God, or in the service to God.

First, for knowledge: how little do many men know of Gods praises and glory,
that might be known? and how far are many from a right con^eit of God, when
they come to think of him, or to worship him?

Secondly, in the most there is a great want in the exercise both of the fear
of God, and trust in God: men have not such awful thoughts of God as they
should have, nor do they tremble so as they should at his judgments that are
in the world, Psalm. 4.4. Heb. 2. ult. Dan. 6.26. And for the trust in God: men
are specially faulty, that they do not commit their ways daily to God for
assistance and success in all estates, Psalm. 27.3, 5. Pro. 2^ 3. Psalm. 55.22.
resting upon him alone, as they ought to do.

Thirdly, joying and delighting our selves in God is hardly found in any: and
yet no wife should take such continual delight in her husband, to solace her
self with him, as a Christian ought to do with God, Psalm. 37.4. and 68.3, 4.
Phil. 4.4.

Fourthly, in the service of God there are diverse defects; as,

1. Some neglect the private reading of the Scriptures, who ought to exercise
themselves therein day and night, Psalm. 1.2.

2. In prayer: some have not the gift of prayer, nor seek it: and prayer for
others is extremely neglected, contrary to Gods express commandment, that
enjoynes us to pray one for another, in many Scriptures.

3. Praising of God in our discourses, as becomes his great glory in his
works, where is this found, and yet required at our hands, and at the hands of
all people, and that which we should do with a whole heart, and while we live?
Psalm. 96.6, 7, 8. and 63.4. and 9.1. and 67.2.

4. Where is that walking with God required in Scripture? Who does always set
the Lord before him? Psalm. 16.8.
Where are those soliloquies between the soul and God? Are not many content
to go weekly and monthly without speaking to God?

And thus of the defects concerning the first table.

In the second table diverse things may be noted, Or else in respect of the
second table.
as were defective in the parts of righteousness; as,

First, there is a general defect of mercy: men do exceedingly fail in that
liberality to the distressed and poor servants. The bowels of mercy are
everywhere shut up, either altogether, or in the neglect of many degrees and
duties of mercy.

Secondly, in many Christians there is a fearful want of meekness, they
being guilty of daily sins, of passions, and worldly vexations, and that many
times with a kind of wilfulness, against knowledge and conscience.

Thirdly, the car^^ of life and worldliness do strive, and blemish the
conversation of many, and discover a strange defect of that contempt of the
world should be in them.

Fourthly, domestical disorders do even cry to heaven against many husbands
for want of love, and of most wives for want of obedience, and of servants for
want of diligence and faithfulness in their places.

And thus men fail in the parts of righteousness.

In the manner of well-doing many things are wanting, 2. Defects in the manner
of doing righteously: and so,
first, both in the general well-doing of good duties: secondly, and in
special affection to God; thirdly, and in the manner of Gods service.

In general,

First, zeal of good works is exceeding defective in the most, Tit. 3.14. Men
show not that willingness and fervency of affection should be showed in all
parts of righteousness: men do not lift up their hearts in Gods ways: 1. In
general, 5. ways.
Gods commandments are usually grievous and tedious.

Secondly, there ought to be a holy fear in the practice of their good duties,
1 Pet. 3.2. which is u^ually wanting: men do so much trust upon themselves,
and do duties with such boldness and neglect of their ways, whereas they
should fear always, Pro. 28.14. Oh that meekness of wisdom (required James
3.9.) where is it to be found?

Thirdly, men are not circumspect to make conscience even of the least duties
as they ought, and to observe to do them, even to watch for the opportunity of
well-doing, and to look to the means of the performance of every duty, and to
abstain from the very appearance of evil, and to be discreet in looking to
the circumstances of time, place, persons, etc. Ephesians. 5.15. Deuteronomy. 5.32.

Fourthly, there is great want of moderation in Christians: for either they are
just overmuch, in conceiving too highly of themselves for what they do, or
else they are wicked overmuch in thinking too vilely of their works, Eccles.
7.

Fifthly, men are strangely negligent in the growth of grace and knowledge: men
stand still and do not prosper, and strive to increase in every good gift, as
they ought, 2 Pet. 3.18. Many graces are not strengthened, and many works are
not finished.

Secondly, in men's affections to God how are men defective? Where is he that
loves the Lord with all his heart, and all his might, and all his soul? Deuteronomy.
30.6. and 6.3.

Thirdly, in Gods worship, these things are in many wanting.

Many defects in Gods worship.
1. Reverence, and that holy fear which should be showed when we appear before
the Lord, Heb. 12.28.

2. Men usually forget to do all worship in the Name of Christ, Colos. 3.17.

3. The care of praising of God, that is, of looking to Gods acceptance in all
service, is much forgotten, Heb. 12.28.

4. The desire of unity and consent in judgment among our selves when we
worship God, is miserably neglected and rejected by diverse wilful Christians,
Zeph. 3.9. Phil. 2.2, 3.

5. Men miserably neglect thankfulness to God for the good they receive daily
from his mercies, Col. 3.17.

6. Many fail publicly and shamefully in want of care to come time enough to
Gods service, Zech. 8.21. Esaias 60.8.

In these things Christians should be admonished to mind their ways and their
works, and to strive to walk as becomes the Gospel, and the death of
Christ, that they may hold fast the light of the truth, and show out better the
glory of a Christian life.

And thus of living to righteousness.

Now follows the third form of speech.

By whose stripes we are healed.]

The healing of our sicknesses is reckoned as another fruit of the Passion of
Christ; or else it is the same with the former, expressed in other words. These
words then are borrowed from the Prophet Esaias, chapter 53.5. who does chiefly
understand the spiritual healing of our souls, of our sins, as the coherence
shows in the Prophet: but yet the Evangelist says, Mat. 8.17. and understands
of the healing of our bodies also. And therefore I consider of the death of
Christ both in respect of soul and body.

And first, as this healing is referred to the soul diverse Doctrines may be
observed.

Doct. 1. The souls of all men are diseased by nature; even the very souls of
the Elect are so, till they be healed by Christ. The soul is diseased diverse
ways, especially by sorrows and sins: it is the disease by sin is here meant.

Quest. It would be inquired how the soul comes to be sick of these diseases,
and why sin is called sickness in the soul?

Ans. This spiritual sickness comes into the soul by propagation. Adam has
infected all his posterity; How the (...) com^. 5 to be diseased.
and every man has increased the diseases of his nature by his own wilful
transgressions. Now sin is called sickness, because it does work that upon
the soul which sickness does upon the body: for sin has weakened the strength
of the soul in all the faculties of it, which all men may discern and observe
in themselves by nature. Besides, it causes spottednesse and deformity in the
soul, as sickness does in the body: and therefore sin was likened to the
leprosy in the Law. Further, it often causes pain and torment in the soul,
as wounds and diseases do in the body: for there is no peace to the wicked,
especially when God fights against them with his terrors. Besides, it will
cause the death of the soul, as sickness will of the body, if it be not
helped: and so men are said to be dead in sins.

Use. The Use may be to show the fearful negligence of worlds of people, that
are exceeding careful to help their bodies to health, but never think of the
poor soul that lies lamentably full of diseases. And withal it shows, that
all wicked men are men of ill natures, because their dispositions are all
diseased, though there be degrees of ill nature, or of this evil in men;
natures, as there is difference of sicknesses in men's bodies. And godly men
should be compassionate when they see the grievous diseases in the natures and
lives of other men, remembering that they also were by nature subject to the
same diseases as well as they.

Doct. 2. The diseases in the souls of men by nature are very grievous; which
is here also implied, in that God was feign to send his own Son to help and
heal us. Now that the diseases of men's souls are so grievous, may appear
many ways; First, because such a multitude of men are infected, The diseases
of the soul are grievous many ways.
not some one person in the whole world: in the body of mankind, not on some
part, but from the crown of the head to the soale of the foot, all full of
sores and diseases. There is no man that sins not, and so no man that is not
sick: and that is the reason why men fear the pestilence, because it makes so
many sick. Secondly, because the soul of man by nature is sick of a
multitude of diseases at once; for even sin is a sickness: and so our
sicknesses are innumerable, because our sins are so. And hence it is that in
Scripture so many metaphors are used to express the sickness of the soul,
as, leprosy, wounds, plagues, poison, gall, etc. Thirdly, because the disease
lies in the soul it self. Of diseases those are most mortal that get into
the spirits, and do most enfeeble man: how much more when it is in the soul?
Fourthly, because, in respect of our selves, our sins or our diseases are
incurable: we can give our selves no remedy that can help us, Ier. 30. Fifthly,
because in the College of spiritual Physicians there is scarce one of a
thousand that can help the poor soul out of these diseases, Job 33. Sixthly,
because there be but certain seasons only in which men can be healed, as it
was with the lame man at the poole of Bethesda; and if men miss these seasons,
they are in danger to dye of these sicknesses. There be seasons of grace, and
days of salvation; and men must not harden their hearts, while it is called To
day.

Use. The Use should be to awaken wicked men to a serious consideration of
their danger, and at length to think of help for their souls, being thus
diseased; as they would do for their bodies, if they were desperately sick.

Ob. We feel no such diseases in our souls.

Sol. First, wicked men have a kind of spiritual lethargy upon them, Why
many feel not the diseases of their souls.
and so are in grievous danger: but by reason of their spiritual sleepiness
they feel it not. Secondly, though they feel not their diseases now, they
shall do hereafter: and then think what a pain it will be unto them when God
awakens them whether they will or no. It may be it will be in this life, as it
was with Cain and Judas: and then a wounded spirit will ache so, who can bear
it? Thirdly, the matter is not altogether so easy with wicked men as they
pretend* f^r they do feel so much as may show they are very sick. Sometimes
they feel their consciences galling and paining them at the very heart for the
time: and what are the passions and perturbations of their souls but as so
many fits of^a Fever? And that they are grievously sick may appear by the
want of their spiritual senses: they can hardly see or hear any thing.
Besides, they may know they are sick by the potions of afflictions which God
gives them, who does nothing in vain.

Doct. 3. That in Christ the diseases of our souls may be healed, Esaias 53.5.
Mal. 4.2. Luke 4.18. He is a sure Physician for our souls. God has undertaken
it that he will cure and heal us: he challenges it as a glory to himself,
which he executes by Christ, Job 5.17, 18. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Now in as much as our
diseases may be healed by Christ, and that he is our Physician appointed by
God, we may gather many arguments of great comfort, even from hence, that he is
the Physician.

First, because he can heal all diseases, Wherein Christ's healing excels for
our comfort.
and has done it: and therefore it is here set down indefinitely, to import,
that by his stripes we may be healed of any sickness: no sin but Christ can
cure us of it, Psalm. 103.3. Mat. 4. 23. Psalm 30.33.

Secondly, because he does it freely; he takes nothing for his cure, Hos.
14.4.

Thirdly, because he has offered, and does daily offer to cure us, Ier. 3.22.

Fourthly, because he does all his cures with wonderful compassion and love,
as is noted in the Gospel, when he healed their sick bodies: much more has
he compassion of a sick soul.

Fifthly, because he is always about his Patients: The Lord is near to them
that are afflicted in spirit, Psalm. 34.

Sixthly, because he heales all that ask him to cure them, Psalm. 30.2.

But then withal we must observe such rules as are appointed us in Scripture:
for if we would have God by Christ to heal us,

Ezekiel. 36. H^s. 14.2.3. Esaias 19.2^. Jer. 17.14. What we must do^ to be healed
of Christ. Psalm. 147.3. Esaias 57.15, 18.
First, we must pray for our healing. He will be sought unto for this. We must
be importunate, like the woman of Canaan.

Secondly, we must feel our sickness, and acknowledge with sorrow of heart
that we are very sick, and need his help: for the whole need not the Physician,
but they that are sick, Mat. 9.13. and he heales none but such as are broken
in heart.

Thirdly, we must bring faith to be healed. This was required in such as Christ
healed in their bodies, and therefore much more in those that would be healed
in their souls. If we trust in the Lord we shall be healed, as some read it.
Pro. 28.25. There is no sin but by prayer and faith in Christ may be subdued,
Ier. 17.14.

Fourthly, we must take heed that we neglect not the time of healing: there is
a time to heal, Eccles. 3.3. We must into the water as soon as the Angel
comes down to trouble it, as the lame men did at the poole of Bethesda; we
must be very careful to make use of the opportunities of Gods grace, when he
calls us to repentance, and offers mercy, and affords help and means.

Fifthly, we must turn to God with all our hearts without dissembling, desiring
in all things to please God: though we have still many infirmities, yet our
hearts must be converted to God, that he may heal us. If we become not new
creatures, the mending of particular faults is to little purpose, Esaias 6.10. as
we see in Herod.

Sixthly, we must make conscience of it to receive the medicines of the Word of
God: for now we are healed by means, not by miracle: Peace and healing are the
fruit of his lips, Esaias 57.18, 19. We must obey them that have the oversight of
it, and suffer their words of exhortation patien^ly, Prove. 12.18. He sent his
Word and healed them, Psalm. 107.20. There is no disease in the soul, but
remedies may be found in the Word. Gods words are life to those that find
them, and health to all their flesh: that is good for all diseases, Prove. 4.22.
And to this end we must take heed of tampering with our own medicines, or
contesting with our Physicians: we must not be wise in our own eyes: no man is
Physician good enough to heal himself, Pro. 3.7, 8. And we must take heed of
superstitious medicines: In vain shall the daughter of Egypt use many
medicines, for she shall not be cured, Ier. 46.11. Indulgences, pilgrimages,
penances, w^ipping of the body, or the like, are vain medicines, and, being
not appointed by Christ, they will never profit to heal the soul of sin. And
further, such as would be soundly healed, must take heed of secret flattering
teachers, that do all their cures with preaching mercy, and cry Peace, Peace,
and never teach men sound courses to be rid of their sins: those are they that
heal the hurt of the daughter of Gods people slightly, Ier. 8.11.

Seventhly, look to the beginning of sin: when we first feel lamenesse in the
ways of righteousness we must speedily seek help, lest we be turned clean
out of the way. Sins of infirmity nourished or neglected may prove grievous
diseases at length, Heb. 12.13.

Eighthly, men that have some good evidence that they are healed by Christ,
that their comfort may be established, they shall do to show themselves to the
Priest, that he may try and testify that they are whole from their leprosy,
Levit. 14.

Ninthly, if Christ heal us, we must be sure to remember to make him our
praise; we must acknowledge his great mercy in healing our natures, Ier. 17.
14. He stands upon the credit of the cure. Christians fail exceedingly, that
they are not more thankful for deliverance from faults and temptations: they
do less for the cure of their souls than they do for the cure of their
bodies: we must bless the Lord, and call upon our souls to do it, as David
did, Psalm. 103.1, 3. and 14.13. and the rather should we with all thankfulness
praise God for such cures: First, because no outward medicines can do any
good; God cures only by his Word. Secondly, because God only can cure us, Ier.
33.6. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Thirdly, because God accounts it the greatest honor we can
do him to offer him praise, Psalm. 50.14. Fourthly, because God never does
those cures upon the soul of a man but he loves him wonderfully ever after,
and forgives him all his sins, Hos. 14. Psalm. 103.2, 3, 4. Ier. 33.68.

Tenthly, we must be patient, and endure the medicines, whether they be hard
sayings or afflictions. David prays to God to wash him, and to purge him with
hysope, and not spare, Psalm. 51.

Eleventhly, it is a great help to get our souls healed, to show mercy to the
bodies of other men: God will not heal our souls if we oppress other men's
bodies, as we see in the case of oppressors in our times, Esaias 58.6, 7, 8.

Thirdly, since in Christ men may be healed, it gives us occasion to bewail
the fearful carelessness of the most men, that will not seek cure, yea in
places where the means is offered to cure them. All sorts of people are like
Babylon for this confusion, she would not be cured, Ier. 51. Men refuse cure,
and all comfort and advice: yea when they are warned of their diseases they
break out into more wilfulness and offending, as God said of Ephraim, When I
would have healed Ephraim, then the iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, Hos.
7.1.

Doct. 4. The fourth Doctrine is, that we are cured by Christ's stripes. His
sufferings heal our sorrows: His wounds make us whole: His sickness offers
us health: and his stripes heal us; partly by satisfying for our sins, and so
removing the cause of our diseases both spiritual and corporal; and partly by
an unspeakeable virtue of his Passion, which being applied to our souls, makes
our sins dye. And this point may serve for Use many ways:

Uses. First, for information: and so it may show us the wonder of Gods
working, that can do great things by means, in respect of us, altogether
unlikely. We hold it a thing almost beyond belief, that the applying of
medicines to the sword that wounded a man, shall make the wounds heal in a
man. But this here is a mystery, that only the Christian Religion can tell of,
of which there never was president in nature: that the wounding of one man
should heal another, or that the stripes of the Captain should cure all his
diseased soldiers: and yet thus it is, even thus is the Lord pleased to
glorify the power of his working. Secondly, we may hence be informed of the
precious use of every part of Christ's sufferings; not his dying only does us
good, but every thing he did endure. His stripes cure our wounds, his shame
wrought our honor, his temptations drove the Devils from us; not any thing was
done to him by his adversaries, but God made it work for our good. Shall we
then dare to take offense at the cross of Christ? Have we not reason to glory
in it above all things? Thirdly, do we not here see how hateful sin is in
Gods sight, Gal. 6.14.
and how foul our diseases are, when nothing can cure us but Christ's blood,
and that must be fetched out of him with the best stripes which the hands of
the wicked inflicted upon him. Oh the hardness of our hearts, that can see
Christ thus used for our sins, and yet are not persuaded that sin is hateful
to God! Oh how should we be sorry for our Savior, and mourn to think of it,
as we would for our only sons! Would it not grieve us at the heart if we should
see the young Prince, the Kings son, basely whipped by our adversaries, only
for our affairs? Oh what hearts have we, that (as bad as they are) would be
melted to see this done to a Kings son, and yet are not troubled to know it was
done to Gods son? Fourthly, we may see what wicked malice will do if it be not
restrained: to disgrace our Savior, to get a sentence against him, to bind him
hand and foot, yea to kill him will not serve their turns, unless they may
most basely scourge him before he dies. That malicious men now do not always
so, is not because their malice does nor tend to it, but because either God or
man restraines them. It is a most divellish humor, and therefore to be avoided
and detested of all those that love the Lord Jesus.

Use 2. Secondly, how many ways should this instruct us, what care the Lord
Jesus requires of us? what should not this make us willing to do? Oh how
should we love him with all our hearts, above all the world, that could endure
to be thus abased, even unto stripes, for our sakes, when he could have
prevented it, if he had pleased? what a shame should it ^e to us to be
impatient, or to think much of our crosses, who though we had suffered many
things, yet not so grievous as those things befell our Savior? Yea further, it
should encourage us to ^uffer any thing for Christ, and the rather, because we
have not resisted to stripes, or blood, nor cannot now suffer the thousandth
part for him of that he has suffered for us.

Thus of the healing of our sou^es.

These words also may be expounded of the healing of our bodies, as we showed
before, and so the like doctrines may be observed; as,

Doct. 1. That the bodies of all men by nature need healing. For sin has
brought upon man the sentence of deform^^^^, and infirmities, and diseases; and
we see God does inflict diseases upon many, and that of diverse sorts; and many
men that for the present ^r^ free from the pains of diseases, yet have their
enemies in their bodies in diverse parts of them, laid as it were in garrison,
which may and will break out upon them at a time they know not: or if they
were not there, the Lord from without can send diseases upon them. The world is
every where full of occasions of sickness: or if there were not outward means
to work them, yet God can strike men from heaven.

Use. The Use should be to warn such as are in health to walk humbly: For
they know not how soon sickness may seize upon them. Secondly, such as have
their friends taken away by sickness or are yet afflicted, should submit to
Gods will; for this is the case of all men, even the greatest, yea and Gods
elect are liable to such a condition by nature.

Doct. 2. The diseases of the body are grievous, and therefore Christ takes
notice of that kind of distress to provide for the healing of our bodies. We
see by experience, that of many sorts of crosses, it is most grievous to be are
the pains that arise from the wounds or sickness of the body: and it is the
more grievous, partly because no men are privileged from diseases, but either
have them, or are in danger of them, as was said before; and partly because God
has armed such a multitude of sorts of diseases, to which the body of man is
liable.

Use. Therefore the use should be, to take warning from these pains of the
body, to prevent eternal pains in hell, by reconciling our selves to that God
that can so fearfully afflict both body and soul; and as we feel the
outward man to decay, the more to labor for the health of the inward man,
especially by those harbingers of death to provide for the time when our change
shall come.

Doct. 3. Christ is a Physician for the body of man as well as for the soul;
in Christ our bodies may be healed. Christ provided healing for man's body as
well as for his soul, and men's bodies he heales either in this life, or in the
general resurrection. First, in this life some he has healed by miracle, as
he did multitudes in the days of his flesh, while he was here in this world;
which he did in execution of his office, as having charge of men's bodies: and
some he healed by means, giving his blessing unto the medicines provided in
nature, and applied by the skillful to the diseased; yea he undertakes the
healing of all Gods Elect in their bodies, as this place imports, which he
does promise and will perform, if it be good for them. Many times to heal
the body, would hurt the soul, or keep the Leaper from heaven, and then
Christ will not heal them; else he undertakes, and is bound to heal the body
as well as the soul. But the especial healing is at the resurrection, when
all the bodies of the Saints shall be healed perfectly of all diseases, and
freed from the very disposition, yea the very possibility to have any diseases.

Use 1. The use should be for great comfort to the godly: when they are
distressed, they may and ought to look up to Christ, and say, If it be good
for me, my Savior will heal me; and the rather, because Christ is such a
compassionate Physician, and has had the feeling of our infirmities and pains
that way: and besides, he is such a Physician, as can do two things that never
Physician could do: For first, he can take away the first cames of diseases,
which is sin, which no physic: can do, Mat. 9. Secondly, he can cure our
bodies when they are stark dead, which never any Physician could do; they may
help some living bodies, but they could never help one dead body. Yea such as
find not cure for the pains of the body, should be of good comfort, because
they should have had cure of it, if it had been good for them; and they must
consider it is the Lord that does it, Psalm. 39. and that all shall work
together for the best, Romans 8. and that nothing can separate them from the love
of Christ; and that they are delivered from eternal pain; and that Gods dear
children have suffered as great torments or weaknesses.

Use 2. Secondly, all men should be taught to seek to Christ for cure, since
it is his office to heal: and so this end men are bound to look to diverse
rules, if they would have Christ to heal them.

First, they must seek to him for cure, they must pray him to heal them; we
do not read that ever Christ healed any sick person, Rules for such as desire
Christ to heal or help their bodily griefs.
unless he were brought to him, or he entreated to heal him: we must pray
for our bodies, as well as our souls: thus did David, Psalm. 6. and 31. and
Hezekiah, etc.

Secondly, we must use the lawful means we can get for our healing. Our
Savior shows that when he said, the whole needed not the Physician, but the
sick; the sick then do need, and must with conscience and care use all
lawful and outward helps that they can attain to, that are fit for them, Mat.
9.

Thirdly, they must take heed of trusting upon the Physician, or physic given
them: that was Asa his great sin: For if we be cured, it is not physic, but
Christ that heals us.

Fourthly, we must bring faith to be healed for our bodies also: this our
Savior often asks after, when he is about to cure men's bodies, as the
Evangelists show.

Fifthly, we must be careful to seek the removing of the cause of our
diseases, which is sin; especially if we find that God has a quarrel with
us* for any special fault we are fallen into: thus David got the punishment of
his sin remitted, by judging himself for his sin, Psalm. 32.4.5.

Sixthly, we must submit our selves to Gods will, and in the case of our bodies,
must refigne our selves into his hands, to let him do with us what it shall
please him, since he knows what is best for us: and if Christ will not heal
us now, yet to comfort our selves, as Job did in the hope of that time, when
our Redeemer will be seen of us in the body, when it shall be utterly and for
ever freed from all pains and infirmities whatsoever, Job 19.

Doct. 4. It is further to be noted, that we are not only healed by Christ, but
it is by his stripes: The wounds made in his body, do heal our bodies. Which
should make us so much the more to love the Lord Jesus, and the more patiently
to bear it, if we be not presently healed, became he did bear more grievous
pains even in the body; and because if it were good for us, he would heaie
us, in that he paid so dear for our healing.

Verse 25. For you were as sheep going astray, but are now returned unto the
Shepherd and Bishop of your souls.


HItherto of the effects of Christ's sufferings in respect of us: in respect of
himself, the effect was his exaltation to become the Shepherd and Bishop of
our souls, even the souls of all the Elect: which is so implied in the words
of this verse, as withal in a passage is expressed both our misery without
Christ, and our happiness under his government.

The words of this verse in themselves contain three things. First, our misery
by nature: in our selves we are as sheep deceived, or going astray. Secondly,
the means of our recovery ou^ of that estate, and that is the causing of us to
return. Thirdly, our happiness under the government of Jesus Christ, to whose
charge we are committed when we return.

The first words expressing our misery, are words borrowed out of the Prophet
Esaias, chapter 53.6, 7. and in the words unregenerate men, even Gods Elect among
them, are likened to sheep. A sheep is a certain image to resemble a man by.
And so we find in Scripture, that a sheep is the image or resemblance, first,
of Christ-man: He is likened to a sheep dumb before his shearer, for his
silence and patience at his arraignment, Esaias 53.7. Secondly, of men that are
^rue believers, for the harmlesnesse, tractablenesse, and profitablenesse, Mat.
25.33. Thirdly, of men that err and wander out of the way of godliness. And
so wicked men before their calling, are likened to wandering sheep; yea, godly
men after their calling, in respect of their falls or failings, are likened to
sheep going astray; as David says of himself, Psalm. 19. ult. But here it is
understood of the Elect of God, before their calling.

The word here rendered [ Going astray] properly signifies deceived, and is so
used in diverse places of the new Testament: but the metaphor to the which it is
joined, requires it should be expressed, Going astray, or wandering, or erring;
but so as it does import two things. First, the evil condition of the
unregenerate, they are like wandering sheep. Secondly, the cur^e of it; and
that is, they are deceived, they are as sheep deceived.

Now that this point may be distinctly understood, I propound five things to
be considered of. First, what faults in men are meant by the term of going
astray. Secondly, what the misery of their condition is, that do go astray.
Thirdly, what the cause is of their going astray. Fourthly, by what signs a
lost sheep may be known, especially such as are within the Church, which
seems to be the Fold. And lastly, the doctrines that may be briefly noted out
of all the words of that part of the verse.

For the first. Under the term of erring or going astay, What is meant by
going astray
are construed in Scripture, errors in opinion, James 1.16. Mat. 22.29. called
erring from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.10. whoredom, Numb. 5.12. idolatry, Deuteronomy.
13.5. drunkenness, Esaias 28.1, 7. bribery, and all ways of unrighteousness, 2
Pet. 2.15. all devising of evil, Pro. 14.12. yea the Prophet Esaias expounds it
of every turning after our own ways, for which we have no warrant in the Word
of God, and in which men persist without repentance, Esaias 53.6. It is implied,
Psalm. 119.110.

For the second. The misery of such a^ go astray ^ppears in diverse r^spects.
The misery of men living in their sins without repentance is very great. I
am tied to the consideration of it, only so far forth, as the simih^ e of a
sheep going astray will import. Every wicked man then is like a lost sheep, and
that in diverse respects.

1. Because he is not within the compass of Gods special providence: God
does not tend him, nor lock to him, he is no part of his flock: he is without
God in the World, and without Christ, as the lost sheep is without the
protection and keeping of the shepherd. Wicked men have no keeper: they are
left to the way of their own hearts; which is a fearful curse, Esaias 53.6. The
wicked shall be as a sheep that no man takes up, Esaias 13.14.

2. Because he has no certain pasture. The provision for his life, for soul
and body, is altogether uncertain. He is like Cain, a vagabond upon the
earth. He is here to day: he knows nor where he shall be tomorrow. God has
not given him any assurance of the keeping or getting of any thing he has or
desires. He is like the stray sheep, that has all the world before him, but
knows not where to settle, Mat. 9.26.

3. Because in the midst of all the best possessions of this life, they have no
peace, Esaias 57. ult. The sound of fear is always in their ears. If a stray
sheep get into a good pasture, yet he is still in fear, apt to be frighted
with every sound, ready to run away upon every occasion: so is it with them
that are rich in the world, and not ri^h with God, 1 Timothy 6.10.

4. Because he is shut out from all comfortable society with the godly: he
enjoyes not the sound fruit of communion with Saints. The stray sheep may sort
with hogs or wild beasts, but from the sheep it is gone away. Evil company
is a miserable plague of a man's life, to sort with such all a man's da^es, from
whom he may have a world of vanity and filthiness, but not any thing scarce
worthy of the nature of men in an age. Every wicked man is an alien, a stranger
and forainer from the Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2.12.

5. A sheep going astray, is easily taken by a strange Lord: it is driven any
whither by anybody, it is so silly. And such is the fearful estate of a man
living in sin: strange Lords may easily surprise him: false teachers may
easily seduce him: evil company may carry him to any wickedness: a Prince may
turn him to any religion: a very Atheist or Devil incarnate may easily lead
him captive.

6. A Sheep is apt to be worried with Dogs, or devoured with Wolves or wild
Beasts, when there is no Shepherd to tend him. So it is with wicked men: their
souls, their bodies, their estates, are all in danger to be seized upon by
Devils, by unjust and unreasonable men; especially as any of them are more
simple, so they are more liable to become a prey to the mighty ones of the
earth.

7. Men that wander out of the way of understanding, shall remain in the
congregation of the dead, Ps. 49.15. Pro. 21.16. And therefore he that converts
a man from the er^our of his way, is said to save a soul from death, Iam. 5
ult.

And this going astray of unregenerate men is the more grievous, because they
are liable to many aggravations: for

Aggravations,of their misery.
First, they go astray from the womb: they were never yet in the right way,
Psalm. 58.3.

Secondly, because they wander in every work they do, as was said of Egypt,
Esaias 19.14. All their works are abominable, Psalm. 14. All things are impure.

Thirdly, because this is the curse of all unregenerate men: we are turned
every one to his own way, Esaias 53.6.

Fourthly, because they delight to wander, place their felicity in their sins,
and will not be reclaimed or advised.

Fifthly, because they may provoke God so long, that he may swear they shall
never enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.10,11.

(...) men's (...) as^ray.
The third point is the cause of their going astray, and that is noted in the
original word. They were deceived. Now then it is to be considered
distinctly, who are the great deceivers of the world, that cause millions of
^oules to go astray.

First, the Devil is the Arch-deceiver, he has been a lier and a murderer
from the beginning; he deceived our first Parents, and made them and all their
posterity go astray, John 8.44. 1 Timothy 2.14. And by him are all wicked men
drawn out of the way, and led captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

Secondly, Antichrist is the next great deceiver, who by his sorceries made all
Nations in the time of the Gospel go astray, Eccles. 18.23. with his
divellish doctrine, and by wicked sorceries he deceived the Christian world.

Thirdly, a ^^arme of wicked ministers have deceived whole Towns and
Countries, and made the sheep go astray, even their whole flocks in many
places, some of them because they take the fleece, and never feed the flock,
Ezech. ^4.2. etc. John 10.12. some of them by preaching lies, and flattering
the people with devices of men, and say, Peace, when there is no peace, Ierem.
23.17, 19, 20, 32.

Fourthly, the world is a mischievous deceiver, and it deceives by evil
example, and evil company, and evil report raised against the godly and the
good way, and the inticements of profits and pleasures, and vanities of all
sorts, and honors, and the like.

Fifthly, man's own heart deceives him, yea the heart of man is deceitful
above all things, Ier. 17.19. It will use such carnal reasons, pretend such
vain excuses, entertain such deceivable hopes, and join it self to such
swarms of temptations and lusts, as it cannot avoid wandering, if there were no
other deceivers to go withal the way of our own hearts is always to go out of
the way.

Sixthly, ignorance of the Scripture is a chief cause of erring and going
astray, both in opinion and life, Mat. 22.29.

Seventhly, the love of some particular sin does utterly undo many a man, that
will not be warned of the deceitfulness of sin, Heb. 3.12. Thus covetousness
made many a man to err from the faith, 1 Timothy 6.20.

Eighthly, God himself in a fearful kind of justice many times not only
consents, but permits a very spirit of perverinesse and error to seize upon
some men, that refused to be guided or kept by God: so as they are given over
to eternal perdition and destruction by reason of it. Esaias 16.1^. Job 12.28.
Signs of a l^s^ sheep^.


Fourthly, the signs of a lost sheep follow: and they are,

First, he that refuses reproof is out of the way. Men that cannot abide to
be told of their faults are not healed, Pro. 10.17. as he is in the way of life
that keeps instruction.

Secondly, he that lives in any known sin without repentance, is a lost
sheep.

Thirdly, he that fouleth with his feet that which the good sheep should eat
or drink, and he that thrusts with the side, and pusheth the diseased with his
horns, is no good sheep, Ezekiel. 34.17, 19, 21. They are so far from feeding
upon the good Word and Ordinances of God, that by wicked reproaches they soul
it as much as they can, and they, that if they find a poor Christian that is
diseased with some infirmities will push at him, to dishearten him utterly from
a religious course, these are wicked beasts, they are no good sheep.

Fourthly, he that lives without God and Christ, that can spend whole days and
nights without any communion with God, yea, that when he is present before God,
finds his heart continually carried with wandering distractions, that constantly
draw him away from all inward attendance upon God. Ephesians. 2.12. Esaias 29.13. he
erres in his heart, Psalm. 95.10.

Fifthly, he that has no other companions of his life but swine and wild
beasts, that is, wicked men of all sorts, especially when it is joined with
willing neglect and shunning of the society of the godly, Psalm. 5. 2 Cor. 6.

Sixthly, he that tastes nothing but earthly things, and finds no savor in
spiritual things, it is a sign that he is out of the pasture, and feeds in
the wilderness, Romans 8. 1 John 2.18.

Seventhly, he that when he is told he is out of the way, blesses himself in
his heart, when it is plainly found that he openly wandereth, Psalm. 36.1, 2.
Deuteronomy. 29.19.

Eighthly, he that lives in any of the gross sins expressly mentioned in the
Catalogue in Scripture, without repentance, as swearing, Com. 3. adultery,
covetousness, drunkenness, railing, extortion, 1 Cor. 6.9. or the known sins
of deceit, Micah 6.10.

Ninthly, he that does his works of purpose to be seen of men, resting only
in the praises of men, not seeking the praise of God, Mat. 6. Romans 2.26.

Tenthly, he that knows not Gods ways, especially if he desire nor knowledge,
or entertain wilful objections against the means of knowledge, Psalm. 95.10.

Eleventhly, they that spend their zeal in meeting with other men's
infirmities, neglecting sound reformation in themselves. It is the wisdom of
the prudent to understand his own ways: but to be a busie-body in other men's
matters is erring, and the folly only of fools, Pro. 14.8. Every busie-body is
out of the way.

The Doctrines follow: and so diverse things may be observed out of these words.

Doct. 1. Even godly men, before their calling, were out of the way, as lost
sheep, as well as others, Ephesians. 2.2. Tit. 3.3. Which should serve, first, to
set out the riches of Gods free grace, as the only first cause of the
happiness and salvation of the Elect. Secondly, it should teach the godly
diverse duties both toward God, other men, and themselves. As for God, they
should live to his praise, and spend their days in magnifying his great
compassions in their deliverance, that deserved so ill at his hands. And
withal, it should teach them to put all their trust in God, seeing they carry
about them a nature that has been apt to wandering, and therefore have cause
to mistrust themselves. And for other men that are out of the way, they should
pity them, and carry themselves with all meekness and charity, remembering what
themselves have been, Tit. 3.1, 2, 3. And for themselves, they should be the
more humble and abased, hating all pride and conceitednesse, and contempt of
others.

Doct. 2. A man may be a sheep, and yet lost. Not only Dogs, Goats, Swine,
Lions, etc. may be out of the way, but even sheep may wander, and be clean
lost. Men of harmless natures, and such as are profitable members of humane
societies, and such as are of a gentle disposition, and free from gross
offenses, yet may be utterly lost, and clean out of the way of happiness;
and, if they return not by repentance, may perish for ever. And this is a
point which should marvellously affect civil-honest men, and move them at
length to see the weak vanity of their confidence in their praises for
civillity of nature or life.

This is a doctrine very hardly entertained by this sort of men; and the
rather, because they think they want nothing unto the praise of a good life;
never considering that they are not religious, though they be civil; and that
they have a world of inward impurities, though they are free from outward
gross uncleanness of life; and that they never felt the joys of the holy
Ghost to approove of them, though they have been tickled with the praises of
men; and that they have not sought or desired the assurance of Gods favor, or
a better life, but spend their time in a still dream, without providing for
what is most necessary; and that they never serve ^od, not have had any
sociable fellowship with him in any of his Ordinances, in respect of the inward
power of them.

Doct. 3. To break out from the means of Religion, and from the society of
godly Christians, is the very way to undo many a soul. A sheep is (...) when
it is gotten from sheep, and is out of the pasture, and has no discreet
shepherd to take the care of it.

Thus of the first part, that is, man's misery by nature.

The means of recovery out of that misery, follows; and that is noted in the
word Return. Where first may be observed, that wicked men may return. It is
not impossible for men that have spent a (...) lives in sin and vanity, at
the length to be saved. And it is the first part of a man's work that would
return, to inform himself seriously of (...) ^^^^ments that may prove that he
may be helped out of his misery. The fi^^t thing a diseased man inquires
after, is, whether his disease be curable or no.

Now there are diverse things that give hope of curing and salvation even to men
that are as yet clean out of the way; as,

Diverse things that give hope of curing to such as be out of the way.
First, the disposition of God toward sinners: which appears, first, because he
swears he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should return
and live, Ezech. 18.21. Secondly, he is patient, and has been with thee all
this while; and he is therefore patient, that men might repent, and be saved,
Romans 2.4. 2 Pet. 3.9. Thirdly, he has declared himself to be willing to
forgive all sins, but only the sin against the holy Ghost. One sin only
is unpardonable: all other sins may be forgiven.

Secondly, the sufficiency of the sacrifice of Christ: He is the Lamb of God
that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. Romans 3.25.

Thirdly, the work of Gods grace already showed unto them. For first, God has
placed them in the visible Church, where repentance and salvation may be had.
Secondly, he has bestowed upon them many temporal blessings, to allure them
to seek to him for mercy. Thirdly, he causes the Gospel to be preached to
all sorts of men, without exception. And so grace is offered to them: and there
is no other let but their refusal of grace offered.

Fourthly, the example of all sorts of sinners that have returned. As great
sinners as they have been received to mercy; and they are set out as examples
to encourage other men to seek mercy; as Manasses, Mary Magdalen, David,
Peter, Paul, and others. Many among the Corinthians have been notorious
offenders, but were justified and sanctified.

The explication of the doctrine of returning follows; where these things are
to be considered of:

First, the motives to persuade men to return.

Secondly, the persons that need returning.

Thirdly, the time when men must return.

Fourthly, the false ways men must avoid in returning.

Fifthly, what a number of lost sheep do usually return.

Sixthly, the aggravations against certain persons for not returning.

Sevently, the means of returning.

Eighthly, the manner how we must return; or the rules to be observed in
returning.

Ninthly, the signs of a lost sheep returned.

Lastly, the lets of returning.

For the first. I mean not to insist upon all sorts of motives, (...)
but to follow the word Return, as it is used in Scripture, and take a few of
the fittest motives as it is used in this place. And so diverse things should
make a man to return; as

First, the consideration of Gods mavelous goodness, and amiablenesse of
nature to all such as turn unto him: he is wonderful gracious to them, and
merciful, and will repent him of the evil, Joel 2.12, 13. Ier. 3^. 19, 20.
The parable of the lost sheep shows this fully.

Secondly, the great danger that men are in if they return not. God is angry
with the wicked every day, Psalm. 7.12. And his fury may breaks forth suddenly
upon them like fire, Ier. 4.4. For the words of his servants will certainly
take hold upon them, Zech. 1.4, 6. And iniquity will be their ruin, Ezech. 18.
verse 30. Except they repent, they must perish, Luke 13.5. And therefore if we
warm men of their sins, and they will not return, we are delivered and their
blood will be upon themselves. Ezech. 3.19.

Thirdly, if a man consider but the happiness of such as do return: God will
forgive them all their sins, he will abundantly provide for them, Esaias 55.7.
If they return, they shall live and not die, Ezech. 18.23. and 32.11. And
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, and sorrow and mourning shall flee
away, Esaias 51.11. And in this verse the Apostle shows their happiness. For
they shall always live under Jesus Christ, as the Shepherd and Bishop of
their souls. For these and many other reasons, it is the only wise course to
return, Luke 1.16. And there is not one wise man amongst all them that return
not, Job 17.

And thus of the motives.

The second point is, the persons that need returning. It is certain, (...)
that those that live out of the visible Church, or in false Churches need
returning: As Pagans, Turks, Jews, Papists, Schi^maticks, and all Heretics:
Yea Juda and Jerusalem need repentance, Ier. 4.4. and 26.2, 3. Men that live in
the visible Church, and are baptized, need to return, or else they will
perish, Luke 13.5. John 3.3.

The time of returning.
The third point is the time of returning: and in short, the best time to
return is the present time, while it is called to day, while we have the means
of returning, when God calls upon us by the ministry of his servants;
especially when he knockes at the door of our hearts, and lays the axe to the
root of the tree. It is wonderful dangerous to defer repentance: for even the
longer thou live in sin, the more hard will thy heart be, Heb. 3.13. and the
means of grace, even the Kingdom of God may be taken away; or God may cut
thee down even by sudden death, or may cast thee into a reprobate sense, and
give thee up to a heart that cannot repent, Romans 2.4, 5.

(...) returning.
The fourth point is, the false ways to be avoided in returning: and these are
first, to return with despair, or to go back without the guide faith in in
Gods mercy, or to go the way that despair leads. In this way Cain and Judas
perished. Secondly, to return fainedly, and not with a man's whole heart; to
make a show of returning, when men do not return indeed, Ier. 3.10. Thirdly
to return but part of the way, and to repent by halfes, as Ahab and Herod did.
Fourthly, to return when it is too late, even when the door is shut: to
repent when it is too late, Job 27.9.

(...) against d^vers the (...).
The fifth point is, aggravations against diverse that returned
the aggravations that lie against diverse persons about their not returning.
For if it be evil in it self for any not to return, then how fearful is
their case, first, that are proud of their skill in going out of the way, that
are wise to do evil, Ier. 4.22. Secondly, that are deeply revoiced, that is,
that are such as live in horrible and fearful sins, Esaias 31.6. Thirdly, that
will not return though their transgressions be upon them, and they pine away
in them? Ezekiel. 33.10. They will not give over though they have no peace, and
are daily buffered for their evill-doing, and their consciences bear the shame
and trouble of their offending. Fourthly, that will not return though the
servants of God openly testify against them, Neb. 9.29. 2 Kings 17.13, 14.
Fifthly, that will not return though the hand of God he upon them: even to
consume them, Ier. 5.3. Sixthly that are turned back by a perpetual
backsliding, Ier. 8.4. that hold fast their sins, and refuse to return, Ier.
8.5.

(...) of lost (...) do (...).
The sixth point may be this, viz. what number of lost sheep do usually
return. Not all that go astray: our Savior tells us of a parable of one lost
sheep returning: and the Prophet Jeremy tells us of one of a Tribe, and two of
a Tribe, Ier. 3.14. Multitudes of men perish, and never return.

The means of returning.
The seventh point is, the means or cause of our returning: and these are
either Principal, or Isntrumental. The principal causes are God and Christ
that good Shepherd. It is God that turns back the captivity of his people,
Psalm. 14. ult. and three times in one Psalm the people pray God to turn them
again, Psalm. 80.3, 7, 19. This is Ephraims suite, Turn thou me, O Lord, and I
shall be turned, Ier. 21.18. So the Church faith, Lam. 5.21. And Christ is that
good Shepherd that seeks that which is lost, yea lays down his life for
his sheep, John 10. The isntrumental causes of returning are either external
or internal. The external means of returning is the Word preached, and so
both the reproves of Gods servants testifying against the wicked, to make them
turn from their sins, Nehem. 9.26, 29. as also the promises of the Gospel, by
which the sinner in the name of Christ is as it were wooed and entreated to
return, with assurance of salvation. The internal means is Faith: for that
is it which turns a man clean about, and causes him to set his face upon God
and Jesus Christ, and to leave all his old courses and by-ways, Acts 15.9.

The eight point is, the manner how we must return: (...).
and so we shall find in Scripture diverse things urged upon us;

First, that we in returning make a through search and trial of our ways, to
find out distinctly in what particulars we have gone astray, Lam. 3.40. They
must remember, and be think themselves, and turn, Psalm. 23.28.

Secondly, we must with true sorrow bewail our former wanderings, and judge our
selves for them, going and rejoicing: we must go with our faces toward Zion,
Ier. 51.4, 5. Hosh. 14.2, 3. 2 Chronicles. 6.24, 37. Ierem. 3.13. Joel 2.12.

Thirdly, we must order our ways to a general reformation. The Prophet
complains, that they would not frame their doings to turn to the Lord:
importing, there can be no returning to God, unless men cast their courses
into a frame of reformation, Hos. 5.4. Men must amend their doings and their
works, Ier. 35.15.

Fourthly, we must return in sincerity: and that has diverse things
considerable: for,

1. We must return with our whole hearts, nor fainedly, Ier. 3.7. 2 Chronicles.
6.38. our very faces must be turned from so much as looking after our
abominations, Ezekiel. 14.6.

2. We must return from our own evil ways, every man from his way: note it,
from his way, that is, from those courses in which he has specially offended,
James 3.8. Esaias 55.7. the wicked must forsake his way.

3. WE must forsake not only outward sins, but inward sins also: we must
reform the wandering of our hearts, as well as our lives: the unrighteous must
forsake his very thoughts, Esaias 55.7. and put down the very Idols of his
heart, Ezekiel. 14.7.

4. We must turn from all our transgressions. It is not enough to forsake sin,
as some outward or inward sins; but we must forsake all sorts of sins, Ezekiel.
18.30.

5. We must return with resolution never to start back: we must not be like a
deceitful bow, Hos. 7.16.

Fifthly, we must so return, as we must consecrate our selves to God, to wait
upon him continually, Hos. 12.6. and to ^erve the true and living God, 1 These.
1.9. and to do works meet for repentance, Acts 26.20.

The ninth point is, the signs of returning, or how we may try whether we be
effectually returned: and that may be partly gathered by some of the points
before, and partly by some other things may be added. He that is truly turned
may know it,

First, by the cause of his returning. (...).
It was somewhat above his own power or disposition. It was God that turned him
by his Word: neither did he turn out of despair, as Judas did; but faith in
God, and perswation of Gods goodness in Christ made him return. He fears God
and his goodness.

Secondly, by the manner of his returning. For if he return in the manner
before mentioned, he needs not doubt the truth of his repentance; especially if
he be sure to have no hypocritical or carnal ends of his reformation, and
that he do desire to return from all his transgressions, making conscience of
the least Commandment of God as well as the greatest, and of secret sins as
well as open, and of the evil that leaves to his best works, Esaias 1.16.

Thirdly, by the fruits of repentance of returning: and so he may comfort
himself,

1. If he esteem Christ's pasture above all worldly things, finding the
sweetest savor in the Word, of all things in this life, Psalm. 19. and 119. 2
Cor. 2.

2. If he have a mind to know God, that he find that out of habitual
disposition he have an earnest desire to know God, and to be known of him,
Ier. 24.7. he will follow on to know the Lord, Hos. 6.3.

3. If he do distinguish between the precious and the vile, Ier. 15.19. and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God,
and him that serves him not, Mal. 3.18* esteeming godly men to be the only
wise men, Luke 1.17.

4. If he be careful to put iniquity far from his Tabernacle: if he be
careful to reform his house, and cannot abide to dwell where sin dwells
unreformed, Job 22.23.

5. If he become as a little child for humility, and trust upon God for all
things necessary, as the little child trusts upon his father for diet, clothes,
inheritance, preferment, etc. without any doubting, or carking care.

6. If he be earnest with God to heal his nature, and to perfect his work.
Esaias 19.22. Ier. 31.18, 19. He prays, and that earnestly, for the mending of
his disposition to wander.

7. If he be profitable according to his bigness and pasture, if he be full of
mercy and good fruit, if he be zealous of good works.

These be things meet for repentance, that is, things that be of equal weight
with it in the scales: they each of them weigh just as much as repentance.

The last point is, what should be the reason that men have so little mind to
return; they will not be driven home again, though they know that they live
sinfully, and hear of Gods wrath, and discern vanity in all their pleasures,
and that sin has usually proved it self to be a lie, and that they are in
danger of strange punishments, and of eternal torment. What (I say) should be
the lets of returning, Q^^st.
or rather the causes that they mind not to return?

Answ. The causes are,

(...)
First, the Devil is the cause, he has blinded their eyes, and works
effec^ually in them, and leads them wandering and captive at his will, 2 Cor.
4.3. Ephesians. 2.2. 2 Timothy 2.26.

Secondly, impotency of consideration is the cause they neither can nor do
think of the arguments should make them to return, or move them: they cannot
spend an hour in the consultations upon it, whether they do well not to
return.

Thirdly, ignorance of the glory of Religion, and the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
Col. 1.26. there is a veil upon their hearts, 2 Cor. 3.

Fourthly, opinion that it is dishonor and shame to return: this makes diverse
continue in erroneous and humorous conceits, or in fantastical conformity to
the wicked: yea, the very excuses of sinning, because they fear they shall be
vilified, laughed at, and censured for it.

Fifthly, expectation to have their particular courses to be proved to be sins.
Thus do almost all men in their times persist in their sins, under the
coverture of this question, Who can prove them to be sinners? Thus scapes
usury, excess, and vanity of apparel; excess likewise in drinking of
healths, till the wine inflame them; swearing, profanation of the Sabbath,
etc. being willingly ignorant of this, that God has condemned sin in the
general in Scripture, and lays it to men to look unto it, that they fall not
into his hands for transgressing; and if they doubt, they must be ruled by
their teachers.

Sixthly, forgetfulness of their latter end. Therefore is their iniquity in
their skirts still, because they remember not their last end: for both the
terror of that day, and the shortness of their life, and the judements they
would meet with of those things, if they were to die, would fright them out of
those courses. But they will not apply their hearts to wisdom, because they
cannot remember their days, Lam. 1.9. Psalm. 90.12.

Seventhly, evil teachers are a great hinderance: for they strengthen the
hands of the wicked, and by preaching peace persuade them they are in no
danger, Ier. 23.14. Ezekiel. 13.22.

Eighthly, in some there is a very spirit of fornication in the midst of them,
they are so excessively delighted with an influence after the courses they
take, that no arguments can enter into their hearts, though they have never so
good means used, Hos. 5.4.

Ninthly, there is in some men a senseless spirit, a fat heart, a reprobate
mind, so as the things they do see, yet they cannot lay them to their hearts,
nor be stirred by them; and so for the most part they see little or nothing at
all, but are utterly unteachable. There are of these sorts of men almost in all
assemblies aad conditions of Christians, where they have had the means with
much power, Esaias 6.10. Acts 28.27.

Tenthly, there is in some a perverse spirit, wilfully to reject the Word of
God, and all good counsel, though they know they are not right; and so follow
vanity, and become vain, 2 Kin. 17.14, 15. and by following foolish vanities
forsake their own mercies.

Eleventhly, the custom of the world has overcome many, and that makes their
hearts dead and senseless, and careless of returning; the examples of the
most, and of the wise men, and great ones of the world, has confirmed them in
their wanderings, Ephesians. 2.1, 2.

Twelfthly, despair is the cause in some; they say there is no hope, Ier.
18.12.

Use. The Use of all should be especially to awaken the careless, and to
persuade men, all shifts and excuses laid apart, to set their hearts upon this
work of repentance, and returning: men should not be like horses or mules, but
receive instruction, and turn unto the Lord, else iniquity will be their
ruin: if they repent not they must perish: and they do nothing by their
delays but heap up wrath against the day of wrath. They live foolishly: for
while they reject Gods Word what wisdom can be in them? and they must die
miserably. Are they not as clay in the hands of the Potter, and will they still
provoke God to his face? Yea if they frustrate the power of all the means they
enjoy, so as it may not be of effect to turn them; it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for them: yea the very dust of
their feet, whose ministry they have despised, will rise up in judgment
against them.

Unto the Shepherd.]

The happiness of the penitent consists in this, that they live ever after
under a Shepherd and Bishop for their souls.

First then, they have a Shepherd to tend them. Here diverse things are to be
inquired:

First, who this Shepherd is, seeing the Text mentions him not expressly. The
Prophet Ezekiel s^ith, it is Gods servant David, Ezekiel. 34.23. and in Hei^.
(...) the Lord Jesus, raised from the dead is said to be the great Shepherd
(...) the sheep; who is therefore called David, because he came o^e of the
(...) of David.

Secondly, who the sheep are: and they are not cattle, but men, Ezekiel. 34.
ult. yet not all men, but Gods Elect, even those his Father gave him, John
10.29. and those chiefly when they are returned, as the coherence ^hewes.

Thirdly, the attributes given to this Shepherd in other Scriptures. What
attributes are given to Christ as a Shepherd.
Here he is named barely. The Shepherd: but it is profitable for us to know
what kind of Shepherd he is: and so four things are said of him,

Christ is one Shepherd.
1. That he is one Shepherd, that is, that it is he only to whom immediately
the charge of these men is given, Exek. 34.23.

He is the true Shepherd.
2. That he is the true Shepherd; and that in diverse respects: First, in
respect of his calling: he came not in by the window, as the thief and robber
does, but was called of God to this work, even from the womb, Esaias 49.1. John
10.2. Secondly, he is a true Shepherd, because he has all the imploiments
that belong to a Shepherd: he goes out to his flocks with a rod, and a
staff, and his Shepherds crook: he has a rod to drive-on his sheep; both a
rod of instruction and correction: and he has a crook to catch them and pull
them back, and he has a staff to drive away evil beasts, Psalm. 23. Thirdly,
he is the true Shepherd, because never Shepherd did his work, or discharged
the trust and care laid upon him so faithfully. The best Pastors, and their
actions done by those that be men, and after their own hearts, yet have many
frailties, and fail many ways, both in skill, attendance, and power.

He is the good Shepherd.
3. That he is the good Shepherd by an excellency, John 10.11. and so he is in
diverse respects: First, because other Shepherds have their flocks delivered
to their hands; but he seeks his sheep, and has none but such as he was feign
to find out in the woods, and deserts, and solitary places of the world: yea he
left (as it were) his own glory, to come down from heaven to look these lost
sheep, Ezekiel. 34.11, 12. Secondly, because he laid down his life to redeem his
sheep, and to get power to bring them back, John 10. 15. yea, put his neck
under the sword of his Fellow, his Father: he was contented that his own
Father should kill him, Zech. 13.7. Thirdly, because he keeps such sheep as
have no fleeces on them, but what he gives them: all his were naked sheep, that
no other Shepherd would have taken up: he clothes them all with the fleeces
of his own righteousness, and so becomes the Lord their righteousness, 1 Timothy 1.13. 16 1 Cor. 9 10, 11
Ier. 23.4, 6. Fourthly, because he is compassio^^^ely moved with the wants
and, distresses of his sheep; not for himself, but for their sakes: and this
he shows, not only by pitying them when they have no subordinate Shepherds
to tend them, but by loathing those evil Shepherds that lead them to evil
pastures, or any way hurt them, Zech. 11.8.

He is the great Shepherd; and that in diverse respects.
4. That he is the great Shepherd, Heb. 13.20. and so he is in diverse respects:
First, because his sheep are his own. Other Shepherds for the most part tend
the sheep of other men, but all his sheep are his own, John 10.12. Secondly,
because he marks all his sheep: he did not only seek them when they were lost,
but made them when they were not, Psalm. 100.3. They are not only the people of
his pasture, but the sheep of his hands. Thirdly, because he has more flocks
than any Shepherd ever had: for he has flocks in all parts of the world, to
the very ends of the earth, Micah 5.4. For he was not only to raise up the
Tribes of Israel, but to be a light to the Gentiles, and gives salvation to
the ends of the earth, Esaias 49.6. Fourthly, because he is great in skill and
power: in skill, because though he have such great flocks, yet he knows all
his sheep particularly, and calls them (...), their names, John ^0.3. and so he
knows all their wants and diseases too, (...) all the ways to help and cure
them. In power, because he has a mighty ^^me, Esaias 40.1 ^, 11. and he stands
and friends them in the strength of Jehova, and in the majesty of the name of
the Lord his God, Micah 5.4. And besides he shows it in his ability to drive
away from his flocks even those hurtful beasts that other Shepherds cannot
resist. If a Lion, or the hungry Lion roar after his prey, he will not care
for the voice of a multitude of Shepherds called out against him, says the
Prophet, Esaias 31.4. yet this Shepherd alone with his voice, can make the
fiercest Lion leave his prey, and run away: He can make the Devils flee, and
restrain the rage of cruel Tyrants.

Fifthly, because he is a Prince, as well as a Shepherd. Other shepherds are
usually no more than ordinary men; but he is a great Prince, and therefore must
needs be a great Shepherd, Ezech. 34.23.

Sixthly, because he is the Arch-Shepheard, the Prince of shepherds; he, under
whose authority all other shepherds are, and to whom they must give accounts,
1 Pet. 5.4.

Thus of the attributes given to this Shepherd.

The happiness of those that live under the government of such a Shepherd,
follows.

First, he will feed them as a shepherd does his flock: they that wait upon
the Lord, shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3. The happiness of such as live under this
Shepherd, appears in ten particular privileges.
And thus chiefly he will feed their souls: they shall grow, and eat, and
find pasture, John 10.9. He will feed them with knowledge and understanding,
Ier. 3.15. and with such food as will breed life, and life in more abundance,
John 10.10. They shall neither hunger nor thirst. He that has mercy on them,
shall lead them by the Springs of water; he shall guide them: those Springs of
water are his Ordinances, Esaias 49.10. and their pasture is fat pasture, Ezech.
34.14. The chief feeding place is his holy Hill, the Temple, and Sanctuary;
and that shall be a blessing to his flock: there shall be showers of
blessings in their seasons, Ezech. 34.26. He does not feed in the fields and
deserts: but with a more excellent feeding, he feeds them in his garden, in the
the very beds of spices, every doctrine being as a several spice, and the
whole sum together, as a bed of spices, Cant. 6.2, 3. The Prophet David
seems to resemble powerful and flourishing doctrine, to green pastures; and
the secret and sweet comforts of the Sacraments, to still waters, Psalm. 23.2.

Secondly, he will tend and keep them so, as,

1. The wild beasts shall not tear them: Tyrants, Heretics, Devils, shall
not make a prey of them, Ezech. 34.25. so as they should dwell safe though they
were in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods, Ezech. 34. 25, 28. Though
they walk through the valley of death, they need not fear, Psalm. 23.4.

2. He will judge the Rams and the Goats that push at them, that is, he will
revenge the wrongs are done unto them by such as live in the same Churches with
them, that reproach or oppose them, Ezech. 34.17. etc.

3. The Sun shall not smite them, Esaias 49.10. that is, the wrath and anger of
God shall not afflict their spirits, but they shall lie down in great rest and
tranquillity of conscience, Ezech. 34.15.

4. If they fall into diseases, he will give them such medicines, as shall
refresh their souls, Psalm. 23.3.

5 They shall want nothing, Psalm. 23.1.

6. None of them shall be lacking; he will keep all that are given to him;
no man shall take them out of his hands, Job. 10.29. Ier. 23.4.

7. He will order them, not by force and cruelty, but by judgments, Ezech.
34.16. showing a due respect of the several ages and conditions of his sheep,
Esaias 40.11.

8. He will go in and out before them himself, and they shall follow him, and
he will lead them in the paths of righteousness, John 10.4. Psalm. 23.3.

9. He will do more for them than ever any Shepherd did for his flock: he
will make them live ever, he will give them eternal life, Ioh. 10.29.

10. Lastly, all this is the more comfortable, because he has tied himself by
covenant for his sheep to do all this for them, Ezech. 34.25.

Use. The use should be for instruction: and so both to Ministers, and to the
people.

First, to Ministers: They should here learn to be wonderful careful of the
finding and feeding of the flocks committed to their charge, seeing Christ
ordinarily and externally does administer this work by their service; if they
be not careful, they dishonor (as much as lies in them) the office of
Christ. The feeding which, under Christ on Gods holy hill, they should provide
for the people, is the chief blessing of the life of a penitent sinner, John
21. 1 Pet. 5.2.

Secondly, to the people: The people that are good, should hence learn,

Cant. 1.7.
1. To pray to Christ to show them where he feeds, that they may be directed to
the fertile pastures of some powerful Ministry.

2. To trust upon Christ for all things necessary for their souls: Since God
has appointed him as the Shepherd of our souls, we should glorify his
office, by believing in him, and relying upon him: never sheep had a better
shepherd; and therefore we need not fear any more, nor be dismayed, Psalm.
37.3. Ier. 23.4.

3. Our hearts should be set upon the house of Christ, and upon his Word, as
the food of our souls; we should run to Church with great willingness^ and
appetite, as the sheep do to their foddering places.

4. When we find good pasture, and safe feeding, we should be wonderful
thankful, and seek all his praise with joyful hearts, Psalm. 79. ult. and 100.

5. We should submit our selves to the Ministers of the assemblies, whose words
are like goades, and like nails fastened, because they are given by this our
Shepherd; Eccles. 12.11.

6. If the spiritual Assyrian break into the Church of Christ, we should
remember, that if seven Shepherds, and eight principal men be raised up
against him, he shall be driven away, Mich. 5.5.

But withal we must take heed, and look to it, that we be right sheep of his
pasture: For there are multitudes in the flocks of Christ, that he will not
feed, Zach. 11 9.10
he takes no care of them, but says of them, That that will die, let it die.
And as a Shepherd separateth the goats from the sheep: so will Christ
separate a world of wicked ungodly men from the good, though they now be often
folded together in one assembly. It is the poor of the flock only that are
his sheep, Zach. 11.7. such as hear his voice, and depend only upon it, and
will follow Christ, John 10 3, 4, 5, 27.

Lastly, we may hence gather, how woeful the estate of such people is, as
either have no shepherds, or evil shepherds set over them, Zach. 11.4, 5.
and 34.4.

And Bishop of your souls.]

The godly have Christ to be the Bishop of their souls. That this point may
be more distinctly and profitably conceived of, I would consider of four
things in the explication of it:

Explanation of the term, Bishop.
First, the use of the term Bishop here given to Christ: it was before the
Apostles time a foraine word, much used in profane writers. For the original
word here rendered a Bishop, was a term given to watchmen, and spies, and
overseers of works; and sometimes to any sort of Rulers. In the Apostles time,
it seems the term was impropriated, and given only to Ministers that had
charge of souls. For the Apostles appointing certain men to look to the
bodies of Christians* which they termed Deacons, they appointed other eminent
men to look to the souls of Christians, whom they termed Bishops, as
appears, Phil. 1.1. Acts 20.28. In the time of the Apostles the term suffered
yet a more strict impropriation, and was given to some especial Ministers,
that had charge, not only of the people, but also of the Clergy: and in time
in some Churches unto these choice men of the Ministry were added the titles
of Barons, jurisdiction and power of censures, sole power of ordination, and
the like. In this place the Apostle gives the term of Bishop to Christ, as the
first and principal Overseer of our souls, to whom the charge of their
original does belong.

Secondly, we must note, that Christ is not said to be a Bishop of our souls,
but the Bishop of our souls: which imports, that he is such a Bishop, as there
is no other like unto him. That charge that Christ has of our souls, he has
it alone. There is no Bishop like to Christ our Bishop: for,

1. There is no good Bishop but he; Christ excels all other Bishops in ten
respects.
for he died for the souls he has charge of, and so do not other Bishops.
And whereas other Bishops may be unrebukeable in respect of men sometimes, he
is unrebukeable in respect of God and men too; never any Bishop lived so well,
or did so much good, or loved good men, and promoted Gods cause so much as he.

2. No other Bishop can instruct the flock as he does. For he can make his
people profit, because he teaches inwardly, whereas they can teach only
outwardly; and he instructs all his flock, and makes them all to know God,
from the greatest to the lowest of them, which no other Bishop can do.

3. He is the only Bishop, because all other Bishops m^ give accounts to him,
1. Pet. 5.3.

4. He is the universal Bishop of all souls: other Bishops ^^ve their
particular charges, or Churches; but he has the charge of all the flocks
under heaven: all Parishes are within his charge.

5. All other Bishops have their ordination from him; they have no authority
but what they receive from him, Acts 20.28.

6. Because no other Bishop can take the absolute charge of our souls; they
are not able to keep us, our souls have many diseases which they cannot cure,
and are assaulted with many adversaries which they cannot resist.

7. Because he is a heavenly Bishop, they are but earthly; and diverse parts of
his office he executes in heaven, whereas other Bishops can do nothing for us,
but on earth.

8. Because he is the only Lawmakers, the only Lawgiver to our souls;
other Bishops can make no Laws, but by his authority, Iam. 4.11.

9. Because the other Bishops may require goodness in their flocks, but cannot
make them good: he can make all his people righteous, he is the Lord and their
very righteousness, Ier. 23.6.

10. Other Bishops die, and leave their flocks unprovided: but he lives ever,
and never forsakes his Church, but is with them to the end of the world, Mat.
28. ult.

Thirdly, who are the charge of Christ? Not all that are found in the charges
of other Bishops; he will not stand to our division of Parishes, he counts by
Election and righteousness; all that the Father has given him, are his
charge, and none else. The coherence shows they are only penitent sinners.

Fourthly, the happiness of such as are under his charge; Such are happy that
live under the charge of this Bishop.
which must needs be great. O! It is a great comfort to a poor sinner, to know
that Christ has a charge of his soul: for he shall be sure that Christ will
feed his soul, and nourish it up by his Ordinances, and will keep him to
eternal life, and use him with all tenderness and compassion. A bruised Reed
he will not break, and the smoking Flax he will not quench. The particulars
are metaphorically handled before, in the consideration of the benefits we
receive from Christ as a Shepherd.

Uses. The Uses follow; and so,

First, for information: and so, first, we may here take occasion to think of
the preciousnesse of our souls: for as they'are made of better stuff than all
this visible world, being spirits, and were redeemed with a greater price than
would have been laid down to redeem this whole world; so it here appears,
because God sets his own Son to tend our souls; which should make us make
more reckoning of them, and not be so careless of them. It were an ill
bargain to win the whole world, and lose our own souls. Secondly, in that he
takes charge of our souls, it imports that his Kingdom is not of this world,
and that he leaves our bodies and outward estates to the charge of the Kings
and Rulers of the earth: he claims himself chiefly the charge of our souls.
Thirdly, in spiritual things it is imported that we are to be subjected to
such as have the oversight of us, only so far forth as they command us in the
Lord, and not otherwise. Other Bishops have their power subordinate to Christ,
and must in all things see to it that they do nothing against Christ. We are
subject first and originally to Christ: the charge of our souls properly
belongs unto him. Fourthly, we may here see what need our souls have of
looking to: if they were not in great danger, and subject to many diseases and
necessities, Christ had never taken such a peculiar charge of them. Fifthly, it
imports the abject estate of all gross offenders: for if Christ be the Bishop
of souls, they cannot belong to his charge. For wise and godly men, as much as
lies in them, cast out notorious offenders, and protest against them: and
therefore will Christ much more cast off and refuse all such servants of the
Devil, and the World, and Antichrist, as will not bear his yoke. Sixthly, it
imports that all Bishops must have ordination from him: and therefore such as
cannot show their calling from Jesus Christ, are plants which he will root out.

Use 2. Secondly, for consolation to all the godly. All that have committed
their souls to him, may rest upon it, that he is able to keep them till the
day of his coming, 1 Timothy 1.2. They shall never be lost: none can take them
out of his hand, John 10.29. It is the will of God that none of them should be
lacking, John 6. And therefore they may comfort themselves with those words of
the Apostle, Nothing shall ever be able to separate us from the love of God,
Romans 8. ult.

Use 3. Thirdly, for instruction; and so it should teach us to take chief care
of our souls. For from his office we may learn that he accounts our souls to
be the chief thing he would have kept safe. Secondly, seeing he is the Bishop
of our souls, we should learn not to give to any man above what is written,
seeing they are but stewards of his graces, and servants under him.

Thirdly, we should especially strive to be such, as Christ may take the charge
of us, Duties of such as be under the charge of this Bishop.
and may prove that we belong to his charge. If we be of Christ's charge, then,
first, we must hear his voice all our days with great attention and
affection. His sheep hear his voice, and the voice of a stranger they will
not hear, John 16. Secondly, we must be sure we have returned and repented us
of our former wanderings, else he is not the Bishop of our souls. Thirdly, we
must resolve all our days to obey him that is thus declared to have the
oversight of us, and be ruled by such messengers as he sends unto us in his
name.

Bishops also and Ministers should here learn to know what a good work it is
to have the charge of souls under Christ, and accordingly carry themselves
with all faithfulness, and diligence, and justice, and humility, not Lording
it over Gods heritage, but as such as give account unto the chief Bishop at
his coming, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3. and 3.1. They are but Christ's
Curates.

Lastly, woe to such as are complained of to this Bishop; there will be no
escaping; he will not be corrupted: they may escape the punishment of earthly
Bishops, but they shall never escape the punishment of this heavenly Bishop,
Matthew. 3.5.

FINIS.
SERMONS UPON PART OF THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE FIRST Epistle of St. PETER.

Being the last that were preached by the late faithful and painful Minister
of Gods Word, Nicolas Byfield.

Wherein Method, Sense, Doctrine, and Use, is, with great variety of matter,
profitably handled, and sundry heads of Divinity largely discussed.

Published since the Authors death by WILLIAM GOUGE.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT YOUNG, 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR HORATIO VEERE, KNIGHT, LORD Veere of Tilbery, and
General of the English Forces in the service of the high and mighty Lords, the
States General of the united Provinces of the Netherlands: And to his pious
and virtuous Consort the Lady Mary Veere, such increase of grace as may bring
them to fullness of Glory.
Right Honorable,
THe Almighties gracious acceptance of such oblations as are brought to him,
encourages sons of men to offer their Sacrifices on the Altar of his Grace.
Like ground of encouragement have I to lay this Oblation on the Altar of your
Honors patronage. Of your gracious acceptance thereof these reasons assure
me: 1. This Impe now presented to your Hon^urs, is a twin to that Posthumus
which was heretofore presented to, and accepted of your Honors. 2. This,
together with his other brothers, was by their own Father, while he lived,
devoted to your Honors: to divert them otherways would be plain plagium. 3.
Your Honors did many ways manifest a very good respect to the forementioned
Father of this Orphane. 4. This Impe it self is a goodly Impe, and gives
assured hope of doing much good to Gods Church. 5. Your Honors high esteem of
all good and faithful Ministers, of their function, of their labors and
work^s, is well known. 6. Your Honors mutual entire affection, and sincere
and sweet conversation and carriage one toward another, is a lively
representation, and evident demonstration of the truth of that doctrine,
concerning Husband and Wife, which is principally handled in this Treatise. 7.
Your Honor (my good Lord) has all your days been a valiant and faithful
Champion for the Church, maintaining her safety and liberty with the peril of
your own life; wherein (though Communis Mars, bellique casus sit incertus,
yet) success has often crowned your valor: instance, among other famous
victories, the incomparable conquest by your Honors more than ordinary courage
obtained in New-portfield. Can now doubt be made of your Honors favor in
countenancing this child of the Church? 8. Your Honor (my good Lady) was a
diligent frequenter of his Ministry who preached these Sermons; and hearing
the distinct points when they were first out of the Pulpet uttered, so approved
them, as often you desired the publishing of them: for they were Cygnean songs,
the last and sweetest of all. 9. As the sacred Scriptures, so good Commentaries
thereon, such as this is, are a solace to your Honors, in reading whereof you
have manifested much delight. Finally, many and great are the favors and
kindnesses which from time to time your Honors have done to the Publisher of
this work; which, as in duty he is bound, be willingly takes this occasion
in all humility, and with all thankfulness to acknowledge. The premises
considered, the said Publisher confidently rests upon your H^nours patronage,
and boweth his knees before the Throne of Grace for a merciful Remembrance,
and bounti^ull Remuneration of that Goodness which your Honors have done to
the Church of God, to the poor members and faithful Ministers thereof, and in
special to the Author of this Commentary, yea and to the Publisher thereof,

Blackfriars London, 25. Ian. 1625. Your Honors much obliged, WILLIAM GOUGE.

AN EXPOSITION OF Part of the third Chapter of the first Epistle general of
Saint PETER.
1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, 3. 1. Likewise let the Wives be subject to their Husbands,
that even they which obey not the Word, may without the Word be won by the
conversation of the Wives.

2. While they behold your pure conversation, which is with fear.

3. Whose apparelling let it not be outward, as with broided hair, and gold
put about, or in putting on of apparel.

4. But let the hid man of the heart be incorrupt, with a meek and quiet
spirit, which is before God a thing much set by.


FRom the thirteenth verse of the former Chapter, to the eighth verse of this
chapter, the Apostle exhorts to such duties as concern particular Christians:
and so either in the Commonwealth, where he exhorts subjects, from verse 13.
to 18. or in the Family, where he exhorts either servants, verse 18. to the end
of the former Chapter, or wives and husbands, in the first seven verses of this
Chapter.

So that in these first seven verses the Apostle entreats of the duties
between man and wife; and first sets down the wives duty, General scope.
from ver. 1. to 7. and then the men's duty, in the seventh verse.

In laying down the wives duty he proceeds in this order: First, he briefly
propounds the service of her duty in the first words, Wives be subject.
Secondly, he expounds upon it, by showing diverse particular things she must
express in her conversation; as, Amiablenesse, ver. 1. Chastity and Fear,
ver. 2. Meekness, ver. 3, 4. Then thirdly, he confirms all by two reasons;
both taken from example, first, of godly women in general, ver. 5. secondly,
of Sarah in particular, ver. 6.

Before I set upon the particular parts of the Text diverse things would be
noted in general.

First, in that this Apostle and other Apostles think it fit with such
effectual terms, when they write to the Churches, to give such special
charge to Husbands and Wives, it shows, That God does greatly desire that they
should in a special manner be careful to lead an orderly and comfortable life
together. Whatsoever in domestical matters is sometimes omitted in the Text,
yet seldom in any place that treats of family duties is the duty of Husbands
and Wives left out. Note.
Here it is vehemently urged, and so in the Epistle to the Ephesians; which
should work in all that fear God a ca^e and conscience of these duties, and
of carrying themselves in the best manner they can one toward another. Now the
substance of an orderly life between man and wife, is, to love one another
with all constancy, tenderness, and fidelity; to show one heart in all things,
helping one another to do the duties of the family, especially in the service
of God, and in carrying the crosses may light upon them in their callings;
encouraging and comforting one another, honoring one another before others,
and ^earing one with another in respect of infirmities, and each of them
striving to do exactly the duty that belongs to each.

Now that men and women may be careful hereof, many motives may be alleged,
and ought to be thought upon.

Sixteen motives f^r man and wife to live quietly and comfortably together.
1. Because this society between one man and one woman in marriage was
instituted of God himself, and was the first society that he brought into the
world, and had the honor to be ordained in the blessedest place in this
visible world, even Paradise, and was made between two persons that were like
God himself; and therefore God does expect that men and women should walk
very carefully in this estate, Genesis 2.

2. Because man and wife had so here an original and dependence one upon
another. The woman was made of the rib of a man: which Adam perceiving by a
spirit of prophecy, said, she was bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh:
that is, another self, or himself in another shape or sex: and therefore
whosoever disagreed, they should agree, it being most unnatural for a man to
hate or disagree with himself, Genesis 2. Ephesians. 5. and ever the more miraculous
the forming of the woman was, the more extraordinary should the affection
between man and wife be.

3. Because they are but two of them: they would hardly please many that cannot
please one.

4. Because they are appointed necessarily to be companions in life, without
parting or dissolution: and therefore since they live always together, they
should resolve to dispose of themselves so, as their lives might be comfortable.

5. Because from man and wife is the original of all mankind, of Church and
Commonwealth, and all other societies: now those Husbands and Wives that live
disorderly, dishonor the whole kind. What would they have the streams to be,
when the fountains are so troubled and impure?

6. Because marriage is honorable in Gods account, and ought to be so amongst
men: therefore it being a great dignity to which they are called, it is as
shameful a fault to live disorderly in that estate, as in the estate of a
Magistrate, or Minister, or the like, Heb. 13.

7. Note that the fifth Commandment, that concerns family duties, and the
order should be in our dwellings, stands between the Commandment of the first
Table, and the rest of the Commandments of the second Table; to signify, that
from the careful performance of domestical duties, men are fitter to serve
God in the first Table, or converse with men in the world, in the second Table:
yea, all we get from God in the first Table, or from men in the second, we
bring it home to our houses, or to the place of well employing it. Note the
last words of verse 7. of this Chapter.

8. Because man and wife resemble Christ and the Church by way of type or
image; and will men or women dare say that Christ and the Church carry
themselves so unlovingly or disorderly one to another, as they do one to
another? Do you not think it had been a hateful thing for any man that was
to be a type of Christ to have expressed the type by false or wicked ways? Even
so is it for man and wife to carry themselves one to another, so as Christ and
the Church do one to another, Ephesians. 5.

9. The end of marriage is Gods glory: now if God may not have glory by the
loving and orderly carriage of man and wife one to another, he will win
himself glory to his Justice, in revenging the quarrel of the Covenant which
they have broken.

10. Because usually the carriage of man and wife is the original cause of
good or evil order in the family; partly, because thereby they are the more
enabled or disabled for their carriage toward others in the family; and
besides, their courses are exemplary, and withal, they thereby lay the ground
of their own honor or dishonor in the hearts of children and servants.

11. Because Gods commandment, injoyning them their duties one to another,
binds the conscience as hard as any of the other Commandments; so as God is as
well provoked by these disorders between man and wife, as by swearing, or
cursing, or Idolatry, or murder, or whordome, or drunkenness, or the like:
yea, they that live in the customary breach of these duties, are unjust and
dishonest, as well as if they broke any other Commandments.

12. The Apostles were the more earnest in pressing husbands and wives to a
loving and orderly behavior one toward another, because of the scandal or
honor came to Religion by it. It did greatly adorn and become the Gospel, if
they lived amiably together, it made men like of their Religion the better: and
contrariwise, it was a foul scandal, and caused Religion to be less
esteemed, or else hated, when they lived so ungodly and unquietly together.

13. Because if they live lovingly together, they are like to have a quiet
conscience, and a clean heart: whereas if they jangle and live in
coffeehouse, it is a thousand to one the conscience will be very froward,
and their hearts filled with foul lusts after others, Pro. 5. And that the
conscience should be froward, how can it be otherwise, when they live in the
direct breach of Gods commandment, which (as was showed before) binds as
strongly in this as in any other duty?

14. Because this commandment is the first commandment with promise. To the
faithful discharge of these domestical duties is promised a long and happy
life in the land God has planted men in.

15. Because men and women may greatly further their salvation by living
according to Gods will in this estate; as is intimated, 1 Timothy 2.15.

16. Lastly, let husbands and wives remember their accounts at the last day.
Will it not be a wofuli misery for a rebellious and froward wife to be thrown
to hell, and see her quiet and religious husband go to heaven? and so on the
other side.

The use may be for complaint of the general and grievous neglect of these
things in the most men and women. Where may a man observe, Use.
in any family almost, that amiable carriage between man and wife that ought
to be?

Quest. What are the causes of this general disorder and unquietness between
men and their wives?

Ans. 1. It may be God revengeth some sin in the manner of the marriage, Five
special causes of disorder between man and wife.
or going about it, of which the parties have not soundly repented; as,
precontracts, or marriage for carnal ends, without respect of Religion or Gods
glory, as for wealth, or the like: or some secret wickedness, between the
parties before marriage.

2. In the most, it is the want of the true fear of God: they are carnal, and
so their natures being not regenerate, are full of all evil fruits. Two
carnal persons can no more agree together, than two wild beasts: and what
will not men and women allow themselves in, when they do not from their hearts
fear Gods displeasure?

3. In many it is ignorance of their mutual duties: men and women do not
study with care and conscience the particular duties which in this estate God
requires of them.

4. In such as know their duties, it is either unskilfulnesse to bear with
infirmities, or neglect of daily prayer to God, to fashion their hearts to obey
his will in those things as well as in other points of his service and worship.

5. In some it is strange and strong lusts, and inordinate desires; which being
not resisted and subdued, the inward cause of all that absurd and perverse
carriage shows it self openly.

Quest. 2. But what should men and women do that they might attain to this
orderly and amiable conversation?

Answ. 1. They should heartily in secret bewail their former disorders, and
seek pardon of God, Helps for man and wife to attain an orderly and quiet life.
and then reconcile themselves one to another, by confessing their faults and
follies. These things will never be mended till they be repented of.

2. They should seriously attend to the doctrine of their duties, and hear it
with all conscience, and desire to obey and take notice of Gods preceptorie
commandment, in requiring these things; and by all means take heed of
prejudice in hearing, but make conscience to hear this part of the word of
God. as the word of God, as well as any other. Think not this doctrine too
base or mean to be heard or studied, nor imagine that it is but the severitie
of the Teacher to tell of so many things to be done by men and women:
especially take heed of that profane jesting, to put off the sound practice of
this doctrine with jesting one at another. Remember one thing by the way, that
it is a great testimony of true uprightness of heart, when men and women make
conscience of it, to be good at home as well as abroad. Thus of the first
general doctrine.

Doct. 2. Secondly, we may hence in general note, That the Word of God, and
the instructions of the ministry of the Word, belong to women as well as men:
and therefore the Apostles call to the women to hear the Word of the Lord.
This point is to be noted the rather, because many give out that the knowledge
of religion, and hearing of Sermons, and studying the Scriptures, is not fit
for women; God does not require it of them. Now that this dotage may be the
more evidently confuted, consider that which is here intimated. There are a
multitude of arguments may be brought: as,

First, the image of God by creation was stamped upon the female as well as the
male, Reasons to prove that women ought to be taught their duties as well as
men.
Genesis 1.27.

2. The profession of godliness, good works, faith, charity, and holiness,
is required of women as well as men, 1 Timothy 2.10, 15. and therefore all means
of grace is necessary for them as well as men.

3. It is required of them to be teachers of good things: though they are not
allowed to teach publicly, 1 Cor. 14. yet they must teach their children; and
the elder women must teach the younger women, Tit. 2.3.

4. They are commanded expres^ly to learn the doctrine is publicly taught, 1 Timothy 2.11.

5. The Scripture is full of instances. Of the good woman in the Proverbs it is
said, that she was not only a good house-wife, but the law of grace was in her
lips, Pro. 31.26. King Lemuel was taught prophecies by his mother, Pro. 31.1.
and women followed our Savior to hear his Sermons: some followed him (I say)
from place to place, Luke 8.3, and Mary was commended by our Savior for
choosing the best part, when she set her heart about religious duties, ^itting
at the feet of Christ to hear his word, Luke 11. Our Savior instructs a woman
of Samaria in the great mysteries of conversion and salvation, Job. 4. At
Philippi Paul's hearers at the first were only women, Acts 16.13. and an
honorable narration is made of many Christian women converted, Acts 17.4.12.
ult. and we read of Priscilla, that she was a means to instruct Apollos, an
eloqent and learned man, and to make him more perfectly to understand the way
of God, Acts 18.26. and so we read of women that labored with Paul in the
Gospel, Phil. 4.3.

6. If women must suffer for their Religion, it is reason they have all the
knowledge and helps in Religion: but women are in danger to suffer for Religion
as well as men, Acts 8.3. and 9.2. and 22.4.

7. Finally, the way to be saved is the same for women as well as men: and
therefore all means of salvation belong to them, and are to be used by them as
well as men.

Which as it may encourage all women that are religious to study the things
that belong to the kingdom of God; so it should teach them to make conscience
of what they hear and learn, of the Virgin Mary, to lay up the good word of
God in their hearts, and keep it, and to look to their ways in all things,
that they may please God: for as God is no respecter of persons, but loves
godliness in women as well as in men; so he does require sound obedience, and
reformation, and holiness of life, of women as well as men. ^or with God there
is neither Jew nor Greek, bond nor free, male nor female, but all are one in
Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.27, 28.

Thirdly, before I yet come to open the particular parts of the text, it may be
asked why the Apostle is so large in speaking to wives, as spending so many
verses upon them. I answer, it is not simply because wives are more faulty than
husbands, though many times it proves to be so in many wives; but,

1. Because it is more against nature to obey than to rule.

2. Because women have many hindrances or lets, Why the Apostle is so large in
setting down wives duties.
both in receiving the doctrine, and in practicing it: sometimes they rest in
the general, that they must obey, and so never study particulars; and
therefore had need to have it beaten out in particulars for them. Besides, they
are in danger to be infected with temptations, evil counsel, evil example,
etc.

3. Because the inferior must mend first: and therefore the Apostle begins
with the wives, and would feign have them in order, before they require respect
from their husbands.

4. Because if the women be gained to religion, they may be great means to
work good upon their husbands: for as they are pernicious instruments of the
devil to do their husbands hurt, if they be wickedly bent; so may they be
great means to do them good, if they be soudly reformed themselves, as the
Apostle imports in the first verse of this chapter. Besides, if the mother be
godly and careful, though the father should not be so, yet the children may be
by her instructed and well brought up, and the advantage from her for the
childrens good is the geater, because she is most with the children, and
usually they more affect her than the father.

5. Because many times their provocations from absurd husbands are so great,
as, if God did not speak very much to them, they could never endure it with
subjection.

To conclude, when things are much urged or repeated in Scripture, What things
are imported by often repeating of them.
usually thereby three things are imported about the matter so urged: the one
is difficulty, the other necessity, and the third excellency; all three may be
well thought on here. The Lord is very long in giving the charge to wives, and
it is, both because it is a very hard task to learn to be a good wife, and
because it is a thing, wonderful necessary, and because a good wife is a
creature much set by of God. The Lord accounts it a great work and excellent,
when he can inform and instruct women so far, as to make them good wives.
Which should be a great encouragement to wives though God set them long
lessons to learn, yet it imports he will make great account of them, if they
be teachable scholars. Again, we may hence gather the vanity of all earthly
felicities. Before marriage men and women promise themselves much happiness in
their married estate, and think they could live together with all delight; but
yet after they are married, they see they are deceived, and therefore need to
go to school to learn how to behave themselves one to another. Further,
husbands may hence learn of God how to deal with their wives, to make them
such as might please them* they must treat with them by good arguments, and not
by fretting, or reviling, or complaining of them. Thus in general.

The first part of the charge given to wives, is the proposition, in these
words, Likewise ye wives be subject to your own husbands. In which words four
things may be noted:

1. The term of connection, Likewise. 2. The parties charged, Ye Wives. 3. The
duty required (viz.) Be in subjection. 4. The parties to whom the duty must be
performed (viz.) To your own Husbands.
Likewise] This term leads us to the duty of servants, entreated of before, or
else to the work of coversion to Christ, mentioned in the last verses of the
former chapter. If it lead us (as is most likely) to the duty of servants, in
the whole latter part of the former chapter; then the Apostle would thereby
tell wives, that God is no respecter of persons. He that requires servants
should obey them, requires also that wives should obey their husbands, and will
indifferently punish the faults of both; yea, if they would have their servants
obey them, they must make conscience to obey their husbands; else it is just
with God they should be vexed by their servants, that care not to be a
vexation to their h^sbands. And if it be referred to the work of returning to
Christ, then it ^eacheth, that women must so think of the conversion of their
souls, as that they make not religion a pretense for negligence or
disobedience: they must so seek the Lord Jesus, as withal they remember to be
subject to their husbands, and to look to I their callings in their family.

Ye Wives.] Note here, first, that in speaking to women, he gives them such a
title as imports only their relation totheir husbands: they have now lost
their own names, and their fathers names, and are now styled by the term that
binds them only to their husbands. Note again, that the charge of subjection
is to all wives indifferently: no difference of age, state, nation, degree, or
the like, can make any difference in the charge. God requires subjection of all
wives, whether poor, rich, noble, wife, younger, or old, or of what state or
quality. A Queen has no more privilege than the poorest Cottagers wife, Note.
Hester 1. Psalm. 45.10. Tit. 2.5. and so contrariwise, poor men's wives must
reverence and obey their husbands, as well as those that are more curiously
brought up; which should be a comfort to such wives, because no more is
required of them, than what is required of all.

Note thirdly, that the Apostle speaks to women, as if he would single them
out by name. Ye Wives; which should teach them to hear their duties, as if God
did speak particularly to them.

Be subject.] Concerning the subjection of the wives, many things may be
considered.

1. The proofs that it is indispensably required, Genesis 3.19. Ephesians. 5. 24. Col.
3.18. Tit. 3.5.

2. The reasons why they must be subject: and so, many reasons may be assigned.

1. Because it is God express will; he will have it to be so. Eight reasons
why Wives ought to be subject.
It is not arbitrary, but necessary in respect of Gods commandment: and they
that will not be subject, must think what accounts to give to God for the
breach of his commandment.

2. It is afterward urged for example: all godly women, mentioned in Scripture
have obeyed their husbands.

3. Because it is equal and meet: for if God give the wife power over all in
the family but one; it is great reason she should be subject to him. God
deals fairly with the wife, in that he makes her subject but to one, and
lets her rule many.

4. Because her husband is her head, and the body is governed by the head, 1
Cor. 11.3.

5. Because the man was not of the woman, but the woman of the man, 1 Cor.
11.8. neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man,
verse. 9.

6. Because the Angels of heaven do look for this in all wives, 1 Cor. 11.10.

7. Because it is comely, Colos. 3.18. A wife never carries her self with
better grace, reputation or honor, than when she shows most obedience and
subjection to her husband. It is a wicked and senseless pride in many women,
that they think it is baseness and dishonor, to be at their husbands
appointment, and to be made to do what he lists: But these are utterly
deceived; for their disobedience can commend them to none but such as have an
unclean devil in them. What more comely in a child than to obey his parents?
so is it in Wives. Were it comely for the body to stand above the head, and to
rule it? Does not experience show, that such wives as are so monstrous, as to
profess they will not be subject, or do in practice cross their husbands, or
rule them; do we not see (I say) that such creatures are hateful to God and
men? do not all sorts of people detest them in their discourse? The wife is
the image and glory of the man, 1 Cor. 11. is it not an ill favored sight to
see a scurvie picture, that resembles the substance after a vile fashion? As
man by obedience is Gods image, so is the woman by obedience man's image.

8. Wives must be obedient to their husbands, that the Gospel be not evil
spoken of, especially the younger wives, Tit. 2.5.

To conclude this point; it is to be noted that he faith, Ye wives be subject,
that is, ye Christian wives that profess religion: as if he would say,
religion should make you, not only better women, but better wives. The husband
should feel the benefit of the wives religion, even in her carriage toward
him: the should make it appear that the more she heard sermons, or read the
Scripture, or prayed to God, the better she would become to her husband.

Thirdly, it may be asked, Why the Apostle charge wives only with subjection.
why the Apostle charge wives only with subjection, seeing many other things
are required of them? The answer may be, first, because this of all other
things is most essentially requisite, as that which characteristically
differenceth the duty of the wife: she must love her husband; but that is so
req^i^ed of her, as it is required of the husband also: and the like may be
said of other things. But subjection is a thing God so stands upon, as, if they
had other praises, as that they were wise, provident, chaste, rich, fair, yea
religious; yet if he may not prevail with them in this point, he is not
pleased with the rest. Secondly, because this duty foundly performed, does
imply the rest, and in the practice of it causes the practice of other duties.
Thirdly, in that the Apostle does reduce all their duties into one word, he
does it, thereby to cut off all excuse; for if they cannot remember one word,
they can remember nothing: and if they will not obey in one commandment, it
shows that they are governed by a very spirit of profaneness, as being
persons that resolve to live as they list.

In what things they are to be subject.
Fourthly, it would be considered in what things they must be subject; and so
wives must be subject to the husbands commandments, to do in all things what
he appoints or desires to be done. They must show a mind desirous to please
their husbands, in obeying the directions he gives in matters of the family, or
any other things may concern his profit or contentment. As the Church is ruled
by the word of Christ, so must the wife be ruled by the word of her husband.
His will must be her law to live by. So likewise she must be subject to his
reproves; to amend what he dislikes, and to avoid what is displeasing to him:
so likewise she must be subject to his restraints, and to the order he gives
about her labor, diet, apparel, compan^e, or the like; striving in all things
to please her husband, 1 Cor. 7.34. Ephesians. 5.23. and this subjection extends
also to that due benevolence the Apostle requires, 1 Cor. 7. 3, 4, 5.

The manner how they must submit.
Fifthly, we must consider in what manner wives must be subject; and so diverse
things are required of them: for their subjection must have in it care, honor,
and sincerity. First, they must be subject with care, and study to do and
dispose of all things so as the husband may not be displeased or disquieted. A
wise woman is said to build her house, Pro. 14.2. which notes, that the studies
in every business how to set every thing in order, as the Carpenter does study
how to set every part of the frame in joint. Oh that this word Study could be
carved upon the hearts of women, that they might never forget it: what a world
of unquietness and inconveniences might be prevented, if care and study did
enter into their hearts? Secondly, they must be subject with honor to their
husbands: now wives honor their husbands, and show it diverse ways; as, by
giving them reverent titles, as Sarah called her husband Lord; and by modest
and shamefac't behavior in her husbands presence: her husband should be the
covering of her eyes; and by striving to imitate what is excellent in her
husband, so she should be his image and his glory, as man is the image and
glory of Christ; and by avoiding all company that is suspected or disliked by
the husband, and by concealing and hiding his infirmities as much as she can.
Thirdly, the sincerity of her subjection must appear many ways; as first, by
being subject to him, not in some things, but in all things, as the Church is
subject to Christ. Secondly, by being subject at all times, and in all places;
at home as well as abroad, and always as well as for the first quarter of the
year. Thirdly, by practicing this subjection, not in outward show only, but in
her very spirit, Mal. 2.15. and that not for fear or shame, but for conscience
sake, and willingly, out of the love and honor she bears to her husband,
performing this subjection to her husband, as it were to the Lord himself,
Ephesians. 5.12. Finally, she must make conscience to obey and be subject, though the
husband did not find fault, or much require it, even because God does require
it.

In what cases the wife ought not to subject her self.
Sixthly, it would be considered negatively, in what cases or respects the wise
is not subject to the will of the husband: and so her subjection is qualified,
and limited, or lightened diverse ways. First, in the quality of her subjection:
she is not to be subject with a servile subjection, as a servant or vassal is
subject to his Lord, but in a sweet and familiar kind of subjection, as the
body is subject to the head* and as one that is partner with him in many
privileges both temporal and eternal: they remain still companions and
yoake-fellowes. Secondly, in the matter of subjection: she is not subject to
his will in matters of her soul and religion, when his will is contrary to
Gods will. Wives must be subject, but it must be in the Lord, Col. 3 15. The
unbeleeving husband must not compel the believing wife to change her religion,
or to neglect the means of her salvation. And again, she is not so subject
but she may admonish and advise her husband with certain cautions; as, if she
be sure the thing she speaks against be sinful and hurtful: and withal,
that she speak without passion or contempt, with reverence, and without
frowardness or imperiousness. Thus Abraham is bidden to hear his wife, Gen
21. 12. Again, her subjection does not bind her to consent to or conceal his
whoredoms, wherein he breaks the Covenant betwixt them, and defiles the
marriage bed: nor is she bound to obey him in any thing she knows to be a sin:
nor am I of their mind that think she is subject to her husbands blows and
stripes, for that does import a fervile subjection, and not a free subjection:
I mean, that I do not think it any part of the husbands power over his wife
to correct her by blows: her vices that cannot be corrected by words must be
committed either to the Magistrate, or to the Church censures to reform.
Likewise I conceive that she is not bound to deliver her body to her husband,
when she is apart for her disease, Levit. 18.19. Ezekiel. 8.6.

Seventhly, the sins by which wives transgress against this subjection to
their husbands be many, viz.

Usurping authority over the man, by teaching him in matters of religion,
Particular sins of the wife again subjection.
1 Timothy 2.12. or busying her self in directing or finding fault with him in
matters belonging to his calling, and are out of her reach. Impatience and
frowardness, passion, brawling, chiding, crying, etc. Idleness and
slothfulness, especially when they disappoint usually the trust or desires of
the husbands, in things wherein they might and ought to be helpful in their
labors, or in the oversight of the works of their servants.

Vile estimation of their husbands, though but in the heart; but much more when
it is showed by unreverent terms, or nicknames, or words of reproach, or by
complaining of the infirmities of their husbands, and finding fault with them
before others.

Suspicious and base interpretations of the actions of their husbands, as when
Michol so censured David for his dancing before the Arc.

Wastefulnesse, either by improvidence, or vain expenses, Pro. 14.1.
especially when they are so impudently monstrous as to profess they will not
be ruled by their husbands, but will be masters. And thus of the duty charged
upon the Wives.

The parties to whom they owe this duty follows: and they are their own
Husbands.

To your own Husbands.] Two things may be noted.

1 That all husbands have the same right and authority over their wives Wives
must be subject, though their husbands be poor; yea, though they be froward
and perverse, yea, as the coherence shows here, though they be carnal and
wicked persons: and so though they be ignorant, and not able to dwell with them
as men of knowledge, though they be diseased and in great affliction, as Job
was.

2 That wives are to be subject only to their husbands; not to their children
or servants, much less to a strange woman, if the wicked husband should bring
any into the family: and she must be subject to her own husband, to be
directed and ordered by him, not by the husband of another woman.

Thus of the proposition, the explication of it follows: where the Apostle
requires three things of the wife.

1 Amiablenesse in her carriage, that she might win her husband if it were
possible, ver. 1. 2. A chaste conversation with fear, ver. 2. 3. Meekness,
and a quiet spirit, ver, 3, 4.
For the first part, we are to note two things about the amiablenesse of her
behavior. First, the fruit to be hoped for by it, viz. the winning of the
husband. Secondly, the means how it should be done, viz. by conversation.

Might be won.] What kind of winning does he here mean? I answer, first, an
obedient careful wife may win her husband to be a good husband, that was
before a froward, unruly, unkind, violent, or injurious husband. But I think
that is not that which is here meant, or not all the Apostle means: for he
means it of winning of the carnal husband to religion.

Quest. But can any man be made a religious man without the Word? can a man be
saved, and find the way to heaven without the preaching of the Gospel?

Answ. I take it the Apostle does mean only of a winning by way of preparation
in general: as, the good conversation of the wife may win the husband not to
think so ill of the religion she professes as he did, and may win him to be
contented to go to the means to hear the Word; by which means he may be
effectually called and sanctified.

Diverse ways of winning men.
For the better understanding of this point, you must understand that men are
said to be won in Scripture by diverse means: as, some have been won to
believe for the miracles they saw, and yet Christ did not trust many of them,
John 2. some have been won by private admonition; but that is to be understood
of persuading them to some good duty, or to receive some truth, or to forsake
some sin or error, James 5. ult. some have been won by judgments and
afflictions; as the Israelites many times came crying to God for mercy, when
the hand of God was upon them, and yet fell away again afterward: some have
been won by the fair conversation of others, as here: but the only ordinary
means to win a soul effectually to God is the Word of God preached, Romans 10
14, 17.

Note.
But one thing we may note here, that a man may be won, and yet not effectually.
A man may convert, and change, and suffer much alteration, and yet not be a new
creature: yea, other Scriptures show that a man may be won by the Word it
self, so as in his own judgment, and the hope of others, it seems his soul
is indeed won, and yet it will come to nothing in the end. Wicked men have
sometimes great remorses, are much touched, promise reformation, consent, for
the time, to enter into the profession of religion, like of the way of God in
the general, resolve to hear the Word constantly, etc. and yet all this comes
to nothing, but vanishes, and they return to their old courses.

Causes o^ revolting in many are diverse.
The causes of their revolting are in diverse men or times diverse. Some fly off
again because of reproach. Some for want of means to nourish what is begun.
Some are driven back because they had not cast up their accounts, what it
would cost them to build the Tower of godliness, or what would be necessary to
overcome so many enemies. Some are choked with worldly cares and lusts: but in
all, the reason is, because they were not soundly converted. The old heart
would never hold out to do the task of godliness.

Quest. But being won so far as to like of religion, to feel remorse, to
resolve to become religious, etc. what did they want of sound conversion?

Ans. In those that are won only to a temporary kind of grace, or general
preparation, diverse things appear to be wanting: as, either they had no sound
sorrows for their sins, or never soundly turned from the love of the world, or
could not forsake particular beloved sins, or were never thoroughly persuaded
to forsake carnal dependancies, or did not think of hiring themselves to do
the work of godliness for ever, or had no hearty love to such as fear God,
or the like.

The consideration hereof should awaken all sorts, especially such as newly
entered into the profession of religion, to look to themselves, and try their
estates foundly, whether they be won effectually or no.

Quest. But how may I know that I am won effectually, now at this time of
remorse, or now that I resolve to take a new course?

Answ. Thou art right and effectually converted if these things following be
true of thee.

1. If thou be inwardly abased and humbled in the sight of thine own
vileness: Nine signs to know whether we be won effectually.
if in thine own eyes thou discern thy self to be a fool and unapt for Gods
kingdom; and if thy sins be a sensible lo^d and burden unto thee, of which
thou art weary, Mat. 5.3. and 11.29. 1 Cor. 3.18. and thy pride and
conceitednesse be subdued.

2. If thou have overcome the world, 1 John 5.4, 5. and 2.15. and can show it
by forsaking the fellowship of ungodly persons, 2 Cor. 6.17. and can deny the
carnal counsel of carnal kindred, Mat. 10. and can hold on this course,
notwithstanding the reproaches will be cast upon thee and others, Esaias 8. and
59.15. 1 Pet. 4.5. and do find that thy taste in earthly things is marred, so
as thou do not find that favor in them thou wast wont to do, Romans 8.5.

3. If nothing can heal thee of those remorses thou feel, but the Word and
Ordinances of God, Hosea 6.1, 2. If merry company, carnal counsel or time,
will heal thee without spiritual medicine, thou art not right.

4. If thou have attained to an es^imation of Jesus Christ above all things,
accounting him only precious; and find that thy heart striveth to settle it
self in the trust upon him and his merits, Phil. 3.8. Gal. 6. 1 Pet. 2.6.

5. If thou have a spirit without gu^te, Psalm. 32.2. and that will appear,

1. By thy desire to be godly and religious, more than to seem so, Romans 2.26.

2. By thy desire to be rid of all siu, and to be turned from all thy
transgre^^ions, Ezech. 18.30. setting thy self against thine own iniquity, 2 Samuel 22.24. If thou feel a combat within thee; the spirit striving against the
flesh, as well about inward sins, as outward, against the very evil that
cleaves to thy best works, and against those sins that thou most love, or
have been most gainefull or pleasing to thee, Gal. 5.17.

3. This will be clearer, if thou desire to forsake thy sins in thy youth, or
prosperity, while thou could yet securely commit them.

4. If thou keep thy goodness in all companies, as well when thou art absent
far, as when thou art present with such as are religious, Phil. 2.12. doing
righteousness at all times, Psalm. 106.2.

6. If thou love the house of God above all the places in the world, and that
thy thirst after means continue and last, and be renewed after the food of thy
soul, as thy stomach is afte^ thy bodily food Psalm. 26.8. and 84. Job 23. 12.
Psalm. 119.20.

7. If thou honor them that fear the Lord, and are religious, above all the
people in the world, discerning between the righteous and the wicked,
contemning vile persons, and joining thy self to the godly, as the people thou will live and die with, and as the best companions of thy life, Psalm. 15. Mal.
3.17. Psalm 16.3. 1 John ^.14.

8. If the veil be taken off thy heart, so as thou can hear as the lear^ed,
and understand spiritual doctrine, that before was harsh and foolishness to
thee, 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.15, 16, 18. Esaias 51.6.

9. If thou find that thou can not sin. Mark it* the Apostle John says, he
that is borne of God cannot sin; he means, he cannot sin as he was wont to
do: for either God crosses him still, and hinders him, or he finds that he
cannot affect his sin so heartily, or commit it with his full consent, or with
his whole heart, as he was wont to do, 1 John 3.9. the power of sinning is
marred and dissolved in him.

Now that this work may prosper, if you find your selves any way effectually
won, be advised then to look to these rules following:

1 Take heed of smothering of doubts: ask the way to heaven, and seek
resolution in things of so high importance, as your Vocation, Justification,
Sanctification and Salvation are, Ier. 50.4.

2 Look to it what teachers and what doctrine you hear: choose that food for
your souls that is most wholesome; be not carried away with the enticing words
of man's wisdom.

3 Be careful to humble your souls in secret, judging your selves for your
sins before the Lord. Be not slight in this great work: though you have
repented, yet repent still, till your hearts be fully settled, and the power of
your corruptions broken: rest not upon common hopes, or probabilities, or the
good opinion others have of you, but lay a sure foundation for your own faith
and hope, Ier. 31.20.

4. Come constantly to the light, that it may be manifest that your works are
wrought in God; and let the Word of God be the light to your feet, and
lantern to your paths, John 21.22. Psalm. 50. and Gal. 6.16.

What remains now, but that I should beseech you to return unto God with all
your hearts? Give your selves to God, he will keep that which you commit to
him, till the day of Christ. Let not our words be as water spilt upon the
ground. Oh that the Lord would bow the heavens, and come down amongst you, and
take possession for himself, and perfect the work he has begun in some of
your hearts. Remember the covenant you have made with God in the Sacrament;
made it (I say) over the dead body of your Savior. Now is the axe laid to the
root of the tree, now or never bear fruit. This is the day of salvation: say
you, This is the day the Lord has made for our conversion. God is gracious, if
you turn to him with all your hearts; and just, if you prove false in his
covenant. Though grace in you be but as the smoking flax, yet it shall not be
quenched: the Lord establish his work. I^ you hold out to the end you shall be
saved.

That they which obey not the word.] The persons that may be won are described
by these words, as a Periphrasis of carnal persons, men that are not in
Christ: and so may note either such husbands as were Gentiles, or such husbands
as were carnal Christians.

If by those husbands be meant unbeleeving Gentiles, a question may be asked,
viz. how the Gentiles are said to disobey the Word of God, seeing it was never
given unto them? For answer, we must understand that at this time the Word was
brought among the Gentiles by the Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel:
and therefore now they are bound to obey it as well as any others: and this was
the condemnation of a world of them, that light was come amongst them, and they
loved darkness rather than light. Otherwise, considering the Gentiles without
the Law brought to them, they shall be judged, not by the Law written (which
they had not;) but by the Law of nature, which they had in their hearts, Rem.
2.15, 16.

Now if by these words be meant carnal Christians, that had turned from
Gentilisme, and received the profession of Christian religion, but yet followed
their carnal courses, we may then note, that the bare change from a false
religion to the profession of the true is not sufficient to salvation. A man
that has professed a false religion had need of two conversions: the one is,
from his false religion to the true; and the other, from profaneness to
sincerity in that religion. The corn must be fetched from the field into the
barn; but that is not enough, for so is the chafe: but it must then be taken
from the barn into the garner. To leave Popery, and turn Protestant, is not
in it self sufficient, unless a man turn from the profaneness that is in
the multitude in true Churches, to embrace the sincere profession of the
Gospel. And there is reason for it: for in changing from a false religion to a
true a man does but change his profession, or his mind at best; but he that
will be changed effectually, must change his heart, and whole conversation, and
become a new creature.

So that then these words describe a carnal man, viz. that he is such a one as
does not obey the word of God. By the Word he means here the doctrine
published by the Prophets and Apostles, and now contained in the Scriptures.
Many Doctrines may be hence observed.

1 The Scripture is Gods Word, because God thereby does express the sense of
his mind, as men do by their words. The Scripture is not the word which God
the Father begat, but is the word which God the Father uttered, and is the
word which God uttered to us bodily creatures. God, though he be a Spirit, yet
does speak both to spirits and bodies: to spirits, by a way unknown to us: to
bodies he has spoken many ways, as by signs, dreams, visions, and the like:
so by printing the sense of his mind in the minds of creatures that could
speak, and by them uttered in word or writing what he would have known. Thus
he spoke by the Patriarks, Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles. They that deny
that God has any words, either deny that God is, as Psalm. 14.11. or else, that
conceive him to be like stocks, or stones, or beasts, as Romans 1.23. or else
think he can speak, but will not, because he takes no care of humane things,
as Job 22.23. These are Atheists.

2. The Scripture is called the Word by an excellency, because it is the only
word we should delight in. God since the fall did never speak unto man more
exactly than by the Scriptures; and we were better hear God talk to us out of
the Scriptures, than ^eare any man on earth, yea, or Angel in heaven: yea, it
imports that we should be so devoted to the study of the Scriptures, as if we
desired to hear no other sound in our ears but that; as if all the use of our
ears were to hear this Word. Let him that has ears to hear, hear.

3. This Word of God now in the time of the New Testament belongs to all men,
in the right application of the true meaning of it. Once it was the portionof
Jacob, and God did not deal so with other Nations, to give them his Word: but
now that the partition wall is broken down, the Gospel is sent to every
creature. That is here imported, in that unbeleeving husbands are blamed for
not obeying the Word: which should teach all sorts of men to search the
Scriptures, and ^o hear the Word devoutly, and withal know that the comforts,
terrors, and precepts co^^ained in it, will take hold upon all sorts of men
respectively.

4. The Word of God ought to rule all sorts of men. That is implied here, in
that fault is found with these unbeleevers, that they obeyed it not. It was
given of God to that end, to instruct, reprove, and direct men in all their
ways, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. It is the Canon or rule of men's actions, Gal. 6. 16. It
is the light and lantern God has given to men: it has divine authority. If
we will show any respect to God, we must be ruled by the Scripture, which is
his Word.

5. Unregenerate men have no mind to obey the Word: and the reason is, because
they are guided by other rules, which a^e false; as their own reason, the
customs of the world, the suggestions of the devil, and the like: and because
too the Word is contrary to their carnal desires; and therefore they yield
themselves to be guided by such rules as are most pleasing to their corrupt
natures: and besides too, the light of the Word is too glorious for his eyes:
he cannot see into the mysteries contained in it, because they are spiritually
to be discerned; and the natural man therefore cannot perceive the things of
God.

6. It is a dangerous thing not to obey the Word of God: they are accounted for
lost and forlorn men here that do not obey the Word. Men be deceived if they
think it is a course may be safe for to disobey Gods Word: for Gods Word will
take hold of them, and destroy them, and it will judge them at the last day,
Zech. 1.4, 5. 2 These. 1.8. They are but lost men, cast-awaies, that care not
for Gods Word.

7. Nothing is to be reckoned a sin which is not disobedience to the Word. That
which is not contrary to some Scripture is no transgression: and therefore men
should take heed of burthening themselves with the vain fear of sinning, when
they break no commandment of God, but only unwarranted traditions, either on
the left hand or the right.

8. The constant omission of religious duties and good works proves a man to
be a carnal person, as well as the committing of manifest injuries, or gross
offenses. Here the Periphrasis of a carnal person is, That he did not do what
the Word required.

9. Men that obey not the Word may be won: which should be a great comfort to
penitent sinners. It is true that disobedience, clothed with some circumstances
or adjuncts, is very dangerous: as, when men have the means, and love darkness
rather than light, John 3.20. and when men are smitten with remorse, and have
blessing and cursing set before them, and see their sins, and feel the axe of
Gods Word, and yet will on in transgression, Deuteronomy. 11. 28. Mat. 3 10. or when
men are called at the third, or sixth, or ninth hour, and will put off and
delay, upon pretense of repenting at the eleventh hour, Ma. 20. or when men
are powerfully convinced, and will rail and blaspheme, and contradict the
Word, Acts 13.45, 46. and 18.6. and when God pursues men with his judgments,
and they refuse to return, Ier. 5.2, 3, or lastly, when men despite the
spirit of God, and sin of malice against the truth, Heb. 10. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30.

10. The chief doctrine is, That sound obedience to the Word of God is the
Character of a true Christian; a mark to distinguish the true Christian from
the false, and from him that is no Christian at all: God makes his count by
righteousness, Romans 10. To profess the true religion, to understand the Word,
to believe it with historical or temporal faith, to talk of the Word, to
receive Baptism, and the signs of the Covenants, or the like, makes not an
essential difference. It is obeying the Word proves us to be true Christians.
Not the hearers, but the doers of the Word are acknowledged for just persons,
Mat. 7.26, 27. James 1.22, 23, 24.

But that we be not deceived in our obedience, we must know that unto sound
obedience diverse things are required: as,

Six things required to sound obedience.
1. That his obedience be from the heart, Romans 6.17.

2. That his obedience arises from the love of God, and the hatred of sin, as
it is sin, and not from carnal and corrupt ends, Deuteronomy. 30.20. Josh. 22.5. Mat.
4.19.

3. That his obedience be in all things with respect to all Gods Commandments,
though it be against his profit, ease, credit, or the like, Heb. 11.8. Genesis
22.12. Psalm. 119.6. Exodus 15.26.

4. That he does righteousness at all times; that he continue in his
obedience, and obey at all times, that is, constantly, and not for a fit, Psalm.
106.2. Hos. 6.5. Gal. 5.7. 2 Kings 18.6. I^m. 1.23.

5. That he make conscience of obeying the least commandment, as well as the
greatest, Mat. 5.19.

6. That obeyes the commandments of the Gospel, about believing in God and
Jesus Christ, as well as of the Law: that practices obedience of faith, and
lives by faith, 2 These. 1.8. Romans 1.5. Mat. 16.16.

11. It is to be noted, that the Apostle uses fair language, when he
speaks even of carnal men. He gives not these carnal husbands reproachful
words, but only says, they obey not the Word; and the reason may be, because
the conscience of a man is not won by the terror of words, but by the evidence
of the matter. And besides, the Apostle did not think it fit that wives should
be humoured in the violent dispraises of their husbands: It is not profitable
for inferiors to conceive much of the hatefulness of the sins of superiors.

12. Religion does not bind wives to account carnal husbands to be
religious. They may know that they are carnal, and yet not sin against their
husbands in such judgment, so as they judge by infallible grounds: for though
the wife must love her husband, with matrimonial love, above all other men,
yet she is not bound to believe that he is the best man in the world.

Lastly, it is a great affliction to a Christian wife, to have a carnal
husband. Till she have won him, she is but in a distressed estate; for other
wicked men she might shun, and so avoid the discomfort arises from seeing and
hearing their wickedness: but an evil husband she cannot, nor ought not to
depart from him, though she must avoid his sin, 1 Cor. 7. and from such a
husband she cannot have the helps she should have from a husband that could
dwell with her as a man of knowledge. Besides, the many ways in which such a
husband may, or will hinder her in the course of godliness: besides, it cannot
but be a great grief to her, to think of their parting out of this world,
that the one of them must go to hell, and that the companion of her life, when
he dies (if he repent not) must be an eternal companion of devils.

13. Good wives may have ill husbands; such wives as are truly religious and
obedient, may have husbands that will not obey the Word of God: and that
arises sometimes from the improvidence, or ill providing of parents. Many
parents that have children that obey them, and will be ruled by them, do
dispose of them for carnal ends, to carnal or ill disposed husbands.
Sometimes from the hypocrisy of such men as fear God, but prove not so when
their wives enjoy them. Sometimes from an unruly affection in good women, who
though they know the men they choose to be carnal, yet they will have them
though it prove to their own continual woe and affliction. Sometimes from a
special corruption of nature in some husbands, who either are loving husbands,
and yet but carnal men; or are good men, but bad husbands. Sometimes it
arises from the special grace of God to the wife; who though she was carnal
when she married the carnal husband, yet afterward is converted and
effectually called: and this was the case of such women ^as the Apostle seems
here to write to. Sometimes it falls out by a special and unavoideable
providence of God, though all means have been used to try or prevent this
evil in the husband: for marriage being to be reckoned amongst outward things,
God, for reasons known to himself, and always just, will give ill husbands
to good wives. And contrariwise, it may be God knows, that if some good wives
had better husbands, they would prove worse wives, or both husband and wife
would be more unapt for the kingdom of God.

14. Unequal matches ought to be avoided as much as may be: and that may be
gathered from the manner of the Apostles speaking, in that he says, If any obey
not the Word. If any, as if he would import, that it is a case he desired might
be very rarely found amongst Christians.

They also may be won.] We read in Scripture of diverse kinds of winnings:
Diverse kinds of winning.
there is a spiritual winning or gaining, and there is a worldly winning.
About the spiritual winning we read of the winning of Christ, Phil. 3.8.
which is the work of a particular believer, laboring and wrestling with God,
in the use of his ordinances, to obtain, by the gift of his free grace, Jesus
Christ for his justification, and sanctification, and final salvation.
Likewise we read of the winning of grace and spiritual gifts; and so
godliness is called gain, and the good servants are said to win or gain more
Talents to the Talents they had. And this gain is gotten by a spiritual
trading, in the diligent emploiment of the gifts the godly have, to get them
increased. We read likewise of the winning of other men's souls in many
places; and that is done either by the Preachers of the Gospel, conquering the
hearts of their hearers to the obedience of the Word of Christ, and unto sound
conversion; or else it is done by private persons, that by their examples and
good carriage, or by their admonitions or counsels, do persuade and incline
others to a liking of a new life, or to humiliation and reformation of some
particular faults. We read likewise of worldly gain and winning, when men by
their sports strive for prizes, or in their trades labor for lucre and gain.
Now this latter kind of gain differs greatly from the former, both in the
matter of the gain, and in the manner of seeking it: for there is no
comparison between the gain of grace and godliness, and the gain of riches
and honor; the one is transitory, the other eternal: the one is true riches
and gain, and serves for the best uses, the other is but in show, and serves
for the meaner uses of a corporal and temporal life: the one does always do
us good, the other does often do men hurt, and therefore is called filthy
lucre. And in the manner of getting or holding these gains there is
difference: we may covet the best gifts, and long after them, and love them,
and joy in them; but we are forbidden the coveting or loving of wordly things.
But in this place the Apostle speaks of the winning of souls, about which the
Etymology affords matter of profitable consideration. The original word
(...), signifies gain, and withal, the joy and delight of the heart in
gaining: this gain being called (...), because (...), that is, it pleases and
delights the heart. And it signifies craft or policy: and therefore in that
language a Fox is called (...). He has his name from this word: which may
teach three things:

Note.
1. To win a soul is a great gain; which must needs be so, because to win a
soul is more than to gain the whole world: for what shall it profit a man to
win the whole world, and lose his own soul, says our Savior?

2. It is a mavelous joy to the heart of man to win souls to God: no man
that understands the worth of the gain can be pleased with any thing more
than with that. The people never comfort the hearts of their godly Teachers
more, than when they are won by them to sound obedience to the Word of Christ;
nor can grieve them more than by their wilful resisting of the means.

3. It requires a great deal of the spiritual policy and skill to win
souls: a Minister that would do it must sometimes be like a Fox. It is
written of the Fox, that when he is very hungry after prey, and can find
none, he lies down, and feigneth himself to be a dead carcas^e, and so the
Fowls fall upon him, and then he catches them. What a Minister must do to
win souls.
Even so a Minister that hungreth after the winning of his hearers, must
sometimes be driven to make a very carcass of himself, by denying himself, and
turning himself into all forms, that his hearers may be enticed to flock to
his doctrine. Paul is feign to deny his maintenance, and to become all things
to all men, even to be a servant unto all, that he might win some, 1 Cor. 9.19,
20, 21, 22. Yea, sometimes a man, to entice his people, must deny his own
profit, and make himself like a dead carcass in respect of profits, that so
he may the better allure them to fall upon him in his ministry. Some people
will never be caught, if the Minister be bussling amongst them for the utmost
of his Rights: but if a man will endure to be stripped of his Rights sometimes,
they will go to hear such a man, and so may be catched.

And thus from the Etymology of the Word. The matter it self imports diverse
things done upon the person so gained: as also it notes something in the
disposition of the party that is to win, and withal, something in the estate
to which he is won.

For the first, when a man is said to be won, it imports, first, To be won,
what it imports.
that he is brought to see that he is lost in his former estate: secondly, that
he is brought to confess his misery and sin, and withal, to yield himself
with humility of mind to be disposed of by the supreme Conqueror, and
withal, that he gives over all opposing of the way of godliness. Which may
serve for trial to all such as account themselves gained to godliness: for
such as oppose sincerity, or see not they are lost, or yield not themselves to
be disposed of by Jesus Christ, are not indeed won, whatsoever they profess.

For the second, it notes, That such as are truly godly show their affection
to such as they are linked to in the bonds of nature, by their earnest desire
after the salvation of the souls of such as they are tied to in those bonds.
Thus Paul desired the salvation of the very Nation he was of: thus parents show
their love to their children, by bringing them up in the nurture and
instruction of the Lord; and thus here godly wives show their love to their
husbands, in endeavoring to win them to godliness, and the obedience to the
Word. Which serves also to try the affections men profess they bear to their
kindred, or neighbors, or any they are linked to in nature or affinity.
Parents love not their children, that endeavor not to get grace for them, as
well as riches; and so neighbors should show their love, by admonishing,
instructing, and edifying one another, 1 These. 5.14.

For the third, in that he says evidently, Won, not mentioning to what, it
imports that such as are won to true godliness are likewise won to all
happiness, even to Gods Kingdom, in respect of their right to it; especially
if they be effectually converted. He is won to glory that is won to grace Which
also may serve for trial: for if thou can find that thy heart is won to
sound sanctification, thou may from thence assure thy self of thy salvation,
as certainly to be had, as it is certain thou have sanctification.

They also.] This Also imports two things.

First, that the Word of God never wins so many, Note.
but there are still more to be won: though thousands were converted among
the Gentiles, yet still there was hope of winning more. In the spiritual
husbandry all times are not times of harvest, and in the harvest all the
spiritual grain is not ripe at once. The Jews were first to be gotten in,
and then the Gentiles were ripe for the harvest, John 4. and when the fullness
of the Gentiles is come in, by that time the Jews will be ripe again; and so
it is in particular Countries, Cities, Parishes, Families. And as in winnowing,
though it be done with never so good a wind or skill, yet some grain will
still be in the chafe: so it is in places where the most good has been done
by the means. And herein, God is better than the natural husbandman; for the
natural husbandman will never winnow the chafe over again for a few grains
of corn, nor will he thresh over his straw again, if but a few corns of
wheat or barley be in the straw: but God will winnow a great heap, if it
were but at length to find one grain of spiritual corn. It may be often
observed, that in some places God sets his servants to thresh or winnow in
great assemblies of chafe, and yet after diverse years labor, it may be they
get but one grain of corn, that is, convert after much toil, perhaps but one
or two souls.

Now if any ask why all that belong to God are not converted all at once; I
answer, that it were sufficient to satisfy us, if we knew no more, but that it
pleased God to have it so: it is his will it should be so. But yet, that it is
a wise providence of God so to order it, it may appear in diverse things: for
by continuing the means to call his own Elect thus by degrees, the wicked are
left without excuse. Why all are not converted at once.
Besides, the godly while they look for the daily discovery of new converts,
are thereby put to the exercise of many graces and duties; as diligence,
compassion, charity, a winning conversation, meekness, prayer, exhortation,
and the like. And besides, the outward peace of the Church is thereby
preserved: for if it were known once, that all the Elect in any place were
called, there would follow such violent opposition from the greater and worser
sort, as there would be no place of rest for the Church in the world. They
would all be of Caines mind, if God had declared his testimony on both sides
from heaven. And therefore at the day of judgment, as soon as he has parted
the Elect and Reprobate, and sentenced them, he disposes so of them, as they
shall never live together again. And further, if all the Elect were gathered
at once, the world would be at an end: for then Christ would deliver up the
kingdom to his father, 1 Cor. 15.24. and therefore Ministers should continue
painful in their labors, as remembering that they are set to work for
edification of the Church, till Christ come again, Ephesians. 4.12. And though the
most of their present hearers have refused the Word of God, and are hardened,
yet they may see cause of constancy; because God still supplies their
Auditories with new generations, that rise up by degrees in the room of those
hardened ones. And withal, they must think that all the year is not harvest:
they are Gods husbandmen, and must not think much to labor and toil many
days and weeks before they see the fruit of their labors; as hoping, that in
the end God may grant them a comfortable harvest: and if Israel should not be
gathered, yet their reward is with God. Thus of the first point, imported in
this word, Also.

Secondly, we may hence gather further, that the Apostle would have us to
account all that are won to religion, to be safe. He imples so much in that he
treats about winning of more to them; as if he accounted them safe that were
won already. And it is true of such as are won to the outward profession of
religion, that in charity we are bound to hope the best of each one
particularly: but for such as are won to sound sanctification (the signs
whereof were noted before) it is certain of them, they can never be lost:
which is clear by these proofs, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. Phil. 1.6 Romans 8. ult. 1 Pet.
1.5. John 6. and 10.29, 30. And it must needs be so: for God will not cast off
the people whom he has chosen, Psalm. 94.14. Romans 11. And besides, Christ lives
in the hearts of those that are truly sanctified, Gal. 2.20. and Christ can
die no more, Romans 6.10. He may as well die at the right hand of his Father, as
die in the heart of a Christian. And further, God has given us his spirit as
the earnest of our eternal salvation, sealing to us thereby all the promises
he has made us, Ephesians. 1.14, 15. and it is a known principle, that whom God
loves he loves to the end; and finally, Gods decree is unalterable, 2 Timothy
2.29.

Ob. This may be true of the most; but alas how know I that God will look so
carefully to me in particular? I may be lost.

Sol. Gods promise is universal: Not one of them, says the Prophet, shall be
lacking, Ier. 23.4. and God has charged Christ to see to the keeping of the
bodies and souls of every true believer, John 6.39, 40.

Ob. It is true, God will never depart from us: but we may depart from him, and
so perish.

Sol. The Lords covenant is, that neither he will depart from us, nor we shall
depart from him: for he will put his fear within us to that end, Ier. 32.41.

Ob. But I feel my self so weak and ignorant I cannot hold out.

Sol. The smoking flax shall not be quenched, nor the bruised reed broken,
Esaias 42.

Ob. But we are in continual danger, by reason of temptations within, and
infections of all sorts from without.

Sol. God is faithful, and will keep you from evil for all that, 2 These.
3.3. and Christ has made intercession to his Father for that very thing, that
you may be kept from those evils, John 17. and God has put his Spirit within
you, of purpose to make you keep his statutes, and to hold on your way, Ezekiel.
36.27.

Ob. But the Apostle John seems to say that we may lose what we have wrought,
2 John 8.

Sol. The words of the Apostle John are these, Look to your selves, that we
lose not those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward.
Which words may be understood as spoken to such as were hypocrites, and had but
temporary grace, and not sound sanctification; for he says in the next words,
He that transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not God.
They never had God then that lose what they have wrought: and so this touches
not such as are sure now they have God, in that they have saving grace. Again,
it is true that the godly may lose what they have wrought, when they fall into
scandalls, or by weakness fall from the profession of the truth. I say, they
may lose what they have wrought, in those sins: first, in respect of the praise
of men all their former honor may be laid in the dust: secondly, in respect of
the inward sense and comfort of what good they have done: and thirdly, in
respect of the fullness of the reward in heaven: for their glory may be much
lessened by their falls: but it does not therefore follow that they may fall
finally away from God; for they will recover again.

Ob. But we see that Christians of greater gifts than we have fallen away, and
never recover again, but die in their Apostacy, as Hymeneus and Philetus did
in the Apostles times.

Sol. The Apostle in that place answers, that Gods foundation remains sure,
and has this seal, he knows who are his; which evidently imports that God
did never know them to be his, what shows soever they made amongst men: and
therefore their fall need not discourage such as are sure, by the former
marks, that they are Gods.

Object. But we see that the godly themselves do fall, as David and Peter did.

Sol. First, they did recover again, and so were not lost.

Secondly, though they fall, they shall not be utterly cast down: for God
stays them from falling wholly away, though they fall away in some particular
act, Psalm. 37.23.

Thirdly, in the worst falls of the Saints, there is ever still an holy seed of
grace, and faith, and knowledge, that abides in all that are borne of God;
though in respect of outward fruits, and the power or joy of inward gifts, they
may be said to lose, Ioh. 3.9.

Diverse ways from God to further our salvation.
Without the word.] God has diverse means to further the salvation of men, and
he is pleased sometimes to work by one means, and sometimes by another;
sometimes by the Word preached, sometimes by the Word read, sometimes by
Prayer, sometimes by the Sacraments, sometimes by the example of his Servants.
So that God does work our good sometime by one ordinance, and not by another,
in the same thing and at the same time: sometimes he will cure a man of a
particular trespass, by the admonition of some private Christian, Mat. 18.15.
Iam. 5. ult. sometimes he will bring a man to feel legal terrors by the
doctrine of the Law, and sometime he will work it by afflictions: sometimes
he will prepare a man to receive the grace of Christ by prayer, as he did
Cornelius: sometimes he winnes him to it by the example of his servants, as
here. And the reason is, partly because God would show the virtue that is in
each ordinance, and partly to teach us not to despise or neglect any of the
means, and partly to show his own power, that works freely by what means
he will, as being not tied to any. And therefore they deal very corruptly and
perversely, that under pretense of commending one ordinance of God, labor to
abase the respect of another, as they do, that say the house of God is a house
of prayer, and therefore there needs not so much preaching; not considering
that our Savior Christ himself, that alleged that place out of the Prophet
to condemn buying and selling in the Temple, yet did spend his greatest pains
in preaching in the Temple, and out of it; thereby showing, the prime ordinance
of God, for the conversion of the souls of men, was the preaching of the
Gospel to them.

Doct. 1.
By the conversation of the Wives.] Great heed ought to be taken by such as
profess Religion, in looking carefully to their conversation, especially
toward such as are without, Col. 4.5. Ephesians. 5.15. 1 Pet. 2.12. It is not
enough to do good duties, but we must do them as becomes godliness, Tit 2.
and so as may allure and win the very ungodly: and therefore it is required,
that our works should shine, Mat. 5.16. for by our practice we resemble God
himself, and by our works profess to show, not only what Gods Word is, but
what Gods nature is. Our life must have the image of God printed upon it: and
therefore they do fearfully that profess Religion amongst wicked men, and by
their works order themselves so foolishly, deceitfully, conceitedly, wickedly,
that they cause the name of God to be blasphemed.

Quest. But what should we do to our practice, that by our conversation we
might allure and win wicked men to a love of the truth?

By what means we may win wicked men in our conversation.
Answ. 1. First, we must avoid such things in our conversation, as may
irritate them: as scandalous behavior in any particular offense; as deceit,
lying, filthiness, drunkenness, pride, covetousness, passion, or the like;
and withal take heed of mis-spending our zeal, about such things whereof
demonstration cannot be made to the conscience. And besides, in the good things
we do we must take heed of conceitednesse and ostentation, but in meekness of
wisdom have our conversations amongst men, James 3.13. and further, we must
take heed of judging and censuring of others, even of those that be without,
James 3.17.

2. Mortification does shine effectually into the conscience of wicked men: it
does move them much, if they see we be such as do heartily judge our selves
for the faults that hang upon us, and do not allow our selves in any sin, Esaias
61.3.

3. A sound contempt of this world, and the things thereof, does much affect
the very natural conscience of men, if they see that not in words but in deed,
the love of this world, and the glory thereof, be not in us: and contrariwise,
it much vexes them that we should profess the hope of heaven, and contempt of
the world, and yet be as full of cares, fears, covetousness, and such like
ill affections, as the very men of the world.

4. Meekness and softness of nature expressed in our behavior, is very
amiable, as the coherence in this Text shows, and Tit. 3.1, 2.

5. Mercy to the poor, especially if we do abound in it, and be ready and
cheerful to it, does justify us much before men, James 1.26.

Doct. 2. A good example, even in inferiors, may win men to Religion. True
Religion, expressed in practice, is amiable in all sorts of Christians; women
as well as men, inferiors as well as superiors, servants as well as masters,
children as well as parents, Tit. 2.3.9.10. Luke 1. and the reason is, because
the true grace that is expressed by any Christian has the likeness of God
printed upon it, and so is amiable for his sake, whom they by their works
resemble. And this may be a great encouragement to inferiors, and should breed
in them a great care of well-doing. But the main thing intended in this Text
is, That religious wives ought to strive to win their husbands, if they have
such as are not religious, or not in such soundness as they ought.

Quest. But what should a wife do to win her husband?

Answ. She must in general resolve to do it, not by her words, but by her
conversation, as this Text shows. It is not her talking to her husband will
do it; no nor her talking of religion to him that in it self is like to
prevail. It concerns women very much to remember this point of the Apostle,
to seek the reformation of their husbands by their conversation, not by their
words.

Ob. But Abraham was willed to hear his wife, Genesis 16.

Sol. What then? has every wife such an husband as will hear her, as Abraham
did his wife? Besides, the question is not, what the husbands should do, but
what the wives should do when the husbands as not such as they should be.

Ob. But how shall a woman know when to speak to her husband, and when not?

Sol. She must not speak to him, no not of religion, 1. when in the matter she
would speak of she is not furnished to speak as becomes the Oracles of God:
2. when by experience she has found that her husband is irritated and provoked
by her words: 3. when she is not her self free from some fault, as apparent in
other things as that is she mislikes in her husband.

Qu. But what things must she look to in her ^^nversation, that she may by her
works win her husband?

Answ. The first thing is, that she be in all found subjection, obedient to her
husband in all things, or else God may win him, What things a wife must
especially practice, to win her husband.
but she must have no part of the praise of it. And this is strongly imported
in the very scope of this place. In general, she must strive to be to him
(even for conscience sake, that he may see it comes from the force of religion
in her) a good wife, discreet, provident, careful to please, meek, such an
one as his heart may trust in her, and delight in her. Wives that be foolish,
wastfull, idle, froward, or busybodies, if they have never so much show of
religion, yet they are not fit for this work, to win any body, much less
their husbands.

Secondly, she must look to her conversation in things of her religion, that
therein she behave her self as becomes religion, Tit. 2.3. and so she must
take heed of conceitednesse and contempt of others, or neglect of her calling,
upon pretense of duties of her religion; and look to it, that she be not her
self guilty of any known fault unreformed: and withal she must strive to
show the power of her godliness in good fruits, laboring to abound in good
works, 1 Timothy 2.10. both at home and abroad; being pitiful, merciful, ready
to help them that are in misery, according to her power, and in the things she
has liberty to dispose of. Other things follow in the three next verses.

Verse 2. While they behold your chaste conversation, coupled with fear.


IN these words is contained the second thing the Apostle charge upon wives
in his exposition, viz. A chaste conversation with fear; so ordered, as their
husbands may daily behold it, and observe it in them. Where the Apostle implies
what the husbands will do, viz. they will observe the conversation of the
wives; and expresses what the wives ought to do, viz. in conversation to show
chastity, coupled with fear. First then, we are to consider of that which is
implied, viz. what the husband will do: and this is imported in the word
(...), While they behold.

While they behold.] The original word signifies to observe and pry into a
thing, to find out the secrets of it: and so it notes, That carnal men (such
as these husbands were) do watch and mark the conversation of such as be
religious, to observe all they can in them that profess true religion. Thus
they watched David, and Christ, and Daniel, and so do they all the godly: and
thus they employ themselves in spying and marking the ways of the godly;
sometimes out of the naughtiness of their hearts, supposing godly men to be
like unto themselves, and therefore hope to find out wickedness in their
practice: sometimes out of malice, lying in wait to find out any fault in their
carriage, of which they may accuse them, and vilify them in the world: Note.
and sometimes they do thus, as compelled by the force of their natural
conscience, which gives glory to the graces of God, in the conversation of true
Christians, while they observe in them that holiness which they find not in
themselves, Use.
or other carnal men. And therefore the Use should be, to teach all that
profess religion to look carefully to their ways, and walk circumspectly,
that they give not occasion of offense; but rather carry themselves so, as to
make proof of their sincerity and good conversation by their works.

Secondly, from hence we may gather also, That a Christian must look to his
justification before men, as well as to his justification before God: for as
God beholds his ways, so do men; and he is bound to seek his justification
from men, as well as his justification from God. And therefore, as the Apostle
Paul had taught the justification of a sinner before God, so the Apostle James
urges the justification of the godly man before men: which this Apostle
imports in this place, when he requires such a conversation as may compel
carnal men to say they are just men. So our Savior, Mat. 5.16.

Quest. What can carnal men see in the conversation of the godly to make them
give glory to God or the truth?

Answ. By the good conversation of true Christians they gather the goodness of
the law or religion which they profess. And besides, they thence gather, that
they are not hypocrites, but are religious indeed: whence they see what power
their religion has over them in all their ways. And further, the scandal of
reproaches cast upon the godly, is often, by the observation of their
conversation, utterly removed in the hearts of such carnal men as set
themselves thoroughly to observe and mark the course of the godly.

Your chaste conversation.] The word here translated Chaste, in all other
places of the New Testament is translated Pure; and so shows, that it ought to
be accepted here in a larger sense than the word chaste does import; yet so as
chastity is a part of the purity of a Christian.

Doct. A pure conversation is required in all true Christians, yea, even in
women as well as men. That purity is required, is manifest by diverse
Scriptures; yea, to be examples in purity, 1 Timothy 4.2. It is the chief fruit
of the wisdom is from above, Iam. 3.17. A pure heart is required, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. and pure hands, 1 Timothy 2.8. And that it may
be had, is apparent, for our Savior says, Ye are all pure, John 15.3.

Quest. How can a man in this world be pure? can any man be without sin?

Answ. No, there is no man that sins not: In many things we sin all,
James 3.2. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, and am pure from my sin?
Pro. 20.9. And, If any man say he has no sin, he is a liar, and the truth is
not in him, 1 John 1.10. And yet though in that sense no man is pure, yet in
other senses the godly man may be called pure, and is bound, even by the
Gospel, to purity: as,

1. In respect of some particular offense. In what respects godly men are said
to be pure.
A godly man may be so pure as to abide the trial of God himself: as David
wills God to judge him according to his righteousness, and the innocence of
his hands; meaning, in that point of false or treacherous dealing against Saul,
which was charged upon him, Psalm. 3.4, 5. and 18.15.

2. In respect of imputation every believer is perfectly pure: all his sins are
as if they had never been, and Christ's righteousness is his; and in that
righteousness of faith he is perfectly pure before God himself, Rev. 19.8.14.

3. In respect of men he may be pure in conversation, though not in respect of
God; and so he is pure when he is unrebukeable and unblameable amongst men. And
this ought to be found in the conversation of every Christian, to live without
offense, and without rebuke. Phil. 2 15, 16.

4. There is a pure conversation in respect of God: not that we can converse
without sin, but God is pleased, for Christ his sake, to account our
conversation pure, when it has diverse prints and marks of his true grace in
us. And so Christian purity has in it many things:

1. Separation from impure men, Psalm. 1.1. 2 Cor. 6.17.

2. The desire of purity in the perfection of it: God accounts his servants
pure, because they desire to be as pure as he would have them to be.

3. Sound mortification and judging of our selves for what impurity we find
cleave to our works: it is Christian perfection to judge our selves for our
imperfections, 1 John 3 3.

4. Freedom from the gross impurities, and vices, and vanities of the time:
God accounts us pure when our spot is not as the spots of the wicked, and when
we are not infected with the corruptions which are usually in the world, 1 Timothy
5.22. 2 Pet. 1.4.

5. Freedom from the reign of hypocrisy in the heart, and from hypocritical
courses in the life. Thus Saint James accounts the heart to be pure, when men
are not double minded, James 4.8. And in conversation he is a pure man, that is
(like Jacob) a plain man, without fraud, tricks, or dissimulation.

6. Preciseness, circumspection, or exactness of conversation; when a man
shows respect to all Gods Commandments, and makes conscience to avoid
lesser sins, as well as greater, Ephesians. 5.15. Mat. 5.19.

7. Devoutnesse and zeal in matters of religion, and Gods worship and glory;
and so a pure conversation is a religious conversation, that expresses zeal
and conscience in the things of Gods service in a special manner, seeking Gods
Kingdom first and above all other things, 2 Timothy 2.22. Titus 2.14.

8. Chastity, in keeping the heart and life clean from the impurities
condemned in the seventh Commandment, is one great part of Christian purity.
But before I come to entreat of chastity in particular, I would apply this
doctrine of purity in general, first, to the Text, and then to the times.

As for the Text, a pure conversation is here considered only so far as it may
fall into the observation of carnal men: and so it comprehends, of the former
senses, chiefly, inoffensivenesse, separation from impure men, freedom from
gross impurities, and dissimulation, a Christian and wise strictness of life,
and devoutnesse and well ordered zeal in matters of religion.

Use. Now for the Use of it. If these be applied to these times, it shows,
first, how wicked and profane those sorts of people are, who reproach godly men
for the care and practice of these things; as if to be a Puritan, even in
these senses, were to be some vile man, not worthy to live amongst men.
Secondly, it shows that worlds of people that bear the name of Christians are
not true Christians, because their conversations are not pure: for their
swearing, or drunkenness, or whoredoms, or sins of deceit, or dissimulation,
or fashioning themselves to this world, or the liberty they take to live as
they list, testifies against them to their faces, that their works are not
pure; and therefore unless they repent they will all perish, Rev. 3.1, 2. and
the rather, because they cause by their evil lives, not only the hearts of the
good to be grieved, but the mouths of the enemies of religion to be opened to
blaspheme. Thirdly, godly men that find these cares in them, should comfort
themselves much in the testimonies of their own consciences, and the gracious
acceptance of God, who will show himself pure with them that are pure, 2 Cor.
1.12. Psalm. 18.

Thus of Purity in general. Now of Chastity, as a part of a pure conversation;
and it may well be that which is chiefly here intended.

Chastity is either of the mind, or of the body: and it is a most certain
truth, that God requires a chaste mind as well as a chaste body, and does
forbid unchaste thoughts and desires, a^ well as unchaste words or deeds. For
unchaste thoughts and desires are, first, foolish and noisome, 1 Timothy 6.9.
secondly, they hinder the power of religion, and true knowledge, and grace, 2 Timothy ^.4* thirdly, they fight against the soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. A man were as good
have his body wounded with weapons, as his soul wounded with lusts: fourthly,
they cause many times many and monstrous sins in the life, which arise at first
from the nourishing of soul desires and thoughts in the heart. The wickedness
that was in the lives of the Gentiles did in many of them spring from the l^sts
which they harbored in their hearts, Romans 1. lastly, if men repent not of them
in time they will drown them in perdition, 1 Timothy 1.9. But it is the chastity
of the body which is especially here intended: and our Savior Christ divides
those chaste persons into three sorts: some are termed Eunuchs from their
mothers womb, and so are disabled for bodily fornication; some are made so by
other men, who by violence, for their own service, made some men Eunuchs. Now
the third sort are they that made themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of
Heavens sake. Of this third sort are all chaste persons, who by a godly care
and watchfulness keep themselves from the sins of filthiness, as well as
natural Eunuchs do, Mat. 19.12. Now these persons that are made chaste for
the kingdom of Heavens sake, are either single persons, or married persons: of
chastity in single persons other Scriptures entreat, as, 1 Cor. 7. of chastity
in married persons this place entreats. Now this virtue of chastity is of
purpose imposed upon godly Christians by the Apostle, because the sins of
fornication were so rife and common among the Gentiles, who oftentimes defended
their filthiness to be either no sin, or a very small sin. But before I come
to speak of chastity in particular, some doctrines would be in general
observed: as first,

Doct. 1. A godly Christian must show the proof of his religion, especially in
keeping himself free from the sins that are most common and rife in the world:
and even the more sin abounds in the world, the more strict they should be in
resisting sin; as here, even the more filthy the lives of others were, the
more chaste should the conversation of godly Christians be; because their love
to God should constrain them the more to be zealous for his glory, by how much
the more God is dishonored by other men; and because they are flatly forbidden
to follow a multitude to sin; and because God has chosen them out of all other
sorts of men, to bear his name, and to hold forth the light of the Word in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation; and because thereby the conscience
of wicked men may be the more effectually convinced, and prepared to
repentance. Thus Lot is righteous in Sodom, and Joshua and his house will
serve the Lord, though all the Nation serve Idols. This point, as it should
inflame the zeal of the godly to contend for the truth the more earnestly, and
to resist all the vices of the time; so it shows, that they can hardly have
any truth of grace in them, that are so easily borne down with the stream of
evil example, and are so apt to follow the fashion of the world.

Doct. 2. Chastity may be in married persons as well as in single persons: as
here, wives are said to be chaste in conversation, though they withold not
due benevolence from their husbands. God himself has freed the coming
together of man and wife from the aspersion of impurity, in that he has said,
that marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled. And this shows the
wonderful indulgence of God, that for the respect he bears to his own
institution of marriage, and for the necessity of marriage for the propagation
of mankind, and prevention of fornication, is pleased to bear with, and cover,
and not impute the many frailties, follies, vanities, and wickednesses are
found between man and wife. And withal, we may hence see reason to condemn
their doctrine, as a doctrine of Devils, that forbid marriage as an impure
thing, and such as hinders holiness: and the blemish will never be wiped away
from some of the Ancients, who, to establish their own Idol of I know not what
virginity, have written most wickedly, and most basely against marriage.

Quest. But what then? does God allow any kind of coming together, so it be
between man and wife?

Ans. No, he forbids coming together in the time of the woman's separation for
her courses, Ezech. 18.6. Nor does he allow of brutish sensuality, though it
pass between man and wife: Note.
for though God bear with many things, yet the chastity he imposes does not
only restrain foreign beds, but moderateth even the excesses of concupiscence
in married persons; so as in those things their conversation ought to be a
conversation with fear.

Doct. 3. The practice of the duties of the second Table adorn religion as
well as the duties of piety in the first Table.

Doct. 4. Some observe, that a chaste conversation is especially charged upon
the woman: which must be warily understood; for God hates whoredom in men as
well as women. But yet it is true, that some sins, as they are abominable in
any, so they are much more in women, as we see in swearing and drunkenness: so
it is true of filthiness in the woman: and therefore the whorish woman is
called a strange woman in the Proverbs. But I think it is not safe to
restrain the sense of this place, or other the like places, so; but I take the
meaning of the Apostle to be, so to commend chastity in the wife, as that
which is necessary in all, both men and women. And so I come to consider of
Chastity, and so would show, first, the motives to it: secondly, the means to
preserve it: and thirdly, the way how Chastity may be manifested and made
known to others.

Motives to chastity.
For the first: many things should persuade with a Christian to preserve
chastity, and to avoid whoredom and bodily lusts. First, it is the special
will of God, and a special part of their sanctification, to avoid fornication,
1 These. 4.3. Secondly, the promises of God, all of them, should allure men to
perfect their holiness, and to avoid all filthiness both of flesh and spirit,
2 Cor. 7.1. Thirdly, the hatefulness of the nature of the sin of fornication
and whoredom should deter^e Christians from the committing of it. This is an
heinous crime, an iniquity to be punished by the Judges, Job 31.11. These lusts
are lusts of the Gentiles, 1 Pet. 4.3. A sin not so much as to be named amongst
Christians, Ephesians. 5.3. A sin that utterly corrupts natural honesty, Pro. 6.27,
29. It is a sin not only against the soul, but against the body of a man; even
that body that was bought with the blood of Jesus Christ, and was made for God,
and is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and is a member of Christ's mystical body,
1 Cor. 6.15. to the end. Fourthly, the consideration of the cause of this sin
should abash men: it is a work of the flesh, even a fruit of a corrupted and
filthy nature, Gal. 5.22. Fifthly, the effects of whoredom are very fearful,
for it is a sin that defiles a man, Mat. 15. and it makes a man unfit for the
company of any Christian, 1 Cor. 5.9. It brings dishonor, and a wound can
never be blotted out, Pro. 6.33. and it causes the fearful curse of God upon
men, Heb. 13 4. and that both upon their states and souls in this life. By
means of a whorish woman a man may be brought to a morsel of bread, Pro.
6.26. It is a sin will root out all a man's increase, Job 31.11, 12. And upon
the soul it brings a fearful senselessness and disability to make use of the
means of salvation. Whoredom and wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.11. and God
casts them many times into a reprobate sense, Romans 1. so as they are past
feeling, Ephesians. 4.18. so as the adulterous person goes about like a Fool to the
stocks, or like an Ox to the slaughter, Pro. 7.^2. In a word, the adulterous
person destroys his own soul, Pro. 6.32. y^^, which is worst of all, it
deprives men of the kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9. and casts both body and
soul into the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Pro. 9. ult. Rev.
21.8. and 22.15.

Preservatives of ch^stity.
For the second: the means to preserve chastity in married persons are these:
First, they must labor to excite and nourish matrimonial love one to another,
P^^. ^.18.19. Secondly, they must do as Job did, make a covenant with their
eyes, and not carelessly give liberty to their senses, to wander about after
vain objects, Job 31.1. Thirdly, they must store their heads and hearts with
Gods word, especially such words of God as do give reasons and motives to
dissuade from this sin, Pro. 2.1, 3, 4, 11, 12, 16, 17, Psalm. 119.9. Fourthly,
they must continually meditate of their mortality, and that they are but
pilgrims and strangers here, and must come to judgment, 1 Pet. 2.11. Eccles.
11.9. Fifthly, they must, by confession, and godly sorrow, and prayer, crucify
these first risings of inward lusts; and so by repentance for the lust of the
heart prevent the filthiness of the flesh, Gal. 5.24. Sixthly, they must walk
in love, that is, exercise themselves in a Christian and profitable society
with such as fear God, Ephesians. 5.1, 3, 4. Lastly, they must with all care and
conscience avoid all the occasions of this sin; such as are,

1. Idleness, that sin of Sodom,, Ezekiel. 46.49.

2. Fullness of bread, and drunkenness, as is noted in the same place. They
must beat down their own bodies, 1 Cor. 9.27.

3. The desire to be rich: for the love of money breeds noisome lusts, 1 Timothy
6.9.

4. Ignorance of God and his truth, Ephesians. 4.17, 18.

5. Evil company, especially the society of such as are filthy.

6. Lascivious attire, and filthy dressing; such as are strange colors, and
naked breasts: this is whoredom between the breasts, Hos. 2.

7. Lascivious pictures, and profane representations of filthy practices; such
as are expressed by those wicked stage players, against which the very light of
nature pleads.

8. Chambering and wantonness, and all provocations to lusts, Romans 13.13.

For the third point; How a chaste wife may be discerned.
if you ask how those husbands could behold the chaste conversation of the
wives: I answer, they might know that they were chaste, both by their modesty
in secret in the use of the marriage bed, and by their strict care to behave
themselves modestly and soberly abroad, in the family, or in other places, by
their great conscience to avoid all occasions of evil, when they discerned
that they did abhor the society and presence of light and vain persons, and
detested all the provocations to lust, of what kind soever. The next verse
shows one way how they may know they were chaste, even by their care to avoid
pride and vanity in attire. Such men as have wives that are proud, and follow
the fashion of the world in attire, or delight in vain company, and haunt
stage-plaies, are fools if they be over-confident of their wives chastity,
unless it be in case of necessity, where they want either beauty, or
temptation, or opportunity. And it is a probable argument of a chaste mind in
the wife, when she keeps house, and is diligent, and careful, and painful
in the business of the family, and desires to please her husband in all
things, and willing to be subject to his will.

Thus of a chaste conversation. A conversation with fear follows.

Some refer this fear to the carnal husbands, and make the sense thus: While
they with fear behold your chaste conversation. It is true, that wicked men
feel a great deal of fear many times in themselves, when they look upon the
godly, and get the fear, as the fruit of their watching, and prying, and
observing. That wicked men are smitten many times with fear many Scriptures
show, as, Deuteronomy 28.10. 1 Samuel 18.15. Psalm. 102.15. The reasons why they are
afraid are diverse:

1. Natural conscience does homage to the image of God stamped upon the
natures and works of the godly: Reasons why wicked men are sinitten with a
servi^e fear.
when they see in them that which is above the ordinary nature of men, or their
expectation, they are afraid of the name of God, which is called upon by them,
Deuteronomy. 28.9, 10.

2. They fear, when they see that they behave themselves wisely and
religiously, and that God is with them, and they prosper, notwithstanding all
the oppositions are made against them, 1 Samuel 18.12, 15, 29. Neh. 6.16. Psalm.
48.4. Zach. 9.5.

3. They fear, because the good conversation of the godly does rebuke their
ill conversation; the chaste conversation of the wives amazeth the hearts of
the husbands, when they think of their own unchaste conversation: so the
piety, patience, mercy, and goodness expressed by godly men, makes the hearts of
wicked men ache within them.

4. They fear extremely, because the goodness of the conversations of the
godly is to them a very token of their own perdition, if they continue in the
state they are in, Phil. 1.28.

Quest. But what do wicked men do, when they feel these fears?

Answ. Either they strive to drive them out, and forget them; or else they
strive to imagine scandalous and vile things, to oppose their wicked surmises,
or false accusations, against the glory of the godly life of such as are good,
as the Pharisees did against Christ, and the wicked Courtiers against David: or
else they use all means to remove the godly further often from them, as Amaziah
did to Amos, and Saul to David, in the place quoted before: or else they
increase in hatred and malice, as their observation of the good hand of God
upon his servants does increase, 1 Samuel 18.15, 29. or else, as men conquered by
the truth, they give glory to God, and confess the wickedness of their own
estate, and be won, as the husbands here, by the conversation of the wives. The
use should be, to stir up godly Christians to look to their own salvation
the more: and to hold on, and do good still, and walk wisely toward them
that are without, and keep their way: for hereby they shall not only convince
and confute carnal persons, but so daunt them, as their good lives will often
make their very hearts to ache within them, and the rather because this effect
may follow the conversation of women as well as men, and servants as well as
masters, inferiors as well as superiors. Thus of fear, as it is referred to
the Husbands. But the most Divines do refer this fear to the Wives, as they
were Christians; and so thereby is noted a second thing in their conversations,
which did much affect their unbeleeving husbands, and that was their holy fear
which they expressed in their lives.

Fear two (...).
Now this conversation with fear may two ways be considered; the one, as it
was common to these women with other Christians, and so it belongs to other
Christians as well as to them; and the other was, as it was particularly
required in them as wives.

For the first, a conversation with fear is required in all the godly: so
says Solomon, Blessed is the man that fears always. And Paul says, Work
out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. and again, Be not high
minded, but fear Romans 12.3. This conversation with fear was in Paul, 1 Cor.
2.3. It is required, that the mighty men of the earth should serve the Lord in
trembling, Psalm. 2.11. this is a fruit of godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.11. Now in our
conversations we are to express both the fear of men, and the fear of God.
There is a fear of men to be showed by other Christians, as well as wives, in
their conversation: as children must fear their parents. L^vit. ^9.3. and
subjects must converse with fear, and show it in their car^^age toward their
rulers; and so all inferiors must express a conversation with fear toward
their superiors. Hence the Apostle says, Give fear to whom fear belongs,
Romans 13.7. so such as have lesser gifts, must submit themselves to such as have
greater gifts, in fear, Ephs. 5.21.

But the special fear we should show in our conversation should be the fear
of God; and so a conversation with fear does import more than barely to fear
God: for it imports, that it must be by such a fear as does appear to the
view of others, and such a fear as is continual. We read of a Spirit of the
fear of God, Esa. 11.3. and there be other phrases of Scripture that express
this conversation with fear: as where we are charged to be in the fear of
God all the day long, Pro. 23.17. and the godly are said to walk in the fear
of God, Acts 11.31. God was said to be the fear of the Patriarchs, Genesis
31.42, 53. so also Eccles. 8.12. Mal. 2.5.

Quest. But what cause have Christians to show so much fear in their
conversations?

Answ. They have reason to fear always,

1. Because of their own insufficiency to perform those holy duties are
required of them, in such a holy manner as they desire, or ought to do:
Reasons why we ought to express this f^^re of God in our conversation.
this made Paul so fearful, 1 Cor. 2.3.

2. Because of the danger that the godly themselves are in, if this fear be
not in them; as we see by the miserable instance of the Apostle Peter, who fell
shamefully when he shook off this fear, and grew bold and confident of his
own strength: and therefore they that stand are charged to fear^ lest they
fall, Romans 11.

3. Because of the many and fearful adversaries our souls and religion have
in this world. We be to wrestle with principalities, and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.10. 2 Cor. 11.3. and our task is, to overcome
the world and the flesh: which has many difficulties in it, considering the
multitudes of evil examples and scandals are in the world, and the great
treachery of our own flesh.

4. Because of the lamentable reproach of the Heathen, and such as are without
God and Christ, of all sorts, and in all places; which would be powered out, if
we should miss it in our conversation, if our foot should but slip, Neh. 5.9.

5. Because of the dreadful relation in which we stand unto God, who has
authority over us, and is our Master and Father, Mal. 1.6. and is able to kill
both body and soul, Mat. 10.28. and is the Lord God Almighty, and the Kings of
Saints; and he is only holy, and of most pure eyes, and has power over all
Nations, Revel. 15.3, 4. and does wondrous things. He has placed the sand for
the bounds of the sea, by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it: though
the waves thereof toss themselves and roar, yet they cannot prevail, Ier.
5.22. He is the true God, he is the living God, and an everlasting King: at
his wrath the earth shall trembl^, and the Nations shall not be able to abide
his indignation, Ier. 10.7, 10. so Job 31.23. David said his flesh trembled for
fear of God, Psalm. 119, verse. 120.

6. Because of the fearful falling away, and rejecting of many Churches and
particular persons, that yet have before flourished, for a time, in the
professing of true religion, Ier. 3.8. Romans 11.20.21.

7. Because of the many precious things, and spiritual treasures may be lost
in deed, or in show, if we do not attend diligently, and with great ear and
fear, Heb. 2.1. and 4.1.

Quest. But how must we show this fear in our conversation?

Answ. It must be showed many ways, both in the ordering of our lives toward
God, and in the disposing of our conversation toward men.

Toward God, we express this fear,

By what ways we must show this fear of God.
1. By the sobriety of our minds, resting in his revealed will, and not daring
to meddle with his secrets, Romans 12.3.

2. By receiving his messengers with fear and trembling, 2 Cor. 7.15. not
daring to contest with them, or stand upon our private conceits and opinions,
but rather to make haste to beseech God, and to repent, when they reprove us,
or threaten us, Ier. 29.19. Exodus 14.31. Ezra 9.4. and 10.1, 2, 3. at the best
mistrusting our selves, and our own wisdom and conceits, and showing our
selves careful to come to the light, that it may be manifest our deeds are
wrought in God, Job 37. ult. Pro. 3.7.

3. By showing all awefull care and devotion in Gods service and worship,
expressing all reverence, Psalm. 2.11. and 5.7. and striving to make glorious
conceptions of God in our hearts, Rev. 15.4. and 14.7. not daring to omit any
time or opportunity of serving God, Acts 10.2. and avoiding all rashness, and
vain behavior, in words, or vows, or carriage, Eccles. 5.2. to the eighth
verse; not mentioning the very names or titles of God, without great reverence,
Deuteronomy. 28.58. and remembering Gods presence, especially at the times and in the
places of his worship, Mal. 2.5. Eccles. 8.12, 13.

4. By showing respect to all Gods Commandments, endeavoring to keep not
one, or some few, but all the statutes of our God, Deuteronomy. 6.2. and 31.12. When
our consciences are afraid, even for the respect we bear to God, to bawke one
of the least Commandments, or to be corrupted with any filthiness, either in
flesh or spirit, or to come short of any goodness is required of us, 2 Cor.
7.1. being afraid to commit those sins are committed without fear, either by
persons near to us, or by the most men of all sorts, Ezekiel. 18.14. Mal. 3.16.
And for the manner of our obedience to Gods will, this fear expresses it
self notably in two things: first, that it does not only make us avoid or
leave evil, (which in some cases wicked men may do) but it makes us loathe
and hate evil, Pro. 8.13. and 16.6. causing us to eschew it, as we would any
thing we account poisonfull or deadly, Psalm. 34. Secondly, it makes us not
only do good duties, but it makes us work hard at them; afraid to omit any
thing enjoined us, or to have our task undone when God should call us to a
reckoning, Acts 10. 35. Phil. 2.12.

Toward men we express this fear of God also diverse ways: as,

By what ways we are to express this fear of God toward men.
1. By a continual care of innocence, avoiding all courses of injury, though
they might be committed with any color of right; as oppression, Levit. 25.17.
usury, Lev. 25.36.

2. By pity and mercy to Gods creatures indistresse: so Cornelius is said to be
a man fearing God, because he gave much alms, Acts 10.12. Job 6.14.

3. By reverence to Gods image in his creatures, even in the lowest kind: as
by rising up before the hoare head, and honoring the face of the old man,
Levit. 19.32. not daring to curse the deaf, or put a stumbling block before
the blind, Lev. 19.14.

4. By all possible care of the faithful discharge of the particular callings
they are set in, for the good of others, as is required in servants, Col. 3.22.
especially, Ephesians. 6.5. and Magistrates, 2 Samuel, 23.3. 2 Cor. 19.6, 7.

5. By a tender and compassionate care to recover such as are spiritually
fallen, and to preserve such as are in danger to fall, from the simplicity that
is in Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 11.3. Jude 23.

6. By an awefull endeavor to give no offense, neither to them that are
without, nor to any of the godly, 1 Cor. 10.3. avoiding all ways of
provocation or contention, even in civil life, Psalm. 34.12.

Now it must be remembered, that of all those ways by which fear should be
showed in our conversation, in this Text those only can be intended which are
subject to the observation of others.

The Uses may be, first, to show how miserably the lives of all sorts of men
are faulty in the want of this fear: for hereby it is apparent, that these
sorts of men following have not this fear of God in their conversations: as,

1. Such as be masters of opinions, What sorts of men have not Gods fear.
and dare boldly and securely obtrude their erroneous conceits and new opinions
upon the Church of God, straining their wits, for applause, to go beyond Gods
revealed will, Romans 12.3.

2. Such as are usually well pleased with themselves and their doings, and are
not troubled at their own insufficiency and infirmities: God cannot abide such
as are wise in their own eyes, Job 37. ult.

3. Such as live securely in known sins, and bless themselves in their
hearts, when their iniquity is found worthy to be hated, Ps. 36.1. Ier. 44.10.
Mal. 3.5.

4. Such as go on in vicious courses, in the abuse of their liberty in things
indifferent, notwithstanding the frequent admonitions of godly and grave
Divines; and seem rather willing to forsake their own mercies, than leave
their foolish vanities, Exodus 14.31. Job 28.28. Pro. 13.13. and 14. 16. and 1,
29 30.

5. Such as take no notice of Gods great judgments which are in the world, and
will not declare his works, Psalm. 64.9.

6. Such as are careless of prayer, and see not need to seek unto God, but
restrain prayer, Job 15.4. And so it is of the constant and wilful omission
of all the service of God.

7. By not pitying the a^flicted, Job 6.14.

I omit to reckon up more particulars, because by the contrary conversation to
that which is required in the former rules, men may see that they are far out
of the way. Yet it is the more lamentable, that this conversation with fear is
not so usually found even amongst the godly themselves, neither in their
awefull reverence of behavior and continuance in Gods service, nor by their
humble, and careful, and mortified behavior toward men.

Again, by the serious consideration of the former explication we may gather,
that there are diverse fears ought not to be found in our conversations; as the
fear of crosses in our callings, or of the reproaches and oppositions of men
for well-doing, or a superstitious fear of transgressing where there is no Law
but merely the wills of men; and such as that fear which through unbelief is
conceived in the hearts of many weak Christians, and does much oppress them,
and that is the fear of Gods acceptance of their best works; so judging
themselves, as they withal judge of God unrighteously, while they remember not
his promises made to his servants, concerning his acceptance of their desires
and endeavors.

Lastly, such as have attained to this conversation with fear should much
rejoice, and labor to preserve it with all care, because it is a thing which
is not only lovely in the sight of God, but is very amiable, and of a winning
quality amongst men, as this Text imports.

And thus of this conversation with fear, as it concerns those women as they
were Christians. Now there is another kind of fear which is required of them
as they are wives: for so it is expressly charged upon all wives, that they
should fear their husbands, Wherein wives show their fear of their husbands.
Ephesians. 5. ult. And this fear they must show,

1. By giving reverent terms and titles, as Sarah did to Abraham.

2. By avoiding all things by wisdom she can guess, or by experience she can
find to be cross to the nature or desire of her husband: even striving to
avoid what might provoke his very infirmities, giving soft answers when he is
angry, and forbearing passion and unquietness, even with others, if he be
present.

3. By a care to show all faithfulness, diligence, care, and tender respect of
him, and his good, in all things in their power and charge. And so it appears
in the negative, what wives do not fear their husbands, viz. such as care not
to be daily guilty of such faults as cross, or grieve, or vex their husbands;
such as give them unseemely titles, out of the rudeness of their familiarity,
or the distemper of their passions; such whose feet will not keep their own
house, to attend their callings; such as blaze abroad their husbands
infirmities, whereas they should have been the glory of the man; such as are
apt to make the worst constructions of the doubtful actions of their husbands;
and such as are inquisitive, and still desirous to have accounts given them of
all their husbands do.

Verse 3. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the
hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on of apparel.

Verse 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price.


THese words contain the third thing charged upon wives by the Apostle in his
exposition, and that is, their comely dressing of themselves; which he sets
down negatively, showing how they must not be dressed, ver. 3. and
affirmatively* showing what does most adorn them, ver. 4.

In the negative observe what is expressly prohibited, and then what is
impliedly allowed. That which he expressly forbids he referres to three heads.
The first concerns the natural abuse of the ornaments that by nature are upon
the body, and instanceth in the hair, which God has given to women for a
covering. And the abuse lies in the plaiting of the hair; by which he means
not the tying up of the hair after a decent manner, but the artificial laying
of it out in plaits, or curles, or locks, or the like. Their devices about
their hair are so many, as we cannot reckon them by the names they give them.

The second concerns the excess of cost about their dressing, synecdochically
expressed by the putting about of gold, and pearls, and such like rich jewels.

The third concerns the vanity of fashions in attire, in the last words, of
putting on of apparel.

Now for the meaning of the Apostle in this negative prohibition, I find three
opinions. The one is of such as think the Apostle did absolutely forbid the
things named, but yet that it was a temporary prohibition, intended to bind
them of that time, not to bind us that live now. The other is of such as
think that he does not simply forbid these things, but only comparatively;
meaning* that in comparison of the inward d^essing we should not have so much
care of these outward ornaments: or about dressing, our care should not be so
much for the outward dressing, as for the inward. The third is of such as
conceive that the Apostle does simply, and for ever, forbid these things named,
and all of like sort, and that for ever. The opinion of the first sort of men
is rejec^^^ by all sorts of Divines, as very foolish and erroneous. The second
opinion has Cajetan a Papist for the author of it; but is rejected by Divines
of his own sect, for this reason, because if that were the Apostles meaning,
his prohibition would teach the most sober and modest women in their apparel,
as well as the most licentious; for ever the most modest are tied to respect
the inward dressing above the outward: which cannot be the Apostles meaning.
The third opinion is the opinion almost of all the Ancient and modern Writers.
But because I will not take power to bind your consciences only by the
opinions of men, therefore afterward I will show you by express Scripture,
when apparel or dressing becomes vicious: but first, I would consider of the
doctrine in general.

Doct. It seems to be a clear truth, that Christian women should, in the
dressing of themselves, take heed of ostentation, costlinesse, and vain
fashions, and that curious desire after the adorning of their bodies. And
though the Text mentions only wives, yet it must needs also be true of
unmarried women much more. For wives many times lay the fault of their vice
upon their husbands, that they do it either by their command, or to please
them: but that vain excuse is wholly taken away from the unmarried, because
they have none upon whom to lay their faults that ways. And therefore the
practice of the younger women is the more abominable in our times, when we see
that usually they are more vile and excessive in cost and vain fashions, than
the elder women. And the pretense, that it is to get them husbands, is
devilish; for if their natural comeliness will not set them out, they are
wicked deceivers, that make themselves to be that in dressing, which they are
not in nature: and those men are excessively foolish, that judge of the
fitness of women to make wives of only by their clothes, and not by the
persons, or gifts. And further, it is out of doubt that if these things in
apparel are ill in wives, they are as ill in husbands, or rather worse. What
can be more abominable to the view, than the observation of the most monstrous
effeminatenes^e that is found in many of our Gentry, that daily betake
themselves to most womanish tricks in their dressing of themselves? The^e are
unclean Devils in the flesh, and no Christians.

Now there are many reasons why Christian women, and so men also* should not
pride themselves, or be any way vain and fantastical in their dressing or
apparel: and why they should not be curious about their clothes, or the
comeliness comes from them.

1. Because our clothes are a continual remembrance of our shame. El^v^n
rea^o^^ against v^ine ^tt^re in ^omen.
A thief may as well be proud of his halter, as we of our garments; for it
was sin brought in raiment. If Adam had never sinned, he had never needed
raiment.

2. Because curiosity and cost is against the first institution of apparel.
God himself made the first garments that were made, and left a pattern to
follow. Now he clothed our Parents with the skins of Beasts; shunning of
purpose, either cost or superfluous ornaments: and I suppose ye will grant
they were as great and as good as any of us. God attired them in a habit became
sorrow and the estate of banished men.

3. Because God has forbidden this curiosity of dressing in women, at all
times, and in all places of his worship. For when the Apostle, (1 Timothy 2.) had
commanded men to pray in all pl^ces, and given them in charge diverse things
they must look to at the time of Gods worship, he then turns to women, and
charge them to look to the clothes they wear when they worship God;
expressly prohibiting rich and vain apparel, ver. 9, 10. And good reason; for
such as either publicly or pri^^tly come to worship God, should come to him in
the habit of suppliants and petitioners, seeing they come, or should come, to
beseech God to forgive them their sin^es: which they should ask with tears
and groans, as such as know no happiness if God be not reconciled to them.
Would any man regard a Beggar if he came to ask alms in rich clothes? and
can any man be so over-growne with dotage, as to think God does not care in
what colors or fashions we worship or entreat him? Besides, we come not into
the house of God to show our selves to men, but unto God amongst men. Yea in
private, how dare fantastical women stand before God to pray, when they carry
upon their backs such Ensigns of pride and vanity? And hereby we may discern
the horrible wickedness of these times, which are just opposite to Paul's
direction: for we see men and women cloth themselves with the greatest cost
and vanity when they are to appear before God in his house. What says a
Father to such creatures as these? What come you for into this place? this is
the house of God: do you come only to show your selves to men? this is no
dancing school, nor wedding house, nor yet any play house, that you should
come hither in these histrionicall and strumpet-like attires, says Chrysostom
upon this second chapter of the first of Timothy.

4. Because our bodies we are so curious about are but houses of clay, and were
made of the dust or mire of the earth, and will be shortly dissolved: and
therefore we should not so sin against our precious souls, as to mis-spend our
cares, cost, and affections, upon that which in it self is so vile: and the
apparel we put on the body will last but a while, whereas the dressing of the
soul will last for ever.

5. Because of the absence of the Bridegroom our Lord Jesus Christ. Is the
Husband so far from home, and can a chaste Spouse be taken up with such
affectation of curious and vain dressing? What more evident sign of a
strumpet, than for to dress her self curiously, and for the show to men, when
her husband is far from home? Shall we so sin against the Lord Jesus, now
absent from us in the body, and so mind earthly things, and set our affections
upon the vanities of the world, as if we had no sense of his absence, and did
not care for him now he is gone?

6. Because these vanities in apparel are so grievously threatened by the Lord.
He will visit them that wear strange apparel, Zeph. 1.8. And what woman can
read the third of Esaias, and not tremble at the wrath of the Lord, if she be
guilty of any such vanities? And the Prophet was but a Novice in describing
vain fashions, if that description were to be applied to our times; for those
vanities are now become the dressing of such as are more sober. Oh what a world
of wicked devices are there now beyond that Catalogue! Those were wicked women;
but now they exceed the wickedness of the wicked. Let these creatures take
heed of vain interpretations of that place. They may deceive themselves, but
they shall find that God will not be mocked. They dawbe with untempered
mortar, that tell them, that those things condemned were not sinful, or that
God was not displeased with them.

7. Because excess and vanity in apparel has been condemned by the greatest
lights in the Christian world, and that with great bitterness of censure. I
will give instance in some of their censures: Cyprian said, They that put on
vain and gorgeous apparel cannot put on Christ. Gregory said, Let no man
think that in the study of precious apparel sin can be wanting. Ambrose
says, That proud attire obtaines nothing of God, and causes that men never
think well of the parti^ using it: for, says he, what wise man does not
abhor a woman proudly dressed? and therefore much more God, their Creator,
cannot abide to see that bodi^ which he made free, to be chained to metals: he
means gold, and pearls, and such like; and adds, The more they are liked of
some men, the ^ore they are hated of God. Tertullian and Cyprian have written
whole Treatises against the apparel of women. Yea Cyprian and Augustine say,
that superfluous apparel is worse than whoredom; and they give this reason,
because whoredom only corrupts chastity, but this corrupts nature. What
Jerome thinks of it you shall hear afterward. What should I reckon more
testimonies, seeing in all ages of the Christian Church these things in the
apparel of women have been bitterly condemned? yea the very Popish Writers
do bitterly inveigh against vain and superfluous apparel; and the very
heathen men did so also.

8. It should the more dissuade women from following foolish vanities in
adorning themselves, because usually where these things are noted by way of
description in Scripture, the parties of whom it is written were notorious
wicked persons, and usually Whores; as it is noted of Thamar and Iezabel, and
the Whore in the Revelation, chapter 17.3. and for notable wickedness, as the
women, Esaias 3. and Dives, Luke 16.

9. This care about the adorning of the body does not agree to the simplicity
that is in Christ Jesus. Godly Christians have their beauty within: they are
not such as will contend with the men of the world about finenesse, or
greatness, or worldly praises, or any outward ornaments. Nor do they walk
with a right foot to the Gospel, that are conformable to the men of this world:
there is great dissimulation to profess so strict a life as the Gospel does
require, and yet take such liberty in the things of this world.

10. About the abu^e of apparel many sins meet together, as vanity, pride,
evil concupiscence, contempt of others, immodesty, and the like.

11. There are many evil effects of vanity and excess in apparel, both in
respect of God, and themselves, and others: in respect of God and his service,
vain and proud apparel breeds carelessness, and abatement of that holy fear
and zeal should be showed in Gods service, and it causes the name of God to
be blasphemed, and the good way of God to be evil spoken of. And for
themselves, by following foolish vanities they bring Gods visiting hand in
judgment upon them, Zeph. 1.8. and withal, they forsake their own mercies.
Jonah 2.8. And for the effects upon others, they are diverse. For first, by
their example they do much hurt, both in provoking others to the imitation of
their vanity, and by inflaming evil concupiscence, and filthy desires: and,
which is the more grievous, parents many times by their examples infect the
minds of their own children, and corrupt their posterity; yea, we see many
daughters made worse than their mothers. Again, excess in apparel causes in
many the oppression of their Tenants, and fraudulent courses, that they may
maintain themselves in that wicked excess and vanity. Besides, it destroies
in diverse all respect of the poor and hospitality. Lastly, do we not see many
families destroyed and overthrown by these courses, so as their posterity is
utterly defeated of their means and inheritances by the riot of their parents
in their apparel?

Now it remains that I should show out of the Scriptures when apparel, or
dressing, or putting on of apparel becomes vicious. And that will appear to
be many ways:

1. The dressing of the hair of the head is judged to be vicious out of this
Text, when it is plaited; Fourteen ways by which app^r^ll or dressing our
s^l^^s becomes vicious.
which is by Interpreters conceived to mean all that artificial dressing of
the head that imploies the hair beyond the natural use of it, only for vain
show. The natural use of the hair is to be a covering: now when the hair is
with curiosity and by vain inventions turned into vain forms, by plaiting,
curling, or other ways which we cannot name, or to fall into dangling-lockes,
like to the hair of Russians, the dressing is then vicious. For Ba^il says in
general of all apparel and dressing, that whatsoever in these things is not
for profit or necessity, is vain and superfluous. And Jerome expressly
condemns the hanging of the hair below the forehead. Plutarch records, that
the Romans, when a woman was to be dressed at a wedding, used to separate and
plaite the hair of her head with the point of a Spear, to show how much they
hated curiosity in dressing. Now if the plaiting of the hair be so ill, how
abominable is the use of strange hair, that is, hair that is not their own?
This is generally condemned, and Nazianzen, amongst the Ancients, sharply
reproves it.

2. All apparel is vicious, if it be strange, Zeph. 1.8. Now strange apparel
is not new apparel, but such apparel as is not used in the Churches where we
live, and has not an apparent comeliness and utilitie in it: some apparel,
though newly invented, has a manifest comeliness and commodiousnesse stamped
upon it, so as it is approved of all, both good and bad; this is not strange,
though it be new. Again, we may observe, that other apparel, when it first
comes in, it comes in like a monster, the natural conscience in all men
detesting it: this is out of question sinful; as for the reason here alleged,
so because it adornes not. Such is yellow starch.

3. All apparel and dressing is vicious when it is against shamefac'^nesse and
modesty, and has in it manifest provocation to lust, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10. such as
is the leaving of the breasts naked in whole or in part, and the short wearing
of their clothes in women. The Prophet Hosea complains of adultery between
the breasts, Hos. 2. Also against shamefac'tnesse is it when woman leave the
dressing proper to their sex, and go attired like men, Deuteronomy. 22.5. A Father
says, that they which dress themselves with an intention and desire to please
men, or to provoke any, they offer up their own souls to the Devil. And
Hierome says, that if a man or a woman adorn themselves so as they provoke
men to look after them, though no evil follow upon it, yet the party shall
suffer eternal damnation, because they offered poison to others, though none
would drink of it. Oh how many souls may be poisoned with lust by thee, whose
sins thou art therefore guilty of!

4. All apparel that exceeds in cost the state or degree of the person that
wears it, is vicious; and that the Apostle in this Text condemns under the
prohibition of gold.

5. All apparel that is taken up from the fashion and example of the world,
and is not judged useful by the most religious and sober minded, Romans 12.2.
And though some that profess religion, out of weakness, or special
corruption, or because they are hypocrites, do follow such fashions, yet that
allows them not, so long as they are the proper characters of the men of this
world.

6. When apparel is not of good report, Phil. 4.8. 1 Cor. 10.38. when it
either causes wicked men to speak evil, or reproach; or godly men are
grieved or offended; or religion it self is reviled for their sakes.

7. When it provokes the party to pride and haughtiness, or contempt of
others, or has the appearance of such evil in the judgment of others, Esaias
3. 1 These. 5.

8. When it becomes not good works, or hinders them, 1 Timothy 2.9. as when
men restrain mercy to the poor, or oppress their Tenants, or defraud other
men, only to mainetaine themselves or theirs in outward pomp and gallantnesse
of apparel. This is the horrible sin of the Gentry in many places of this
kingdom.

9. When it is condemned and reproved by godly Ministers, that are both wise
and learned: for their testimony ought to be received, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10. and it is
a vile sin to vex them and grieve them by our obstinacy; yea, though they
were not able to make so full demonstration, yet when they reprove such things
out of a spiritual jealousy, and fear they corrupt their hearers, they ought
to be heard, Heb. 13.18. 1 Cor. 11.2.3.

10. When the time that might be profitably spent is consumed by the tedious
curiosity of dressing, Ephesians. 5.16. as it is with those that have not time for
God^ worship in private, or cannot come time enough to the Church, or neglect
their calling, by being so long in dressing.

11. When it dishonours the body of a man, Col. 2. ult. as when it is slovenly
or sluttish, or is taken up of mere singularity and affectation of the praise
of mortification, and tends to restrain Christian liberty in others. For no
pretense may uncomely apparel be used; for 1 Timothy 2.9. it is required that the
apparel of women be comely; for so the original word signifies. But
especially uncomely apparel is then most vile, when it is worn with a purpose
to deceive, as the Prophet complained of such as wear a ro^gh garment to
deceive.

12. The purity of a Christian life should avoid all dressings or fashions
which had their original from infamous persons, such as are the fashions of
Whores, or debauched creatures; and such a beginning it is said commonly Yellow
starch had. What fellowship between light and darkness, righteousness and
unrighteousness, Christ and Belial? If we would have God to love us, we must
separate and come out from amongst them, and touch no unclean thing.

13. When such apparel is worn as is contrary to the wholesome laws of men:
for we are bound to submit our selves to every ordinance of man for Gods sake,
1 Pet. 2.13.

14. Lastly, when the party that uses such apparel or dressing is condemned
in himself, and has his own conscience accusing or disliking it, or is no^
fully assured that he does not sin. Whatsoever is not of Faith in those things
is sin, Romans 14.

Verse 4. But let it be the hidden man of the heart, etc.


HItherto of that adorning they should not be curious or costly in. Now in this
verse he shows, in the affirmative, what apparel or dressing they should be
careful of, and that is the adorning of their souls, and the apparelling of
the inward man. In the words three things may be noted:

1. What must be apparelled, viz. the hidden man of the heart.

2. With what it must be adorned: which he shows both in general, and in
particular; in general, it must be with incorruptible things; in particular,
it must be with a meek and quiet spirit.

3. The reason, viz. because such apparel is very rich in Gods account.

The fir^^ thing then is, what must be apparelled* viz. the man of the heart
The man of the heart. This is a kind of speaking not used in any place of
Scriptu^e but this only: this Apostle only uses this kind of expressing
himself.

Now concerning the man of the heart I would consider of six things:

1. What he is. 2. Whence he is, or his original. 3. In what he excels the
outward man. 4. What condition he is in by nature. 5. H^w he may be mended, or
made better. 6. How we may know when the man of the heart is right.
^or the first: Wh^t the man of the ^eart i^.
by the man of the heart he means the same the Apostle Paul ^oth by the
inward man, 2 Cor. 4.16. and the inward man is the soul or he^rt of man Thus
^e speaks of a Jew that is outward, and a Jew that is in^ar^, Romans 2.28, 29.
Now the heart is and may well be called the man for diverse reasons:

1. In respect of definition. For the definition of a man agrees to the heart
of man, though there were no body: for God was the God of Abraham, and Abraham
was, and was a living man many hundred years after his body was in the grave,
Mat. 22. And hence it is that unto the soul or heart of man in Scriptures is
attributed all things that the outward man can do; as life, Psalm. 22.27.
language, Eccles. 9.1. Psalm. 14.1. and 36.1. praying to God, Psalm. 37.4.
receiving messages from God; as when the Prophet is bidden to speak to the
heart of Jerusalem, Esaias 40. serving of God, etc.

2. In respect of dominion. The heart is the man, because it disposes the way
of man, Pro. 16.9. and rules the outward man: for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. And therefore Solomon says, that from the heart
comes life, Pro. 4.23.

3. In respect of acceptance. The heart is that which God especially respects
in man: it is the heart he looks upon, 1 Samuel 17.7. He tries the heart, and,
as Solomon says, He weighes the hearts of the children of men, Pro. 21.2. and
he will be served with our hearts, Josh. 24.14. and in all holy duties it is
with us in Gods account according as he sees the heart, 1 Kings 8.39. so he
requires the heart in repenting, 1 Samuel 7.3. in praying, 2 Timothy 2.22. Hos.
7.14. in hearing the Word, Luke 8. and so in every good duty. Thus of the first
point.

His original.
For the second. The man of the heart has his original from God himself. He
is the Father of Spirits, Heb. 12.8. and it was his especial glory to form
and fashion the heart in man, as diverse Scriptures show, Zech. 12.1. Psalm.
33.15. and is therefore called the God of the heart, Psalm. 37.

Wh^r^in he e^cells the outward man.
For the third. The man of the heart excells the outward man exceedingly, and
that both in substance and in privileges. As for substance in the outward man
we agree with beasts, but in the inward man we agree with Angels; in as much as
the man of the heart consists of a spiritual and immateriall essence, as well
as the Angels. And as in substance, so in properties there is great difference:
for first, the man of the heart is hidden; it can be and do all his work, and
yet be invisible. God himself has variety of conversation with the man of the
heart, that no creature else knows.

Secondly, he is free, and subject only to the God of his heart properly. No
man can come at, or govern, or command the heart of man.

Thirdly, he is properly the seat of Gods image. We are not properly like God
in our bodies, (because God has no body) but in our spirits, though it be
true, that the glory of Gods image shines through the body of man (as the light
does through the lantern) in respect whereof the outward man is said to be
made after Gods image: but else, properly, only the man of the heart is
capable of that preferment, to be made like God.

His natural condition very miserable many ways.
For the fourth point. The man of the heart by nature is in a most woeful
condition, though in those general things before mentioned he excels the
outward. His misery will appear, if we thoroughly consider, either what he is
in his qualities, or what he does in his work, or what he suffers in that
estate. If you inquire after his qualities by nature, first, he is vain,
Ephesians. 4.18. yea so vain, as the outward man dares not act what the man of the
heart entertaines. Secondly, he is foul; as Solomon says, Who can say, I have
made my heart clean? Yea he is so foul, that it is as hard a work to make
the he art of one man clean, as to create a world anew. Hence David said, O
Lord create in me a clean heart, Psalm. 51. Thirdly, he is uncircumcised and
altogether indisposed to matters of religion: he is slow, and hard to believe,
incapable and unteachable, and makes not use of the very first business in the
entrance into religion, Ier. 9.26. 1 Cor. 2.14. Fourthly, he is deceitful
above all things; he can be trusted in nothing, Ier. 17.9. Fifthly, he is
very unquiet, and never enjoyes any sound peace, nor is pleased with any
condition; and oftentimes he is like the raging Sea, Isa. 57. These are his
qualities, some of them. His works he does are most abominable: for,

1. He is always imagining mischief; Especially in his works, which are
abominable.
the whole frame of his thoughts is only evil continually, Genesis 6. There is a
world of wickedness in him ev^ry day.

2. That he may be wicked the more securely, he imprisons the truth, and
lays hold upon all the principles in his head, that might any way disturb his
course in sin, and locks them up in restraint, Romans 1.18.

3. He resists the spirit, and proclaims enmity to God, and gets out of the
way, that so the heart may be far from God: and further, the more to provoke
God he chooses strange gods, which he daily entertaines, and gives unto them
what is due unto God. These are they are called by the Prophet the Idols of the
heart, Ezech. 14.

And finally, he is the author of all the mischiefs are done by the outward
man: for it is he that gives wicked laws to the members, and makes the outward
man do all the villainies we see are done in the world, Mat. 15. Romans 7.

And as he is most wretched in what he is, and does; so is he in what he
suffers: for first, he is smitten with a most woeful Lethargy; always given
to sleeping, and in danger to go to Hell in any of these sleeps. And besides,
he lives in the dark: it is always night with him, he never sees day, Romans
13.11. and besides, the Devil possesses him, and has raised strong Holds,
and fortified himself within him, 2 Cor. 10.4. and lastly, he is an
abomination to the Lord. As nothing is more esteemed of God than the man of the
Heart, if he be right: so nothing is more loathsome to God, if he be wicked,
Prove. 11.20.

Now for the fifth point: If any ask what must be done, that the man of the
Heart may be mended and made right: I answer;

1. The heart most be prepared: prepared, I say, to return to God, By what
means the man of the ^eart may be men^ed.
1 Samuel 7.3. Now the heart is prepared two ways: first, by a sound confession
of the sins of the heart, when a man acknowledges the plague of his evil
heart before God, 1 Kings 8.38. secondly, b^ earnest prayer to God, to direct
the heart, and set it in order, and bow i^, and incline it to goodness, 2
These. 3.5. Now it is certain, that even these works of preparation are not
neglected of God; for he hears the preparations of the heart, Psalm. 10.17.

2. It must be stored with sacred notions, and knowledges out of the Word of
God. The Law must be written in the heart: the Word of God, in the sound
knowledge of it, must be hidden there, Psalm. 119.11. Ier. 31.33. Esaias 51.7. for
these sacred notions have a power to master and order the heart.

3. It must be washed and purified. It must be soundly rinsed in the tears
of true repentance, and then it will become very acceptable to God, through the
merits of Christ and his mediation, James 4.8. Ier. 4.14. God greatly delights
in the heart, when it is broken and contrite, Psalm. 34.19. and 147.3. and 51.17.

Now for the last point: The man of the heart is then right, when

1. It is true, Heb. 10.22. that is, How we may know when the man o^ the heart
is right.
when it is without the guile of fraud and dissimulation; when it is as it
seems to be in religion; when it had rather be good than seem so.

2. It is clean: for, Blessed are the pure in heart, Mat. 5. Psalm. 51.12. and
24.4. It is a sign the man of the heart is right, when it is freed from the
liking and residence of natural filthiness it was given to, and when that
continual frame of vile thoughts and lusts is dissolved; especially when it
strives after inward purity as well as outward.

3. When it is sound in Gods Statutes, Psalm. 119.80. And so it is, first, when
it is careful to get warrant for every action from the Word, and seeks
doctrine and instruction, and to that end comes to the light, Pro. 15.14. and
18.15. Secondly, when it submits it self to the form of doctrine into
which it is delivered. The heart is sound in the Word, when a man does from his
heart consent to obey, and striveth to follow the directions daily given out of
the Word, Romans 6.17. especially when it is perfect with God: and so it is when
it is a willing heart, and has respect to all Gods Commandments, and desires
to live in no sin, 1 Chronicles. 28.9.

4. When the full purpose of the heart is to cleave to God for ever; Acts 11.23.

And thus of the man of the heart, or what is to be apparelled and adorned.
With what it must be adorned follows: and in general, it must be adorned
with that which is incorruptible.

In that which is not corruptible.] Four things may be noted in these words;
two of them are implied, two of them more express.

Doct. 1. That the things belonging to the outward man are corruptible. All
things that concern him are ^o: for first, his substance is corruptible; All
flesh is grass, 1 Pet. 1.24. so Job 14.1.2. and besides, all his glory is as
the flower of the field. His riches, pleasures, honor, strength, beauty,
health, and all he any way accounts his glory, it all will corrupt: for either
vanity will consume it, or violence will take it away, 1 Pet. 1.24. 1 John
2.17. Mat. 6.19, 20. All earthly things are vanity and vexation of spirit, as
Solomon shows in the whole book of Ecclesiastes.

Now if worldly things be corruptible things, then in general we should all
learn diverse lessons: first, not to set our affections upon these things here
below, we should not set our hearts upon that which we cannot keep long. All
we have, though it be not yet corrupted, yet it is all corruptible: why
should we then make such haste to be rich? especially, why should we trust
upon unc^rtain^ riches? Secondly, seeing we shall have these things but a
^hile, we should use them as such things as we cannot enjoy long; and so we
should take our part of them in a sober and Christian freedom while we have
them, Psalm 49.18. Eccles. 9.7, 10. and especially we should employ them to
the best uses we can: And the best use to put worldly things to, Not^.
is either to make friends with them, by liberality to the poor, Luke 16. or
to buy wisdom with them, by spending freely for the procuring of the means
of salvation for our selves or others, Proverbs 17.16. and in general the
chief use of them is, by them to make our selves rich in good works, 1 Timothy
6.19, 20. Thirdly, seeing earthly things are corruptible, we should not envy
the prosperity of wicked men, that abound not in any thing that will ^arry long
with them: all their portion is in these things that will away, Psalm 37.1, 2.
and 49.15, 16, 18. Lastly, we should all therefore be of Moses mind, rather
to suffer affliction with Gods people that shall possess eternal things, than
with the wicked to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.26. And
in particular, both poor and rich may be instructed hereby: for rich men
should not glory in their riches, but rather r^joice if God have made them low
by true grace, which will last for ever, James 1.9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.17, 20 and
poor men that have a portion in spiritual things, should not be troubled for
want of these ^^rthly things, seeing if they ^^d them they would last but a
while, I^^^s 1.9. and therefore having food and raiment they should be
content. Thus of the first Doctrine.

Doct. 2. Earthly things do not adorn a man. As they are corruptible, so they
do not make a man any whit the more comely: which is true in these four
senses following: First, they do not adorn a man in the sight of God: he
respects it not, whether a man be poor or rich, bond or free, clothed or
naked, in robes or in rags, Gal. 3.28. Secondly, they adorn not the inward
man: they add nothing to the mind or heart of man. Thirdly, they adorn not
with true ornament, but only with a show: for if the glory of the world be
like a withering flower, what true ornament can it be to wear such withered
things? Fourthly, they adorn not for continuance. All apparel for the body of
a man, and all ornaments for his house or state any way, they are the worse for
wearing, and will wear clean out in the end. And therefore for the use,
first, how vain a thing is the pride of life! and secondly, we should
therefore know no man after the flesh, but to reckon of man's worth by better
things than worldly things.

Doct. 3. A third doctrine is evidently to be observed out of these words; and
that is very comfortable for godly Christians, such as the Apostle supposed
these to be to whom he writes; and that is, That godly Christians have right to
all incorruptible things. That which is not corruptible, if they seek, they
may possess. It is their own, God would have them put it on as they put on
their apparel. He has adorned his children with the gift of all incorruptible
things: heavenly treasures are theirs, and they may lay hold on them, and lay
them up as their certain riches and portion, Mat. 6.^0. He grants eternal
life to them that seek glory, and honor, and incorruptible things; that is,
he grants them an eternal possession of spiritual things, Romans 2.7.

Now that this doctrine may be more evident and full of comfort, it is
profitable to inquire distinctly what is incorruptible, and will last always;
and so we shall find by the testimonies of the Scripture that seven things are
incorrup^ible.

1. ^od is incorruptible, Romans 1. and God is their God by covenant; and, (...)
as David says, he is the strength of their heart, and their portion for ever,
Psalm. 37.26. and 1^9 57. and God his mercy, and his love, and his power is
everlasting. His mercy endures for ever, Psalm. 136. and his loving kindness
^^all never be taken from him, Psalm. 89.33. and with everlasting compassion he
has received them to favor, Esaias 54. and with everlasting love has he loved
them, Ier. 31.3. and in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength for the
protection and preservation of his people; and therefore they may trust upon
him for ever, Esaias 26.4. and therefore if all people will walk every ^ne in
the name of his God, godly men ought much more to wa^ke in the name of the Lord
their God for ever and ever, Micah. 4.6.

2. The Word of God is incorruptible, and lasts beyond all end, 1 Pet. 1.24.
Psalm. 119.89. And this is the heritage of the godly, Psalm. 119.111, 127. The
truth shall be with us for ever, 2 John 2.

3. The righteousness of Christ is everlasting, Dan. 9.24. and this
righteousness is theirs, ^o as they may put it on as a garment; and it makes
them righteous before God, Romans 13. ult. 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21.

4. Gods covenant is incorruptible and everlasting Esa^ 55.4. and it cannot be
abrogared but the godly shall have the benefit of it for ever.

5. The gifts of saving grace are incorruptible; and their hearts can never ^ee
drawn dry, but the spring of grace will be in some measure in them. And
through these graces the godly have everlasting consolation: for Gods gifts and
calling are without repentance, John 4.14 2 These 2.10. Romans 11. This love is
incorruptible, 2 Cor. 13. and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads, Esaias 61.
So the seed of saving knowledge will abide in the godly for ever, 1 John 3. and
their meekness, and a quiet spirit, is reckoned an ornament that is not
corruptible. But of this afterward.

6. Good works are incorruptible; so the righteousness of the just will last
for ever, 2 Cor. 9.9. and though he die, yet his works will follow him to
Heaven, Rev. 14.13. Psalm. 139.24.

Lastly, Heaven and the glory of it, is everlasting; Gods kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom, 1 Timothy 6.11. and that glory is an eternal weight of
glory, 2 Cor. 4.14. We have an house that is eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor.
5.1. our inheritance there is immortal, and undefiled, and withers not away,
1 Pet. 1.3.

The uses may be diverse:

Use 1. For first, it should teach us to strive to be such as may have our
portion in incorruptible thing: and so we must first take often our affections
from all things that may offend; as resolved if our right eye offend us, to
pluck it out; and if our right hand offend us, to cut it off; that is, to deny
all sinful things, though they were as dear to us as our right hand, or right
eye, Mat. 9.45. Secondly, we must be such as yield our selves to obey the voice
of Christ, and to be ruled by him. He gives eternal life to his sheep: we
must be sheep then, for hearing his voice, and tractablenesse, John 10.29.
Thirdly, we must give glory to God, and rely upon his promise of grace in
Jesus Christ: we must be believers, John 3.16. Fourthly, we must by patient
continuing in well-doing, still seek immortality, Romans 2.7. Thus of the first
use.

Use 2. Secondly, seeing the portion of the godly lies in incorruptible things,
we should not be much troubled for the wants or losses in corruptible things.
We have so large an inheritance in things that will last for ever, that it
should be no grievance to us, though we should want those transitory things
(...) world.

Use 3. Thirdly, for this reason, such as abound in earthly things, should be
(...) more willing to distribute them, and give them for good uses, seeing
those things are not their portion; and therefore they need not be overcarefull
for the keeping of such things.

Use ^. Fourthly, hence we may gather infallibly, That the godly can never
fall from grace: for Gods mercies cannot corrupt or fall away, and his gi^ts
are without repentance. If they could be lost, then they were corruptible as
well as earthly things. But this is a comfort that must not be taken away,
that God will establish Sion for ever, Psalm. 48.8. and though the (...) pass
away, and the lusts thereof, yet he that does the will of God abides for ever,
1 John 2.17. and though the servant may be cast out of the house, yet the son
abides for ever, John 8.35.

Lastly, we should the less fear death, seeing hence we learn that we have
many things that will last with us, even after our bodies be rotten in the
grave. Thus of the third doctrine.

Doct. 4. Now a fourth point is also clear, and that is, That incorruptible
things do wonderfully adorn, and make men comely. This is the maine scope and
drift of the Text, and therefore we should the more seek after th^se things:
for if we could see the beauty of the inward man, as it is adorned with grace,
we would be wonderfully enamoured and in love with it. No comeliness of the
body can so allure, as would this inward beauty of the man of the hear: and
therefore again, we should hence learn to make the more account of poor
Christians. There are no persons in the world so comely as they, if we knew
the worth and ornament of true grace. And so in general, we should love the
godly above all people, because they are the fairest, and best adorned of all
the men and women in earth: and in particular, those husbands that have
gracious wives, Note.
should learn so much religion as to love them entirely, even for the beauty
of the man of the Heart, though they wanted the outward ornaments of riches, or
extraordinary comeliness of the outward man. Women also should especially
hence learn to get grace, and knowledge, and holiness into their hearts; for
their best handsomnesse is in their qualities and gifts. It Is not their
clothes, but their manners and disposition, that becomes them or disgraces
them. A fair body does commend little, if the heart be foul; it is a small
praise to have a good face, and an ill nature. Some women are like Helen
without, and like Hecuba within.

Thus of the adorning of the man of the Heart in general. Now follows the
particular ornament, which the Apostle commends by name; and that is, a meek
and quiet spirit.

Of a meek and quiet spirit.] Quietness is added to meekness, lest by
mistaking the definition of meekness, they should not understand the Apostles
meaning.

Now the doctrine hence to be gathered, is, That amongst all the particular
virtues required in Christians, meekness and quietness of nature and spirit
is a special virtue, and carefully to be sought: and in particular by
Christian wives, as this and other Scriptures show, Ephesians. 4.2. Mat. 11.28. Zeph.
2.3. Col. 3.12.

Before I make use of this point, I must consider what is comprehended in those
terms, of a meek and quiet spirit; and first, we must know before hand, what
it does not comprehend. It does not require that women or men should be so
quiet, as not to be troubled for their sins; or not to humble their souls
for sin; or that they should be careless of their callings, either general
or particular; or that they should not admonish or reprove sin in others,
when they have a calling and fitness.

But unto the constituting of true meekness and quietness of spirit, is
requisite,

1. Freedom from the evils that disquiet and molest the spirits of men; What
things are requisite to me^knesse.
such as are, first, anger, frowardness, fretting, and peevishness: secondly,
worldly sorrow, crying, and aptness to take unkindnesse, and fullennesse:
thirdly, distrustful cares of life arising from covetousness, 1 Timothy 6, 10,
11. fourthly, rash zeal and fierceness, or inordinate striving and
wilfulness; as may be gathered in the case of a Minister, 2 Timothy 2.24, 25,
26. fifthly, contention, and evil speaking, or ill language; as may be
gathered from Tit. 3.2. and stirring up contention or brawles: sixthly, all
inordinate desires, and reigning heart-sinnes, whether sins of ambition,
lust, malice, or the like, Iam. 1.21. seventhly, unconstancy and levity of
mind. Especially it crosses those evils which are noted to be most usual in
women: such as are fretting, crying, taking unkindnesses, unconstancie,
wilfulness, complaining of their husbands, or the like.

2. A kind of peaceful contentment, when Christians are habitually well
pleased with their condition.

3. A gentle behavior in case of wrongs or faults from or in others: so as to
be, first, able to bear them: secondly, not to render evil for evil, but
rather to overcome evil with goodness: thirdly, ready to forgive: fourthly,
not provoked to anger.

4. A harmless and innocent behavior, Zeph. 2.3.

5. The fixing of the heart by trusting upon God, and living without care, like
a little child that believes his father will provide for him, Mat. 18.

6. Lowliness of mind, thinking no great thoughts of our selves, and esteeming
the gifts of God in others, and accounting others better than our selves: and
therefore is lowliness so often added to the word meekness to explain it.

7. Silence from many words, from vain and rash speeches, especially provoking
terms.

8. Retiredness, when a Christian is no busie-body in other men's matters, and
his feet will be kept out of his neighbors house, and refuses to have to do
with the strife that belongs not to him.

9. Tractablenesse, and easiness to be directed, or appointed, and governed:
as in relation to God, it is meekness to take his zeal upon us, Mat. 11.28.
and so in a wise, it is a property of a meek and quiet spirit to be easy to
be directed, and advised, and governed.

Ob. But is it not lawful to be angry?

Sol. Yes, it is at some times, for some persons, upon some causes, and in some
manner. Anger is a tender virtue, and such a one as by reason of our
unskilfulnesse may be easily corrupted, and made dangerous.

Ob. But we must reprove or correct.

Sol. You may do so: but that you must reprove with passion, or unquietly, I
read not; but rather you must reprove with the spirit of meekness. And
besides, many rules are requisite to the right use of reproose and correction.

Ob. But can all this be attained?

Sol. It may, or else it would not be required in the new Covenant so often,
and so vehemently urged; and the Church of God is not without instance of such
as have attained it: and though in many things we may sin all, yet this virtue
may be had, though not in the perfection of it.

Object. But I have desired and endeavored to attain to it, and cannot.

Sol. First, use the means to attain it yet still: it may be had at length,
though not presently. Secondly, it may be doubted of many that pretend this,
that they have not such desire, nor use not such endeavor in sincerity; they
are not watchful and careful to look to the opportunities of this virtue, or
the occasions of the contrary vices.

Ob. But may not one have comfort of this virtue, if he be at any time angry?

Sol. Moses the meekest man on earth was once angry, and Christ himself we
read was angry: but where this virtue of anger is not habitually, it reigns
not; and where it is, it is bridled and ordered. Or else I may answer, that the
act of meekness may be interrupted, and yet the habit preserved.

Ob. But we are so provoked, and have such wrongs as are very great and absurd,
etc.

Sol. Else it were no great praise to be quiet: a Mastive, a Bear, a Lion, it
may be, can be quiet sometimes, if they be not stirred or provoked. There is
nothing from without us can make us vicious, without the working of a vile
nature in our souls.

The Use should be, first, for instruction. I may say of meekness and
quietness as Christ said of humility, If you hear these things, blessed are
you if you do them, Motives to meekness.
John 13. Now there are many reasons should move us to be very careful to
express a meek and quiet spirit in our behavior at home and abroad; as first,
Gods Commandment. He requires this at our hands earnestly, as appears by
the places before quoted, and other Scriptures, Pro. 4.24. ^^condly, we have an
excellent example for it in Christ; and he charge us, of all the things
which be imitable in him, to learn meekness and lowliness of him, Mat.
11.29. Thirdly, it will be a sign of our election and true sanctification, and
that God loves us, Col. 3.12. Psalm. 147.^. and that we have attained the
wisdom that is from above, James 3.17. Fourthly, it is a great ornament to a
man, as this Text imports, and that both in the sight of God and man. A meek
behavior is very lovely and comely, Pro. 19.11.

5. Hereby we shall bring much rest to our souls, Mat. 11.29. Our hearts and
consciences will be at great peace, whereas there are many occasions of trouble
to our consciences which flow from passion and an unquiet and cont^ntious
course of life.

6. Meekness is incorruptible, it will last for ever, both in the habit of
it, and in the comfort and fruit of it: and besides, it will keep the spirit
from such putrefaction and corruption as passion and unquietness uses to
breed in the spirits of other men.

7. Meekness makes the heart very capable of grace, and of the Word of God.
The heart is fit to have the Word graffed upon it when it is meek and quiet,
James 1.21. and the Lord teaches the humble his way, Psalm. 25. Pro. 3.32. and
he will give more grace to the humble, James 4.7.

8. God will be the protection of the meek; he will relieve them, and make
them glorious by deliverance, Psalm. 76.8,9. and 147.5, 6. and 149.4. Zeph. 2.3.
Yea a meek spirit is a great advantage to a man's outward estate, for the meek
shall inherit the earth. God loves no Tenants better than such, nor grants
longer leases to any than to them, Mat. 5.6.

Secondly, this discourse of a meek and quiet spirit should greatly humble
such Christians as are froward, and passionate, and unquiet; and in particular,
such wives as are guilty of these or the like faults. Now that this Use may be
more profitable to these Christians, I would add two things; first, reasons to
dissuade them from frowardness and unquietness: secondly, I would show them
remedies how to help themselves against these faults.

There be many things observed in Scripture, and which they may feel in
themselves, which should move them to hearty repentance for this unquietness
and frowardness; as to consider,

1. The causes of frowardness and unquietness; which are in general,
O^iousnesse of frowardness, from the cause and effects of it.
their ill nature; and in particular, pride, idleness, want of love to those
with whom we converse, ignorance, and love of earthly things. From these, or
some of these roots, proceeds this vice.

2. That the Scripture makes this fault to be a sign of a wicked and naughty
person, Pro. 6.12, 14. and 21.24. especially where one is guilty of it in the
power and custom of it; and besides, reckons it among the faults of which
there is little hope of cure* Pro. 29.20.

3. It causes many and vile effects: for,

1. It is a great affliction and vexation to such as converse with them that
are guilty of it, as these places show, Prove. 17.1. and 21.9, 19. and 27.3, 15.

2. It is very hurtful to the party that is guilty, for it makes him run into
many sins, as these places show, Pro 17.19. and 22.8. and 29.22. Psalm. 37.8.
and besides, it brings upon him great misery, for it makes a breach in his
spirit within, Pro. 15.4. and brings much mischief upon him without, Pro.
17.20. and further, it makes him abominable in the sight of God, Pro. 3.32. and
8.13. and 11.20. and shames him almost incurably amongst men, Pro. 12.8. and
25.9, 10. and further, no body that is wise will make any friendship with them,
but every body will avoid them as much as they can, Pro. 22.24. Wives tha^ be
so froward, and peevish, and hard to please, and unquiet, should much think of
these things. And yet besides, it interrupts prayer, 1 Pet. 3.7. and is a great
hinderance to the power of the Word, James 1.19, 20, 21. Lastly, if it be not
repented of, it will bring damnation of body and soul, Mat. 5.22.

3. It grieves the spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30.

Now Christian men or women that desire to mend this fault of frowardness and
unquietness, may attain unto reformation, if they will carefully observe
these rules following:

Helps for the attaining of quietness and meekness.
1. They must study to be quiet, 1 These. 4.12. They must not trust their own
conceits of things, but with good conscience study how to prevent occasions of
unquietness, and how to carry themselves discreetly, and with meekness. It
does require much study to live quietly.

2. They must be sure they meddle with their own business, as it is further
added in the same place. They must be sure to place their greatest care in
learning how to discharge their own duties to others, and not allow themselves
liberty to suspect or censure the ways of others with whom they converse. Such
wives as are so diligent to study their husbands duties, and to find fault
with them in their callings, seldom or never live quietly with their husbands:
whereas the Apostle here would have such wives as have ill husbands, to lay the
ground of a quiet life, in the care of sound discharge of their own duties to
their husbands.

3. They must heartily repent for their faults of unquietness and frowardness
past, and not only humble their souls in secret before God for such sins, but
also show their repentance to those with whom they converse, by an humble
acknowledgement of their vile nature, and froward behavior, even in the
particulars of it. Repentance for known trespasses can never be sound, if it
be secret, and not made known to the parties grieved.

4. It will wonderfully help them if they pray constantly to the Lord Jesus,
that left such a pattern of meekness, and to entreat him, by influence of his
grace, to quiet and sweeten their natures. Beseech the Lord Jesus, even by his
meekness to make us meek, and able to express his virtue in a quiet
conversation.

5. They must not give place to wrath; but if they perceive their hearts
rising, and inclined to passion, and provoking and censorious words, they must
presently lay necessity of silence upon themselves, till they be able to speak
quietly and without frowardness. This one rule constantly, for a while,
observed, would breed a great alteration in their dispositions quickly, and in
time wear out the force of the disease. Unquietness is much enlarged by the
words are uttered after the offense is taken.

And thus of a meek and quiet spirit: only we may note from the indefinite
requiring of meekness, That Christians and (in particular) Christian wives,
must exercise meekness and quietness toward all persons, and at all times,
and in all places. In all places I say, and so both at home and abroad: toward
all persons, and so they must carry themselves quietly, not only toward their
husbands, but toward their servants, and their neighbors, whether they be
poor or rich: and at all times: they must not be young Saints, and old
Devils, as the Proverb is, that is, of a soft and gentle behavior at first,
and then grow froward afterward. Age and infirmities are not sufficient
excuses for vicious anger and unquietness. Besides, in that the Apostle
resembles meekness to apparel, it imports, That by nature we are borne
without it, our souls being as naked in respect of meekness, as our bodies be
in respect of clothes; and withal, that it should be our every-daies care to
put on meekness, and fit our selves for quietness, as we would put on our
clothes. And further, as it is not enough to put on our clothes, but we must
tie them, and fit them handsomely; so must we use discretion in the putting on
of meekness and quietness, fitting the virtue to the reasons and occasions of
the day.

Thus of the second part of this verse. The third and last is the reason why
women should be so careful of this kind of dressing and apparel; and that is,
because it is a thing of great price in the sight of God.

Which in the sight of God is of great price.] Diverse things may be hence
observed:

1. That God does highly esteem of the virtues, and true grace, and good
behavior of his servants: and therefore in this place their virtues are said
to be very rich in Gods sight; and in the Scriptures, he gives the term of
riches to their gifts, 1 Cor. 1.5. and grace is called glory, Esaias 4.5. and God
is described, as if he were in love with his people, when they carry themselves
graciously, John 14.21. And this serves greatly to exalt the praise of Gods
good nature, and tender affection to man: and the more, because all good things
in us are his own gift, James 1.17. and because our best gifts have many
imperfections in them, and our best works are defiled with sin, Esaias 64. and
besides, because he greatly esteems them, even the least beginnings of
goodness in his servants: as, their desires to be good, and their very
preparations of their hearts to goodness, Esaias 55.1, 2. Psalm. 10.17.

2 Christians are bound in all their behavior, to carry themselves so, as that
God may accept of them, and esteem what they do: and this is required of them
in every state of life. They are tied to this, not only in what they do in
Gods house, but in what they do in their own house: This all are charged,
Heb. 12.28. and so wives here, and so servants, Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. The praise and
acceptance of God should be ever before their eyes: the reasons are, because
the forms and rules of all behavior are given by God: his Word is the light
to our feet, and the lantern to our paths, Psalm. 119. and is only able to
make the man of God perfect in every good word and work, 2 Timothy 3. ult. and
besides, if we do well, we are sure never to fail of the praise of God:
whereas if we seek the praise of men, we may be deceived. For either they may
praise us for that which is abominable in the sight of God, Luke 16.15. or they
may dispraise us when we do well; or at best, their praise is mutable. And
further, it is God that must reward our good conversation, Ephesians. 6.8. and
therefore reason that he be looked after in what we do. Lastly, this is a
sign of difference between the godly and the wicked in doing good duties: a
godly man is known by this sign, that his praise is of God and not of men,
Romans 2.29. Mat. 6.

The Use should be, to teach us therefore in all our ways to labor to please
God, and above all things to seek his acceptance. Now if we would have God
pleased with what we do, we must look to diverse rules.

1. We must be sure that we are not in the flesh: Rules for our practice, so
as God may be pleased with (...).
for they that are in the flesh, cannot please God, Rom 8.8. We must be sure
we are new creatures, Gal. 6.15.

2. We must set God always before us, and remember his holy presence, Gen
17.2. Psalm. 16.8. God cannot abide to be forgotten.

3. We must come to the light, that it may be manifest that our works are
wrought in God, John 3.22. We must walk by rule, Gal. 6.16. and do all in
faith, Heb. 11.6.

4. We must serve God in our spirits, as well as in our outward man: not as
men-pleasers, or with eye service, or with outward worship; but from the heart,
and with the spirit, Romans 2.28, 29. Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7.

5. We must make conscience of the least sins, to avoid them, and of the least
Commandments, to obey them, if we would be great in heaven, Mat. 5.19. Diverse
of these are expressed in one sentence, Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man,
what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee; surely to do justly, and to
love mercy, and to humble thy self to walk with thy God.

6. We must avoid those sins that God especially hates; such as are swearing,
Commandment 3. Deuteronomy. 28.58. lukewarmnesse in religion, Rev. 3.15, 16.
persecuting such as fear God, 1 These. 2.15, 16. wilful fashioning our selves
after this world, Romans 12.1, 2. to bless our selves in our hearts against Gods
curses, Deuteronomy. 29.19. through impatience or unbelief to withdraw our selves in
adversity, Heb. 10 38. and in general, all gross sins, Rev. 22.15.

Doct. 3. The best riches a Christian has are his virtues and gifts of his
mind: and therefore he says here, they are rich in Gods sight. Now they are
his best riches in diverse respects:

1. Because they are riches in Gods sight, whereas all worldly treasures
commend not any man to God, Gal. 3.28. He gives us naked into the world, and
takes us himself naked again.

2. Because they furnish the best part of man, viz. his mind; wh^^eas worldly
riches do only furnish men's houses or bodies.

3. Because no violence can take these treasures away. A man may be virtuous
spite of the hearts of all the Devils in hell, or divellish men on earth;
whereas worldly treasures may be many ways lost.

4. Because those things do make a man rich to immortality, whereas worldly
riches can serve at best but for a mortal life. And therefore this point
shows, that godly men that seek virtue and grace have chosen the better part,
and that we should all covet spiritual gifts with more earnest affections than
worldlings do outward riches. And it shows the happy estate of poor
Christians: they may be very rich for all their poverty outward, Rev. 2.8.
Neither may hypocrites please themselves with saying they are rich, Rev. 3.17.
for God will discover their counterfeit wares. And in general, we may hence
gather, that the richest men in the Parish are virtuous men.

Doct. 4. It is evident from hence, that God sees the spirits of men: our
hearts are all open and manifest before him, Ier. 17.9. 1 Kings 8.39. 1 Samuel
17. Heb. 4.13. And this must needs be so, because God is omniscient: all eye,
and sees all things. The Sun may cease shining, but God cannot cease seeing.
Secondly, because God formed the hearts of all men, and therefore must needs
know them, Psalm. 33.15. Thirdly, because God by his providence does specially
watch over the world of spirits, add daily visits men's hearts, Job 7.18. Psalm.
17.3. and receives presentiments of all abuses. He daily tries the hearts and
reins, and weighes the heart of man, Pro. 21.2.

And therefore the Use should be diverse: first, to reach men to labor for
inward and secret goodness, as well as outward and open conformity; and to be
afraid of sin in secret: for no darkness can hide from God, the day and night
are all one to him: and though no eye of man see thee, yet art thou always
before the eye of God. We should therefore keep our hearts with all diligence,
Pro. 4.23. And it may be a great comfort to the godly against all the scorns
and censures of the world, that traduce them as hypocrites; for God sees their
hearts: yea, it may comfort them against the imperfections of their works: for
God sees the preparations and desires of their hearts, and that they would
feign do better. But especially this is terrible to wicked men; for if God see
the hearts of men, in what case are they that have such evil hearts?

Ob. Why, will some one say, what fault can God find with our hearts?

Sol. God sees the deadness and dullness that is in thy heart in his service.
He sees thy directions, and how far off thy heart is from him, when thou
drawest near to him with thy lips: he sees thy hypocrisy and security, and
thy double and divided heart: he sees thy carnal cavils, and the boiling
risings of thy heart against him and his truth: he sees thy f^^^fulnesse and
unbelief, and the uncircumcision of thy heart; thy unre^^h^blenesse and
forgetfulness: he sees all the vanities and errors of thy imaginations, all
thy lusts, and passions, and wicked desires, and all th^^ fram^ of thy
imaginations that are only evil continually: he sees thy filthy nakedness,
and all the Idols thou entertainest in thy heart: and therefore if thou will
not perish in the eternal abomination of God, make haste to wash thine heart
from wickedness, and seriously to repent of the sins of thy spirit.

Lastly, the scope of this place teaches us distinctly, That God makes a great
reckoning of such men and women as have meek and quiet spirits. There is
reason for it, because a quiet mind is like to Gods mind, which is never
stirred nor moved from everlasting to everlasting, but is always the same; and
because where the spirit is meek and quiet, there all sin is mortified, and
every good gift and grace does prosper. And this should be a great
encouragement to all Christians, and in particular, to Christian wives that are
meek, and live quietly with their husbands: for though their husbands should
not love them the more, or esteem of this grace, hence they may see that God
will like them much the better for it, and they are very comely and richly
clothed in Gods sight.

Ver. 5. Por even after this man^r in times past did the holy (...), which
tr^sted in God, (...) themselves, and were subject to their husbands.

Ver. 6. As Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord: whose daughters ye are,
while ye do well, not being afraid of any terror.


IN these two verses is contained the confirmation of the Proposition exhorting
wives to be subject to their own husbands, ver. 1. And this is made good by
two reasons, both taken from example; the one in general, from the practice of
holy women of ancient times, that did so carry themselves toward their
husbands, ver. 5. the other in particular, from the practice of Sarah, the
mother of faithful women, ver. 6.

The example generally considered, ver. 5. is described and commended six
ways:

First, for the manner of it: it was in this manner, that is, just according to
the precept now given by the Apostle.

Secondly, for the an^iquitie of it: it was so in old time.

Thirdly, for the subject persons in whom it was found, viz. not only women
that did so, but the holiest women.

Fourthly, for the cause of it, viz. their trust in God.

Fifthly, for the effect of it: it adorned them.

Sixthly, for the matter of it, viz. they were obedient to their own husbands.

Thus of the order of the words. Before I enter upon the particulars, diverse
things may be noted in general about examples of goodness in others.

First, we may hence evidently gather, That it is not enough for us to do
good, but we should strive so to do it, that we might be examples to others, 1 Timothy 4.12. Mat. 5.16. Phil. 2.15. and that for diverse reasons. For first God is
interessed in us and our works; and there is a glory due to God which must be
collected from our works do^^ before men, Mat. 5.16. Secondly, we must so act
our parts in godliness upon the Stage of this world, that we may thereby
silence and convince wicked men, that out of their hatred to the truth, and
frowardness of hearts, would else take all occasions to speak evil of us,
and the good way of God, Phil. 2.15. Thirdly, our Teachers have a part in our
works; and we should hold forth the patterns of sound practice, that they
might be comforted in our learning from them, and graced in their Ministry,
Phil. 2.16. Fourthly, by this means we may do much good in helping forwards
weak Christians. For as the wicked take fire from evil examples, so do the
godly from good examples, both in piety, 1 These. 4.7. and mercy, 2 Cor. 8.16.
etc. Which should work a^ effectual care in all godly Christians, to strive
to express such conscience and power of godliness as may be profitable to
others: and so chiefly in such things as may most grace the profession of
religion, or profit others; as wisdom, mercy, meekness, just dealing,
contempt of the world, affectionatenesse in Gods service, patience,
undauntednesse, or the like; especially those that be Parents, Masters,
Magistrates, Ministers, that have charge of others. And this greatly reproves
such Christians as undo the souls of those that belong to them (as much as
lies in them) by their wicked examples; as Ministers that are examples to their
people of drunkenness, usury, covetousness, pride, or the like; and Masters
of families, or Parents, that give such wretched examples to their children and
servants, in swearing, vanity of apparel, filthiness of life, passion, or
the like.

Secondly, we may hence note two singular virtues in a good example: the first
is, Two singular virtues in a good example.
That it may profit a world of people, 1 These. 1.7. Romans 16. It is like the
fire; you may light many candles at it, and yet it is neither the worse, nor
the less. Many that we know no^ of may receive good from our good conversation
and example in well-doing, as was true in the case of those holy women. And the
reason is, because men are more apt to understand things when they are
practiced, than when they are taught. And besides, good examples are so rare,
that they shine as a Beacon on fire in a dark night, Phil. 2.15. And therefore
one Use should be to teach Christians, by an humble acknowledgement of the
praises of others, to spread abroad the light of good examples ^s far as they
can, 1 These. 1.7, 8. And withal, he shows the horrible sin of those wretches
that strive to blemish the good conversation of the godly, and so rob the world
of the profit of their examples.

The second virtue in a good example is the lasting of it. It may do good for
a long time after, yea, in some cases, to the worlds end. The sweet savor of
it may be freshly sented many years after: which was never true of any perfume
in the world. It is a light that will not out of a long time; as here the
example of these holy women, and Sarah in particular, have a fresh power to do
good many hundred years after it was given, and will still have to the worlds
end. The memorial of the Just is blessed. They that are to live hereafter may
praise God for the good they receive from the examples of those that are long
since dead, in their graves. Their works live long after they are dead. Which
should be a wonderful consolation to eminent Christians that excel in gifts
and good works, and have held forth a good profession before, many witnesses.
And in as much as God by his providence keeps burning so long the light of the
good examples of his children, it will make the more to increase the
condemnation of such persons as will not learn goodness from such examples.
Especially their case is fearful that have had this light in such as have
been near to them; as in Parents, Masters, Ministers, ^p^ciall acquaintance,
kindred, or the like, and yet make no good use of it.

Thirdly, we may hence gather, That a good example ought to be given, and may
be taken from women as well as men. Pro. 31.28, 29. Mat. 26.13. Tit. 2. 3, 4.
And the reason is, because God is no respecter of persons, but gives his gifts
and graces to women as well as men; as Scripture and experience shows. And
besides, as their ill example may make the word of God to be blasphemed, Tit.
2.5. so why should not their good example become godliness, and profit others?
And this point should teach women, if they will profess Religion, to look to
their ways, and strive to give good example, especially aged women, Tit. 2.3.
And withal, it may be a comfort to that Sex, that God should use their
service to do his work, and many times to teach men by their ways and works,
God has raised up the glory and light of many worthy women, and they have bin
as eminent for holiness and good works, as men have bin. Thus in general.

In this manner.] The first thing in the description is the manner of the
pattern: about which we may note three things;

1. That the patterns of well-doing, or the rules of life have been the same
in all ages. There is no more required of Christians now, than was required of
Gods servants in former time: which should make us the more willing to bear
Gods yoke, and to do the task that God sets us.

2. That an example is then of power to bind, when it agrees to some precept:
When an example binds.
as here the example of holy women is urged, because it did agree to the
doctrine of the exhortation before named. This rule is of great use, in
ordering of conclusions, taken from examples in Scripture: examples have but
the power of illustration of what was before in the precept. And again, it
should teach us, not to esteem of any men above what is written; but to follow
them as they follow Christ, or as their actions are warranted by the Word of
God.

3. God did ever stand upon subjection, and an amiable and meek behavior in
women, in all ages. Which should much prevail with Christian women, to teach
them to make more conscience of their carriage toward their husbands, seeing
God had ever required such a behavior in all holy women of former ages.

In old time.] The example is, in the second place, commended for the
antiquity of it. Where we learn, that a respect may be had to old time; yea,
respect is due to the times of old. Antiquity is an argument of praise:
therefore are we bidden to ask after the old way, Ier. 6.16. to ask of the
days that are past, Deuteronomy. 4.32. to remember the days of old, and to consider
the years of many generations, Deuteronomy. 32.7. And Ministers in public teaching,
must be like the good Scribe, that brings out of his treasury things both old
and new, Mat. 13.52. and fathers must talk of the things of old time to their
children, Ps. 44.1.

Now because the argument from a^^^quitie, or the old time, has been much
abused, and such reasoning is taxed in many Scriptures; therefore that the
point may be more clear, I will distinctly consider, first, in what cases the
old times and antiquity may not be pleaded; and then, in what cases antiquity
may be pleaded, and good use may be made of it.

For the first; antiquity is ill pleaded in the case^ follo^^ing: as*

1. When antiquity is counterfeit: when that is called the old time, In what
things Antiquity is ill pleaded.
which in comparison was but yesterday; as the Papiste lead us to the ages not
long since past, and will not permit us to look higher to the times of the
Prophets and the Apostles, which is the true antiquity.

2. When antiquity is pleaded to confirm (...) in doctrine. And so the
doctrine was never a whit the better, that caught the law of God (...) only bind
the outward man, and not the heart; and the outward man ^oo but in some higher
cases. And therefore our Savior rejects the errors of the Pharisees, though
they would confirm th^^ by the sayings of old^ime^punc; Mat. ^. Io^. ^5.^0.

3. In the case of sin; sin is not the better for the oldnesse of i^, (...)
the worse, therefore the old man must be mortified, and all old things must be
put away, 2 Cor. 5.17. As an old leprosy is worse than a new Lev. 13.11. so
their hatred was the worse, because it was old, Ezekiel. 25.15. And the godly
pray, Remember not against us our old iniquities, Psalm. 79.8. and the wicked
are condemned for not purging out their old sins, 2 Pet. 1* 9. and all men
should purge out the old leven, 1 Cor. 5. And as in the sins of life between
man and man, so about Gods service old courses are barefull, if they be
idolatrous and superstitious: and therefore they were condemned for doing after
the old manner, 2 Reg. 17.34. and they are reproved by the Prophet Jeremy, that
so commended the old times of Idolatry, Ier. 44.

4. When God abolisheth the old things, and brings in new: and so the old
Covenant is not better than the new, nor the old Testament better than the new,
Heb. 8.6, 7, 13. 2 Cor. 5.17.

5. In the case of the discovery of such mysteries, as for the time of
revealing them, depend upon the good pleasure of God only: so things hidden for
ages and generations are revealed in the Gospel, and yet must not be rejected,
Col. 1.16.

6. When old times are pleaded of purpose to lessen the glory or profit of the
present works of Gods power and mercy, Esaias 43.18. And this way the Pharisees
offended, that, to avoid subjection to Christ and his doctrine, would magnify
Moses and the Prophets of old time. And so do those people offend, that
commend the old Teachers more, that are dead or absent, and will not profit by
those they have, Mat. 23.

7. When it is used in defense of public disorders, and offenses, and
grievances in Church or Commonwealth. The pretense of Innovation must not
hinder the reformation of known diseases in public States. Such things as
have been wastes of old must be built, though it were not done of long time:
They shall build the old wastes says the Prophet, Isa. 62.4.

8. When particular Christians do mis-apply it, to confirm them in their
unbelief or doubting; as if God did not regard or accept as informer times:
whereas if we serve him in uprightness of heart, he will accept our offerings
as in the days of old, Mal. 3.4. And if we get David's affections to God and
goodness, and will attend upon Gods mercy in the means, we shall have the
s^^e mercies of David, Isa, 55.1, 4.

Thus of the ways how old things, and the pleading of them, may be misapplied
and done in our own wrong.

Now follows to show in what cases respect must be had to Antiquity, and old
times. And so Antiquity commends,

1. The works of Gods power and mercy, Deuteronomy. 32.7. 2 Kings 19.25. Psalm. 44.2.
In what cases respect is to be bad unto old times.
and God is well pleased to be urged with arguments taken from his old dealing
with his people: Arise as in the days of old, Isa. 51.9. so in Mich. 7.14, 20,
and bath left the memory of them upon record, that we might thence confirm our
weak faith.

2. The particular experiences we have had of Gods goodness toward us. Thus
David remembers days of old, Psalm. 77.6. and 143.^.

3. The profitable determinations of right in judicial things between man and
man: and so the old bounds are to be greatly respected, Pro. 22.28.

4. The public orders of the Church about the circumstances of Gods worship,
as the orders of the Jews, to have the preaching of Moses in every City on
the Sabhath day, Acts 15.21. This order is the more observeable, as few other
reasons (...) because it was so in oldei^^^.

5. Gods Commandments. It is an argument of weight to persuade to obedience,
when it can be showed that that Commandment is an old Commandment, John 2.7.

6. In things that one doubtful or difficult, such respect is to be given to
Antiquity, as men should not rashly oppose their own or other men's new
conceits; so as due respect be had to equally comparison in the nature of the
things questioned, Ioh. 32.6.

7. In the examples and patterns of well-doing, that have had due conformity to
Gods will revealed in his precepts: and so the examples of holy practices in
old time, should much move the consciences of the godly now-adaies, as the
Apostle shows in this verse. And thus of the two points in the description.

Holy women.] The persons from whom this pattern is taken, are holy women:
where observe,

1. That holiness in the first Table, is required of women as well as men: and
they are bound to the duties of Gods worship, and to be religious women, as
well as to the duties of the second Table, to be chaste, merciful, faithful,
diligent in the affairs of the family, or obedient to their husbands. Which
serves to confute those men, that say women need not be studious in matters of
Religion; it is enough for them to be good house-wives, and obey their
husbands. And withal, it may comfort women in the practice of the duties of
Religion; for by the commendation given of holy women in this Text, it appears
that God accepts holiness in them as well as in men.

2. That all holy women did make conscience of subjection to their husbands:
and therefore the Apostle speaks indefinitely of all holy women. And this is
the more evident, because amongst all the infirmities noted in any godly woman
in the Scriptures, yet there is no example of a godly woman that did
customarily live in the sin of frowardness or rebellion against her husband:
the instance of Zipporah is but of one only fact, and the error seems to be
as much in her judgment as in her affections. And this doctrine should light
very heavy upon many wives, that profess Religion in these times, and
compel them to reform their hearts and behaviors in their carriage toward
their husbands: for this Text does import, that they want holiness that are
not subject to their husbands, and live in customarie frowardness and
unquietness.

3. That Christian women ought to study the example of holy women in old
times: and therefore they should do well to get a catalogue of the praises of
godly women in Scripture, to lay before them for their imitation; and so they
should learn of Sarah reverence to their husbands; and of Rahab and the
Midwives of Egypt, to show mercy to Gods servants in distress; and of Ruth,
obedience to their parents, and constant love to religion; and of the
Shunamitish woman, 2 Reg. 4.8. etc. and of Lydia, Acts 16.14. and of Ph^be,
Romans 16.2. to be entertainers of Gods servants, and to succor them; and of
Hanna, to be humble, and patient, and devout in prayer; and of the good woman
in the Proverbs, chap. 31. and of Priscilla, and Sal^mons mother, P^^. 30.1, 2.
and Timothies mother and grandmother, 2 Timothy 1.4. to get the law of grace into
their lips, to instruct others; and of that woman in the Proverbs, to be
painful in labor, and to be wise in oversight of the labors of their
servants and children; and of Hester, to keep religious Fas^^ to God, with
their maids and children, Hess. 4.16. and of the Virgin Mary, to lay up the
words of Christ in their hearts; and with Mary Magdalen, to love Christ with
all tenderness, and to bewail their sinswith sorrow* and to sit as Christ's
feet to hear his words; and of Elizabeth, to live without offense, L^^e 1. and
of Dorcas, to be merciful to the poor; and of the holy women, mentioned Heb.
11.3. to be constant professors of the truth in the times of persecution.

That trusted in God.] The fourth thing is the cause of their subjection; and
that is their trust in God: about which four things are to be observed.

1. That trust in God is such a grace as is found in all the godly* even wom^n
that were holy had attained to trust in God. All holy women trusted in God, and
therefore if women that are the weaker sex cannot get holiness, but withal
they trust in God, it is impliedly clear, That all the godly do trust in God.
The house of Israel, and the house of Aaron, Priests and people, even all that
fear the Lord must trust in the Lord, Psalm. 115.9, 10, 11. and all the
Gentiles must trust in the Lord. Romans 15.12. It is the Periphrasis of God to be
the confidence of all the ends of the earth, Psalm. 65.5. And the reasons why
the godly must and do all of them trust in God are, first, Gods Commandment,
that requires it of all, which the former places show: secondly, Gods promise,
that he will be the hope of his people, even of all his people, Joel 3.16. and
they have a sure word of the Prophets to warrant their trust, 2 Pet. 1.19.
thirdly, without faith and trust it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. 6.
fourthly, because they have nothing else to trust in. Of all people the godly
are most miserable, if their trust were to be placed in other things than God:
for as all earthly things are vain and transitory, so can they make least
shift for themselves, and are most opposed in these things. And therefore the
Use should be to teach us to try our hearts soundly, Use.
whether we be such as trust in God, seeing in this thing lies one great part
of our evidence about true grace. If all the godly trust in God, then we are
not godly, nor holy men and women, if we do not trust in God. The question
then is, By what signs do godly men prove that they do trust in God? and the
answer is;

Signs of such as trust in God.
1. By making God their refuge in all their distresses, and by pouring out their
hearts before him in prayer and supplication, 2 Samuel 22.3, 4. Psalm. 62.8.

2. By their fear in any thing to displease God, and their care to keep his
Commandments, and to cleave to God, 2 Reg. 18.4, 5, 6. doing his work
whatsoever come of it.

3. By relying upon God in times of distress, without using any ill means or
courses that they know or fear to be unlawful, Esaias 28.16. with 1 Chronicles.
10.13, 14. but still wait upon God till he help them, Psalm. 33.20.

4. By accounting God to be their portion and sufficient heritage, Psalm. 16.1,
5, 6.

5. By setting the Lord always before them, Psalm. 16.1, 18. for if we put all
our trust in God, then our hearts do continually think of God, and are lifted
up to God.

6. By committing all their ways to God, and leaving the success of things to
his disposing, Psalm. 37.5.

7. By their patience in the case of wrongs and indignities, having their
hearts free from desires of revenge, and their tongues from words or reproach
or reproof: they are as deaf or dumb men, Ps. 38.13, 14, 15 1 Timothy 4.10.

8. By contemning the glory of the world, and not regarding or seeking
dependancies upon proud and sinful persons, Psalm. 40.4.

9. By the joy and contentment they take in the house of God; their hearts
flourishing like a green Olive tree, when they hear of the doctrine of Gods
goodness, and feel the refreshing of his name, Psalm. 52.8, 9.

10. By their thankfulness, and great desires to praise God, when they find
the experiences of Gods providence in grace and bounty toward them, Psalm.
13.5, 6. and 52.8, 9.

Yet by the way we m^^t know, that godly persons that do truly trust in God may
be burdened with cares, but yet they cast their burdens upon God when they
feel them, Psalm. 55.22. They may be afraid, and yet trust in God, Psalm. 56.3.
They may cry and make great moan, and that a long time, Psalm. 69.3. They may
seem to want strength, and yet renew their strength, Esaias 40 ult.

2. From ^^nce we ^^y gather, That it is a great praise and an excellent gift
in any to trust in God, to have and exercise this trust in God: and therefore
of all parts of holiness and f^nctification, in this place trust in God i^
mentioned. And therefore in diverse Scriptures they are pronounced to be very
blessed that can do it, Psalm. 84.12. and 34.8. and it is reckoned as a great
ornament and glory in great Princes, as, 2 Reg. 18.5. Psalm. 21.8. and the
chief praise of the Fathers and Patriarchs of the Church, Ps. 22.5. And the
reasons are diverse:

1. Because it is a supernatural power in any man or woman, Reasons proving
the excellency of this trusting in God.
because it is grounded upon things not seen, Romans 8.24.

2. Because the Lord takes special pleasure in this grace, and takes notice
of such as can exercise it, above all others: it is a thing God specially
observes in his people, Psalm. 147.11. and 33.18. cob. his eye is upon them, he
cannot look off them: so also Nah. 1.7. And contrariwise, he is as much vexed
with unbelief, and not trusting upon him, as with any other sin. We read that
fire kindled against Jacob for not believing in God, and not trusting in his
salvation, Psalm. 78.22.

3. Because the trust in other things will prove the shame and confusion of a
man, Esaias 30.2. and therefore better to trust in the Lord than in Princes, etc.
Psalm. 118.8, 9.

4. Because it is a grace that produces admirable effects: for

1. It establishes a man's heart, and makes it fixed and immovable, Admirable
effects of this trusting in God.
Psalm. 112.7, 8. and 31.24. so as he can endure things that are almost beyond
belief, if it be rightly exercised, Esaias 14.32* coh. Psalm. 27^.3.

2. It procures from God all things a man's heart can desire, or his condition
any way need, 2 Samuel 22.2, 3. Psalm. 5.11, 12. It gets a man mavelous loving
kindness from God, Psalm. 17.7. so great experience of Gods goodness as cannot
be uttered, Ps. 31.19. Mercy shall compass them about, when many sorrows
shall be to the wicked, Psalm. 32.10. His mercy will be upon us, according as
we have hope in him, Ps. 33.22. and 55.12. and 91.1. etc. It is the best way,
either to preserve us from trouble, or to deliver us out of trouble, of what
kind soever, Psalm. 130.7. Esaias 25.4. and 26.3, 4. 2 Chronicles. 13.18.

3. It opens for us a most comfortable entertainment in Gods house: our
hearts that can trust in Gods mercy drink out of the rivers of his pleasures,
when we come into his house, and are satisfied with his goodness, Ps. 36.7, 8.

The use of this point may be diverse*

1. Such as find want of this grace should use* all means to attain it. Helps
to attain this grace of trusting in God.
And that we may be able to put all our trust upon God, we must look to these
rules following:

1. We must hate them that regard lying vanities, Psalm. 31.6. and 40.4.

2. We must know Gods name, Psalm. 9.10. we must get knowledge of Gods
goodness, and so, the warrant of our trust in the word of God. We must thence
learn both what to do, and upon what grounds to trust upon God. To this end
did God give his word to his people, Psalm. 78.5, 7. Romans 15.4. Pro. 30.5. Psalm.
56.3, 4.

3. We must labor to get assurance of Gods love to us in Jesus Christ, to know
that God is our God, and we are the children of God, Psalm. 31.14. and 36.7. for
the confidence of an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a broken tooth,
or a foot out of joint, Pro. 25.19. and the ground of our trust must be in the
merits of Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 1.12.

4. When we know God to be our God, we must strive to get our hearts to it, to
make God our portion, and to rest satisfied with Gods goodness and love to us,
whatsoever else we want, Lam. 3.24.

5. We must be sure that we be upright in heart, and that we have warrant for
our actions* and do not live in any sin that might provoke God against us,
Psalm. 64.10. And to this end we should pray God to cause us to know the way we
should walk in, and to let us hear of his loving kindness in the morning, to
encourage us in all good courses, Psalm. 143.8.

6. We must be sure we do not draw upon our selves needless troubles, Pro.
28.25. and when we are in a good way, we should not give way to our own vain
fears, Pro. 29.25.

7. When we find troubles to arise, and fear and care to surprise us, we must
make our refuge to get our selves under the shadow of Gods wings, till the
calamity be overpast, Psalm. 57.1. and 91.1. Now Gods wings are his Ordinances,
especially Prayer and his Word. Thus of the first Use.

Secondly, seeing to trust in God is such an excellent grace, such as do
endeavor to practice this trust in God must look to diverse rules in the
exercise of it, which are necessary to a right trusting in God: as,

Rules to be observed in our right trusting in God.
1. They must trust him with their hearts: their souls must trust in God, Psalm.
57.1. and 28.8.

2. They must put all their trust in God: God will have no partners. All my
trust is in thee, says David.

3. They must trust in God at all times, continually, and with praise for what
they have felt of Gods goodness, Psalm. 62.8. and 7^.14. Esaias 26.4.

4. If God do defer to answer our hope, we must wait for the Lord: their
souls must wait, Psalm. 130.5, 6.

5. They must make the most High their habitation: they must dwell with God, by
setting the Lord always before them, and attending upon all means of communion
with God. They must not be strangers from God, to go days or weeks without
directing their hearts after him, Psalm. 91.9.

6. They must handle their matters wisely, and not upon pretense of trust in
God carry themselves indiscreetly, or neglect the use of any lawful means,
Pro. 16.20

7. Their trust in God must be joined with an awefull fear of God, and sense
of their own unworthiness: they must not be conceited persons, or despise the
care of their ways, Psalm. 147.11.

8. They must declare all Gods works, that is, they must labor to glorify
God, by telling others of the experiences they have had of Gods goodness,
Psalm. 73. ult.

9. When they have committed their ways to God, they must be quieted as a
weaned child, and contented with whatsoever the Lord shall lay upon them, Psalm
131.2, 3. La^. 3.26.

10. They must believe above hope, and under hope: they must rest upon Gods
promise, how unlikely soever the performance seem to be, Romans 4.18. Thus of
the second Use.

Thirdly, we may from the reasons of this doctrine gather evidently, That all
Gods servants, that trust in God, are in a wondrous safe condition, as David
shows of himself, Psalm. 18.2, 3. Neither may they say that they cannot look
that God should be to them as he was to David; for God has given his word for
it, that he will be good to all that put their trust in him, 2 Samuel 22.31.
Psalm. 34.22. and therefore all true Christians, that find themselves prone to
fear or discontent, should speak to their souls, and chide their own hearts
as David did, Psalm. 43.5. See Esaias 30.2.

Fourthly, wicked men have little cause then to deride and scoff at the people
of God for trusting in God, and refusing to use such evil courses as they do:
for by the doctrine and reasons before it appears plainly, that they do both
holily and happily by committing all to God, Psalm. 14.4, 7. and 22.9. Thus of
the second doctrine.

Doct. 3. It is a special praise in women to trust in God; and the more
praise, because it is so rare in women, who use to rely upon either their
parents or their husbands, to provide for them, and seldom look up to God.
And besides, it produces excellent effects: for it makes them subject to their
husbands, and that with all quietness, and meekness, and fear to displease
their husbands, as is implied here. And besides, women that trust in God will
be a great help and comfort to their husbands in their crosses: Vid 1 Timothy 5.5.
Ier. 49.11.
they will encourage them to rely upon God, in whom they put their trust,
which very help is worth great riches. The Use should be therefore to persuade
wives to be the more careful of their faith and trust in God, and to look to
it that it be a true faith, and a right trust in God: for such wives as are a
vexation to their husbands by their carelessness, and frowardness, and
unquietness, and such as are so far from comforting their husbands in
distress, that they rather add affliction to their afflictions, by censuring
them, and crossing them, they may justly fear that their trust in God is not
right. Yea, it maybe observed, Note.
that some wives that profess religion, and are unquiet, and live frowardly
and stubbornly toward their husbands, they are unquiet in their consciences
too; and when crosses come upon them, call their faith into question, and
cannot be established in their trust in God. And it is just with God it should
be so, that such women as dare live in known transgressions against their
husbands, should not know their portion in the consolation of God: God will not
be loved when their husbands are not loved.

Thus of the fourth point. The fifth point is the effect, and that is, They
adorned themselves.

Adorned themselves.] In all ages the comeliness and ornameut of a wife as a
wife was to obey her husband with meekness and fear: Doct.
and those were the comeliest and best apparelled women, in the sight of God,
their husbands, and good men, that were most quiet and easy to be governed,
and willingest to please their husbands, And so on the contrary, a wife were a
very unhandsome woman, and not fit to please any wise man, that were of a
froward and unquiet disposition, either through anger, or crying, or the like;
yea though she had otherwise never so great an estate, or never so excellent
gifts of nature, of mind, or body; yea if she could be imagined to have true
holiness and grace, yet she were but a loathsome creature. And this doctrine,
as it should move all wives, so especially such as have not other things to
commend them, but want either portion, or beauty, or skill, or have but weak
gifts in religion; these should be the more careful to recompense their
husbands, and strive to please them in this way of adorning themselves.

The matter of the example is subjection to their husbands; and of that I have
entreated in the exhorration it self.

The special argument is taken from the particular example of Sarah, ver. 6.
Where we are to observe,

1. What she did, viz. she obeyed Abraham, calling him Lord. 2. What fruit will
follow to Christian wives if they follow her example, viz. they shall become
her daughters. 3. Upon what condition they shall obtain that honor, viz. if
they do well, and be not afraid of any amazement.
Sarah.^ The names here mentioned are Sarah and Abraham, and both their names
are kept in the Christian Church, not as they were at first, but as they were
changed of God out of his love and respect to their faith and obedience. The
woman was first called Saras* which signified My Lady, or My Mistress; but after
was changed into Sarah, to signify that she should be a Mistress to many, or a
Mistress indefinitely, meaning that she should have a great posterity; as the
man's name was changed into Abraham, and signified a father of many nations.
From the giving of the names we may gather,

1. Such as glorify God by believing, and keeping his covenant, and patient
bearing of adversity, shall be blessed of God; and in particular, shall have
this blessing of a happy posterity. A godly life brings God to us and our
families, and an ungodly life drives him away.

2. That God is no accepter of persons, but godly wives shall have their part
in the blessing of godly husbands. This Christian wives may look for, if they
be as Sarah, holy women, and such as obey their husbands, and are a comfort and
help to them in all the travels of their lives, and no way hinder godliness
in them.

Obeyed Abraham.] Diverse things may be noted hence.

1. That obedience is the chief thing required in the subjection of wives:
showing how Sarah was subject, he says, she obeyed him. The maine thing
required of wives, is to be ruled by their husbands. Those wives transgress,
that are not careful to see that done which their husbands require, and with
reason require: and those that cross their husbands, and vex them, by
opposing or censuring; especially those that will not be quiet unless they may
do what they list, and rule their husbands.

2. That as much is due to every husband, as was due from Sarah to Abraham;
else this argument of the Apostle had not been good. They might have said that
Abraham was a great man, and holy, and wise, and loving, etc. but the Apostle
requires, that what women would do, for the substance of obedience, if they
had Abraham to their husband, that must they, do to him that is now their
husband. And the reason is clear, because Gods commandment in the moral Law
prescribes the same honor to be given to all husbands: and in the New
Testament obedience is required of all wives to all husbands. And this was the
more observable in Sarah, because in obeying Abraham, she was feign to leave
her own country, and be exposed to a world of pains, and danger, and wants.

3. That the discharge of domestical duties is a good work, and shall be had
in everlasting remembrance. Though all good wives have not the honor to be
written in Gods book of Scripture, and praised therein, yet they have the
honor to be written in Gods book of Remembrance, which shall be opened at the
last day; and so contrariwise.

Calling him Lord.] That she did so call him, the Apostle found written, Genesis
18.12. Hence we may observe;

1. That godly wives ought to acknowledge their husbands to have power over
them, as if they had been servants bought with their money; not that their
subjection is no better than the subjection of servants, but that the husbands
have as well power over them, as they have over their servants. Sarah does not
in judgment only acknowledge it as due, but with wonderful affection, does
easily and with great love give that title to Abraham.

2. That it is one part of the subjection of wives, to carry themselves
reverently toward their husbands; and to give them such titles, as may show
that they do heartily honor them.

3. We may here observe the wonderful goodness of God toward his servants,
that in a great heap of sin, can see and accept of a little spark of true
grace. The whole sentence of Sarah was vile and profane, only that word was
good: God praises her for that was good, and passes by the great fault she
committed. Yea we may note, that God is so well pleased with her loving
subjection to her husband, that he is content to forgive her great sin of
unbelief against him. Yea it is probable, that her great respect of her
husband made her the more willingly to believe Gods promise afterward: for,
Heb. 11.11. she is commended, judging God to be faithful, who had promised her
a child, though at first she laughed at it.

Whose daughters ye are.] Godly women may be said to be the daughters of Sarah
three ways.

1. If Sarah be taken mystically for the new Jerusalem, as Gal. 4. Ga^ly women
da^g^ters of Sar^h three wa^es.


2. In respect of inhe^iting the love and blessing of God which Sarah had, they
shall be her daughters, that is, they shall have the same portion from God, as
if they had come in Sarahs room, as in the case of Abraham is said, Romans 4.11,
16.

3. In respect of spiritual kindred and alliance: Christian women are as near
a kin to Sarah as if they were her own daughters.

So that the maine doctrine from hence is, That there is a spiritual kindred
and consanguinitie between the godly: about which, from this place we may
observe diverse positions.

1. That all the godly are a kin: and the reason is, because they are all the
children of one father, that is, God; and all borne of the immortal seed of
the Word.

2. That they are near a kin, as near as mothers and daughters, or as
brothers and sisters, as Christ said of his kindred, Mat. 12.49, 50. Here are
no cousins removed.

3. That this kindred does confer a real honor upon every Christian: so as
the Christian wives are as truly great as if they were immediately descended
out of Sarahs womb.

4. That God himself does seriously acknowledge this kindred, and looks upon
the meanest Christian, as truly allied to the greatest Worthies have ever
been in the world.

5. That this neerenesse of consanguinitie is not a jot altered by the distance
of hundred of years, as in the Apostles time the glory of alliance with Sarah
did shine in Christian women: the reason is, because the root of this
consanguinitie is ever alive, which is Christ.

6. That Christians are not borne to this kindred, but made so. Godly women
were not borne daughters of Sarah, but became so after their new birth.

7. That that which breeds this spiritual kindred is not being Gossips at the
Fon^, nor no carnal propagation, Romans 9.8. but faith, Romans 4.16. and
well-doing, as this Apostle says in this Text.

The Use may be, first, to comfort godly Christians against the want and loss
of carnal kindred, and to teach us all to honor such as are truly godly; for
they are the only excellent ones, and have the greatest and best kindred in
the world. Yea, we should prefer our godly kindred before our carnal, in the
dearness of our love: and the godly should show all duties of love one to
another, as they that are mothers and daughters, brothers and sisters in the
Lord, and so should stand one for another, as men would do for their carnal
kindred.

A second doctrine may be noted from hence, That all Christians are not alike
in gifts: some are mothers, ^ome are daughters: as it is in the body of a man,
all the members are not of like honor or use, though all serve for the good of
the body, 1 Cor. 12. Which should teach those of greater gifts not to despise
those of lesser gifts, and those of lesser gifts to honor those of greater
gifts; and both sorts to praise God for the gifts they have, having nothing but
what they have received, and to be a daughter of Sarah, being sufficient to get
the blessing that Sarah had her self.

So long as you do well.] Observe hence;

1. That Christians obtain not the proper privileges of communion of Saints,
unless they do well* None but Christians that lead a holy life have the
honor of true spiritual kindred with Christ and the Saints, Mat. 12.49, 50.
Wicked Christians are a kin to the Devil.

2. That we are bound only to imitate that which is good in the Saints, not
their sins. They must follow Sarah in her well-doing: they must not imitate her
in her frowardness, Genesis 16.5. nor in her bold adventuring of her chastity,
though it were upon pretense of saving her husbands life, Genesis 12.11, 12. And
this condemns those women that so wilfully allege the example of others to
uphold them in such behavior as their own consciences tell is naught.

3. It is imported here, that some women may do well for a time, and yet prove
very naught afterward. Some begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh. Some
women are at first quiet, sober, loving to their husbands, good housewives,
etc. and yet after a time they grow froward, excessive in apparel, diet, and
the like, imperious, such as slight their husbands, idle and wastfull, and
careless of the duties they should do in the family. They are condemned of
themselves, and shall rise in judgment against themselves: their first works
condemn their last.

4. In general we may here note, That it is not enough to do good, but we
must see to it, that what we do be well done.

Quest. What can come to a good action to make it ill?

What things mar a good action.
Answ. Impenitencie in any sin will stain any action, though it be in it self
never so good, Esaias 1.13, 16.

2. An ill end will defile a good action, to do it of purpose to be seen of
men, Mat. 6. or as men pleasers, in the case of wives, or servants, or
subjects, etc.

3. Unbelief makes all actions ill: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin: when we
either know not the warrant of it, or believe not Gods acceptance.

4. Rashness and indiscretion mars good actions, Pro. 19.2. when men have not
respect to the circumstances of well-doing, or the provision should go to it;
when good duties are done rudely, and without respect of due time and place,
etc. We should be wise to do good, Romans 16.19.

5. Unwillingnesse defiles a good action, when it seems evil to us to serve
God, Josh. 24.14. when our works are dead works, Hebr. 9.14. Deuteronomy. 28.47.

6. When the fruit men bear is not their own fruit; as if a King will offer
sacrifice, or women preach, or the like. And so when wives do not the duties
of wives, though they did never so much good other ways, yet they have not the
praise of well-doing, unless they do their duties to their husbands: the like
may be said of Magistrates, Ministers, Husbands, Parents, Servants, etc.

7. Confidence in the flesh mars good duties, when men trust to their own wits,
reason, skill, or any gifts, and do not all they do in the name of Jesus
Christ, Col. 3.17. Phil. 3.3. and in particular, conceitednesse, and to be wise
in themselves, and proud, will mar any action. All should be done in meekness
of wisdom.

8. Inconstancy shames any action, when we are weary of well-doing, or
wavering, or decline and go backwards; their righteousness being as the
morning dew.

Quest. Can any thing we do be well done, seeing all our righteousness is as
a menstruous cloth? Esaias 64.6.

Answ. Our works in themselves are none well done, but by Gods indulgence
assured unto us in the new Covenant: where he,

How we are said to do well.
1. Accepts the will for the deed. It is well done when our desire and endeavor
is to do it as well as we can.

2. He beholds the work in Christ, and for his intercession passes by the
evil that cleaves to our best works.

3. He regards it as proceeding from his own Spirit in us, who causes us to
do good, and works our works for us; as in the instance of prayer, Romans
8.26. Thus of the fourth observation.

Doct. 5. From the manner of the term in the original, which has a continual
respect to the present time, and imports a continual well-doing, I note, That
a Christian should strive to be always doing good: he should let no time pass
without well-doing, 2 Timothy 2.21. 2 Cor. 9.8. Psalm. 106.2. Col. 3.10. 1 These.
5.15. 1 Timothy 5.10. And that for many reasons:

1. Because he has so little time left to work in. Reasons why we (...)
always to be doing well.
He should walk in the light while he has the light; the night will come when
no man can work: and the rather, since he has lost so much time in doing
works of darkness, he should now redeem the time, Ephesians 5.15. 1 Pet. 4.2, 3.

2. Because he is Gods servant, and therefore should be always working, Romans
6. yea, he is Gods Sacrifice, therefore should he be wholly devoted to the
doing of good, Romans 12.1.

3. Because we have our task set us, and ever the more work we do, the
sooner we shall fulfill the measure prescribed us,

4. Because hereby we shall much glorify God, Mat. 5.19. and silence wicked
men, 1 Pet. 2.12, 15.

5. Because God is faithful, and will not forget our works and labor; we
shall be rewarded accordingly. If we sow sparingly, we shall reap sparingly,
2 Cor. 9. Heb. 6.11. Gal. 6.9. God gives us richly to enjoy all things in this
world, 1 Timothy 6.17. and our continuance in well-doing will be marvellously
rewarded in heaven, Romans 2.7.

Now, that we may do much good, we must p^ay God to establish us in every good
word and work, 2 These. 2.17. and withal, we must furnish our selves with
directions out of the Scriptures, and study the rules of life there
prescribed, 2 Timothy 3.10, 17. James 3.17. and then we must be sure to make use
of all the opportunities of well-doing.

And be not afraid with any amazement.] These words may be diversely referred,
and so diversely expounded.

If they be referred to the exhortation to subjection to their husbands in the
manner before showed, then the sense may be, that they should not fear that
they should be misused if they were subject: or else it limits the manner of
subjection, that they should not be subject only for fear, or out of baseness
of mind; fear should not be the ground of their obedience, but conscience of
Gods Commandments, and love to their husbands.

If they be referred to the example of Sarah, they may be taken either as a
promise, or as a condition; as a promise thus. If they imitate Sarah in
well-doing, they need not be afraid of the troubles of a married estate; for
by this course those troubles will be prevented, or the tribulation they shall
have in the flesh will not be great. Or they may bethe second, as a condition
of their filiation: if they will be Sarahs daughters, then they must learn of
Sarah to bear the troubles and afflictions may befall them and their husbands,
without disquietnesse and amazement. Sarah could leave her own country, and
was a comfort to her husband; and we never read that she any way discouraged
her husband, or complained of misery, though she was feign to live in many
strange places, and had not at any time any certain abode any where.

But I think the words may be interpreted in general, as containing a
prohibition of excessive fears and consternation of mind, which is often found
in women, to the great offense and disquieting of their husbands. The word
translated Amaz^ment, notes such a perplexity of mind, in which one is almost
at his wits end: and therefore the Verb of which this Noune is derived is used
in the New Testament only in these cases, as in the cases of rumors of wars or
seditions, ready to seize upon a people, Luke 21.9. or in the case of a
conceit that one sees a ghost or spirit, Luke 24.37. And such as either of
these do women sometimes fall into: and this the Apostle forbids.

He does not forbid all fear: for they must fear their husbands, Ephesians. 5.
ult. and they must fear God, 2 Cor. 7.11. Nor does he severely tax that
natural fearfulness in women which follows their sex, but only such
desperate vexations or passions as suffer them not to make use of their trust
in God, or love to their husbands.

Quest. What causes can there be imagined why these Christian wives should be
in danger of any such consternation of mind?

Answ. The Apostle might well imagine diverse causes of this frailty.

1. They had husbands that were Infidels, which might be a great grievance to
them: Causes of amazement in wives.
and besides, those husbands might perhaps absolutely forbid them, or labor to
restrain them from the exercises of Christian Religion, which might put them
into a great strait.

2. Their profession of Christian Religion might bring upon them many
tribulations and persecutions, which women are not so able to bear.

3. It may be the Apostle had observed that women were apt to fall into these
desperate fits of passion and grieving, when they were crossed by their
husbands, or servants, or children. Sure it is, that many women now a days, if
their husbands do but cross them in reasonable things, they will cry and
grieve, as if they would die in the vexation of their hearts.

These strange humors, and perplexities, and desperate fits, the Apostle
absolutely forbids: he would not have any of them found in a Christian wife.

Ver. 7. Likewise ye husbands dwell with them according to knowledge, giving
honor unto the wife, as unto the weaker vessel, as being heirs together of
the grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered.


HItherto of the duties of Wives: the Husbands duty follows in the words of
this Verse. Where three things are to be observed: 1. The proposition of their
duty; Husbands dwell with them. 2. The exposition, showing how they must do
it, viz. as men of knowledge, and such as honor them. 3. The Reasons; which
are three: 1. Because they are the weaker vessel, and therefore need to be
carefully and continually well used. 2. Because they are both alike heirs of
Gods grace. 3. Because else their prayers and Gods service will be much
interrupted and hindered.



In the Proposition may be observed, First, the word of connection, Likewise.
Secondly, the term of application, Ye. Thirdly, the persons charged,
Husbands. Fourthly, the duty imposed, viz. Dwell with them.

Likewise.] This term binds these words to the former, and shows, that God
does charge husbands to look to their duties, as well as wives. Now if God
charge the husband, it imports, that evil husbands must give account to God of
all the evil they do: though no law of man punish them, yet God will, that
gave them this law. And withal, it may comfort such husbands as are censured
without cause: God that has given them their charge knows their integrity,
whatsoever foolish wives object, or a vain world imputes to them. And in
general, God will accept and reward the careful behavior of good husbands.

But before I proceed, two questions may be asked.

Quest. 1. Why are husbands charged in the last place?

Answ.There may be two reasons given of it:first, Why Husbands duties are noted
in the last place.
to show the respect that God gives to husbands. He first by his precept
informs his wife before his face, and shows him a pattern how he shall walk
toward him; and therefore now may the more willingly attend to his own duty.
Secondly, because things last spoken, have usually the greatest and longest
impression upon the heart: and this is a matter of greater consequence, that
the husband be soundly careful of the discharge of his duty. The well-being
of the family, and the well-doing of both man and wife, depends much upon the
husbands right behavior. If the head be out of order, how can the body be
well? and the wife being the image of the husband, what shall she learn of him
if he give an ill pattern? If the eye be dark, how can the body be light? If
the Pilot of the Ship be ignorant and careless, what safety can the Ship be
in? Besides, what a world of hurt will the ill example of the husband do in
the family, either in children or servants?

Quest. 2. But why are husbands charged with so few words?

Ans. Because it is to be supposed, that they have a larger knowledge of Gods
will. And besides, in that tender age of the Christian world, the Apostles in
discretion said less to superiors, to avoid provocation of irreligious
husbands, and the better to allure them to the Christian faith, when they
should see their wives so largely instructed in their behavior toward them.
And further, ever the shorter their lesson is, the more shame for them not to
learn it, and show themselves exact both in the understanding and in the
practice it.

Ye Husbands.] God speaks to them in the second person, to import, that they
should hear these words, as if God were present to speak to them in his own
person; and withal, to teach them that the right hearing of this doctrine, is
for every man to hear it as spoken directly to himself. God does single them
out to hear their charge, and speaks to them as if he named them in
particular.

Husbands.] The persons charged are husbands: and the word is a term that
imports that special relation, in which God binds one man to one woman;
investing the man in prerogatives of a superior in that union.

Before I come to the duty charged upon husbands, it will not be unprofitable,
by way of preface, to use some motives to such husbands as will make conscience
of their ways, to persuade them to be very careful of their charge. The
reasons used in the Text afterward I will not now meddle withal, but only put
them in mind of some few things which ought to be effectual to persuade them.
The motives may be drawn from four fountains.

1. From commandment: Mo^^v^^ (...) pers^ade Husbands to be careful of their
duties.
and there let them consider who commands them, and how. Who commands them;
and so let them mark, first, that God himself has given them their law of
walking. They are not tied by man's laws, but by Gods own law. Secondly* God
speaks to them by the Ministry of great Apostles: it was one part of the
Commission of those high Ambassadors (sent into the Christian world) to give
husbands their charge. Thirdly, it should somewhat the more move them* that S.
Peter was himself a married man, and therefore did practice what he taught
them, and did know by experience, that a husband mightwith comfort undertake
this task. And then it should much move them, to observe how God has given
his commandment to them: he first charge their wives, before he char^^t^
them. And besides, he has given a long charge to the wives, and but a short
charge to them*

2. From their relation to their wives. They are their wives heads, and
therefore should be careful how they order themselves. They are the life of
their lives, as it were: God has made the wife to depend upon them for
comfort, and direction, and preservation.

3. From their prerogatives: God has given them great power more than the
wives. They are heads to their wives: and besides, they are images of Jesus
Christ: they show in the family what Christ is in the Church: they do as it
were act Christ's part, and resemble him in his relation to the Church: and
therefore they had need to think of it, how they carry themselves. They are
types of Jesus Christ, and will they shame him by acting folly, passion, pride,
and dissoluteness? Did Christ do so to the Church? Besides, it should much
move him, that God has, in the most things, left the husband free from the
laws of men. He has no man to control him in his office; and has not God
made him both King and Priest in his family? His household is a little Kingdom,
or a little Church, where he is of sovereign power, and has great supremacy;
and if the world acknowledge not the glory of his place, yet it is acknowledged
in heaven.

4. From the manner of his coming into this relation: he was not borne a
husband, but made so, and made so by the gift of God: for God gave him his
wife, as he did Eve to Adam: yea, let him consider that God gave him the wife
that was of his own choosing, and whom with so much desire he longed after,
and, it may be, prayed for. But especially let him consider that God has bound
him to his wife by covenant; yea, that he has bound himself to God by
covenant for this thing; yea, that the oath of God is upon him: he has sworn
before the Lord to do his duty. Thus of the general motives.

Further, in that he said Husbands indefinitely, he shows thereby, That all
husbands are bound to observe this charge, and all alike. God charge rich,
learned, wise, godly husbands, as much and as well as poor, unlearned, and ill
disposed men. Two Uses may be made of this point: for first, hereby we may see
clearly that outward things make no difference before God: when God gives a
law he gives it to all men, as if they were but one man. Civil difference of
blood, nations, calling, condition, or common gifts* makes no exception from
any, when God gives his law. Secondly, such husbands as find an outward
difference from other husbands, either in their gifts, or greatness of means,
or highness of office or calling, should lay aside all thought of such things,
and show as much respect to their wives, as any other men that have no such
things to boast of. And yet one thing more I may add to such hearers as hear
this doctrine; seeing God charge all, they should take heed of that common
fault of thinking of other husbands* and how the doctrine will fit them, and so
neglect application to themselves.

Dwell with them.] The duty charged upon husbands is contained briefly in these
words; and under this phrase of dwelling with them is comprehended in effect
all essential matrimonial duties: for it imports,

What things cohabitat^^n does import.
1. Not only cohabitation,but also,

2. Separation from all the world, to a special fellowship with that woman.

3. Communion of goods. They that must be partners of Gods treasures in heaven,
must be partners in all outward blessings. All things should be common: so as
the husband must provide maintenance for his wife, and that not only while he
lives with her, but he ought, as he is able, to provide for her maintenance
after he is dead.

4. Mutual benevolence, or the mutual use of each others bodies, 1 Cor. 7.

5. Delight in her company, so as to be loath to be absent from her: it is not
enough to be with her, but he must dwell with her, Pro. 5.19.

6. Serving of God together, as the last reason in the end of the verse shows.

Now diverse reasons may be given of this, why husbands should dwell with their
wives.

1. From the institution of marriage diverse things may be noted: as, that God
said, he would provide a helper for man to be before him, Genesis 2.18. and
besides, Adam confessed she was bone,and flesh of his flesh, which the Apostle
urges, Ephesians. 5. And further it is said, For this cause shall a man leave father
and mother, and cleave to his wife, and they shall be one flesh. All which
imports a necessity of living together.

2. From the example of Christ: husbands should love their wives, as Christ
loved the Church. Now, how Christ desires to be with the Church, may be seen
in the Canticles; and he has promised he will be with his Church to the end
of the world, Mat. 28.

3. From the unnaturalness of the offense of living asunder. Did ever any man
hate his own flesh? says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. or can the arm or head in
the natural body, live well from the other parts of the body? no more either
comely or convenient is it for husbands to live from their wives.

The use is therefore, for great reproof of many husbands, that have so little
desire or delight to converse in this holy and loving manner with their wives,
but study all occasions to draw them from home: yea some men had rather live
abroad with their dogs or hawks, than at home with their wives. But
especially, those beasts are abominable, that leave the society of their wives,
to follow strange women, that is, Whores.

Secondly, here is somewhat for wives too: If they would have their husbands to
keep home, and delight in their company, they must labor to be amiable, and
pleasing, and study to be quiet and obedient, that their husbands may be
encouraged with delight to live with them.

Again, the indefinite propounding of the duty, shows, that they must dwell
with them at alltimes; not for the first quarter after they are married, but
for ever, and that for conscience sake, not only to avoid shame, or the
displeasure of the wives friends, or only while her portion lasts, or for such
like carnal respects.

But before I leave this point, something would be said of four cases of
absence, which may be put: as first, the case of absence in respect of
calling: secondly, the case of separation from bed and board: thirdly, the case
of nullities: fourthly, the case of divorce.

For the first, when God gives a man a just calling to live from his wife, In
what cases it is (...) full for the husband to be absent.
or to go into foreign parts, it is lawful to forbear cohabitation for the
time: as in the case of Soldiers, or Merchants, or Ministers, that are called
to exercise their Ministeries in remote places. In these cases, when the wives
cannot or will not go with them, they may lawfully live absent; yea, though
their wives consent not to it: because all relations to man must give place to
our relation to God. Now when God calls any man to any imploiment, no man can
disannull that calling; and therefore such in the Ministry as have lawful
callings to exercise their Ministeries in other countries, and have not fit
imploiment at home, do very sinfully when they refuse to preach the Gospel in
such places, upon that silly pretense, that they cannot get their wives to
consent.

For the second, viz. the case of separation from bed and board, it is for the
most part very wicked and abominable; Whether separation from bed and brood be
lawful.
because we have not either commandment, or permission, or example of any such
in the Word of God. And besides, experience shows it breeds a world of
scandalous inconveniences: though I doubt not, but in some special cases the
Magistrate or Church may cause such a separation for a time; but as it is
ordinarily practiced by diverse husbands and wives it is very vile.

For the third, viz. the case of nullities, we must understand, in diverse
cases, though the man have bound himself by the contract or consummation of
marriage, to the woman, yet he must not dwell with her, because such contracts
and marriages are mere nullities in the sight of God, and of no force.

Cases of nullitie.
1. If he marry her that is divorced for any other cause than fornication, Mat.
19.9.

2. If the marriage be incestuous, that is, within any of the degrees
prohibited in the law of God: see Lev. 18. Which laws were not ceremonial or
political, but moral and natural: which may appear, as by other reasons, so
by this one; God (says he) did destroy the Nations for such incestuous
matches, Lev. 18.24. Now God could not punish the Nations for breaking a law
was never given them. The ceremonial and political laws were given to the
Jews, and not to the Gentiles: thus it was not lawful for Herod to have his
brothers wife; nor must the Corinthian that married his fathers wife be
suffered to dwell with her, 1 Cor. 5.

3. Divi^es generally agree, that if there be a precontract with another person
in verbis de praesenti, in the words of the present time, made with consent of
parents, etc. then the marriage after with another is a mere nullitie, and
such dwelling together is wh^redome. Zanchius brings reason for this from the
law of God and Nature, and civil and common laws.

4. If a marriage be made without the free consent of the parties, or in cases
where they are not able to give a free con^ent; as in the marriage with
children under age, or with mad men, or persons that are drunk when they give
consent, and do disclaim it when they are sober: These are nullities in the
common opinion of Divines of all sorts: and the reason is, because the consent
of parties is essentially requisite to such a bond.

5. If there be error personae, an error of the person, that is, if a man mean
to contract marriage with one person, and another person is given him; as when
Leah was given in stead of Rachel to Jacob. Divines agree that Jacob might have
rejected Leah, and that his own consent afterward did only bind him to dwell
with her. But yet error about the condition or state of the person is no
nullitie. If a man contract himself to a woman he thinks to be a free woman,
and she proves a bond woman; or he thinks he marries with a rich woman, and
she proves a poor woman; these errors do not cause a nullitie, he must live
with her for all this.

6. If marriage be contracted with such as are utterly and incurably unapt for
marriage, this marriage is a nullitie; as in the case of Eunuchs, some kinds of
incurable palsies, or the like. And about this I find no difference amongst
Divines.

Zanchius and some other Divines go further, and pronounce nullities in the
cases following* as,

If marriage be contracted, yea, and celebrated without the consent of parents.
He brings many arguments from the Law before Moses, and from the Law of Moses,
from the testimony of the Apostle Paul, and from the laws of Nations, and from
the Fathers.

If marriage be contracted or celebrated with such as have any notorious
contagious disease, which is known to be incurable, as the Elephantiasis, or
worse kind of leprosy, or the like; because this will prove a mischief to the
party clear, and to his children, and to the Commonwealth; and God ordained
not marriage to be a mischief, but a help.

If marriage be celebrated with a woman that is found to be with child by
another man.

Yea, he enclines to those that think the marriage of a Christian with an
Infidel, as a Jew, Turk, or Pagan, as being the known and professed enemies
of Christ, is likewise a nullitie. He gives many probable reasons, and quotes
diverse authors for the opinion.

But for my part, I dare not venture so far, especially to be peremptory in
it: much less have I attained to the learning of those Divines, that think
Veneficium versus hanc, Witchcraft disabling a man toward that woman only, to
be a sufficient cause of a nullitie in the marriage. Thus of the case of
nullities.

For the case of divorce, I think that rule of our Savior binds peremptorily,
Concerning divorce, what rule is to be observed.
that no man may put away his wife, but only in the case of fornication, Mat.
19.9. In that case a man (making a lawful divorce) is not bound to
cohabitation, but freed from it, and must not dwell with her any more. If it be
objected, that in the case of disertion, when an Infidel forsakes a believer,
the Apostle faith the believer is free. I answer, that this is not a case of
divorce: The believer does not for the business of Religion put away the
unbeleever, yea, the Apostle shows he ought not, 1 Cor. 7. only if the
unbeleever will depart, let her depart. And so by the wilful departure of the
Infidel, the Christian is freed from the bond of marriage, as Divines
conceive; which is a kind of nullity, but not a divorce. But then a great
respect must be had to the kind of unbeleever: not every wicked man or woman;
nor every person that professes a false religion, but such an unbeleever as
is a professed enemy to the Name of Christ, is the unbeleever the Apostle
speaks of.

Yet one thing more I must add about the case of disertion, when the disertion
is for other causes than Religion, if it be wilful or inevitable, then the
party diserted is freed from this charge of cohabitation; freed, I say, for a
time, till the diserted return: and if he never return, the party forsaken is
for ever free. Thus of the proposition of their duties: the exposition of it
follows.

According to knowledge.] By knowledge, I take it here meant that Christian
knowledge of Religion and the Word of God, which godly husbands had attained by
the Gospel: for, in the end of the verse, he speaks of husbands, as heirs of
the grace of life. And so before I come to show what special things, in the
manner of cohabitation this knowledge does charge upon husbands, I would
consider of some doctrines in general, employed by the words: as,

Doct. 1. That the knowledge of Gods Word is a gift of God to be much
accounted of: and therefore the Apostle here for honor sake to the man,
mentions this grace rather than any other. And that knowledge is a precious
thing,or a great treasure, may appear diverse ways. First, Excellency of
divine knowledge in many respects.
by the seat and use of knowledge: it is a gift that adornes the mind of man,
making him by his inward understanding to see excellent things. It is a great
benefit to have senses to discern things without us: but this divine light
that God puts into the understanding of man, gives to the understanding power
to see admirable things; especially, when it is spiritual light, it shows a
man the differences between good and evil, and reveals such glorious things
as no senses can reach to. Secondly, by the author of it: God is the father of
light, and dwells in light, Iam. 1.17. and it is the special glory of
Christ's divinity, to lighten every man that comes into the world, John 1. and
the holy Ghost claims a part in this glory, to give illumination to the mind,
2 Cor. 3. Thirdly, by the testimony God gives of the worth of knowledge,
e^pecially when it is spiritual and religious knowledge. (...) is called
riches, 1 Cor. 1.5. and preferred before all outward things in the world, Ier.
9.2^. and Christ accounts it a great sign of special friendship, to
communicate knowledge to his Disciples, Ioh. 15.15. and God gave Jacob a
greater portion when he gave his word to him, than he did give to all the
world besides. He did not so with other Nations, Psalm. 1. Fourthly, by the
accounts Christ gives unto his Father of the discharge of his office: he is
careful to prove that he has given knowledge to the men God gave him, to
prepare them for eternal life, John 17.6, 7, 8, 26. Fifthly, by the relation
it has to God himself: it is a part of the image of God in the new man, Col.
3.10. Sixthly, by the contrary: it is accounted a great sin and a curse to
want knowledge, Hosh. 4.11. and other gifts or services are rejected as vain,
if this grace be not had; as Zeal, Romans 10.2. Sacrifice, Hos. 6.6 and
therefore such as want knowledge should shake off profane sluggishnesse, and
vain objections, and seek to be rich in knowledge, as the men in the world
do to abound in wealth, Pro. 4.7. and 2.4. And such as have knowledge should
strive to increase it, and be thankful to God for his great mercy in giving
them knowledge, and the means of it.

Doct. 2. Knowledge is required of all sorts of men. Not of Ministers only, but
of private men; of all husbands, yea, and of all men before they be husbands:
because so soon as they have wives, they are charged to show their knowledge,
John 1.9. 1 Cor. 8.1. 1 Timothy 2.4. This condemns the sacrileg^ous humor of
those persons that are like the wicked Lawyers our Savior speaks of, Luke
11.52. which take away the key of knowledge from private men, either by their
opinions hindering others from seeking knowledge, with their errors mudding
the clear fountain of Gods Word; or by their power, restraining the means of
knowledge from the people. And withal, this should stir up all sorts of men
to seek knowledge, and use all means to attain it, as they will give their
account unto God of the use of their time at the last day.

Doct. 3. Knowledge is given us for use and practice, not for idle speculation:
it is given, as other gifts of the Spirit, to profit withal: it is a light to
lighten our paths. Our knowledge should be after godliness, Tit. 1.1. It
should some way help forwards the work of godliness: that we get by hearing
should be showed by practice, James 1.22, 23, 24. They that have knowledge,and
will not use it, shall have that knowledge taken from them. Mat. 13.11. Nor is
the use of knowledge only for discourse, but for conversation. The words of
knowledge, or utterance, is given to some Christians only, 1 Cor. 12.8. And
such as cannot talk much, may yet have comfort, if they have knowledge to stay
their hearts in faith, and that they can show their knowledge by a good
conversation.

Doct. 4. The knowledge seated in our minds should have a commanding power of
our actions: all should be according as a man's knowledge faith. Those parcels
of divine truth put into our minds should rule us, and dispose of us, and make
us ordered according to them. Those laws in our minds should make us master
all that rebels against them, and make the members be subject to them to obey
them. Our knowledge should be lively, and endued with sovereign power. This is
the honor we should give to the light that is in our minds, to let it rule us
in all things. And this point may much humble all sorts of Christians for want
of stirring up their knowledge, or for want of obeying it. Most Christians have
their knowledge so feeble, that the Devil or the world may lead them aside to
all sorts of temptations, and yet their knowledge makes not opposition, and
does not take arms to subdue what exalts it self against the light of it, as it
should do. 2 Cor. 10.4. Now if men would hearten and give life and power to
those notions of knowledge are in their minds, and would have their knowledge
to have full power, they must observe these rules:

Means to give power to our knowledge.
1. They must daily wound, and mortify, and resist the law of the members, that
is, such humors in them as are w^nt to be incorrigible. Most persons have some
faults in their natures that they are guilty of, with a kind of wilfulness;
such faults as must be allowed; such as if they be crossed in, there will be no
peace, but open rebellion; such faults as stick so fast to them, as if God and
man must let them alone in them: these members must obey them as a law. Now
these men must find out, and be sure they resist them, or else the laws of the
mind will be but feeble, and sacred notions infused will starve and wither,and
never appear in their life and power.

2. Men must be sure they study profitable things, and avoid such knowledges
as are fruitless, as belong not to them, 1 Timothy 6.20. 2 Timothy 2.23. Tit. ^.9.
There is knowledge that will puff up, 1 Cor. 8 1. But men must be wi^e for
themselves, and strive to understand their own way, Pro. 9.12.

3. They must pray God to put a spirit and life into their knowledge, and give
them grace to show all good conscience in their obedience; and withal, they
must pray hard for their Teachers, that their word may be a word of power to
give fire to the sparkles of light are already in their minds.

Finally, let all men that profess the knowledge of Gods word remember that
their knowledge should make them differ from all other men. Their lives should
excel others, according to the knowledge in which they differ from them. A man
must hold forth the life and light of the knowledge he has, Phil. 2.15. They
have a great task to do, that have received much knowledge; much is required
of them: if they do ill, their example may do much mischief, 1 Cor. 8.10, 11.

Doct. 5. True knowledge makes an impression upon every part of a man^ life: it
makes him better in all his ways, both toward God and man; as here, true
knowledge makes a man a better husband. He must carry himself as a husband,
according to his knowledge he has of Gods word. Tru^ knowledge enricheth a man
in every thing, 1 Cor. 1.5. The favor of our knowledge should be manifest in
every place, 2 Cor. 2.14. The knowledge that will not do thus is falsely so
called* 1 Timothy 6.20. There is use of knowledge in the most ordinary things of
the life of man; as meats, marriage, and the things of our calling, 1 Timothy 4.3.
and therefore this should stir up all godly Christians to show this proof of
their knowledge, and to pray that they may abound in kno^ledge, and all
judgment, Phil. 1.9. C^l. 1.9. and gives cause to Christians of ill behavior
in their callings or private carriage, to mistrust that their knowledge is no^
tight: and in particular, wives should pray God to give their husbands
knowledge of his Word, and to bless all means to that end, for that will make
them the better husbands.

Doct. 6. It is an ill thing for men to transgress against their knowledges,
when they do things that are not according to their knowledge, or leave undone
things they know they should do. The servant that knows his masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes, See Romans 1. ult. Heb. 10.26. 2
Pet. 2.21. Husbands and wives should in a special manner remember this: for
there is a great deal of need that they should take notice of this point. Oh
it is a grievous thing for a Christian to be wilfully corrupt, to do or leave
things undone against his knowledge.

Doct. 7. One thing here is comfortable, that God requires no more of his
servants, but to do according to the knowledge they have. Ignorances, by the
benefit of the new Covenant in Christ, he will pass by, so as they be careful
to get knowledge, according to the means they have of knowledge. This is a
great comfort.

Doct. 8. In knowledge men should excel women: therefore is knowledge here
specially mentioned, in giving the charge to men. They are the head^ of their
wives, and therefore in them should be the especial seat of spiritual senses
and understanding; and their wives are charged, if they doubt of any thing, to
ask their husbands at home. It is a great dishonor to many men in this age in
many places, that women excel them in knowledge, both for the measure of it,
and power of it, and care to use the means to get it. Thus of the general
Doctrines.

These words, as they in particular order the duties of husbands, show diverse
things they are to look to in their carriage, in dwelling with their wives. To
dwell with them according to knowledge imports,

What this dwelling with knowledge imports.
1. Matter of edification; and so three ways: for first, they must set up
religion, and the worship of God, in their dwellings, Josh. 24.15. They must
keep off the curse of God from them, and their wives and children, by daily
praying to God, Ier. 10. ult. They must diligently (in their kind) instruct
their family in the plain things of Gods law, talking and discoursing of the
Word of God upon all occasions, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Genesis 18.19. They must see that Gods
Sabbaths be kept and sanctified in their dwellings, and therefore must not
only restrain labor, but bring their household to the exercises of religion,
and privately help them by examination or repetition, Commandment 4. Exodus
20.4. yea, and by sanctifying them to Gods worship, Job 1.5. which is done by
exhorting them to holiness and preparation, and by humbling himself in prayer
before God for himself and them: and he must sanctify the creatures they use
by prayer, 1 Timothy 4.5. Secondly, in special toward their wives, they must use
their knowledge in instructing them, or resolving their doubts, as there shall
be occasion, 1 Cor. 14.35. Thirdly, they must teach their wives reformation,
and right order of behavior by their example; giving full proof of their
piety, discretion, providence, painfulness, and meekness, not daring to
commit the faults themselves they reprove in their wives, and to live so, as
not to be liable to any just exception. There is a question is often asked
about the first branch of this answer, and that is, whether a woman may
perform the duties of religion in the family, in case of the absence or
insufficiency of the husband? Now for answer thereunto, it is hard to give any
peremptory rule, because in this thing we have no Commandment from the Lord;
but yet, seeing some of the duties of religion may be done by the wife, as
instructing of children and servants, for the law of grace should be in her
lips, Pro. 31. and both Parents are charged with instructing the children, Ephesians.
6. therefore I think by Anallogie it will follow, that the wife may do other
duties, as pray, and repeat Sermons. But yet it is most likely that this power
extends not further than her children and her maids, which was the power Hester
used, chapter 4.16. or if it go further, it must be in some special cases, and
with observation of diverse circumstances, in which their safest way is to get
direction and resolution from their learned Pastors.

2. Matter of toleration, and that in respect of the infirmities of his wife:
if her infirmities be bodily, it must be the praise of his knowledge, not to
loath her for that, because God lays them on her, and she cannot help them.
And for her faults, they are either mere frailties arising from ignorance or
insufficiency she cannot help; and those he must pass by altogether, when he
discerns that she is not willing to offend in them, Pro. 19.10. or else they
are faults she commits of knowledge; and so they are either curable, or
incurable. Curable are such faults of negligence or waiwardnesse that prove
grievo^s to him or others: for these his rule is, he must not be bitter to her,
Col. 3.19. but show himself to be gentle, and easy to be entreated, James
3.17. He must use all good means of counsel, and forewarning of her, and
entreating, and such reproves as may be seasonable and secret as much as may
be. He must avoid raging and furious passion, and reproaches. If her faults be
incurable, that is, such as he cannot mend by such courses, then I suppose he
may fly to the general remedy of all Christians in the case of trespasses,
and that is, to take one or two with him, and admonish her, and then, if she
mend not, he may fly to his Pastor, and such as have charge of souls with him,
and get them to admonish her. But if none of these courses will serve, I think
the Pastor, or others employed in the business, may give notice, as they have
occasion, to other Christians of her incurablenesse, and they may thereupon
forsake her company, and reject her as a Pagan or Publican: but for the
husband, he must cohabite still, and with patience bear the cross God has
laid upon him, waiting if at any time God will give her repentance, or
otherwise restrain her wickedness.

3. Matter of circumspection. To dwell according to knowledge is to dwell with
circumspection, and that he must show in matter of his own right. He must take
heed that by no indulgence or remissness he lose his own right. He must
keep his authority, and rule as head; and not suffer things to be done or
disposed (ordinarily) against his will. And for the good ordering of necessary
directions, if his wife will not obey, he must then provide to have things done
as well as he can by his children or servants. This I speak of things
essentially expedient to the peace or well-being of the family: he must not be
his wives underling, contrary to the order of nature, and ordinance of God,
Genesis 3.16. 1 Cor. 11.3, 7, 8, 9. Ephesians. 5.23. 1 Timothy 2.12, 13, 14. Secondly, he
must show it in the care of his estate, restraining her wastefulnesse if she be
given to disorder, or retchlesnesse in that kind, Pro. 14.1. Thirdly, in case
of sin against God: he mu^t take heed that he nourish not sin in her by
connivence, or neglect of counsel or reproof, Job 2.9, 10. Fourthly, in case
of difference between her and her servants; so preserving his authority, as he
judge not partially, but with equal judgment, showing the fault wheresoever
he find it, else he may extremely harden his servants against them both.

Giving them honor.] This is the second thing required in the Exposition. They
must honor their wives: and this the husband does,

1. When he uses her with signs of his estimation of her, How many ways
husbands honor their wives.
according to her rank in the family, and her relation to him; entertaining
her as his companion, and not as his servant or slave. To honor her, is to
carry himself with such respect toward her, that all may see that he makes a
great account of her, as the companion God has given to him for his life, to
be a helper to him.

2. When he is careful to protect her from wrongs, and dangers, and
indignities, 1 Samuel 30.5.

3. When he provides for her maintenance, both in his life time, and after his
death, as well as he may* allowing her such apparel, and other things, as may
show manifestly how great account he makes of her; and doing all with
cheerfulness, and not like chu^lish Nabal: and the rather, because for the
most part they are not able to make shift, and provide for themselves.

4. By the special delight he takes in her above others, cherishing her as his
own flesh, and making as much of her as he can do of himself, Pro. 5. 19.
Ephesians. 5.28.

5. By suffering himself to be entreated, and in some cases advised and
admonished by her, Genesis 21.12.

6. By giving her such emploiment as her gifts are fit for, leaving to her
trust such things in the family and his estate as she is fit to dispose of. It
is a dishonor to the wife, when the trust of business is committed to
servants, or others, when she is able and willing to undertake it, Pro. 31.11.

7. By yielding a free and just testimony of her praises upon all fit
occasions, both to her self and others, Pro. 31.28, 29.

8. By covering her infirmities, passing by mere frailties, and not speaking
to her, to provoke her, when she is wayward, or else giving soft answers, and
forbearing as much as may be to speak to her disgrace before others.

9. When he gives her leave to dispose of some things at her pleasure, not
exacting account of her; allowing her, as a reward of her care or diligence,
some such overplus as his estate will bear, that she may be free to give for
pious or charitable uses, what may be for her credit or encouragement.

Ob. But my wife was of mean birth, condition, or portion, when I married.

Sol. So and much worse was the Church before Christ married her, and yet
Christ loves the Church.

Ob. But since marriage she is idle, and froward, and wastefull, etc.

Sol. If shebe so thou have cause to pray for, and admonish her; but for all
that thou must love her, and yield her due honor. The Church sins after
calling, and yet Christ honors the Church, both by praying for her in heaven,
and by laboring to cleanse her by his Spirit and Word in earth, Ephesians. 5.

Ob. But she is profane and carnal, a wicked woman, a scorner of religion, or
perhaps of a contrary religion.

Sol. Thou must love and honor her, not because she deserves it, but because
God requires it.

Thus of the Exposition. The reasons follow: and the first is, because they are
the weaker vessel.

As the weaker vessel.] The word translated Vessel, is diversely accepted in
Scripture; sometimes properly, sometimes metaphorically. As it is taken
properly, it is sometime taken for goods, or any household stuff, Mat. 12.29.
Luke 17.31. Sometimes again it signifies any instrument used in the house, or
without the house: so the instruments used in the Temple about any part of Gods
service were called Vessels of the Ministry, Heb. 9.21. So a Bushel is called
a Vessel, Luke 8.16. So that which held the four footed beasts and fowls,
etc. in the vision, Acts 10.11, 16. is called a Vessel, yet like a sheet: so
is a sail of a ship called by this term, Acts 27.17. Now in a metaphorical
sense this term signifies either the parts or members of the body of man or
woman that serve for generation, 1 These. 4.4. or else it signifies any person
that God has set apart for some special service or ministration. Thus Paul
was a Vessel of election, or a chosen Vessel to bear Gods name among the
Gentiles, and Kings, and the people of Israel, Acts 9.15. Or else such persons
upon whom God will declare either his mercy or justice. Thus Vessels of honor
and mercy, and Vessels of dishonor, Romans 9.21, 23. and in general, any man or
woman that God appoints to do any work, or his instruments either publicly
or privately. Thus all men, in respect of the work God requires of them, are
Vessels, 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. and so women are Vessels here, because they are
instruments God makes use of for the help of man.

Now for the word Weaker. It signifies the frailties and defects in the sex of
women: in respect of which they are inferior to men; not so much for their
sinful defects, as their natural defects; defects of negation rather than
defects of privation.

So then the sense is, that in as much as women, whom God has given unto man,
instruments of his blessing and their help, are by nature frail, and have many
weaknesses and defects, men should be the more tender and careful in their
carriage toward them. And so here are three points of doctrine may be observed:

Doct. 1. In that men and women are called Vessels, in respect of the service
God does cause them to perform, we may learn, That in works of grace, or
matters of holiness, we are rather Patients than Agents. Not but that by Gods
assistance men and women do work that which is good, but because thereby God
would have us to ascribe all to his grace. And therefore he compares us not to
active instruments, as tools are in the hands of the workmen; but to passive
instruments, such as Dishes are, that bear and carry treasure, or meat, or
such like. Hence it is the Apostles call themselves earthen Vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7
and Paul in converting the Gentiles did but bear Gods name, Acts 9.21. And
therefore we should all acknowledge our insufficiency, and fly to the blood of
Jesus Christ to sanctify us: for all the Vessels of the Ministry in the
Temple were sprinkled with blood, Heb. 9.21. And further, such as are
unprofitable should repen t and amend: for they are but as the vessel in the
hands of the Potter, and God will break them in pieces with his rod of iron,
Rev. 2.27.

Doct. 2. Women are weak and frail, called here the weaker Vessel; and I
take it this weakness is attributed to them, not in respect of sin so much as
in natural defects: so as he means not personal faults, but such weaknesses
as are found in all women, or the most. But yet I would not be understood to
free women altogether from sin in these frailties, because since the fall the
natural defects are tainted, and there is in them a special kind of
defectivenesse or infirmity which cleaves to their sex, which is not so
usually in men, or not accompanying the nature of men.

Quest. What are the things wherein women are more usually frail, or
defective, or infirm, than men?

1. In capacity and judgment. In what things women are more frail than men.
They are not capable of so large a measure of knowledge as men (in equal
comparison) nor so able to teach the depths and mysteries of knowledge.

2. In respect of their insufficiency for the greatest imploiments of life; as
that sex is not ordinarily capable of the great services of God in Church and
Commonwealth: the works cannot be done by women.

3. They are apter to be seduced than men, as the Apostle implies in the case
of all women as well as Eve, 1 Timothy 2.14.

4. In respect of dependancies. They cannot make shift for themselves, their
desire is naturally subject to men, in respect of depending upon them for
provision and protection, Genesis 3. This weakness is stamped upon the whole sex.

5. In respect of their aptness to fears and amazement, and other
perturbations,; more unconstant, and not so stable in heart as man.

6. In respect of the discovery of their hearts and natures, whether in good or
evil. It is harder to find out thoroughly the perfect disposition of a woman in
good or evil, than of men. Solomon could find out the temper of one man among
a thousand men, but not the heart of one woman among so many; and that I take
to be the true sense of that place, Ecol^s. 7.28, 29. compared with ver. 25.27.

7. In respect of their pronenesse to vanity, and pride in apparel; which I
gather from this, that all the express directions about apparel that I
remember in Scripture, are given rather to women than to men, especially in the
New Testament, as, 1 Timothy 2.9. 1 Pet. 3.3.

The Use may be, first, to give us occasion to magnify the power and mercy of
God. His mercy, that despises not his weak creatures, but bestows the grace
of life upon them. His power, in that he keeps them in life, and preserves his
own work of grace unto the possession of eternal life. Secondly, it should
stir up women so much the more to use all the Ordinances of God, and all
helps, to make themselves strong in the power of the gifts of grace; especially
they should get a strong faith in God, that they may trust in the power of God,
that gives strength to the weak, Esaias 40.29, 31. 1 Pet. 3.5. It will be their
greater glory if they can overcome their natural weaknesses, especially if
they can excel men in the things of the kingdom of God, as many times it
comes to pass. Thirdly, all Christians should have those women in great
estimation that have overcome their frailties, and do excel in knowledge, and
piety, and mercy, and trust in God. Fourthly, all women should be therefore the
more humble, and apt to fear and judge themselves, and more willing to be
taught or admonished, and more frequent in prayer to God, to help them, and
keep them: and in particular, they should be the more willing to be ruled by
their husbands, as knowing it is a mercy of God, considering their weakness,
to give them husbands, to support them, and provide for them. And finally, they
should be the more faithful and diligent to do all the good they can in
domestical affairs, seeing by nature they are not fit to manage the greater
and more public services of God.

The third Doctrine concerns husbands; and so they are taught from hence to
give the more honor to their wives, because of their natural weakness. For
as it is in the natural body, those members of the body which we think less
honorable, upon them we bestow the more abundant honor, 1 Cor. 12.23, 24. so
it should be in the Oeconomicall body: for the wife is unto the husband bone of
his bone, and flesh of his flesh; and this honor he should give her, and show
it both by taking the more care to provide for her, and by cherishing and
encouraging her the more, and by hiding and covering her frailties as much as
he may, and by not exacting more from her than she is able to perform, and by
helping her all he can, by instruction or otherwise. Only we must note that he
is not bound to honor her the more for sinful infirmities, but for natural
defects. How he must carry himself toward her in respect of sinful
infirmities, or personal faults, has been showed before in the manner of his
carriage toward her as a man of knowledge. And thus of the first reason.

As being heirs together of the grace of life.] In these words is contained
the second reason, taken from the general dignity of Christians; which also
extends to Christian wives. And concerning the dignity of Christians five
things may be noted out of these words.

1. The title of their dignity; They are heirs. 2. What they inherit; Life.
3. What the cause of this dignity is, viz. Grace. 4. In what manner they
possess it; viz. Together. 5. The persons capable of it; Woman, as well as
men.
From the coherence we may note, That if women will have their husbands to
honor them, they must be religious women, and true Christians, that have grace
as well as worldly portion. God requires religion and grace in all wives: and
the rather should they be careful to get grace, and become truly religious,
because it was long of their sex that sin came into the world: and as by one
woman's bearing of a child salvation was brought again into the world: so
should they every one in particular strive to recover their honor, by
expressing the sound power of a religious life in all faith, and charity, and
holiness, and sobriety, 1 Timothy 2.14, 15. And besides, what shall it profit
wives to get them jointures on earth, and husbands to provide for them while
they live here, if their souls and bodies perish when they die, and lose the
inheritance in heaven? and perish they will if they get not true grace. And
further, if they be gracious women, if their husbands be so profane as not to
make much of them, yet they shall be greatly set by of God: as was showed,
verse. 4. But on the other side, if they be ignorant and irreligious women, it
is just with God to deprive them of the comforts of this life, and to let their
husbands neglect them or abuse them. For though their husbands sin in so doing,
yet God is just in permitting such a thing for their punishment.

Secondly, another doctrine may be noted from the coherence; and that is, That
inheaven there shall be no difference between husbands and wives, but they
shall be all one in Christ, alike heirs of eternal life. Which is to be
noted, the more to persuade them to submit themselves, and endure to be under
the rule and authority of their husbands in this world? for that estate of
inferiority shall not last ever, for in heaven God shall be all in all, they
shall be ruled by God and the Lamb. Thus from the Coherence.

The first thing to be observed about the dignity of Christians in general
is, That they are heirs.

Heires] The doctrine is, That all true Christians are heirs.

Now, for the opening of this doctrine, two things must be considered; 1. How
they come to be heirs. 2. What their glory is in being so.


For the first; Christians are not borne Heirs: I mean, not heirs to God, H^w
godly men come to be heirs.
as is intended in this place, but have it by the grace of adoption. God has
but one Heir by generation, and that is Christ: all his other heirs are by
adoption, such as he chooses of his mere Grace, and makes them his heirs.
Now the mystery of our adoption must be considered of in this manner: A
Christian by the Gospel is made a believer: Now says, after an unspeakable
manner, engrafts him into the body of Jesus Christ: Now being engrafted into
Jesus Christ, who is Gods Son, he thereby comes to the power to be the
Son of God, and to be an heir with Christ. Christ is Gods Heir, and so is
all that is grafted upon Christ, Ioh. 1.12. Now there is a double adoption: the
one imperfect in this life, the other perfect, which we shall have after the
Resurrection of the dead. By the one we have the promise of inheritance, and
by the other we shall have full possession. Of the first is mention made, Romans
8.15. and the other, Romans 8.23. the first adoption is meant here.

For the second, Adoption is called a glory, by an excellence because there is
no glory like to it; even the adoption to be heirs as it is in this life, is
the greatest glory in the world. Now the glory of our adoption may appear to
be very great, if we consider,

1. By whom we are adopted ( viz.) God. If is be such a glory to be the Heir
to any great Prince in the world, Wherein the greatness and glory of our
adoption appears.
what a surpassing glory is it to be the Son and Heir of God? Romans 8.17. and
that if we respect either the excellence of God, who is the King of all the
earth, and above all kings; or his eternity; he is such a Father as lives
ever, Hos. 1.10. An everlasting Father, Esaias 9.6. Other fathers that adopt, may
die before they pass the estate, or at the best, it is a kind of infelicity to
enjoy the inheritance without the presence and love of the Father. But not so
here.

2. The great price was laid down, to make us capable of this honor to be
Gods Heirs ( viz.) the blood of Christ. There was never so much paid for all
the inheritances in the world besides, Gal 4.4, 5. Heb. 9.14, 15.

3. The great things we are heirs to, which I will but briefly touch here; we
are heirs not only to all our eyes can see, but to all things our hearts can
think of. We shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5.5. We shall be heirs of the
world, Romans 4. God will give us all the world: yea, we shall inherit eternal
life, as is to be showed afterward: yea, we are coheires with Christ, Romans
8.17. And what would we ask more?

4. The great privileges which Gods adopted children do enjoy even in this
life: as,

1. They have within them the spirit of Christ in their hearts, therefore
called the spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15, 16. Gal. 4.6. The spirit of Christ, I
say, to drive away regal terrors, and to testify to their spirits that they
are the sons of God, and that he has adopted them to heaven and to make them
able to treat with God as a Father, by affectionate prayer: and, as other
Scriptures show, to lead them into all truth, and to be the guide of their
lives, to tell them when they go our* either on the right hand, or on the
left. And lastly, to be their continual comforter, John 16. Esaias 30.

2. By the right of their adoption in Christ, both their persons and their
works are accepted before God, so as they stand always high in Gods favor,
howsoever they are entertained in the world, Ephesians. 1.6.

3. They have a name and honor shall never be taken from them; an everlasting
name: no preferment so high as theirs, Esaias 56.4, 5. And this is the greater
privilege, because no meannesse or contemptiblenesse of condition on earth can
bar them from the enjoying of this prerogative, as the coherence of that place
shows.

4. They have the Angels of heaven to attend them: God shows by that that he
will have them looked unto as his sons and heirs, Heb. 1. ult.

5. They may ask whatsoever they will of God, and are sure to have it: that
may get any suit of God; and he is so far from not granting* that he rather
complains that they will not ask him often enough, John 16.23.

6. If at any time they fall into distress, they have such interest in Gods
special providence, that a hair of their heads shall not fall to the ground,
without the providence of their heavenly Father. And besides, God will make
himself mavelous in their deliverance, if all worldly helps fail, Esaias
43.18, 19, 20, 21.

5. If we consider the wonderful manner of their communion with Christ, and
that four ways. For first, we have communion of nature with him, and that by
his Incarnation, for he took our nature, and so became our Brother. And this
does nothing at all belong to Reprobates, because Christ took not nature
polluted with sin, Heb. 2.14. Ye^, we have communion with him in his divine
nature, as that nature does dwell graciously in us, and we are made like unto
it, 2 Pet. 1.4. Secondly, they have communion of state with him, which the
Scripture acknowledges as a great mystery: for so they are said to live with
him, to suffer with him, to die with him, to be buried with him, yea, to rise
with him, to ascend to heaven with him, and to sit together with him, Ephesians. 2.
yea, to judge the world with him: only preserving the difference between the
head and the members in all this. Thirdly, they have communion of offices with
him, for he has made them Kings and Priests with him. The oil that was poured
on his head has run down upon his members, Rev. 1.5, 6. so that Gods heirs
are all Kings and Priests. A royal nation, and a kingdom of Priests, 1 Pet.
2.10. Fourthly, they have communion in benefits with him; for God as a Father
has blessed them in him with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things,
Ephesians. 1.3. Communion they have with him in grace in this life, and in glory in
the life to come.

Lastly, if we consider the assurance that Christians have given them for their
right of adoption: for, first, they have an Act for it in Gods eternal
council, Ephesians. 1.5. Men that have an Act of Parliament for the holding of their
lands* they think they have a sure tenure; and yet many Acts of Parliament may
be repealed, but the Acts of Gods council are like himself, immutable. The
godly they are predestinate to adoption. Secondly, they have not only Gods
promise for their inheritance, but Gods oath, that by two immutable things the
heirs of promise might have abundant consolation, as the Apostle shows, Heb.
6.17, 18. Thirdly, to make all sure, God has put his spirit within them, as
the seal and earnest of their inheritance, Ephesians. 1.13, 14.

The Use may be,

1. For information: and so, first, to show the great goodness of God to man,
that not only requires and gives holiness, but adds also blessedness to his
servants. In justification and sanctification he gives to men those good things
they call bona virtutis, the good things of virtue; and inadoption he gives
those good things they call bona conditionis, the good things of condition,
even blessedness and true happiness: whom God makes holy he will make happy
also. Secondly, it manifestly shows that we hold all our happiness, not by
merit, but by grace. For adopted children cannot plead merit, but must
acknowledge all of gift, as will more appear when we come to speak of the
cause of inheriting, viz grace.

2. For instruction: and so,

The first impression this Doctrine should work upon us should be a desire to
be such as may obtain the right of adoption of sons, for flesh and blood
cannot inherit, 1 Cor. 15.50. So long as we are carnal and unregenerate men,
we neither are, nor are to be called the heirs of God. The unrighteous, that
is, such as live in gross sins, and do the works of the flesh, are
expressly and peremptorily excluded from the benefit of adoption, 1 Cor. 6.9,
^0 Gal. 5.21. None but such as are effectually called, and borne of God, are
capable of this grace, Heb. 9.16. John 1.13. And in particular, What kind of
persons we must be to attain this adoption.
we must have a true justifying faith, John 1.12. For, as was showed before, we
come to the right of Sons, only as we are ingrafted into Christ, upon whom all
the inheritance is originally and fundamentally conferred: and into Christ we
cannot get but by faith. And further, we must look to the sound mortification
of the deeds of the flesh, Romans 8.13. and know that none can inherit but such
as overcome the power of their corruptions, and are not in bondage to any sin,
Rev. 21.7. And more specially God requires in all such as will be his sons,
that they be such as are not in bondage to the passions and perturbations of
the heart; for he has promised that the meek shall inherit, Mat. 5.5.
Thirdly, we must forsake all needless society and familiarity with the wicked
of the world, if we will be Gods sons and daughters, and resolutely refuse to
be corrupted with the sins of the times, as the Apostle she^es at large, 2 Cor.
6.17, 18. Fourthly, we must be such as are described Esaias 56.4, 5, 6. We must
make conscience to keep Gods Sabbaths, and choose the thing will please God;
being more desirous to please God in all things, than natural children are to
please their earthly parents; and take hold of Gods Covenant, as resting upon
this preferment, and the promises of it, as our sufficient happiness.

And that we may be the more established in the knowledge of our adoption, it
will be good for us to try our selves by the signs of such as are Gods
adopted children.

1. Such as are Gods children by adoption have this mark, Marks of Gods heirs
and adopted children.
they are made like unto God their father in holiness, in some truth of
resemblance, 1 Pet. 1. 15. and this they show two ways: first, by purifying
themselves, and sound humbling of their souls for their sins, that deface the
image of God in them; as Saint John says, Every one that has this hope
purifieth himself, as he is pure, 1 John 3.2, 3. Secondly, by employing
himself constantly in doing righteousness; for hereby the children of God are
known from the children of the Devil, 1 John 3.10.

2. In the last recited place you may discern another sign of a son and
heir to God, and that is the love of the godly as his brethren and fellow
heirs: He that loves not the brethren, is of the Devil, not of God, 1 John
3.10.

3. The gift of prayer is a sign of adoption, and that we have received the
spirit of adoption, Romans 8.15, 16. By the gift of prayer I mean not the skill
to utter words to God in a good form of words, and variously, but the gift to
speak to God in prayer, both with confidence in God, as in a Father, and with
the affections of prayer, which the phrase of crying Abba, Father, imports.

4. A child of God discovers his adoption by the manner of doing good duties: he
does serve God, not with servile respect, but with filial affection: he loves
to be Gods servant, as may be gathered, Esaias 56.6.

5. To love them that hate us, and bless them that curse us, and do good to
them that persecute us, is a sign that we are children to God as our heavenly
Father, Luke 6.35. Mat. 5.

The second impression that this glory of adoption should make upon our hearts,
should be to stir us up to carry our selves in this world as becomes the
children and heirs to such a Father as God is. And so in general, it should
wonderfully fire us to all possible care to be holy as he is holy, and to
express more to the life the Image of Gods grace and holiness, 1 Pet. 1.14,
15. and that in all manner of conversation, striving to carry our selves as the
sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of this froward and wicked world; all
sorts of the men of the world being so ready to reproach such as are Gods
people, that if they will speak evil, it may be only for our good
conversation in Christ, Phil 2.15, 16. And in particular, we are charged in
Scripture with certain special and choice things, that do greatly adorn and
grace the life of a child of God that is an heir of heaven, if we be Gods
heirs, and he be our Father.

How Gods ^eires must carry themselves.
1. We should be Peacemakers, for our Father is the God of peace; and this will
force men to call us the sons of God, Mat. 5.10.

2. We must not render reviling for reviling, but rather bless, seeing we are
heirs of blessing, as the Apostle urges it, ver. 9.

3. We should live without care, as knowing that we have a heavenly Father that
cares for us, Mat. 6.32. And seeing we are heirs of a better world, we should
not love this world, nor set our hearts upon such mean things as this world
can afford, 1 John 2.15.

4. If we be Gods sons we should be willing to submit our selves to his
correction. If we yield that power to the father of our bodies, how much more
to the Father of our spirits? Heb. 12.9. But especially take heed that we
provoke not God by carelessness and boldness, in favoring any corruption,
Deuteronomy. 32.18, 19.

Thirdly, our adoption should be a singular consolation to us against all the
miseries of this life. It matters not though our life be hid, and though it do
not appear to the world what we are, and though we have many crosses, and
losses, and persecutions, yet the thought of our inheritance with God should
swallow up all. Whatsoever we are now, yet when Christ appears we shall
appear in glory: and there can be no comparison between the suffering of this
life, and the glory to be revealed upon us, Romans 8.17. Mat. 19.29. Col. 3.2, 4.
1 John 3.2. And that we may be the more comforted, we should often pray to God
to show us by degrees, and to make us know the riches of our inheritance, both
in what we possess in this world, and what we look for in heaven. And thus of
the title of our dignities, We are heirs.

Of life.] Now follows to consider what we inherit, and that is life; we are
heirs of life. It is somewhat a strange speech; but yet if we consider of it,
life is a most sweet thing, there can be no happiness without it. A living Dog
is better than a dead Lion. But as life is to be taken here, it is a treasure
above all treasures in the world. But the inquiry into it is very difficult:
it is wonderful hard to find out what life is; especially to describe or
define the life here mentioned, as the glory of Gods adopted ones.

Life, in Scripture, is either natural or spiritual: as for natural life
(especially since the fall) that is so poor a thing, as to be an heir to it,
is no great preferment. By natural life, I mean that life that men live while
they are unregenerate: I say, that life is a very poor thing; which will
appear, if we consider the quality of it, or the means of preserving it,
Natural life but a mean thing in diverse respects.
or the short continuance of it, or the subject of it, or the things with which
it is oppressed, or the whole nature of it.

1. For the quality of it; what is life? It is but a wind, or breath: God
breathed into man the breath of life, as if his life were but his breath, Genesis
2.7. and so it is said, Every thing that had the breath of life, Genesis 6.17. and
7. 15.22. My life is a wind, says Job, chap. 7.7. What is your life (says S.
James)? it is even a vapor that appears for a little while, and then
vanishes away, Jam. 4.14.

2. If we consider the short continuance of it. It will vanish away of it self
after a while, as we see in that place. It is compared to a Weavers Shuttle; or
at the best, every hour of our life, or every action, adds secretly a thread
till the web be woven, and then we are cut off. So Hezekiah compares himself
to a Weaver in that respect, Esaias 38.12. Our life is scarce a span long: for to
live is but to die; to begin to live, is to begin to die; for death takes away
time past, and every moment we yield something to death.

3. If we consider the poor means of preserving life: It is such a weak
thing, that if we do not daily give it food, it will fail us: and if it be
not kept with raiment, it will be extinguished. And for the means we use, how
silly are they? Our life is called the life of our hands, Esaias 57.10. because
it will not last, unless we make hard shift with our hands to preserve it.

4. If we consider the subject of it; it is but our bodies: for our souls in
our natural condition, according to the sense of Scripture, are dead in
trespasses and sins. They have as it were a being, but, not a life. Our
souls, in respect of the substance of them, are excellent things, because
invisible and spiritual existences; but yet are destitute of that life is
proper to them: They are things indeed will last long, but are void of that
life which is spiritual.

5. If we consider the miseries with which this life is infested, both by sin,
and the punishments of it. As for sin, it is leprous from the womb, and
charged with Adams fault, and erres so often as cannot be numbered; the faults
of it are more than the hairs of our heads. As for punishment, how has God
avenged himself upon thy wretched life, to thrust thee out of Paradise, and
would not let thee enjoy life in any place that was not accursed? The Devils
also compass about thy life to destroy it, 2 Cor. 10.5. What deformities and
infirmities are found in all the Vessels of life, even in all the parts of thy
body in which it dwells? And without thee, in the objects of life, how is it
frighted with cares, plagues, or vexed with particular crosses? How does God
pass by thee, in many blessings he gives before thy face to others, and will
not to thee? And what thou have to comfort thy life, is it not cursed to thee,
so as thou feel vanity and vexation in the use of it? But above all, how is
thy life frighted with the danger of eternal death?

6. Lastly, if we consider the whole nature of life. The Apostle here thinks
it is not worth the naming by the name of life, when he says only of the
godly, that they are heirs of life: as if there were no living men but they,
and as if they had been dead all the time they were, till they were adopted.

But it is not natural life is here meant, but spiritual life, called in
Scripture new life, and the life of God, and eternal life. The words of the
Apostle Paul, Tit. 3.7. when he says, We are heirs according to the hope of
eternal life, serve to expound these words of the Apostle Peter.

Now concerning this life, it is above the reach of all mortal creatures to
describe it as it is, especially in the perfection of it in heaven; for Saint
Paul says, of what he saw in heaven, that he saw things that could not be
uttered, 2 Cor. 12. and Saint John says, it does not appear what we shall
be,^ Ioh. 3. 2. And in 1 Cor. 2.9. it is said, that eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has
prepared for them that love him. Yea, Christ himself does seem to grant,
that, as man, he did not fully see the glory of this eternal life in his
mortal condition; where, speaking of his estate after death, he said, Thou will show me the paths of life, Acts 2.

And for so much as is revealed concerning this spiritual and eternal life,
two things must be remembered; the one, That the doctrine of this life lies hid
from ages and generations in extreme darkness; and when the Gospel treats of
it, it brings it as it were out of a dark dungeon into the light, 2 Timothy 1.10.
the other is, That when it is brought to light, none can reach to it, but such
as God endues with special wisdom: for Solomon long since had observed, that
life is above to the wise only, Pro. 15.24.

The things I would consider of about this life are these; 1. The degrees of
it. 2. The original of it. 3. A guess at the nature of it. 4. The things that
nourish it. 5. The differences between this life on earth, and as it is in
heaven. 6. The means to attain it, or what we must do if we would enter
into life. 7. The signs to know whether it be in us. 8. The properties of it.
9. Lastly, the Uses of it.


Degrees of spiritual life.
1. For first, we must understand that this life has three degrees, into which
we enter in at three gates as it were. The first degree of eternal life begins
at the first spiritual acquaintance with God in this life, when his favor is
made known to us in Jesus Christ by the Gospel, so as we are truly justified
and sanctified, being reconciled unto God, having all our sins forgiven us, and
our natures made new: and into this degree we enter by the gate of
regeneration. Thus our Savior says; This is eternal life, to know God, and
whom he has sent, Jesus Christ, John 17.3. Thus he that hears Christ's words,
and believes, is passed from death to life, John 5.24. The second degree
begins at our death, and continues the life that the soul, separated from the
body, enjoyes till the resurrection at the last day. And concerning the estate
of the soul in this degree of life we have no absolute revelation, but yet are
taught in Scripture that it returns to God that gave it to the body at first,
Eccles. 12.7. and that it is with Christ, Phil. 1.23. that it is in the hands
of God and in Paradise, Luke 23.43. and lives in unspeakable joy, Luke 16.25.
and is freed from all miseries of this life, and enjoyes the honor of all good
works, Rev. 14.13. the body resting in the grave from all pain and labor,
as in a bed of rest, till the resurrection, Esaias 57.2. And into this degree of
life eternal we enter in by the gate of death. The third degree of life
eternal begins at the resurrection of our bodies at the last day, and is
enjoyed by body and soul for ever, comprehending all possible consummation of
felicity and glory in the heavens. And into this we enter by the gate of
resurrection, which is a kind of new begetting of us, and therefore is called
the resurrection of life, John 11.25. and so the blessed in heaven are called
the children of the resurrection, and by that way the children of God, Luke
20.36. In the first degree life is imperfect, in the second it is perfect, in
the third it is consummate.

And the Use of this first point should be to warn men to look to it, that
they enter into the first degree of eternal life while they are in this world,
or else they shall never get to heaven when they die; and therefore should
strive for saving knowledge, and to become new creatures, or else it is in vain
to hope for heaven.

2. For the second, which is the original of life, The original of this life.
it is greatly for the praise of it, that it flows from that life which is in
God himself, which is an unspeakable glory to the creatures that enjoy it.
With thee is the fountain of life, says David, Psalm. 36.9. So he calls him
the God of his life, Psalm. 42.8. Natural life is but a sparkle that flows
from the life of our Parents; but spiritual and eternal life is kindled from
that infinite light and life of God: but yet not as Christ received we this
life; for he had it by natural generation; we have it by a way unspeakable
from God, but yet by Jesus Christ. In him was life, as the life was the light
of men, John 14. He that has the Son has life, John 5.12. and he it is that
is eternal life, viz. to us, ver. 20. As there is no light in the visible
world, but from the Sun in the firmament; so there is no life in the spiritual
world, but from God in heaven, which has caused it to shine in our hearts by
the Son of righteousness, Christ Jesus. Thus our life is called the life of
God, Ephesians. 4.18. and Christ is said to live in us, Gal. 2.20. Which should
teach us greatly to admire and adore the excellency of Gods goodness, and make
us to rest our selves for ever under the shadow of his wings, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9.
But that this point may be more clearly understood, we must consider of the
original of this life from God three ways: First, in respect of ordination,
and so it flows from Gods decree: It has its original from God three ways.
he has ordained us unto life. Acts 13.48. and our names are written in the
book of life, Phil. 4.3. Secondly, in respect of merit; it was bought of God
by the death of the flesh of Christ. I give my flesh for the life of the world,
John 6.51. This life will not be had without his death: that we might live in
eternal life he must die a temporal death. And shall not this greatly inflame
our hearts to love the Lord Jesus, that gave himself for us, that we should
not perish, but have everlasting life? Thirdly, in respect of operation or
inchoation; and so the fountain of life is either without us, or within us:
without us is the Word of Christ, that is the immortal seed by which we are
begotten unto life, 1 Pet. 1.24. and so is called the Word of life, Phil. 2.15.
And the Word is so, as it is the Word of Christ, that is, Gospel: My words
(says he) are spirit and life, John 6.63. And that Word, considered as it is
preached to the dead souls of men; the dead shall hear the voice of Christ,
and live. Shall hear it: note that, John 5.25. which should make us greatly to
esteem the preaching of the Gospel. Within us the fountain of life is the
Spirit of Christ, which is called the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.2. Now the Spirit of Christ, that we may live, does two things, viz. it
quickens the seed of the Word, and unites us unto Christ, as members of the
mystical body; and then look how the soul of man does give life to every
member of the body, so does the Spirit of Christ to every soul, as a several
member of the mystical body.

The nature of it consists in a saving knowledge or celestial light.
3. For the third. We shall not exactly know what the nature of eternal life
is still it be perfected in us, or consummate; yet by diverse words God has let
fall in Scripture we may guess at the nature of this life: and in general, I
think it is a kind of celestial light falling into the soul, that does to it
that which natural life does to the body. This Saint John, showing how Christ
was the life of men, says, he was the light of men, John 1.4. And David having
said, With thee is the fountain of life, adds, And in thy light we shall see
light, Psalm. 36.8. And so the promise to the penitent sinner was, that his life
should see the light, Job 33.28. So Christ says, he that follows him shall
have the light of life. Mark it, the Light of life, John 8.12. So that the
life of our minds is knowledge in general; and in particular, it is the saving
knowledge of Jesus Christ, as our Savior says expressly, John 17.3. This is
eternal life, to know God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ. And the reason
why this knowledge does most inlive and quicken our hearts, is, because God in
Christ is the most glorious subject of contemplation; as being that highest
good, a very Ocean of goodness, only able to fill and ravish the heart of man:
and besides, because God as our chief good can alone make the ravishment of
the heart perpetual, and so last for ever, which nothing else can do.

But because every knowledge of God has not this effect, to breed everlasting
life in the heart of a man, therefore I will distinctly set down what kind of
knowledge it is that has this effect, and what is required that it may be
right.

Which knowledge must have these properties and effects in it.
1. It must be such a knowledge as discernes God to be the only true God: and
this rule excludes the Pagans from eternal life, who though by the light of
nature they might discern the invisible things of God, by the works of the
creation, yet they so shut up those principles of natural truth in
unrighteousness, that they set up creatures as God, and gave the glory of the
true God to them, Romans 1.

2. It must be such a knowledge as ascribes unto the Nature of God such an
excellency as can be expressed by no likeness of any creature in heaven above,
or earth beneath, or the waters under the earth. God must not be conceived of
by any Images. Images in the Church shut out the Papists from eternal life,
and Images in the heart to conceive of God by, exclude the ignorant and carnal
Protestants. In the right conceiving of Gods nature we must adore him that is
like nothing in heaven or earth.

3. It must be such a knowledge or vision of God as discernes him to be the
chief good, and only happiness to be desired: and so all those persons that
behold any thing in this life, to be sought after as the chief felicity of
their lives, are excluded from eternal life. And the things so esteemed the
Scripture calls their gods; so some make their bellies their gods, some their
riches, some honor and the favor of men.

4. It must be such a knowledge of God as conceives of him in Jesus Christ
(that is) that sees the way how Gods infinite justice, provoked by many sins,
is pacified by the atonement made by Jesus Christ, as the Mediator between
God and man, John 17.3. else the knowledge of God, in respect of the
contemplation of Gods justice, will be so far from inliving our hearts, that it
would kill them if they had life. And this rule excludes all such from eternal
life as live in despair of Gods mercy, as Cain and Judas. These knowledges are
such, as without which life cannot be had; but yet in themselves do not
quicken the soul, and inspire it with life.

5. It must be such a knowledge as does not only discern aright the doctrine
of the nature of God, and of the person and offices of Christ, but does
discern that God is ours (in particular) in Jesus Christ, and fully reconciled
to us, and our portion for ever. To know God to be our God in Christ is the
very life of our souls. Now, because we discern this in God two ways, viz by
the light of ^aith, believing the promises of the Word, though we see him not;
and by the light of vision, when we shall see him in his goodness face to
face: therefore is the former light called the light of faith, and belongs to
this life; and the latter light belongs to another world. Hence our
justification which is by faith is called the justification of life, Romans 5.18.
This is a point which should be of unspeakable comfort to the weak Christians
that have attained to this knowledge; for certainly this is eternal life in
them, as true as if they had the glory of heaven already. But now that true
Christians may be the more infallibly settled in the knowledge of their
interest in eternal life, as it lies in the right knowledge of God, ^o be
ours i^ Jesus Christ, I will add certain effects of this knowledge, which
show, not only that it is right, but also that it is very eternal or
spiritual* for if it be a right knowledge,

1. It raises in the dead heart of man spiritual senses, that were never
there before: it makes the soul of a man able to hear Gods Word, that could
never do it before: it gives sight in spiritual things, and sense, and
feeling, and spiritual tastes of Gods goodness, and a savouring of spiritual
things more than earthly, 2 Cor. 2.15. Romans 8.5. Psalm. 36.8. Phil. 1.9.

2. It is a knowledge with admiration: it sets a man's heart upon a constant
wondering at the glory of the things revealed. He that has this knowledge sees
in a Mirror; he sees, and wonders. Nothing more ravisheth the heart than does
the word, when it shows him the glory of Gods grace to him, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Wicked men see, but they see not in a Mirror.

3. It is a knowledge that works transformation: it changes a man into the
likeness of that it sees, even from glory to glory, by the power of the spirit
of Christ. The light comes into wicked men, but leaves them the same men it
found them, for disposition and conversation; but this light humbles the heart
of a man for his sins, and purifieth him from his most secret sins, Acts 15.9
and besides prints upon him the image of God, and stirs him unto all the
motives of life in doing good works, 2 Cor. 3.18. Col. 3.10. 1 John 2.3. and
3.24.

4. It is such a light as is indeleble, and will abide the trial of manifold
afflictions, and gives life and joy still to the soul: it does not only
comfort in Gods house, but will support us when we are gone home, under the
miseries of this present life, 1 Pet. 1.7.

The Use should be to teach us all to bless God for the Gospel that brings
life to light, and shows us the love of God to us in Christ; and for all the
means by which the Gospel is preached to us in the life of it. Oh how should
we be beholding to them that help us to eternal life, by leading us unto God,
this Ocean of goodness! And withal, we should be wonderfully thankful to
God, and for ever comforted, if we can find that we have attained to the
assurance of Gods love to us in Christ. Though our knowledge here be but small
and weak, yet it is so rich as the tongue of man cannot utter, if it be in any
measure true and sincere. Besides, how should this fire our desires after
wisdom, and spiritual understanding in the world of Christ, seeing it is our
life, and in the same degree we increase in eternal life, that we increase in
acquaintance with God in Christ? and therefore above all gettings we should be
getting understanding And finally, it shows the woeful estate of ignorant
persons, that are careless of the study of the Word of God, and of hearing of
the Gospel preached. This is their death, and will be their eternal death, if
they prevent it not by repentance, and sound redeeming of the time, for the
service of the soul, about this sacred knowledge.

Now for the fourth point: the things that nourish life are greatly to be
heeded, both to show us what we should apply our selves to, and with what
thankfulness to receive the means of our good herein.

Diverse things nourish this life.
1. We must know that the principal cause of the nourishment and increase of
spiritual life is the influence of virtue from Christ our mystical head, by
the secret and unutterable working of the spirit of Christ; which is therefore
called the spirit of life, because it both frees us by degrees from the fears
of death, and from the power and blots of sin, Romans 8.2. and withal, it
quickens and increases life in us, for the better exercise of righteousness,
Romans 8.10.

2. The contemplation of Gods favor and presence does wonderfully extend and
inflame life in us. To mark God any where, or by any experience to find
effectually his love, and to taste of the sweetness of his goodness, this is
life from the dead, better than all things in natural life: it does a godly
man's heart more good than all things in the world can do, as these places
show, Psalm. 30.5. and 63.7, 8. and 36.3. and 16. ult. with coherence.

3. The entertainment God gives his people in his house is one special cause
of increase of this life in us, as it increases both knowledge, and joy, and
all goodness, and satisfies the heart of man; especially amongst all the
things that are without us, the Word of God, as it is powerfully preached in
Gods house, is the food of this life, called the savor of life unto life, 2
Cor. 2.16. Christ words are the words of eternal life, John 6. see Psalm. 36.
8. John 12.50. Pro. 4.22.

4. Fellowship with the godly is singular to quicken and excite the life of
grace, and joy, and knowledge in us; therefore it is an amiable thing for
brethren to dwell together in unity, because there God has commanded the
blessing, even life for evermore, Psalm. 133. ult. Pro. 2.20. The mouth of the
righteous is a vein of life, Pro. 10.11. Yea, the very reproves of
instruction are the way of life, Pro. 6.23. And therefore weak Christians
should be instructed from hence, with faith to rest upon the God of their
lives, who by the spirit of Christ can enable them to eternal life; and with
thankfulness to embrace all signs of Gods favor and presence, and above all
things in life to provide for themselves powerful means in public, and good
society in private, and not to be turned off from either of these by slight
either objections or difficulties; and to resolve to labor more for these than
carnal persons would do to have their natural lives, if they were in
distress or danger. It is also excellent counsel which Saint Jude gives in
this point concerning eternal life: he would have us look to four things:
The first is, to edify our selves in our most holy faith, striving to get in
more store of Gods promises, and divine knowledges, and to strive to establish
our hearts in our assurance of our right to them. The second is, to pray in the
holy Ghost; for he knew that powerful prayer does greatly further eternal
life in us. The third is, to keep our selves in the love of God, avoiding all
things might displease him; choosing rather to live under the hatred of all the
world, than to anger God by working iniquity. The fourth is, to look as often
and as earnestly as we can after that highest degree of mercy and glory we
shall have in the coming of Christ, Iud. 1.19, 20.

I will conclude this point with that one counsel of Solomon, Keep thy heart
with all diligence, for thereout come the issues of life. Christians that would
prosper in spiritual life should be very careful of the first beginnings of
sin in their thoughts and desires, and be very diligent in nourishing all good
motions of the holy Ghost, preserving their peace and joy, in believing with
all good consciences, Pro. 4.23. Thus of the fourth point.

5. Now for the differences of life in these degrees, especially the first and
last degree they are very great: for though eternal life in the first degree
be a treasure of singula^ value, yet the glory of this life does greatly
excel, as it is to be held in another world.

I intend not to compare life in heaven with natural life here, (for that is
not worthy to be mentioned in the balance with that eternal life of glory)
but with eternal life it self, as it is held by the godly only in this world.
And so the difference is very great; 1. In respect of the place where the godly
live in each degree. This life differs from eternal life many ways
2. In respect of the means of preservation of life in each degree. 3. In
respect of the company with whom we live in each degree. 4. In respect of the
quality of life it self. 5. In respect of the effects of life eternal in each
degree.


For the first. There is great difference between the life of grace and the
life of glory, in the very place of living. 1. In respect of place.
Here we live in an earthly tabernacle, in houses of clay; there we shall live
in eternal mansions, buildings that God has made without hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.
Here we live on earth, there in heaven. Here we are strangers and pilgrims, far
from home, H^b. 11. there we shall live in our Fathers house. Here we are in
Egypt, there we shall live in Canaan. Here we live where death, sorrow, and
sin, and Devils dwell* there we shall live in a place where God, and
immortality, and all holiness dwells, 2 Pet. 3.13. Here we are but banished
men, there we shall live in the celestial Paradise. Here we have no abiding
City, but there we shall abide in the new Jer^s^lem that is above. The glory of
the whole earth can but shadow out by simili^ude the very walls and gates of
that City, Rev. 21. Here we can but enter into the holy place, there we shall
enter into the most holy place, Heb. 10.19. To conclude, there we shall enter
into the heaven of heavens, which for lightness, largeness, pureness,
delightfulness, and all praises, almost infinitely excells the heavens we
enjoy in this visible world.

For the second. In this life, unto the preservation of life, 2. In respect of
the means that preserve this life.
we have need of many things: as first, we need meat, drink, raiment, sleep,
marriage, physic, the light of the Sun by day, and the Moon by night. Yea,
the life of grace, though it consist not in these things, yet, in a remote
consideration, has need of these, that we may be the better able to serve God
in body and soul. But in heaven we shall need none of these, we shall be as
the Angels of heaven, and God himself shall there be all in all, and shall
fill us with his goodness, 1 Cor. 15.28. Our life shall subsist in God
himself, who, shall satisfy us out of the plenty of his own glory. In that
City there will be no need of the Sun to shine by day, or of the Moon to give
light by night, for the glory of the Lord does lighten it, and the Lamb shall
be the light thereof, and there shall be no night there, Rev. 21.23. and 22.5.
Secondly, in this world we need the help of superiors, as Kings, Rulers,
Parents, Husbands, Teachers, etc. But in that world inferiority and subjection
shall cease, when we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of God, Mat. 8.11. and so all the first things shall then be done
away, Rev. 21.4. Thirdly, in this world we need spiritual means for our
souls, and the help of diverse gifts in the Spirit, which serve for our
furtherance in the way to eternal life. Our souls cannot live without a
Temple on earth, without the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments; but in that new
Jerusalem St. John saw no Temple in it, there is no preaching nor praying,
there we shall not need any, nor have cause to mourn for the want of it, as
many times we do now; for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the Temple
thereof^ from God we shall have an infinite supply, in stead of all these
things, Rev. 21.22. Here we treat with God by means at a great distance, there
we shall enjoy him immediately: yea, those gifts of the Spirit, that suppose
imperfection in us, or misery in others, shall there be done away. The gifts
that suppose imperfection in us are faith, and hope, and repentance: we shall
not need promises to imply either faith or hope, because all shall then be
performed, and we shall have actual possession, 1 Cor. 13. ult. Nor shall we
need sorrow for our sins, because all our iniquities shall then be done away.
The gifts that suppose misery or sin in others are such as these, holy fear,
anger, jealousy, care, hatred, grief, pity, or such like; now all these
shall then be put off for ever, because in that kingdom shall be nothing that
is either unclean, or wretched, or in danger to fall away. Yet notwithstanding
this hinders not, but that God may delight the souls of his people, by ways
unknown to us, after a most glorious manner; which seems to be shadowed out by
eating of the tree of life, which bears so often fruit, and by drinking of the
water of life, which runs like a river, pure as crystal, and proceeds from
the Throne of God, Rev. 21.6. and 22.1.

3. In respect of the company.
For the third. There is great difference between the company with whom we live
here, and those with whom we shall live there, and that in seven things. As
first, in the sorts of peoples. Here our life is made grievous by the evil
ones, that either molest us with their oppositions, or grieve us with their
wickedness, or infect us with their evil examples; but there shall be no
wicked ones, no Devils to tempt us, no divellish mento slander us or persecute
us, no abominable persons either to grieve or pollute us. All these enemies
shall be cast into the Lake of fire, Rev. 11.8. and 20.4. and 22.14. we shall
never be troubled with them more; and the people there are all righteous, Esaias
60.23. Secondly, in the dignity of the friends we shall find in heaven. They
are usually but mean persons we must sort withal here, but there they are
such as exceed all the glory of this world: our friends and companions shall be
glorious Angels, and blessed Patriarchs, and Kings, and Prophets, and Apostles,
and the Martyrs of Jesus: and in general, all wear Crowns of glory. Thirdly,
in respect of the number of our friends. Here we have scarce one friend we have
reason much to admire, or can safely rely upon; there we shall have an
innumerable company of Angels, of the spirits of just men, a huge congregation
of the first borne, even the general assembly of all Gods elect, Heb. 12.22,
23. Fourthly, in respect of disposition, both theirs and our own. Here our
life with our friends is made often grievous, by reason of envy, suspicion,
offense, passion, pride, forgetfulness, and private discords, or our own
indisposition at some times to take delight in the presence of our friends: but
in heaven the spirits of just men are made perfect, Heb. 12.23. and charity
will be enflamed on all hands to perform exactly all those properties
mentioned 1 Cor. 13. Fifthly, in respect of constancy. Our friends her^ are not
only mortal, and must leave us, but mutable, and may forsake us; but there all
the company is immortal, and being perfec^ly sanctified are as God himself,
immurable; and so their love is not only perfect, but everlasting: charity
there will abide for ever, 1 Cor. 13. ult. Sixthly, in power to content us, and
satisfy us. Alas, here on earth many things befall us, wherein our friends,
though they would, yet they cannot help us: but in heaven there is
all sufficiency of power to solace and content one another ^o all eternity.
Lastly, in their relation to us* On earth we lose daily such as are near and
d^^re to us; in heaven we shall have them all, and it is very probable we shall
know them all, and one by one. Adam in his innocence knew his wife, and could
call her by her name, without any body to tell him. And Peter and John, in the
Transfiguration on the Mount, knew Moses and Elias, and yet had never seen
them; how much more in heaven shall our knowledge be perfected, to know and to
be known perfectly, and as it were by name?

For the fourth; 4. In respect of the quality of the life it self.
Our knowledge (which is our life) differs greatly now from that it shall be,
both in respect of the ground of it, and in respect of the manner of it, and in
respect of the measure of it. The ground of it is our union with God, by which
we partake of his light, Psalm. 36.8. Now in heaven we shall be made one with
God, after an unspeakable manner, in such a neerenesse as we cannot conceive of
now. This is that which our Savior prays so earnestly for, Ioh. 17.20, 21.
Secondly, in respect of the manner of it. Now God treat with us by means, as
by the Word and Sacraments, etc. but then without means, immediately. Now we
see by the help of a glass, or as an old man does by Spectacles; but then we
shall see God by direct vision. Moses, that saw as much of God as a mortal man
then could, saw but his back parts; he saw God, as we see a man going from us,
but then we shall see him face to face, as he is coming to us; yea, as he is
possessed by us. We shall not need help to show God to us, as we do now, for
God himself shall be our everlasting light, as was showed before.

There is a fourfold vision of God; the one is natu^all, as when we see him
in the creatures: the other is speculous, or Symbolicall, when we see God in
certain signs of his presence, as in the burning fire in the Bush, or in the
Cloud, or Pillar of fire at the Tabernacle. The third is, the vision of Faith,
when we know how good God is by the promises of his word to us in Christ. The
last is, the vision of ^lory, which differs from all the former, in a way of
seeing unknown to us. Thirdly, our knowledge will differ in the measure. Now
we know b^t in part; there are many things we know not, and what we do
know, we know but obscurely, and darkly; then we shall know perfectly, even
as we are now known perfectly of God, 1 Cor. 13.10, 11. etc. and so we shall
know both God, and the Creat^res. There is a world of most delightful and rare
knowledge of the Creatures, which we attain not to in this life: but the
chief glory of our knowledge then, shall be in the perfect vision of God and
those unspeakable beauties of his nature, when we shall behold perfectly the
glory of every property or attribute in God, which will be sufficient to breed
everlasting wonder and delight. In a word; the knowledge of the meanest
Christian in heaven, shall be above the knowledge of Prophets or Apostles on
earth.

The first difference is in the effect of our knowledge: for from our
knowledge, and this celestial light, flows righteousness, peace, 5. In
resect of the effects of life in ^^ch degree.
and joy in the holy Ghost; which the Apostle Paul makes to be the parts of the
Kingdom of God, and so both in this life, and in heaven, Romans 14.17. And unto
these three heads may be referred all things that concern the glory of
eternal life: and all these are held with great difference in each degree of
eternal life. For though we have righteousness, and peace, and joy now in the
truth of them; yet we have them not as we shall have them in heaven; as will
appear, if we consider of them distinctly.

First, for righteousness. 1. For righteousness.
Here it is the greatest burden of life unto the godly, that they are not able
to serve God as they desire: the imperfections of their gifts, the corruption
of their natures, the daily infirmities that discover themselves in their
conversations, make life many times more bitter than death would be to them, as
appears by St. Paul, Romans 7. But there all that is imperfect shall be done
away; there shall be no danger of displeasing God, for we shall be made perfect
in all parts and degrees of holiness: our nature shall be perfect, like the
nature of God; our members shall never more be servants unto unrighteousness,
and our souls shall exactly resemble God in all perfection of goodness and
gifts. Here the glory of man's inheritance lies in the goodness of things
without them; there it shall consist principally in an everlasting goodness,
confirmed upon themselves. We shall be without spot and wrinkle, Ephesians 5.27. We
shall be as he is in holiness, 1 John 3.2. Here is our grief, that our hearts
cannot be so filled with the love of God and the godly, as they should be;
there our hearts shall burn with an eternal inflammation of affections
toward God, and the blessed ones, without any interruption or decay; we shall
never more be troubled with hardness of heart, discouragement, fear,
distractions, inordinate desires, and perturbations. Yea, our holiness shall
be better than Adams in Paradise: for he had a power not to sin, but we shall
have no power at all to sin. Yea, in relation to Christ, it shall be better
with us then than it is now; for now we are reckoned just men only by the
benefit of Christ's righteousness imputed to us; but then we shall be made so
perfectly holy by inherent righteousness, that we shall stand everlastingly
righteous before God, by the righteousness, that is in us. Imputation shall
there cease for ever, when Christ has delivered up the kingdom to God the
Father, and when faith shall be done away. Lastly, the difference in this point
may further appear in the freedom of our wills. In this life many times our
wills are not free to desire to do the good we should do, and most an end
want power to execute what we desire: but there shall be all liberty, so as we
shall never want either desire or power to accomplish what may be for Gods
everlasting glory, or our own felicity.

2. ^^r peace.
Secondly, for peace there is great difference: for first, in this life we have
but little peace in respect of the miseries of life. Sometimes we have but
little inward peace, our hearts being unquiet with fear, or grief, or
discouragement, or passions; or else our consciences are unquiet, either
because God fights against us, to try us or to humble us, or we fight against
our selves, through ignorance and unbelief, or distress for sin. Sometimes
when our spirits are quiet, and there is a truce from inward war, we then want
out vard peace; either men are unreasonable, and molest us without cause, in
our estates or names, or else God afflicts us in body with pain and weakness,
or in estate, sometimes with easy crosses, like small rain, sometimes with
greater crosses, like some fierce storms. Now in heaven there shall be an
eternal cessation of all misery; there shall be no curse, and affliction
shall be cast into the Sea, Rev. 22.23. Secondly, our Sabbaths, or days of
rest which G^d has consecrated and blessed to us as the chief joy of our
lives, prove many times days of sorrow and affliction, because either our
bodies are molested with pain, or our souls distressed for want of powerful
means, or for want of ability to keep a Sabbath unto God, or for want of joy
in our souls: but in heaven we shall have an eternal Sabbath; not one day in
seven, but all our days; rest without labor, and solace of heart without any
difficulty in our selves, or interruption without us: God and the Lamb will be
an eternal Temple to make our rest for ever glorious. We shall be freed from
all the labors of life, and from all pain and difficulty in serving God, and
our works shall be all easy, and full of delight, even the praising of God for
ever, Rev. 14.12. Heb 4.9.

3. For joy.
Thirdly, for joy. There is great difference both in the causes, and in the
measure, and in the continuance of it. The causes of our joy shall be the
highest can befall a creature. Here, while we are present with the body, and
the blessings of life, we are absent from the Lord, the infinite life of our
lives; but there we shall enjoy him as fully as our hearts can desire, 2 Cor.
5.8. Here we want our crown, whatsoever else we enjoy; but there our honor,
and glory, and majesty shall be so great, as if all the Kings of the earth did
bring their glory to one man, it would not equal what every one shall have
there, 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 2.24. and 3.21. we shall reign in life, Romans 5. And
this Crown is the more glorious, because it shall not consist of some precious
thing without us, but of royal excellency, with which our souls and bodies
shall shine as the Sun in the firmament; our very bodies in quality being
altered to such an expression of majesty, and beauty, and Angelical
excellency, as now exceeds all mortal language; being rather like spirits
than earthly bodies. And for the measure, now we have but little tastes of joy;
and if these tastes be unspeakable and glorious, what are those rivers of joy
at Gods right hand? Psalm. 16. ult. And for continuance, they are for evermore,
as the Psalmist there speaks: whereas now they are gone from us, like
lightning, in an instant, and our lives are afterward assaulted almost
continually with causes or occasion of sorrow; so as the world in the best
place is but like a vale of tears: but there shall be no sorrow, no death, no
crying nor pain, but God shall wipe away all tears from our eyes for ever,
Rev. 21.4.

6. Thus of the differences of life on earth, and life in heaven. Wh^t men must
d^e to attain this life.
What men must do that they may enter into life follows. And about this point
our Savior tells us two things before hand. First, that the way to life is a
narrow way, and the gate is exceeding strait: men may be misled by a thousand
bywayes, and the work to be done is a very hard work. Secondly, that there
are but few that find the right way; yea, but few amongst those that seek it,
and seem desirous to know what they should do; for either they understand not
the directions when they are given, or by taking time to think of them, they
forget them; or else when they have the answer, they go their ways, (like the
young man in the Gospel) and are sorry the conditions be so hard; and so give
over all further care, and rest in the estate they were in before. And
therefore we had need to attend the more carefully, and resolve to do
whatsoever God requires of us, whatsoever it cost us, and not be troubled at
the difficulty of the work, considering the excellency of eternal life, and
the many helps we have to further the work. Of which afterward. This then is
the question: What should a man or woman do that he might be sure to enter
into life?

Answ. 1. Thou must lay the foundation of all in Jesus Christ: thou must
disclaim all trust in any thing in heaven or earth, in thy self, or thy own
works, or any other creature, and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, as
the only means of pacifying Gods anger, or procuring eternal life, Acts
4.12. John 3.16. and thou must inwardly lay up Christ in thy heart, so as
spiritually ever to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, by applying all he
has done or suffered for thee in particular, John 6.53. 1 John 5.12.

2. Thou must pray hard to the God of life, Psalm. 42.8. and with great
importunity beseech him to give thee the spirit of life, that is, Jesus Christ;
and with the more encouragement, because he has promised to give even his holy
Spirit to them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

3. There will be no life in the soul if thou do not repent thee of thy
sins, Acts 11.18. And this is the harder work, because first to confess thy
sins will not serve turn, unless thou forsake them, and overcome them, Rev.
2.7. so as the power of them be mastered, and thou do from thy heart desire
and resolve to leave them. If thy lusts, passions, disorders of life, in
drunkenness, swearing, sins of deceit, or the like, be not mended, thou
can not live this life, 1 Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.22, 23. At the best, without an
apparent victory, there will be little comfort in life. Secondly, in turning,
thou must turn from all thy transgressions, so as thou be sure thou leave no
sin thou know, but thou will endeavor to judge thy self for it, and strive
to forsake it. Thy heart must be turned from it, Ezekiel. 18.21. Yea, if some of
thy sins, for profit or pleasure, be to thee like thy right eye, or right
hand, thou must cut them off, or pull them out, or else thou can never enter
into life, Mat. 18.8, 9. As in the case of rich men, the way of life is
compared to the eye of a needle, and their hearts to a great cable: now there
is no way for thee to enter into life, but by untwisting the great cable, till
it be made like small threeds, which is done by great humiliation, James 1.10.
And withal, thy* heart must continue afraid in the least thing to offend God.
This fear of the Lord is required to the very beginning of this life, Pro.
14.27.

4. Thou must deny thy self extremely in outward things: thou must look for
persecution, yea, and perhaps be put to it, to forsake father and mother, house
and lands, wife and children, yea, and life it self, so as to hate and lose
this natural life, in comparison of the gaining of eternal life, Mark 10.30.
John 12.25.

5. Thou must be tied to walk in a strict course of life all thy days,
resolving to walk in the way of righteousness, and let the word of God be the
rule of all^thy actions, and by patient continuance in well-doing, to seek
increase of happiness and holiness; for life is only in the way of
righteousness, Pro. 12.28. Romans 2.7, 8. Ezekiel. 33.15, 16.

Now, though this work be very hard, yet thou have many helps, if thy heart be
right and willing to obey: for,

A Christian has many helps to attain it.
1. God will give thee his holy Spirit to work all thy work for thee, and to
cause thee to walk in his statutes, and keep his judgments, and to do them;
and will mortify the deeds of the flesh, and teach thee in all truth, and
comfort and support thee, and make thy works acceptable to God, as has been
showed before.

2. Thou have the help of spiritual armor, that is mighty through God, to
cast down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.3, 4. thou will find a strong supply from
every ordinance of God: the Word, and Prayer, and Sacraments, all s^rve to help
against the difficulty of this work, and so will the society of the godly,
as was showed before.

3. Thou will have the benefit of Christ's prayers and intercession for thee in
heaven, John 17.15. which is of unspeakable force and power to help thee.

4. The greatness of the reward should pluck up thy heart against all the
hardship of godliness: for,

1. God will grant thee pardon of all thy sins, Acts 2.39.

2. Thou shall have fellowship with God himself, and he will show thee so much
when thou seek to him in his ordinances, 1 John 1.7.

3. Thou have most precious promises, recorded every where in the sacred volume
of Gods book, 2 Pet. 1.4.

4. Who would not be stirred up with the contemplation of that glorio^s
inheritance is reserved for us in heaven? that incorruptible crown should make
any body willing to abstain from all things, and to run with all violence in
the race set before us, 1 Pet. 1.3. 1 Cor. 9.24, 25, 26, 27.

Only let me conclude this point with an earnest exhortation to all Christians,
that would have comfort of life, to apply themselves to get all possible
knowledge they can in the Scriptures; for that knowledge is a tree of life,
Pro. 3.18. and 16.22. and those sacred knowledges they must not let go, but
take fast hold on them, Pro. 4.13. They must attend, incline their ears, and
not let them depart from between their eyes, and be sure to keep them in the
midst of their hearts, Pro. 4.21, 20, 22. Mark every one of those words to
do it; and consider, that it is not the having of the Bibles, or Sermons, or
the reading, or hearing, but the knowledge we get into our hearts: nor is it
any knowledge, but wisdom, or the wise knowledge of the Scriptures: and our
knowledge is then wise, when it is an understanding of our own ways; and we
are wise for our selves, when we study profitable things, and when we sow
those seeds of truth in daily practice, and when we practice with discretion,
looking to the circumstances of every duty, not to draw upon our selves
encumbrances by our own rashness or indiscretion. And lastly, when with all
knowledge we join lowliness of mind, and meekness; that meekness that is
called meekness of wisdom by Saint James.

Thus of the means to attain life: the signs follow.

There are diverse ways to try our selves, whether eternal life be begun in
us: as,

1. By the savouring of those things that are immortal. Signs of this life
are six.
Our mortal life relisheth nothing but what is transitory: and eternal life
finds happiness in nothing but what is eternal, or tends to it. Thus a man
that is endued with this life, esteems with sense, grace above riches,
spiritual treasures above all earthly. In particular, the desire after the
Word of God is a sign that we are at least newborn babes in Gods kingdom,
if so be we desire it with a kind of natural affection, as the child does,
the breast; and constantly, and as the word is sincere; and with an unfeigned
desire to grow in grace and goodness by the power of the Word, Romans 8.5. 1
Pet. 2. John 6.27.

2. By our knowledge of God in Christ, as has been showed before; when it is
such a knowledge as works not only admiration, but also sound transformation
of our hearts and lives.

3. There is a kind of sorrow, that the Apostle faith is to salvation, 2. Cor.
10.7. and that is, such a sorrow as is voluntary and secret; for our sins,
and for all sorts of sins, Romans 7. Esa. 6.5. Esa. 1.16. and as they are
sins, and not for other respects; and such a sorrow as quieteth the heart,
and leaves a vehement desire of reformation, and is most stirred by the sense
of Gods goodness, Hos. 3.5. Esa. 1.16. and is found in prosperity as well as
adversity.

4. By our love to God; for if the light of life be in us, and that we are
truly acquainted with God, as our God in Christ, the heart has seen that that
will make it in love with God for ever; and show it by his estimation of Gods
loving kindness, and all the signs of it, above all things in life, Psalm.
63.2, 11. and by longing after the coming of Christ, 2. Tim. 4.8. and by
grieving for Gods absence, Cant. 3.1. and by his fear to offend God in any
thing, Jude 20. and by his willingness to suffer any thing for God and the
Gospel, 1 These. 1.2.

5. By our love of the brethren. The Apostle John with great confidence of
words, makes this a ^^gne that we are translated from death to life, 1 Ioh.
3.14. and it is infallible, if we so love them as we account them the only
excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. and desire them as the only companions of our
lives, and if it be for the grace and goodness is in them, 1 Ioh. 5.1. 2 Ioh.
1.2. and if it be notwithstanding their infirmities or adversities; and if we
love all the brethren, without respect of persons.

6. To conclude this point generally: If eternal life be begun in us, we are
new creatures, borne again; the Image of God is restored in us in some degree,
Ioh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5. Colos. 3.10. and we are such as are fully resolved to
spend our days in the way of righteousness, and a holy course of life, Prove.
12.28.

8. The properties of this life follow, and they are five: for,

Properties of this life are five.
1. It is unspeakable: eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of
man conceive what God has prepared in life for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

2. It is free; it is not given by merit, but is the free gift of God, Romans 6.
ult.

3. It is certain: for there is an Act for it in Gods counsel. Men be
ordained to life, and their names written in the book of life, Acts 13.48.
Phil. 4.4. and God has bound himself, by many promises in his Word, to the
believer, and besides, has confirmed it with an oath, Heb. 6.17. and Christ is
gone into heaven to make the place ready for all the heirs of life, John 14.3.
and further, we have it already begun, even eternal life begun, John 17.3.

4. It is a life by assimilation, that is, such a life as is fashioned in
likeness to the life of another, even Jesus Christ, according to whose Image
we are created, Col. 3.10. And who shall change our vile bodies, and make them
like his glorious body, Phil. 3.21.

5. It is eternal; a life that will last as long as God lives; it will never
have an end. Divines express the eternity of it, in part, by this similitude:
Suppose a little bird came to the Sea once in a thousand years, and took up
only one drop of water, and so should continue to take every thousand years
only one drop, what an unspeakable space of time would it be before the Sea
would be drunk up? and yet eternity is a lasting beyond that unmeasurably.
Thus of the explication of the Doctrine concerning life.

The Uses follow: and,

Use 1. First, what a strong impression should this doctrine have upon the
hearts of all unregenerate men? How should life and heaven suffer violence? How
should this force open their eyes, that they might awake from that fearful
lethargy, and stand up from the dead, that Christ might give them this light
of life? How should they unchangeably resolve to seek Gods kingdom first
above all things, and above all gettings strive to get understanding? What
shall it profit them to win the whole world, and lose their own souls?

But especially the doctrine of life should melt the hearts of all the godly,
and imprint upon them the care of many duties: as,

What duties this doctrine should compel godly men to practice.
1. They have cause to wonder at the exceeding riches of Gods kindness to them
in Jesus Christ, in providing such an inheritance for them, Ephesians. 2.7.

2. They should pray earnestly to God to open their eyes more and more to see
the glory of this life, and effectually to take notice of the high dignity of
their calling, and riches of their inheritance in life, Ephesians. 1.19.

3. This should marvellously wean their hearts from the cares of this present
life, and from the love of earthly things, seeing their inheritance lies in
spiritual and eternal life, 1 Cor. 7.38. Heb. 13.4, 5. and 11.13. Col. 3.1,
2. Phil. 3.20.

4. Since they have found this precious life by the Gospel, they should
therefore take heed they be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrine,
nor trouble themselves with doubtful disputations, or unprofitable questions.
They have found the words of eternal life, and whither else will they go?
Tit. 3.7, 9. Heb. 13.9.

5. This should make them love one another, as such as shall be companions in
life for ever. Yea, they should receive one another, as Christ received them to
glory, John 13.34. Ephesians. 4.2. and 5.1. Romans 15.7. And in particular, husbands
should make much of their wives, and masters of such servants as are heirs
with them of the grace of life, as this Text shows, and Col. 3.14.

6. They should strive to show the power of this life, and how much it excells
natural life: and therefore the fruit of the Spirit should be in them in all
goodness, righteousness, and truth, Ephesians. 5.9. and they should so hold forth
the Word of life, that they should think on whatsoever things are true, honest,
just, pure, lovely, and of good report; and if there be any virtue, or any
praise, they should strive to act that, being careful in all things to
maintain good works, Phil. 4.8. Tit. 3.7, 8. Oh what manner of persons should
they be in all manner of good conversation!

7. They should lift up their heads with joy, and be always comfortable,
considering the assurance they have of eternal life; they have the spirit of
glory resting upon them. One would think they should be always singing, and
making melody in their hearts: though they have crosses and wants in this
life, yet is not God their portion? and is it not enough they are provided for
in respect of eternity? and is there any comparison between the afflictions
in this world, and the glory to be revealed?

Grace.] Thus of the matter of their inheritance. The cause follows, and that
is grace.

Grace is either a gift in us, or an attribute in God. Grace manifold
Sometimes by grace is meant the gifts God bestows upon men: and if grace were
so taken, then would be implied this doctrine, That dead men may have the grace
of God. There may be grace in men without life: yea, men may have excellent
gifts, and yet be not alive spiritually; as gifts of government from the Spirit
of God, as Saul had; and gifts for edification in the Church. A man may be an
excellent Preacher, as Judas was, and may have the gifts of prophesying and
working miracles, as the Reprobates mentioned Mat. 7.21. a man may have the
gift of knowledge of the Scriptures, as St. Paul imports, 1 Cor. 8.2. Heb. 6.4.
a man may confess his sins, as Pharaoh and Saul did: a man may be much
grieved, and sorrow, and humbled for his sins, as Ahab and Cain, and may repent
too as Judas did, and may make a great profession of true religion, and be very
forward, as Demas, and Hymeneus, and Phyletus did: a man may be very zealous
for the truth, as John and the Galatians were: a man may pray, and cry hard and
often to God, and be heard of God, as the Israelites were in their distresses
many times: a man may be of an unrebukeable conversation amongst men, as Paul
was before his conversion; and such as have sinned may reform their lives in
many things, as Herod did: finally, a man may have faith to believe Gods Word,
as the Devils do, and to believe Gods promises, as they that have a temporary
faith do after a sort, and may joy much in the comfort of them, as they
concern the godly: and yet in all these gifts there was no life.

Another point in that sense is this, That there are gifts of Gods grace
bestowed on the Elect, which are ever accompanied with life, so as their grace
is the grace of life. And both these points should wonderfully awaken all sorts
of Christians to look about and try their estates, and weak Christians
should diligently study their book of signs of true grace, and mark how the
Scripture proves all those saving graces to be such as can be found in no
reprobate. But because I think Grace in this place cannot be taken for the
gifts of grace in men, I pass from these points. What is meant here by grace.
By grace then here is meant the glorious attribute of goodness that is in
God, by which he freely shows his love and mercy to his creatures. And that
it must be taken in this sense, I gather from the third of Titus, v. 7. where
the sentence being like, grace is called there, His grace: we are justified by
his grace, and made heirs of eternal life.

Two ways considered.
Now this grace of God, as it is in God, I consider of two ways: first, as it
is in relation to this spiritual and eternal life of Gods heirs; and then
secondly, as it is in it self generally considered. In relation to spiritual
life I consider of it, both in what it excludes, and what it includes.

What it excludes.
Grace excludes both nature and the works of the Law. It excludes nature from
this life in three respects: first, in respect of propagation. This life cannot
be propagated by natural generation: we are not borne heirs of life, and so
the sons of God; we are borne only the sons of Adam, not of God. They that are
borne after the flesh are not the seed, Romans 9.8. Secondly, in respect of
privilege. By nature we are the children of wrath, and therefore cannot be the
children of promise, Ephesians. 2.3. Thirdly, in respect of the works of nature: for
by nature we do such works as proclaim us to be children of disobedience,
and children of the Devil, and therefore cannot be heirs of life by any
works done by nature since the fall. And as it excludes nature, so it excludes
the works of the Law; not in respect of the obedience to the Law but in
respect of the merit of life: so as the inheritance cannot be had but by the
works of the Law, Romans 4.4. and 11.16. nor can our best works after calling
deserve life and salvation, Tit. 3.4, 5.

And on the other side, the grace of God includes all things in life, as wholly
caused by Gods free favor to us in Christ. What it includes.
For first, our election to life is from the mere grace of God, Ephesians. 1.4.6.
Secondly, the meritorious cause of life is by grace, Gal. 4.4.5. Thirdly, the
promise of life is by grace, Romans 4. 14. Gal. 3.18. Fourthly, the inchoation of
life is from grace, whether we respect vocation, Gal. 1.15. or justification,
Tit. 3.7. Gal. 2. ult. Lastly, in respect of the consummation of it in the
perfection of glory in heaven, Romans 6. ult.

Thus of grace in relation to life. In it self grace is a most amiable
attribute in God, extending his goodness unto the creature, without respect of
deserts. And that we may the more admire the glorious grace of God, it will be
profitable to give a touch of the fruits of it unto man, upon whom he sets his
favor: for look what men have interest in the grace of God, these things flow
upon them from the beams of that grace.

What privileges follow on such as enjoy Gods grace.
1. God knows them by name, Exodus 33.12.

2. When God is angry with all the world, and about to declare his wrath by
terrible judgments, yet still they find favor in his sight, Genesis 6.8. and
19.19.

3. When they offend, and are sorry for their offenses, and seek for mercy,
he pardons iniquity, and takes them for his inheritance, and repents him of
the evil, Exodus 34.9. Joel 2.12, 13.

4. He will withold no good thing from them, Psalm. 84.12. and bestows of his
best gifts upon them liberally, in all sorts of gifts, 1 Cor. 1.4.5.

5. He will give them any thing they ask of him, without hitting them in the
teeth, James 1.5.

Lastly, we see by this Text he gives them the inheritance of eternal life,
and all things that belong to life and godliness, 2 Pet. ^.4.

The Use should be to teach us many things: as,

1. To celebrate the praise of this graciousnesse of God, seeing God does all
things so freely; he stands upon it greatly to have this glory in his nature
acknowledged, Psalm. 111.1. and 149.3, 4. Ephesians. 1.6.

2. To acknowledge that all good things we enjoy, either in temporal or
spiritual things, we receive from his free grace, Psalm. 44.4. Ephesians. 2.8. for by
the grace of God we are that we are, 1 Cor. 15.10.

3. When we would wish the best good to others, either in public to the
Churches of Christ, or in private at home or abroad to any that are dear to
us, our cry should be Grace, Grace, to them, Zech. 4.7.

4. We should especially be moved to seek this grace of God to our selves, as
the sufficient and the only happiness in the world, Col. 1.6. Now, that this
point may the more effectually be understood, I will show you how this grace of
God comes to men, and then what we should strive to be, that we may be sure to
receive the comfort of it, that God is gracious to us. For the first, we must
know that all grace from God is given to Jesus Christ, and comes by him, John
1.17. and therefore called The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the blessing
at the end of the Epistles. Without Christ no grace can come to sinful men.
Further, we must again know that the grace of God is extended unto us from
Christ by the Gospel, that brings the doctrine of it to us: therefore is the
Word called the Word of his grace, and the Gospel the Gospel of the grace of
God. And yet further, we must know that there must be wrought in us that
supernatural gift of faith, by which only we can be capable to receive this
grace of God: we have our access only by faith, Romans 5.2. Now for the second
point. There are many things God stands upon to find in the persons that
should receive the comfort of his grace; not for the merit of them, but for the
honor of his own grace, that it be not abused: as first, we see by that which
went before, we must have faith to believe and apply to our selves the doctrine
of Gods grace. Secondly, we must be good men; not such as are men of wicked
devices, or such as make a mock of sin, but such as are careful in all their
ways to avoid what may displease so gracious a God, Pro. 12.2. and 14.9. Tit.
2.11, 12. Thirdly, we must be lowly and humble persons, that attribute nothing
to our selves, but all to Gods goodness, Pro. 3.34. James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5. And
therefore it concerns all Christians to take heed that they rest not in the
hearing of the doctrine of Gods grace, but must labor truly and effectually
to know Gods grace to themselves, Col. 1.6.

5. This doctrine of Gods grace may wonderfully comfort the godly, and
establish their hearts in the assured expectation of heaven when they die: for
nothing can hinder their comfort and hope herein, but only their unworthiness,
and that is removed by this doctrine of Gods grace: thus the Apostle faith, We
have good hope through grace, 2 These. 2.16. and again, We have access unto
this grace, by which we stand and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, Romans
5.2.

6. It may wonderfully embolden us in our suits and requests to go to Gods
Throne, seeing it is a Throne of grace, where petitions are granted freely, and
great suits as easily as lesser, Heb. 4.16.

7. Men should be warned to take heed that they do not transgress against
this doctrine of the grace of God. Men tr^nsgresse against the grace of God
many ways.
And men sin against the grace of God fearfully four ways: First, when they
frustrate it in the doctrine of it: which they do, partly, when they receive
the doctrine of it in vain, and fail of the right knowledge of it, 2 Cor.
6.1. Heb. 1^.15. partly, when they trust upon the merits of their own works,
Gal. 2. ult. Secondly, when they fall away from grace, either by relapsing to
the world, by entertaining the corruptions they had forsaken, or by removing
the sincere doctrine of Gods grace, Gal. 5.4. Thirdly, when men turn the grace
of God into wantonness, and draw wicked and licentious conclusions from the
pure doctrine of Gods grace, making it a cloak for their sinful liberties,
Iud. 1.4. Romans 6.1. Fourthly, when men despite the spirit of grace, that shows
it self, either in the power of Gods ordinances, or in the practice of true
Christians, Heb. 10.29.

8. It should be a wonderful comfort to a Christian against his own frailties
and daily infirmities, according to that of the Apostle, We are not under the
Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14, 15.

Lastly, even the more gracious God is, the more careful we should be to walk
worthy of his grace; for, as the Apostle says, The grace of God that brings
salvation unto all men, teaches us to deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts,
and to live righteously, and soberly, and religiously in this present world,
Tit. 2.11, 12.

Thus of the third point, viz. the cause of inheriting. The manner follows,
viz. They inherit together.

Together.] The godly are heirs together: their inheritance lies all together.
Which may appear by reckoning up the particular privileges of the godly, in
which they all meet, and are joint heirs, and fellow heirs, as the Apostle
calls them, Romans 8.17. Ephesians. 3.6. Christians hold their inheritance in
Gavelkind; I think that is the term the Lawyers give for that tenure, where
all the brethren have the same inheritance divided amongst them, and all alike
heirs. And as they are so in the matter they inherit, so in the manner of
coming to their right: for they are all the children of God, and children by
adoption, and not by natural generation; so Christ only is Gods heir.

Now, that it may distinctly appear that they are heirs together, I will
number some particulars: as,

Godly men and women are heirs together many ways.
1. They have all the same Father, Ephesians. 4.6. who is in them all.

2. They are all of the same body, viz. members of the mystical body of
Christ, Ephesians. 3.6.

3. They have all one spirit, Ephesians. 4.3, 4.

4. They wear all the same apparel, being clothed with the same
righteousness of Christ, Gal. 3.27, 28.

5. They wear all the same livery, and badge of distinction; they have all one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4.6.

6. They are all fed with the same commons at the Lords Table, the bread is the
communion of the body of Christ, and so the wine of his blood; I say communion,
because all partake of it, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17.

7. They have all the same gifts: for though in outward administrations and
callings there be difference, and in natural endowments, and in common graces;
yet in the gifts of saving grace they have all a part of all gifts, and differ
only in the measure, as they have but one faith, and one hope: and so in all
other saving graces, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. 1 Cor. 12. Ephesians. 5.7. Romans 12.

8. They have all the same promises, Ephesians. 3.6.

9. They have all the same, or the like attendants, viz. the Angels of heaven,
Heb. 1.13.

10. They are governed by the same laws, have all one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. and have
all the same way to heaven, which is by Christ; and have all interest in the
Teachers of the Word of Christ their Lord, 1 Cor. 3.22.

11. They shall have all the same glory after this life; for the inheritance of
them all is immortal, and undefiled, and without end, 1 Pet. 1.4.

12. They shall hold their glory in the same place after this life. viz. in
heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4.

The Use of this should be greatly for the comfort of weak and poor
Christians; for though they differ from other men in outward calling, or the
measure of gifts, yet they are, in the substance of the inheritance, provided
for, as well as the greatest Kings, or Prophets, or Apostles. And besides, it
should teach the brethren of higher degree to carry themselves with all
humility toward their poor brethren; and it should teach all Christians to
love as brethren, to be courteous and tender hearted one toward another, as
follows in the next verse of this Chapter. Thus of the fourth point.

5. The fifth point is concerning the persons that do inherit, and so the
coherence shows, That both sexes are capable of inheriting; women as well as
men, wives as well as husbands. God is no respecter of persons, but in all
conditions of people, such as fear him, and believe in Christ, and work
righteousness, are accepted and adopted of him, as these places show, Act.
10.35. Gal. 3.28. Col. 3.11. And this should teach all Christians, not to have
the glorious faith of Christ in respect of persons, Iam. 2.1, 2. And in
particular, such husbands as have religious wives, should make the more account
of them: though God has made them inferior to them in outward condition, yet
he has made them equal in the inheritance of life.

Lest prayer be interrupted.] Hitherto of the second reason to persuade
husbands to make conscience of their duty toward their wives. The third
reason is taken from the ill effect, if it be not done, and that is, that Gods
service (and in particular, prayer) will be hindered; and that diverse ways:
First, if he dwell not with her, prayer in the family is like to be omitted, it
being his work, as the head of the family, to perform that duty, and to see
that his household serve God with him, Josh. 24.14. And if he carry not
himself as a man of knowledge, there may arise such discord amongst them, that
they will have no mind either to pray together, or one for another; at least,
their passions will tempt them many times to omit prayer: and if he give not
honor, but despise her, he will have no heart to pray for her whom he
contemnes.

There are many observations to be gathered out of these words: as,

Doct. 1. Prayer is a part of Gods service that is necessarily required, and
not left arbitrary for men to do, or not to do it, Psalm. 105.1. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. Mat. 7.7. Romans 12.12. Ephesians. 6.18. Col. 4.2.

Doct. 2. The exercise of prayer is not only a part of Gods service, The
excellency of prayer appears in many respects.
but it is an excellent part, a chief part, that which much excels. Which may
appear, first, by the nature of it. It is an exercise in which a mortal
creature talks with the immortal Creator. Secondly, by the antiquity of it.
It is an exercise that godly men have betaken themselves to with great devotion
from the first times of the world, Genesis 4.26. and 21.33. Thirdly, by the
efficient cause of it. God poures out his own Spirit upon his people, of
purpose to make them able to pray, and therefore is called, The Spirit of
prayer, Zech. 12.11. Joel 2.28. Romans 8.26. Fourthly, because they are things so
precious, as Christ takes them and presents them to God, covering our
imperfections, and making them acceptable, Rev. 8.3. Fifthly, by the great
privileges, this exercise enjoyes. For first, God is greatly delighted in it,
Pro. 15.8. and therefore one of his titles is, that he is a God that hears
prayer, Psalm. 65.1. and hears with great attention; his ears are open, Psalm.
34.15. and will not despise prayer for the infirmities of his servants, Psalm.
102.17. nor reproach them, James 1.5. Secondly, any man of any condition, that
has an honest heart, may be regarded with God in prayer, Mark 7.7. Luke
11.10. Thirdly, whatsoever is asked is obtained, which is an unspeakable
benefit, Mark 11.24. Psalm. 85.5. Lastly, God has promised salvation to all
them that call upon his name, Joel 2. ult. And this point should be a great
encouragement to all true Christians to be much in prayer, and to resist all
dullness in themselves, or temptations and objections against the exercise of
prayer.

Doct. 3. Prayer is a duty required of private Christians, as well as of
learned men, or Ministers. Husbands and wives are supposed to practice this
duty of prayer. Hence it is that where we read of any commandment to pray in
Scripture, usually it is as large as any of the ten Commandments, even such as
binds all persons to the performance of it: which should serve greatly to
show the profaneness of most families that have no prayer. A family without
prayer, and the exercises of religion in it, is a very den of wild beasts, and
a cage of impure birds; and the wrath of God hangs over those families that
have not prayer used in them, as these places show, Psalm. 79.6. Zeph. 3.1, 2.
Dan. 9.13. Ezekiel. 22.30.

Doct. 4. Yea, in that he takes for granted, that Christian husbands and wives
did pray; only admonishing, that they look to it that their prayer be not
interrupted, it shows, That every godly Christian can pray, and does make
conscience of it to do it, Psalm. 32.6. for every Christian, that is a true
Christian, has the spirit of adoption, by which he cries Abba, Father, Rom 8.
16. And it is made a sign of a wicked man not to call upon the name of the
Lord, Psalm. 14.4.

Doct. 5. In that prayer may not be interrupted or hindered, it shows plainly,
That this is an exercise for every day constantly while we live in this world,
which these places confirm, 1 These. 5.17. Col. 4.2. Romans 12.12. Psalm. 105.4.
praying by fits will not serve turn.

Doct. 6. Wives and husbands, though they had never so many praises other
ways, or for their carriage one toward another, yet if they be not religious
persons, and in particular, such as serve God by daily and devout prayer, they
are not true Christians, nor accepted of God. The Apostle takes it for granted,
that all Christian men and women do make conscience of daily prayer to God.
Which serves notably to con^ure the vain trust in civil honesty, and the
fairness of domestical conversation, which bewitcheth many persons in the
world.

Doct. 7. When the heart is not right toward man, it is not right toward God:
as here, domestical disorders hinder the exercises of religion toward God.
That husband that loves not his wife has no great mind to pray. Wives that
make no conscience to live quietly and obediently with their husbands, suffer a
like alienation from God, both in their ability to serve him, and in his
acceptance of it.

Doct. 8. In that he says your prayers, it shows, That every Christian must
make prayers of his own. As the just man lives by his own faith, so must the
true Christian think of getting his living under God by his own prayers. It Is
not enough that he partake of other men's prayers in public, or that he can get
others to pray for him in private; God looks for prayers from himself.

Doct. 9. In that he says prayers, it imports, That there be diverse kinds of
prayer, and that private Christians must make not only a prayer, but prayers
to God, Ephesians. 6.18. Phil. 4.6. Col. 4.2. The sorts of prayer and differences
arise,

From whence the sorts and difference of Prayer does arise.
1. From the instrument by which it is formed; for there is the prayer of the
heart only: such was Hannah her prayer, 1 Samuel 1. There is a prayer of the
mouth only; such is the prayer of hypocrites, Esaias 29.13. There is the prayer
both of heart and mouth; and such is the prayer ordinarily of all the godly.

2. From the place of prayer: some prayers are public, some private; and a
Christian must use both. Some are alone, some with others.

3. From the form: and so we have the prayer of Christ as the pattern and
rule for all prayers, and the prayers of Christians agreeable to that pattern.
We must not r^st upon saying over the words of the Lords prayer, and neglect
all other prayers. Again, some prayer is conceived, some is in a set (...)
used. A set form is (...) for the public, and for such weak Christians as
are not yet able to express their own desire to God in their own words. No^
(...) conceived forms unfit or unlawful for such as are able and desirous to
perform prayer according to the rules of prayer, as is apparent by the
examples of all sorts of prayers in both Testaments.

4. From the object of prayer; and so some prayers are made daily at set times:
and thence it was that the Chuch of the Jews had their hours of prayer, Acts
3.1. and some are uttered suddenly, according to some special occasion. And of
this sort are ejaculations, short petitions put up to God, expressing the
present motion in the heart.

Doct. 10. It is a great loss or inconvenience to have our prayers
interrupted. This is plain from the Text. And there may be many reasons
assigned of it; I will instance but one or two: first, because for that time a
man is thrust out of the presence of the King of heaven. To pray is to stand
before his face. Secondly, because while prayer stands still our spiritual
trade stands still: while we pray not we thrive not. Thirdly, if it were
nothing else but the respect of others, it must needs be a great inconvenience
to omit prayer, because thereby we withdraw our aides from the Church; and that
is as bad as in evil times of war to withdraw our succors from the house of
Israel.

Quest. But how many ways can prayer be interrupted?

Answ. Prayer may be interrupted either in heaven, or in earth; either in the
hearing of it, or in the making of it.

Prayer is interrupted in the hearing of it, or God will not hear prayer,

1. If the person making it lie in any sin without repentance, Prayer may be
hindered seven ways in the hearing of it.
Pro. 15.8. Esaias 59.2. Lam. 3.44. Psalm. 66.18. 2 Timothy 2.19. 1 John 3.22.

2. If it be not made in faith, that is, if we believe not that we shall have
what we ask, Mat. 11.24. James 1.6.

3. If not made in the name of Christ, John 16.23.

4. If it be made carelessly and coldly; if a man's head be full of distractions,
so as he regards not what he prays, he is not likely to be heard: for how
shall God hear him when he hears not himself? and how shall God heed what he
says, when he heeds not what he says himself?

5. If a man ask amiss, that is, ask for carnal and corrupt ends, James 4.3.

6. If a man be not in charity with his neighbor, and will not forgive him
his trespass, Mat. 6.14.

7. If a man be unmercifull, and will not hear the cries of the poor, Esaias
58.7. Pro. 21.13.

Thus prayer is interrupted in the hearing of it.

Prayer is interrupted in the making of it, How it is interrupted in the making
of it.
when men are indisposed to prayer, and so omit the performance: and thus
prayer is interrupted,

Sometimes by the violence of wordly cares and business, the heart of man
being overcharged with these cares of life.

Sometimes by domestical discords, and private passions; which it seems the
Apostle especially means in this place.

Sometimes by the love and lust after some particular si^: for while men's
hearts run after sin they have no mind to pray.

The Use may be to reprove two sorts of men in special, besides those
mentioned before.

1. Such as pray not at all. Is it such an evil to omit prayer for a time?
what is it then not to pray at all?

2. Diverse weak Christians are to be warned about fainting or discouragement
in praying: they interrupt themselves with their own fears and objections. As
for instance:

Ob. I find so much hardness of heart and insensiblenesse, and therefore I
dare not pray.

Sol. David himself in the beginning of many of his Psalms, expesseth a kind
of want of feeling, and yet before he has done he is full of life. Besides,
hardness of heart felt and mourned for, is no hinderance to the success of
prayer. And further, for this reason thou have more need to pray: for prayer is
like a fire to melt the leaden heart of man.

Ob. I want words, I know not what to say when I come to pray.

Sol. Pray for that very thing; that God that commands thee to take unto thee
words, Hos. 14.2. would himself give them to thee. Secondly, the Spirit helps
our infirmities, when we know not what to pray as we ought, Romans 8.16.
Thirdly, we serve such a God as will hear us, if like little children we can
but name the name of our heavenly Father, Romans 8.15. 2 Timothy ^.19.

Ob. But I am afraid God will not regard what I say to him.

Ans. Consider first the nature of God; he loves to hear prayer, Psalm. 95.1.
then think of the commandment of God, who in so many Scriptures, does so
peremptorily enjoyne us to pray to him; and thirdly, think of the many
promises he made unto such as do call upon his name, and then thou have no
reason to doubt of audience, if thou bring lawful petitions, and an honest
heart.

Ob. But I have prayed, and I find no success.

Sol. God sometimes seems not to hear, of purpose to make us the more
importunate, Luke 18.1. etc. Again, God may hear us, and not grant what we
ask, but something that is better for us: as he heard Christ, Heb. 5. and
Paul, 2 Cor. 12.8, 9.

Verse. 8. Finally, be ye all of one mind: one suffer with another: love as
brethren: be pitiful: be courteous.


HItherto of the general exhortation to all Christians, and the special
exhortation to su^jects, servants, wives, and husbands. Now follows the third
part of my division, which I made when I entreated of verse. 3. of Chapter the
first, viz. matter of dehortation. For I conceive, that the Apostle in the rest
of this Chapter does secretly entend to dehort Christians from impatiency,
under the troubles may befall them in this life.

Where he proceeds in this order: First, he strives to show them the best
course to avoid trouble, as much as in them lies, from verse. 8. to 14.
Secondly, he shows them how to avoid impatiency, if trouble do come, from
verse 14. to the end of the Chapter.

About the avoiding of troubles, he gives both rules and reasons: rules, verse.
^.9. reasons, verse 9. to 14.

The rules show us how we must carry ourselves, both toward the good, verse
8. and toward the bad, verse 9. And to strengthen those rules, especially the
latter of them, he gives three strong reasons: one taken from the state and
condition of the true Christian, verse 9. the other taken from a prophetical
testimony: where he shows what the Prophet David's opinion was long since,
verse. 10.11, 12. the third taken from the profitable effect or event of such a
course, verse. 13. About avoiding of impatiency, if trouble do come, (...)
proceeds in the like order: For first, he gives rules, verse. 14, 15, 16. then
Reasons, ver. 17. to the end of the chapter. In giving rules he shows (...)
what to think on, ver. 14. and what to do, both toward themselves, ver. 14.
and towa^d^ God, ver. 15. and toward other men, ver. 16. In general, if we
mark the whole frame, and the Apostles order, we may observe diverse things: as,

1. That troubles are not to be desired: for the Apostle shows how to avoid
them. Which is to be noted, to confute those weak Christians that long for
that which they call persec^tion.

2. That a man may be a good Christian, and yet not be much opposed outwardly:
which blames those that dislike their own estate, or censure the estate of
others, because they are not afflicted or persecuted as other men.

3. Yea, it is the duty of every Christian to look carefully to his
conversation, and to strive by the use of all good means to avoid unquietness
and trouble in the world, Romans 12.19. Amos 5.12. 1 Timothy 2.2, 3.

4. That some Christians may carry themselves with great discretion, humility,
piety, and inoffensivenesse, and yet cannot avoid trouble, but shall suffer
from the world.

5. That impatiencie and disquietnesse in the time of trouble is a very
dishonorable vice in a Christian, and with great care and all possible
endeavor to be avoided.

6. That it is possible for a Christian to attain to that degree of goodness,
as to be able to express great patience and unmoveablenesse, though many and
great troubles befall them, if they will use the medicines prescribed in Gods
Word, and follow such directions as the Apostle here gives. Thus of the
general doctrines.

In this eighth verse the Apostle gives rules that show a way how to avoid*
trouble, and they are rules that concern our conversation with godly
Christians; and so he shows, that there are five things that are of singular
use to preserve a man from unquietness and trouble if it may be: as,

1. To agree in opinion, to be all of one mind; for many discords, Five things
of singular use to keep us quiet in trouble.
and much unquietness, and sometimes public troubles arise from singularity
and diversity in opinions.

2. To be compassionate and like affected when other men are in trouble; for as
this is amiable amongst men, so many times it moves the Lord to keep us from
trouble, because we are tenderly affected toward other men in their troubles.

3. To love our brethren: for that both shows us to the world to be the true
Disciples of Christ, John 13. and besides, by the quality of brotherly love a
world of discord and trouble is prevented.

4. To be pitiful, or as it is in the original, to be well bowelled, in
respect of mercy: to have right bowels of mercy, in comforting and relieving
such as are in distress; for to the merciful God will show mercy, and, if it
be good for them, even this mercy of living a quiet life.

5. To be courteous: for a courteous and loving behavior prevents suspicion,
and quenches much fire of discord, that other ways would break out, and wins
much affection both in good and bad.

Be ye all of one min^.] Diverse things may be here observed.

The first is general to the whole verse, and that is, That in this world, in
the best estate of the Church, there are many defects, and disagreements, and
faults in the carriage or judgments of Christians in their living together.

The earnestness of the Apostle in heaping up these directions imports, that
he discerned many things amiss: which was not only true of the Churches of
Corinth, and Galatia, and Thessaloni^a, but even of the Church of Philippi,
which St. Paul most commends. And the like we may find in the estate of the
seven Churches of Asia, if we mark what is said to them by S. John in his
Revelation. Yea, there was not perfect agreement at all times amongst the
Pillars of the first Christian Churches, Paul and Barnabas were at variance,
Acts ^5.^9. and Paul and Peter did openly disagree, Gal. 2. The reason is,
because in this life we know but in part, and are sanctified but in part, 1
Cor. 13. The Use should be, first, to teach us not to be offended or
scandalized at the differences of opinion, that break out in all the Churches
of Christ every where in our times. We must pray the God of peace, to give us
peace, and know, that it has always been so; and therefore it should not
hinder us from embracing the known truth. Secondly, this should the more
inflame our desires after heaven, and make us the more willing to die, because
there will never be perfect holiness and agreement till we come to heaven;
then we shall be holy as God is holy, and know as we are known; and charity
will be perfect for ever. And besides, this should teach us with the more
patience to instruct and wait for the amendment of such as are contrary
minded; and not strive over violently, or passionately with them, 2 Timothy 2.25.
Lastly, if Christians can agree no better, and have such defects, then we
should never wonder overmuch at the monstrous abominations in opinion or life,
that are found amongst the wicked of the world, and in false Churches.

A second doctrine I observe from hence is, That we ought to be rightly ord^red
in our minds, as well as any other part of our souls or lives. Yea, the mind
is to be looked to in the first place: Hence it is that in our regeneration our
minds are especially renewed, Romans 12.2. and God requires to be served with
our minds, Mat. 22.37. Yea, as God is an eternal mind, so the service of the
mind is most proper for God. And besides, our minds give laws to our lives;
and therefore if the mind be not good, the life must needs be evil. Note.
The happiness of the whole man depends upon the mind; and therefore the
Apostle reckons the impuritie of the mind and conscience to be the worst
impurity can befall a man, Tit. 1.15. and the same Apostle makes it a sign of
a man whose end is damnation, to have his mind taken up, and wholly bent to
earthly things, Phil. 3.19. This point may serve, first, to show the woeful
estate of such persons as have ill and unsound minds. And the mind is unsound
when it is corrupt or putrefied with ill opinions concerning either faith or
manners, 2 Timothy 3.8. 1 Cor. 11.3. and when it is blinded with ignorance, 2 Cor.
4.3, 4. for without knowledge the mind cannot be good, Pro. 19.2. and it is a
divellish mischief to have darkness in our minds, as that place in the
Corinthians shows. The mind is also unsound, and in wof^ll ^aking, when it is
taken up with vile thoughts, and contemplative wickedness, Romans 1.21. Ephesians.
4.17. and when men have double minds, James 4.7. or wavering minds, James
1.7. And therefore one of the highest curses God inflicts upon men with whom he
is angry, is to plague them in their minds, either with a reprobate mind, Romans
1.28. or with a desperate mind. Secondly, this Doctrine shows what harmfull
creatures deceivers of minds are: they do more mischief than such as deceive
men in their estates, or poison men's bodies, Tit. 1.10. Thirdly, this should
teach all careful Christians to gird up the loins of their minds, 1 Pet.
1.13. and to labor to get a sound mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. and in particular, to get
the unity of mind which the Apostle here requires. And so I come to the third
point.

The third Doctrine then, which I observe out of these words, is, That all true
Christians are bound in a special manner to strive to be all of one mind; which
in this place is meant of unity and agreement in judgment, and matter of
belief in the points of Religion. This is urged in diverse Scriptures, as, 1
Cor. 1.10. 2 Cor. 13.11. Phil. 2.2. Rom 15.5. and this was the great glory of
the first Christian Church, that all the multitude were of one heart, and one
soul, Acts 4.32. There are many reasons to persuade us hereunto.

For what reasons we ought to be all of one mind.
1. From the nature of this agreement. It is as it were one of the bonds of the
mystical union: for though it be not the principal one, for that is the
Spirit of Christ, yet it is a special one; it is like the veins and sinews
which tie the body together: to break this unity is to cut asunder the very
veins and sinews of the mystical body of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.10.

2 From the equity and comeliness of it. We have but one Father, one
Baptism, one Spirit, one Hope, and therefore should have but one Faith, Ephesians.
4.3, 4, 5.

3 From the good effects of this unity: for first, it will make us the fitter
to praise God, and do him service with the greater encouragement and comfort,
as we may see, Romans 15.5. Secondly, it will make us ever eat our meat with more
gladness, and singleness, and quietness of heart, Act. 2.46. Thirdly, it
will win us the more favor and honor amongst the people, as we read in
the example of those first Christians, Act. 2.47. yea in the end of that verse
we may gather, that it is a great advantage for the conversion of others, when
they see us agree so well together: and further, it will be a singular joy to
our Teachers, to see us agree and be all of one mind, and to serve God with
one shoulder, as the Prophet speaks, Zeph. 3.9. so Phil. 2.2. Yea, it will
be a sign to us that we are true Christians, and have found true comfort in
Christ, and in brotherly love, and that we have fellowship by the Spirit in the
body of Christ, and that we have right bowels and mercy unto others, Phil.
2.1, 2.

4 From the ill effects of dissenting. Two of them may be gathered from the
coherence in this place: for first, it is employed, That if Christians agree not
in opinions, they will hardly practice the four other virtues here named,
toward the persons with whom they dissent: they will not love them as brethren
heartily, nor be so pitiful to them in distress, nor so merciful to help
them if they be in need, nor so courteous and kind to them. Secondly, if this
first rule be transgressed, it is very probable they will bring trouble upon
themselves; and that either in their consciences, or in their estates. It may
be observed, that all the while a man is in contention about his diverse or
strange opinions, in which he dissents, he is not quiet in himself, nor
enjoyes firm rest and peace in his own heart and conscience. And experience
shows, that many, both Ministers and private Christians, have brought a great
deal of trouble upon their estates by dissenting. Now, out of other Scriptures
we may observe diverse other ill effects of diversities in opinions: as first,
it breeds confusion in the Church, as the Apostle shows, 1 Cor. 14.32, 33.
Secondly, it breeds division and schism, 1 Cor. 1.10. When men begin to broach
new opinions, schisms begin in the root of it, though it may be a long time
before it come to the full growth. Thirdly, it much disquieteth the hearts and
heads of many weak Christians; in which respect S. Paul wished they were cut
off that troubled the Galathians, chap. 5. Fourthly, it not only troubles
Christians, but many times works still in them, as it proves the subverting of
their souls, as the Apostles show in the case of difference about the
Ceremonial Law, Act. 15.24. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Timothy 2.14* 16, 17. Fifthly, it drives
men many times into diverse acts of hypocrisy, or passion, or pride, or such
vices as are contrary to singleness of heart, Act. 2. 46. Sixthly, it breeds
many times strange censuring: the authors of new opinions censuring of others,
as if because they received not their doctrine, they were not spiritual
enough, but too carnally minded, and that they were f^rre behind them in
knowledge, as we may gather 1 Cor. 14.36, 37. Thus the false Teachers vilified
Saint Paul and the Apostles.

Thus of the motives to unity in judgment. Before I come to the Use, I must
put you in mind of a limitation that concerns this doctrine. We must be of
one mind, but then it must be according to Christ Jesus, Romans 15.5* that is,
this consent in ju^gement must be in the truth, and in such truth especially
as may further the edification of the mystical body of Christ: else agreement
in judgment is a conspiracy rather than unity.

The Use may be both for instruction and reproof: for instruction, and so we
should all be affected with a great estimation of unity in judgment, and
strive by all means to attain to it, and keep our selves so all of us, that
we do live in unity with the Church of God. Now that we may do thus,

Helps unto unity of mind.
1. We should beseech the God of patience and consolation to give us to be like
minded, even to work in us the unity he requires of us, Rom* 15.5.

2 Pet. 1. ult.
2. We must take heed of private interpretations. Men should with much fear and
jealousy here or read of such opinions or interpretations of Scripture as
have no authors but some one, or few men. Of such authors of doctrines we
should say with the Apostle, What, came the Word of God out from you? or came
it unto you only? 1 Cor. 14.36. Especially men must take heed of receiving
opinions from mere private persons, that are not Ministers of the Gospel: for
I suppose it cannot be showed from any place of Scripture, that ever any truth
was revealed to or by a private man, that was unknown to all the Teachers of
the Church: yea, if the Authors of diverse and strange doctrines be Ministers,
yet that rule of the Apostle should hold, that the spirits of the Prophets
should be subject to the Prophets. Such doctrines as may not be approved by the
grave and godly learned that are eminent in the Church, must not be broached, 1
Cor. 14.32. And this rule has one thing more in it, viz. that men should not
express difference of opinion, without open and manifest Scripture. Avoid
doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. Esaias 8.

3. A great respect must be had to the Churches peace, so as such doctrines as
are likely to breed either scandal or division in the Church, are either not
to be received, or not uttered, except in some special case. Yea, moderate
Christians, that make conscience of unity, should hold themselves in conscience
bound to be afraid to depart from the judgment of the Church in which they
live, unless it be when doctrine is brought in with great demonstration to the
conscience. To preserve the unity of the spirit we must have great respect to
the bond of peace, Romans 14.19. 1 Cor. 14.33. Ephesians. 4.3. We must greatly
reverence the form of doctrine in the Church where we live, Romans 6.17.

4. That we may be of one mind, every Christian must be sure to know the truth
which is given to the Churches, and to make himself fully persuaded in his
mind about such truths as are fundamentally necessary to salvation, ^ Tim.
1.1*3.

5. Private Christians, in receiving opinions, should have great respect unto
such Teachers as have been their fathers in Christ; God has bound them to a
special reverence toward them; which they should show by reverencing their
judgments more than any other men, in meet comparison, 1 Cor. 4. 15* 16. and
11.1, 2, 4, 5. Phil. 3.15, 17.

6. To preserve a further unity: it should be the care of such as have gifts of
knowledge and utterance, to help forwards such as are weak in judge^^nt, and
to comfort the feeble minded, lest they being neglected become a p^^y to
deceivers of minds, 1 These. 5.14. and to warn such as are not of the same
mind, Phil. 4.

Lastly, we should mark such as cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the
doctrine which we have l^^rned, and avoid them, Romans 16.17, 18.

The second (...) may be for the reproof of multitudes of Christians in all
places, that (...) greatly against this doctrine, by their dissenting in
opinions, without due respect of the former rules. There is almost no
Congregation in the kingdom but is disquieted with this sin: yea, many times
the glory of such as profess religion is greatly obscured by this sin, and the
sincerity of religion much exposed to contempt, and the profane reproach of the
wicked. And this sin is the greater,

1. When men not only bring in new opinions, Aggravations against discord in
opinion.
but also bring them in with an opinion that they are more holy and more
spiritual than such as receive them not, or resist them, 1 Cor. 14.37.

2. When the opinions are merely new, and unheard of before in the Christian
world.

3. When they are brought in by private persons, that go from house to house
to infer upon others the singularity of their conceits.

4. When themselves are doubtful inwardly of the truth of what they affirm,
and are not fully persuaded, but doubt both ways, and yet take to that side
that differs from the general judgment of the Churches, Romans 14.5. 1 Timothy
1.6, 7.

5. When men urge their dissenting so violently, that a Schism is made in the
Church, or Christians are divided from the exercise of brotherly love, and
mutual fellowship, 1 Cor. 1.10, 11.

6. When men are vain talkers, and will have all the words, and by their good
wills will talk of nothing else, and so hinder edification in profitable
doctrine, and such as is out of question, Tit. 1.10, 11. and when men lust to
be contentious, and are like Salamanders that live always in the fire, and
know no zeal without contention, 1 Cor. 1^.16.

7. When men differ in judgment, in the very points of foundation, and err
against such truths as must be believed to salvation.

8. If men be so ^^gh^ headed, and variable, that they are tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine; sometimes of one opinion, and
shortly after of another: especially when men are so new fangled, as in every
place to receive almost any doctrine that is new and diverse, Ephesians. 4.14.

9. When men quarrel so earnestly about things of less moment, contrary to
the custom of the Churches; as about praying, or prophesying bare or covered;
or about eating the Sacrament full or fasting, 1 Cor. 11. or about such
indifferent things as may be used or not used, with Christian liberty, Romans
14. or about Genealogies, 1 Timothy 1.4. and such like. And that this reproof may
enter the more deeply upon the hearts of some Christians, it will be profitable
to consider of the ill causes of disse^^ing: which are these, and such like.

1. Ignorance of the Scripture: if they had more true knowledge they would not
disagree; and this ignorance, Many are the ill causes of dissenting.
(yea, sometimes palpable ignorance) may be found in some that think
themselves to have more knowledge, and to be more spiritual than a multitude
of those from whom they disagree, Mat. 22.1 Tim. 1.6, 7. 1 Cor. 14.37* 38.

2. Want of love to those found truths that more concern sanctification,
causes God in his justice sometimes to give men up to delusion^, and to
believe lies, 2 Th^s. 2.

3. Vainglory: the very desire to be some body, and to excel others, makes
some Christians gladly to receive, or bring in different opinions, 1 C^r. 4.8*
Phil. 2.^* Gal. 5.26.

4. Over much trust upon the judgments of some ^h^n they esteem, when they
respect some Ministers so much as to be of their opinion, though their
consciences be not informed of any ^ound reason from the word of God for it.
This estimation of men above that is written, has deceived ^^^y, ^ Cor. 3.21.
and 4.6.

5. Respect of earthly things. Some men teach and profess to hold opinions of
dissenting, sometimes merely for advantage to their estates, either to get
maintenance or preferment in the world by it, Tit. 1.10, 11. Romans 16.19, 20.

6. Prejudice is the root of dissenting many times: as the Gentiles would not
abide yielding to ceremonies, out of very dislike of the Jews; and the Jews
would not understand the needlesnesse of their ceremonies, out of very contempt
of the Gentiles: and so the strength of faction on both sides kept them from
agreeing.

7. Heaping up of Teachers disorderly: when Christians are so diseased with
humor, and so hard to be pleased with sound doctrine, that they hunt up and
down to hear all sorts of men, it many times proves hurtful in this respect,
that they get infection from the different humors of the many Teachers they
hear. Disordered hearing in this respect breeds as a surfe^ of the inward
regard of sound doctrine, so a great aptness to receive diverse and strange
doctrines, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

8. The contempt of their godly Teachers, and want of sound affection to them;
to them I say that have a charge over their souls, whom they ought to obey.
And this is the more vile, as some Christians order the matter, because of
their hypocrisy, in magnifying the judgment or gifts of Teachers that are
absent, and have not the charge of their souls, and abusing the due respect of
their own Teachers: which is yet more vile, if this injury be done to such as
were their Fathers in Christ. Thus of the Use for reproof.

By the limitation given before from other express Scriptures, we learn so to
understand this doctrine of unity, as it excludes all unity of opinion or
practice with such Churches* or particular persons, as hold doctrines against
the foundation of Christian religion; so as we must never agree with them. As
for instance: We may not, without the damnation of our souls, be of one mind
with the Church of Rome: for there are many things which they believe and
practice, which we must in no case join with them in; and it is impossible to
reconcile us to them, unless they change their minds. I will instance in
diverse things, wherein we cannot, without losing Christ, be of one mind: as,

In what things we may not be of one mind with the Church of Rome.
1. In opinion of merit of works: for thereby we make the Gospel or Doctrine of
Gods grace of none effect, and the promise of God void; which is to deny the
grounds of Christian religion, Gal. 5.3. Romans 4.14. and 11.16.

2. In the opinion of worshipping Saints and Angels: for the Apostle says
expressly, that they that do so hold not the head, and so cannot be true
members of Christ, Col. 2.18, 19.

3. In their Idolatry, in making and worshipping of Images, and almost infinite
superstitions, contrary to the second Commandment expressly; and so as we are
commanded to get out of this spiritual Babel, in respect of her spiritual
fornications.

4. In their doctrine of Traditions: for they teach that Traditions that are
not agreeable to Scripture, yet are to be received, if they be delive^^d by the
Church, in equal authority with the Scriptures. If we be of one m^^de with
them herein we cannot escape Gods eternal curse, as these Scriptures show,
Gal. 1.8. Rev. 22.18.

5. In their doctrine of perfection: for they teach, a man may perfectly keep
the Law of God. Now, this is so dangerous an error, that the Apostle says
there is no truth in the man that holds it, 1 John 1.8.10.

I omit the rehearsal of other differences. Thus of the first virtue.

The second virtue charged upon Christians is compassion one toward another.

Have compassion one of another.] The word signifies such a fellow-feeling or
sympathy, that makes us like affected as if we were in their case.

The doctrine then is clear, That we ought to have a sympathy one toward
another; this is a singular virtue. In handling of which point I will observe
these things: 1. The proofs of it from other Scripture. 2. The Explication of
the sense, showing in what things we should be like affected. 3. The reasons of
it. 4. The Uses.


1. The proofs are very pregnant and full in these other Scriptures, Romans
12.4* 15. Heb. 13.3.

2. For the explication. This sympathy is to be expressed both in the case of
the evils of others, and in the case of the good of others. Wherein ^e
express our compass^on.
In the case of the evils of others we ought to be tenderly affected toward
them, both in respect of their sufferings, troubles, griefs, and crosses, Heb.
13.3. and 10.34. Job 30.25. whether they be inward or outward; as also in
respect of their falling by infirmities, when it proves a grief and affliction
to them, Gal. 6.1. Jude 22. 2 Cor. 11.29. So likewise in the case of the
prosperity of others, we ought to rejoice with them that rejoice, and be
affected as if the blessing had been ours, Romans 12.15.

3. The reasons are manifest. First, The motives or reasons to persuade us to
it.
because hereby we prove our selves to be fellow members in the mystical body
of Christ; which is to be doubted, if this sympathy be not in us in some
measure, 1 Cor. 12.12, 25, 26. Secondly, because hereby we show our selves
conformable and like to Christ our Head, who excelled in this virtue, Heb.
4.15. Mat. 25.40. Thirdly, because that which is the case of others now, may be
our case hereafter, as the Apostle shows in the case of temptation, Gal. 6.1.
Fourthly, a reason may be drawn from the excellency of the grace: it excells
alms and outward works of mercy: for when a man gives an alms, he gives
somewhat without himself; but when we show compassion, we relieve another by
somewhat that is within our selves, and from our selves. And lastly, the
coherence shows, that this may be a means to keep us from trouble our selves.

The Use may be, first, to import the misery of living in this world. This
life must needs be a vale of tears, when we have not only occasion of sorrow
many ways from our own estates, but also such variety of occasions of sorrow
from the condition of others dear unto us. Neither is our case the better, but
the worse, if we do not sorrow with others.

Secondly, this may greatly humble all sorts of men for their Apathie, or want
of care, or feeling, or sympathy in the distresses of others: and the rather
now, when whole Churches are in great distress, Amos 6.6.

Thirdly, this should greatly move true Christians to strive after this virtue,
and to express it lively, and show it forth in all the fruits of it: as first,
by declaring our affection to the afflicted, with all tenderness of heart, and
words of comfort: secondly, by using all our means and power to relieve them,
and help them out of distress: thirdly, by pouring out our souls before God
for them.

Love as brethren.] This is the third duty charged upon them, viz. the
exercise of brotherly love. This is vehemently urged in many Scriptures, Romans
12.10. Heb. 13.1. John 13.34. 1 John 2.7. and 4.21. Now for the explication of
this doctrine four things would be distinctly considered of, viz.

1. Who are brethren.

2. What privilege they have by the brotherhood, or by being brethren.

3. For what reasons we should so love them.

4. With what kind of love we should love them.

Who are brethren.
For the first. Men become brethren one to another many ways: as first, by
propagation, when they are borne of the same blood, and so the children of the
same parents are brethren; and in a remoter sense, kinsmen of the same blood
are brethren, Luke 8.19.

Secondly, by Nation. When men are countrymen they are called brethren,
especially when they descend originally from the fountain of the same ancient
families; and so the people of the twelve Tribes were brethren, Exodus 2.11.

Thirdly, by profession; especially the profession of religion makes all
professors brethren, Acts 11.1. and 1.16. And this was one of the first titles
of love and relation in the Christian world.

Fourthly, communion with Christ: and so we become brethren, either by his
incarnation, Heb. 2.16.17. or in respect of our mystical union with him in his
mystical body, Col. 1.2. Mat. 25.40. and so we are brethren with the Angels,
as they also are joined under this head Christ Jesus, Rev. 19.10. and 22. So
then if any ask, who are the brethren here meant that we must so love? I
answer, they are such as are professors with us of the same religion, and
fellow members of the body of Christ. But that we may more plainly see who are
meant by brethren in the Scriptures, it will be profitable to observe that they
are described by their holiness. The brethren we must love are such as are
partakers of the holy calling, Heb. 3.1. such as are begotten of God, 1 John
5.1. such as will do the will of God by sound practice, Mat. 12.47, 49. They
are the holy brethren we are here charged to love, 1 These. 5.27.

For the second. Our relation to the godly as brethren ought not to be
despised: for, as we are brethren by religion, we enjoy many excellent
prerogatives: for thereby we partake of a heavenly calling, Heb. 3.1. we stand
all in relation to God, as his own children by adoption, Ephesians. 4.6. and so
peace, and the blessing of God as a Father, is upon us all, Ephesians. 6.23. Gal.
6.16. and we are greatly beloved of God, Romans 1.7. and brought up in the same
family, Ephesians. 3.17. fed with the same diet and entertainment in Gods house, and
estated into an inheritance better than all the kingdoms of the world, Romans
9.17. And hereby also we enjoy the fruit of the love of all the godly in the
world, even those that know us not in the face.

Reasons to persuade us to love as brethren.
For the third: There are many reasons why we should love the godly as our
brethren, above all the people in the world: For first, if to be all the
children of one father have such a power over the natural affections of men,
then should it not be without power in religion. Secondly, this is charged upon
us above many other things: yea, above all things we should put on love, Col.
3.14. and yet he had reckoned many excellent virtues before. This was the
special, and one of the last Commandments of our blessed Savior, which he
gave in charge when he was going to his death, 1 John 3.23. John 13.34.
Thirdly, because this love comes of God, and is a sign that God is in us, and
dwells in us, and that we do indeed love God himself, 1 John 4.7, 8, 12, 16,
20, 21. Fourthly, we have the example of God himself, and Christ his Son, that
love them as their peculiar treasure, above all the world; and he showed them
love by unspeakable benefits, 1 John 4.10, 11. Fifthly, because our souls will
thrive and be edified, as brotherly love is continued and increased in us, Ephesians.
4.16. Sixthly, because the godly must be our everlasting companions in heaven, 1
Pet. 4.8. 1 Cor. 13.8. and if we cannot see so much, it is because we are
pu^blinde, 2 Pet. 1.

For the fourth point. If any ask with what kind of love we should love them?
I answer, that our love must have many properties in it:

1. It must be a natural love, that is, such a love as is not by constraint,
With what kind of love we are to love the brethren.
but arises out of our dispositions and inclinations, as we are made new
Creatures in Jesus Christ, Cor. 8.8.

2. It must be a sincere love, a love without dissimulation, Romans 12.10. not in
word, but in deed, 1 John 3.18.

3. It must be a fervent love: we must love them earnestly, and with great
affection, above all other people, 1 Pet. 4.8. brotherly kind love, 2 Pet. 1.7.

4. It must be a pure love, that comes from a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5. and
projects not any iniquity, 1 Cor. 13.6. and therefore must be a love in the
Spirit, Col. 1.8.

5. It must be a diligent love, that will express it by the daily fruits of it
upon all occasions; a laboring and working love, 1 These. 1.3. Heb. 6.10.

6. It must be a speedy love, that will not put off or delay; a love that will
not say, Go, and come again to morrow, Pro, 3.22.

7. It must be an humble love, a love that would ever serve the brethren, not
do them good only, Gal. 5.13. and that is farther showed by not respecting
persons, but loving all the Saints, even those that are poor, or sick, or in
temptations, or fallen by weakness, Ephesians. 1.15. Pro. 19.7. James 2. and that is
also showed by carrying our selves with all lowliness, and meekness of mind,
in all long suffering and forbearing one another, Ephesians. 4.2.

8. It must be a constant love, we must love always, as well as earnestly,
Gal. 4.18.

9. It must be a growing love, that will still increase and abound, Phil. 1.9.
1 These. 4.10.

The Use may be diverse: for,

Use. 1. First, carnal Christians are by this doctrine sharply to be reproved
for their want of love to the brethren, and for all the courses by which they
show their dislike or hatred of godly Christians. This very sin is grievous in
the sight of God: for, for this sins sake, when they have a godly Christian
because his works are better than theirs, God reckons of them but as Cainits,
the seed of Cain; yea, as the children of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. yea, God
will reckon with them as if they were guilty of murder. To hate a godly man is
murder in the sight of God, and deprives a man of eternal life, 1 John 3.14,
15. and proves him that is guilty of it to be a person that abides in death.
And it is in vain to plead that they love God; for if a man say he loves God,
and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his b^other whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And it is Gods
peremptory Commandment, that he that loves God, love his brother also, 1 John
4.20, 21.

Yea, this Doctrine affords matter of reproof to diverse that go f^r true
Christians: and so for many fault. As first, it reproves those that have the
faith of Christ in respect of persons, James 2.1. (...). This is a fault in the
richer sort, and such as stand upon their wor^dly greatness: they rest in
their show of respect and love to some Ministers, or to some great persons that
answer to their own rank, but wholly neglect the acquaintance, and
entertain^ment, and fellowship of poor Christians; and thereby not only
displease God, but much darken their own evidence in this sign of the love of
the brethren, because they show not their love to all the Saints as they might
and ought. Secondly, it reproves intemperate Christians, that sin against
brotherly love by (...) censuring and condemning of their brethren; especially
when they become divulgers of (...), and stand out as ^c^users of (...)
brethren. This is a divellish sin; for it is the Devils special (...)
adversary, and an accuser of the brethren, Rev. 12.10. so that he is a devil
incarnate that uses this course, Romans 14.3, 10, 13. Iam. 4.11, 12. and 5.9.
Thirdly, it reprooveth the great worldliness that is discerned in diverse
Christians, that are so hardly drawn to show compassion and mercy to poor
Christians when they are in distress. They have this worlds goods, and yet
shut up the bowels of their compassion from their brethren, though they see
they have need, and therefore how dwells the love of God in them? 1 Ioh.
3.17. Fourthly, it reprooves the great aptness to contention, that appears in
many, that easily fall into discord, and from thence into suites of Law,
against their brethren: which is clearly condemned in these Scriptures, both
by example and prohibition, Genesis 13.8. Act. 7.26. 1 Cor. 1.10. and 6.5. Fifthly,
it greatly reprooveth such as by their opinions or practice offend and grieve
weak Christians, and cause them to stagger, or stumble, or be unsettled in the
good way of God; and so endanger not only their present consolation, but (as
much as in them lies) their salvation also, Mat. 18.6. 1 Cor. 8.11, 12.13.
Thus of the use for reproof.

Use 2. Secondly, this Doctrine may serve for instruction; and so it should
prevail with us, to desire and endeavor to express and preserve amongst us
brotherly love, that it may be, and continue, and increase amongst all such as
fear God, Heb 13.1. And to this end diverse rules are to be observed: for, that
brotherly love may continue,

Rules to be observed that brotherly love many continue. Either such things we
are to avoid,
1. We must not fashion our selves according to this world, but avoid all
needless conversation with wicked men, Romans 12.^, 2.

2. We must take heed of, and avoid such as sow discord, or cause divisions
amongst men: whether they be such as go about to seduce men in opinions, Romans
16.19. Gal. 5.12. 2 Pet. 3.16. or such as make contention in practice. A little
leaven of dissenting or discord ^^y leaven the whole lump.

3. We must take heed that we be not ensnared or entangled with vainglo^ious
desires after worldly greatness, whether in Church or Commonwealth: Therefore
Christ charge his Disciples not to be called Rabbi, because they and all
thegodly were brethren, Mat. 23.8. Gal. 5. ult.

4. If we would preserve brotherly love, we must take heed of conceitednesse
and wilfulness of judgment; we must not be wise in our selves, but rather in
lowliness of mind, esteem another man's gifts and judgment better than our
own; and show it by making our selves equal to them of the lower sort, Phil.
2.3. Romans 12.10, 16* Prove. 12.15.

5. We must take heed of worldliness and self-love, and the minding of our
own things and studying of our ends in conversing, ^ Cor. 13.5, Phil. 2.4.

6. We must take heed of overmuch retiredness, and neglecting of comfortable
fellowship with our brethren, Heb. 10.25. Phil. 1.6. Psalm. 1 33.1.

Or such things we are to practice.
These are things we must avoid. The^e are diverse things likewise to be done,
that we may preserve brotherly love: as,

1. We must provoke one another to love, by all words and carriages that (...)
be without flattery or dissimulation, Heb. 10.24.

2. We should strive, without complement, to show the sound proof of (...)
love in (...) our action^* and by the fruits of it, in all well-doing, strive
to (...) to God, and before men in this thing, 2 Cor. 8.2^*

3. In all things we do^ to, or for the brethren, we should strive to do
(...) respective ma^^er. Let all your things be done in (...) Apostle, ^. Cor.
16.14.

4. We (...) ^^rive to be ^ightly ordered toward our brethren, in case of
si^^e (...) God, or trespass against (...) And that we shall be, i^ we soundly
(...) r^les.

If we know any fault by our brother, How to order our selves toward our
brethren, in case of sin against God, or trespass against us.
and feel that it does tempt us to alienation, we must then remember the
charge given, Levit. 19.17. which is, not to suffer our hearts to hate him, but
give a vent unto our hearts by a plain and discreet reproof.

2. We should be soundly settled in judgment, that there are infirmities in
the best, though we know them not; and so to look for it, as when they do
break out, we should show our selves ready to bear their infirmities, and
forbear them, if they be mere frailties, choosing rather to cross our
selves, than to irritate or provoke them in their weakness, Romans 15.1, 2.

3. If any brother trespass against us, we should show our selves easy to be
entreated, and willing to practice the rule given by our Savior, even to
forgive him if he offend unto seventy times seven times, when he says it
repents him, Mat. 18.21.

4. If we have done any wrong, we should make haste to be reconciled, and seek
it with willing acknowledgement, and readiness to make satisfaction, Mat.
5.23, 24.

Only we must remember about this doctrine of the love of the brethren, that
there are three caveats to be looked to.

1. That we misplace not our affections upon false brethren: Three caveats to
be looked unto in our loving of them.
for there are false brethren that will creep in privily many times for
corrupt ends, Gal. 2.4. 2 These. 3.13.

2. That if any brother be scandalous, or walk inordinately, or will not be
subject to the form of doctrine, and the public ministry, then such a one
is to be avoided; only he must be admonished as a brother, 2 These. 3.6, 15.

3. Servants are charged to look to it, that they be obedient and subject,
notwithstanding this doctrine, that their Masters are brethren, 1 Timothy 6.1.

Pitiful.] The word rendered Pitiful, in the Original signifies rightly
bowelled, or such as have true or right bowels: and so it is to be referred to
mercy, and is more than other Scriptures express, when they require bowels of
mercy: for here it is required that these bowels be right.

In Mat. 25. men are sentenced to condemnation for not showing mercy. In other
Scriptures it is showed, that though they do show mercy, yet if some things be
not looked to, it will not be accepted, as Mi^h. 6.8. there is required not
only mercy, but the love of mercy; and Mat* 6. the Pharisees did works of
mercy, and yet our Savior finds fault with them, because they were done to be
seen of men: and in 1 Cor. 13.2. the Apostle says, If a man give all that he
has to the poor, and want love, it is nothing. So here the Apostle requires
not mercy only, but that their bowels be right in mercy: and about this rule
therefore two things are to be explicated.

1. What bowels of mercy means. 2. What right bowels imports.
For the first. Bowels of mercy imports,

1. Truth in showing mercy, What things bowels of compassion or mercy import.
that it be not in ceremony, or word only, but in deed: that the heart show
mercy as well as the tongue.

2. Love: that our mercy proceed from hearty and Christian affection to the
party, 1 Cor. 13.2. not of constraint, nor with wicked thoughts, or grief of
heart, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. to 12.

3. Tenderness of affection: that we be affected as if our selves were in
want, Romans 12.16.

4. Cheerfulness in expressing our mercy to such as are in misery who are
sometimes as much refreshed with the respect we show to their persons, as with
the supply we bring to their estates. Men in misery should be comforted as well
as relieved.

5. The practice of secret mercy as well as open; even to think of them, and
provide for them, and to provoke others to mercy, and to pray for them when
they know not of it; even when we are gone from them, still to show them mercy.

For the second: our Bowels are right in showing mercy:

When our bowels of mercy are right.
1. If we be prepared unto such good works, and so both our ears should be
prepared, that they may be open to the cry of the poor, Prove. 21.13. and the
matter of mercy should be made ready. And to this purpose, it were an excellent
course if Christians would lay up weekly a part of their gettings, which they
would consecrate to God, that it might be ready when there were need, 1 Cor.
16.1, 2. and further, if we be (as God is) mindful of mercy, and do exercise
it speedily without delay, Prove. 3.27, 28.

2. If we look not for too much beholdingness from them that are relieved.
The rich must not rule over the poor, nor the borrower become a servant to the
lender, Prove. 22, 7.

3. If we have a good eye, Pro. 22.9. and show it by dispensing of our mercy to
such as have most need, and to such as are best affected in religion, if there
be choice.

4. If we do works of mercy, out of goods well gotten: for God hates
robbery, though it were for burnt offerings, Esaias 61.8.

5. If it be for right ends, as not for merit, or the praise of men, Mat. 6. 2
Cor. 9.19.

6. If we be full of mercy, rich in mercy, much in mercy, abundant in mercy,
not only to our power, but sometimes and in some cases beyond our power. We
must open our hands wide, Deuteronomy. 15.8.1 Tim. 6.18. 2 Cor. 8.2, 9. good measure,
and pressed down, Luke 6.8. if we give not sparingly.

7. If we be discreet, so to ease others as we burden not our selves, 2 Cor.
9.14, 15.

8. If we exercise our selves in every kind of mercy, both spiritual and
corporal, in giving, lending, visiting, clothing, feeding, instructing,
admonishing, comforting, etc.

9. If we be constant, and not grow weary of well-doing, Gal. 6.

The use may be, first, for reproof and confutation of diverse sorts of men.

1. Of the Papists, that brag of their good works in this kind: to whom it may
be granted, that they show works of mercy; and perhaps have bowels of mercy:
but they are not right bowels, both because with the Pharisees, they do their
works to be seen of men, and with opinion of justification and salvation by
the merit of their works: and besides, though they show compassion to the
bodies of men, yet are they without all true compassion to the souls of men.

2 Of the house keeping of many Protestants, that brag of their great
Hospitality, and good house keeping, when their entertainment is either spent
upon the rich, or else in the profane abuse of the good creatures of God by
drunkenness, or else in the entertainment of disordered and lewd persons.

3. Of the great neglect of mercy in the most men, that either show not mercy
at all, or not bowels of mercy, or not according to the rules given before,
especially such as hide themselves from the poor, Esaias 58.7. and use shifts
and excuses to avoid such supplies as are necessary for the furtherance of the
relief for the poor in such places as they live, Prove. 24.11, 12. But
judgment merciless shall be to them that show no mercy, Iam. 2.13.

4. Diverse of the better sort are to be rebuked about this point: many
Christians spend a great deal of z^ale about lesser matters, and in the mean
time neglect the greater things of the Law, such as are judgment and mercy;
for few Christians are sufficiently instructed, or inflamed in the estimation
of the worth of the works of mercy, or the necessity of them to the
glorifying of God, and the profession of Religion, Matthew. 23.23.

Secondly, for instruction: and so this doctrine should work in us a great
impression of desire to show forth the fruits of mercy with all tenderness
and sincerity: and to this end we should show that we desire in practice to
obey this doctrine as near as we can; I say, we should show it by accepting
the exhortations of others that move us for any works of this kind, 2 Cor.
8.17. especially we should strive to answer the expectation of our Teachers
herein, and willingly give our selves, first, to the Lord, and then to them;
suffering them to direct our works herein with all readiness, Motives to be
pitiful.
2 Cor. 8.5, 24. and to this end we should use all good means to stir up our
selves to good works of this kind all our days; and therefore we should plow
up the fallow ground of our hearts, by prayer and confession of our natural
barrenness herein, and indisposition, Hos. 10.12. and withal, think much of
all the motives might stir us up hereunto. And so we should think of the
matchless pattern of Gods mercy, and in particular, of his mercy to us, Mat.
5. Luke 6. as also of the worth of mercy; it is better than sacrifice, Mat.
9.13. and of the original of it; God is the father of mercies, 2 Cor. 1.3. and
of the use of it; it proves us to be the true brethren, and true neighbors,
Luke 10.37. and of the great profit of it; for they that are merciful shall
obtain mercy, Mat. 5.7. and to give to the poor is but to lend to the Lord:
and so there is no usury can be so gainful as this of laying out of our
estates for the relief of the poor. Thus of the right bowels of mercy.

Be courteous.] Courtesy is the fifth thing required in our conversation one
toward another. This is exacted in other Scriptures, as Ephesians. 4. ult. Tit. 3.2.
Col. 3.12. this is called by the title of comitie and kindness. Now that we
may know distinctly what is meant by courtesy, I will show both what it
comprehends, and what it has not in it. It comprehends diverse things: as,

1. A willing saluting of those Christians we meet.

2. A conversation void of harshnesse, sullenness, intractablenesse, What
things are comprehended under courtesy.
scornfulnesse, clownishnesse, churlishness, desperateness, or hardness to
please.

3. In matters of offense it makes the fairest interpretations, and forgives
heartily and cheerfully, Ephesians. 4.32.

4. In entertainment it is free, and hearty, and loving, Acts 28.7.

5. In hearing others speak it is patient and willing, Acts 24.4.

6. In giving honor it prefers others almost of all sorts.

7. In moderating authority over inferiors so, as to be better toward them
than they can require. Thus of the courtesy of the Master to his Servants, 1
Pet. 2.18.

But yet we must know that under pretense of courtesy we must not hold
needless conversation with the wicked, nor any way countenance or honor open
and notorious offenders, nor use a promiscuous respect of good and bad all
alike, nor unadvisedly contract any special familiarity or friendship with
persons unequal or unmeet, nor rashly discover secret things to all we meet
withal.

The use should be to teach all Christians to make conscience of this virtue,
seeing God requires courtesy as well as piety; and the contrary causes the
good way of God to be evil spoken of. And besides, the Apostle imports here,
that a courteous conversation may preserve us from many troubles. But yet let
men be again warned, not to rest in mere complements, and outward
formalities, but practice such a courtesy as is joined with the right bowels
of mercy and good works; which may be observed from the coherence. Especially
let all true Christians abhor that dissimulation, that men should salute
willingly, and speak fair, and use men with great kindness, and yet plot
malice and mischief in their hearts, and speak evil behind men's backs, and
secretly labor to subvert other men, who are deceived by their complement, and
mistrust not their envy or malice: and withal, men should avoid complementing
with others, when it is for the compassing of their own ends, especially when
they are sinful, as was the practice of Absolon, when he aspired to the
kingdom.

And thus of the directions the Apostle gives for the avoiding of trouble, as
they concern our conversation toward the godly.

Verse. 9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: but
contrariwise, blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should
inherit a blessing.


REnder not evil for evil.) Now follows the directions for our carriages to
wicked, or unreasonable, and injurious men: and so if we would live in peace,
and out of trouble, we must take heed that we be not provoked by them to
revenge or reviling. Where observe,

1. That wicked men are naturally bent to do evil, and to be injurious, and
to revile others, especially the godly, Psalm. 36.3, 4. Destruction and misery
are in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known: and their throat
is an open sepulcher, their mouths are full of cursing and bitterness, the
poison of Aspes is under their lips, Romans 3.13, 14, 16, 17. The use should be
therefore to teach godly men to provide for it; wheresoever they live in this
world, they must look for it, to be abused and reproached: they may think to
live safely in a wilderness, as well as to live without receiving injury from
carnal and profane men. God can restrain the very Lions that they should not
fall upon Daniel, and he can cast a fear upon the wicked, that they shall not
attempt injury against the godly: but though God do thus at sometimes, yet he
will not be bound always to do it. Secondly, this should teach such as desire
to live in safety, to avoid all needless conversation with the wicked: for
though at the first thou might think they were of fair carriage, and would
do no wrong, yet after a time they will show their nature; especially if they
see they cannot draw thee to run with them into the same excess of sinning.
And thirdly, as any desire to have evidence to their own souls, that they are
become new creatures, and have new natures, so they should show the proof of
it hereby, viz. by avoiding all injurious courses, and reproachful and bitter
words.

2 All private revenge is forbidden; for it is unlawful to render evil for
evil. 2 These. 5.15. the Apostle says, See that no man recompense unto any man
evil for evil. Note there three things: first, that he gives this as a
special charge, as a thing most hateful or ill-beseeming a Christian.
Secondly, what he says, No man must do it: Great men have no more liberty by
private quarrels to revenge their dishonor or hurt, than mean men. Thirdly,
that he says, To no man: we must not render evil to any man, of any
religion, condition, or estate, whatsoever the injury be. So Rom* 12.17. the
like charge is given, and two excellent reasons against private revenge: One,
because vengeance belongs to God only: it is his office. And it is best God
should revenge, because he gives recompense to every transgression: and
besides, he gives a just recompense, Heb. 2.2. whereas men that will perform
their own revenge, give or seek many times an unequal revenge; as when our
Gallants will have blood for a reproach: this is not equal, that a man's life
should be taken for a supposed wrong to their reputation. And further, God has
never failed to execute vengeance, whereas men many times fail, and cannot
perform the revenge they seek; but rather the contrary. Gods vengeance falls
upon them for taking his office out of his hands, as many of those that seek
the blood of others in revenge lose their own, Heb. 10.30. Also it is worth
the noting, that in that place to the Romans the Apostle adds another reason
against private revenge, which greatly crosses the proud and passionate
spirits of our times; and that is couched in these words, Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness: which words import, That he is over
com^^, and has lost his honor, that will revenge: and contrariwise, he does
overcome that will render good for evil. If this point were seriously
considered, it would mightily subdue that unruly pride and passion^ that
discovers it self in the most men: and it does directly prove that Duels or
single combats are simply unlawful and intolerable in any well governed
Commonwealth, and should warn all Christians to take heed of allowing
themselves in the desires or projects of revenge. Nor is their sin the less
that seek revenge, but it is closely, and much dissembled, while they watch
for an opportunity to be even with them that have wronged them.

Nor reviling for reviling.] Observe,

1. That people that are ungodly are very prone to reviling. This we may see in
the conversation they have among their neighbors: what brawling and scoulding
from day to day? and also in the case of religion, how do they continually
reproach and slander the true Christians? so in family affairs, with what
disgraceful and hateful terms are all the businesses (almost) of the
household dispatch? But of this I spoke before.

2. That reviling and railing is a very hateful sin. It is here accounted a
great suffering to suffer reviling. Our Savior reckons it murder in his
exposition of the sixth Commandment, Mat* 5. And if godly men be reviled, it is
termed blasphemy in diverse places of Scripture in the Original. It proceeds
from vile and base natures, Heb. 12.14, 15. James 1.21. and 3.9. Gods spirit is
a Spirit of meekness, and evil words corrupt good manners, 1 Cor. 15.16.

The Use is therefore for great reproof and shame to all those that are guilty
of this sin, especially such as have their mouths full of cursing and
bitterness, Romans 3.14. and such as revile men for this very reason, because
they follow goodness, calling good evil, Esaias 5.20, 21. 1 Pet. 4.5. and such
as revile those that are near unto them in the strong bonds of nature, or
covenant; as when wives revile their husbands, or children their parents.

3. That though we be reviled, yet we must not revile again, because reviling
is a sin, and God has flatly forbidden it in this and other Scriptures: and
besides, we have an excellent example of our Savior himself, that suffered
all sorts of reproaches, and yet was so far from reviling, that he threatened
no^, 1 Pet. 2. and all sorts of godly men have endured reviling, that were many
degrees better than thou. And further, what know thou but God may bless
thee for their cursing? as David said. And therefore all that are true
Christians should be effectually warned from hence to resol^e against bitter
words and reviling, though they be never so much provoked.

Thus of the rules the Apostle gives for avoiding of troubles. Now follows the
arguments for the confirmation of those rules, especially of the later: and the
first is taken from the estate or condition of a Christian, in this verse* the
second from the Prophet David, ver. 10, 11, 12. and the third from the probable
event or effect of such a course ver. 13.

In the rest of this verse he infers from their calling to Gods blessing. That
they should be so far from cursing and reviling, that they should use no other
language than blessing even to the wicked and their adversaries.

But contrariwise.] This very term imports, That the life and discourse of a
true Christian should be not only different from the life and language of
wicked men, but in many things contrary. And it must needs be so, because the
godly and wicked arise from a contrary fountain; the one borne after the
flesh, the other after the spirit, Gal. ^4. and their words and actions flow
from contrary principles; for the one is led by the old man, the other by the
new man^ and they have from without contrary leaders; the one led by the
Devil, Ephesians. ^. the other by the Spirit of God, Romans 8. and further, they trade
about contrary commodities; the one for earthly things only i^ the ^ther for
heavenly; the one for things of this world, the other for things of another
world; and lastly, they go contrary ways; the one to hell, the other to
heaven, and therefore there can be no agreement between them, no more than
between ligth and darkness, Christ and Belial. This point serves for great
reproof of some weak Christians, for coming so near the ways of carnal
men, as they can hardly be distinguished from them that look so like them.
Such were those Corinthians Saint Paul reproves, 1. Cor. 3. 1, 2, 3.

Bless.] It is required of all true Christians that they should bless; their
conversation should express blessing continually. Now for the understanding of
this point, we must know, that man is said in Scripture to bless ^ither God
or man. He blesses God when he praises his mercy, and acknowledges his
blessings: he adds nothing to Gods blessedness, but only acknowledges Gods
blessed nature, and dealing toward man. This exercise of blessing God began
betimes in the world, as Genesis 14.20. and was constantly continued in all ages
among the godly. But in this place the Apostle means it of blessing man:
Diverse kinds of blessing.
and to bless man is either a vice or a virtue. There is a vicious blessing of
men, which must be separated from the doctrine of this Text. Now it is vicious,
first, when a man blesses himself in his own heart, even then when God
threatens him, Deuteronomy. 29.19. Secondly, when a man blesses wicked men, and
praises them, notwithstanding their vile courses, Psalm. 10.3. Thirdly, when a
man uses blessing with his mouth, and yet curses inwardly, Psalm. 62.4.
Fourthly, when a man blesses his friend by way of flattery, Pro. 27.14.
Fifthly, when a man blesses Idols, by worshipping them, and by setting his
affections upon them, Esaias 66.3. Thus of blessing as it is a vice.

As blessing is a virtue, it is performed diverse ways* as first, from
Superiors to their Inferiors; so parents bless their children, Genesis 27.
Ministers bless the people, Number. 6.23. 1 Cor. 14.16. Secondly, Inferiors
bless their Superiors, as the Subject the King, 2 Samuel 14.22. the Child his
Parents, Pro. 30.11. the People their Teachers, Mat. 23.39.

In this place I take it blessing is considered of as it is required of all
sorts of men, toward all sorts of men; and in particular, toward their
enemies, or such as wrong them or revile them: and so a true Christian should
bless both in deeds and words.

When we bless in deed.
He blesses in deeds, when either he is a means to keep others from evil, 1 Samuel 25.33. or by doing good, or showing mercy to others; and so a man blesses
his enemy, when he relieveth him in his misery, and overcommeth his evil with
goodness, Romans 12.20, 21. Yea, a man may be said to bless, when he causes
others to bless either God or himself for his welldoing. Thus Job blessed,
when he caused the poor to bless him, Job 31.20.

It is required also that we bless one another in words; and in particular, it
is required that we bless them that curse us, Mat. 5.44. Romans 12.14.1 Cor 4.
12. And this we do,

Wherein particularly.
1. By gracious communication in general, when we use such words as may not
only express to the life the power and truth of the gifts of grace in us, but
also may minister grace to the hearers, if it be not their own fault.

2. By acknowledging the just praises of others.

3. By praying for them, Mat. 5.44. Psalm. 109.4.

4. By giving soft answers, Pro. 15.23. and entreating them to avoid strife,
Genesis 13.8, 9.

5. By a discree^ reproof of their sin: for as he that slattereth curses, so
^e that wisely reproves blesses, Pro. 27.14. Psalm. 141.5.

The Use should be to stir up all true Christians to practice true virtue of
blessing, and to carry themselves so as all their words and actions may be
blessed and a blessing to them that converse with them; and may appear to be
so, even to their enemies. It is a hard lesson, but yet if we seek constantly
to God for this help, it may be attained in some acceptable manner.

Knowing that ye are thereunto called.] Many things may be here observed.

Doct.1. That a Christian should be vehemently affected with the consideration
of his calling, and that for diverse reasons.

1. Because of the cause of it, which was Gods purpose, election, For what
reasons ^ Christian should be much affected with the con^ideration of his
calling.
and free grace in Jesus Christ. We were sinners, and we were not called for
any works of ours, Romans 8.28. and 9.11. 2 Timothy 1.9. The wind blows where it
lists: we are taken, and others refused. And this is the more to be thought
on, because this grace was given us in Jesus Christ before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. It could not be had but by a mediator, and it was granted from all
eternity.

2. If we consider from what we were called; from gross darkness, 2 Pet. 1.9.
from this present evil world, Gal. ^. from the lump of forlorn mankind, from
innumerable sins and curses, from the danger of eternal damnation of body and
soul for ever.

3. If we consider the wonder of the means of our calling, which is by the
Gospel, which is the voice of Christ, raising us out of the graves of sin: even
that voice that shall make men's dead bodies arise at the last day, does now
raise the dead ^oules of men in this world. One resurrection in this life,
another at the day of judgment, Ephesians. 2.1.2 These. 2.14.

4. If we consider to what we are called, viz. to be partners and companions
with Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1.7. and to great and precious promises, Acts 2.39.
and to obtain the glory of the Lord Jesus, and a kingdom with him for ever,
Phil. 3.14. 1 Timothy 1.6. The called are vessels of Gods mercy, and upon them he
will make known the riches of his glory, Romans 9.24.

6 Because the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Romans 11.29.
This a link in that chain, can never be broken: this takes hold before the
world of election, and after the world of glorification, Romans 8.30.

7. Because the great, wise, noble, and mighty men of the world are not called,
and God has looked upon such poor and weak creatures, 1 Cor. 1.26.

The Use should be to teach us with all possible affections to magnify Gods
grace in our calling* and to strive to walk worthy of our calling. Ephesians. 4.1.
and to pray hard unto God to fulfill the work of his grace in our calling,
that we may live to his glory, and abound in all faith and well-doing, 2 Thessalonians.
1.11, 12.

The second Use may be for great reproof of men's wickedness, in neglecting
the voice of Christ in the Gospel, and in entertaining so many excuses and
delays, hardening themselves in their evil ways, and suffering the Devil to
keep them without this high preferment, Mat. 22.

Doct.2. From the coherence it is plain, That all Gods servants are called to
holiness of life, as well as to happiness. Their calling is a holy calling,
and they are called to be Saints, Romans 1.7. so also 2 These. 2.13, 14. 1 Pet.
1.15. 1 These. 4.7. The Use is to discover false Christians from true; by their
fruits you shall know them. Such as make not conscience of their ways to serve
God all the days of their lives in holiness and fear are not right.
Christians. And therefore as men desire to have comfort in their calling, they
must take heed that they abuse not their liberty to licentiousness, Gal. 5.^3.

Doct. 3. The calling of a Christian is a hard calling to flesh and blood; he
is called to hard work. As in the coherence here, to be so humble, and
unmovable, and holily disposed, as when he is grossly abused and wronged in
words and deeds, yet not only to be patient, but to bles^e: so it is in other
parts of their work, as when a man must deny himself, and take up his cross
daily and follow Christ. For a man to forsake every thing his heart naturally
desires, and to be daily crossed, is a hard task. The Use should be to raise
up the hearts of Christians to a care to live above the course of this world,
and to press forward toward the mark, not caring for the difficulty of the
race, but looking to the price of his calling, Phil. 3.14.

Doct. 4. A true Christian may know his calling: know it, I say, that is, he
may be insallibly assured of it. And this is true in two respects: first, he
may know that he is truly called, and converted, and elected of God: secondly,
he may know his calling in respect of the warrant of all his particular
actions: as here, he may know what is required of him in his carriage toward
his enemies.

Now, that every true Christian may be sure of his calling and election, and
may know his conversion, is most apparent by these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 13.5.1
Cor. 3.16. 2 Timothy 1.12. Heb. 8.11. 1 John 2.3. and 3.14. and 4.16. and 5.13, 19.

And that every Christian is bound to seek this assurance and knowledge is
apparent by many reasons. As first, from Gods Commandment: he requires it of
us, that we should with all diligence seek to make our calling and election
sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Secondly, many reasons may be gathered from the effects and
benefits such knowledge and assurance will bring to us. Assurance is profitable
for many things. In general, it is our best riches on earth, Col. 2.2. and in
particular,

Reasons proving the necessity of knowing our calling and assurance.
1. It estates us in all the promises of God: when we know we are truly called,
then we know our right to all the promises of Gods Word.

2. It purifieth the heart and life of man, Acts 15.9. for when we know we are
the children of God, we are thereby stirred up to the greater care to please
God, and walk in his ways.

3. It greatly stays and supports the heart of man: in the evil day, when
temptation or afflictions befall us, yet the comfort of our assurance sustaines
us, and refreshes us greatly. For help in the evil day, the Apostle says we
should above all things put on the shield of faith, which, if it remove not the
cross, yet it qu^ncheth the fiery temptations of Satan, with which we may be
assaulted, Ephesians. 6.16. and it greatly helps us against the fear and terror of
death, Heb. 10.19, 20, 22. In a word, it overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4, 5.

4. The faith of a Christian is all his living: he lives by faith in all the
occasions of life; as his faith helps him when all other means fail him, and
makes all other means more successful when he uses them. The just man lives
by faith. The people in captivity, that were Gods children, raised a living for
themselves in a strange land by their faith, Hab. 2.5.

5. It puts life into all the duties of religion or righteousness: it works
by love, it ^ets all our affections on work toward God, and his people, and
creatures, Gal. 5.6.

6. It opens a spring of grace in the heart of a Christian: every good gift
from above is excited and made to flow from within him by the benefit of his
certain knowledge, and assurance of faith, John 7.38.

Now if any ask, how a Christian comes to know his calling? I answer,

1. By his sensible feeling of his sins to be a heavy burden to him, By what
means a Christian comes to know his calling.
of which he is truly weary so as he desires more to be rid of them than of
any burdensome cross whatsoever, Mat. 11.29. and 9.13.

2. By his manner of receiving the voice of Christ, and the preaching of the
Gospel, not in word, but in power. The voice of Christ has a mavelous power
over him above all things in the world; which appears by the effects of it:
for he seeles, in hearing the word, first, such an estimation of it, as he
acknowledges nothing like it for power and wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.23, 24*
Secondly, he finds, at some times especially, such an assurance of the truth of
his religion, and the doctrine he hears, that he is fully established, and
freed from his natural uncertainties about the true religion. Thirdly, the
Word works in him spiritual senses, and very life from the dead, which he
feels in all parts of his conversation, making conscience of his ways in all
things, bewailing his frailties, and striving to be such as God would have him
to be. Fourthly, it makes him to separate himself from the world, avoiding all
needless society with the wicked, and exciting in him constant desires to use
the world as if he used it not. Fifthly, much spiritual joy before the Lord,
even then when in respect of outward things he is in much affliction. The most
of these effects are noted 1 These. 1.4, 5.

3. By the image of the virtues of Christ in his heart, by new gifts in some
measure: for when God calls a man, he reveals his Son in him* Gal. 1.15, 16.
There is begotten in him a likeness of Christ: his very disposition is changed
into the similitude of the virtues of Christ: God gives him a new heart, with
the image of Christ stamped upon it; and he is like Christ in respect of
lowliness of mind, and meekness, and contempt of the world, and love of God
and the godly, mercy, wisdom patience, love of his very enemies, and desire
to live without offense, and praying to God as to his Father.

Quest. But if Christians may know their calling, what should be the reason
that so many Christians are so unsettled, and are not assured of their calling?

Answ. Distinguish of Christians: Diverse sorts of Christians.
some are Christians in name and outward profession, but not in deed, being not
at all converted, though they have the means of conversion: and this is the
estate of the most men and women in all places. Now some are indeed converted,
but are weak Christians, as it were infants that lie but in the cradle of
religion.

Now for the first sort the answer is easy. They know not their calling,
because they are not called* yea they are so far from knowing it, that they
generally are offended at it, that we should teach that any body can know his
own calling certainly. Carnal Christians then know it not, because they have
it not: and in particular, the causes why these Christians attain not
assurance is, because they rest upon common hope of mercy in God: which house
is but like the house of a Spider, and will give up the ghost when the evil
day comes upon them. And besides, they live in known sins, which they love
and prefer before all things can be offered to them by the Gospel. Now it is
impossible to have true assurance, and to lie at the same time in known gross
sins without repentance. And further many Christians by their wilful
unteachablenesse, and incurablenesse in sinning, do so provoke God, that all
means notwithstanding, yet those things that concern their peace are hidden
from their eyes, Luke 19.42.

Causes why many weak Christians know not their calling.
Now for the weak Christian, the causes of his want of assurance are such as
these: sometimes ill opinions about assurance, either that it may not be had,
contrary to the charge given, 2 Pet. 1.10. or if it be had, it will not be
profitable, contrary to the reasons given before.

Sometimes it is their ignorance; they are so unexpert in the Scriptures, that,
not discerning the frame of godliness in general, they can never tell when
they fully know this or any other doctrine in particular. And this let is the
stronger, when they smother their doubts, and will not ask the way, or seek
resolution in things they understand not, especially in cases of their, own
consciences.

In some Christians this want of assurance arises from mere slothfulness:
though they be often called upon, and convinced, yet they return to their
former carelessness, and will not be at the pains to use the directions given
them for the settling of their hearts.

In some Christians it is a violent pronenesse in their natures, to take
offense at such infirmities, or mistakings, as they observe in such as have
professed religion b^^ore them: yea, sometimes they take offense at the libe^ty
of those that are truly godly, though they abuse not their liberty. And this
offense is sometimes so deadly, that they give way to the projects of
renouncing of all religion, because they have observed such things in those
that profess religion. As in the Primitive Church, many Christians took
grievous offense at other Christians, for the use of their liberty in things
indifferent, so as the Apostle was afraid they would fall away and perish in
their scandalls.

Lastly, some Christians are not settled, because when the evil day comes upon
them they cast away their confidence, and strive to think that because God
afflicts them, therefore they are not his; being, for the present, incapable
of all those promises of Scripture, that make it clear, that God may afflict
them, and not be displeased with them, and they may be his dear servants and
children. They will not know that whom God loves he chastens, and that he is
used to try his gold in the fire, and that whom God gives the greatest
comforts, he usually sends great trialls immediately after; as when Christ was
honored with a voice from heaven at his baptism, and a visible descending of
the holy Ghost upon him, he was by and by led into the wilderness to be
tempted of the Devil. And Paul, after his revelation, was cast down almost
into hell with temptations.

Thus of the knowledge of conversion and calling in general. Now in this Text
is further imported, That a Christian may know the warrant of all his
particular actions: for the true Christian goes to the light, that it may be
manifest that his works are wrought in God, John 3.22. and he walks by rule,
Gal. 6. and he makes the Word a light to his feet, and a lantern to his
paths, Psalm. 119. And this point greatly reproves the carelessness of the
most Christians, that are unresolved in the most actions of their lives, and
live by false rules; as the example of others, or the conceits of their own
heads, or their profit, or the like: They do not know their calling in seeing
the warrant of all their courses; and therefore it is, that they live in
strange offenses, and see not the danger. These walk in darkness, and know
not whither they go. Now if any ask how they may attain to the knowledge of
the rules for all their actions? I answer shortly, they must redeem the time,
and study the Scriptures: for there only shall they find the right rules of
all good conversation, John 5.39. 2 Timothy 3.15. Ephesians. 5.15. and withal, men must
ask the way to Sion, Ier. 50.4, 5. They must make conscience to seek
resolution and counsel of their Teachers especially: and in all this be sure
they bring an humble heart, and a lowly mind; for God has promised to teach
the meek and the humble his ways.

To inherit blessing.] The end of their calling is to inherit blessing. What
things are contained in these words will appear by certain general
observations, and by the particular unfolding of them.

In general, we may hence gather,

1 That Gods people, or true Christians, are a blessed people, such as have a
mavelous excellent estate above all men; none like them, Deuteronomy. 23.29. Let the
righteous man dwell where he will, he is better than his neighbor: they are
the only noble and excellent ones, Psalm. 16.3. As God said of Job, so is it
true of all them, none are as they, Job 2. They do not inherit that which is
blessed only, but they inherit blessing. Every leaf of the Bible says they
are blessed; and the word in the Old Testament so translated signifies
blessedness: all blessings are theirs. This would be a great comfort to true
Christians that know their calling: nothing should dismay them: they should
chide their souls if they be discouraged, as David did, Psalm. 42. And the
wicked men of this world should be asha^ed of their sottish blindness, that
account godly men in a miserable case, or do any way vilify them. And weak
Christians should pray earnestly to God, to show them the hope of their
calling, Ephesians. 1.9. that they may be from their hearts persuaded of their
happiness.

2. That Gods Elect by nature are not in a blessed estate. They are called to
it, not borne to it. It is a preferment they are advanced to by means of their
receiving of the Gospel, and the sincerity of true religion. Their religion,
not their parents or their own endeavors, helps them to it: by nature they
are in a miserable case, both in respect of unholinesse and unhappiness, Ephesians.
2.1, 2, 3, 12. Tit. 3.3. And this is fit for them to know, that they may be the
more stirred up to magnify the free grace of God, and to love the Gospel, and
that they may be the more humble in themselves, and strive to walk worthy of
so excellent a calling, and use all means that God has appointed, to increase
more and more in blessing. And unregenerate men must likewise hence take
notice, that they can never inherit blessing, unlesle they repent, for calling
is the door of blessing.

3. That true Christians inherit nothing but blessing: there is no curse
mingled withal. It will presently rise in men's minds, that many afflictions of
all sorts befall them as well as others. But I answer, first, that all the
malediction deserved by their sins was charged upon Christ, and he has borne
all the curse for them, Gal. 3. Esaias 53. and so Gods justice is satisfied, and
their debt paid. Secondly, I may take advantage of the word Inherit, and that
two ways: first, that though afflictions (which are properly rods for the
wicked) may break in upon the lot of the righteous, yet they shall not rest
there, Ps^^. 125.3. It is but for a little while that God can be angry with
them, but he loves them with an everlasting love, Esaias 54. Note.
They inherit not afflictions, though they have afflictions. Secondly they are
called to inherit blessing: which imports further, That though during their
minority in this world they may endure some hardship, yet when these heirs
come to perfect age in heaven, then all affliction shall be cast into the Sea,
and there shall be no curse, Rev. 22. Thirdly, I answer, that even their
crosses are blessings: for as God can curse the very blessings of the wicked,
so can he and does bless the seeming curses of the godly. All shall work
together for the best to them that love God, Romans 2.28. All things are to be
measured for good or ill, according to the use of them to us. That which does
us hurt cannot be a blessing, and that which does us good cannot be a curse.

Now for the particular unfolding of this blessing they inherit, we must know,
that godly Christians inherit blessing diverse ways:

Godly men do inherit blessing many ways:
1. From other men; and so the poor bless them for their charity. The blessing
of him that is ready to perish many times comes upon them, Job 29.13. Their
very loins bless them, Job 31.20. and their neighbors bless them for peace
making, 1. From men,
Mat. 5.8. and the godly bless them for their gifts of grace, and pray for
Gods blessings upon them, Psalm. 134.3. and if they have any public employments
for God in Church or Commonwealth, the ear that hears them blesses them,
Job 29.11. And at some times God does so guide and prosper the ways of his
servants, that all sorts of men do acknowledge them for the seed which the
Lord has blessed, Esaias 61.8.

2. From their own consciences.
2. From their own consciences: if the world at any time testify against him,
or revile him; yea, if Devils and men set against him, yet he inherits this
blessing, that his own conscience will witness for him to his singular joy, 2
Cor. 1.12. The daily encouragements of a good conscience are like a continual
fea^^ within.

3. From God, and that diverse ways
3. From God; and so they have Gods blessing certain: and this is a great
inheritance, and has so much happiness in it, as it should swallow up all the
grievance of afflictions, and the contempts and scorns of the world. It is
enough if we have Gods blessing. Now that this point may be distinctly beaten
out, we must understand, that true Christians may be said to inherit Gods
blessing, first, in a more restrained sense, and then in a more large sense. In
a restrained sense blessing may here be taken for Gods comfortable speaking:
for (...) properly signifies blessing by words, and so it answers to the
coherence. If they will use good words to men, God will speak good words to
them. And in this sense we may hence gather, That Gods natural language to the
called of Jesus Christ is blessing, or comfortable words. God will speak to
his people peace, Psalm. 84.5. and therefore he gives a charge to his Ministers
to speak comfortably to Jerusalem, Esaias 40.1, 2. Secondly, that Gods Elect
never find this till they have their calling. Thirdly, that it is a great
inheritance in this life to have God to speak well to us. Fourthly, that if
the fault be not in us, we shall never have God speak otherwise. It is our
inheritance, to comfort us against all the miseries of life. And therefore
Ministers that are the mouth of God should study comfort much: and those
Christians that desire to have the fruit of their inheritance in this thing,
should provide to live in such places where God speaks to men. And those
Ministers have a great account to make, that set themselves to speak
disgracefully and terribly to such as fear God, striving to discourage their
hearts, and to strengthen the hands of the wicked. Thus of the restrained
sense: only note by the way, That God speaks good words both for his people
behind their backs, and to his people before their faces: They inherit Gods
good word for them in their absence. Thus God speaks excellently in the praise
of Job to the Devil, before the Angels, Job 1. and 2. and thus he can speak
in the consciences of the greatest on earth in praise of his people, as Esaias
41.9.

In this life godly men have Gods blessing three ways.
Now in the general sense, Gods people enjoy this blessing many ways; and that
both in this life, and in the life to come. In this life they have his blessing,

1. In temporal things of all sorts: he makes the earth bless them, and the
heavens, and the waters, Genesis 49.25. he blesses them in the City, and in the
field, in the fruit of their bodies, and of the ground, and of their cattle,
in their basket, and in their store, when they come in, and when they go out:
yea. God will command the blessing upon them in their storehouses, and upon
all they set their hands to, and he will open his good treasures unto them, and
bless all the work of their hands, Deuteronomy. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 12. And if they
enjoy not so much in quality of these things as some wicked men, yet they have
a fair portion, and a good blessing, because that they have is blessed, both
in the original of it, and in the nature of it, and in the use of it, and in
their right to it.

2. In the means of grace and salvation: and so they enjoy the blessing of God
in his housekeeping; and great is that blessing, wherewith God blesses his
people in his house, on his holy hill, and round about. The Lord has long
since promised to make all the places about his holy hill blessings. Yea, there
Gods people do receive showers of blessing: every powerful Sermon is a shower
of blessing, every doctrine being as a blessed drop of instruction or comfort,
Ezekiel. 34.26. Exodus 20.24. Psalm. 132.15.

3. In the gifts of grace: and so he has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things. A poor Christian carries about with him in his
heart more treasure than all the Monarchs of the world (being not true
Christians) can any way possess or command, Ephesians. 1.3.

Thus of Gods blessing in this life. After this life who can recount the glory
of their inheritance in the blessing they shall have then from God? Oh that our
hearts could be enlarged to think of the power of these words of Christ at the
last day, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
before the foundation of the world.

The Use should be for great comfort to all true Christians. They have great
cause to rejoice in their fathers blessing all their days: and the rather, if
they consider that Gods blessing, as a Father, is better than the blessing of
any earthly father; for an earthly fathers blessingis most an end but verbal,
in words; Gods blessing is real, indeeds. A father on earth cannot derive
blessing to his child from himself, but from God; whereas Gods blessing is
from himself. Besides, if an earthly father would bless his child, yet he
wants power to give him what he desires; but God our Father is Almighty, able
to give as much as he wishes, Genesis 28.3. Finally, an earthly fathers blessing
may be lost, as Chams was; but Gods blessing cannot be lost, he will bless
with everlasting mercy.

Secondly, such as yet enjoy not the privilege of Gods called ones, should be
greatly stirred up with desire to get this blessing, even to have Gods
blessing. Let no man be profane like Esau, to contemn Gods blessing, but seek
it while it may be had, Heb. 12.17.

Quest. But what should we do to get Gods blessing?

Answ. First, you must diligently resort to Gods house: What we must do to get
Gods blessing.
for there God has commanded the blessing, Psalm. 133.3. and be careful and
attentive hearers of Gods Word: for the ground that drinks in the rain
receives a blessing from God, Heb. 6.7. the rain of instruction must soake
into your hearts.

2. You must turn you every one from all your transgres^ie^^ if you will have
Gods blessing in his Son Jesus, Acts 3.26. without found repentance Gods
blessing will not be had. Men must not think to get Gods blessing, and do
after the things they do now a days, every one that ^h^^ is right in his own
eyes, Deuteronomy. 12.7,8.

Finally, we must be all such as fear God truly, Psalm. 115.13. and such as
will not lift up their souls to follow vanity, but get clean hands, and a
pure heart; for such only shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness from the God of their salvation, Psalm. 24.4, 5. and to this end
we must carefully hearken to Gods voice, and observe to do all that he
comm^^deth us, Deuteronomy. 15.4, 5, 6.

Lastly, Gods own children, that have felt the comfort of Gods blessing, must
be admonished to carry themselves so, as they may grow in the comforts of it
more and more. And to this end,

How godly men may grow in the comforts of Gods blessing.
1. They must daily ask God blessing, and by their daily prayers let the Lord
know that they make more account of his blessing, than any children of earthly
parents can do of their fathers blessings.

2. Since they have such showers of blessing in Gods house daily, they
especially should be like good ground, so to drink in the spiritual rain,
that the fruits of it may appear in their lives, in all piety, and mercy, and
righteousness, Heb. 6.7.

3. Since they know the worth of Gods blessing, they should learn of Abraham
to command their servants, and their children, and their households to fear
God, and to live righteously, that so they may be a means to help them also to
this great happiness of inheriting Gods blessing, Genesis 18.18,19.

4. If they be put to it, to deny themselves in things most dear to them, for
the glory of God, they shall approve themselves, as Abraham did in offering up
Isaac, to be such indeed as do fear God, and esteem his favor above all
things, Gen 22.17, 18.

Verse 10. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips, that they speak no guile.

Verse 11. Let him eschew evil, and do good, etc.


THus of the first reason, taken from the condition of Gods servants, as they
are heirs of blessing. In these words is contained the second reason, taken
from Prophetical testimony: David long since taught the same doctrine Saint
Peter now does, and gave the same advice in effect: for he had showed, That if
a man would live a quiet and contented life, free from troubles and mischief,
he must then take heed of all reviling and evill-speaking, and avoid all things
might offend either the godly or the wicked: all things, I say, that are evil;
and must labor after all courses of peace, and mercy, and well-doing: and then
God would be a protector of such godly and careful men, and he would
recompense upon the wicked all the wrongs they do to his servants. This is the
sum of the meaning of these words.

In the words (for the order of them) observe three things:

1. The persons advised or charged by the Prophet David, viz. such as would
needs love life, and to see good and quiet days.

2. The duties charged upon them, as the means to attain what they desired:
and so he shows what they must avoid, and what they must do. They must avoid,
in particular, an evil tongue; and in general, an evil and injurious life.
And contrariwise, for what they must do; in general, they must do good; and
in particular, seek peace, ver. 10, 11.

3. The reason of his advice: and that is taken from the nature of God, and his
disposition, both toward the godly, and amongst the wicked, ver. 12.

From the general consideration of all the words we may gather, That a great
part of the miseries of life might be avoided, if men would be advised and
ruled. Most men and women may thank themselves for the unquietness and
distress they live in. And this will appear if we consider of either their
crosses, or their temptations, or their corruptions, which are the things only
that can distress life.

Note.
As for the crosses, it is manifest by experience, that the most people suffer
for their ownefolly, and such things as might have been avoided. Their
discontentments arise, either from their rash matches in the estate of life
they are in, or from vain jangling in idle opinions, or from their rash and
perverse words, or from their wilful neglect of easy rules of good behavior
in the family, or the like. Take but the directions here given. If men did
refrain their tongues from evill-speaking, by censure, or reproaches, or
slander, orfrandulent words, and that men did avoid injurious courses, or
gross crimes; and withal, if men did strive to do all the good they could to
all sorts of men: and finally, if men would use all lawful means to preserve
peace, and to avoid contumely, how quiet might the lives of the most people be?
Note.
Again, let a Christian consider of his corruptions, which at some times so
trouble himself and others: does not his own conscience know, that if he
would constantly pray against them, and be sure to be circumspect in his
carriage, how certainly, and how soon he might be delivered from the power of
any sin? And for his infirmities, with how little labor might he store his
head with comfortable places of Scripture, that might support him against the
sense of his daily frailties? And for temptations of Satan, that so extremely
molest some few Christians, how might they have been either avoided, or borne
with more quiet? Some Christians tempt the Devil to tempt them, by their
solitariness, or idleness, or security, or wilful nourishing of pride and
vanity in themselves, or by a careless living without assurance of faith. And
when temptations are upon them, and they are truly humbled under them, how do
some Christians wilfully refuse consolation, and limit God, so as never to be
quiet till the temptation be removed, though the Lord himself answer them,
that his grace shall be sufficient for them? The Use should be therefore to
warn all men that would live quietly and comfortably, to awaken to the care of
their duty, and to study the rules given them out of the Word of God: for let
them be assured, till they make conscience of living by rule, it will never be
better with them.

Again, in that St. Peter and the Prophet David agree so right in judgment
concerning the practice of true Christians, it shows, That the rules of holy
life have been the same in all ages of the world, before the Law, and under
the Law, and now under the Gospel. We may see by the carriage of holy men
before the Law, that they walked by such rules as these:and the reason is,
because the rules of a religious and virtuous life were in the mind of God
from all eternity, and so given to men from the beginning; and cannot change,
in as much as God is unchangeable in the forms of things. And this point may
show us how hard the world is to learn, in that these lessons have been
taught from the beginning, and yet the most men have not learned them. And
besides, godly Christians should be encouraged to live by rule, and to walk
circumspectly, seeing this is no harder a task required of them, than what
has been required in all ages.

Thirdly, it is worth the observing, who the persons are that give this
counsel, to strive as well as we can to live out of trouble, and to lead a
quiet life. They were two great Champions that had endured a world of troubles
themselves, Peter I mean, and David, and yet we see they press other men to
seek to live as quietly as is possible: and thus did Paul do also, 1 Timothy
2.2. 1 These. 4.11. Heb. 12.11. Now one maine reason why they do so, is,
because they themselves did feel by experience how unable they were to beat
crosses, when they fell upon them. It was this Peter that denied his Master,
upon the very sight (as it were) of adversaries: and it was this David that
gave this advice, after himself had changed his behavior before A^im^lech, as
you may see by the title of the Psalm. Which should teach us to be thankful
for that public or private quietness any of us do enjoy: and besides, it
should warn those unruly froward Christians, that live not in quiet, either at
home or abroad, to repent and amend their words and works. They cannot imagine
what singular comfort and contentment they withhold from their own lives, and
the lives of others. If they did but know how much God abhorr^s a froward
Christian, they would be more afraid than they are.

Thus of the general observations. The first part concerns the persons that
are exhorted; and they are described by two forms of speech; the one, such as
will love life; the other, such as would see good days.

If any man will love life.] From this form of speech three things may be
observed.

Doct. 1. That men by nature are prone to the love of life: and so prone, that
the most men will break all bounds, and will love life, whatsoever be said to
them, or done to them. This is a point so sensibly felt by the experience of
the most that hear it, that it needs no proof. If any man ask what the
reason should be why there is such an inordinate love of life in the most: many
things may be answered. The first cause of it is the general corruption of
nature in the most men, which came in by sin. To love it self is nature, but
to love life so pertinaciously is from degeneration, and the great abasement of
the nature of man, that cannot now move it self toward the perfection of it
self: for unto the godly the change of life is an alteration that brings
perfection. Secondly, ignorance and unbelief is the cause of it. If men did
know and believe those glorious things God speaks of a better life, they would
loath this present life, and long to be in heaven. Thirdly, the cause in many
is, that their hearts are engaged upon such perplexed and intricate projects,
about profit, or pleasure, or greatness in the world, that they are not at
leisure to examine the reasons of the love of life: the heart of man is usually
oppressed with some one or other of these projects. Fourthly, in all sorts of
people there is such an in^^rable inconsideration, that no warning from the
Word or works of God, no experience of their own or other men's, can force
them to a serious and constant meditation of the things concern their true
happiness. Fifthly, the love of life arises in the most from the Idols of
their hearts. There is one thing or other that they have set their hearts upon
in a vicious manner: and this unreasonable love of their particular sins does
hold them down in bondage to this present life, and so cannot be cured of the
disease till they repent of their beloved sins. And the guiltiness of their
consciences makes them afraid of death and judgment, and to embrace this
present life upon any conditions. And in godly people this inordinate love of
life arises from the defect of particular repentance for it. Thus of the first
point.

Doct. 2. Men have cause to take off their affections, and not to be so
desperately bent to the love of this present life. This is a point very
profitable to be urged, and most men and women have need of it: and therefore I
will show more largely the reasons why we should not love life, or not so
inordinately as to be unwilling to leave it upon any terms.

For what reasons men ought to take off their affections from the love of this
life.
The first reason may be taken from the commandment of Christ, who gives this
charge to all that will be his Disciples, that they must not love life. As
they must deny themselves in other things, so in this particular. And be so
gives this in charge, as he seems to threaten them with the loss of life if
they love it, so Luke 17.33. Ioh. 12.25.

The second reason may be taken from the example of the godly, that have not
loved life. Job detested life, Job ^. Solomon tells of a multitude of occasions
that he had to hate life, in his book of Ecclesiastes: and a multitude of godly
men have showed the proof of it, in laying down their lives willingly, when
they have been cal^^^ to it. Act. 20.24. Phil. 2.20. Heb. 11.35, 37.

The third reason may be taken from the consideration of life in it self, both
in the nature of it, and in the end of it: for the nature of it, it is but a
wind, or a vapor, James 4. so mean a thing, that no man can well tell how to
describe it perfectly; which is the greater wonder, that it should get the love
of all the world, and yet no body knows what it is he loves. And for the end
of it, it is not in the power of man to number his own days, God has set an
appointed time for every man's death: and though they love life never so much,
they cannot hold it beyond that time, Job 7.1. And besides, our times are so
hid, that a man cannot be sure of a month, a week, a day, an hour, and shall
our hearts be so bewitched with that which we know not how long we shall enjoy?
Job 24.1. and the rather, because there are so many ways for life to go out
at, though but one way to come in. And further, we can find no means that has
sufficient power to make a man live. God has so reserved the power of life in
his own hands, that none of the means we use to preserve life can do it, to
make it hold out for a moment, if God do not from above give special
assistance. Man lives not by bread, Mat. 4. and if a man had abundance of all
worldly things, yet a man's life consists not in that, Luke 12.15. etc.

The fourth reason may be taken from the profession of a Christian, or his
state, or relative calling, or condition in this life. First, we are Christ's
spiritual soldiers. Now men that go to war, entangle not themselves with
the things of this life, that they may please them that have chosen them to be
soldiers, 2 Timothy 2.4. Secondly, we are pilgrims and strangers in this life,
and therefore nothing should be more easy to us, than to be weary of the
present condition, and to long to be at home. Thus did the Patriarchs, Heb.
11.13. Thirdly, in this life we are but poor cottagers, that dwell in poor
houses of clay; and shall we love to be here rather than in those eternal
mansions? 2 Cor. 5.1. Ioh. 14.2.

The fifth reason may be taken from the sins of life. Even sin is a disease,
and a loathsome contagious one. Now then see what life is; thou thy self have
innumerable sins, and there is no man alive that sins not in the whole
world. Now if every man have innumerable contagious diseases, what a loathsome
pesthouse is this world to live in? The thoughts of a man can reach to the
depth and length of this argument, but inconsideration buries all wholesome
counsel and motives. But besides this respect of sin, a Christian finds from
his own sins, if there were none else in the world, great cause to be weary
of life, first, because sin argues the imperfection of his nature both in
soul and body; and so long as he is in this sinful life, he can never have a
perfect nature: now a man that loves himself, for this reason would never love
life, Romans 7.23. Secondly, because sin is an offense to God: now a child of God
should therefore loath life, because by sinning be does injury to God his
merciful Father: and in the most holy Christians this argument has
extraordinary force.

The sixth reason may be taken from the crosses of life. Has not every day his
grief? Is there any estate or degree of men free from them? Are not those whom
God loves corrected? yea, and perhaps more than other men. Seriously think of
what thou do suffer in thy particular. What diseases or infirmities are in
thy body? What unquietness and vexation do thou suffer in the house where
thou live? What crosses do follow or fear thee in thy calling? Yea, does
not thy religion breed thee trouble? If the reproaches and oppositions be
considered of which godly men sometimes suffer, we might say with the Apostle,
Of all men they are most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19. Paul says, he was a man
crucified while he lived, Gal. 2.20. and did always in his body carry about
the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor.4.10. Besides, consider of the danger of
what may come upon thee in life. What if war come, or the pestilence, or sudden
poverty that cannot be cured, or with fearful diseases that will fill thee
with horrible pain? Nay, what if thou should fall into some shameful fault?
Oh, what were the misery would follow upon it!

The seventh reason may be taken from the extreme vanity of those things that
seem to be felicities in life: all the things in life, that with any color of
reason can be made objects of thy love, are either the people of the world, or
the commodities of the world.

Now for the first of these: thou have no reason to be in love with life, for
the people of the world with whom thou live: for,

In what respects the vanity of earthly things appear.
1. Amongst all the thousands of men and women thou see in the world, it may
be there is scarce one that loves thee entirely, scarce one from whom thou
may enjoy delight or comfort. They are poor things thou can have from the
rest, whether they be neighbors or strangers. More than thou give thou shall
not receive, unless it be in poor complements of salutations, and ceremonies
of life.

2. If thou did excel in the privilege of being loved by friends, kindred,
wife, or children, yet reckon how small a portion of thy life is refreshed from
them: there is sometimes more delight in one poor dream, than will be had
this way in a long time.

3. Think of it what changes and losses thou do or may suffer, if there
were any thing worthy thy love in friendship or acquaintance: thy friends may
be daily lost, either by the change of their mind from thee, or by distance in
habitation, or by death; and the pleasure is had by thy acquaintance, is made
not worth the having, either by interruption, or by discord, and taking of
offense, or want of power or will to help when thou have most need.

4. Who would not hate life for this very reason which I now give? Let a man
consider by experience in all others how little the world cares for him. If
thou were to die what would the world care, or almost any in the world? Let it
be thy wife, children, neighbors, hearers, dearest friends, yea, thy religious
friends, what would any of these care for thy death? Look not at their words,
but note it in their deeds. How few will be sorry for thee? or for how short a
time? and how soon will thou be clean forgotten? or how poor a thing is the
greatest memory any man has when he is dead? Do thou live to hear this, and
yet wilt be so mad as to love life, for the love thou bear to any other?

5. The evil thou suffer from the world is greater than the good thou can
get by it: think of the reproaches, injuries, oppositions, contempts,
persecutions, infections thou may find from unreasonable men. How many
thousand would triumph over thy poor fame, if thy feet do but slip.

Lastly, the company thou shall have of Angels, and spirits of just men in
another world, should make thee loathe all these things in this life, whether
thou respect number, or power, or dearness in friends, even in such as must
be companions of thy life: and therefore for the company that is in the world
thou have no reason to love life.

The commodities of the world are lands, houses, money, honor, credit, beauty,
pleasure, and the like: now m^n have no cause to be so in love with these, Men
have no reason to be in love withearthly commodities, and that for diverse
causes.
if they consider,

1. How small a portion they have of these. If a man had won the whole world
and the glory of it, yet it were not worth the having if he must lose his own
soul. May,if it were all had upon the best conditions, yet it would not make a
man truly happy; and therefore much less these silly parcells of the world we
can attain to, Eccles. 1.3.

2. These are all common things, and that in two respects: first, there is
nothing now new to be had, which has not been had heretofore ordinarily. What
is now, has been before, and will be afterward. Thou can enjoy no felicity
of life that can be proper to thy self, Eccles. 1.9, 10. and 3.15. And then
further, all these things a fool may enjoy as well as a wise man, and a wicked
man as well as a godly man. A man shall never know love or hatred by these
things, for they fall alike to all sorts of men, Eccles. 2.14.

3. All things are full of labor, who can utter it? If men do reckon the
pains, and care, and unquietness, and weariness they are put to about the
getting, or keeping, or using of these things, they would find little cause to
love them; especially, considering that unto the use of the most of these is
required a daily labor with toil, that men that possess these things cannot
possess themselves, they are so overburthened with the cares and labors of
life, Eccles. 1.8.

4. If a man had never so much of these things, yet they cannot satisfy him;
his soul will not be filled with good. The eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the ear with hearing. He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with
silver. Man walks in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain,
Eccles. 1.9. and 5.10. Psalm. 39. A shadow is something in appearance, but
nothing in substance, if a man would seek to claspe it, or receive it to
himself.

5. All these things are transitory, and uncertain, and mutable: which may be
considered of three ways: First, if thou love these things, thou art not sure
thou can keep them, they may be lost suddenly and fearfully: for either
they may wear out of themselves, or they may be taken from thee; they are
liable to vanity in themselves, or to violence from others, Mat. 6.19, 20. 1
Pet. 1.24. Secondly, if thou be sure to enjoy them, yet they will be suddenly
lost to thee, because thou can not make thy heart to take delight in the same
things still; for not only the world passes away, but the lusts thereof also,
1 John 2.15. Eccles. 6.1, 7. and 9.3. Thirdly, if neither of these befall thee,
yet thou art mortal, thou must be taken from them, and thy life is short like
a dream, and passes away like the wind; and thou art but a stranger and
pilgrim here, and thou must carry nothing out of the world, but in all points,
as thou earnest in to the world, so must thou go hence, Psalm. 90. Job 7.7.
Eccles. 5.13, 14, 15. All flesh is grass, Esaias 40.6.

6. That a man may receive much hurt from them: they may steal away our hearts
from God. The amity of the world is the enmity with God, James 4. They are
like pitch to de^^le: there is a snare and temptation in all of them; they fill
men's hearts with foolish and noisome lusts, and a man may damn his soul for
too much loving of them, 1 Timothy 6.9. Phil. 3.18. and they may serve to witness
against a man at the day of judgment, James 5.1.

Lastly, consider that there is no comparison between the commodities of this
life, and the commodities of the life to come. There are rivers of pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16. ult. There are Crowns of honor and glory, such as
will neither be held with envy, nor lost with infamy; there shall men
possess enduring substance, Heb. 11. treasures not liable either to vanity or
violence, Mat. 6.20. an inhe^it^^^e immortal and und^^^led, and that withers
not, and lies in heaven, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Thus of (...) second doctrine.

In what cases it may be lawful for some persons to be in love with this life
A third Doctrine may be gathered out of these words, and that is, That in some
cases there is a permission of the love of life. In that he gives rules to such
as will love life, it imports, That God is contented to suffer or tolerate that
humor in men. Now this toleration may be considered of as it is granted to
some men, or as it extends in some sort to all sorts of men. Some men that are
high in place, and have public emploiments, and are about some special
service for the glory of God, and good of the Church or Commonwealth; in these
men the desire to live longer, in it self is not sinful: this was the case of
David and Hezekiah. Now further, unto all sorts of men the Lord does allow a
certain kind of liking of life, so as they observe such cautions and rules as
he appoints; as namely, that the cares of this life hinder not the preparation
for death, or the provision for a better life; and withal, that they limit not
God for the time of life, but be willing to die when God calls for their lives.

What such must do to prolong their life.
Now for a conclusion to this point. I would advise those that have such a mind
to live here, to look to certain rules which will prevail with God to grant
them long life, if any thing will prevail: as first, they must be exhorted to
take heed of overmuch desire of life, they must moderate their desires after
life. If they could once attain to it, to be content to die when God will, it
may be they should find life prolonged, according to that of our Savior, He
that will lose his life shall find it. Secondly, such as have Parents in
nature or religion must be very careful to give them due honor, for to such
God has promised long life in the fifth Commandment. Thirdly, godliness has
the promises of this present life, as well as of the life to come; and
therefore ever the more godly we are in all manner of conversation, the longer
we may be likely to live: and contrariwise, a profane man has no assurance to
live out half his days. Thus of the first form of speech.

The second form of speech, by which the persons he advises are described,
are, such as will see good days.

And see good days.] Before I come to the observations, here is work of large
inquiry and consideration about the sense: for these words import, That in the
life of man there be some good days, and some evil days. Physicians tell us
in their profession of some days in the year that be good days, and some
that be evil days for their directions: and superstitious and idle people in
the world tell us that there are some good days to begin businesses in, and
some evil. It seems here the Prophet David, in Theological contemplation,
finds that in the life of man some days be good, and some be evil. This
would be enquired into. And that we may find out which be good days, we must
first enquire which be evil days, and that by Scripture account. And that we
may distinctly understand this, we must enquire which be evil days, 1. For
wicked men. 2. For godly men.


The days of wicked men must be considered more generally, or more specially:
generally, all the days of the wicked are evil, both because he is a
transgressour every day, and because the curse of God is upon him all his
days, even then when he lives longest, and enjoyes most prosperous times, Esaias
65.20. Every day the wrath of God hangs over his head, and every day God
judges him, Psalm. 7. either in soul, or body, or name, or estate; either by
withholding his blessings, or by mingling the curse with the good things he
enjoys, Psalm. 7^.33. as the Israelites under censure of death from God.

More specially, the days of the wicked man are evil, either in this life, or
after this life. In this life his days are evil in two special senses;
either in respect of the shortning of them, or in respect of the afflicting of
them. What days are evil in respect of wicked men.
It is a special evil to some wicked men, that their days on earth are
shortened. Some men live not out half their days, and die in the midst of
their days, Psalm. 55.24. Ier. 17.11. and so it is a curse that his days are
few, Psalm. 109.8. Eccles. 8.13. Again, the days of wicked men are said to be
evil, in respect of some special judgments of God to be poured out upon them
for their sins. These days are called the days of Gods wrath and anger, and
days of Gods visitation, Esaias 10.3. the day of vengeance, Esaias 61.2. which God
proclaims against all wicked men; and by an excellency, The evil day, Amos
6.3. And these days are in special called the days of wicked men: and they
are theirs, because properly no day is theirs till it be evil, Ier. 50.31.
After this life comes that most special evil day, even that day of eternal
misery in hell; of which Solomon said, God made the wicked for the day of
evil, Pro. 16.4.

This doctrine of their evil days should much astright wicked men, not only
with the consideration of what they suffer now, but of what they are liable to
in the days to come. Little do they dream of the misery may befall them such
days may come as will burst their hearts with exquisite grief, their hearts
shall not be able to endure, Ezekiel. 22.14. and therefore they should take heed
of putting far from them the evil day, Amos 6.3. and in time repent, and
reconcile themselves to God in Jesus Christ, that they may prevent the evil
days may yet fall upon them, and know that their uncircumcised heart is the
cause of all the evil brought, or to be brought upon them, Ier. 9. ult. Thus
of evil days in the life of the wicked.

The godly man's days are evil diverse ways:

1. The days of spiritual famine are evil days: Wherein godly men's days
are evil.
when a man cannot enjoy the means of salvation in the life and power of them.
In this case David said, his tears were his meat day and night, Psalm. 42.2.

2. The days in which God is displeased with them, or hides himself, so as
he will not hear their prayers, or not let them discern it. These are bitter
days to the godly, Psalm. 102.2, 3. and 90.9.

3. Days of temptation, in which they are to wrestle with principalities and
powers, are evil days, Ephesians 6.

4. All days of trouble are in some respect evil days, Psalm. 49.5. and
50.14. and 41.1, 2. especially those days are evil, when the Lord turns
wicked men loose upon the godly, and leaves them as it were in their hands, to
be reproached and oppressed all the day, especially when himself will not
appear to help them, Psalm. 102.8, 10, 11. Esaias 37.3. and most of all, when the
just man seems to perish in his righteousness, Eccles. 7.15.

But yet here is a great deal of difference between the evil days of godly
men, and the evil days of wicked men; Great difference between^ the evil
days of wicked and godly men.
because God sanctifies the evil of his days to the godly man, so as he is
blessed when God chasteneth him, for he thereby teaches him his law, Psalm.
94.12. Heb. 12. Secondly, God will deliver him out of evil, if he call upon
him, Psalm. 50.15. yea, though his troubles seem desperate, Ier. 30.7. Thirdly,
though God may seem to delay for a time, yet he will make haste to perform
his deliverance: After two days he will return, and the third day he will
revive them, Hos. 6.3. Fourthly, God will make them glad, according to the
days he has afflicted them; he will make them amends for all their evil
days, Psalm. 90.15.

To conclude this point. There be days that are called evil, Evil days
common to wicked and godly men.
which are common both to good and bad* and such are the days of old age,
Eccles. 12.1. when the Sun, Moon, and Stars are darkened, that is, all sense
of prosperity is removed, and the infirmities of old age come thick one upon
another, like clouds after rain, ver. 2. when the arms, which are the keepers
of the house, shake; and the thighs and legs, which were like strong men, now
bow and bend under them; and their teeth, which were the grinders or chewers of
their meat, now cease working, because they are few; and the eyes, which are
the windows of the body, grow dark, ver. 3. when the doors shall be shut in
the streets, that is, when upon the loss of his appetite he shall have no
delight in any thing at home, nor mind to go abroad, but his own house shall
be his prison; and when he shall be so unable to rest in his bed, that he shall
rise with the first voice of the bird, and be waked with the least noise that
is, and that he has no delight in music of any kind, as Barzillai said: 2 Samuel 19.36.
When they shall be afraid of every straw in their way, they shall go so
weakly, and their Almond tree shall flourish, that is, their heads shall be
white as the blossoms of the Almond; and they shall be so sore, that a very
Grasshopper shall be a burden to them; to touch them shall be grievous, and all
the things they were wont to love they cannot now find any comfort in: and thus
they are passing to their long-home, which is the grave; and they are so near,
as if their very mourners were ready in the streets to carry them to their
graves: yea, they will not continue long, but the silver cord will be
loosened, that is, the marrow of their backs be consumed; and their golden
Ewer, which is the braine-pan, be broke; and so will the Pitcher at the Well,
that is, the veins at the liver; and so will the Wheel at the Cisterne be
broken, that is, the head which draws the powers of life from the heart: and
the dust returns unto the earth as it was, and the spirit to God that gave it.

Thus of the days that be evil days. Now it remains that we enquire which
be good days; and so we shall find that there be days that be good, in the
judgment of the inward man, and sometimes days that be good, in the judgment
of the outward man. Only thus much we must know, that, in the first sense, none
enjoy good days but good men. Now good days in the sense of the Scripture
must be considered, either in general, or in particular.

What are good days in general.
In general: and so, first, all the days of Christ, after he is revealed in a
Christian, are good days: and so all the days of a true Christian, from his
conversion to his death, are good days. Which appears thus: Saint Paul says,
that Christ is our Passover, and the Passover is a feast which we must keep,
1 Cor. 5.8. and such high festival days are good days; especially the first
and last days of the Passover were good days, in a special solemnity, that
is, the day of thy conversion to spiritual life, and the day of thy death,
which is the beginning of the day of eternal life. Secondly, all the days in
which Christians enjoy the preaching of the Gospel in the power of it, and
other ordinances of Christ in their glory, all these days be good days, for
they are days in which God makes rich feasts unto all Nations, as is
effectually described in the Allegory, Esaias 25.8. Thus David says, One day in
Gods courts is better than a thousand any were else, Ps. 84.10. The righteous
flourish when Christ comes down upon their souls, as rain upon the mowne
grass, Ps 72.6, 7. Thirdly, those be good days in which we see the Church of
God in general to prosper; when God keeps his Church as his vineyard, and
waters it every moment, and watches it night and day, and destroieth every
thing that might annoy it.

In particular, there are diverse sorts of good days to the godly.
In particular, a Christian finds diverse sorts of good days: as first, the
Sabbath days well sanctified, are good days, above all other days of the
week, when his body enjoyes rest, and his soul is blessed, according to Gods
promise, with spiritual rest and grace in Jesus Christ. Secondly, the days in
which the soul of a Christian after sin, and the judgment of God for it, is
humbled soundly, and anew admitted into Gods presence, and reconciled to God:
those days, when God entertaines the repenting sinner that prays unto him,
especially at the first reconciliation, are wonderful good days, Job 33.25,
26. with the coherence, and 36.11. Psalm. 90.14. Luke 4.21. with Esaias 61.1, 2,
10.

Thirdly, all the days in which a Christian thrives and prospers in the
knowledge of Gods Word, and grows in the spiritual understanding in the
mysteries of Gods kingdom, are all good days; for this knowledge is that
wisdom Solomon speaks of, which makes a man so happy, Pro. 3.18. and 2, 16.

Thus of the good days that are so in the judgment of the inward man. God is
pleased also to grant such good days, as are, or ought to be so accounted in
the judgment of the outward man: and so,

First, the days of youth, in which a man has strength of body, and vigor of
mind, to fit him not only for the comforts of life, but for the service of his
Creator, are good days, Eccles. 12.1. it being a blessed thing to bear Gods
yoke in a man's youth.

Secondly, the days of special prosperity in the world, which sometime God
grants unto his people, are also good days: when God gives his people
abundance of blessings in their families and estates, and withal, public
honor and respect with all sorts, even the great ones of the world; as was in
the case of Job, which he describes in the whole 29th. Chapter of his book:
but then it must have this indeed, that in this prosperity the godly man be
employed in all well-doing, and get himself honor by the flourishing of his
gifts and good works, as is showed in that Chapter by Job.

Thirdly, such days in which a man enjoyes a quiet estare, free from all
trouble, or vexation, or contumely, at home or abroad, being free from Gods
afflicting hand, or man's injurious dealing, are good days; and such as perhaps
are specially meant in this place.

Thus of the sense of the words. Diverse Doctrines may be observed from hence.

1. That the days of men usually are evil; which is true, not only of the
wicked, but of the godly also. This Jacob said long ago, his days were few
and evil, Genesis 47.9. but of this point before. Only this may serve for great
reproof of those that so little mind a better life, and so willingly love
this life, that though they live in much misery, are loath to think of dying,
and make no conscience to provide for a better life.

2. It is evident from hence, that the life of man is but short; Man's life is
short.
whether he live happily or miserably, yet his life is reckoned by days, not
by longer measures, of purpose to signify the shortness of our lives. This is
expressly affirmed in other Scriptures, Job 10.20. Job says, his days were
few; and of all men that are borne of women, that they have but a short time to
live, Job 7.1. And this is resembled by diverse similitudes: so our life is
compared to a Weavers shuttle, Job 7.6. to a Post for swift running out, Job.
9.25. to the grass of the field, Job 7.12. Esaias 40.6. to an hand breadth, so
as he says his age is as nothing, Psalm. 39.5. to a watch in the night, Psalm.
90.4. to a sleep, ver. 5. to a tale that is told. ver. 9.

Thus the life of man is said to be short, either as he is in Gods sight, In
what respect it is short.
with whom a thousand years are but as yesterday, when it is past, Psalm. 90.4.
or in his own account, if he measure time to come, as he measures time past:
and in plain reckoning, let the life of man be improved according to man's
utmost strength, ordinarily a man's years are threescore and ten, and if he
live to fourscore, it is but labor and sorrow to him, Psalm. 90.

Quest. But what should be the cause that men's lives are so short?

Answ. If there were no other cause but the will of him that has the disposing
of the times and seasons in his own power, yet that might satisfy us; Causes
why most men's lives are so short.
but we may guess at other causes, as both the mercy and justice of God. This
world is so bad to the godly, that it is Gods mercy to take them quickly out
of it: and contrariwise, it is so good to the wicked (considering their
desects) that it is justice in God to take them hence, and send them to their
own place, which is hell. Besides, many men bring speedy death upon themselves
by their own ill courses, or by sinning against their own bodies by lewd
courses, and by eating up their own hearts with worldly cares and sorrows, or
by living in any gross sin* to provoke God to cut them off, or by falling into
such disorder, as the Magistrate cuts them off, or by laying of violent hands
upon themselves, or by getting their goods unlawfully, to bring upon themselves
that curse, Ier. 17 11. Finally, in this last age of the world there may be
this reason assigned, that the Lord makes haste to have the number of his Elect
fulfilled, and therefore he dispatcheth away the generations one after another,
and so shortneth the days of man, for his Elect sake.

Now for the Uses. Are our lives so short? then it should teach us diverse
lessons: Uses.


1. To pray God to make us able to think so, and so to number our days, that
we may not make any reckoning of any long continuance here, Psalm. 39. 3. and
90.12.

2. To make haste and dispatch our repentance, and all the businesses that
concern our sound reconciliation, and so to walk while we have the light, and
to use all good means while we enjoy them.

3. To redeem the time, and save as much of it as we can, for the uses of a
better life, Ephesians. 5. and to work the harder, to fulfill thy measure, and
dispatch that task God has set thee to do.

4. To lay fast hold upon eternal life, 1 Timothy 6. and to make that sure.

5. Every day to provide for our departure; even all the days of our appointed
time to wait when our changing shall come, Job 14.14.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICALL TABLE OF THE MOST Principal things handled throughout the
whole Book.
ACtion. What things mar a good Action, 630 How we are said to do well,
ibid. Adoption. Wherein the greatness and glory of our Adoption appears, 645
their privileges in this life, 646 What kind of persons we must be to attain
this Adoption, with the marks of it, 647 How they must carry themselves, 648
Affection. We must care that our Affection grow not either cold or corrupt, 163
Four things which abate Affection in the godly, ibid. Afflictions. The godlies
Afflictions are but for a season, 56, 57 God tries man in Afflictions seven
ways, 62, 63. comforts therein, 63 Afflictions better than gold, in diverse
respects, 67 Angels. Of their names and natures, 96 The singular account that
God makes of them, 97 Their affection to man, ibid. and 98 Of the Cherubims
looking upon the Ark, Exodus 268. 98 Of their knowledge affirmatively and
negatively, 99, 100 Antiquity. In what things Antiquity is ill pleaded, 621
What respect is to be had to old time, 622 Apostacy twofold: 1. inward, 2.
outward, 237 Apparel. Rules for it, 105. Vide Attire, 603, 604, 605
Application. Rules of application of the word aright, 288 Assurance. Such as
have the persuasion of the Assurance of salvation should look to four things,
77 Astray What is meant by going astray, 555 Their misery that so do, ibid.
An aggravation of their misery, 556 Causes of men's going Astray, ibid. Signs
of a lost sheep, 557 Attire. Eleven reasons against vain Attire in women, 603,
604 Fourteen ways by which Attiring of our selves becomes vicious, 605
B
BAbes. Why most are Babes in religion, 228 Special duties of newborn Babes,
229 What Babes by nature should teach men in grace, ibid. Backe-biters. Vide
Evill-speakers, or Whisperers, 215, 216 Behold. The diverse acceptance of the
word, 274 Believe, Vide Faith. Believers. They only have benefit by Christ,
154 We may be said to believe five ways, 156 What it is to be a true believer,
290 In how many things it is seen, ibid. etc. Its excellency, 625 Helps to
it, ibid. Rules for a right trusting in God, 626 It is by Christ that we
believe in God, and that for diverse reasons, 157 Birth, Borne. The necessity
and ho^^ur of our new Birth, 32 Why repentance is called a new birth, 184 We
had need often to be put in mind of our new Birth, 185 Lets of it, with
excellent uses thereof, ib. Bishop. The word expounded, 566 Christ excels all
other Bishops in ten respects, 561 All are happy that live under the charge of
such a Bishop, 567 The duties of such as be under his charge, 568 Bless,
Blessing. How man blesses God, how God man, how man blesses man, 29, 30
Diverse kinds of Blessings, 688 When we bless indeed, and wherein it stands,
688, 689 Godly men inherit the Blessing many ways, 694 In this life three
ways, ibid. etc. What we must do to get Gods blessing, 695 How godly men may
grow in the comfort of Gods Blessing, 696 Blood. The benefits flowing from
Christ's Blood, 21 This his Blood diversely taken, 145 Why shed, ibid. Why this
is most urged, ibid. etc. The uses of it, 146 The preciousnesse of it, ibid.
What makes it so precious, ibid. Bowels. What Bowels of mercy does import. 183
When they are right, 684 Motives to affect the having such Bowels, 685 Brother,
Brotherhood. How we should express our love to the Brotherhood, 477 In what
respects godly men are Brothers, 178, 478, 680 Reasons persuading to love as
Brethren, 680 With what kind of love we are to love the Brethren, 681 Rules for
Brotherly love, 682 Build, Builders. Means to build up a Christian, 260 Causes
why men are so little edified, 261 How far wicked men may be said to be
Builders, 295, 296 The causes why many great and learned are often times
Destroyers rather than Builders, 296 How Builders, that is, Churchmen, refuse
Christ, 298. and how Christ refuses them. 299
C
Calling. It is a matter of great weight to show a good warrant for our
Calling, 2, 3 Seven sorts of men transgress about their Calling, 3 Those sorts
of lusts which must be hateful to us after our Calling, 114 Eight reasons why
we should avoid lusts after our Calling, ibid. How many ways God calls us,
119, 120 What our effectual Calling is, 120 Why our conversion is termed our
Calling, ibid. How a true Calling may be discerned, ib. Seven things which we
are called to, 121 Three sorts of Calling; 1 personal: 2 natural: 3
supernatural, 334, 335 Distinction of Callings, 335 Four things in the order
of working in our Callings, ibid. Eight signs of effectual Calling, 336 Five
rules to show us how to walk worthy of our Calling, ibid. The danger of such as
refuse their Calling, in eight things, 337 Of the C. of the Gentiles in
general, 345 Why Christians should be affected with the consideration of their
Calling, 689 The Calling of a Christian is a hard Calling, 690 The necessity of
knowing our Calling, ib. By what means, 691 Ceremonies. About taking and
giving scandal in the use of Ceremonies, 436 Chastity twofold, 1 of body: 2 of
mind, 594 Chastity must be as well in married persons as in single, 595 Motives
to Chastity, 596 It is specially charged upon the woman, ib. Preservatives of
Chastity, ibid. How a chaste wife may be discerned, 597 Christ. The benefits
flowing from his blood, 21, 22 His generation and ours how unlike, 31 In three
things we should learn of Christ to carry our selves toward God as our
Father, 31 Christ hid till his second coming in six respects, 69 Seven signs
of his love in the sparkle, 71 Seven more in the flame. ibid. The word Christ
is a word collective, 144 His blood precious, 146. etc. He is said to be a Lamb
in six respects, 147 Christ manifested five ways, 152 Believers only have
benefit by Christ, 154 Excellent uses of the manifold descriptions of Christ,
248, 249 As he is a Lord how he excels other Lords, 249 How said to be both a
stone, and a living stone, 249, 250. etc. Christ is precious many ways, 254
How we may get an esteem of Christ above all things, 281 How we may manifest
this esteem, ibid. How Christ is an honor to us, 292 Christ many ways
refused, 298 In what respects Christ bare our sin, 531 Christian. A
Christians life is a joyful life, 54 What they must do to preserve that joy
in their hearts, 55 How far he may rejoice in earthly things, 56 Privileges
of weak Christians, 229 Encouragement for weak Christians, 237 Christians have
diverse sacrifices, 266 Only Christians come of the best generation, 317 They
are royal many ways, 318 The priesthood of a Christian is a singular
privilege, 320, 321 It should put us in mind of diverse duties, 321 Christians
are holy many ways, 322 How Christians are said to be all of one Nation, 325
Why called a peculiar people, 326, 327 A sound Christian shows himself so by
his conversation, 388 For what reasons Christians should be much affected with
the consideration of their Calling, 689 The necessity of knowing our calling,
690 How it may be known, 691 Diverse sorts of Christians, ibid. Carnal
Christians know not their Calling, ibid. etc. The reasons of it, 692 Good
Christians have a blessed estate above all men, 693 True Christians inherit
nothing but blessing, 693. and that many ways, 694 Church. Eleven prerogatives
of the Christian Church, 79, 80 The Church like Mount Sion in many respects,
276, 277 The uses hereof, ibid. The excellency of the word above all other
assemblies of the world besides, 277 Clean, Cleanenesse. Eight things to be
done for the getting of a clean heart, 175 Come. We Come to Christ many mayes,
256 Eight ways to come to Christ, 257 Encouragements thereto, ibid. etc.
Compassion. It was showed by Christ five ways, 332 In man how, 679 Motives to
it, ibid. What bowels of Compassion does import, 683 Confound. Believers shall
never be Confounded, 284 The diverse acceptance of the word Confound, ibid.
How Confounded may be taken in a good sense, 285 Means by which God keeps the
Believer from being confounded, ibid. In what he shall not be confounded, ibid.
How far he may be confounded, 286 Conditions of such as will not be
confounded, 287 What sorts of men shall suffer shame and Confusion, ibid.
Conscience. It ought to be adorned with nine things, 18 Kinds of Conscience,
503 Reasons why men ought to be instructed about Conscience, 499 What
Conscience is, ibid. Its proper work, 500 How Conscience is employed in us,
ibid. The law by which Consc. judges, and the manner of proceeding in judgment,
502 Prerogatives of Conscience, ibid. etc. Diverse kinds of Conscience, 503
Differences of evils in men's Consciences, 504 Signs of an evil Conscience
that is still, and stirred, 505 Hurts of an ill Conscience, with four effects
^hereof, 506 Aggravations of the misery of an ill Conscience, 507 What must be
done to make an ill Conscience good, 508 Two things for guiding the Conscience,
509 Signs of a good Conscience, ibid. Benefits of it, 510 How far Conscience
may be bound, 510 511 Conversation. Our conversation said to be vain in six
respects, 140 The sins which make it so, ibid. There is vanity in the
Conversation of the Saints themselves, ibid. Five degrees of our redemption
from a vain conversation, 141 Seven signs of it, ibid. Special rules for the
right ordering of a holy Conversation, 323 Means to ^ttain^ it, 324
Differences between a holy Conversation and a civil, ibid. A sound Christian
shows himself so by his Conversation, 388 Vide Honest. Six things which make
an honest Conversation, 389 An honest Conversation is the way either to convert
or convince the Gentiles, 392 By what means we may win wicked men in our
Conversations, 594, 595 Reasons why a Christians Conversation should be coupled
with fear, 598, 599 Conversion. Nine signs to know whether we be effectually
converted, 585 Rules for it, 586 Courtesy. It contains seven things, 685
Creation. The wonderfulnesse of our Creation showed many ways, 151, 152 The
use of it, ibid.
D
DAy. Many sorts of Days n^ted in Scrip^^^^, 416 How the Day and season of
grace may be known, 417 Darkness. The acceptance of the word Darkness, 338,
etc. Degrees of it, 339 Nine aggravations of the Darkness that is in wicked
men, 340 The use of it, ibid. etc. Four signs of spiritual Darkness, 341
There is some Darkness even in the children of Light, ibid. There are seven
differences between the Darkness of the godly, and the darkness of the
ungodly, 341, 342 Death, Vide Die, 198, 534 Deceit, Vide Guile. The misery of
Deceitful persons, 206, 207 Of Deceitful Servants, 207 The iniquity of our
times herein, 208 Signs of a man without Deceit, 209 Despair. How many ways
wicked men may Despair, 307 Preservatives from Despair, 308, 309 Special
differences between the Despair of the godly and wicked, 309, 310 Desire. The
necessity, utilitie, and nature of this affection of Desire largely handled,
221 The true Desire of the word has four distinct things in it: first,
Estimation of it: secondly, Longing for it: thirdly, Content in it: fourthly,
Constancy in the renewing of it, 221, 222 How we may discern our affections
to it, 222 Signs both external and internal of our Desire to the word, 222,
223, etc. Impediments, 223 Means of getting true Desire to the word, 225 Rules
for preserving these Desires, 226 Motives thereto, 227 How far wicked men may
desire the word, 230 Die, Vide Death. Men Die many ways, 534 The many
inconveniences by forgetting to Die, 198 How to prove willing to Die, ibid.
Disobedience. How unbeleevers are guilty of Disobedience, and their
Disobedience aggravated, 293 Drunkard, Drunkenness. Reasons against it well
applied, 106
E
EArth, Earthly. In what the vanity of Earthly things appears, 700 No reason
to be in love with them, ib. etc. What days are Evil in respect of wicked
men, 703 Wherein godly men's days are Evil, ibid. Great difference of the
evil days of good and evil men, ibid. How far Christians may rejoice in
Earthly things, 56 Elect. The Elect have eight privileges above all men in the
world, 7, 8 Three sorts of Elect, 150 Election. A fourefold Election, 7 How
they may be known, ibid. 315 Good use of the point, 8 There are many things in
our Election which may ravish us, 314 Rules to live so as becomes the
assurance of Election, 316 Envy. It is a hateful sin, 214 Signs of a man
free from Envy, 215 Evill-doers. Who are pointed out for such, 446
Evill-speaking, Vide Backe-biting. Report, the aggravation of it, 213 Reasons
against it, 216 The effects of it foul, 217 The use to be made of it, with
Rules against it, 218 What to do to avoid it, 219 In what cases odious, 395
Helps to bear it, 396 The wicked usually speak Evil of the godly, 456
Example. Excellent documents from the word Example, 519, 520 Ten things for us
to follow in the Example of Christ's sufferings, 521 In what cases Christ's
Examples bind not, 522 Two singular virtues in a good Example, 620 When an
Example binds, 621 Excel. The godly Excel others in diverse respects, 313
F
FAith. It does ten things to further our preservation, 45, 46 What Faith will
not preserve us, 47 How to show it in affliction, 65 The praises of it then,
ibid. Seven things should move us to trust on God in affliction, 60 Faith is
only seated in the hearts of the Elect, 155 God is the object of our Faith,
and that not only in his nature, but in his mercies and promises also, 156 It
is Faith that makes difference among men before God, 282 Its necessity, ibid.
Marks of true saving Faith. 290 Signs of a true though weak Faith in a weak
Christian, 291 The Christians continual use of Faith, 157 What we should do
for comfort when the sense of Faith is gone, 158 Seven rules for the daily use
of Faith, ibid. The difference between Faith and Hope, 160 Helps to continue
in the Faith, 161 All Faith and Hope in other than in God i^ vain, 162
Faithful. The life of the Faithful is a joyful life, 54 Seven things should
move ^^ to be Faithful in affliction, 66 The Faithful bow precious in Gods
sight. ibid. Family Vide Household. What makes a Family happy, 484 We are
bound of God to care for Family duties, ibid. Why inferiors are first
commanded Family duties, 485 Fashion* Fashioning our selves to sin has
seven things in it, 115 Father. How God is a Father to Christ, Angels and Man,
11, 12 His affection is Fatherly, that is, first, Free: secondly, Tender:
thirdly, Constant, 12 So i^ his provision, both in respect of, first,
Attendance: secondly, Diet: thirdly, Preservation in trouble: fourthly,
Portion, ibid. Of what excellency Gods Fatherly love i^, first, (...) godly
men: secondly, to carnal men: thirdly, to earthly Fathers, 13, 14 The name of
Father given to diverse sorts, 492 Fear. Three sorts of it; first, worldly:
secondly, servile: thirdly, filial, 134 Our conversation must be coupled with
Fear, ibid. The Fear of God what, 480 Six things in God of which we are to
stand in awe, 480, 481 Motives to get this Fear, 481 What kinds of men do not
Fear God, 481, 482 The signs of it, 482 Reasons why wicked men are stricken
with a servile Fear, 597, 598 A conversation coupled with Fear required of
all Christians, 598, 599 How we should show this Fear, 600 What sorts of men
have not Gods Fear, 601 Wherein wives should show Fear to their Husbands,
601, 602 Fight, Vide War. The Flesh fights against the Soul five ways,
384 Why God does suffer this Fight, 385 How we may get victory in this Fight,
387 Flesh. Lusts are Fleshly in diverse respects, 365 Eight evil properties and
effects of the Flesh, ibid. How they hurt the souls of wicked men, 366. as
also of the godly, ibid. The Flesh fights against the Soul five ways, 384
Fools. Unregenerate men are Fools, 459 Signs of spiritual Folly, ibid.
Wherein godly men sometimes show Folly, 462, 463 Foreknowledge, Vide
Prescience, 3. Vide Foresight, 149 Foresight, Vide Foreknowledge, 8 Three
kinds of Foresight, 149, 150 Foundation diversely accepted, 151 Christ the
maine Foundation of all grace and holiness, 247 With the use of it, ibid. etc.
The only Foundation of his Church, 250 That Christ is laid as a Foundation
stone imports many things, 276 Freedom, Vide Liberty, From what Christ is
made Free, 467 To what a godly man is made Free, 468 The Freedom of the Old
and New Testaments, 469 In what respects we are But as Free, 469 470 Hypocrites
in bondage whilst they seem Freemen, 471 Frowardness. Reasons against
Frowardness both in Masters and Servants, 494, 495 Helps against it, ibid.
Frowardness how odious, showed by the causes and effects, 615
G
GEneration. It is threefold; first, corporeal: secondly, metaphysicall:
thirdly, singular, 30 Three things wherein Christ's and our Generation is not
alike. 31 The acceptance of the word Generation, 316 Only Christians come of
the best Generation, 317 Gentiles. Of the Calling of the Gentiles in general,
345 Gird. We must Gird up our minds, and that diverse ways, 103. etc. Eight
rules for it, ibid. Glory, Glorify. How God is glorified by himself, 404 How
of us in general, how in particular, 406 Motives to the care of glorifying
God, 408, 409 Helps thereto, ibid. The thoughts of Gods glory two ways
established, 411 Four caveats for making others to Glorify God, ibid. etc.
Vainglory, wherein it is seen, 512 Wherein true Glory does consist, ibid.
The Glory of man but vain in six respects, 196 What is his true Glory, 197
God. Of his foreknowledge, 8, 9, 10 How a Father to Christ, Angels and Men,
11, 12 Gods power in keeping us, 43 Excellent uses of it, 44 Wherein Gods
graciousnesse is seen, 238 By what means God may be brought to our minds, 410
Helps to conceive of God aright, ibid. By what means he is to be magnified in
our hearts, 411 God is a Judge, 529 And thereby terrible to wicked men, 530
Comfortable to the godly, 531 Rules of committing our selves to God, ib. Godly.
The Godly dispersed, and the good that comes thereby, 6 The Godly are Priests
in many respects, 264 The Godly excel others in diverse respects, 313, 314 How
the Godly come to be Gods heirs, 645 That the Godly are Brethren, 178
Godliness. It has many lets, 102 The use of it, ibid. Fourteen internal
lets of Godliness, 102, 103 Gospel: The word taken diverse ways, 90, 91 Eight
effects of this Gospel, 91 Eight things required of every one that would have
part in it, ibid. How it differs from the Law, 92 Excellent uses of it both to
Priest and People, 92, 93 Grace what, and how it and Peace is multiplied, 27,
28 What we must do that it might be multiplied, 28 That we may not fail of
the Grace of God we must do four things, 8 How we frustrate the grace of God,
ibid. We must labor to walk worthy of that grace by doing four things, ibid.
etc. The diverse acceptations of the word Grace, 109 The glory of heaven called
Grace in three respects, 110, 111 Seven things in which we should imitate Gods
Grace in showing mercy, 111 Why God gives not heaven as soon as he gives
Grace, 112 Wherein Gods Graciousnesse is seen, 238 The state of such as have
but temporary Grace, 338 Grace is either a gift in us, or an attribute in God,
665 Grace as it is in God considered two ways, 666 What privileges such have
as enjoy Gods Grace, ibid. Men transgress against the Grace of God many ways,
667 Grass. Man's life is but Grass, 193 194. etc. Grow, Growth. Diverse kinds
of it, 232 In what graces Christians ought to grow, 233, 234 Helps thereto,
234 L^ts thereof, 235, 236 Signs, ibid. etc. Guile, Vide Deceit, Hypocrisy.
The words acceptance, 205 Why and how to be avoided, 206 The misery of
Guilefull persons, ibid. Of secret Guile, 207 Signs of a man without Guile,
209 Guile in words many ways, so in Hypocrisy, 525
H
Hardness. Hardness of heart seemed to be f^lt more after assurance than
before, 113 Healing. Wherein Christ's Healing excels for our comfort, 550 That
we are all healed by Christ's stripes, 551 What we must do to be healed by
Christ, 550 The bodies of all men by nature need Healing, 552 Christ is a
Physician as well for the body as the soul, 553 Rules for such as desire to
Heal their bodily griefs, 554 Heart. Adorned with eight graces makes it
acceptable to God, 17 Eleven things in which a sanctified Heart rejoices,
ibid. Three special signs of a new Heart, 415 What the hid man of the Heart
is, 607 Wherein it excells the outward man, 608 By what means it may be
mended, 609 How to know when it is right, ibid. Eight things to be done for
getting a clean heart, 175 How our Hearts are purified in obeying the truth,
176 Heaven. Where, and what, wi^^ its excellency above all other pl^^^s, 41
The glory of Heaven ^^ll^d grace in three respects, 110, 111 Heaviness. Four
sorts of Heaviness, 56 Heirs. How godly men become Heirs, 645 How they must
behave themselves, 648 Godly men and women are Heirs together many ways, 688
Holy Ghost. The Spirit why called the Holy Ghost, 93 He is a Person distinct
from Father and Son, 94 Whether its mission does signify any inequality, 95
Holiness. Four sorts of Holiness, 122 God Holy three ways, ibid. Helps,
with motives thereto, 123 Christians are Holy many ways, 322 Rules for the
right ordering of a Holy conversation, 323 Inward Holiness wherein it
consists, 174, 175 Honest. Honesty. What it signifies, 388 Six things which
make and manifest an Honest conversation, 389 An Honest conversation is the way
either to convince or convert the Gentiles, 392 Honor. How Christ is an Honor
to us, 292 By what ways we may express our Honor to men, 477 How we must
honor the King, 483 Honey. The Word for sweetness compared to Honey, 240 The
excellent uses of it, ibid. Hope. The differences between a living and a dead
Hope, 36 Nine ways to show our Hope, 108 Five things to be done to get assured
Hope, 108, 109 The difference between Faith and Hope, 160, 161 Household,
Householders, Vide Family. Humble, Humbleness. Humbleness of mind has six
things in it, 16 Humbleness is showed in three things, 330 Husband. For
Husband and Wife to live together quietly there are sixteen motives, 576 Five
special causes of disorder between man and wife, 577 Motives to make Husbands
careful of their duties, 633 Their cohabitation, 634 In what cases they may be
absent, 635 He must dwell with her in knowledge, 637 How they honor their
wives, 641 Hypocrisy. How many ways men commit it, 210 Motives against it,
with effects of it, ibid. etc. Excellent uses hereof, 211 The sorts of
Hypocrisy that we are most in danger of, 212 Preservatives against it, ibid.
Hypocrites. How an open Hypocrite may be discerned, 213 What makes an
Hypocrite, and how a man may know himself not to be one, ibid. etc. Hypocrites
in bondage whilst they seem Freemen, 471 Eight things for the discovery of
Hypocrites, 177
I
IGnorance. The unregenerate charged with Ignorance, 116 Signs of their
Ignorance, 117 How different from the Ignorance of the godly, ibid. It is
hateful to be Ignorant in spiritual things, 457 A hard thing to cure
Ignorance, 463, 464 Imitation. We must imitate God, 118 Five things in which we
are not to imitate Christ, 328 Immortality. Four degrees of it, 186
Incorruptible. Seven things which are Incorruptible, 611 Incorruptible things
do wonderfully adorn, 612 Grace begotten in the hearts of the godly is
Incorruptible in diverse respects, 188 Indifferent. Things ^Indifferent in
matters of religion, though som^times inconvenient, may be commanded, and must
be obeyed, 434 Pretended inconveniences by humane laws surveyed, 435 About
taking and giving of scandal at humane ceremonies, 436 How Christian liberty
is made a cloak of maliciousness in things indifferent, 472 In thongs
indifferent there be cases wherein Christian liberty is vilely abused, ibid.
Inheritance. How the Saints inheritance is incorruptible, even in four
respects, 39 Undefiled in five respects, ibid. Inventions. Whether any
Inventions of men may be obeyed, 433 A catalogue of such Inventions as were
used for religious ends without any commandment, 434 Joy. A Christian life is
a joyful life, manifested in nine things, 54 Gods servants may joy nine ways,
ibid. How that their joy is preserved, 55 How full his joy may be in earthly
things, 56 Six^ kinds of joy, 72 Five kinds of divelish joy, ibid. Eight signs
of discerning the joy of the holy Ghost from all other joys, 73 Whether the
joys of the holy Ghost be felt of every Christian, 74 What we must do to get
the joy of God, ib. How to preserve that joy, ibid. The differences between
joy temporary and true joy, 188 Judge. God is a terrible Judge to the wicked,
529 He judges righteously, 530 Judgment. The day of judgment why called The
last day, 52 Why deferred, ibid. Why the Day of judgment is called The
Revelation of Jesus Christ, 111 Of the last judgment, and the certainty
thereof, 128 All must appear at the day of judgment, 129 We shall be judged
according to our works, iibid. How infants can be judged according to their
works, 130 Judgments inflicted on some particular offenders belong to all for
diverse reasons, 301
K
KIll, Repentance for sin does in diverse respects kill a man, 538 Kings.
Differences between spiritual and earthly Kings, 319 Christians should live
like Kings, 320 King is a note of the highest dignity on earth, 440 The
original of Kings, 441 The excellency of Kings above others, 442 Many
encouragements to Subjects to bear Kings superiority, ibid. Kings must be
honored, first, in heart: secondly, in word: thirdly, in work: 483 Kin, Vide
Generation. Only good Christians are of the best kin, 317 The uses of it,
ibid. They are of Royal kin, and that in many respects, 318, 629 Knowledge.
The excellency of divine Knowledge in many respects, 637 It is required of all
sorts of men, 638 It is given for use and practice, ibid. It ought to have a
commanding power, ibid. Means to give power to our knowledge, ibid. etc. It
makes an impression in every man's life, 639 In it men should excel women,
ibid. What it is for the husband to dwell with the wife in knowledge, 640
Knowledge must have three properties and effects of it, 652, 653
L
LAmb. Christ a Lamb in six respects, 147 The Lambs in the ceremonial law
types of Christ, ibid. etc. The uses of it, 148 Liberty, Vide Freedom.
Christian Liberty is a great gift bestowed by Christ, 466 A man may use his
Liberty as a cloak of malice five ways, 470 How Christian Liberty is a
cloak of malice in things indifferent, 472 Cases in things indifferent wherein
Christian Liberty is vilely abused, 473 Life, Live. How we may live like Gods
children, 13 A religious Life is the best Life, 541 Natural Life but a mean
thing in diverse respects, 649 The degrees of a spiritual Life, 650 Whence it
has its original, even from God, and that in three respects, 651 Diverse
things nourish this spiritual Life, 654 It differs from eternal Life in many
ways, 657 Man's Life is grass, 193 Excellent uses of it, 193, 194 What we must
do to attain eternal Life, 661 A Christians helps hereto, 662 Six signs of
it, 663 Five properties of it, 664 What duties this Life should imprint in us,
ibid. For what reasons men should take off their affections from the love of
this Life, 698, 699 In what cases some men may be in love with this Life, 702
Man's Life short, in what respects, and why, 705 The uses of it, 706 Light. The
acceptance of the word Light, 342 Gods servants are brought into great Light,
ibid. Excellent instruction and consolation drawn from it, 342, 343 In how
many respects the Light of the godly is called A mavelous Light, 343, 344
Excellent uses thereof, 344 Love. Seven signs of the Love of Christ in the
sparkle, and seven more in the flame, 71 What we must do to get that Love, 72
Seven things to be observed to keep our hearts in this Love, ibid. Christ's
Love to the godly, 332 How many ways the people of God are Gods only beloved
ones, 361 How to preserve this Love, ibid. How we should show our Love to the
Brotherhood, 477 Nine signs of unfeigned Love, 180 The impediments of brotherly
Love, 181 Seven signs of fervent Love, 182 Nine causes of the want of it, 183
What to do that we may have and hold it, ibid. Reasons to persuade to the Love
of the Brethren, 680 With what kind of Love we ought to love them, 681 Rules
for it, 682 Three caveats to be looked unto in loving our Brother, 683 Lusts.
The sorts of Lusts which must be hateful unto us after our Calling, 114 Eight
reasons why we should avoid Lusts after our Calling, ibid. Four preservations
against Lusts, 115 Lusts how to be avoided, 362 Three differences of Lusts in
the godly and wicked, 363 Helps to avoid them, ibid. Lusts are fleshly in
diverse respects, 365 How Lusts hurt the souls of godly and wicked men both,
366 How we may get victory over our Lusts, 387 How we may know that we have
gotten this victory, ibid.
M
Madness. Signs of spiritual Madness, 460 Magistrates. They are to be
submitted to, 424 This submission has in it six things, 425 Objections
against it answered, 427, 428 We must be subject to all sorts of Magistrates,
428, 429 In what things Magistrates are not to be obeyed, 431 In what matters
Ecclesiastical Magistrates have no power, ibid. In what he has power, 432
Whether we must obey Magistrates in things unlawful, 437 Diverse motives in God
to move man to the obedience of Magistrates, 438 Excellent uses of the point,
439. etc. In what cases not fit to complain to the Magistrates, 529 Malice.
Its acceptance, 203 Signs of it, and reasons against it, ibid. Remedies, 204
Aggravations of it, ibid. Men may use the liberty as a cloak of Malice five
ways, 470 Man. He is but grass, 193, 194, etc. His glory vain in six
respects, 196 What his true glory is, 197 Manifest, Manifestation. Christ
manifested five ways, 153 We must show our affection to this his Manifestation
four ways, 153, 154 Marriage. Sixteen motives for man and wife to live
together quietly and comfortably in Marriage, 576 Masters. The original of
Masters, 492 Signs of good Masters, 493 Reasons against frowardness in
Masters, 494 Signs of good Masters, 495 Meditation. Rules for Meditation, 289
Meekness. It is showed in four things, 330 What things are requisite to
Meekness, 613 Motives to it, ibid. etc. Helps to attain to Meekness, 616
Mercy. Gods Mercy abundant, 32, 33 It ought not to be any cause of liberty
either to the godly or wicked, 33 Whether the Lord shows any Mercy to the
wicked, 33, 34 Showed four wayes^* 331 What sorts of people God will not be
merciful unto, 352 What wicked men in particular are not under Mercy, 354 Why
many obtain not Mercy, 355 Four properties of Gods Mercy, 356 It is tender
many ways, ibid. It is free many ways, ibid. etc. Eternal, 357 Nine effects
of it, 358 Excellent uses of it, 358, 359 Helps to obtain mercy, 359 What
Bowels of Mercy does import, 683 Milk. The word called Milk in many
respects, ^30 Excellent uses thereof, 231, ^32 Mind, Vide Unity. Our Minds
must be rightly ordered, 6^4 For what reasons we ought to be all of one Mind,
ibid. Minister. This word Minister sounds Servic^, 89 Misery. All Misery
referred to (...) heads: ^: of (...).: ^ Of (...): 3. Of adversities: 4. Of
death, 77 The remembrance of our past Misery is profitable in six respects,
338 Mortification. None but mortified Christians are true Christians, 536
Repentance for sin does in diverse respects kill a man, 538 Signs of
Mortification, 539 Men truly mortified shall live happily, 540
N
NAme. Of a good and evil Name. Vide Report. Nature. The natural condition
very miserable many ways, 608 New, Newnesle. The necessity and honor of our
New birth, 32 The means of the New birth, 34 The lets, ibid. Four signs of
it, 35 Uses of it, 35, 36 Special duties of such as are newborn, 229
Privileges of such, ibid. Speciall-signes of a New heart, 415 A New behavior
discovered diverse ways, 416 Why repentance is called a New birth, 184 Why we
had need to be put in mind of our New birth, 185 Lets of it* ibid.
O
OBedience. What* the causes of it, with six rules for it, 19 Motives to it,
20 Of obedience in word^, ibid. Our Obedience must be the Obedience of children
in six respects, 113 Our Obedience to God a special sign^ of his fear, 482
Six things required to (...) sound Obedience, 588 The extent of our Obedience
in respect of times, truths places, and persons, 176, 177 How (...) may know
their Obedience to be right, 177 In (...) things the Spirit works (...)
Obedience, ibid.
P
PArents. How many ways children are infected by the traditions of their
Parents, 142 Why they are so infectious, ibid. Seven rules for Parents ordering
their children, ibid. etc. Passover. The manifold passages concerning the
sprinkling of the Passover expounded, 25, 26. etc. Patience. It is to be
showed four ways, 331 People. Many sorts of People in Scripture, 346 Why
wicked men are said not to be a People, ibid. Who are not Gods People, 347 Men
are Gods people three ways, 348 The misery of those that refuse their calling
to be Gods People, 337 How Gods people excel all others, 349 The uses thereof,
350 Rules for Gods People to carry themselves to God, 351, 352 How many ways
Gods People are the only beloved one^^ 361 S. Peter, what he was by name and
office, 1, 2 Plagues. Spiritual Plagues are worse than ^^mporall (...) for
(...) reasons, 302 Power. Questions concerning Gods Power in keeping of us, 43
Excellent uses of it, 44 Prayer. What we must do that God may answer our
Prayer, 85 Prayer how it may be hindered both in the bearing and making of it,
671 The excellency of Prayer in (...) respects, 669 From whence its (...) do
arise, 670 Praise. Wherein it is unlawful to seek the Praise of men, 448 If
(...) would be praised they must do well, 449 (...) to get Praise from men,
450 P^ecious. Christ is so (...) ways, 254, 255 The reasons why he is (...)
with men, ^55 What uses are (...), (...), 256 Prescience. Prescience, 1.
Absolute: 2. Special: 3. Of approbation, 8 How God for^knoweth, 9 How his
Foreknowledge may comfort us in our distresses, 9, 10 What it may teach us, 10
Terrible to the wicked in four respects, 11 Preservation. Faith does ten
things to further our Preservation, 45, 46 Presumption. How to know whether we
sin presumptuously or no, 115 Priests. The godly are Priests in many respects,
264, 265 The uses of it, 265 The Priesthood of Christians is a singular
privilege, 320 Princes. All good Christians must be obedient to their Princes,
422 Ministers should teach and press this duty, 423 The submission that
belongs to them has six things in it, 425 Pure. In what respects godly men
may be said to be Pure, 597 A Christians Purity has in it many things, 597,
598
Q
QUicken. What we must do to Quicken our hearts, 260 Quiet. Sixteen helps to
a Quiet life in marriage, 576 Five special causes of their unquietness, 577
Helps to cause them to be Quiet, 578 Helps to attain quietness, 616 (...)
things of singular use to keep us quiet in trouble, 673
R
RAiling, Reviling. The wicked are prone to it, 687 It is a great sin, ibid.
Though we be reviled we must not revile again, ibid. Excellent uses of it,
ibid. etc. Reason. The faculty of Reason in the soul, and wherein it excels,
382 Recreations. Rules for them, 104, 105 Redemption. Of all other doctrines we
must be sure to know the doctrine of our Redemption, 137, 138 We are redeemed
from six things, 139 Five degrees of Redemption from vain conversation, 141
Seven signs of it, ibid. Two ways our Redemption is ratified, 159 Refuse.
Christ many ways refused, 298 Regeneration. How it depends on Christ's
resurrection, 38 Rejoice, Rejoicing, Vide Joy. 54, 55, 56, 72, etc. Religion.
How hard a thing it is to reduce a man from his Religion though it be never so
absurd, 390 A religious life is the best life, 541 Repentance. Against such as
presume on late Repentance, 417 Their vain objections for it answered, ibid.
etc. Repentance of sin does in diverse respects kill a man, 538 Diverse things in
Christ's death which ought to be in our Repentance, 539 Why Repentance is called
a new birth, with five differences between false and true Repentance, 184
Report. The lot of the righteous is to be evil spoken of, 393 The causes and
causers, ibid. etc. How hurtful it is to report evil of the good, 394 Reasons
against it, ibid. etc. In what cases it is odious, 395 Helps to bear them, 396
To have a good Report among men is a great blessing of God, 447 Reproaches.
They are to be avoided as much as in us lies, 457 That only fools reproach
good men, 465 Reprobation. Proofs of Reprobation, 311 Observations for
consolation in the point of Reprobation, 312 Resurrection. Four benefits of
Christ's Resurrection, 35 Christ risen in the Old Testament three ways, 37 How
our regeneration depends on Christ's Resurrection, 38 It is a great wonder, with
an excellent use thereof, 159 The glory given to Christ after his Resurrection
showed in eight things, 160 Revelation. A twofold Revelation of Christ, 69 God
has revealed his will three ways: 1. By the light of nature: 2. By the book
of the creatures: 3. By his word, 77 And by that many ways, ibid. Distinctions
of Revelations, 86 A difference between Revelation and Knowledge, ibid. We
have six sorts of Revelations under the Gospel, 87 Why the day of judgment is
called The Revelation of Jesus Christ, 111 Revenge. It is unlawful, 686
Reviling. What it is, 526 Who are guilty of it, 527 Not to render Reviling for
Reviling, 528 Rich, Riches. The woeful estate of Rich men, 138, 139 Virtue and
grace are a Christians best Riches, 618 Righteous, Righteousness. Signs that
desery a Righteous man in himself, 542 Six other signs of Righteousness as
it grows, 543 How the Righteousness of a Righteous man differs from the
Righteousness of a Pharisee, ibid. Why so few embrace Righteousness, 544
Helps thereunto, 545 Defects of Righteousness, 546 Defects in the manner of
doing Righteously, 547 Royal. Christians are Royal many ways, 318
S
SAcrifices. Christians have diverse sorts of Sacrifices, 266 Special laws to
be observed in offering our Sacrifices, 268, 269 The use of it, ibid. What to
do to make our Sacrifices acceptable, 270, 271 Three comforts from an
acceptable Sacrifice, 271 Saints. Saints are strangers, 4 In fourteen things
they should be strangers, 4, 5 See more, 132 Salvation. What it imperteth in
the original. 48 Salvation may be said to be prepared for us five ways, 49,
50 To whom revealed, 50 In the last day revealed three ways, ibid. Excellent
uses of this revelation of Salvation, ibid. etc. Four signs of the persuasion
of our Salvation, 75, 76 Such as have the Assurance of Salvation should look
to four things, 77 Why such a multitude of men enquire so little after
Salvation, 81 We ought to devote our selves to the study of it, ibid. We must
study our Salvation with diligence, 82 Diverse ways from God to further our
Salvation, 594 Salutation. Of the usual form of Salutations, 27
Sanctification. Man is sanctified three ways: 1. Ex non sancto privative: 2.
Ex minus sancto: 3. Ex non sancto negative, 14 What need our spirits have to be
sanctified, 15 This lies in two things: 1. In cleansing it from sin: 2. In
adorning it with grace, ibid. The Spirit is cleansed by eight things, 16 Three
things which adorn the mind in Sanctification: 1. A heavenly light: 2. A
humble mind: 3. A pure imagination, ibid. The nature, subject, form, cause,
and end of our Sanctification, 162, 163, 164. etc. Two things in our
Sanctification: 1. Healing: 2. Cleansing, 164 Scandal. It is defined, 302
Christ a Scandal to the wicked many ways, 304 Wherein we are not to regard
the offense of wicked men, 305 In what things we may be guilty in giving
Scandal to wicked men, 306 Rules for the preventing of a Scandal, ibid. etc.
Rules for it in matter of Ceremonies, 436 Scripture. Proofs of doctrine are to
be fetched from Scripture, 124 The Scripture why so called, 272 Wherein it
exceeds all other writings, ibid. Servants, Service. How we are to serve God,
473 Who are rejected from the number of Gods Servants, 474 It is an excellent
freedom to be a Servant of God, 475 Their prerogatives, ibid. Servants are of
diverse sorts, 486 For what cause Servitude came in, ibid. How a godly Servant
may comfort himself in his estate, 488 They must be subject three ways, 490
Helps in their subjection, ibid. They are to show their fear of God in their
callings, 492 Their fear toward their Masters showed diverse ways, 493 Sheep.
Signs of a lost Sheep, 557 Hopes of returning, 558 Motives to return, 559 The
time when, the number, and means, 560 The manner and signs of returning, 561
The lets, 562 Shepherd. What attributes are given to Christ as a Shepherd, 563,
564 He is the one, true, great, and good Shepherd, 564 The happiness of such
as live under this Shepherd appears in ten things, 565 Show. Seven ways
whereby we may offend by outward Shows, 333 Motives to the Show of virtue, 334
Sickness, Vide Healing. How it comes into the soul, 548 The Sickness of the
soul grievous many ways, 549 Why many feel not the Sickness of the soul,
ibid. Silence. To put to Silence is diversely accepted, 455 Sin. Six ways by
which one man's Sin is derived on another, 141 How many ways Sin hinders the
growth of the word, 200 A man may be said to make Sin many ways, 522, 523 How
Christ had no Sin. 524 Inwhat respect Christ bare our Sins, 531 His sufferings
fitted to our Sins, 532 Men are said to be alive in Sin many ways, 535 Their
misery great that so do, ibid. Sinner. To be a worker of Iniquity what, and
three ways manifested, 397 Sion. The Church is like Mount Sion in many
respects, 276 How the Citizens of this City may be known, 277 Their special
privileges, 279 Sober, Sobriety. A fixefold Sobriety, 104 Sojourners, Vide
Saints, and Strangers, 4, 5, 132 Soul. What it is, 76 Soul taken many ways,
367 Its description, ibid. Seven things considerable in it, ibid. etc. It is a
substance, but not bodily, 368 It is immortal, 369 Its original, 371 Anima
non est ex traduce. 372 God creates the Soul, 373, 374 Objections against it
answered, 374, 375 Of the union of the Soul with the body, 376 Showed by many
similies, 377 By what band the Soul is bound to the body, ibid. The faculties
of the Soul, 378 Its five senses, 379 The inward senses three, 380 The Soul
gives to the body a threefold motion, 311 The faculty of reason in the Soul,
and wherein it excells, 382 The end of its creation, 383 Four kinds of war
against the Soul, 384 The Flesh wars against the Soul five ways, ibid. How
the Soul comes to be diseased, 548 The sickness of the Soul grievous many
ways, 149 Many feel it not, ibid. The Soul synechdochically signifies the
whole man, 17^ Speaking, Vide Evill-speaking, and Report Spirit. What need our
Spirit^ have to be sanctified, ^5 In what its sanctification consists, ibid.
Eight things belong thereto, 16 Why the Spirit is called the Holy Ghost, 93 Why
the Holy Spirit, ibid. Sprinkling. The meaning of that ceremony of Sprinkling
Christ's blood, 22 A fourefold legal Sprinkling, 22, 23, etc. The manifold
passages of Sprinkling the Passover opened, 25, 26 Statutes. God has four
Statute books, 149 Four praises of those Statutes, ibid. Stone. How Christ is
said to be, first, a Stone: secondly, a living Stone, 249, 250 This Stone
disallowed, how, and by whom, 251, 252 Wicked men compared to Stones in many
respects, 258 So the godly also, ibid. Reasons why we ought to be lively
Stones, 259 That Christ is laid as a foundation Stone, imports many things, 276
A corner Stone, 282 Elect and precious, ibid. Strangers. Who: and why man is a
Stranger, even in five respects, 3, 4 The Elect are Strangers, 4 And in
fourteen things they should be like Strangers, 4, 5 The word Stranger
literally and mystically taken, 132 Pretty allusions from Isreal's being in
Egypt, 132, etc. We should carry our selves as Strangers, 364 Submission. The
Submission which belongs to Princes and Magistrates has six things in it, 425
Objections against this Submission answered, 427 Suffer. The marks of such as
truly suffer with Christ, 315 Diverse ways of Suffering, 514 Christ Suffered
for us in diverse respects, 517, 518 His Sufferings were for our examples, 519
Ten things to be followed by the examples of Christ's Sufferings, 521 Christ's
Sufferings (...), 532 He suffered in his body and soul, 533 Why he suffered on
a tree, 534
T
TAbernacle. Christ has a fivefold Tabernacle, 261 A godly man like a
Tabernacle in many respects, 262 Excellent uses hereof, 263 Taste. What will
bring us unto a good Taste of Gods goodness, 239, 240 Our true Taste is seen
both by the causes and effects. 241 Wherein the Taste of the godly and wicked
differ, 242 How far the Taste of the wicked may go, 243 The uses of it, 243,
244 We can have but a Taste of Gods sweetness in this life, 244 The uses of
it, ibid. The true causes of the want of Taste to the Word, 245 When we have
tasted of it we must not lose our Appetite, 246 Temptation. Four sorts of it,
57 Satan tempts five ways, 58 Thirteen degrees of it, ibid. etc. How Satan's
Temptations differ from our own concupiscence, 59, 60 Comforts against
Temptation, 60 Twelve rules in Temptation, 61 God tempts man six ways, 62
Seven ways in affliction, 62, 63 Testimony. The Scripture is our sure
Testimony, and thence how our Testaments are to be fetched, 124, 125 Time,
Times. Four sorts of men have enquired about Times: 1. The curious: 2. The
weak: 3. The superstitious: 4. The wise, 83 Tradition. The word is taken five
ways, 89, 90 How many ways children are infected by the Tradition of their
fathers, 142 Why those Traditions should be so infectious, ibid. etc. Trust.
Five things pertaining to a perfect Trust, 105 Nine ways to show our Trust,
108 Truth. What it is, 175 What it is to obey the Truth, and how, 176
V
Vainglory. Wherein it is seen, 512 Verily. The word often used in Scripture,
and that for three special causes, 150, 151 How many ways we show forth the
Verilies of Christ, 332, 333 Why the Verilies that are in us are called Christ's
Verilies, 334 Virtue. How the word is taken in the Original, 327 Nine Virtues
in Christ which we should show forth, 329 Virtue and Grace are a Christians
best riches, 618 Vessel. The word Vessel diversely taken, 642 Visit,
Visitation. Men are said to visit diversely, 412 So God also, ibid. etc. First,
in judgment, 413 Secondly, in mercy, 414 Signs of such as he visits in mercy,
415 What glorious things the day of Visitation brings forth, 419 Uncleanness.
Two ways contracted, 25 Unity. Of Unity in mind or judgment, 674, 675
Helps thereto, 676 Aggravations against discord in opinion, 677 Many ill
causes of the contrary, ibid. etc. In what cases we may not be of one mind with
the Church of Rome, 678
W
War, Warfare, Vide Fight. The Christian condition is military, 42 He must
keep a fivefold garrison, 43 Four kinds of War against the soul, 384 The
flesh wars against the soul five ways, ibid. Why God does suffer this Ware,
385 Our armor in this War what, 386 How we may get victory in this War,
387 Weak. Privileges of Weak Christians, 229 Encouragement for Weak
Christians, 237 Well-doing. Well-doing is the best way to stop the (...) of
wicked man, ^65 Excellent uses of it, ibid. How we are said to do well, 639,
631 Reasons why we ought always to be Well-doing, 631 Whisperers, Vide
Bac^biters. 216, 217 Wicked, Wickedness. What Wicked men in particular are not
under mercy, 354 God does often suffer his children to live among Wicked men,
391 In what case we may converse with wickedmen, 392 Wife. Sixteen motives for
Husbands and Wives to live together quietly in marriage, 576 Five special
causes of disorder between Husband and Wife, 577 Why the Apostle is so large
in setting down the Wives duty, 579 Eight reasons of the Wives subjection, 581
In what, 582 How, and in what cases not, ibid. Particular sins of the Wife in
case of subjection, 583 What means a Wife must use to win her Husband, 595,
596 Chastity in marriage is specially charged on the Wife, 596 How chaste wife
may be discerned, 597 Wherein Wives should show their fear to their Husbands,
601, 602 What is a Wives best ornament, 627 Obedience and reverence are a Wives
ornaments, 628 Will. The Will of God is, first, Personal: secondly,
Essential. First, Legal: secondly, Evangelicall, 451 Gods Word is his Will in
two respects, 452 The Will is the rule of our actions, 452 Whether a Christian
can exactly do Gods Will, 453 Win. Diverse kinds of Winning, 590 What a
Minister must do to win souls, 591 To be won what it (...), ibid. Why all are
not won at once, 592 By what means we may win wicked men in our conversation,
594 Wise Wisdom. Why many Wise men are rather confounders than founders in
grace and goodness, 296 How the ignorant may herein notwithstanding be
supported, 297 Five waye's we should show forth the Wisdom of Christ, 329 What
this Wisdom must not have in is, ibid. Woman. In what things a Woman is more
frail than man, 643 Word. How powerful, 55 Vide Scripture. How many ways sin
hinders the growth of the Word, 200 How to be desired, 221 How our affections
to it may be discerned, 222 Other signs of it, ibid. etc. Impediments thereof
both external and internal, 223, 224 Means to get desire to it, 225 How to
preserve our desires to it, 226 Four motives of getting it, 227 How far
wicked men may desire the Word, 230 The sweetness of the Word, 240 Rules for
applying the Word aright, 288 When, and how a man is said to be offended at the
Word, 310 The Word must be the warrant for all our actions, 422 Its praise, 189
The only outward means to beget the seed of grace in us. 190 Eight things
needful in us to hear the Word of God as the Word of God, ibid. How the Word
is said to live, 191 Six ways to show the life of the Word in our
conversation, ibid. etc. Gods Word should be our maine care, 199 The power of
the Word Preached, 200 Works. How men shall be judged according to their
Works, 129, 130 How infants, 130 How poor men, 131 Manifold distinctions of
Gods works, 148 How wonderful Gods Works are, 274 The uses of it, 275 To be a
Worker of iniquity signifies three things, 397 Wherein Works are good, 398
Rules to be observed in doing good Works, 399, 400 The diverse kinds of good
Works, 400, 401 How any man that is not absolutely good can be said to do good
Works, 401, 402 What Works are good for, 402 How a man may lose his Works,
403 What Works may and ought to be showed, 404 We should by good works
silence the wicked, 454 World. Contempt of the World showed in four things,
331 Worship. Actions about Gods Worship of two sorts, 432, 433 Many defects in
Gods Worship, 548 Wrongs. Reasons against righting Wrongs by our own private
revenge, 498 We may not (in some cases) resist but endure Wrongs, ibid. To
suffer Wrongs is profitable, ibid.
Places of Scripture herein expounded occasionally.
GEnesis 10. ver. 9. p. 428 Exodus 26. ver. 8. p. 98 Leviticus. 14. a ver. 4.
ad 32. p. 165, ad 173. Cap. 16. ver. 12, 13, 17, p. 26 Numbers 19. a ver. 1, 2.
ad 7. p. 23. Psalm 19. ver. 10. p. 240 Psalm 119. ver. 103. ibid. Psalm 145.
ver. 8, 9. p. 32 Proverbs 15. ver. 30. p. 447, 448 Proverbs 22. ver. 1. p. 447
Esaias 53. ver. 7. ibid. Jeremiah 11. ver. 19. ibid. Matthew 16. ver. 18. p. 250
John 1. ver. 29. 36. 147 Acts 5. ver. 10, 28, 29. p. 435 Acts 17. ver. 30. p.
127 Romans 2. ver. 10. p. 449 Romans 12. ver. 3. p. 104 2 Cor. 2. ver. 14, 15.
p. 241 Ephesians 4. ver. 17, 18. p. 458 1 Thessalonians. 5. ver. 15. p. 686 Hebrews 4.
ver. 12. p. 55 Hebrews 12. ver. 9. p.374 2 Epist. Johan. ver. 8. p. 593
FINIS.

