A SERMON PREACHED in the Cathedral Church in Norwich, the xxi. day of
December, 1589. by W. Burton, Minister of the word of God there. And published
for the satisfying of some which took offense thereat.

Job. 27. 5. God forbid that I should justify them until I die, I will never
take away ^yne innocence from my self. To the Reader.
BEcause we are in all holy duty to give no offense, to lew, Grecian, 1. Cor.
10. 23
nor to the church of God, and this Sermon has been taken so unkindly, as that
the author thereof is for it accounted an enemy to Caesar, is turned out of
living, interdicted of his ministry for a sabbath of years, and by a public
act, disabled from all kind of scholasticall function throughout the whole
land: the deliberation of Job seemed good in this behalf. Oh that I had some to
hear me: but behold, Job 31. 35.
my sign that the almighty will witness for me, though my adversary should
write a book against me, 36. Would not I take it upon my shoulder, and bind
it as a crown unto me? 37. I will tell him the number of my goinges, and go
unto him as to a prince. And therefore has it been publ^shed to s^tisfie both
the church of God, to whose censure, no doubt, he submits himself, sitting
as a prophets sonn^ at the feet of the Prophets, 1: Cor: 3. 2 14^
to be judged by the spirit that speaks in the prophets, and also to preserve
his innocence entire and inu^olable, that the mouths of others might be
stopped for God forbid that he or we should take away a man's innocence from
himself. Job 27. 5
Therefore is his book set upon his shoulder, and lifted up ^s a standard on
high, that they which hear, and read, may testify unto him: lo, his own
words are his witness, he has ge^ uen a bill against himself, he has told
his ad^ersaries all his goinges, Job 29. 23. 24.
his words ar^ now ^ritten, and written in a book to the view of al, they are
graven with an iron pen, as it were wrought in lead or stone, to remain for
ever. If all this will not serve t^ stop up the open sepulchers of men's
throats that are still wide open, and as common Innes ready to receive all
surmises that come: then his resolute consolation withal in the like case is
this. Behold, ^. Cor. 6. 3
we endeavored to give no ocasio^ of offense in any thing, that our ministry
should not be ropr^ued, purposing to approve our selves as the ministers of
God, in much patience, 4 in afflictions, in necessi^ies, in distres, 5 in
stripes, in prisons, in tumultes, in labors, 6 by ^a chings, by fastings by
knoledge, by purity, by long suff^ring, by kindness, by the holy Ghost, by love
unfeigned, 7 by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness on the right hand and on the left, 8. by honor and dishonor, by
evil report and good report, as decei^ers and yet true, 9. as unknown and
yet known, as dying and behold we live, as chastned and yet not killed, as
sorrowing and yet always rejoicing, as pore and yet making many rich, as
having nothing and yet possessing all things. Leaving the aduers^ries to the
merc^e of God which we beartely wish them, as we look our selves to be
forgeuen of God in anything, and putting them in mind of that heavy doom, that
they may fear before him, Whereof Esaias speake^h saying: The cruel man shall
cease, Esaias 29: 2^
and the scornful shall be consumed, and all that hasted to iniquity shall be cut
off* 21 Which made a man to sin in the word, and took him in a snare, which
reproved them in the gate, and made the just to fall without cause. Craving of
the rest that they will not cease to strive in all manner of supplication till
they overcome, that though me^ thrust out laborers out of his harvest, keeping
in the loytering nonresident and idol shepherd, yet he will thrust in seven
ways pastors according to his own heart, (...) 3. 15
which may have the sweet milk of knowledge and understanding in their own
breasts, and may feed his people therewithal, that not one of his may perish
for want of gathering amongst us. As for the sermon it self, he protests
(as in the sight of God) that it is faithfully translated from the pulpit to
the pen, saving that some points he has now more enlarged then he could
then for want of time, but as for those things whereof he was accused, and
which were taken so gree^ously, they be set down even as they were uttered, so
nigh as he could, word for word, without adding or detracting, without
changing or altering, persuading himself, that there is nothing to be gotten
by licking him self whole, as it is thought some would have done: and
therefore leaving them to God which would make the world believe that the
hares ears be horns, calling good evil, and evil good, groping for the light
at noone day: he also commits himself and his cause, this Sermon and the
event thereof, unto the God of heaven and earth, that judges all hearts, and
will judge all people in equity and truth. Philip. 1. ^
The same God make our love to abound yet more and more in all knowledge and
judgment, that we may discern things that differ, and that we may ^e sincere
and without offense, until the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

A SERMON.
Jeremy 3. verse 14. O ye disobedient children, turn again says the Lord:
For I am your Lord.
THESE words be part of an exhortation be gun in the 12 ve. of this chapter,
which was made to the children of Israel, being captives in Assiria in the
year of Hoshea king of the ten tribes, as appears in the second of the
kings, the 17. chapter, the 6 verse. And it did grow upon a complaint against
Judah because that Judah did not profit by the judgments of God upon Israel:
which being ended, God here comma^deth him to exhort the 10. tribes in
captivity to profit better by those afflictions which were upon them, and to
return to God by true and timely repentance. Which if they did, then God does
also promise (for his part) to forget all their sins past, and to place them
in their former estate again. In this exhortation we are to consider of two
circumstances. The first is of the persons: the second is of the matter
subject. The persons be two fold. First, exhorted: Secondly exhorting. The
persons exhorted are the captive Jews, described in the two first words: the
first is, disobedient, the second is, children. The persons exhorting, are two
fold. The Lord by Jeremy: and Jeremy in the name of the Lord, and that
appears in these words: says the Lord. The matter subject, is two fold.
First, what they are exhorted unto, in these words: turn again. Secondly, a
reason why, in these words: for I am your Lord.

In the names given to the persons exhorted, appear first, the wisdom of
God. Secondly his mercy. His wisdom appears in ripping up of their sins
before he exhorts them to repentance. He says not simply, O my children,
turn again: least they should plead, not guilty, and take an action of the
case against Jeremy for impeaching their credit. But he says, O ye disobedient
children, that so he might convince persons, with whom he has to deal, and
according to the quality and quantity of the sin against which he deals:
examples hereof we have not a few in the scriptures.

Christ will not break the bruised reed, Matt. 12. 20.
nor quench the smoking flax, Psalm. 2. 9.
but the rebels will he batter in pieces like a potters vessel. Moses was the
mekest man upon the earth, Number. 12. 3.
yet none more angry with Aaron then he, Deur 32. 6.
neither more severe against Idolaters then he. Paul will persuade Foelix to
become a christian, Acts. 2. 6 28. 29.
and will convey himself into the bowels of the Galathians, Gal. 4. 19.
to win them unto Christ, Gal. 2. 11. 14.
but he means to take up Peter for halting, Acts 13. 10.
and to pronounce Elimas the very child of the devil.

As this doctrine was always profitable, so never more needful then in these
our times: when there be quot homines tot opiniones. How many me^, so many
minds. Some would have the preacher to speak always alike, and that of
nothing but of mercy and salvation by Christ, to speak placentia, and to
prophecy of new wine and strong drink, but in no case to avvaken them out of
their dead sleep of sin and transgression. Some would have the preacher never
to alter his tune, but always to be thundering out the judgments of God, and
to minister nothing but bitter purgations, as though all men were sick at
once, of one disease and of one cause. Some again, can abide neither piping nor
mourning, but will take exceptions against the charmer, charm he never so
wisely. If the minister reprove their sins, they call him a busy controller:
If he shall apply the scripture to his conscience, then who made him a judge:
If the preacher shall tell them of Gods judgments, then he speaks, as though
he would fraie his audience: If he stands never so little above his hour,
then he does not edify but tedifie: If he entreats them friendly and
privately, then they say he is glad to currie favor, and they will ask him
for his commission: If he be sparing in his speech, then he is afraid to
displease: If he speak learnedly, then he is proud: If plainly, the^ he is no
scholar: If often, then they are glutted: But if he will sooth them up in their
sins with an omne been, or a nihil dicit, he is the best preacher that ever
they heard.

Thirdly, the prophet tells them of their disobedience, that so he might make
them more fit to return unto God: wherein we learn this lesson, that in all
our reprehensions and admonitions, we must seek the good of our brother, and
the glory of God: and therefore sharp sentences in the scripture are very
profitable, not to drive men from God, but from their sins. Mat. 3. ^
If John Baptist call the scribes and pharisees a generation of vipers, it is
not to make them desperate but fruitful in the works of repentance. And
truly beloved, then is the^ c^hope of doing good by sharp censures, when men
may see that we do not censure them of malice, or to make them odious, or to
get our solues a name, or for some other sinister respect, but of conscience
and of love, seeking thereby the good amendment of our brother, and that we
are no whit glad for their faults, but rather grieved at their falls. And if
this rule were observed among those, to whom the censures of the church be
committed, I do not doubt but that more good should be done, then now is done.
But when men shall perceive that all their citations, admonitions, suspensions,
excommunications, and other censures whatsoever do not proceed from a hatred
of sin, nor a conscience and care to amend their brethren, but either of a
stomach to revenge their own quarrels, or else from a covetous affection, to
mayntaine their own gains: alas, who will greatly care for them? And when
al men shall perceive that they are no whit grieved at the sins of men, but
the more presentmentes, the more their gains, and the gladder to restore him
again. And good reason: for if we be bound by the law of God to help a beast
under his burbe^, much more our brother. But alas this is a mere stranger
among us. Homo homin^ non Deus, sed lupus. man is a wolf to man. If a man's
foot has slipped never so little, especially, if he be a good man (as who can
say his heart is clean) profane men are ready to exclaim of him, but never
labor to reclaim him, and if a brother be once down in any sin, every one
will be ready to throvve his verdit and cast a stone at him, never remembering
what our savior Christ said when he vvrote upon the ground, John 8. 7.
but forgetting themselves to be laden both with motes and beams, they do
as dogs do, which when one poor curre is in disgrace, all the rest run
after him with open mouth and full cry. Alas if God should thus hotly pursue
our sins as we do persecute our brethren, Psalm. 130. 3.
and if God should be so inexorable as we, Psalm. 143. 2.
alas I say what should become of us?

Fourthly, this gracious example of our heavenly father, dealing so mer^
cifully with his disobedient childre^condemneth the uncharitable practices of
three sorts of men. First, of the Papists, Whose fingers are dyed of a
sanguine color in the blood of those men, which have but transgressed the
dyrtie decre^s of an Italian Priest and deuilish ordinances of hell itself: and
yet these Gnat-strainers and Camelsvvallowers bewail the want of love among
us. Secondly, it meets with an abuse in our Church-gouernours, who use (for
the most part) to make excommunication ^acken about the country for fees, for
trifles and matters of no moment, asthough that the greatest censure of the
Church, and the greatest judgment next to the general judgment may be
played vvithall and so far abused as thereby to cut off, and cast out members
of the Church to the devil at our pleasure. What servant will care for that
master, which will be fighting for every trifle? And who will not abhor
that surgeon that for every little vvheale or bone ache, will cut of a
member, and yet take money for his painful pains? Our good God does not
cast off his people, no, not for disobedience, but still admonishes them, and
takes them for his children, so long as there is any hope of returning.
Thirdly, of our Brownists, who cast of the whole Church of England for no
apparent Church of God, which is more then they ought to do for two causes:
first, though disobedience be (as it is in deed) as the sin of witchcraft,
and who is not disobedient in many things? yet so long as they cannot challenge
us for apostacy, as we may some of them, and so long as there is any life at
all in her, she is not to be laid out upon the cold ground. But soft a while:
though she has not all her ornaments according to the word of God, yet she
does not refuse them, if she might lawfully come by them, but is ready to
receive them when so ever they shall be offered unto her. In the mean time she
mourns for her wants, and seeks a redress as she may, Ex^ch. 9. 4.
and sueth as she ought, and therefore no doubt is marked on the forhead for
the dear spouse of Jesus Christ, so long as she does hold the foundation in
him. But let it be granted that the church of England were proved as the church
of Rome, a very harlot, and were judged for her contumacie worthy to be put
into the black book of excommunication (which God forbid) yet for them to be
their own caruers and bailiffes, is more then they ought to do, for they be
but private men: and this is certain, 1. Cor. 5. 4.
that no particular congregation, much less a private person may excommunicate
a whole church.

Lastly, in joining these two words together, we learn to censure sin in
all, but to judge and hope charitably of all, to spare sin in none, so to
condemn none, Mat. 7. 1.
for that is Gods office. And on the other side, to hope the best, and to love
thy brother, but so as we wink not at sin in any, Leuit. 19. 17.
for that were indeed to hate our brother. And this are we taught here, while
God calls them disobedient, yet still children: children, but yet
disobedient. Many think that we hate them if we tell them of their sins, and
many take those me^ for their best friends, which do always sooth them up in
their sins, and never reprove them: but both these sorts of men are greatly
deceived. The first must know that the reproof of a friend is better then the
kiss of a flatterer. Pro. 27. 6.
Yea, 1. Sam. 16. 11. 12
if Shimei an enemy shall rail upon Dau^d, though it be Shimei his sin, yet
it may and ought to be David's benefit. The second sort must also understand,
that the sweetest doctrine to the ear is not always the vvholsomest to the
heart: but the bitter pill is better to purge then the sweet perfume. The
wind is boisterous, but it will make a man hold his garment fast about him,
when the gleaming Sun will make him put of al to his shirt. And though the
thunder be terrible to the ear, and the lightning a dazzler of the eye, and
both an astonishment to the heart, yet do they more purify the air then the
calmest day in summer. And are the golden mouthed flatterers always the best
friends? No, no beloved, Latet anguis sub herba, the greenest herb does often
cover the fowlest toade, where the water is stillest, there is it deepest, the
fairest garment does often cover the fi^thiest carkas, when the bait is most
in sight the hook is least suspected, the friendliest kiss in show, is
sometimes but treason in truth. The Be has her honey, so has she a sting,
and the one vvil wou^d more then the other will heal. When Herodes Courtiers
cry, Act. 12. 21. 22.
O vox non hominis, sed dei. O the voice not of a man but of a God, then must
Herod come down with a mischief: when the four hundred false Prophets
shall say to Achab, 1. King. 22. 12. 28.
go and prosper, then must Acha^ look least to thrive, neither shall be
return in peace. And yet behold, unwise men content themselves with the
names of Christians, Protestants, and the children of God, when disobedience to
God has robbed them of the nature of Gods children. Oh unwise indeed, that
care more for the shells then for the kernel, which set more by the badge on
the sleue, then by the wages in the purse, which take more delight in the name
then in the nature of a true Christian man. Malunt baberi quam esse. They had
rather be so accounted, then be so indeed: but beloved, howsoever God in mercy
calls them children, yet is it not because they are disobedient, but in hope
of their amendment, and as he calls them children that he might encourage
them to return, so also does he call them disobedient children, to put them
in mind wherein they degenerated from the nature of children indeed. And so
much for the persons exhorted, in these words O ye disobedient children.

The persons exhorting are, God by Jeremy, and the Prophet in the name of the
Lord. And this is of force to enforce the exhortation: as if he should say, I
do not of my self thus reprove you, for then you might think me too busy,
but the Lord set me a work, whose will I must obey, and therefore you must hear
me with patience. Thus Jeremy pleads his commission, partly for his own
discharge, and partly to make his message of more credit and force unto them.
And thus might Jeremy reason: He that is but a servant, must do his masters
message: I am but a servant, therefore I must do my masters message. Again,
he that does but his masters message, is not therefore to be blamed: I do that
and no more, and therefore I am not to be blamed. Again, whatsoever the Lord
says, that must be believed: but the Lord says you are disobedient, and if
you will obey him he will be your Lord, therefore you must believe it. Again,
whatsoever the Lord by his messengers does command, that must be obeyed: but
the Lord by me does command you to turn again, therefore see that you do
obey as you will answer at your uttermost peril.

Here we have three things to consider of. First, of the authority, Secondly,
of the dignity. Thirdly, of the duty of Gods Ministers.

Their authority is very great, Of their ^A^thority
and their commission is very large. For behold (says the Lord to Jeremy) I
have set thee over Nations and kingdoms, Ier. 11. 10
to pluck up, and to root out, to destroy and throw down, to build and to
plant. But how? Ezechiel shows how. Thou son of man* fear not them, Ezec. 2.
nor their words, although thou remain among scorpions, fear not their
looks, for they are a rebellious house. verse. 7. Therefore thou shall speak
my words unto them. So that it must be done without fear, and by speaking the
word of God without ceasing. The Minister of God therefore has authority by
the word to reprove Princes, 2. Chro. 36. 15.
as the proph^t says, Ie^. 2^. 2.
but not by the sword to remove princes, as the Pope says: He has authority
in Christ his stead to proclaim forgiveness of sins to the penitent
beleuers, Ioh. 20. 23.
as the Evangelist says, but not to absolve them whom he list, as the pope
says: He has authority to reprove things amiss in the Church or
commonwealth by doctrine, as the word says, but not of himself to reform by
practice, as the Brownist says. For d^position of Princes belongs to God
only: 1. Sam. 15. 28. and 24. 6. 7. 8. 13 Luke 5. 20. 21.
forgeuenes of sins belongs to God only: reformation of Churches and
Commonweales belongs to Princes only: but the reproouing of sin in Prince,
Church or commonwealth, belongs to Ministers also. And this they ^ay do,
this they ought to do, yet with vvisdome and discretion. Nay, blood for blood
if they do less then this, if they do more then this, and if they do not all
this. Why then should Moses be murmured at? why should Micbea be smitten? or
why should Jeremy be imprisoned for executing their commission? Have they not
authority to speak? Nay we say to you (if you be ang^y with us for this) as
your servants will say for themselves: We are but servants, it is nothing to
us, agree with our master and we shall be content. We may speak what his word
speaks, for we have authority, and we must speak so much, for therefore
are we put in authority. And so much briefly for the authority of Gods
ministers.

As their authority is great, so is their calling excellent and honorable in
respect of their office, Of their dignity.
and of his person, whose mouth they are. We can think as basely of our selves,
as any can either think or speak of us: but if it be an excellent thing to be
a kings Ambassador, how much more then to be Ambassador to the king of heaven
and earth? Therefore are they called in Scripture by names of great account,
Ap^c. 12. 1.
as Angels, Stars, Fathers, 2. Kin. 2. 12.
Horsemen and Chariots of Israel. 1. S^m 4. 15. 18
Of these some be old, 1. Tim. 4. 12
as Hely was* some be young, as Timothy: and yet all, the messengers of the
Lord Jesus. Some be learned, as Paul was: some be unlearned, Acts 22. 3
as Peter and John were: Acte^ 4. 13
yet all the messengers of the Lord Jesus. Some have ten talents, some have
but one, Mat. 25. 15
yet all must occupy for their Lords advantage. Some come at the first
hour, Mat. 20. 2
some at the last: yet all sent of God. Some are like James and John, Mark 3.
17
the sons of thunder, some like Barnabas, Acts 4. 36
the son of consolation: yet all the messengers of God. Some have received a
greater measure of gifts, Ephe. 4. 7
some a less: yet all according to the measure of the gift of Christ. And
therefore let us esteem of them as of the ministers of Christ, and the
disposers of the secrets of God. Men they are as we are, 1. Cor. 4. 1
that is our benefit, for if God himself should send forth his voice, we
must yield up our lives. Sinful they are as we are, that is, because they are
men, born of the seed of Adam. Mortal they are as we are, that is, because
they are sinful, for the reward of sin is death: yet still the messengers
of God, 2. Cor. 5, 20
and do beseech us in Christ his stead to be reconc^led unto God. If this
were regarded, then Gods ministers should be more regarded, less despised,
more believed, less disgraced, better provided for, less pinched, and not so
villanously entreated, shamefully slandered, and every way abused of so many as
now they are. But alas, it is not greatly regarded, no not at all of many, and
therefore every churlish Nabal denies them maintenance, 1. Kings 21. 4
every covetous Achab is sick for their livings, every proud minion, and
minsing damsel longs for their heads in a platter, every Judas is ready to
sell them to every one that will give but thirty pence, Mat. 26. 15
or thirty half pence, or three farthings, or just nothing or rather for unjust
nothing, and at the day appointed a kiss shall make delivery. 48
Zidkijah the kings clawback will not stick to take his (...) from their
cheeks: 1 Kings 22. 24
Tertullus the Orator dare^h call them pestilent fellows, and troublers of the
state, Act 8 24. 4. 5
if any man of his courtesy will give him the hearing. Acts 26. 24
Festus in his mad mood will call them mad men, and lay the fault (if there be
any) upon their learning too. Demas the worldling will give them the sl^p, 3.
Tim 4. 10 1.
only the poor widow of Sarepta is found relieuing poor banished Elias. Kin
17: 9: 15
Some (thanks be to God) but not many in respect of the multitude, have the
ambassadors of the Lord Jesus in that good accounte which they should,
especially for their works sake. For, do not many grudge our meat, number our
morsels, and reckon our livings to every farthing? Christ commanded his to
car^ie neither bread nor money, Mark 6. 8
nor to put on two coats. He is a rich man now a days that has 2. coats to
put on, except some that have two or three benefices, for many in the world
are turned out of all, and yet God be thanked he does deliver us. We may say
as Paul said, we are afflicted on every side. in poverty, 2. Cor: 4. 8
yet not overcome of poverty: as dead, yet alive: as sorrowing, yet rejoicing:
as possessing nothing, yet having all things. But what is this to the
ungrateful company of worldlinges? In the time of popery one congregation did
maintain many mas-priests: now many congregations will hardly maintain one
good preacher of the gospel. And no maruail, for then there were too many
foolish bees that brought al their honey into the popes hiue: and now we have
too many d^ones that suck all the honey out of the churches hiue: nay now we
have too many horseleeches, Pro: 30: 1^
which alvvayes cry, give, give, but never say ho, nor have. One cries give
me the College lands: another cries, and me the lands of cathedral
churches: another cries, give me the impropriations: the fourth must have
another benefice or two to buy him books withal: one is sick for a deanrie,
and (they say) that some about the court, and I know not where, are sick of
a consumption, and nothing will restore them but a Bishoppricke, or some other
thing that should go to the church, and that they would have as soon for their
minstrels as the ministers maintenance, and some I think will never leave til
they have the devil and all. And wot you what they say? if our most gracious
soueraign were as ready to give and grant, as some are to beg and crave, Mark.
6.
John Baptists head had been in a platter ere this time. But thanks be to God
she is not so ready to give, though she be most liberal, and too bountiful to
some, except they deserved it better, and therefore God make her days as the
days of heaven, Psalm 89. 29.
that Jonas may never want a shadow to sit under after his weary iornie. John
4. 6.
If men take pains, some will reward them with a thistle, the reward of an
ass: others (if they might have their wills) would send away their pastors
in worse case then the basest officers in their kitchen, without either lawful
warning, or due deserved wages. I blame not all, God forbid, for God knows
who are his* Why? say some of these men, can you not live as the Apostles
lived? Why? say I again, let them lay down their goods at the Apostles feet,
Acts 4. 35.
and then let them ask that question. Truly, many do as Ananias did, Acts
5. 2
if they give one groate, they vvil brag of two. Many ask whence comes the
fall of the church? Indeed it is a question to be moved, though the disease
will hardly or never be remo^ed. It is said that seven ill favored lean kine
devoured seven fat kine, and this was Pharaos dream: Genesis 41. 20.
but now seventy times seven il favored lean kine have devoured seven hundred
fat kine: and this is no dream, but a truth. But why are they thus handled?
do they ask their duties? No, they dare not, for the earthen pot dares not
strive against the brazen vessel: and men are now like dru^ken guests, which
having filled their bellies are loath to pay the reckoning. What is the cause?
Any cause will serve the turn in this point. Facile inuenies baculum, quo
canem cedas. When the Pharisees could not abide the doctrine of Christ's
disciples, they found quickly a just defense of their quarrel. Mark 2. 24.
They do that on the sabbath day which is not lavvfull. And wot you what that
was? They pluck the ears of corn. Our Pharisees also have taken up the same
accusation against us. For (say they) we do that on the sabbath day which is
not lawful. And first to begin vvithal, they cry out service at all times,
and therefore (whether the law dispense with him or no if he preach) we have
found sufficient cause to deny him his duty. Again, they say gloria patri at
the end of every Psalm, nor make a leg at the name of Jesus: and is not this a
sufficient cause to deny him to our public ministry: yet this is cause
sufficient to deny their duty. Again they say, we vvil not read service
commonly they leave when we end: and is not this a sufficient cause? Lastly,
Currat lex: let the law be judge, then say they we da^ce in a net. But I
would ask of these our heavy masters but two questions. First, whether I
were sufficiently discharged or no, if I should refuse to administer the
Lords supper, because some Church papist in my parrish will never receive the
communion.

Secondly, what has good Queen Elizabeth done, that she can get nothing of
some of them. I hope it is not because she has banished idolatry, and brought
in the gospel. Some ca^rob Peter to pay Paul, but these men can cunningly rob
both Peter and Paul, and pay neither of both, and all to save stakes. O auri
sacra fames, quid (...)? What vvil not some do for money? Well, we have not
yet found the true cause, for we have been all this while among the ears of
corn, and therefore the writ must be returned with non est inuenta: but we will
have another ad melius inquirendum, to make a nevve search. What, are we
sharp in reproouing their sin? No, we dare not say to Herod, thou must not
have thy brothers Mark^ 6.
wife. We dare not say that a right papist is a rank traitor, least we
should be told that when we are in our privileged places we prate what
we list, as once I was told. We dare not say that the magistrates are breakers
of the Sabbath day, if they suffer it to be broken, least we should be called
coram vobis for it, and hear of it again 2. years after in the pulpit. And to
meddle with any abuses or corruptions of the church is auribus canem vellere,
to pull a dog by the ears, and to put our hands into a hornets nest. A learned
father (who belike had experience of these things) said once (if not often)
Tutior est d^scentis, quam docentis ratio. It is better to learn then to
teach. But we may say, Tutior est peccantis, quam arguentis conditio. It is
more dangerous now adays to reprove sin, the^ to commit sin. And if ever
it were true, it is now too true, that Lepores concionantur leonibus. Let men's
words be never so well ordered, never so comely, so gracious, they must
preach with fear and trembling, as poor hares before the stout lions. For if
we please 1. Kin. 22. 8.
them not they will say as Achab said, he does not prophecy good unto me,
but evil, and therefore my soul does hate him. But will you know the true
cause indeed? Well, now we have found Exodus 5. 8.
it* we read that Pharao cried against the Israelites as appears, Give them
no more straw, but let them gather it them selves, and get it where they can,
and yet we will have our whole tale of brick, for they be idle, and cry, Let
us go 3^dayes journey into the wilderness, and offer sacrifice unto God. So play
our Pharisees with us, for they cry, Let our pastors and preachers have no
more liberty given the^, let them gather their straw themselves: that is, let
them preach their belly full, and keep all our exercises (for they account of
preaching as of straw.) But in the mean time we vvil have our whole tale of
brick, that is, all our old customs and ceremonies kept, whatsoever they be:
and albeit we have no law for the^, we vvil make them do as we vvil have
them to do, or else they shall know the price of it. And why so? because (as
they say) we be idle, and cry, let us go offer sacrifice: that is (say they)
they never leave calling to church and to the sermon every morning, and there
we must be reproved for every fault, and this diet is not for our humors, and
they had as good be idle as thus occupied, yet seeing as they will needs be so
holy, let them: but we vvil set them to their task, and see whether that will
weary them or no. And as Pharao urged those things at Isreal's hands, which he
would not touch with his least finger: so these our Pharaos lay heavier
burdens upon our backs, then either prince, or law, or conscience vvil
vvarrant. But when they urge that which law it self does justly require, it
is not of any conscience (for then vvoulde they come themselves and see it
done) but of malice, and therefore very seldom or never shall we see some of
them at sermons. But what say they? Let the minister go to church and pray
for us, we vvil be at home and work for him: or else let the minister go to
church and pray, and we will go to the alehouse and play. Again, because the
Egyptian task was not done, Israel and their officers were beaten. Even so,
because their task (I mean not the task of the law, for that have we borne,
and most willingly vvil we undergo it) but the vnstinted task of men's
affections, whose behavior sauoureth of the discipline of an alehouse, because
their task is not done, we are complained of by them, their accusations take
place against us, we are condemned for disobedient persons, and away we must
pack. Thus are we beaten with the slanderous tongues of ungodly me^ with the
reproach of the world, with the disgr^ce of our ministry, with the^ disdame
of our persons, with the bitings of pouer^ie, and if some may prevail, with
the loss of liberty, living, and life it self. For they cry crucifige
already, and so long as these people find such favor at some men's hands as
they do, it will not be better, but rather worse with Gods servants, and
therefore God (if it be his vvil) turn these Pharaos he arts. But at the last
Israel cried to the Lord, and the Lord heard them, Pharao was plagued, and
Israel was released. And will not God now be reuerged of his servants
vvrong and oppression? Yes no doubt: For if princes take that contempt to the^
selves which is offered to their messengers, much more vvil God. If Hanun and
Ammon stink in the nostrels of Israel, for their villainy offered to David's
messengers, 1 Chro. 19. (...)*
much more shall these before God. If Judas took his peniwoorthes of himself
for betraying of innocent blood, much more shall God of these. And if God made
Jerusalem, yea even famous 2. Chro. 36.
Jerusalem a heap of stones, and the shame of the world, for mo^king,
despising, and misusing of Gods messengers, How shall God suffer these
oppressing Pharaos, whether they ^e Papists, A the^sts, or Libertines, or
neuters, or Machiuels, of any religion, or of no religion, whether in city or
in country, whether in village or in cottage, or whersoeuer they be: how shall
God I say suffer the^ at last (though he suffer them long) to escape his heavy
Ezec. 33. 31.
wrath? And know you of Norwich, whose hearts run after covetousness, who
sit and hear the preacher for a fashion, which go home and jest at him
your bellyes full, which censure him at your pleasure, which eat him at your
feasts, which buy and sell him in your shops, which recreate your selves with
their faults, which make the^ your marks to shoot at, and your fields to walk
in, (I speak of no more but these, for I am sure that many, and all that fear
God truly, do take another course) let these men (I say) know now if they
will, that one day will come when they shall know that prophets have been
amongst them, and that their discourteous dealing has been offered to the
ambassadors of the most high, which men might well have seen by the last
plague that was amongst us: which God would also teach us by the st^uings of
Jacob and Esan, in their mothers be^^ie, I mean by the stirs of Cen. 25. 22.
the church. For though it be granted of many, both godly, wise and learned,
that in man's judgment it was not the best course that might be taken, for any
man in vvriting for reformation, to publishe the overthrow of the mighty in
Gath, 2. Sam. 1. 19. 20
or to tell the faults of Bishops in the streets of Askalon, that the
daughters of the Philistines might rejoice, and the uncircumcised might triumph:
yet can not this be denied, that the Lord, whose providence is over and in all
things, had and has also a stroke in this. And it is to be feared, that the
same God in his ius^e judgment, has brought these fears and stirs upon
them, because some of the^ (not all, God forbid) have had the poor ministers of
Jesus Christ in so ill account, that the most disgraceing terms have been
thought good enough for them, and some in their houses have taken liberty to
abuse them for their pleasure, and to pray upon them for their profit, and when
they best of all did speed, they should have mountains promised the^, and that
in have, and be paid home with mollhils, and that at leisure. And thus Iere.
20. 1. 3
did God in Ieremies days, when Pashur the priest and governor of the Lords
house, smote Jeremy, and lodged him in the stocks for speaking the truth, the
Lord changed his name from Pashur to Magor-missabib, that is, a terror on every
side. For this is a ruled case in the 2. of James 2. 13
James, the 13. verse, there shall be judgment merciles to him that s^hweth no
mercy: therefore I would vvish that this contempt and neglect of Gods
ministers might be taken away from amongst us, and that they might be more
regarded: for though (in respect of humain infirmities) they are but as other
me^, and though 2. Cor: 12* 7
the messenger of Satan be sent to buffet them, and though there be a law in
Romans 7
their members rebelling against the law of their minds, whereby many times
they are led (against their wills) captives to the law of sin, Oh wretched
men 25
that we are^vet in respect of their office which is honorable and excellent
in respect of him whose message they bring, and in respect^ of the message it
self which they bring, they are to be regarded. And God give us al grace so
to behave our selves both in life and doctrine, as we may be regarded, and not
justly be despised, for we are the ministers and messengers of the Lord of
hosts, who with Jeremy may and ought to say unto you when occasion serves,
O ye disobedient children turn again, for thus says the Lord. And so much for
the dignity of Gods ministers.

Their authority is great, their office is honorable, their dignity is great,
their Of their duty.
duty therefore must needs be very great, but which is the greatest I know
not. They are messengers of Gods counsels, therefore they must be trusty:
Acts 20. 27.
they are fathers of Gods children, 1. Cor. 4. 15
therefore they must be loving and tender: they are builders of Gods church, 1.
Cor: 3: 10
stewardes of Gods household, 1: Cor: 4: 2
shepheardes of Gods flock: and therefore they must be skillful, faithful,
and vvatchfull: they are captains over Gods church, Cant: 6
which is terrible as an army with banners, therefore they must not be
fearful and ^aintharted: Mat. 5. 14. 5
they are the lights of the world, and the salt of the earth, and therefore
they must neither stad under a bushel, nor be unsavory: they are nurces of
Gods tender ones, therefore their breasts should never be without milk: they are
to deal with old and young, with learned and unlearned, with strong and weak,
with wilful and ignorant, and with all sorts: therefore he must be wise: in
the time of peace, in the time of war, in time of prosperity, and in time of
adversity, in season, and out of season, and at all times, therefore they must
be no time-^eruers: against principalities and powers, Ephe. 6 12
against holds mighty and strong, 2. Cor. 10, 5.
against flesh and blood, the world and worldlinges, the devil and hell,
presumption and despair, and against al sin in others and in themselves:
before princes and subjects, before angels and men, 1. Tim. 6: 121.
before heaven and earth, and before God himself: and there fore their garners
must be stored with all kind of grain, Mat. 13. 5^
both old and nevve, their armories must be furnished with all kind of
weapons and armor, Mal: 2: 7
both blunt and sharp^, their lips must always preserve knowledge, their prayer
must be continually, Phil: 1: 9
that their love may abou^d with all knowledge and i^dgeme^t, with vvisdome and
discretion, their knees should be hardened before the Lord in prayer, Exodus: 17:
(...)
their hands should be holden up and their arms underset when they fai^t in
prayer, their hearts should ache when they are weary in prayer, their eyes
should dazel with wanting for the hope of their prayer, ^ eremy 9: 1
their checkes should be watered with tears when they pray for the sins
of the people, and when they can pray and preach no longer, let them chatter
like a swallow, mourn like a dove, and groan in their spirits: for, Oporte^
Episcopum mori concionantem and (...) ante^^. A good bishop must die preaching,
and praying, and must pray and preach till he die. What should I say^ he is the
minister of God, therefore of God must he learn his duty, and to God he must
perform his duty. He is to speak in the name of God, therefore he must
speak, what, when, to whom, how, and all that God will. If therefore we
speak men's inventions, in painted eloquence to set forth our selves, to some
and not all, John 1. 3.
faintly and coldly, to Tharsis for Niniuie, if we condemn the good, and
commend the bad, encourage the wicked, discourage the godly, if we speak but
once a year, once a quarter, once a month, or when we list, or not at all,
and not in season and out of season, and at all occasions both instantly and
earnestly, we do not the duty of Gods messengers. But if we speak Gods will
without adding or diminishing, in the evidence of the spirit, to the
conscience as well as to the ear, to the courtier and countreyman with courage
and boldness, with vvisdome and discretion, with a zeal of Gods glory, a love
of Gods people, and a desire of their good, to Niniuie, when we are sent to
Niniuie, John 3: 2
and not to Tharsis until we be called, and that continually, constantly and
faithfully: then we do the duty of Gods ministers. If therefore any man vvil
^end for us home, and school us beforehand, either in his secret closet, or
pleasant orchyard, or wide field, or elsewhere, and will teach us either what to
speak, as general doctrine without application: or how to speak, as in fine
terms and filed phrases, to please al, and displease none, as some have done,
and who is not cunning in the ministers office, and in every man's office saving
his own? we are to signify thus much unto him, that we are not ministers of
men's v^brideled affections, but of Gods most holy vvil, and therefore we must
not speak either what they will, or how they lift: but what, when, to whom,
how long, how short, how mildly, how sharply, and al, both for matter and
manner as God vvil. So said Mi^haiah the true Prophet to the Kings Eunuch, 1.
Kings 22. 14
so said Balaam the false prophet N^m: 23: 3
to the king himself, and so say we to every one. And good reason: for if the
Lawyer vvil think scorn to learn of the Divine to plead at the bar, why
should the Lawyer take upon him to teach the Divine how to speak in the
pulpit? And if our servants must not do our business by the direction of other
men, if the stevva^d must not dispose of his masters goods, either sparingly or
liberally at another man's appointment, if the Captain must not fight when the
mean soldier vvil, and if the soldier must not fight with such a vveapon as
his enemy vvil appoint him: why then should Gods mini^ter, which is to plead
Gods matters, which is Gods servant, Gods steward, and to fight the Lords
battles, become a servant and a slave to men's affections? if he should (which
God forbid) hurt he may do much, but good he shall do none* And yet I deny
not but that the minister may receive good counsel of any man: Jeremy ^3: 32
And the Coloss^ans may say to Arist^ppus, Coloff: 4: 17
look to thy ministry. And so much for the authority, dignity, and duty
of Gods ministers, and thus much both for the persons exhorting, and exhorted.

In the second part we are to consider first of that whereunto they are
exhorted, secondly, of the reason why. For the first, it is repentance, and
here is called a turning again: alluding to one that is in a wrong way, and
cannot come into the right way except he turn again: Or else to one in his
right way, but had left something behind him, without which he could not
speed in his journey, and therefore must needs return again. Jeremy 3. 1: 8
But most likely to a wife that was divorced from her husband for adultery,
and her husband calling to mind the old and svveet love that was wont to be
betvveen them, calls her again, and offers still to be her spouse, upon
this condition, that she will become a new woman. At these unstayed stays
were we all by our selves, for by nature we are all gone out of the way,
we are corrupt and become abominable, the ways of peace we have not
known, but then did the Lord call to us and said, Adam, C^ne^is 3: 9
where art thou? turn again into the right way, Christ Jesus the seed of the
woman is the way, the truth, and the life, walk in this way, and he shall
not only break the serpents head, but also conduct thee right unto Chanaan,
the kingdom of heaven.

Again, when we had found that way, we made no more reckoning, but
thought we had all when we had the way: but we were deceived, for we left
behind us the works of faith and repentance. We were going to Christ, not as
the wise men, Man. 2. 11
with our presents, but like the foolish virgins, Matt. 25: 3
without oil in our lamps, but behold, the Lord calls to us, and says,
Turn again, take your provision with you, and let every one that will
walk in this way, depart from evil. 2. Tim: 2 19
We also in our depraved nature went a whoring after our own inventions,
Psalm. 1^6
we were trudging to hell with bag andbaggage, we had plighted our troth to
many husbands, as* to the world, sin and satan, yet all naught, and never a
one vvorth the taking. Yet lo, God of his infinite mercy and goodness sends
his ambassadors after us, his prophets, apostles, and ministers, to call us back
again, and to offer us conditions of peace. Nay, he sent his own son to call
us back again, Man: (...): ^
and he cries, Come unto me, come unto me. Nay, God himself calls unto
us, and he cries, Why will you die, O house of Jacob? why will you die? Eze^.
18. 31
When this would not serve, he falls to ^ntreating of us by his messengers,
2: Cor: 5: 20
that we would be reconciled ynto him, O love without comparison! Thus has our
good God, and most gracious father forbidden the banes of matrimony between
the devil and us, and has offered us a better match then so, even his own
son, the heir of all things, and Rom: 8: 32
king of heaven and earth, and all upon Heb: 1: 2
this condition, that we will turn again, and forsake the devil and al his
works, and embrace Christ Jesus with all his merits, Luke 1: 74. 7^
and serve him in righteousness and true holiness before him all the days of
our life, blessed be his name for it. Well, by this time we see what true
repentance is, namely, Pro: 24: 16
a continual turning vno God, by forsaking our old ways of iniquity and
transgression, and walking in the new ways of a holy life, by casting of the
works of darkness, Romans 13: 12
and putting on the armor of light. This turning again is a hatred of all
sin past, with a sorrow for the same, with a preventing of sin to come,
Psalm. ^19. 11
and that with a resolution not to embrace it when it is offered again. Rom:
6: 12
This turning again is the death of sin, and the life of righteousness, a
mortifying of the old Adam, and a quickening of the new. It is a conquest of
our own vvilles and affections, Acts 10 33
and a subiecting of them to the only will: of God. The time of this turning
again must be continual, even while it is said to day. Psalm 95^ 7
This turning again must be by one certain way, John 14 6
and that is Jesus Christ. And for the better finding of our way, and keeping
of it being found, Psalm 1^ 9. 5
we must needs have a lantho^e to our feet, and a light to our paths, and
that must be the word of God, read, preached, heard, Joshua 1 8
believed and meditated upon. And because the paths of our life be slipperie,
and we but feeble and faint, we must have a staff to walk by, and that is,
a lively 2 Cor 1 24
faith. Our guide must be the spirit of God, which is a spirit of vvisdome,
Esaiu 2
knowledge, understanding, courage and truth. And because the way wherein
we must walk is holy ground (for it is Jesus Christ the righteous) we must
therefore put off our old shoes of our beastly affections, which carried us
every way before, Ephe. 6. 15
and put upon our feet the shoes of preparation to the gospel. In this our
turning again we shall meet with many discouragements, we must therefore
cover our heads with a helmet of hope: Ephe. 6. 17
and least we should meet with our old enemies, the devil, the world, and
our own flesh, to make us retire back again, Ephe. 6. 13
we must put upon us the whole armor of God, be valiant, and quite our selves
like men, and so march on forward toward our heavenly Chanaan, 1. Cor. 16.
(...)
And if at any time we chance to lose our way, being either benighted, or
vveatherbeaten, or otherwise beguyled, we must go about the city, by the
streets and open places, and enquire of the watchmen, C^nt. 5. 7
the ministers that go about the city, if they did not see him whom our soul
loves: and if they shall show us where he is, Can. 5. 3
we must not say, I have put of my coat, how shall I put it on? but leaving al
such dilatory pleaes, turn again, and meet him with speed and great joy.

If these be the qualities and properties of true repentance, then are many in
the world far from true repentance. The papists Papists
dispense with murder and treason, as, the killing of king John, the prince of
Orange, the king of France, and others can testify. The price of whoredom,
incest, sodometrie, partricide, matricide, fratricide, and of all sin, is set
down in the market of Rome, where Omnia sunt venalia, all is for money, and
the devil is clarke of the market: Far enough therefore are they from true
repentance, neither can they be saved except they turn again. Their foolish
penance which consists of whipping. creeping to the cross, going
barefoote, and such like, God never required, and therefore no true repentance,
except they leave those and turn again. The Turk Turks
is ruled by his alcoran, even darkness it self, and not by the word of God;
even light it self, and therefore (so long) he cannot turn again. The Jews
I^we^
deny Jesus Christ the right way, and therefore are far from this turning
again. The Anabaptist Anabaptist^^
relinquisheth the written word of God, and relieth upon his drowsy dreams,
and night revelations, and therefore shall hardly, or never find the right
way, except he turn again. The Neuter Neuters
is for any way, and therefore shall hardly or never find the right way,
except he turn again. The Atheist says in his heart, there is no God. The
Machiuel with the Atheist Athiests
vvil not know that there is either God or devil, hell or heaven, and in all
their actions they quench the spirit of God, and that one day shall they know to
their cost, except they turn again. The profane worldling worldlinge
with Esau weepeth, not for his sins, but for the loss of some vvorldly
commodity, but this is no true turning again. The presumptuous Presumptuous
person drives of all to the last hour, and therefore is like to be
prevented, if in time he do not turn again. The desperate Desperate
person hates himself for his sin, and because he vva^teth Christ the way,
and faith his staf^e, he lays hands violently upon his own body, and
destroys the good creature of God, and so turns further from God then ever
before. The turning turner that turns with the wethercocke in the wind,
Turncoates
cries, this is the true religion: believe me now good brethren, but he also
must turn once again by true repentance, before he can be saved. The church
papist Churchpapist
turns in show but not in truth, and therefore shall have his portion with
hypocrites, except he turn again. The Libertine says he turns in heart,
Barbarians
but not in act, in words but not in works, but because he brings not forth
the fruits of repentance, he shall be cut down if in time he turns not
again. The Barbarians Barbarians
turned from Scylla to Charabdis, from one extremity to another, Acte^ ^ 28. 4.
6
for one while they called Paul a murderer, another while a God* Our Brownists
Brownistes
also, once accounted highly of Gods ministers, now they call them murderers,
and false prophets, once they thought our church to be the only church, but
now no church, but I hope tha^ some of them will turn again, and all that
belong unto God shall one day turn again, and my hearty desire is that all
might turn again. Some turn from popery to atheism, from one sin to
another, but to God they cannot turn except by true repentance they turn
again. Some turn as dogs do* that is, eitheir to their vomit again, or else
to snatch at them which bring them meat. I would to God I could devise a way
to make usurers Usurers
turn again, but I fear me I shall not, for they which ca^ cousin al laws,
vvil be (no doubt) too cunning for me. Usury is a devil that all the disciples
of Christ in England cannot cast out, for it is a kind that will not be cast
out but by fasting and prayer. Mark 5. 3. 4
We read that there was a man possessed with a devil called legion he kept
amongst the graves, and no man could pass quietly by him. I think usurers
also are possessed with the same devil, for no man can pass without his
marks. The father cries, Oh my son is undone by the ^surer: the son
cries, oh, the usurer has eaten up my father: and every one that comes that
way vvher this same devil keeps, cries, God keep me from the usurers hands.
No statutes, nor laws, can tame usury, for he has so many turnings, and
turnagaines, that a man cannot tell vvher to find him. He is in money, in
vvares, in buying and selling* for ready money, for time, in borowing and
lending, by himself and by his brokers, the devils hun^smen. And this is
certain, usury is grown so strong, that it has sinews and bones like a man,
and walks up and down the streets like a seruingman, like a gentleman, like
a marchantman, I hope no man may justly say like an Alderman, god forbid. But
this I am sure of, it walks so stoutly, that it takes the vva^ of all
honestic and religion. These turners are like the devil, that when he was
out of the man, Mat: 8:^^
vvoulde needs be in the swine: but wheresoever they be, they will be doing of
small good. But these turners vvil never turn into heaven except they turn
again. My brethren, James 3. ^
in many things we sin all, and therefore let us at all times turn again
with mourning and weeping, Joel 2. 12. 13
and renting our hearts, Mat. 7. 1
and let us take heed that we condemn not all that are not yet turned again,
no^ turn so fast as others do, for if they belong unto God, they shall be at
the last turned again, and far goes he that never turns again.

In every turning again there is ter^^^^ a (...), and terminus ad quem, that
is, the thing from which, and the thing unto which we must turn. ^. The^^. 1
Paul shows us that we must turn from idols to the living God. And Jeremy
in the first words of the text shows that we must turn from disobedience to
true obedience, for the reproving of the one is the approving of the other, and
the forbidding of the one is the commanding of the other. And no marvel, for
disobedience is as the sin of vvitchcraft, ^. Sam. ^5. 22. 23
but obedience is better then sacrifice. And to say the truth, they are truly
turned unto God, that are truly obedient to the word of God: and they are
indeed disobedient persons, which disobey the word of God. And therefore let us
make what show of holiness we can, if we obey not the word in all that concern
us, we are unholy. Let us pretend what lets we list, if we obey not the word
we are no true co^uerts. The word of God forbids us to follow the fashions of
the world, it forbids men to wear long hair, (...): 12: ^
and women to lay out their hair, 1. Cor. 11. 14 1.
and both men and women to disguise themselves with strange attire, Peter 3. 3
now if we shall practice the contrary, Esai 3. 16. to ^he end
we turn from God and not unto God. The Lord in his word forbids all
lying, Colo^^: 3: 9
and false dealing, to deceive, and all deceit to live, if any man in his shop,
or elsewhere shall use both, they may well hear the word, but God will know them
from obedient children. And so we are to examine our selves for euerything, for
the wickedest man that lives may hear the word gladly, reverence the
preacher, and in many things obey the word. So did Herod, Mark 6
but he would still have his brothers wife: and so, many will love one sin or
other as their darling. And truly, the devil will draw a man to hell with one
bayt, as well as with a thousand. Gods children therefore must strive against
all sin, and in every thing obey the word of God both willingly and gladly,
or else as God allowed the good things, and ever had somewhat to say for the
evil he found in the seven churches of Asia, Ap^^ ^
so vvil God recko^ with us for all our sins, both of omission and
commission, although he find some, yea many good things amongst us. Many under
pretense of obedience to princes, Acts 5. (...)
would give entertainment to any religion, forgetting that God must be obeyed
before man, but these men are disobedient to all, especially to the king of al
kings, but truly obedient to none* Many again at this day amongst us cry
nothing but obedience, obedience, as though they were compounded of obedience:
but soft, all is not gold that shines, and flattering Judas is not the
faithfullest disciple. But how shall we know them? Ex vnguibus leonem: ex
fructibus ar borem. The lion by his claws, 1. Cor: (...): 24. 25
and the tree by his fruit. The Lord says, Come often to my table: the law
says, thrice a year at the least. We allow both, we obey both: some will obey
neither of both yet they cry obedience, and call us disobedient, but when will
these disobedient persons turn again? The Lord says, Let prayers and
supplications be made for kings, 1. Tim. 2: 1^^
and princes, and for all men: we have a morning exercise, where we are
faithfully taught our duty, both to God and her Majesty, where prayers be
made for the Queen, realm, and all other christian princes, for magistrates
and ministers, and the commonaltie, for our soldiers abroad, for our neighbors
at home, for the prosperous succes of her Majesty's affairs, and for the good
(...) cesse of the gospel, for the distressed, for the released, for the sick,
for the whole, and for all men. And though this exe^cise be commanded by the
word, confirmed by the law, countenanced by the wise and godly magistrates,
vpholden by learned and godly preachers, (...) of loyal and duetiful subjects,
^eutified with a godly consent, and svveete harmony of them all, and
approved by a daily blessing upon their labors by God himself: yet as soon
shall we get a hare with a taber, as persuade some of them to come to this
heavenly and religious exercise. And why so? It is in the morning by
c^ndlelight, and that is not convenient, say some of them, and those wise men
too. As wise as they are, they can be at plays by candlelight, and hear them
until midnight, and that without any inconvenience too, and swear by their
trothe they find more edefying in one play, then in twenty sermons, and yet
never come at fermo^: and as wise as they be, I could never hear the^ yet say
that it was inconvenient any manner of way to go in Queen Mary's days at one
of the clock in the morning to hear a mass, but if the prince should command
it again, by their trothe they see no reason why it should not be done again,
but as for this christian exercise, it is inconvenient in the morning: and if I
could hear that they went to any other exercises on the day time, I would
think they spoke as they meant: but as they vvil never come at it themselves,
so they see no reason why they may not discourage others, and vpbraide them by
their going unto it, after a most sco^nfull manner, calling them Saint Andrews
birds, holy men, and men that are inspired with the holy Ghost. Nay, to be a
frequenter of that exercise, is a note of a Brovvnist, a Puritan and a
disobedient person. And yet I deny not but that there may go thither as great
hypocrites as themselves which so much disgrace the exercise: yet these men
will cry, obedience, and call us disobedient, but when will these disobedient
persons turn again? The Lord says Remember thou keep^ holy the Sabbath day,
Exodus 20
the law confirms the same, we say Amen to both: some of these me^ can
dice, card, bowl, shoot, tipple, swear, riot, and more, then this on the
sabbath day, yet they cry, obedience, and call us disobedient: but when will
these disobedient persons turn again? The Lord says, Ephe. 6. 18
pray in all (...) of prayers, that is, in set prayers, in conceived prayers,
in long, in short, as occasion serves: the law of the land allows the same,
we allow both, we obey both some will allow only read and set prayers, but
will seldom come at any, yet they cr^e obedience, and call us disobedient,
but when will these disobedient persons turn again? The law says, if time
permit not, sometimes omit reading for preaching, some say always omit
preaching for reading, we crave the benefit of the law, they deny it, and
yet cry obedience, and call us disobedient, but when will these disobedient
persons turn again? The Lord says, Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26
root out all remnants of idolatry, the law of the land commands the
same, yet when we speak against idolatrous and blasphemous pictures in
churchvvindovves and elsvvhere, and other superstitious relics of popery,
these men which have their mouths full of obedience, call us disobedient: but
when will these disobedient persons turn again? The law says, if any
offend the law, complain to the rulers, and let them redress faults: this
we crave, they will none of this, for almost every private man upon every
private quarrel will accuse us, judge us, and punish us, yet they cry
obedience, and call us disobedient, Oh, when will these rebellious and
obstinate disobeyers both of God and man, be ashamed, and tu^ne again by true
repentance? These me^ are like Carus Gracchus that took upon him the defense
of the treasury, whereof he was the spoyler: so they cry obedience to the
law, when no man do more disobey it then they do. Or they are like thieves,
who having done a robbery, can makehue and cry after the true man. Some can
hold one with a tale while they pick his purse, but these are cunning
thieves. which can hold all the world with a ^ale of obedience and
conformity while they in the mean time deceive both prince, church, and
commonwealth of their duties, and themselves of Gods kingdom, if in time
they take not a new course. These holowharted Ambodexters have learned to
serve the time, but to serve their own turn, looking when time will turn,
that they might turn with time: but if careful circumspection be had, which
the necessity of these times requires, and the sub^ilties of these enemies
do crave, it vvil be no hard matter to discern the vvoodues, though they
wander in sheep clothing, by the noise of their howling, and o descrie the
ass (though he ^et in the ions skin) by the length of his ears, ^xcept
they become truly obedient to God and man and so by true and timely epentance
they turn again* which God grant.

But here arises a question, that is this, Whether a man in turning to God,
must forsake the company of the wicked, or no. If yea (as they must indeed)
why did the Jews continue stil^ amongst the Assyrians, which were idolaters?
and why we^ttey not to Sion, the place for Gods worship? Or if they could
not because they were in captivity, to what purpose served this exhortation?
The answer is not hard. There is a turning in outvvarde action, and
affection. In outvvard action, when a man does that which he ought to do,
and may lavvfully and conuementlie do (...). In affection, when a man would
do that which he ought to do, but cannot, being let outwardly by
imprisonment, sickness, banishment, law, or such like: or inwardly by some
natural infirmity. Ex^ples we have of both in the scripture They turned in
outward actio^ who with David fetched home the a^ke: 2, Sam, 6, 1
so did the Niniuite which sasted and prayed at the Kings commandment: Jonas
3: 8
so did also the Jews and Grecians which burned their books. ^ctes 19 7
In affection turned the Jews in Babylon, Psalm. 137
which mourned and we Pt at the remembrance of Sion. Psalm 42
In affection turned David in banishment, when he desired to go to Gods
house with the people but could not. In affection also turned those men which
mou^ned for all the abominations that were done in the midst of Jerusalem:
Ezec. 9. 4
and in affection also the Apostle turned when he desired to do all that he
ought to do, but could not being led captive into the law of sin. Romans 7
So we in many things may turn both in outward action and affection, as from
idolatry to the gospel, from ignorance to knowledge, and in many things more.
Some things are yet vvanting which the church should have (if she had her
right) as namely a learned ministry throughout the land, and that holy and
ancient discipline which was in the primitive church: but as yet we cannot
have them, and therefore seeing in outward action we cannot have them, we have
them in affection: that is, we pray for them, we would gladly have them if we
might lawfully come by the^, and this we may do by the law: for the book
of common prayer says so in plain words, eface before omination ^ Ashw ed^^day
There was a godly discipl^ne in the primitive church, which is to be wished,
and much to be wished that it might be restored again. And here witness with me
I pray you that I speak not against the state, because I speak according to
the Queens book, which is established by the whole state, and therefore also
when occasion serves it must be taught, and yet with great wisdom and
discretion: for shall it be prayed for, and shall we not preach for it also
that it may be much wished for? Yes beloved, for Ignotinulla cupi^c. There is
no desire of that which is not known. And in affecting that which is
vvanting, we must bevvare that impatient rashness dravve not our affections
beyond the ^onds of char^tie and modesty, least we forget to be thankful for
that we have already: and so for our impatiencie on the one side, and our
ingratitude on the other side, we be revvarded in the end with the loss of
all. If thus innocently, yet vvisely we hold a golden mean, we shall give no
occasion justly to fear the sheading of blood, except by some butcherly
Machiuel, who belike having lost his penknife, knew not how to make his pen
but with a hatchet. You know my meaning, and so much for turning a gain.

Now follows the reason of the exhortation, in these words: for I am your
Lord. The word Lord in the original sig nifieth to command as a Lord, or to
rule as a husband: either is sufficient, so the sense be taken: as if he
should say, it is good reason thou should turn again for thou have entered a
covenant with me, and married thy self unto me, and therefore I have power
over you, and interest in you. This being the sense, the doctrine shall be this.
First, that it is never in vain to turn to the Lord, for such is his love to
those whose names are once written in his book of election, that finally he
vvil not forsake the^, but most mercifully embrace them whensoever they shall
faithfully turn unto him. Neither does he snew vsfauour in this sort, or in
any sort because we by our turning again have deserved it, as the papists
say, but because of his free and vndeserused love he has made us this promise.
And if any shall think that of himself h^ has will and power to turn to God by
true repentance, he is deceived, for by nature we run from him with Adam.
Genesis 3: 8
but God sought us up. By nature our thoughts are evil continually, Genesis 6: 5
our words are vain, our works filthy, Psalm 51 10
but God must create in us new hearts, and make our words gracious and our
works acceptable, and that by Jesus Christ, for of our selves we cannot so much
as think a good thought, 2. Cor. 3, 5
And as God ^nely by his good spirit preuenteth us, philip. 2 13
and works in us both the vvil and the deed, John 6. 44
so by the same spirit he draws us to himself, or else we never come
unto him: and by no other spirit, but by the same also he finisheth and
perfecteth that good work which he has begun in us, and that in Jesus
Christ. And as our repentance is of God only, so is our ^aith also^ for S. Paul
says, To you it is given both to believe and^^ffer. Philip: 1, 29
And S. John says, It is the work of God to believe in Jesus Christ. John 6, 65
And what have we that we that we have not received? And if we have received
all the good we have from God only, and not of our selves, and that of his
free grace and mercy, without any consideration of our parts, why should we
not attribute al unto him again? and why should any part of our conversion or
sal^ation be ascribed to our own works, or the works of any saint, or
creature, in heaven or earth, and not wholy to the merits of Christ Jesus in
his death and passion? I see no reason at a^^for shall the disobedience of one
man, Adam, Rom: 5: 17, 18 19
destroy all the world, and shall not the obedience of one man, Christ Jesus,
save all that do believe? shall the works of men, of saints, of martyrs, of
Marie, (all sinful) be sufficient, which were imperfect, and not the works
of Christ Jesus, which are most perfect, and perfection it self? Is he the
seed of the woman that brake the serpents head, Genesis 3
and could he not do it without us? Is he the brazen serpent that heals all
that look upon him with the eye of a lively faith, and must we now lick our
selves whole? But (say they) there is righteousness inherent in us, as the
accident in the subject. To which we answer, first, though this be true in
philophie, yet is it false in divinity, and therefore Paul says, Take heed
that no man spoil you through ph^losophie. Colo^^ 2. 8
Secondly, there is righteousness in us, as sin was in Christ, but Christ had
no sin really of his own, but of ours by imputation, neither have we any
righteousness of our own really, but of Christ's by imputatio^. Thirdly, God by
his good spirit begins tighteousnes in us even in this life, but it is
imperfect, and polluted so soon as it comes into the stinking vessels of our
corrupted nature, Es^^ 64, 6
but it shall be perfect in the world to come, by Jesus Christ only. But yet
say the Papists, as our evil works are auailable to condemnation, so our good
works are to salvation: for (say they) Contrariorum contraria est ratio. The
comparison is unlike, and holds not: for first, our sins are of our selves,
our righteousness is of God: secondly, our sins are perfectly evil, our good
is imperfect: thirdly, he that is guilty of one commandment is guilty of
all, and deserves damnation: shall we therefore conclude, James 2, 10
that he which keeps one, deserves salvation? most absurd to grant. No,
no beloved, both our conversion and salvation be the free work and gift of
God. Heaven is our inheritance, Ephe. 1.
ergo no purchase by us. Luke 12: 32
It has pleased our father to give us the kingdom, ergo we get it not by our
selves. Saint John says, John 10. 7
Christ is the door by which we must enter. Acts 10. 12
S. Peter says, There is no other name under heaven whereby we can be saved,
but only the name of Jesus Christ. And therefore to join Christ with us, and
his perfect righteousness with our broken works, even vnholines it self, were
but to put new cloth into an old garment, Mat. 9. 16. 17
and so to make the rent worse, to put nevve wine into old bottels, and to lose
all, to build half upon Christ, and part upon our selves, ^ Cor. 3. 11. 12
were to set part of our house upon the foundation, and part beside the
foundation, and so to bring al under foot. And therefore if we will be wise
builders, let us not do so unwisely, but let us ascribe all wholly and only
to our good God, who has so loved us in Christ Jesus, that albeit we have been
disobedie^t^ unto his majesty, yet if we will come when he calls, and use
the ordinary means when he oftereth them, and turn again, he will be still
our Lord, and that for his promise ^ake in Christ Jesus our^ Lord, and yet al
of his favor vndeser^ed, and love unspeakable, wherewithal he loved us before
the foundation of the world was laid.

This doctrine is necessary for 2. sorts of me^. First, for those that are too
much oppressed with the burden of their sin, even to despair: these men are
to know that Christ spoke to them, when he said, Come unto me all you that are
heavy lo^ den, and I will ease you. Mat. 11. 28
And the prophet here speaks unto them when he says, O'ye disobedient
children turn again, for I am your Lord Let them only believe, and pray Lord
help my unbelief. And let not this be the question, Mark 9, 24
whether God will be their good Lord or no, or whether they shall be saved or no,
but whether they be surely persuaded of Gods love toward the^ in Christ, or no,
Romans 8. 38
which if they have, then if they turn again God will still be their Lord. The
second sort are such as are not at all touched with their sins, but
drenched in the sea of ^innes, and feel not the waves: in the midst of the
fire, yet feel not the flame* Gods judgments are present, hell gates are
gaping, death ready to strike them, yet they not abashed. No threatening, no
promise, no example, nothing will make them forgo their sins, that God may
forgive them: God make us feel our sins, that we may turn again, for this
comfort belongs to none but to those that in obedience turn to God by Jesus
Christ our Lord. Eay 1, 16*. 7, 18 19
The second thing that from hence we learn is this, that the consideration of
Gods love toward us should move us to serve him in true obedience. This
argument did Moses use to the Israelites. The Lord (says he) will curse thy
enemies, D^ut: 30. 7. 8
and them that hate the and persecute thee: return therefore, and obey the
voice of the Lord, and do all his commandementes. The same argument did
Joshua use. The Lord (says he) has given you a land wherein you did not
labor, Josh. 23. 13. 14
cities which ye builded not, and vineyardes which you planted not. Now
therefore fear the Lord your God, and serve him in vprightnes and truth. The
same argument does David use, My soul (says he) the Lord has forgeuen thy
sins, Psalm.^03. 1.
healed thy infirmity, and satisfied thy mouth with good things, therefore my
soul praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me praise his holy name.
The same reason does Jeremy use here, (or rather the Lord) Turn again and be
obedient, and why? for I am your Lord. The same reason ought also to move
every one of us to fear the Lord, for with him is mercy that he may be
feared. Psalm 130. 4
Apply we this to our selves. No nation has been longer urged with this
argument then this our English nation: but has it persuaded England to obey
God? God indeed has made us his vineyard, and done for us what he possibly
could devise, by planting, Esai 5. ^. ^
dressing, hedging* watering, and defending us: Yet lo, nothing but sower
grapes. Nay my beloved, have we not degenerated from our duty more then any
nation? I would to God we had not. For thus stands the case with us, the
more love, the les duty: the more mercy, the less pity: the more peace,
the less quiet: the more knowledge, the les practice: come Spaniards, and we
hold together: go Spaniards, we fall asunder: come sickness, and we send for
the minister: come health, we hate the preacher: come death, we give a little
to the poor: come life, some take all from the poor. When David of love sent
ambassadors to visit the king of Ammo^, 1. Ch^o. 19. ^
they cut away half their beards, and curtold their garments by the buttocks:
but some seek to cut their throats which do them most good, and that eue^
now. Jonathan used his fathers love to David's benefit, and by 3. arrows gave
him warning of his fathers displeasure. Sam. 20. ^6
But we, even many of us, do abuse our fathers love, shooting poisoned
arrows at those that are true of heart, causing displeasure where none was,
and that even now: when God makes me^ most able to do good, they are least
vvilling, and that is even now. In time of dearth the richest men hoard up
their corn, hoping still for a greater price. In time of war and common
calamity, when men are infinitely charged, the^ is every man for himself,
setting the dice upon men, taking 5. shillings for one, and 20. for ^iue. But
by the way, these be no usurers, but devils incarnate. One poor man beggeth
of another. Elias goes to Sarepta, and from thence to the Ravens for comfort.
Lazarus goes to the rich man's gate, Luke 1^
the dogs give him his alms. Nabals song is, I have not for David, and that
even now when Naball has the devil and al* 1. Sam. 25
Now do men eat the calves of the stall, and the lambs of the flock, Amos 6.
4. 5
drink wine out of golden cups, anoint themselves with costly ointment,
vvallow upon beds of iuory, and sing to the violl and musical instrument: and
even now is Joseph's afflict^o^ quite forgotten. When the Lord spares us, we
smite our fellow servants, when the Lord forgeueth us 1000. talents, we take
our brethren by the throat for every farthing, crying not o^nly pay that thou
owe, but thy ^oifer also, When God gives Achab a kingdom let Naboth look to
his vineyard, and when Achab is sick for Naboths vineyard, and Iezabel
religious in proclayming a fast for Achabs sickness, then let Naboth look to his
life. There is nothing but joining house to house, and land to land, til there
be no more room except it, before a plague. The Israelites took their earings,
Exodus: 32: 3
and their jewels, and bestowed the upon a calfe, the papists (like calves)
would bestow al upon the popes bull, and we (like profane Esau) are content to
g^ue our patrimony for a mess of belly sorrow, as though God did spare us
that we might spare none, as though he did give us our portions to vvast
prodigally, as though he gave us our meat to play vvithal, and to throw to the
dogs, nay, as though his mercy and love should not make us merciful and
loving, and as though his long suffering and patience were not to dravv us to
repentance. Rom: 2: 4


The last thing that from this reason I observe, is this: that seeing as the
love of God is so free, so continual, so undeserved, and so unspeakable, that
therefore we set more by it then by any love in the world. Great was the
love of Damon and Pithias, when one offered to die for another, but it was
neither free, perpetual, nor undeserved, for Damon lo^ed Pithias, because
Pithias loved Damon, and so one friend loved another: but God loved us when we
were his enemies and hated him: Romans 5, 10
their love ended with their lives, Gods love is eternal, as himself: the
love of princes is great, 1. Sam, 19, (...)
but princes may be unconstant, as was Saul, to David. Psalm: 103, 13
The love of fathers is great, but they may be unkind, as they which offered
their children in the fire to the devil. Wives be unfaithful, as Dalila:
scoffers, as Michol. Children may prove unnatural, Judges 16
as Absalom was. Servants are untrusty, ^. Kin: 5
as Gehez^e. Friends are famed, and fickle, as Ioab and Judas. But the loving
kindness of the Lord endures for ever and ever upon such as think upon his
commandments to do them. Psalm 103: 17
There are many things vvanting in the world which should bring us out of love
with the love of the world. ^2. Kings 6. 27
There wants ability in the king of Samaria: Luke 18. 2
vvillingnes in the wicked judge: there wants knowledge in Isaac, so as
Jacob may deceive him: fid elitie in Laba^, so that Jacob is deceived:
constancy in the Jews, Genesis 29
which vvil cry Hosanna, and Crucifige, and almost all with a vvinde, so that
Christ is executed: Luke 19
there wants in Pharaohs butler thankful remembrance, so that Joseph is
forgotten: Genefis 40
mercy in Rehoboam, wisdom and discretion in his young counselors, 2. Chro: 10
and a good nature in both is vva^ting, so that Quicquid delirant reges,
ple^ctuntur achiu^. The whole land smarted for their folly* In all men wants
somvvhat, the whole world has not all, things, no the world has no
interest in us, for we are chosen out of it by that God which says here, I
am your Lord. There are not vvanting the contrary, which should be scorpion
vvhippes to drive us from the world to the lord: as, the malice of Cain, the
hatred of Esa^, the villainy of Ioab, the unkindness of Hanun the treachery of
Judas, the cruelty of Iezabel, the sickness of Achab, the churlish nes of Nabal,
the dissebling of Ananias: the beasts of the world are not benointed only
with sower things, but the very milk that they yeald is bittemes it self:
for all is but vanity and vexation of spirit. There is not wanting ignorance,
weakness, vnvvillingnes, unfaithfulness, forgetfulness in all, imperfections in
the best, nothing certain, but all changeable as the moon, fading as the
flower of the field, and vanishing as the smoke in the air, 1: John 5: 19
al wax old as a garment, and as a vesture shall we al be changed. What
should I say? Totus mundus in maligno positus est. The whole world is set on
a mischief. But with the Lord our God the case is otherwise, for he is
almighty and the Lord of hosts, and therefore is of ability to revvard the
godly when they turn unto him, and to punish the wicked that vvil not obey
him. He is our father by Jesus Christ, and therefore willing to receive us
when we turn unto him: he is also a just God, and therefore will plague those
which vvil not turn unto him ^he has all knowledge, and knovveth all
things, and therefore he will know Barrabas from Barnabas, Esau from Jacob,
Bethauen from Bethel, Simon Magus from Simon Peter, Judas Iscariot from Judas
the brother of James, Shiboleth from Siboleth, Judges 12
and who shall deceive the Lord? He is not as the son of man, Number: 23
that he should change his mind, and therefore he must needs be constant,
Esaias 46. 10
and his counsel shall stand. He is not, he cannot be let of his purpose,
for he is in heaven, Psalm 135. 6
and does whatsoever he vvil: he cannot forget his children, Esaias 49. 1
for he has written them in the palms of his hands, He is alvvayes
vvatchfull over his children, for he that keeps Israel, Psalm. 121: 4
neither slumbereth nor sleeps. A second information shall not miscarie him:
for he that knows all at once, needs no information. No orator no, not Tully
nor Tertullus himself shall turn his mind, for he will never alter the decree
that is gone out of his mouth^^ yea, Pro: 21: 30
his counsel must needs stand, against whom no vvisdome, no counsel, no
strength can prevail. If he has conceived any displeasure against his
children, Psalm: 103
he vvil soon be entreated. He calls us, he persvvadeth us, he entreats us
to turn, and therefore let us turn unto him and obey him: Deuteronomy: 5: 29
he claymeth it as his right, it is for our benefit, he shall get nothing by our
service, if we never serve him, he vvil lose nothing by us: if we obey him
and be saved, Exodus: 14: 18
he shall be glorified: if we do disobey him and damned, he will be glorified
also: for no way will he lose an inch of his glory, and therefore let us
turn again and obey him. He commands it in his law, when he says, Thou
shall have no other gods but me. We confess it in our belief, when we say,
I believe in God the father almighty, And in Jesus Christ, And in the holy
Ghost, We pray for it in our Lords prayer, when we say, Our father, halovved
be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done in earth as it is in he aue^:
and therefore if we do not turn again, we break his law, we deny our faith,
and we mock God himself in our prayers, his mercies should move us to
obedience, his promises should allure us to turn again. If he corrects us,
it is that we might obey him: if he plague us, it is because we disobey him:
if he spare us, it is that we might turn again unto him: if he defer his
punishments, it is that we might not defer the time of obedience: if he be a
swift judge against us, it is for that we have been so swift to disobey
him. But if he does bear with us, and forbear us, it is to see whether his
long suffering and patience vvil dravv us to repentance. He is our Lord, and
still offers us love, we are his servants and alvvayes owe him duty: he is
our Lord in goodness, power, vvisdome, justice, mercy, providence, and in
himself abo^e all, and therefore let us turn unto him before any. God for his
mercies sake turn our hearts as the rivers in the South, that he may still be
our God, and we may still be his people. What shall I say, when I can say no
more? Oye disobedient children, says the Lord, turn again, for I am your
Lord. Now let us pray.

FINIS.

