THE MODERATE CHRISTIAN. A SERMON PREACHED IN EXETER AT A Triennall Visitation
of the Reverend Father in God JOSEPH LORD BISHOP of that See. March 24. 1630.
BY John Bury, sometime Fellow of Baliol College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Nathaniell Butter at Saint Anstins
Gate. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in God, Joseph Lord Bishop of Exeter, the fruits
of Peace, and Holiness be abundantly multiplied.
MY GOOD LORD:
STeddily and happily goes the Ark of God, when it is drawn by Peace and
Holiness tied together (Heb. 12.14.) as those two milch kine keeping the high
way, and turning not aside to either hand. Belial hates this Yoke; and (seeing
his Image falls, where the Arc stands) striveth either to kill or sever,
yea, by severing to kill these blessed yoke-fellowes. He has a bridle for
Peace, to draw her back from Holiness, and a Spur for Holiness to gallop away
from Peace. Needs must he therefore malign your Lordship, as his professed
enemy, both in your person and government. How does he fret to see in your
breast the sacred fire of Devotion, so guarded with a pious moderation, that he
cannot reach it either with his Water, or his Gunpowder? How does it gnaw him
to hear your Visitation charge, so vehemently bent with equal severitie
against his two darlings, Faction, and Profaneness; and to see your careful
weeding out the Tares of Schism, without pulling up any Corn of true Piety?
With what indignation does he feel for the present, and fear for the future,
the prevalent success of your mild sunshine, beyond the force of a blustering
wind? no wonder then, if while you break his head, he bite at your heel;
traducing both your holy peaceablenesse, as not enemy enough to Rome, and your
peaceable holiness, as too much friend to Faction. But how could Integrity be
better cleared, then by being thus accused? No fairer testimony of an
impartial arbitrament, then the repining of both Parties; and it is the common
lot both of Virtue and Verity, to be buffeted on both cheeks by the two
extremes. What pity it is, that men should put asunder those whom God has
coupled together? and cast such iealousies between these two Daughters of
Jerusalem, that whosoever is a Suitor to the one, is suspected and censured of
neglecting, if not contemning the other? I was willing to step in (though
perhaps with as little thank) as Moses between the two striving Israelites:
Sirs, ye are Sisters: why should jealous distractions set you at variance?

But finding my self too weak, I entreated S. Paul to interpose, a man beyond
exception, deeply and equally interessed in both parties: who more peaceable?
pleasing all men in all things; yet who more zealous? not seeking his own
profit, but the profit of many, etc. That it now is preached on the house
top, which lately was spoken in the ear, is but in prosecution of my text,
seeking the profit of many, that they may be saved. The success I commend to
the God of peace and holiness, Under whom I covet to be and approve my self

Your Lordships in all duty and service to be commanded. JOHN BVRY.

THE MODERATE CHRISTIAN.
1. COR. 10. ult. Even as I please all men in all things, etc.


THose Leviticall Ordinances of the Ceremonial Law, Heb. 9.10.
(...), in meats and drinks, etc. as they were borne mortal, in their
institution, imposed until the time of Reformation, so they had given up the
ghost, with Christ's consummatum est, but were yet Austine.
allowed a time to prepare for their Decent interring. Until which funeral,
wherein the Jews and Gentiles people of diverse and discrepant metal were to
be cast into one body, it was thought fit in the mean time to soder them
together by some uniformitie. And to this purpose the first Synod of the
Christian Church assembled in Jerusalem made that Ecclesiastical Constitution
for the time, that the converted Gentiles should Act. 15.29,
abstain from meats sacrificed to Idols, and from strangled, and from blood:
and shortly after Paul and Sylas going in visitation, exacted the practice of
that Canon, and gave out the Book of Articles: Act. 16.4.
And as they went through the Cities, they delivered them the Decrees for to
keep, that were ordained of the Apostles and Elders, etc. Whether the
Corinthians (as some contend) had not in those six years between that Synod
and this Epistle, heard of that Decretall Epistle directed Act. 15.23.
only to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, about a thousand miles from them,
or that they punctually stood upon their knowledge ( 1. Cor. 8.11.
Through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish) once it seems, that
some under the color of Christian liberty had taken liberty to be
unchristian, and by scandalous eating of meats offered to Idols 1. Cor. 8.12.
sinned in wounding their brethren; and through their sides Christ.

The Apostle having begun the cure hereof Cap. 8. by tenting the grief, now
takes it in hand again to apply the plaster, not pressing the Synodicall
Constitution, but the ground of it, the reason of scandal: and for making and
keeping peace he marries together the Law of Charity with the Law of Faith.
The Law of Faith lays abroad the Doctrine, omnia licent: the Law of Charity
contracteth the use, Omnia non expediunt. Defect in the Doctrine entrencheth
upon Christian liberty, excess in the Use breaks out into unchristian
licentiousnes. Christian Charity therefore is assigned to be the moderatrix of
Christian liberty; casting one eye to God, Charitas in Deum, Verse 31. Whether
ye eat, etc. the other to our brethren, Charitas in proximum, Verse 32. Give
no offense, etc. which precept that it may the better enter, is headed with his
own example. Even as I, etc.

A fair example whether we look to the matter, or the manner, his action, or
his aim. In the 1. A plausible practice: Even as I. 2. A profitable purpose,
Not seeking, etc.


The first answers to four Circumstantiall questions, 1. Quis, who is the
example: I, even as I 2. Quid, what is the matter: please 3. Quibus, whom: All
men 4. Quatenus, Wherein: in all things.


The second answers one maine question, Quorsum? to what end this (...)?

1. Negatively, an end free from base corruption. Not seeking mine own profit.
2. Affirmatively, an end full of Noble Charity, seeking the profit of others:
amplified by the Quantity Of the Subject, Multitude, no small company, but the
profit of many. Of the Object, Magnitude, no light benefit, but the best and
greatest, that they may be saved.

1. Quis. I.] I that have no less liberty, no less authority, no less
knowledge, both of my liberty and authority then the best, yet I please, do
even as I. A right and compendious method of teaching as in all arts, so in
the School of Piety. First, a rule, Give no offense, Secondly, an example,
even as I. So Christ our head-schoolemaster: Matthew. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, there is the precept, as your heavenly Father is perfect, there
is the pattern. To teach all by precepts is tedious: Longum iter per
praecepta: to teach altogether by example is dangerous: the rule gives
authority, the example adds efficacy, and where the example follows the
rule, we may both more easily, and more safely follow the example. But of all
examples none so pregnant and powerful, as when the teacher voucheth himself
for example. Even as I. Precepts offer to drive, Examples to lead: the example
of others leads by the ear, our own leads by the hand. That practical
oratory, 2 Thessalonians. 3.9. To make our selves an example to you to follow us, is
the most powerful Charm of Rhetorike, leading people by the eyes, as Hercules
did by the ears. Even as I.

Lo here an example to turn us all into examples. Parents, Masters,
Ministers, to our Children, Servants, Parishioners: the way to make them such
as we desire, is to be our selves such as we would make them: their minds
look out more at their eye, then at their ear, more attentive to what we do,
then what we require. If we cherish any vice in our selves, they will cherish
it as a virtue: Platoes short neck, and Aristotle's crup-shoulder had their
Scholars as a piece of their Philosophy. Well or ill, they learn to do, Even
as I.

But we especially (Reverend Brethren) we are Matthew. 5^.4.
the light of the World. Light? the most excellent Object of the most excellent
sense, and that which gives luster to all the rest, but withal it inviteth
every eye to be looking on. It stands us the more upon to look to our light,
that it Ibid. v. 16.
shine before men, ut non solum audiant bona verba, sed and videant bona opera.
They expect we should translate, translate our good words into good works, and
with fiery tongues in our heads, to make their Luke 24.32.
hearts burn within them, while we open the Scriptures; to have also Luke
12.35.
our lamps burning in our hands to light them by a pious conversation. Though
we bring them heavenly 2. Cor. 4.7.
treasure, they are poring on the earthen vessel; but if with Gideon Judge.
7.16.
we carry our lamp burning in our pitcher, and can boldy and safely say to our
followers, As ye see me do, do ye likewise; sound we our trumpet, and
break our pitcher, that our light may shine: and the sword of the Lord and of
Gideon will do wonders, to put to flight sins though swarming as grasshoppers
in our Parishes.

What a reverend awe shall we stamp into our peoples hearts, if we do both
(...), and (...), 2. Tim. 2.15.
Galat. 2. ^4.
preach roundly, and live squarely, Tit. 2.7.
in all things showing our selves a pattern of good works. Naturalists tell
us that the Lion, the King of beasts, and terror of his subjects, yet stands in
fear of a Cock, and of fire. The divine Story tells me as much ( Mark 6.20.)
Herod was a Lion as well as a Luke 13.32,
Fox, The Prove. 20.2.
fear of a King, is as the roaring of a Lion, and yet he feared poor John
Baptist. Was it as he was fire? Ioh. 5 35.
John was a burning and shining light, burning in his zealous preaching, and
shining in his strict living? or was it as he was a Cock crowing to awake him
out of sin, and laying hard at him with his Non Licet, It is not lawful for
thee to have thy Brothers wife: for though this Cock crowing did not prevail
here so much as with Math. 16.75.
Peter, to draw bitter tears of sound repentance, yet much it did, he was a
parcell-penitent, he did many things. But yet me thinks it should not be John's
preaching that he feared, for (...), 'twas sweet to hear him as music, he
heard him gladly. For what then did that Lion so fear this Cock? surely it
was for the clapping of his wings, that as he crowed to others, he roused up
himself in austere devotion; the text says as much: Herod feared John knowing
that he was a just, and a holy man. Herod feared John not so much for the
Thundering of his preaching, as for the Lightning of his life: for what
Nazianzen has in his Epitaph on great St. Basil was due to this great John:
(...). His words were thunder, his life lightening.

Then may we expect to feel life in our doctrine, when our people do see
doctrine in our life: an exemplar life able to strike dumb all gain sayers,
and rippe up the hearts of the profane; that 1. Cor. 14.25.
falling down on his face he may worship God and report, Est Deus in nobis,
agitante calescimus illo: that God is in us of a truth. With what a holy
reverence did Constantine embrace Paphnutius, Theodosius stoop to his Ambrose?
the Emperors greatness honoring the goodness of their ghostly Fathers, and
entertaining their injunctions as Oracles, Nec vox hominem sonat, as if Act.
14.11.
God had been come down in the likeness of men!

But alas? Esa. ^.2^.
how is our silver become dross? our wine is mingled with water: the price of
our reputation is brought down by our wearish Conversation? Our esteem and
value is grown lower, because our light is grown dimmer. Tempora mutantur, I
would (and nos) did not follow, yea, I wish it did not go before. But if we
cry out O tempora; there want not to cry us down with O mores, and to excuse
their contemptuous undervaluing of holy orders, by accusing our unholy
disorders; to say we are Math. 5.13.
trampled upon, because unsavory salt, good for nothing else; and scorned as
base Priests, because the sons of Levi are become 1. Sa. 2.12.17
the sons of Belial making the people loath the service of God.

-- pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
But stay Doeg: why does thy malevolent Psalm. 52.2.
tongue' cut like a sharp rasor, shaving all by the ground? Grant Ahimelech
have been faulty, must 1. Sam. 21.18.
all the Priests be chopped? Why Haman; if Mordecai be stiff, must a Ester 3.6.
national destruction expiate a personal offense? if some few Ministers
(though those few be too many, and I wish discipline might make them nonc) but
if some few be debauched, must the whole calling be disgraced? must the
Apostleship down if there be one Judas among the twelve, yea, one among
twenty? But salus est haec nosse.

Let us dear Brethren, make Triacle of this poison, and with the more caution
carry our selves Phil. 2.15.
blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God (...), in whose coat Momus may
find no hole, but what his malice shall make, that we may shine in the midst of
a crooked and perverse nation, as lights in the world. Such lights to our
people as the Star to the wisemen, Math. 2.9.
going before them till we bring them home to Christ; that calling them after
us, as Phil. 4.9. do the things which ye have heard and seen in me; to all
our Christian exhortations, our good example may come in with Amen, Even as I.

But you (Beloved Brethren of the Laity) that use to see the light, and not
hear the voice, here is no lesson for you, either to neglect your Ministers
good doctrine, when his life is bad: or to follow his bad life, when his
doctrine is good. If his life confute his doctrine, you may not stand of with
Barak? Judge. 4.8.
If thou will go with me I will go; else not. Noah's Carpenters may build a
good Arc to save others, though themselves be drowned for not entering: A sick
Physician may make thee whole; and the Feriman may row thee right, though his
face turn the contrary way. If for heeding your Ministers evil life, ye
should not heed his good Doctrine; take heed you be not Donatus his Disciples
rather then Christ's, who tutored the auditors even of Scribes and Pharisees
Math 23.1.
to do as they say, though they say and do not. If on the other side, his
doctrine condemn his life, he teaches you better, then to do even as I.
Examples do well to second rules, not to make them: yea rather an example
without, especially against a rule, is an unruly example. Lot in his
drunkenness, David in his adultery, and Peter in his denial give us example
not to trust examples even of the best. He that will draw after every light,
may hap to be misled by some ignis fatuus, or deluded, by rotten though shining
wood. It is the royal prerogative of the Lord Paramount, to take from none,
but give to all, both rule and example. 1. Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, the rule his own, As I am holy, himself the example. His only
son only shares with him in this royalty, Ioh. 13.15.
I have given you an example, and that example may stand for a rule, that ye
should do as I have done to you; but all subordinate examples (like
generasubalterna) take from their superior as they send down to the inferior;
nor may you safely write after their Copy, where they recede from the
original Archetype: but must always understand, what we find here expressed,
the pattern for imitation, even as I, to draw after it a faithful limitation,
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ, in the very next verse; To. 15.3.
for Christ pleased not himself, I do please even as Christ: do you even as I
please, and that is the Quid, The second quaere, what is the example. I please.

That bedroll of persecutions which he reckons up to these Corinthians, 2.
Ep. 11. conatu non eventu, I affect it, though I cannot always effect it: Some
are ignorant, and cannot, some froward and will not, some envious that cannot,
will not be pleased; but I endeavor to please all that I can, though I cannot
all that I would. But what? is (...) now clapped on as a crown on his head,
which elsewhere he shakes off as the viper from his hand? Gal. 1.10.
Do I seek to please men? If I should please men, I should not be the servant
of Christ.

Distinguish then. There is a pleasing carnally and a pleasing Christianly; the
first he there detesteth as damnable, the second he here professes as laudable
and imitable. Carnal pleasing is propterse, determines in our selves, and our
own ends: Christian pleasing is propter Deum, looks over and beyond our
selves to the salvation of men and glory of God, Not seeking mine own profit,
but the profit of many, that they may be saved. How then did he please, and not
please men? not (...) making merchandise of the Word, either for favor,
profit, or credit, the three golden Balls that men pleasers usually run after.
Hear his own protestation 1 Thessalonians 2.5. Not with flattering words, to curry
favor; nor a cloak of covetousnes, for turpe lucrum; nor of men sought we
glory, digito notari and dicier, hic est: Thus he did not please men.

How then did he please? v. 7. We were gentle among you, even as a Nurse
cherishes her children: yea more then a Nurse, a servant, 1. Cor. 9.19. I have
made my self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more, not more money to
my purse, but more souls to God. Thus to please men for Gods sake, is not to
please Men but God; yea, Nonianhomosed Deus placet, it is not the Apostle, but
God by the Apostle, that does please and gain.

Pleasing he was both in his Doctrine and Conversation: first in teaching he
pleased, not so much in the matter, seeking placentia (that is Ier. 6.14.
a badge of salse Prophets) as for the manner, speaking truth placenter;
faithfully yet wisely to become with men; he could handsomely close Act. 26.27.
with Agrippa, that he might get within him, but would never have humored his
Uncle Herod, with his Herodias, nor sow pillowes under any sinners armehole: no
pleasing in dispendium veritatis, all his pleasing was in Compendium
Charitatis. How easily may we trace in his Epistles that artificial piece of
Oratory to make and keep Benevolos auditores, to hold their ears while he
teaches, and their hearts, while he turns them?

But there are Impenitent sinners; those he must needs displease: yet even in
displeasing he will please what he may. Must he needs lance the impostume of
sin? yet even in that he will please: as the Surgeon in Seneca did by the
Kings daughcer: who gently fomenting her sore breast, with his launcet hid
under the sponge, opened it ere she was aware. Si scisset ferrum praesens
repugnasset: The Patient would have been impatient, except with the Lions
heart of resolution there were joined the Ladies hand of tender Compassion. The
earthlyminded Belly-God shall be told his own roundly, that Phil. 3.19.
their end is damnation, and yet even there he will please: the tears of his
eyes shall testify the bleeding of his heart, ver. 18.
I tell you weeping: Gutta cavat lapidem, such drops might pierce even a stony
heart. Thus our Apostle.

And now (dear brethren) judge whether it be Apostolical, to gall our hearers
with tart invectives, to exasperate them with conceited nickes, and to please
our selves in displeasing them. Did you ever know any soul converted, any man
cured, with such gall and vinegar? we shall as soon catch fish with a naked
hook. I may not presume, I know my unworthines to teach teachers (especially
such as many of you) It is our Apostle to whom now we all go to school, and
he teaches us to please, that we may profit. 2. Tim. 2.25, 26. to instruct
with meekness, etc. as the way to recover souls. Reprehensions like Pills are
naturally distasteful, we had need administer them with the sirrupe of good
affection.

Ye know, the good Mother Truth has a bad daughter dogging her: Gal. 4.16.
veritas odium: our Apostle either was, or feared to be haunted with her, I am
become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? now must our skill be, to get
in the Mother, and keep out the daughter and how may that be? (...), Ephesians.
4.15. let naked verity go no longer naked, but be clothed with the robes of
her sister Charity: Speak the truth in Love; and then it may be Hatred that
knows her Mother but naked, may pass by and not own her in that attire.
Suppress we Anger, eagerness, indignation, and such other passions as may
arise from displeasure in the speaker, and are apt to breed displeasure in the
hearer; and express a loving fear, a wel-wishing tenderness, pity and such
other affections, as are both the Daughters and Mothers of Love. And to follow
our Apostle, in this holy art of pleasing, let the souls we labor to save,
see in our face, theare in our tongue, and fecle in our heart, that we grieve
for their sin, and fear for their danger, and pity them for both; and
speaking out of these bowels of love and compassion, I hope, these precious
balmes shall not break their head, but may in time by Gods grace supple and
mollify their heart.

Again, he pleased in his conversation, carrying himself not only with
plausible affability, and a gentle placiditie; but also by a pliable humility
condescending to all, that he might give offense to none. Omnis alteritas
discors (says Boethius) a sullen differing occasioneth difference, while
likeness breeds liking. Herein therefore he complied with all sorts, that
indifferent things might make no difference, he would conform and subscribe so
far, as omnialicent would reach. A skillful fisher of men, that could fit his
several baits according to the several seasons, and diverse kinds of fish;
one time he circumciseth Timothy, to please the Jews, another time he
refuses to circumcise Titus, to please the Gentiles. See how he did turn and
wind to give content on all hands. Cap. preced. 20. To the Jew I became a Jew,
that I might gain the Jews; to them that are under the Law, as under the Law,
that I might gain them that are under the Law, to them that are without Law,
as without Law, etc. I became all things to all men, that by all means I might
save some.

What now Paul? become a politic Proteus, a time serving Dissembler? No: that
good Father will come into be his Compurgator, Non simulantis astu, sed
compatientis affectu: All this his turning, was but to turn them unto God,
being covetous of nothing but men, and fishing for nothing but souls; being
loath to loose so precious a substance, by standing on a circumstance; or to
hazard a soul, by nice sticking at a Ceremony. Who will not rather commend,
then blame the tender Nurse 1 Thessalonians. 2.7.
(to whom he compared himself) for playing the child, that she may still
the child? or who ever counted it a Diminution to Elishaes greatness, that he
contracted and drew in himself, 2. Kings 4.34. that so he might apply his face
to the childs face, his hands to the child's hands, etc. thereby to recover the
dead child to life? In the like posture is our blessed Paul, bowing himself
to please that he might save, and in this posture calls upon us to follow
him, and with him to follow the things that make for peace, and things whereby
one may edify another. Romans 14.19.

What? peace and edification both to be followed? and both at once? Not two,
but one, or two in one; the things that make for peace, make also for
edification: no peace, no edification. Solomon the King of peace is the only
man to build Gods house: Division is fit to build nothing but Babel, confusion.
The Trowell is for building, not the sword: the sword in the other hand of
Nehemias builders, Neh. 4.17.
is for necessary defense, not unnecessary offense, to keep off enemies, not
to foine at their fellows. Our Master is the Prince of peace; Esaias 9.6. and
his flock are peaceable, (...), inoffensive creatures; not snarling Dogs, but
gentle sheep; John 10. gentle in their inward quality, gentle in their outward
Coat.

Mistake not then (my brethren) as Samuel did Gods call for Elies: this
pleasing and peaceable gentleness, is a virtue not only in Aristotle's Moral,
but in Gods Theological Philosophy: not a complement of a Courtier, but an
ornament of a true Israelite. Said I an ornament? I wronged it, it is the soft
wool of Christ's sheep, the very liverie of Gods Elect, Col. 3.12. Put on as
the Elect of God bowels of mercy, kindness, etc.

Think then on this, I beseech you (dear brethren) you that please your
selves too much in the neglect of pleasing others, and in a good (if moderate)
opposition to flattery, and time serving, run too much on the other hand, while
you entertain a Cynicall roughness, or selfe-conceited Stiffenesse, too
forward to give offense, and break Christ's peace. If our Lord should come to
feel out his sheep by the wool, to examine your faith by your carriage, how
may you expect to pass for sheep, if with the Hedge-hogge ye be all prickles
to offend any hand that shall touch you, yea with the Porcupine ye dart quils
of censure at those which touch you not. Come about then I pray, and be Saint
Paul's Scholars: that his teaching may metamorphose you into sheep; teaching
by precept, Romans 15.2. Let every man please his neighbor: and here teaching
the same by example, even as I please. And Who is my Neighbor? is the Lawyers
next quaere: Luke 10.29. quibus: whom must we please? is the next
circumstantiall question.

3. All men.] that is, as some would have it, all good men: and so make the
Jew, and Gentile to meet in the Church of God, Verse preced. But it may plainly
appear to be a large circumference drawn about that triangle, the Jew, and
Gentile, and the Church of God, standing in triangular opposition each to
other, and each both to the third: the Jew that was under the Law, the Church
that was under faith, and the Gentile, neither under the Law, nor under faith.
As he offended not the fish already within the net, lest they should run out,
so he pleased the fish without the net, that they might come in: that they
which obey not the word, may without the word be won by conuer sation. 1.
Pet. 3.1. As he was 2. Cor. 11.28. jealous over these Corinthians, whom he had
already espoused to Christ; so was he zealous in wooing more; travailing
far with Eliezer to win Rebecca, (though a Pagan) Genesis 24.22. with bracelets
and Earings, pleasing things, so to bring her home to his Master.

The Schools teach us that the ground of true love is the participation of
eternal blessedness: now the prophanest worldling, the Turk, the Pagan have
in them a nature capable of that communion and fellowship. There is a potentia
remota, though not proxima: no sensible disposition, yet no flat
impossibility, but that he may one day (for ought I know) be brought to be
partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light. Since then there is in me a
desire, and in him a possibility (though as yet not no probability) that he
may be in good time my fellow heir of Heaven, and Citizen with the Saints, I
must love his nature, and wish to meet him both in grace and glory, though I
hate his wickedness with a perfect hatred, as the bar that yet keeps him
out from that communion of bliss. And indeed how can I love his good if I hate
not his evil? how can parents love their childrens salvation, and not detest
their vices, that would hurrie them to damnation? perdita volunt vitia,
servatos filios; their desire is to have their sins destroyed, and their
sons saved.

The person may not be hated for his faults, nor the faults loved for the
person: the man I must please, that I may save him; his sins I must let fly
at, that I may kill them, that else would kill him. Heedily therefore must we
aim our arrows, that we wound not the person in shooting at the sin, but
level discreetly with Alcons wary hand, who when he saw a Dragon seize on,
and claspe about his son, shot the Dragon, and saved the child.

Wherefore I cannot but pity diverse good souls, whose zeal in Iehues march
out-runnes their judgment, and with unadvised haste dasheth them against
Salomons Eccles 7.16.
Iustus nimis, wrapping the vice and the man in the same extremity of violent
detestation. What? please a lewd and profane man? an enemy to God and all
goodness? no, I defy him, as I do the Devil and all his works. Spare a
little; there is great difference between the Devil, and a deuillish man: the
one an enemy irreconciliable, the other an enemy, but may turn friend. Is he a
blasphemer, and a Persecutor? such was our Apostle, 1. Tim. 1.13. Is he an
Idolater, Adulterer, etc? And such were some of you. 1. Cor. 6.11. Secondly,
the one is past redemption, his damnation is known; So is not the other.
Thirdly, the Devil I may not pray for: for the spiteful contemners of
Religion I may, I must, even as Steven, Acts 7.60. even as Christ, Luke 23.34.
and to look no further then this Chapter. S. Paul forbids fellowship with
Devils, Verse 20. but allows fellowship with unbelcevers, Verse 27. and
Christ himself practiced it, Luke 15.2. Eating and drinking with Publicans and
Sinners, and none but Seribes and Pharisees censured him for it.

But because he that touches pitch may easily be defiled: nor is it usual to
find a River like Hypanis that keeps the sweetness of his water even in the
Salt Sea: or a righteous Lot, 2. Pet. 2.8. that abides unstained among the
impure Sodomites: with a Licet, there may follow a Non expedit, especially for
weak ones to have frequent and ordinary familiarity with lewd and scandalous
people. And though they must desire to please them, by unoffensive carriage,
and not to shun them for contempt, but only for caution: yet it may be for
their safety, to think of dissolute company, as Tertullus pronounced of our
Paul, Acts 24.5. (...), plaguey or pestilent fellows; whom we should not rashly
frequent without both skill and care, either to do them some good, or at least
that they do us no harm: but before we go near them fortify our selves
with that Antidote of Ieremiahs resolution, Ier. 15.19. Let them turn to thee,
do not thou turn to them: and all the while wear on thy breast before thee
that Amulet of Saint Bernard, Vive cantus tibi, utilis alijs, gratus Deo:
cautus tibi, that they may not pervert thee, if they would; utilis alijs, that
thou convert them if thou may; gratus Deo, to become with them, and please
them so far, as thou may not displease God: and how sarre that is,
Quateniu? is the last Quaere,

Fourthly, In all things.] not only to please all men in some things; or some
men in all things, but the universality is continued, and doubled, (...).

How? in all things without exception? Yes, if you understand it adidem; all
such things, as come under omnia licent; all lawful things. So is pleasing
confined, Romans 15.2. (...); for his good to edification: not for his evil, but
for his good: for his instruction, not for his destruction. Saint James will
not own that for wisdom, James 3.17. at least for heavenly wisdom that is
not first pure, and then peaceable, etc. Mark both the connection and order: To
be pure and not peaceable, were to attire that Devil Contention like an
Angel; to be peaceable and not pure, were to cloth that Angel Peace like a
Devil: To be first peaceable and then pure, were to salute the servant before
the Master, and prefer men before God: but to be first pure and then
peaceable is fairly to ascend up to God in a good conscience, and orderly to
descend down to men in good correspondence.

But generalia decipiunt: therefore come we more particularly to view the
bound-stone, consining All things: and in our way consider that All things in
general, under which our all things in special are contained, are of three
sorts: bona, mala, media, the good like the tree of life has Oportet engraven,
his sound is invitation, Gustate and videte: his fruit is peace, Ecce quam
bonum and quam iucundum.

The evil like the for bidden tree, Genesis 3.3. in medio paradisi, next to hand,
has non licet written, his sound is prohibition; Noli me tangere, his fruit
destruction (...). The middle are things indifferent, in their nature and
essence neither good nor bad, but in their act and existence no longer
neutrals, but either good in their use, or ill in their abuse: good when we
please, evil when we give offense by them. The evil is forbidden, the good
commanded, (...) neither forbidden nor commanded.

Concerning the evil; we may not please any man in sin: we may not sin to
please any man. Will you have the Emblem of a Flatterer? take the little Wren
of Egypt, Trochilus.
who to feed his own belly picketh the Crocodiles teeth, and with his ticklous
and pleasing delight causes him to yawne wide: which Ichneumon, the Rat of
Pharaoh, watching and taking that advantage, shoots suddenly into the bowels
of the Crocodile, and eats ont his belly. They that please for advantage, and
humor men securely sleeping in their sins, perform such another office, in
making open way for the Serpent of Eden. I remember that once the Devil taught
that beast to speak, Genesis 3. and it was to please his Master, thereby to
tickle him to death: ye shall be as Gods: And once I find God opened the
mouth of a beast, Numb. 22.28. and he spoke to reprove his offending Master,
and to save him by displeasing him. I leave you to judge whether the plain
tell-troth Ass were not a better servant, then the subtle flattering Serpent.
For if I should please any man by heartning and hardening him in sin, I rivet
it faster upon him, and yet I should make the sin mine own; a poor piece of
friendship, if instead of saving my friend from drowning, I should lovingly
embrace him, and keep him under water, and my self with him.

As I may not please him in sin, so neither may I sin to please him; not by
society in sin, least running into the same excess of riot (1. Pet. 4.4.)
if I light in bad company, I should go to Hell with them for good-fellowship;
if the fellowship in going to Hell may be called good. Unhappy knots of Satan's
tying, who coupleth men as Sampson did the foxes, Judge. 15.4. with a firebrand
between them to burn themselves and our corn. I say, our corn. For if the
search should go now as then, Verse. 6. Quis hoc fecit? Who has brought this
dearth of Corn, Malt, etc? I believe the hue and cry would apprehend the
drunken Epicure upon strong suspicion, that he forces God, to pull the cup
from his mouth, because being filled with Gods plenty, he vomited his bounty
into the Donors bosom.

Yea more, I may not sin to please, though in the pleasing I might profit: as
it must be, (...), Romans 15.2. so it must be only (...), in good, as well as for
good. I may not sin to preserve peace, then which nothing more lovely, no nor
to save a life, then which nothing more sweet.

Yet more, I may not sin to please, though for some spiritual good; as to
keep off sin from some other, and draw it on my self; no not to prevent
another sin in my self: in evils of punishment, e malis minimum, but in
evil of sin, e malis nullum. No nor yet may I do it for the end of all ends
the glory of God; least God take us up, as Job did his friend, Will ye speak
wickedly for God? Job. 31.7. non defensoribus istis, etc.

One exception, and that out of Scripture will keep All things within his
banks. A Christian may please and condescend, in all things, as Christ did
condescend, and was tempted like us in all things, (Heb. 4.15.) (...), sin
only excepted. Here then is the difference between the fawning flatterer and
the pleasing Christian: the flatterer that feeds on the air of men's favor
like the Cameleon, borrowes of the next object, any color save white, the
Hieroglipheke of innocence: but the good Christian, whose meat is more solid,
profiting and saving, will suite to any color save black, the livery of sin
and death.

Secondly, in Good things we must please, not only in joining the adverbe with
the nowne, in doing a good thing well, in a good and unoffensive manner, but
also, sometimes in for bearing it, where is danger of offense. What? (will you
say) is not Omissioboni mala? and will you Romans 3 8.
do evil that good may come thereof? yea the omission of good is the evil of
omission; and simply evil, when the duties are simply necessary: but since
affirmative precepts bind not adsemper (it being impossible to do them all at
once) charity must look out with the eyes of discretion, for the ubi and
quando, and other circumstances necessary attendants on virtuous actions. A
wise man will think what the wiseman advises Eccles. 3.1. There is a time for
all things. If thou suffer thy brother to sin, thou sinnest in suffering Levit.
19.17. Thou shall plainly rebuke him: and yet I may sin in reprooving, if I
reprove him for sin unfeasonably, when he is in passion, as ministering Physic
in the fit. Again, We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth,
2. Cor. 13.8. Yet to avoid offense, sometimes some truths may be concealed. For
though we need not stumble at scandalum Pharisaeorum, malicious exceptions, but
keep on our way, and turn them off with Christ's Let them alone, etc. Mat.
15.12, 14. yet we must be so tender of Scandalum Pusillorum, such as stumble
of weakness, as to prevent their offense, our hand may hold from doing some
kind of good not presently necessary, and our tongue from speaking some truth
not importantly material; but to defer the one, and conceal the other,
until by sufficient and mature instruction that rock of offense (like the
dead body of Amasa) be removed out of the way. For as S. Hierom advises,
Whatsoever spiritual good may be omitted without prejudice to that triple
truth of life, of righteousness, and of Doctrine, we should let it pass
(understand pro hic and nunc, that is, defer or conceal it) rather then give
offense to Jew or Gentile or the Church of God.

Thirdly, Indifferent things, which are our present All, and the maine object
of pleasing in all things: in all things indifferent, wherein God has not tied
up our hands, by any either express or implicit command; but left us in
bivio, upon due weighing of circumstances to take or leave. So that as Bernard
says, In medijs lex positaest obedientiae; so in these indifferent things
especially must we show ourselves peaceable, inoffensive, pleasing, that we
neither wound in them, or for them, our weak Brother by scandal, or authority
by contempt, or the Church by faction. That where humane authority commands,
and divine authority does not countermaund, we retain our conscience free from
Doctrinall necessity, yet stooping the outward Man to Obedientiall necessity,
Ye must needs be subject. Romans 13.5. and that not patience perforce, not
only because of wrath, but for conscience sake. For howbeit such laws of man
lay not any direct and immediate tie upon the Conscience (There is one Lawgiver
that can save or destroy, (Iam. 4.12.) Yet they so bind us indirectly and
mediately, that Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God,
and is bound over upon breach of the good behavior, they that resist, receive
to themselves damnation, Romans 13.2.

Pliny tells us that Snakes encompassed in a circle of Betony, fight one with
another till they kill each other, and will not to the death come over that
enclosure. If either the Laws of the Realm, or the Constitutions of the
Church, should lay a tie of sin upon us, in such case should we show Christian
valor, (yet not in resisting or striking, but) suffering blows, wounds,
martyrdom, rather then violate that Axiom, We must obey Godrather then men,
Act. 5.29. But while we may obey them not contra Deum, but sub Deo, in Deo; yea
and obey God in the Men who are the powers ordained of God, he expects we
should peaceably and humbly submit our selves 1. Pet. 2.13.
to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake. In a word; where there is no
danger of sin in keeping the peace of the Church or Commonwealth, it is a sin
to break the peace: and every moderate Christian, that owneth God for his
Father, and the Church for his Mother, must learn for their sakes to do as
our Apostle here exampleth us, please all men in all things.

I should now have descended to particular application suitable to this
auditory, and the times; and have solicited you (my Brethren, who as Trumpeters
are much heard among the multitude) to perform the part of Gracchus his man,
who standing behind his Master with an Ivory Pipe, when earnestness in
declayming transported him beyond the due compass of his voice, used with
sounding a temperate note, to bring him to a lower key, a nimia contentione
revocare: that by your moderate and peaceable carriage and counsel, ye might
qualify the offenses taken both in Church and State, by unhappy distractions
and misprisions of the time. But I speak to such an Auditory as (though I do
not) your selves can sufficiently apply.

To you Right Reverend Visitour, I can make no other application, but humbly to
beseech you to do as you do: in the eminent luster of your pleasing meekenes,
follow our Apostles example to be example to all your flock. And might you
ever with the Master-Bee, govern without a sting, and do all by the spirit of
meekenes without use of the Rod, but that you may observe sometimes when the
rod is out of hand, and cast on the ground, it turns to a Serpent, Exodus 4.3.

To those that have the subordinate exercise of jurisdiction and their
Ministers, I make no other application, but desire they will take the latter
part of my text for a comment on their process: Ex officio mero, that is, Not
seeking-mine own profit, Salutem little concernent', that is, seeking the
profit of many that they may be saved. Let the proceeding be according to your
process, and my Text; and ye muzzle the mouths of all contradiction.

The Churchwardens and Sidemen, I briefly desire to remember, that they may
not please their neighbors in their sin, nor sin to please their neighbors.
Bring forth conscionably their faults to the Court of Reformation, and seek
the profit of the offenders, that they may be saved: at least, be careful to
deliver your own souls, Ezekiel. 3.19. and not for any man's pleasure to wrap
your selves in the horrible sin of perjury.

And now that I have ended my work, beseech we the Lord to begin his; and to
give us grace, so conscionably and Christianly to please all men in all things,
that we may please him above all, and in service of the Prince of peace,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, we may
attain that peace of God, that passes all understanding: which keep our
hearts and minds, etc.

FINIS.

