A PLEA TO AN APPEAL: Trauersed Dialogue wise.

By H. B.

August. De Tempore. Sermo. 98. Idcirco Doctrinam Catholicam contradicentium
obsidet impugnatio, vt fides nostra non otio torpescat, sed multis
exercitationibus elimetur. Ibid. There must be heresies even among you, that
they which are approved, may be made manifest among you. 1. Cor. 11. 19.

Printed at London, by W. I. 1626.

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, KING OF GREAT Britain, France and
Ireland; Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most gracious Sovereign:
IF it be a man's glory to pass by an offense: how much more a Kings? who being
armed with power to revenge, his pardon is the more glorious, the more
gracious. This is Your Majesty's glory: that You have passed by the offense of
Your servant: and Your glory how beautifully shall it shine forth, if Your
noble pardon shall be sealed with Your Royal Patronage of this poor Plea?
which if it pass not under the Privilege of the Caesarean Majesty; it is
like to fare the worse for the Atturneys sake; whom (besides his many personal
imperfections) the very scarres of his late disgrace with so gracious a
Master, expose, with his Plea, as no lesseridiculous to the Antagonists, then
David's sling was to Golia^, and his Philistims. Who, if they ask me, upon what
hope I presumed, to impleade an Appeal to Caesar: I cannot answer with Solon,
upon old age; rather, upon poverty; rather, upon Caesar's equity* rather, upon
the causes verity. Yea, my duty to God, to your Majesty, to the sacred memory
of your Royal Father, to the Church of God, to my Mother Church of England, to
the State, to my Reverend Fathers, to my reproached Brethren, all these summon
me from my sweet, safe Priuacy, to run a hazard upon the Theater of
importune opposition.

And see also, Dread Sovereign, how deeply You stand engaged in this Plea.
Therein seven Plaintifes solicit Your Grace for justice.

First, Truth: she complains of hard usage, how she is driven to seek
corners, since she cannot pass the Press Cum Priuilegio, but must be
sile^ced, yea Gagged, least, while she refuses to subscribe to An Appeal,
she should by writing, clear her Doctrines from the infamous term of
Puritanisme, and her self from being reproached for a Puritan.

The next Plaintiff, is Gods Glory, Grace, Gospel, complaining they are
undermined, ouerturned, by an Appeal: wherein Gods foundation of his free
grace and mercy in electing us in his Son to salvation, is laid upon the sandy
ground of Man's freewill. his eternal and unrepentant love to his Elect, made
to depend upon the hair of human mutability, standing on its own unsteady
bottom to fall totally, finally.

The third Plaintiff, is the Sacred Ashes of Your Royal Father of famous
memory, complaining His honor is polluted, profaned in a high degree by An
Appeal, so much depressing the Synod of Dort, which His Majesty so much
graced, and exalting Arminianisme, which His sacred Majesty so much detested.

The fourth Plaintiff, is Gods Church, especially our Mother Church of England,
justly complaining, how impiously she is abused, and her Doctrines traduced, by
an Appeal, as if in the very Fundamentalls, (as Praedestination, Election,
Freewill, Justification, Faith, Perseverance in saving grace, Certainty of
salvation, and the like) she iumped with the Apostatized Church of Rome, and
her confederate Arminians: as if her Doctrines were not the same with the holy
Scriptures: as if they must be rated by a few private spirits, engrossing, as
by a Monopoly, the name of the Church of England, reducing Ecclesia Romana to
Curia Romana: as if her Doctrines were as mutable, as their unjust Judges, who
Cameleon like will change color with every object of time.

The fifth Plaintiff is the State, complaining of a ruefull distraction and
rent it suffers, by a most factious and seditious Appeal, which coming very
unseasonably, like a disastrous Comet, portendeth universal ruin both to
Church and State, if the vast breach made thereby, for the grand enemy to
enter, be not all the sooner and surer (if possible) made up again.

The sixth Plaintiff is the Ghost of some of the Reverend forefathers of our
Church, as Doctor Bancroft, once Bishop of London, and Doctor Ouerall, once
Deane of Paul's, and Bishop of Norwich, complaining, that their speeches in the
Conference at Hampton Court (Ianua. 14. 1603.) now lately printed, the one
about Praedestination, the other, Perseverance in grace, are pitifully and
palpably perverted in An Appeal, to the great reproach of their own Credits,
and in them, the scandal of the Church of England.

The seventh Plaintiff is the Communion of Saints militant, in this Church, and
elsewhere (yea some, now Triumphant in heaven) complaining, that notwithstanding
they strive both in faith and practice to come as near, as is possible for
human frailty, to Christ and his Apostles, yet for that very cause they are
persecuted and reproached in An Appeal, with the odious name of Puritan, and
what not?

Now all these Plaintifes, most noble King, do as by special interest, crave
justice at Your Majesty's hands. Truth claims it, as You are King of England,
Defender of the faith; that as It makes You free, so You would it, with full
privilege to plead its own cause. Gods glory claims it of You, as whom
(above all Princes in Christendom) He has put such a rich crown of grace and
glory upon, that thereby Your Majesty might learn how highly to prize His
infinite glory, which the more You stand for against its enemies, the more
firmly it shall make You to stand against all Your Adversaries. The Sacred
Ashes of Your royal Father of pious memory require justice of You, not only
as you are a King, but as the most pious Son of such a Father, that as by An
Appeal, You are called to be an vmpire, You would accordingly determine,
whither in Your judgment the Synod of Dort, with the Decrees of it, be rather
to be rejected, and set at naught, for the Appealers vilifying and disclaming
of it: or religiously maintained by Your Majesty, at least for the
incomparable judgment of King JAMES, who both sent thither a learned select
representative Church of England, and Himself also gave His royal assent to
all the conclusions of it, as being in all points consonant to the Doctrine of
the Church of England. The Church of England, with the State (like Hipocrates
twins, mutually affected with each others weal or woe, both living together,
both dying together) with one heart and voice humbly crave justice of Your
Majesty, as being next under Christ over both, in all causes, over all
persons, the only supreme Governor; that You would chastise their
contumacious children, who fasten reproaches, and hasten ruins to both. The
fame of our Forefathers craveth justice of Your Majesty, to free them from the
false aspersion of blasphemy, and from the opinion of being Arminians. All Gods
children, co-heires with Your Majesty of the same Kingdom of glory, implore
Your justice, to rescue their innocence from the reproach of Puritanisme, the
very name, being enough to cause Truth to be taken for Heresy; sincerity, for
hypocrisy; a peaceable Conformitant, for a seditious Schismaticke; a loyal
subject, for a traitor; an honest man, for a varlet.

Thus by justice, shall Your Majesty's throne be established. Thus may
fearful consequents be prevented, if the causes be timely removed. I read
but of two maine things, which wrought Ierusalems wrack: the one, Idolatry,
causing often desolations, and miseries upon that Church and state: the other,
Heresy, in rejecting of Christ, and his righteousness, seeking justification
by works. This later alone, even without the other (for in Christ's time, and
after, not an Idol, or Image was found in Judea) caused that fatal and final
irreparable ruin, once for all.

Parallel to these two, are Pontifician Idolatry, and Arminian Heresy, the
sum whereof is to abolish the true, and to establish a new Religion. For the
first, it is gross enough to bewray it self, and to deserve to be cast out,
least such lading not only cause, but conspire with the storm to drown the
ship it is carried in. For the second (because it is somewhat more refined, and
has learned to go veiled under the Mask of the Church of England; the more
dangerous both for seducement and sedition; as a poison, the more subtle, the
more mortal) be your Majesty pleased to take aduertisment of the more proper
marks of an Arminian. An Arminian is in his personal qualities, just like his
Religion. First, he is no less ambitious of head-ship over men, then his
Religion is of copartnership (at least) with God, in His glory. Secondly, as
his Religion flatters him, so he men; very officious in soothlesse soothings,
the Spaniels, that find his ambition game. Thirdly, as his religion is
contrary, so he cannot away with Reformed Churches, and their learnedest and
foundest writers, as Calvin specially beyond the Seas. Fourthly, as he hates to
be reformed, so one piece of his Sermon must be an inuectiue against a reformed
Christian, his Puritan. Fifthly, since his Religion complies so well with
Popery, he will therefore ever prefer the Church of Rome before any, yea, all
Reformed Churches. Sixthly though he love to be a droane, yet brings he a kind
of honey to Preferments hiue. And he is now so fleshed with confidence, that
(as every where abroad) he will more frankly at Court make the theames of his
Sermons to be, Uniuersall grace, equally offered to all, to receive if they
will: when a man has received grace, he may fall away totally, yea, finally
from that grace of God and justification: He teaches also, that man can have
no other certainty of salvation, but coniecturall: that God has predestined
none to glory, but those, whom he foresaw would both by their Freewill receive
grace, and would or could of themselves persevere to the end: that in the maine
and fundamental points of religion, the Doctrine of the Church of England
agrees with the Council of Trent. These, and the like, be the Doctrines of
the Appeal; which how true, this ensuing Plea will plainly show.

Pardon my plain zeal, gracious Prince. The Romans despised not the noise
of their geese, whereby their Capitol was preserved from the Gauls. Let me be
accounted one of them for telling truth, so our dangers may thereby be
prevented. Yea, those geese were highly rewarded: I desire no other, but that I
may be a common sharer in those blessings, which shall attend both Church and
State, if but those Plaintifs be righted, whose satisfaction shall be Your
Majesty's honor, the settling of Your Crown, the comfort of Your best friends,
the confusion of Your greatest foes, the retaining of Gods favor upon Your
Majesty's Person for grace, peace and prosperity here, for glory and
immortality hereafter: for all which, I shall be, as I am ever bound,

Your Majesty's most humble Orator, though unworthy servant, HENRY BVRTON.

The Preface to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, I present thee here with a Plea to an Appeal. That Appeal
I mean styled, An Appeal to Caesar. Which is such, as I confess (saving for
the Titles, wherein I find the Sacred name of Caesar) I had filed my feet,
rather then my hands with it, if after my long frustrate expectation of seeing
it burned, I had not, to my great wonderment, seen the contrary, namely, that
it found so many friends and favorites. Besides sundry things therein, which at
first might have passed only for errors, as falling from some distemper of
hasty passion: being now stoutly and stiffly, in cold blood, defended, they
grow to be flat heresies, and so no further to be tolerated, as S. Augustine
speaks. For my own part, when I perused the book, my spirit was not a
little stirred in me, to see Gods glory defaced, our Salvation undermined, our
Church scandalized, and popish Arminianisme triumphing, even upon the open
Theater. Feign would I have been dealing with it, but both the consciousnes of
my many both natural disabilities, and personal infirmities, as also the hope
I had of so many my worthy and able elder brethren (who I trusted would, and
still hope will, vindicate at least their dear Mothers credit, the Church of
England) held me back. Notwithstanding at last (though the least of all) I
gave the onset (nec tardum opperiens, nec praecedentibus instans) as, well
knowing, that Hosanna is accepted of Christ, as well from the mouths of little
children, as of others; Yea, and sometimes, (if those should hold their peace,
the very stones would cry. And where as not only my personal imperfections,
but my natural corruptions also stood up to dissuade me from such a Task: yet
even from them also, did I draw motives unto it. First, because I thought my
example of showing willingness to my weakness, might provoke the more able,
to be the more willing to supply my wants. Secondly, out of the sense and
conscience of my many corruptions, that Law in my members, leading me
(miserable!) captive to the law of sin; having such abundant experience of
that superabundant grace of God, which has mightily borne me up even against
the stream of rebellious nature, so that when my foot slipped, his mercy held
me up: I have learned hereby how deeply I am bound to express my thankfulness
to God, in setting forth to the uttermost of my power, the praise of the glory
of his Grace, sufficient for me, against those thorns in my flesh, against
those buffering messengers of Satan, threatening to overthrow me, if the Lords
never failing grace had not made me to stand. Yea how many storms of
temptations has my brittle bark endured, yet blessed be God, it is not
wracked. Those Relics of rebellious Canaanites dwelling in me, as thorns in
my side, and pricks in mine eyes, by Gods grace humble me only, overcome me
not. So that God having put in my hand, such a tried weapon of infallible
experience of his saving grace: I should be very ungrateful to let it lie
rusting in the sheath, and not to use it with my best strength, courage and
skill, against the adversary of this grace, who says, that the Child of God
man fall away totally, and possibly also finally from grace and justification.
Which one Heresy overthrows the whole tenure and truth of the Gospel; it
turns vpside down the very foundation of our salvation, grounded upon Gods
eternal love, in Electing and Predestinating us in Christ to Grace and Glory,
those gifts and calling of God without repentance; it revineth (directly in
part, and by consequence, altogether) that wicked heresy of the Pelagians,
noted by the Reverend Bishop of Chichester, and the worshipful M. Francis
Rovs, two noble champions of Gods Truth; it comes close up also to make a
league with the Council of Trent, to truck with Rome, in all that fard^ll of
Apostaticall doctrines, packed up in the sixth Session of it, as of Freewill,
Justification, Predestination, Cortaintie of salvation, Perseverance in grace
etc. In which points and many more of that nature, coincident to the doctrine
of Justification, the subject of that whole Session, I had (I confess)
formerly taken some pains, in setting down the true difference between us,
and the Church of Rome, in this main fundamental. And having the Treatise by
me, already finished, and privileged also, (while the season served) for the
Press, only prvented by the last visitation: I have been the more willing to
take this new occasion to borrow at least some Artillery from that greater
work, to encounter these fresh Assaults, made against the Truth.

And see, how the same motive, that put me upon the former work, has drawn
me also to this. Shall I tell the plain truth? Why not? But I must name Doctor
Francis White then, and discover something, which passed between him and me in
private. But this I hope shall not violate the Law of fidelity, since I shall
say no more, but what himself, in his Approbation prefixed to the Appeal,
has not stuck to make open profession of to the world. It is this, I having
about four years ago, taken a through survey of the sixth Session of the
Council of Trent, and finding therein Romes Apostasy from the faith of Christ
cunningly couched: I took occasion (simply suspecting nothing, as then) to go
to the said Doctor, wishing he would undertake so worthy a Task, as to declare
fully the true difference between us and the Church of Rome, in the doctrine
of Justification, according to the Council of Trent. But his answer was, that
the difference was but small between us. I wondering at his answer, No Sir,
said I, then let us shake hands with them, and be good friends. For on this
foundation stands the maine fabric of Romes Religion, consisting in human
satisfactions and merits, all devised to fill up the vast emptines of their
Justification, from which Root they all, as branches, do receive life and
growth. Yet to be sure, another time I propounded the same question unto him;
his answer was the same; and so was my reply.

Hereupon, far above my strength, I took courage to attempt that task my
self, leuelled against Pontifician and Arminian Doctrines jointly all along:
and now again am I no less, if not much more, justly provoked, to reuiew and
revive something of that former work, being spurred thereunto, more (I
confess) by Doctor Whites Approbation, then Master Mountagues Appeal. Nor, in
such a Cause, am I a whit moved with the name and fame of Doctor White. He is a
learned man, I confess; but Truth is better learned. He is an ancient grave
Divine, crowned with an hoary venerablenesse; true: but Solomon says, The
hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of righteousness.
And howsoever the world may value Truth according to personal respects: yet
God is no Accepter of persons. My brethren (says Saint James) have not the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of persons. He
condemns those, that in points of faith, preferres the Gold-ring, Tertul de
Praescript aduersus hareticos. lib^^^^^ mi^^^^.
the soft or white raiment, before the poor man Tertullian says, Quid si
Episcopus etc. What if a Bishop, if a Deacon, if a Widow, if a Virgin, if a
Doctor, if also a Martyr, shall fall away from the Rule: therefore shall
haeresies seen e to obtain the truth? Ex personis probamus fidem, an ex fide
personas? Do we approve the faith by the persons, or the persons by the faith?
Nemo sapiens etc. No man is wise, but he that is faithful; none great, none a
Christian. Nemo aute^ Christianus etc. And no man is a Christian, but he that
shall persevere unto the end. Auolent, quantum volent, paleae leuis fidei etc.
Let the chafe of light faith fly away as fast as they will, with every breath
of temptation, the cleaner heap of grain shall be laid up in the Lords
Garner. Nonne etc. Did not some of the Lords Disciples forsake him, being
scandalized, and offended with his Doctrine? Yea was not Judas the Traitor one
of the twelve Apostles? What then, if any great Doctor, yea or Bishop fall away
from the faith, they once professed? Is this a sufficient proof, that Gods
saints may fall away totally or finally from saving grace and justification?
Will any Appealer, or his Approuers make this good by their own examples of
falling away? No, says Saint John, cited by Tertullian in the foresaid place,
Phigellus, Hermogenes, Philetus, and Hymeneus forsook the faith; they went out
from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no
doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be made
manifest, that they were not all of us. And why went they out? Saint John a
little before admonishes Gods children to beware of the love of the world;
whereupon he gives them examples of Apostates; inferring, that the love of the
world drew them away. Demas forsook Paul, and embraced this present world. So
easy a thing is it for a lover of the world to fall into all heresy, the God
of this world having blinded his eyes? Therefore when we see a star shoot,
as the vulgar call it: do we, as they, think it to be a very star, falling
from the firmament? Nothing less. We know it to be nothing else, but an earthy
slime, falling to the earth, whence it ascended in a vapor. For earth will to
earth. Stella cadens non est stella, cometa suit. Such acry vapors then, when
you see ambitiously mounting aloft toward the upper part of the lowest heaven,
well may they shine there for a time like stars, but marvel not when you
see them fall back again; they were no true stars. Sacerdotium, quod intus
cecidit, diu foris stare non potest. It was Gregory the greats saying of
ambitious simoniacks. Was Judas once in the state of grace and justification,
because he was an Apostle? Indeed Andreas Vega, (...)
one of the champions of the Trent Council, puts him down f^^ an in instance,
that the Elect may fall away finally from grace: because Christ said, Have not
I chosen you twelve? Judas then (says he) was one of the Elect. But as Saint
Augustine answers well, it is one thing to be elected to the office of
Apostleship, another, to the fellowship of the Quaest. super (...). 1. qu. 117.
(...) 4. and in Psalm. 55.
Saints. For there is, as a twofold vocation, so a twofold election; external,
and internal; temporary, and eternal. Judas was of the external and
temporary, but not of the internal and eternal election. For of this, Christ
said elsewhere, I speak not of you all; I know whom I have chosen. There
Christ puts a plain difference between Judas an elect Apostle, and the rest,
who were also elect Saints. But how came Judas, an elect Apostle, to fall away?
he was a thief, and bare the bag. Yet he b^ught not his Apostleship, he was
elected by Christ. He had a fair, and lawfu^l calling. Yet his coueteousnesse
brought him to Apostasy, and even to betray the innocent blood of the Lamb of
God. Then wonder not at the Church of England. The sa^e Rebecca brought forth
as well a rough Esau, as a smo^th Jacob. And, as Tertullian says to the same
purpose, Of the kernel of the mild, and fat, and useful olive, does spring
the rough wild olive: and of the most pleasant, and sweet figs seed, does
grow the windy, and empty wild figtree. So heresies (says he) have
fructisied of that, which was ours, but they are not ours, being degenerate
from the grain of truth, and by lies become wild. They went out from us, but
they were not of us. What then, if we shall see some of the Apostles, or such
as would be accounted Apostolical, to prove Apostaticall from the faith?
shall this stumble Gods Saints? Or shall an impotent admiration of their
persons draw belief to their heresies? God forbid. For as the same Tertullian
Tertul ibid.
(for I find not an acuter author for this purpose) comparing champion-like
heretics to wrastlers, or sword players, which many times overcome, not by
their own strength, but by the others weakness: no otherwise (says he) do
heresies prevail over the infirmities of men, but have no power at all upon a
sound faith. Yea, of what quality or dignity soever heretics be, whether for
personal, or political respects, the holy Ghost warnes the Saints to avoid,
and contemn them. Avoid an heretic, says the Apostle. And St. John, 2.
John 10.
If there come any unto you, that brings you not this Doctrine, receive him not
to your house, neither bid him God-speede: for he that bids him God-speede,
is partaker of his evil deeds. And Saint Paul doubles his admonition, If an
Angel from heaven preach unto you any other Gal. (...).
Gospel, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed; which
is not another Gospel; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert
the Gospel of Christ. Into this condemnation be the new Pontifician Arminian
(shall I say Heretics? I need not, if they persist; I will not, if they As
Master Mountag^^ has fairly promised, laying, though he may err, yet he will
be no Heretic, especially against the Church of England Appeal c 1. p. 4.
and p. 9.
recant, and desist) Approvers of the Council of Trent fallen: the doctrine
whereof is a foul and flat Apostasy from the Mystery of godliness. They would
bring in another Gospel, though no Gospel, but they would obtrude it far the
true and only Gospel of the Grace of God. And if the Galatians were said to be
fallen from Christ, only for mingling Circumcision with the Gospel, as
requisite with faith to their justification: how fearful is that Apostasy
from Christ, which quite overthrows the effectual and free grace of God,
excluding, yea, accursing the true saving faith, in our justification, as the
Doctrine of Trent does; so dangerous it is, to be any way accessory by yielding
the least assent unto it. And what execrable heresies will these prove to be,
that go about to pluck up the tree of life, by the root, out of the Paradise
of Gods Church, and would plant instecde thereof, the forbidden tree of
knowledge, teaching and persuading the eaters, that they are made thereby as
Gods, selfe-sufficient, selfe-wise, selfe-able to save themselves, not only in
their receiving, but retaining grace, which work of their own wills being
foreseen of God, was (say they) the first moving cause of electing and
praedestinaring them to salvation? which what is it else, but a mere making
void of Gods unchangeable Decree of Praedestination, and free grace of
Election, no farther fixed and certain, but as man's receiving and retaining of
grace, and perseuering therein is certain, which (say they) is uncertain.

Pardon my zeal, gentle Reader. Impute it not to any bitterness of spleen. I
bear it not to any man's person living, God is my record, much less to the
Authors of the Appeal, and the Approbation. I know none whom I hate more,
then my sinful self. But the Lord knows, it is no small grief to me, that I
am thus forced to sharpen my style. Which if it seem tarter to thy Palate,
then may sure with Christian moderation and modesty: examine I pray thee,
whether the long custom of Court-smoothing, and eare-pleasing, specially in
Divine matters, have not bred such a delicacy in the souls taste, as that down
right zeal for Gods glory, can hardly find a slomack to take it down, or
digest it, but is rejected as a bitter pill, or potion, of such Patients, as
account the remedy worse then the disease. Zeal will not pass now but for
fury, or rude incinility, at the best. But ab initio non erat sic. In old time,
it was lawful to call a spade, a spade. Saint Peter dealt roundly Acts (...).
with Simon Magus for his Simony, Thy money perish Acts 13.
with thee. How sharp was Paul with Elimas the Sorcerer, for going about to
turn away the Deputy fio^ the faith? O full of all subtilty, and all
mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all righteousness etc. And
what would he have said (trow we) to those men, who go about to turn away,
not a Deputy, but a whole kingdom, and a well settled flourishing Church, from
the faith? What if they were grave and learned Divines? So much the worse. If
an enemy had, done this, it had been more tolerable; but it was even thou, my
guide, and familiar friend. I will not add David's imprecation, but rather
advise them, as Peter did Simon, to pray, that if it be possible, the sin,
not of their heart only, but of their hand, may be forgiven. How did Paul,
though but a young Apostle, reprove the prime Apostle Peter, only for a matter
of dissimulation in his conversation, not any default in his preaching? And
shall we not zealously resist those to the face, that, no^ now dissemblingly
anymore, but with open profession, approve, auow, and stafly maintain gross
and greiuous heresies, devised by the Devil, to betray Gods glory, and man's
salvation? That stick not to call the Doctrinas of Pradestination, freewill,
and the like, Scholasticall speculations merely, questions of obscurity, not
fit for pulpits, and popular ears; but procuring rather discord and troubles
in Church and State, then serve to edification, etc. (Appeal page 42. 78. 80.)
Which speeches, and the like, whether do they tend, but to suppress those
Doctrines of the Gospel, whereby God is most glorified, and man most humbled?
shall we spare such? When Policarpus met Marcion the heretic casually, Eusebius.
lib. 4 cap. 14.
and neglecting him, was asked of him, Do thou not know us? He replied, I
know thee for the Devils eldest child. Such was the zeal of holy men in times
past, against, not only those that were Heretics, but hinderers of the truth.
The Apostle wished, that those false teachers of legal righteousness, were
even cut off, which troubled the Church of Galatia. Therefore what cause any
faithful Minister of Christ has to use sharpness of style to seditious
seducers, and troublers of Church and State, in so famous a Kingdom, in so
perilous a season too, let any indifferent man judge.

And consider judicious Reader, if we had not a King, seasoned from his very
cradle with the knowledge of the true faith of Christ, having now grown up
therein to a goodly ripeness, in regard whereof we have small cause to suspect
his constancy herein: i^to what danger were we, and Gods religion brought, when
such kind of Ministers are not wanting to help forward the reerecting of the
Romish Baal in our Land, had they but a young Manasses to restore the Altars
and Groves, which the good King Ezechiah his Father had pulled down?

But to conclude: since these two fore named Worthies, worthy to be named
again, the Reverend Bishop of Chichester, Dostor Carlton, and the Worshipful
Master Francis Rovs, have so learnedly and zealously confuted some material
points in the Appeal (which like expert archers, making special choice of for
their mark, they have hit home) although I could have wished, that they had
with no less felicity coped with the rest of the materials in the book: yet
since they have been pleased to leave behind them some liberal gleanings, yea
some whole ricks of tares to be cut up, and carried away from Gods wheat field:
I will crave leave, to show at least my good will in all, hoping my defects
will find pardon of all them, who though they can, yet forbear to make their
best supply. The blasphemer was to be stoned of the whole Congregation, some
hitting one part, some another, till he were beaten down, and buried under the
heap.

Yet in this Impression, the Plea reaches no farther, then the first part of
the Appeal. Which if it find courteous intertainment, the other part is forth
coming, and wants but time, to help the slownesse of the Press to bring it
forth. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord, H. B.

Good Reader, correct these faults with thy pen, with others of smaller note.
The rest are noted in the end of the book. Amend first, then read.

Page 7, line 19, read scantling. l. 28, r. Doctrines. p. 51, l. 13. r.
preuifion p. 52, l 6, r. ^ss^s. p. 54. l. 21. r. 4. 5. l. 29, r. s^^scos. p.
82. l. 3, 1. ^^^^^ude 10. l. 9, 1. un (...) etc. Whence. l. 13, 1. anima. l.
24, 1. pr^^^ceth. p. 83, l. 15, r. the beginn^ng p. 84. l. 35, 1. into him. p.
85, l. 24, r. quomodo. p. 87 l, 13, 1. ^xecrated. p. 91, l. 30, 1 ground of
hope. l. 35, r. his Majesty's.

A PLEA TO AN APPEAL.
Asotus. Babylonius. Orthodoxus.
ASotus. Master Babylonius you are well met.


Babylonius. And you Master Asotus.


Asotus. Sir I thank you for your last good company at the Ordinary; and
especially for your both merry and learned discourse; wherein, among other
passages, you wittily disciphered the nature of a Puritan, that common
opposite to us both. I was much delighted to hear you, and have often thought
of you since, and shall love you the better for it: for of all men I cannot
away with these Puritans, a precise sect, cross and contrary to all other men.
A man may not swear an oath (forsooth) nor play the good fellow a little, in
drinking a cup or two more then needs, for good fellowship-sake, nor love a
wench, and the like, but we must pass their most sharp censure. Nay, having
deeply waighed the matter, I am persuaded, that were it not for these Puritans,
we and you should agree together, as loving brethren, and Countrymen.


Babylonius. Are you advised of that, friend Asotus? you have hit the very
nail on the head; and herein you discover your wisdom, and judgment. For it
were no hard matter (I wis) to reconcile you and me, and such as we are, as
well in Religion and opinion, as we are already in affection, were it not for
these makebate Puritans. And you have well said, in saying, we and you: for,
howsoever, the Puritans, both in England and beyond the seas (I mean, the
Caluinists and Hugenots) are called Protestants; yet between them and us
Roman Catholics, there is a great Gulf set, so that there is no hope of
reconciliation between us. And indeed; for those civil and good fellow
Protestants (whom I know you mean) that hold of the Church of England, and of
the Doctrine of the Church for the prop and pillar of their Faith; there is
great hope, that they will, ere long, be reconciled to the holy mother Church
of Rome: for, he that believes as the Church believes, is not far from the
kingdom of God. But these Puritans, they will not acknowledge any rule of
faith from the Church, but are all for Scriptures, Scriptures: so that so long
as they are of that mind, there is no hope of reconciliation between us and
them; unless they will yield to this Manime, That the Church is the Judge and
interpreter of the Scriptures; which they most obstinately deny.


Asotus. But, by your leave, Master Babylonius; I never understood, but that
the Doctrine of the Church of England, was all one with the Doctrine of the
Scriptures; as I ever have been taught.


Babylonius. I will not take upon me now to dispute that point: but have you
not seen an excellent Book, set out of late, by one of your most learned
Ministers, which he calls, his Appeal to Caesar.


Asotus. I have heard of it; the Author is highly commended by some for a great
Scholar: but a great many on the other side, and especially those we call
Puritans, do very much condemn the book; saying, it is written in the gall
of bitterness, and with the spirit of sedition, enough to set all in a
combustion, if his books should pass for current.


Babylonius. In the gall of bitterness: That was the doom of Saint Peter upon
Simon Magus: but by such like puritanicall censures, you may the better judge
of the worthiness of the book, which is both learnedly and wittily pend.


Asotus. You say well, I think never a whit the worse of the book, for the
Puritans taxing of it; nor the Author the less learned, when you Master
Babylonius stick not so to commend him.


Babylonius. I must needs ingenuously confess, that I like the book the
better, because it plagues the Puritans, and plots a reconciliation between us
and you.


Asotus. We agree in that; But, since you so much commend the book, and so
much rumor runs of it, I will go cast away one couple of shillings upon it.


Babylonius. Friend Asotus, though I would not prevent you of buying so worthy
a book, yet for this time, I will lend it you; here it is, read it, then as
you like, buy it.


Asotus. Sir I accept it thankfully. Let me a little peruse it.


Babylonius. Freely.


Asotus. Appello Caesarem etc. But I find here Doctor Whites approbation
prefixed to it, which I must tell you, Master Babylonius, does make me much
marvel, that you so much commend the book; for you know what a public
adversary he has been to Roman Catholics; so that I should imagine, this
book, which Doctor White so much approves, is more an adversary to Roman
Catholics, then to our homebred Puritans.


Babylonius. Yea, but you must know Master Asotus, it is one thing what a man
says in public, for popular applause, and salary; and another, what he
thinks in his own private opinion and conscience. As the Mathematician cited
by Saint Aug: said to his wife, disciplining her for abusing his art for
wantonness, she imputing her lightness to the aspect of Venus, and that he
should beat Venus, not her for it. It is one thing what I do Aliud est, quod
competit Rectori, aliud, quod prosertur emptori.
as a governor of my wife, another, what I vent to the buyer for the
maintenance of my life. Doctor White is a good wiseman, and knows how to
attemper himself to the times: It is less envy to pass his judgment, under
another name, which he thought not so fit in his own.


Asotus. But in Law, if there be any default, the Accessory is no less guilty
then the Principal, the Receauer then the Thief.


Babylonius. True; but here the case is different. For say, the book contains
matter vnapprouoble to many, yet Doctor White if he se occasion, may easily
wind himself out of the snare; as I hear he does already, saying, That the
Copy printed varieth from that which he approved. Blame him not, till the
book (as happily, and hopefully it will) get better footing in the worlds
affection, and good will. In the meanetime, it is good policy a little to pull
in the horns: For it is objected by the Puritan faction, that Master
Mountagues former book, called his Gag, which his Appeal defends, does in
many particulars contain express contrarieties to the Doctrine of the Church
of England: and consequently his Appeal, with the factors and abettors, as
Accessaries at least, come within the compass of a Praemunire. But you know
these pestilent Puritans will say, and make the worst of things; and they are a
strong faction. And perhaps the buzze may somewhat possess the good old man
with a panicke fear, least not only he loose what he has, but which is
much more, what his many merits may hope for, saving that Saints merits are not
so high flowne in the Church of England, but they are easily ouersoared by
Simon Magus, flying to the top of every pinnacle of the highest Temple, upon
Angels wings. But for the book, I do not hold it so greatly blame worthy, as
finding it a fair and towardly beginning, to produce in time most hopeful
consequents; (as they say, Rome. was not built in one day) but let me a little
excuse the good old man And the rather, because the Puritans stick not to cast
him in the teeth with White dyed black: which color (say they) coming from
the fatt of a Roman Catholic Dyer, would not have holden so sure, if it had
not found the ground of a selfe-woading, to make it the more permanent. Yet the
Appealer (I can tell you) has fair Cards on his sides, and almost all the
Helps; for the fiue-fingers being the Club-trump turned up. The first Card dealt
him; is the best help but one. Yea all the Cards in his hand are black, and
he has a fair pull to rub, for his ase colors for it, putting his Appello
in good hope. But the mischief is, after much hard drawing, his Ase proves a
Spade. Well: yet he has a strong hand of the best Coats; and what he cannot
do by strong hand with Clubbs, he hopes to play his part with the undermining
Spade, whereof he is well stored. Only he misseth the Ase of Hearts, which
some make an emblem of truth, being always a Help whatsoever is trumpe; nor
has he any of that color. But he well hopes that Help sleeps; as also the
rubb-ase^ which if his adverse part have not, he doubts not, but the game will
go cock-sure on his side, with his number of Coats. Pardon me this
comparison. I was late the last night at. Maw, with two or three fair Ladies.


Asotus. And I could have wished to have been so happy as to have borne you
company; But is it lawful for those of your Order to play at Cards?


Babylonius. Lawful? Does not the Apostle say, All things are lawful?


Asotus. But he adds withal, All things are not expedient, all things edify
not.


Babylonius. But the same Apostle says elsewhere, I became all things to all
men, that I might win the more.


Asotus. Yea, to save some; but what was that with Card-play?


Babylonius. Come, now you play the Puritan. But, is it not more to gain, then
to save?


Asotus. But, there is a gaining to a man's loss; For what shall it profit a
man, if he shall gain the whole world, and loose his own soul?


Babylonius. On my soul, I think you will turn Puritan.


Asotus. Ha, ha, ha.


Babylonius. But we gain the world to the Church; wherein the world is saved,
as the Beasts were in Noah: Arc, which were therefore saved to be food for
Noah, who was then the Priest.


Asotus. You reason very learnedly ad oppositum.


Babylonius. But in a word friend Asotus, we of our holy Order and Society,
howsoever in our Cells and Cloisters, we live strictly, observing the ancient
Cannons of Priests: yet conuersing, here amidst many Wolves; I mean the
vengeable Puritans, which are still pressing the Laws against us, we are feign
to be wise as serpents, and to put on all habits and fashions; yea, even those
of Russians and Roring-boyes, that so we may not appear to be those Sheep
whom the Wolves seek to devour.


Asotus. Now you say something; I commend your wit; but I know not how this
stands with honesty. Should ye not also be innocent as doves?


Babylonius. Tush man, we must do as we may; and in case of necessity,
dispense with honesty for spiritual advantage.


Asotus. Well, these be Paradoxes. But to return to your former matter
concerning this book, me thinks you tell strange things of it.


Babylonius. Strange things? I tell you, you shall find it a most rare book,
written with a brave authority, and with a most lofty spirit: me thinks he
writes as if he were the very Or^elo of the Church of England, as the Popes
Holiness is the Oracle of the World. O that he were but one of our holy
Society! which if he were, our discipline within a short time would so season
him, as he would prove a most accomplished active instrument for the
Catholic cause. He is full of metal, and he wants but the stamp of our
minte to make it current. O the grateful tartness, and smartnesse of his
style! And such is the dexterity of his wit, that in his Limbecke he can
easily draw and distill all learning into the quintessence of his For example.
own singular, and rare opinions. Let him but conceive a rare notion, and by
and by the Church of England either says it; or not expressly denying it, or
being altogether silent, he can easily conclude, silence to be consent. Yea,
he is strong as Sampson; for when he is disposed, neither the Philistines cords
of the Council of Door, which he tramples as dirt; nor yet of his Dalilah,
his Church of England, can hold him, further then himself pleases. Oh, I am
even ravished with the love of the man: he has dared and damped all the
Puritans in England. Do but go on, and read the Contents, which will give
you some scanting of the substance of the book.


Asotus. I do. I find here many things, the contrary whereof I have heard
our Minister publicly teach, and that with no less vehemency, then plain
evidence of argument from Scriptures and Fathers; at least to the conuincing of
my simple judgment.


Babylonius. I would your Minister were here present, whosoever he be; you
should see what he could say to many points maintained in this book; they
being also the very Doctrine of our holy mother Church of Rome at this day, and
those also fundamental; as of Freewill, Praedestination, Justification,
Falling from grace, Certainty of salvation, Antichrist, and the like.


Asotus. And you wish in a very good time; for if I be not deceived, yonder he
is walking; shall we go near him, and accost him?


Babylonius. With a good will. But by the way, I pray you inform me a little
of the qualities and conditions of the man, that so I may the better attemper
my speech, and carriage toward him; is he not a Puritan?


Asotus. Surely, in one sense he is no Puritan, for he is conformable; none of
the refractaries, but does both practice himself, and preach upon occasion, in
the defense of Ecclesiastical ceremonies, and that very earnestly; insomuch as
I have seen him sometimes, put back from the Communion those, which would not
receive it kn^eling; yet not leaving them, till he brought them on their knees.
Now formerly, Non conformitants only, were accounted Puritans. But if we
understand Puritan in a second degree, to wit, for a Minister to be a diligent
Preacher, and resident upon his charge; one that cannot away with
non-residency, that will not take two Benefices, and makes conscience how he
comes by one; that is of an honest conversation, and is a very sincere rebuker
of sin; an vrger of the more strict keeping of the Lords day as he usually
calls it; and rather content to suffer wrong in his tithes, then contentions
for his right: and above all, a vehement inueigher against the Mass, and all
the Idolatries and Superstitions of the Church of Rome, as he terms them; and
one, who I warrant you would never give his consent, that Jesuits and
Mass Priests should be any way tolerated to live up and down in our Land
(insomuch as I have heard, he being desired to be in a place, where it was
appointed, and so expected, that Father Fisher should dispute, and when all
came to all hearing Fisher refused to dispute, without special license from
the Archbishop of Cant^rbury: he replied and said, Master Fisher, I marvel
by what license you go up and down seducing our simple people; and yet you
want a licenc^ to dispute with our learned Divines. It is pity, such as you
are thus suffered to undermine souls and states, and so to prove the bane of
our Kingdom and Church, since for your sakes (if we had no other sins) and for
your abominable idols (the abomination of desolation standing in the holy
place, where it ought not) we are exposed and endangered to all those plagues
and punishments, which we have partly felt, and have much more cause to fear
and expect, which (...) most (...) flames must (...) break forth from the
kindled (...) of Gods spouselike jealousy to our consumption, if ye may be but
suffered thus to set your Dagon, check by i^wle in c^rrinall-ship with God's Ark in this his pure Church.) Now (Master Babylonius) how far is he a Puritan
in these respects, I leave to judge.


Babylonius. How? Can there be a more pestilent Puritan in all the Pack, then
such a one? But now you have informed me thus much of the man, I will tell you
after what manner I think it fit to deal with him. By no means must he
perceive what profession I am off. For then ten to one he will fall foul upon
me, and so we short of our purpose, which is, to try what he can say against
this book: Therefore we will only by way of question, as for your resolution
sake, see how he can answer some of the most material things therein. And for
the manner of dealing with him, let me alone; only give you the occasion, and
first onset.


Asotus With a good will. I applaude your prudence herein. God give you good
morrow Master Orthodoxus.


Orthodoxus And you neighbor Asotus,


Asotus. Sir, you are very well met; for this gentleman and I have accidentally
light upon a book, wherein I find sundry things maintained, contrary to that
I have heard of you; and we shall be much beholden to you to resolve us in
some points, which do a little stumble us.


Orthodoxus. Neighbor Asotus, I am glad to hear you make such a motion to me,
it being no usual thing with you, nor many others, (and more is the pity)
once to move a question of conscience or faith to your Minister, unless it be
more for cavil and contention, then for Christian resolution: Therefore seeing
you seem to do it out of a good desire to be informed in the truth; and
propose such questions, as concern those Doctrines which I have publicly
taught, I hold it my duty to satisfy you the best I can. As for this
Gentleman, (a^ it seems your friend) if he be of the same mind herein, with
you, though he be a stranger to me, yet I shall not be curious, but deal
ingenuously with you both; and I pray God give a good issue to our meeting, in
directing us in the way of his truth.


Babylonius. Sir, we both thank you for your courtesy.


Orthodoxus. Sir, it is my duty. But, neighbor, what book is that you speak
of?


Asotus. Sir, the Title of it is in Latin, which I understand not so well,
Appello Casarem.


Orthodoxus. O, I know the book.


Asotus. I pray you Sir, what think you of it?


Orthodoxus. Nay pardon me for that; I do not take upon me to be a censurer
of books, much less of an Appeal to Caesar: if the Author have any just
cause for which to Appeal^ to Caesar, and which is just, and fit for Caesar to
judge, no doubt but he shall find a just Caesar to do him right. But the
points you seem to propose to me, are matters of Faith, wherein the Author
seems too suspicious of his own cause, that (like to fraudulent Merchants,
who have run themselves into many men's debt, and danger) he appeals to Caesar
to have a protection for his person. But blessed be God, we have a Caesar, The
Defender of the Faith; not a protector of oppugners and underminers of the
Faith. And for matters of Faith, our Caesar knows they ought to be pleaded
only at Gods bar, and tried at the Common Law of the holy Land, the
Scriptures. Nor will he give way for any Prohibition out of any Court of
Chancery, or conscience, which may inhibite the proceeding of Gods cause, in
Gods Court, by any prerogative whatsoever. Therefore in such causes, (causes of
Faith I say) to appeal to Caesar; gives (to speak plainly) a strong suspicion
of the weakness at least of the cause. For so did Heretics in times past;
to maintain their heresies, they had no other way, but to patronize themselves
under Caesar's wings. Thus did the Arians so mightily prevail against the
Orthodox professors, by the only help and authority of Caesar. Not that I
impute heresy to the Author of this book, only for his appeal to Caesar.
Let the book, like Baal, plead for it self.


Asotus. Sir, you make me begin to suspect something; Did Heretics so as you
say? I pray you for my better satisfaction, give me some example of it.


Orthodoxus. I will briefly. Constantine the great, he that restored the Church
to a general peace and calm; sitting at the first Council of Nice, not as
Judge, but rather as a Minister, (as himself piously confessed) did for his
part ratify the Councels Decrees against Arius; yet afterward, growing old,
he was won by a woman, his sister Constantia, and she seduced by a
sycophantizing Arian Priest, to recall Arius from banishment, that he might
again declare his Faith: whereof, coming before the Emperor, he made such a
cunning confession (as formerlie he had done to the whole Council of Nice,
Rusinus Ecc. hist. lib. 1. cap 11. and Socratas lib. 1. cap 25. homo^ousios
for, homousi^s.
which he had well nigh imposed upon by his (...) in steed of (...)) as that
the good Emperor (suspecting no deceit) took it to be in all points the very
same with the Councels own confession; yet so, as he referred Arius to the
determination of a Council. But the Emperor not long after dying, Arius with
his faction creep into the favor and protection of Constantines successors,
especially of his son Constantins, who was by the same Arian Priest, who had
formerly inueagled Constantia about Arius, persuaded to favor and protect the
Arians; and the rather was the Emperor persuaded by this old Priest, because
Constantine had committed to him his last Will and Testament, to deliver it to
his son Constantius, which he did. Thus Arius by his Appeal to Caesar, and
by the cunning insinua^ion, of his crafty confederate, an old Court Priest,
got footing again; and had in all likelihood mightily prevailed, but that God
in justice, to that impious impostor, and in mercy to his Church and children,
calling the cause into his superior Court, cut Arius short, by a sudden and
strange infamous judgment, even in hot blood, as he was going with all his
pomp and train into the Cathedral in Constantinople, in despite of the good
Bishop Alexander, who all the night before, and that morning continued his
earnest supplications to God, prostrate in the Temple, to ^uert and prevent
Arius from setting his wicked foot, and proud Standard of triumph against
Christ, in that sacred place. His devout and zealous prayers were heard; and
Arius his infamous death struck all his train with a shameful amazement, and
confusion. I would this example might teach the Appealler to tremble before
that God, from whose Tribunal is no appeal, but by speedy flying with
repentance to his throne of grace and mercy in Jesus Christ. But for the
Appeal, here let me tell you thus much by the way, which I dare be bold to
avouch, that as he thinks he has done politickly, so I know he has done very
poorly to appeal to Caesar: being such a Caesar as when his many weighty
affairs shall lend him leisure to view the Appeal, the Appealer will quickly
find his own error, and have cause to repent his appealing to a Prince of
such dexterity and judgment, as in human, so also in divine matters.


Asotus. Sir, I thank you I am satisfied in this matter. Now let me entreat
you to perform your promise, in resolving some doubts, ministered by this book.


Orthodoxus. If you instance any particular, I am ready to do my best
endeavor.


Asotus. Sir, because this Gentleman my friend, has some more learning then my
self, and is somewhat acquainted with the book, I shall entreat him to
propou^d and object, and your self to resolve the Objections.


Babylonius. Friend Asotus, I pray you do not impute that to me which I was
never guilty of, as matter of learning; yet, if as a friend you impose this
task upon me, to ease you, I will the more willingly undertake it: provided
that where you see me fail, you will supplie^ and Master Orthodoxus pardon. I
shall only act your part in propounding those particular point^, which you say
are contrary to those, which Master Orthodoxus has taught you; as being also
the most material things in the book.


Asotus. Sir, I thank you, I desire no more.


Babylonius. Then to begin in order as they lie: the first thing is about the
loss of Faith and Justification, in the Of loss of Faith, and Justification.
Of total and final ^^lling from grace.
third Chapter, and so consequently of falling away from grace totally, in the
fourth Chapter: and if totally, Pap. 34.
possibly also, finally, without recovery. Now although the Author do not
avouch absolutely his own oppinion, yet he proves the affirmative from
antiquity of Fathers, and from the authority of the Church of England, unto
whose Articles and Homilies, all the Ministers thereof have subscribed. Now we
desire your resolution herein.


Orthodoxus. True it is, that the Author is very cau^elous, in auerring any
thing in his own opinion, especially in points of such consequence; therein I
commend his wit, as the Lord did the wisdom of the unjust Steward; but his
private conception he fathereth upon the Fathers, and his mother Church: yet
it is to be concluded, that what he goes about to prove by the Fathers, and by
the authority of the Church of England (though most falsely, by him forced and
forged glosses) himself is of the same judgment with them: and by the way,
for the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England, we Subscription to the
Church of Englands Doctrine, not to Mr. Mountagues private inte^pretation.
subscribed unto them indeed, but not to the private sense which any
particular man may make of them. Now for loss of faith (he must mean
justifying and saving faith, and not that faith of the Roman Church) he
alleges the 16. Article, in these words, After we have received the holy
Gh^st, we may depart from grace given, and fall into sin; and by the grace of
God we way rise again, and amend our lives. Now in all due remembrance to my
blessed mother, the Church of England, is it not as lawful for me her Son,
to take her in a good sense, as for another in a bad? And if it be lawful for
me to interpret her words according to the letter, it is one thing, reced^re a
gratia, another excidere, one thing, to depart aside, as out of the way
erroniously; another, (...) fall quite away, and to abandon the way; at least
for the time to fall quite away from grace: nor does the Article speak of a
total falling away: but of such slips, as are recovered by repentance, against
the Doctrine of N^^atus, as is there expressed. It being one thing to fall into
sin of infirmity, another, to fall away from grace totally. But, if by
departing, be meant, a total falling away; then how does this accord with the
Scripture, The Church of England^ doctrine, ^o other then that of the
Scriptures. Heb. 6. 6
that says, If such as were once enlightened etc, do fall away, it is
impossible they should be renewed again to repentance. Again, for the words
of the Homily alleged by the Appealer, they contain a wholesome admonition to
piety, and perseverance therein: but they mention no total falling away from
true and saving grace in any one particular true believer. Therefore, by
departing, is meant some other thing, then any total falling away from grace;
so that howsoever we embrace, and adore the general Doctrine of the Church of
England our dear Mother, yet whatsoever she says, we must not presently take
it at the first rebound, according to our private fancy, which what it affects
and inclines to, it can easily, (as the corrupt stomach) assimilate even
wholesome meats, and cause them to corrupt; or, as the Natural thinks the
bells ring that which he imagines; so apt is man's fancy to take words, rather
by the sound, then by the sense, to feed his pre-conceiued opinion: yet, as
neither the Church of England, her self, avouches, or concludes any thing
for Doctrine and matter of Faith, but so far as is consonant to the word of
God; so that her Doctrines are to be called, the Doctrines of God, rather than
of the The Churches rule of faith is the Scriptures.
Church: so neither are we to measure her Doctrines, but by the only line and
rule of the Scriptures. But, by the Scriptures, there is either no total
falling away from grace; or if there be (as from the common grace) it must
necessarily be final too; for it is impossible, (says the holy Ghost) (...)
such as fall away, should be renewed again to r^pentance. Therefore the Church
of Englands words, speaking of d^p^^ting from grace, and yet of returning
again, cannot be understood of a total falling away of particular persons
from (...) and (...) grace: so that it appea^es, the Appeall^r has wrested the
words of the Article to his own fancy, he should first conclude out of the
Scriptures, that there is a falling away from grace totally. But, if the
Scriptures teach the contrary, let no man fasten such a reproach upon the
Church of England, casting dirt in his Mothers face, as teaching otherwise,
then her heavenly Husband has taught in his Word.


Babylonius. But where do the Scriptures teach, that a man cannot fall away
from grace, and saying (...), after he once has it?


Orthodoxus. In many places, and that so pregnantly, and definitiuely, as the
very Adversaries of this truth confess, it may be waued and taken
indifferently either way, whither for a penny, as we say, their Opinion, or
Gods Truth.


Babylonius. But if Scripture say, and gainsay, how shall we believe them? or
how shall we reconcile them?


Orthodoxus. Very easily; for as there is but one truth, so if we first pitch
upon that truth, where we find it clearly and positiuely laid down in the
Scripture, then A sure rule to interpret Scriptures.
whatsoever places of scripture seem to contradict, yet the sense thereof must
of necessity be reduced to that positive truth. For the purpose, 1 John 3. 9.
Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin; for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because h^ is borne of God. Here is set down a
positi^e truth; Whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin; and the
reasons are annexed; first, for the seed of God remai^eth in him; and
secondly, because he is borne of God, he cannot sin. But this seems a hard
and a dark saying, do not Gods (...) sin? yo^ sur^ly, for, In many things
we (...) all, says Saint (...), but the same Apostle cleares the sense, in his
5. Chapter of the Epistle. Verse 16, 17. There is a sin unto death, and,
there is a (...) not unto death: now Gods children commit sin, which is not
unto death, whereof ver. 16. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is
not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin
not unto death. But of the sin that is unto death, of that the Apostle
speaks, ver. 18. We know, that whosoever is borne of God sins not, that
is, not unto death. Now Gods child sins not unto death, that is, falls not
from faith (as Saint Augustin^ understands this sin unto death) neither
totally, nor much Aug. de corrept. and gr^. cap.
less finally; for the seed of God remains in him. The seed of God is the
holy Spirit of God; by which, as a holy and living seed, we are begotten and
borne of God. This seed^ is that anointing, whereof the Apostle speaks, 1
John 2. 27. The anointing which ye have received of ^im, abides in you, and
therefore ye shall abide in him. Therefore none shall be able to seduce you,
v. 26. Now, if the the anointing abide in us, if the seed of God remains in
us, how then can we fall totally, much less finally from grace, for the Spirit
of grace remains in us. So long as this seed of God remains in us, (and
being once received, it abides with us) Gods regenerate cannot so degenerate,
as by falling from grace, to cease to be his sons. He that is of the blood
royal, yea, who is descended immediately from the Kings own loins, cannot
cease to be the Kings son; for the seed and blood of the King is in him.
And yet, though a Kings son may degenerate from his Fathers virtues,
notwithstanding his Fathers blood be in him, yet the b^gotten of God, as they
have his seed always remaining (...) them, so it is an active, quickening, and
pregnant seed, springing up to life eter^all, wherein Gods child grows in
grace, till he be a perfect man in Christ Iasus.

Again, this seed of God is immortal, as the Father is immortal. Now as a
mortal father begets a mortal son: So the immortal God can beget no son,
but is immortal as his Father is. It is impossible for the immortal God to
dye, no not for a moment. Of this nature also is the borne of God; he cannot
fall away totally, that is dye in his spiritual life, no not for a moment, for
he is, borne of that Father, the seed of that God remains, abides in him,
and never departs from him, which is immortal, and cannot dye. This truth,
that the borne of God are preserved from ever falling from grace, is confirmed
by many other clear places of Scripture, if time would permit to recite them.

Now, this being so clear a proof, if any places of Scripture seem to be
opposite, they are so only in sound, not in sense. For proof, the Scriptures
are full of admonitions, (the only proofs that they bring for their opinions
against the positive truth) to take heed of falling away from the grace of
God, as Heb. 12. 13. So 1 Cor. 10. 12. He that think he stands, let him take
heed lest he fall; and the like: also of exhortation, if any man be fallen, as
Ezech 18. and elsewhere; all which places must not so be taken as if Gods
children did at any time fall away totally from, grace: but they are as so many
Preservatives and Antidotes, as so many directions to keep Gods child in his
way; they are a part of those means which God has ordained to preserve us in
the way from falling. Hereupon I remember, Saint Augustine says excellently,
(alledg^ng these words, Reu. 3. 11. Tene quod habes, etc. Hold that Aug de
correp^. etc. cap. 13.
thou have, least another take thy Crown) now that these things are so
spoaken, even to the saints that shall persevere, as if it were uncertain that
they shall persevere, they ought not to hear this otherwise, to whom it
belongs, not to be high minded, but fear. Hence also it was said to the
Apostles, If ye shall abide in me; himself speaking it, who knew full well
that they would abide in him: And by the Prophet, If ye be willing, and will
hearken unto me: when himself knew in whom he would work, even to will. And
many such things are spoken for the vtility and profit of this secret, least
any should be puffed up, but that all, even th^se that run well, should
fear. So he. Nothing can be added to it.

Again, when we read of any Apostates, and such as make shipwreck of faith,
as 2 Timothy 2. Himeneus and Alexander, and the like: then have recourse to that
saying of Saint John 1. 2. 19. where speaking of Antichristian reuolters;
says, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of
us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that it
might be made manifest, that they were not all of us. For there is a common
temporary faith, a common grace, a common illumination, whereof the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 6. from which men may fall away totally and finally, as Judas,
and Julian, and others: but the saving grace, the justifying faith, which is
proper to Gods elect, is of the foundation of God, which stands sure, upon
which, they that are built, shall never fall away, as Aquinas in Romans 8. ver.
30. whom he has justified, them he has glorified.

To this purpose, I remember a saying or two of Saint Augustine: Aug. de fide
et operibus. cap. 16 Tom. 4.
Fides Christi, etc. The faith of Christ, the faith of Christian grace, namely,
that faith which works by love, being put in the foundation permits none to
perish. And in another place, (...) de correp^ ^^t grat^a cap. 12.
Nic nos moueat, etc. Nor let it move us, says he, that God does not give this
perseverance to some of his sons: For there are some, who because of a
temporary grace received, are called of us the sons of God, and yet with God
they are not so; of whom John speaks; They went out from us, but they were
not of us, they were not of the number of sons, no, not when they were in the
faith of sons. For the son of promise perishes not, but the son of
perdition. Those were of the multitude of the called, not of the small number
of the elect. And again, in the 9. Chapter, reciting Christ's words. Si man
eritis in verbo meo etc. If ye abide Et (...) 9.
in me, then are ye my Disciples indeed, he says, Therefore because they had
not perseverance, as also being not Christ's Disciples indeed, so neither were
they the sons of God indeed; even then when they seemed to be, and were called
so. Therefore we call those both the elect Disciples of Christ, and the so^^^s
of God; because they are so to be called, whom being regenerate (to wit
sacramentally, and in our account) we see to line godly: but then they are
indeed, that which they are called, if they abide in that, for which they are
so called. But if they have not preseuerance, they are not truly called, that,
which they are called, and are not. Thus we see Saint Augustine following the
rule of Gods word, has truly laid down the state of the perseverance of Gods
saints in faith and grace; distinguishing all along between saving grace, and
common temporary grace; between justifying faith, and common historical Note.
faith; between the outward ordinary calling of Christians, and the inward
effectual calling; between the external regeneration, and the internal;
between the sons of God in men's account, or in appearance, and those in Gods
account, and in truth.

And in this sense, not otherwise, is that to be understood, which the
Appealer urges, of all that are baptized, of whom we profess, we believe
that they are regenerate, and in the state of grace; who, coming afterward to
live lewdly, and so to dye, the Author by their example would prove, both a
total and final falling away from grace. True it is, that Baptism is called
regeneration, but Sacramentally; and so all children baptized Baptism is
called Regeneration Sacramentally.
are said to be regenerate, and so generally we believe they are saved, while
we judge them to be in the state of grace, in regard of the common sacred
Ordinance of God, which is always effectual, if it be accompanied with the
effectual and inward working of the Spirit of God, and received by a saving
faith, wrought by the same Spirit. I say, all children duly baptized, we
believe to be made the members of Christ, and heirs of the kingdom of heaven,
and to be saved, dying before the committing of any such sins, as might give
us occasion to judge and believe the contrary. This is the pious faith of the
Church, and of Christians. Yet though in our account, many are called, by
receiving the outward Ordinances of God, and the external ordinary means of
salvation: notwithstanding in Gods account, few are chosen. And the chosen are
only those that are truly saved in Gods account. The Lord knows who are
his. As above, Saint Augustine speaking of the impious, after baptism, says,
Fuerunt isti, etc. Such were of the multitude of those that be called, not of
the small number of the Elect.


Babylonius. But Saint Aug: (as our Author alleges him, both in this book,
and in his Gagge) delivers it, as an Article of the Creed, (Credendum est,
quosdam de fil^is perditionis, non accepto dono persuerandi vsque in finem, in
fide quae per dilectionem operatur, incipere vinere, and aliquandiu just, and
fideliter vinere, et postea cadere) etc. That some may fall away quite from
that faith, which works by love. And you see the words there Just and
fideliter, and, postea CADERE are set down in Capital letters, as being most
remarkable.


Orthodoxus. It is a fair flourish indeed; I remember the place quoted in his
former book: nor does he in this, vary from that. But I must tell you, the
Author (besides his misquoting of the * book) has not dealt He quotes the
book, De bono p^rseuerentia, for the book, (...) corrept. and gratia. Saint
Augustine guelded by the Appealler.
altogether so squarely with Saint Augustine herein; as having broken off the
chief corner of this stone, which else would stand firm and uniform, with
the entire fabric of Saint Augustines building. For Saint Augustine speaking
there of perseverance, and to admonish the truly faithful to be the more
careful in the constant pursuit of it, he sets down the sentence, thus;
PROPTER HVIVS VTILITATEM SECRETI. (Which words the Appealler leaves out)
credendum est, etc. Which words are the maine qualification and seasoning of
the whole sentence; that is, in regard of the benefit of this secret, Credendum
est, etc. Which we may translate, we are to suppose, as well as we must
believe. But if we must believe it, it is, propter huius vtilitatem secreti; a
phrase which S. Augustine often uses upon this purpose. And wherefore would
Saint Augustine have us to think or believe so? but to contain us the better
within the bounds of fear and humility, in regard of our human frailty, as
he specifieth both a little before, and after this sentence. And elsewhere he
says expressly to the purpose, Aug. de ben. persevere. cap. (...).
God judged it better to mingle some, that should not persevere, among the
certain number of his Saints, that they, for whom security in the tentation
of this life is not expedient, might not be secure.


Babylonius. But Saint Augustine says, that a man may fall from that faith
which works by love, and so dye in that fall.


Orthodoxus. Besides the former qualification, PROPTER HVIVS HVIVS VTILIT ATEM
SECRETI; and besides our former allegations out of Saint Augustine he Aug. de
corrept et great. cap. 7
does in another place speak conclusiuely, with an asseueration, saying, The
faith of those which works by love, does in very deed, either not fail at
all, or if their be any, whose faith does He says not, whose faith does fall
totally away; expressing the same thus: ibid. (...) si quando exorbitant
electi. correpts emendantur, and in^iam, quam reliquerant, redemus.
fail, it is repaired, before this life be ended, and the iniquity which came
between, being blotted out, perseverance is reckoned even unto the end. Now,
if this be true, that faith works by love, either fails not at all; or if
it doc any whit fail, it is repaired in time: then his former speech of the
falling away from faith, working by love, is to be understood not really of
true faith working by love, but as it is in appearance to our sense, as he
says formerly of the sons of God. Yea, Saint Augustine is so copious in this
point of perseverance of Gods Saints, that I marvel any man that has read
Saint Augustine of these points, would ever meddle with him in this matter, to
wrest one bare mangled testimony, against so many pregnant proofs of this
truth.

And to conclude this clause with Saint Augustine, who says nothing but upon
the express ground of Scripture; Christ saying, (says he) Aug. de cor^p^ de
gra^. cap. 1^
Rogaui pro te, etc. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not, let us
understand, as spoken to him which is built upon a Rock; and so the man of
God, not only because he has obtained mercy, to be faithful, but also
because faith it self does not fail; He that glories, let hi^ glory in the
Lord. And again, God does work in his Saints a will to persevere, that
because they shall not persevere, unless they both can, and will; therefore
both the power and will of perseuering, is by the bounty of Gods grace given
unto them: therefore the weakness of man's will is helped, that by Gods grace
it might be firmly and unseperably vpholden; and therefore, though weak, yet
it should not fail, nor be overcome by any adversity. And he that holds the
contrary, he calls him, Inimicum gratiae Dei, an enemy to the grace of God.


Babylonius. But justifying faith may be diminished, and consequently wholly
abolished.


Orthodoxus. It does not necessarily follow; Faith indeed may be said to be
diminished, in regard of the, act, operation, external fruits, sense and
apprehension of it; but not in regard of the habit and substance of it. To
illustrate this a little. The seed cast into the ground, lies there hid,
appears not for a good space: is it therefore dead? wait a little, and so it
begins to sprout and spring forth, and by degrees comes to a mature harvest.
The sap in the winter lies hid in the root, and the withered vine seems
dead with cold: yet the cold blown over, and summer approaching, so the goodly
leaves it puts forth, and goodlier clusters, unto a full vintage. The Sun
ecclipsed by the Moons interposition, or by some black cloud, from our
aspect, yet we know it keeps his course, loses none of the native light
the while, only our sense misseth it, till anon it break forth with a fresh
luster and glory. The soul, while the body suffers a kind of d^liquium, or
fowning, though now it exercise not the organicall operations (...) the body,
yet we know the soul is in^ue and whole still, without any substantial
diminution: so that the body being revived with some aqua caelestis, the soul
actuates every organ and member of it afr^sh, as before. The ship (as that
wherein Christ slep^) may be even covered over with waves, and given for lost,
as in the Disciples sense and apprehension: but Christ being awakened, and
commanding a calm, the ship comes safe to the Port. The fire raked up close
under the ashes, though you neither see nor feel it, yet so it is preserved
till the morning, to feed upon new fuel. A man in a deep or dead sleep may
seem dead, but awakening, he feels himself the more refreshed after his
sounder sleep. So is faith. It is a seed, (though but as a grain of mustard
seed) well may it lie hid for a time, yet the while, it is but fastening the
root the more firmly to bring forth the better and more abundant fruit. It is
the sap, which in time of wintery persecutions and afflictions, coucheth
close to the heart root, but the summer of Gods comforts returning, it
displayeth it self in leaves and fruits, showing plainly it was not dead,
though to our sense it seemed so. It is the Sun inlightning the soul, which
though ecclipsed from our sense, by some interposition of transitory
temptation, yet retains his full light, holding on his insensible course, and
when this nubecula pertransibit, when this cloud is over, it sends forth new
rays of grace. It is the soul of the soul, which even in the midst of
extreme fainting of the soul, yet remains entire, without diminution, and by
the aqua caelestis of Gods never failing mercy, actuates every faculty of the
soul afresh, to the atchieuing of greater works. It is the ship of good hope,
which when covered with waves, sets prayers to awaken Christ asleep in it, who
by and by stilleth the storm, or sends his Angel, as to Paul, to assure him,
that none in this little bark of ours shall perish, but safely arrive upon
Act: 27 and 28.
the honey haven of Melita, even that true hony-flowing land of Canaan. It is a
fire, which while raked up under the dead ashes of deep contrition, though it
seem dead, yielding neither light nor warmth, to our weak senses, yet it is
but fostered for a new fire, that though heaviness for sin may endure for a
night, yet joy of faith comes in the morning, feeding it self with the
fuel of new works of obedience, flaming forth in a holy conversation. The
faithful man, as David, as Peter, may be overtaken with a dead sleep of
faith: but awakened by grace, his soul is enlightened, that he sleeps not in
death, but as the Sun arising, rejoices as a giant to run his course with
greater alacrity and vigor. Thus we see the fruit of saving faith may be for
a time suppressed, yet the root not supplanted: the act of it may be
suspended, yet the habit not lost: it may be ecclipsed to our sense, yet his
light not lessened, or his course stayed: it may be in a dead sleep, yet
live: faint, yet not fail: sick, yet not to death: weather beaton, yet not
wracked: languish, yet not perish.


Babylonins. But the famous Scholar Doctor Ouerall (alleged by the Author)
late Deane of Paul's and Bishop of Norwich held, that a man might fall from
grace into the very state of damnation, and so remain under Gods wrath, till
he did recover Yea, that he avouched this to his late Majesty, and what
concertations he had with other Doctors in the University about it.


Orthodoxus. If we take up all the Appealer faith upon trust, without further
examination, we shall reckon before our host, for he plays the shuffler
egregiously. Nor will he (I perceive) to save his own stake, stick to pawn
the best credit of the most famous of our Church, for the security of his most
shameless slanders of the truth. And if we had not all the better evidence to
convince him, he would carry it away hand smooth with down right daring.
Pardon my zeal hearein. I cannot but be moved, when not only Godscause, and
glory (then which nothing ought to be more precious unto us,) but also the
credit of our learned and reverend Fathers is so traduced. But the sum of the
Conference before the Kings Majesty at Hampton Court, now newly published in
print, will tell us the plain truth of the matter. And that we may not with
the Appealer falsify the truth, in dealing by halfes: I will give you the
entire words of that worthy Deane and reverend Bishop, as they are set down in
the 42 page of that book: Namely, that whosoever (although before justified)
did commit any grievous sin, as adultery, murder, treason, or the like, did
become ipso facto, subject to Gods wrath, and guilty of damnation, or were in
state of damnation (quoad praesentem statum) until they repented; adding
hereunto, that those which were called and justified, according to the purpose
of Gods election, howsoever they might, and did, sometime fall into greiuous
sins, and thereby into the present state of wrath and damnation: yet did
never fall, either totally from all the graces of God, to be utterly destitute
of all the parts and sccde thereof, nor finally from justification, but were in
time renewed, by Gods Spirit unto a lively faith and repentance, and so
justified from those sins, and the wrath, curse, and guilt annexed thereunto,
whereinto they are fallen, and wherein they lay, so long as they were without
true repentance for the same.

Do we not see plainly here how he distinguishes between a common
justification in regard of the external Doctor Ouerall fred from the App^alers
wrestings.
and ordinary means of the Word and Sacraments, and the true and real
justification, according to Gods purpose? yet in the first, he makes no
mention of a total falling away. Or if the Appealer will contend, that so much
is employed, we will not contend for that, for such as are not truly and really
justified, according to Gods purpose, but only according to the external
vocation, no marvel if they, both totally, and finally fall away. But for
those, that are justified according to Gods purpose, to wit, the elect and
praedestenate unto life, he says expressly, that though they may and do fall
into greiuous sins: yet they never fall, either totally, or (much less)
finally from the grace of God; but are in time renewed, by Gods Sririt, unto a
lively faith, and repentance. A golden speech, which all the Apealers chimicall
counterfeit Philosophers stone, cannot so easily transmute into his base copper
alcumy coin, how bravely and boldly soever he braze it on; according to his
rule, Calu^niare audacter, aliquid bar^bit.

To conolude this point of perseverance in true grace, it Reasons of the,
Saints perscu^rance. 1 Reason.
stands firmly built upon sure grounds, and evident reasons, set down in the
Scriptures, such as no wit of man, or devil, can overthrow. For the purpose;
one reason of the elects, perseverance in grace unto glory, is taken from the
nature of that holy fear, which God puts in the hearts of all his faithful
ones: as Ier. 32. 39, 40. where the Lord says, I will give them one heart, and
one way, that they may fear me for ever, etc. And I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but
I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. So
here is a double reason of the Saints perseverance; first on Gods part, He will
not turn away from them to do them good, and that by an eternal covenant.
And secondly, they shall not depart from him. Upon which words, Saint Augustine
says, (Quod quid est aliud, Ang. de ^omo perse^^^. cap. 2.
quam talis actantus erit timor meus, quem dabo in cor coru^, vt mihi
perseueranter adhareant) which what is it else, but that my fear, which I will
put in their hearts, shall be such and so great, that they shall perseueringly
cleave unto me.

A second reason is alleged, Ioh. 13. 1. drawn from (...) Reason.
the immutabilitie and eternity of Christ's love to his elect, saying, Having
loved his own which were in the world, he loved them, unto the end. * And as
the Apostle says, The gifts and calling of God are without repentance. Rom 11.
29.


A third reason of the Saints perseverance, is taken from the power of Christ,
and of the Father, Ioh. 10. 28. where (...) Reason.
Christ says, I give unto them, (to his sh^^pe) eternal life, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father which
gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my
Fathers ^and, I and my Father are one. And Saint Peter said, we are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation 1. Pet. 1. 5. And the Prophet David
shows by this reason, that the righteous shall never fall totally away,
because Gods band ever supporteth them, as Psalm. 37. 24. Though he fall, he
shall not be utterly cast down; for the Lord vpholdeth him with his band.
Which place Aquinas applies to the same purpose, in Romans 8.

A fourth reason, from the will of God, Ioh. 6. 39. This is the Fathers will,
which has sent me, that all which he has 4 Reason,
given me, I should loose nothing, but should arise is up at the last day. And,
this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and
believes on him, should (...) everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the
last day.

A fifth reason, drawn from the efficacy of Exemplified also in Christ^
prayer for Peter mantioned a little before, and applied to St. Aug to all the
faithful. 6 Reason. 7 Reason.
Christ's 5 Reason.
prayer, Ioh. 17. 20. and so to the end of the Chapter.

A sixth reason, from the impossibility of seducing the Saints from Christ, by
Antichrist and false Prophets. Mat. 24. 24.

A seventh reason, from the perpetual mansion, and inhabitation of Gods Spirit
in all the faithful, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God, sins not,
(that is, not unto death; as chap. 5. ^6.) For his seed remains in him, and
be cannot sin, because he is borne of God.

An eight reason, from the infallibility of Gods knowledge 8 Reason.
of all his, called, Gods foundation, 2. Tim. 2. 19. The foundation of God
stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that are his, whereupon
Saint Augustine concl death thus, If the elect may perish and fall away, then
God may be deceived. But God cannot be deceived; therefore his Et si quando
exorbitant electi corr^p^ ^^^^dantur and i^^iam qua (...) r^liqu^rant, redeunt.
Aug. de corrept. and gr^ (...). 7.
elect cannot perish, nor fall away. And if at any time the elect do
exorbitate, or decline out of the way: upon reproof, they are reformed, and
return into the way, from which they had digressed; As Aquinas cites the
gloss on Romans 8. verse 28. Vsque adeo etc. To such as love God, he does so
cause all things to cooperate for good, as if any of them stray or straggle,
even this also he causes to turn to their further good; yea, even their
sins cooperate to their greater good, in causing them to walk more humbly
and carefully.

A ninth reason, is from the inseparable union between Christ, and every true
believer. Christ himself expresses 9 Reason.
this sweetly, applying it as a special tie, and token of the saints
continu^ance in him. Ioh. 17. 20. I pray not for these alo^^, but for them
also, which shall believe in me, through their word, that they may all be one,
as thou Father art in me and I in thee; that they also may be one in us. And
that glory, which thou have given me, I have given them, that they may be one,
even as we are one. I in thee, and thou in met, that they may be made perfect
in one. So that as not a bone of his natural body was broken: so neither a
bone of his mystical body. For he keeps all his bones, not one of them is
broken Psalm. 34 20. Not a hair of their head shall perish, that are his
members.

I will add but one reason^more, of many, used in Scripture, to confirm the
Doctrine of the Saints perseverance, and it is taken from Gods eternal
election and effectual vocation of his elect unto eternal life: As Romans 8.
30. Whom he did praedestinate, them he also called: and whom he called, them
he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified: This is
such a golden chain, as all the Devils of hell can never break. Christ uses
the same reason, Ioh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you,
and ordained you that you should go, and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain: which place Saint Augustine sweetly applies to Gods
eternal election, whence springs the perseverance of his elect, whose fruit
remains for ever. As also the same Augustine applies that other place to the
Romans, to the Saints perseverance, and Aug. de predest. lib. 1. cap. 17. Aug.
de predest. san^lo^u^. li. 1. and de fide ad P. D^a con^ cap. 3. Aug. de
corrept. and gra. cap. 13 Quis in (...) potu^^ ordina^^, nisi perse^^^antia
do^^?
only to the elect Saints, quoru^ it a certus est numerus, etc. whereof the
number is so certain, that none of them can perish, no more than any of the
reprobate can be saved. And so he concludes the Saints perseverance, from the
foundation of Gods eternal election, and praedestination. Quis etc. What one
could be ordained to eternal life, but with the gift of persence ra^ce? This
is the Doctrine also of the Church of England, Arti^. 17. So then, if God can
break his everlasting covenant, with his people, if his saving fear be such,
as to whom it is given, it will not suffer them to depart from (...) Aug. de
^^rept. and gra^. cap. 6.
God; if Gods love in Christ to his own be immutable and endless; if Christ's
power and his Fathers be so great, that none can pluck his elect out of his
hands; if it be the Fathers will, that none of his elect shall perish, but have
eternal life; if Christ's prayer for his elect cannot be in vain; if it be
impossible for all Antichrists power and policy, and lying wonders, to seduce
Gods elect; if the perpetual residence of Gods holy Spirit in his regenerate,
preserve them from sinning unto death; if Gods infallible knowledge of his own
cannot be deceived, but remains as a sure and sealed foundation; if all
things cooperate for their good, and nothing can separate them from the love of
Christ; if Gods eternal election and praedestination of his, to grace, and so
to glory, cannot be frustrate: then who dare be so bold, as to affirm, that
the Saints may fall away, either totally, or finally from grace, and so fall
short of glory.


Babylonius. But my author instanceth two examples of total falling away from
grace, the one of King David, the other of the prime Apostle Saint Peter, now
if these did fall totally from grace, at least for a time, then is it possible
for any in the state of grace to fall totally from that state^, and so come
short of final perse^^rance. And to prove their total fall, he argues thus,
(...) ^ter fell; now if he fell, he must needs full totally or finally: for
Cedo tertium. And (says he) if David's and Peter's repentance had been
prevented by death, they should have perished eternally. And you know, that a
supposition must necessarily imply a possibility of the thing supposed; else
it were absurd; so that it was possible, they might have been prevented by
death, before they had repented, and so have perished eternally. As the Author
says elsewhere, * cap. 4. that it is possible for the fallen away to arise
again: possible, but not certain and necessary.


Orthodoxus. By mentioning this last speech of the The Appel^^ contradicts
himself.
Appealer, you give me occasion to call to mind, a flat contradiction of his
in that place, to what he had said before, cap. 2. his words (as I remember)
be these; Does Arminius ^^intaine, touching final perseverance, that sometime
the called and elect of God, the chosen ^^^s, and justified by faith, such as
Peter was, though they do full totally for a time, shall yet recover
necessarily again, and not fall away finally, or for ever? If this be
Armenianisme, and so his conclusion, then therein he (to wit, the Appealer)
holds with Arminius. Yet in his foresaid forth Chapter he contradicts
himself, and says, that the recovery of such is possible, not certain, and
necessary. Is he such an enemy to perseverance, as himself will not persevere
longer in his own opinion? Or rather will he be an Arminian by holding with
Arminius a totality of the elect falling from grace for a time, with a
necessuit of their recovery, than an orthodox Christian, while he allows
only a possibility, but no certainty and necessity of recovery? Oportet
Appellatorem esse memorem. But for the Appealers two instances of David and
Peter, I deny that they fell totally. David's and Peter, fall, not total.
Fall they did both, and that fearfully; yet not totally? Neither of them. Is
there no other kind of fall? not a third? yes, there is a fall, whereby a man
gets some hurt in a limb, as Mephebosheth did: and there is a fall, whereby a
man, breaks his neck, as it befell old. Eli: and 2 Samuel 4.
there is a fall, wherein a man is struck stone dead for the 1 Samuel 4.
time, as befell (...). Now, if by Elies break-neck fall, may be exemplified,
the final falling away; and by Eutychus Acts 20. 9.
his fall, the total falling for the time: why not as well by Mephebosheths
fall, may we conceive of such a fall of Gods Saints, as whereby they may
bruise, or break some limb, and not necessarily with Eutychus, so to fall
from the third lost, as falling totally to be struck stoned ad: or with Eli to
break their necks, by falling away finally and irrecouerably; as Lucifer, that
fell from the third heaven. Now we say, that the fall of David and Peter, was
like that of Mephibosheth, whereby they did break or bruise a limb, the fear
whereof they might carry to then grave, though by Gods ^yle, and wine of grace
and mercy, they were ^f^* soonees received, and recovered. Again, a member,
bruised, or broken, or put out of ^oynt, cease not instantly to be a member of
the body; nor is it by and by cut off from the body, unless it be incurable,
and endanger the whole, Immedicabile vuln^^ ens^ reeidendum est, ne part
sincera trabatur, as that incurable sin against the holy Ghost, and that,
committed with a high hand, with a full concent, and malicious contempt of the
blood of the covenant etc. as that Heb. 6. which sin is impossible to be
renewed by repentance; such a grangreend member is cut off. Now David and Peter
were the members of Christ, they were wounded by a grievous stroke of sin,
yet such as was curable, and so during the malady, they were not cut off from
Christ's body, but still continued members, though sick for the time, not
totally fallen, or cut off. The Prophet David himself, inspired by Gods
Spirit, sets down a notable and manifest difference between fall and fall;
he says of the righteous, of the ^^stified by faith, of the elect, Though he
fall, he shall not be utterly be cast down; for the Lord vpholdeth him with
his hand. Psalm. 37. 24.
Though he fall: therefore the righteous may fall: yet though he fall, he
shall not be utterly cast down; therefore he shall not fall totally, or
finally: not totally; for that is to be utterly cast down; for the time at
least. Not finally; for that is, to be utterly cast down, to wit, for ever.
But, if by being utterly cast down, the Appealer would have, not the total
fall meant, but the final; let him remember, that as he says in one place, he
is of the mind with Ar^imius, that the elect may fall totally from grace for
the time: so he says in another, that their recovery is possible, not certain
and necessary. Contrary to David here, who says, He shall not be utterly cast
down, not finally fall away (if the Author will restrain it to that) but he
shall certainly recover. And he adds a strong reason, For the Lord vpholdeth
him with his hand. If the Lord uphold him with his hand, then how can he either
fall finally, or yet totally, which in either were to be utterly cast down?
The Comparison.
manner of speech seems to be taken from a father, holding his son in his
hand, and to (...) his child see his own weakness, to make him use the more
wariness, for the time to come, suffers him to fall; yet so handles the
matter, as with his hand he preserues him from being utterly cast down. And as
Lyranus says on this place. ^loss. Lyral^ Psalm. 36. alia^ 37.
Huius autem manus suppositio est diuinae gratiae conseruatio; the putting
under of Gods hand, is the preservation of divine grace.

Object. But some will object, that according to the same gloss of Lyranus in
that place, this fall is meant of a venial sin, not of a mortal, such as
David's, and Peter's sin was. To which I answer, first, that the word for fall
in the original, signifies such a fall, as when a man Naphal.
falls prostrate, or flat upon the ground; not to slip, as men account of a
venial sin, but to fall down all along. And for venial sin, we know
there is no sin committed by any servant of God, but through Christ upon
repentance it is venial, yea David's sin, and Peter's Si^ venial: mortal.
sin; for they were both pardoned. And venial, is that which may be
pardoned. And there is no sin, be it never so small in man's conceit, but it
is mortal, deserving death eternal: As Adam sin, in eating the forbidden
Apple, which to a carnal man's conceit, might seem to be but a venial sin,
as the Pope accounted it, in comparison in stealing of the his Peacocke. (...)
3.


But first for David's sin: it was grievous indeed* yet sin is to be
weighed, not so much by the Act of the sin, as by the affection of sinning.
David and Ahab, both committed the like sin of murder: the fact Difference
between David's and Ahabs sin.
was the same, but not their affections. Ahab sold himself to work
wickedness, David not so; Ahabs humiliation procured the delay of his
punishment only, not the remouall of his sin. Deus d^stulit paenam, non
abstulit culpam. But David upon his peccani, heard, The Lord has put away thy
sin. Saint Chrysostom compares David's case in lusting after Bat^sheba, to a
sea-storme, fore afflicting the (...) 1 Cor. 16. hom. 44. Comparison.
Martiners for the time; so that, he suffered a vehement perturbation of his
passions, during the temptation, not knowing well what he did; and though his
brittle Bark of carnal lust, and human frailty went to wrack, yet the
gulf of a total falling away, did not swallow him up in the deep, but upon
the planke of repent^nce, he did swim safe to shore. And Saint Augustine
says of David's sin: Aug de Doctr. Christ. lib. 3. cap. 21.
In ista vi^o ((...) Dauid^) immoderata etc. In this man (i^ David) there was
not an abode, but only a passage of this inordinate lust: And therefore the
Prophet, reproving it, called it a guest; for he said not, that he set before
his King, but before his guest, his poor neighbors sheep to feast withal: so
that thereby Comparison.
Augustine gives us to understand, that David's inordinate lust, was not as a
King to reign, and to keep his Court of residence in his heart, but only as a
guest, coming accidentally, and lodging with him for a night, and so away. The
like he says of Peter's denial. Quis ita euanescat, etc. Who can be so vain,
as to think the Apostle Peter had that in Aug. contra medatium ad Consentium.
cap. 6.
his heart, which he^ had in his mouth, when he denied Christ? surely in that
denial, he retained the truth inwardly, and outwardly uttered a lie. For with
his heart he believed to righteousness, but with his month he confessed not
to salvation. If therefore in Peter's denial, his faith was not lost, then
certainly he fell not totally away. And that Peter's faith was not then lost,
we have Christ's testimony in his prayer for Peter, But I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. This prayer of Christ was before Peter's denial of
him; Luke. 22. 32.
yea, Christ's prayer did in particular, point at Peter's denial, which was that
very night, to preserve his faith from failing therein, though his tongue did
foully faulter. And who shall deny Christ's prayer to be effectual? For the
Father hears him always, Ioh. 11. 42. and if it were effectual, Peter's
faith failed not, no, not in that his fearful denial; and consequently, his
sin was not a total falling away from grace, no, not for an instant: for his
faith failed not, nor finally, nor totally, nor at all. St. Augustine says,
Fides eius qui aedificatur super Petram, etc. Aug. de correps. and gra. cap. 7.
His faith that is built upon the rock, for which also Christ prayed, that it
should not fail, does not fail. So that the faith of the elect fails not,
no not in the degrees, as we have showed.


Babylonius. But admit (...) faith did not fail, yet others faith may, for
which Christ did not so particularly pray, as for Peter's says.


Orthodoxus. That which Christ prayed for Peter, he did also in him pray for
all the faith full; Peter standing oftentimes for a type of the Church. For
Christ says, Peter a type, not the Head of the Church.
(Lake 22. 31.) calling Simon by name, Simon, Simon behold Satan has desired
to have you, that he may s^fe you as wheat: so that he speaks to Simon in the
plural number, as including all his Disciples, all his faithful; Satan has
desired to have you, that he may (...) YOU. And in the next verse, he adds,
But I have prayed for THEE, etc. Where Christ does more particularly apply his
speech to Peter, to arm him the better against his approaching denial; so
that in Peter, he prays for all his faithful: as Saint Augustine applies it;
Dicent^ argo Christo, Roga^i pro te, etc. Christ saying, I have prayed for
thee, that thy faith fail not: August. de corr^p^. et gratia. cap. 12.
let us understand it to be said to him, that is built upon the Rock. And
again, more plainly in the plural number, Pro his interpellante Christo, etc.
For these (to wit, the called, Ibid.
according to his purpose) Christ praying that their faith fail not, without
doubt it shall not fail, unto the end. And as Saint Augustine in sundry places
notes, Saint Peter beats the person and figure of the Catholic Church;
though he say not, that Peter is the head of the Church: so that oftentimes
that which Christ speaks to Peter by name, is extended to all the faithful.

To conclude: these fell not totally, nor yet any of Gods elect, since the
covenant between them and God stands Gods coue^a^ with his, never fails; so
that they never fall totally.
firm, and is never totally broken; the covenant I mean, made by and with
David in his Circumcision, and by and with Peter in his Baptism. Which
covenant, on our part, is to believe in God, and to serve him, and to love him,
with all our heart, and with all our soul, etc. Now for David's and Peter's
faith, that failed not, as we have proved. For their love, that was in the
exercise of it defective for the time, while the act of it was suspended, so
that they had made a partial breach of their Covenant. But total it was not:
for the total breach pertaines to that sin, which is impossible to be
expiated by repentance; described, Heb. 6. as the sin of Judas, of Julian,
and the like. But David and Peter's sin, was not committed out of a hatred of
God; much less, a total hatred of the whole soul, mind and heart; that is
for Iudasses and Iulians, and all Apostaticall Reprobates. But the sins of
Gods elect, howsoever for the act, they may be equal to the sins of the most
reprobate: yet in the affection they are not, and so they make not a total
breach of their Covenant with God. Again the Covenant on Gods part, is a
Covenant of mercy, as Ro^ 11. 27. as also, Ier. 31. 33, 34. This is my covenant
unto them, when I shall take away their sins; so that Gods Covenant with us,
is a Covenant of mercy: and mercy implies misery, yea sin it self; that if
through human frailty we fall into sin, as David and Peter did, there is
mercy with God, that he may be feared; who if he should be extreme to mark
what is done amiss, who could abide it? yea, to take the extreamitie, were to
break his covenant with us, which is a covenant of mercy. But he is not as a
strict, and cruel Landlord, who will take the forfeiture of our lease, upon
every the least breach. Neither is he as a Judge, strictly to take away our
inheritance from us, only for some flaw in the conueyance. No, our inheritance
is conveyed over Comparison.
unto us, not according to form of law, or regal right: but according to the
covenant of the Gospel, which is not forfaited for every flaw, or defect on
our part. Indeed in point of Gods strict law, every the least flaw forfeits
all: but not so according to the tenure of the Gospel. For, says God, Psalm.
89.
I have found David my servant, etc. It is spoken literally of David,
typically, and mystically of Christ: for he is Gods first borne, higher than
the Kings of the earth. Now of him, and of his seed, to wit, all his elect,
and regenerate, he says (ver. 28.) My mercy will I keep for him for evermore,
and my covenant shall stand fast with him, his seed also will I make to endure
for ever, etc. But if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;
thou will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquities with
stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him;
nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor alter
the thing that is gone out of my lips; once have I sworn by my holiness, that
I will not fail Dauid^: his seed shall endure for ever. And St. Ioh. says,
If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father (...). Ioh. (...). 1.
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins.


Babylonius. But say, their fall was not total, yet fearful it was; and
such, as without repentance would have tumbled them down to hell. Where is
then perseverance? where praedestination, and election, unto grace and glory?


Orthodoxus. True it is, that without faith and repentance, there is no
salvation; and a man dying impenitent, is damned. But, we must know, that as
faith and repentance are conditions, which God has ordained, and so requires
on our part, though himself give them, and work them in us; so they are a
part of those means, which God has appointed to attain the end of our
salvation. And the means are such, so fixed and established of God, as they
shall always attend upon his purpose and The means ever atte^d God Decree of
our salvation, as being inseparable God Decreed the means, as well as the end.
pleasure, in our election to grace and glory. So that as God has in his
eternal decree preordained us unto glory, he has also preordained the
means in time, as the way unto that glory; so that none of his Elect shall
fall through infirmity into any sin, as David and Peter did; but Gods grace,
which never fails his, shall raise them up again, by the renouation of their
faith and repentance, before that any sudden death shall be able to prevent
them, or so, to take the^ out of Christ's, and his Fathers hands. Neither does
the stabilitie of Gods election depend upon the condition of our faith and
repentance: but contrariwise, the condition of our faith and repentance
depends upon the immutabilitie of Gods Praedestination, producing all the
means and conditions requisite to the end; as the root of the tree does the
branches and fruits. And this is the express Doctrine of the Church of
England, most sweetly set down in the 17. Article, of Praedestination, and
Election.


Babylonius. But this Doctrine, howsoever it may seem to be true, yet it
tends to presumption, and carnal security, to commit and continue in sin.
Also David's and Peter's sin, if it were not a total falling, it gives too
much encouragement to others, to commit the like, or at least, less sins,
boldly.


Orthodoxus. No, this doctrine appertains properly to the faithful penitent,
that if through frailty they have sinned, they may not be without hope of
mercy, upon their repentance. So that this doctrine is an Antidote against
desperation, when Gods child through human frailty is overcome with a
temptation; it is a cordial of comfort, quickening his hope unto a godly
sorrow. But if it be, or seem to be a Doctrine of presumption, it is so to
none of Gods Saints, who pray with David, as to be cleansed from their secrets
faults, so to be kept back from presumptuous sins. And where St. John Psalm.
19. 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
says, If any man sin, we have an Advocate, etc. There he sets a barracado
against presumption in the frontire of it: My little children, these things
write I unto you, that you sin not. And God has his rod likewise, to scare his
children from sinning, by presuming on his mercy; for he says, If they sin,
I will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. Yea Gods holy fear is in their hearts, that they shall not by
presumption depart from God, as Jeremy speaks.

As for David's sand Peter's sin, while we defend it, not to be a total alling
away; we do not any way extenuate. it; for they were notwithstanding great and
fearful sins, neither of them exemplarie to be imitated, but rather to be
avoided. Their examples are left us in Scripture, that we might imitate, not
their sin, but their repentance; since they found mercy; not their fall, but
their speedy rising again. As the Apostle says of such Scriptures, they are
written for our learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. Romans 15. Yea, their examples tend rather to
humiliation, then presemption: for if such pillars The right use of the Saints
falls.
shake, the laths may well tremble. Lapsus maiorum sit tremor minorum, says
Augustine. Let the fall of the greater and stronger, be the fear of the lesser
and weaker. And to conclude with Saint Augustine this point concerning Aug in
Psalm. 50. alias 51.
David's sin, he says, M^lticadere etc. Many will fall with David, but they
will not rise with David; therefore he is not set for a precedent of falling,
but if thou have fallen, of rising again: beware thou fallest not; let not the
fall of the greater, be the rejoicing of the lesser, but their trembling: for
this end is it set forth, for this written, for this often read and sung in the
Church. Let them that have not fallen hear, that they may not fall: and they
that have fallen, let them hear, that they may get up again. (But says he)
Auiunt male vinentes etc. Ill-liuers hear it, and seek thereby a patronage of
sinning; they attend, that they may have to defend, what they are about to
commit, and not to prevent, what they have not as yet committed: and they say
to themselves, if David, why not also I? Hereupon is their soul more wicked,
which doing so, because David did so, they do worse then David, whereas David
sinned not by sample: he fell by the slip of his lust, not by the patronage of
sanctity; thou love that in David, which he hated in himself. In a word,
such ensamples stand for sea-markes, to warn us to decline, not to teach us to
rush upon the rock. And who would, to enjoy David's sin, endure Gods rod, the
smart whereof went so to David's heart? It was a sin dearly bought, though
mercifully pardoned.


Babylonius. But the Doctrine of perseverance tends to possess men with
carnal security.


Orthodoxus. It may seem so to those, that know not the true nature of saving
grace, which is such, as in whomsoever it is, it preserves that man from all
carnal security; saving grace and carnal security being opposite one to the
other: as in the forenamed place of Jeremy, chap. 32. 40. Gods fear causes
perseverance. And Saint Ioh. says expressly, He that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. So far is a lively hope of eternal
life, from possessing him that has it in him, with carnal security, the more
licentiously to wallow in the puddle of sin. It is an evil sign to that
man, to whom the truth of Christ becomes a stumbling stone, and a rock of
offense. Let such beware, lest so stumbling, they be broken, and so, least at
last this stone falling upon them, grind them to powder.


Babylonius. But Sir, you conclude the point of perseverance with a dangerous
and difficult Doctrine of praedestination; Of Praedestination, out of cap. 5.
and 6.
a Doctrine, which it were to be wished, might never be mentioned by Divines,
and Preachers. Yet the mentioning of it by you in this place ministers unto me
a fit occasion to desire your resolution, concerning this point, it being also
the next thing in order, treated of by our Author.


Orthodoxus. Sir, you speak contradictories; first you wish all were mute in
the mention of this Doctrine, and yet in the second place, you desire me to
speak my mind of it. But I pray you tell me, why you wish the mention hereof
to be altogether silence.


Babylonius. Because of the general offense taken at it, for it is a stumbling
stone, whereon many do fall.


Orthodoxus. So is Christ a stumbling stone, and a rock of offense, to many;
would ye therefore have the mention of Christ suppressed? But what if many men
are offended with this Doctrine? an offense may be unjustly taken, where it is
not justly given.


Babylonius. But it is called by a late great Bishop of this Land (quoted by
the Author, cap. 4.) a desperate Doctrine; as himself also styles it in his
7 chapter; and none (says he) did contradict the Bishops words at that
Conference.


Orthodoxus. I have by this time learned to lessen my wondering, to see (which
Saint Jude tells us) a raging wave of the sea, foaming out his own shame; he
having not Qui s^m^l V^^ccundiae limits tra^s^eri^, grauiter etc.
once, but so often, leapt over all the limits of modesty. Ci^. Orat. pro S
Ros^^^ Amerino. Quod si luce quoque canes latrent, cum Deos salutatu^ aliqui
(...), opinor ij^ crura suff^ingantur, quod acres sint etiam tum, (...)
suspicio nulla s^t. (...) est accusatoru^ ratio.
The Romans had a custom, if the dogs that kept their Capital, did bark in
the day time', or causlesly at friends, and those that came to worship their
Gods, crura suffringere, to break their legs. The Orator applies it to
accusers. Yea, I have known a poor dog beaten by his Master, for giving
warning of thieves approach. So easy it is to find a staff to beat a dog.
And yet shall Appeal. part. 1. chap. 4. page 31.
Censure pardon the Crow, and punish the Dove? shall a man thus impune,
lawlesly reproach Gods truth, his Church, his children, yea the prime Fathers
of our Church, (no small scandal to our Religion) and yet be suffered to
triumph and glory in his own shame? How? (...) ven^^m (...), vexat (...)
columb^^.
The Lord Bishop of London, Doctor Bancroft, in public audience, with much
vehemence, without any check, dislike, distaste, dissent, to style
praedestination a desperate Doctrine? Is it possible, a Bishop of the Church of
England should say so? to call praedestination a desperate Doctrine? And if he
did so, is it credible, that such a speech, so vehemently avoucht in a public
assembly, should pass without hissing? And in what assembly? surely, where
were present the most wise, learned, judicious, pious King in Europe, or in the
whole World, the most renowned King JAMES: with many reverend and learned
Divines. And none of these to check such a speech? surely their honor and
credit lies at the stake upon it. But how does it appear, that the Bishop
uttered such a speech? How? Pythagoras himself has said it, M. Mountagu, the
Appealer says it. But by his leave, by our former experience of his
allegations, we will ask and enquire in the original record, whither it be
so, or on. In the sum of the Conference, page 29. line 8. we find these
very words indeed, a desperate Doctrine. But what did he call a desperate
Doctrine? The doctrine of praedestination? Nothing less. The Appealers wits
are too nimble, out-running his his reason by many degrees. We must put a clog
upon his heels, setting down the whole passage of that upon this occasion:
The Bishop of London took occasion Sum of the Conference. page 29. line 1.
to signify to his Majesty, how very many in these days, neglecting
holiness of life, presumed too much of persisting of grace, laying all their
religion, upon Praedestination, if I shall be saved, I shall be saved; which
he termed a desperate Doctrine, showing it to be contrary to good Divinity,
and the true Doctrine of Praedestination, wherein we should reason rather
ascendendo, then descendendo, thus: I live in obedience to God, in love with my
neighbor, I follow my vocation etc. therefore I trust, that God has elected
me, and praedestinated me to salvation; not thus, which is the usual course of
argument, God has praedestinated and chosen me to life, therefore though I
sin never so grievously, yet I shall not be damned. Thus the words run. Now I
must confess I am to try the matter at the Appealers own chief weapon, even
the Syntax of Grammar, wherein he is no small Critic. He says, that the
Relative line 7.
which, has for the Antecedent, Praedestination. I a poor Punie say, Which,
has for his Antecedent, Presuming too much of persisting of grace, laying all
their Religion upon Praedestination, If I shall be saved, I shall be saved:
Which, he termed a desperate doctrine. For it is plain, the Bishop called not
Praedestination, a desperate doctrine; but the sinister conclusions, that
carnal and impious men abusiuely draw from thence; being of the number of
those unlearned (in the true mystery of Christ) and unstable, which (as Saint
Peter speaks) wrest this and other Doctrines of the Scriptures, and
particularly of St. Paul's 2. Pet. 3.
Epistles, to their own destruction. Such wreched perverting of the Doctrine
of Praedestination, the Bishop calls a desperate doctrine; and not,
Praedestination it self. For Praedestination, and the holy use of it, (such as
the Scripture has revealed and described unto us) he calls good divinity,
and true doctrine, laying down very godly and anc^^tly, the right order and
rule of every faithful man's particular use, and application of Praedestination
to himself; namely, that we labor to know we are rooted in that deep mystery
of Gods Election in Christ, by the fruits of a lively faith in all obedience.
Thus and no otherwise do the Scriptures teach. Thus and no otherwise do all
orthodox Divines, even Calvin himself, apply this Doctrine. Such the learned
Calvin calls Insti^. lib. 3. cap. 23. 12.
plain hoggs, that say, if they be of the number of the Elect, their sins
shall not hinder them from attaining to life. Facessant ergo etc. Away
therefore with such sacrilegies, which wick^dly pervert the whole order of
Election. And he calls also such conclusions, blasphemies. So that the Bishop
of London, Doctor Bancroft, and Master John Calvin, say in effect one and the
same thing, the one calling the corrupt conclusions, which carnal men draw
from Praedestination, a desperate Doctrine: the other, the blasphemies, and
sacrilege of hogs and swine, which is the very Doctrine of the Church of
England, as it is excellently set down in the Article of Praedestination and
Election. 17. Thus we see the Appealer has brought his hogs to a fair
market, while through poor Caluins sides he smites the Bishop of London,
Doctor Bancroft; yea, and the whole Church of England: and through all, by his
undisciplined solecisme, he wounds Praedestination it self, while he will
needs have it absolutely called A DESPERATE DOCTRINE. Carnal cauellers at
Gods mysteries no ^ewes.


Nor is it a new thing, that carnal men stumble and cavil at the Doctrine of
Praedestination. The Pelagians in Saint Augustines time did the like. Nor can I
shape you a fitter answer, then he did to them, and so to all adversaries of
this Doctrine of the grace of God, Nu^ propter Aug. de bono perseuerant. lib.
2. cap. 16.
malos etc, Is the truth of this Doctrine (to wit, of praedestination) to be
forsaken, or shall it be thought worthy to be cancelled out of the Gospel,
because of those that are wicked and cold? Let the truth be spoken, especially,
where any question does require it to be spoken, that they may receive it, who
are capable of it; least happily, while it is concealed, in regard of those that
are not able to receive it, they who are capable of the truth, whereby falshhood
may be detected, be not only defrauded of the truth, but may be overtaken
with falsehood. And a little after, Nonne potius est dicendum verum, etc. Is not
the truth rather to be spoken, that he which can receive, may receive it: than
to be suppressed, that not only neither can receive it; but also he that is
more intelligent, may be made worse? The enemy of grace is importunate, and
urges by all means, that it might be believed, that it is given unto us
according to our merits, and so grace should now be no more grace; and yet we
will not speak that, which by the testimony of the Scriptures, we may
speak; for we fear, forsooth, lest if we speak, he that cannot receive the
truth, be offended: and we fear not, lest while we are silent, he which is
able to receive the truth, may be deceived by error. For either is
praedestination so to be preached, as the holy Scripture does evidently declare
it, that in those that be praedestinate, the gifts and calling of God may be
without repentance or: else we must confess, that the grace of God is given
according to our merits, which is the opinion and wisdom of the Pelagians; And
again, cap. 2 1. ibid. he says, Nimiae co^tentionis est, etc. Itis too An^
Ibid. cap. 2 1.
much peruersues to contradict praedestinatio^, or yet to doubt of it.


Babylonius. But you know that the late wise and judicious King JAMES, of
famous memory, did inhibite and restrain the preaching of the Doctrine of
Praedestination, and Election.


Orthodoxus. But in what respect? His Majesty did not restrain Preachers from
the liberty of preaching the Doctrine of Praedestination, it being a special
part of the Gospel; but rather to give caution, and direction, at least to
younger Ministers and Divines, lest through want of mature judgment, in the
manner of opening that mystery, and applying of it, they might happily, put a
stumbling block before the in^udicious, and ignorant hearer, or those of weak
consciences, As Saint Aug. denies not, but wisdom and discretion is to be
used in the preaching of it. For (says he) it is not so to be preached to the
ignorant multitude, as that the preaching of it may seem worthy of reproof.
Nam dolosi vel imperiti medici est, etc. It is the Aug. ibid.
property of a deceitful, or an unskillful Physician, so to apply, even a
wholesome plaster, as that either it do no good, or else Comparison.
hurt. This was the mind of his Excellent Majesty of blessed Memory, in that
his iniunction, to advise all Ministers, to play the faithful, and skillful
Physicians, in in the applycation of so wholesome, profitable, and comfortable a
plaster and Doctrine, as the Church of England calls it, Art. 17: though the
Appealer does flout his Informers, and those which call Praedestination a
comfortable doctrine. Appeal page 39. But otherwise, his Majesty himself of
blessed Memory, has left His royal record of this Divine Doctrine, in his
learned and Divine Paraphrase of the Revelation, the 20 chap. in the latter
end, in these words, The Book of life was opened to the Elect, that all those
those whose names were written into it, to wit, Praedestinated and Elected for
salvation before all beginings, might then be selected for eternal glory.


Babylonius. Neither does the Author here simply oppose, or question the
Doctrine of Praedestination and Election, but as it is delivered by the new
Divines, as he calls them, to wit, Calvin and his fellows, whom he charge
with a twofold error as touching Praedestination: The first is, that they
teach, (especially Calvin) that Gods eternal election, and praedestination was
irrespectiue, and absolute, without any respect or reference to Adams fall: The
second error of Calvin, is, in delivering the doctrine of praedestination in
such a rigid manner, as he does.


Orthodoxus, For Master Calvin, there needs none other Apology, then his
own Works or Writings, which shall ever praise him in the gate. For his
works, and in sum, his Institutions, if a man snatch at them (as the
Egyptian dog, does at Nilus, for fear of the Crocodile) not observing his
grounds taken from Scripture, nor well waighing his reasons: no marvel if such
snatchers, prepossessed with a preiudicate opinion, can as easily open their
mouths against such famous Authors, as the Dog can bark at the Moone-shine.
But perhaps he had no more quarrel to holy Calvin, then that fellow had to
just Plutarch in the life of Aristides.
Aristides, who not knowing Aristides by face, but only by fame, that he was a
just man, came to him unwittingly to crave him to write down his name for him,
that he might with the rest of the envious Citizens consent to his banishment
by their law of Ostracismon, because he so much excelled others in honesty. It
may be he never read Caluins works, much less his Institutions, to catechize
him in the grounds of religion. Or perhaps, he hates Calvin, as Ahab did the
Prophet Micaiah, because his Doctrine is altogether against his
Interim-religion, with all his confederate Intermiists. Orwhatsoeuer is the
cause. Thus did Heretics, by catching at the outward rind and bark of some
one part of Scripture, maintain their Heresies. But I marvel what the
Appealer could read or hear of Master Calvin, that he should write so
contemptuously of him; saving that he was a holy man, faithful and painful in
his calling, exercised with continual preaching, writing, watchful providence
in governing; a man of great learning, dexterity of wit, sincerity of
judgment, of great piety, equity, and sobriety of life, a true pattern and
precedent of virtue. Therefore as Christ said, Many good works have I done
among you, for which of these do ye stone me? so, for which of Caluins
virtues does this Author tongue-smite him? The most noble and judicious King
JAMES of happy Memory, thought not so slightly of that learned Divine, while
he prefered his Commentaries upon the Scriptures before all others. It were to
be wished, that the Author, going about to oppose such a worthy and famous
man, had imitated the heathen Academicke Carneades, who, intending to write
against the positions of Zeno the A. Gall (...). Attio. lib. 27, cap. 15.
Stoicke, did first purge his stomach, and pectorall parts with white
hellebore, lest some malignant humor possessing the stomach, might distemper
and imbitter his style, which is no less a disparagment to a professed
Christian Divine, than was wont to be of old, to the Heathen Philosophers.

But, not the person of so worthy a man, but his opinion is inueighed against.
Well, what opinion? about Praedestination, and Reprobation. But, I pray you,
what is Caluins error about Praedestination?


Babylonius. In that he holds it to be an act of an irrespectiue decree of
God, ordaining some to salvation, others to torments, without any prerespect of
good in the one, or of evil in the other, or without any reference to Adams
fall.


Orthodoxus. Why, may not God do so, if it please him? Is not his will
absolute and free? And has not the Potter power to make of the same lump, one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? Is it not said of Iacoh and Esau,
twins, newly conceived in the womb, that before they did good, or evil,
that the purpose of God, according to Election, Romans 9.
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, The elder shall serve the
younger? And whatsoever God wills, it must needs be just. I would gladly see
this place well solued. But to let that pass: what place does your Author
allege out of Calvin, for this his opinion?


Babylonius. Out of his Institutions, book 3. chap. 21 sect. 5. you may read
his words here at large set down by the Author.


Orthodoxus. This place, in my simple judgment, does not conclude necessarily,
and such opinion, as he is charged withal. For, it proves not, that God in
his eternal decree, had no respect to the corrupt mass in Adams fall; Every
man is created to that end, to which God has ordained him. True. For God does
nothing, but for a special end. But is this creation meant of Adams first
creation? That is not necessary. For although all men might be said to be
created in Adams loins, yet it is only potentially, and seminally. So that,
if Calvin may as well be understood to speak of the particular creation of
every man in his generation, as of his general creation in Adams loins before
his fall, charity should induce a Christian, to interpret in the better part,
where there is not evidence to the contrary. But what if Calvin do in express
words otherwhere acquit himself of what the Appealer thus calumniously
charge him with all in this point? As indeed he does in sundry places, where
he says. That Gods Election and Praedestination, was not without special
respect, and reference to Adams fall, and to the corrupt mass: as is evident
in the 22. chap. of the alleged book, and seventh section, saying, Quaeritur
an natura (elects): imo qui alieni erant, trahendo suos facit. It is demanded,
Calu. Insits. lib. 3. cap. 22. sect. 7.
whether they are by nature elect: yea, they which were strangers and aliants,
by drawing them, he makes his own. So that God chose them, finding them
strangers. And a little after in the same section, Si quis roget, vnde
elegerit, alibi, respondet Christus, Ex mundo, quem a precibus suis excludit,
vbi Discipulos Patri commendat. If any ask, whence he chose them, Christ
answers elsewhere, Out of the world, which he excludes from his prayers,
when he commends his Disciples to his Father. If then they be chosen out of the
world, and the world be meant of all the wicked, as here; then what else can
Calvin mean hereby, but that Gods eternal election had a special reference
to that world of wickedness packt up in Adams sinful loins after his fall,
out of which he made his Election? And yet more expressly and punctually, being
urged by the Adversaries of Gods Election, in his 22. chapter of the same
book, and 11 section, Fatemur communem noxam, Calu. Instit. lib 3. cap. 23.
sict. 22.
sed dicimus qui busdam succurrere Dei misericordiam: We acknowledge a common
lapse in all, but we say that the mercy of God succoureth some. And he
concludes with the judgment and words of Saint August, highly praising his
saying, Duid in primo homine etc. Seeing in the first man, the whole mass of
mankind fell into condemnation, those which one Aug. Epist. 106. De praedest.
and gr^^ De b^n^ per^^^^^. cap. 12.
of it are made vessels unto honor, they are the vessels, not of their own
righteousness, but of Gods mercy: but that others are made to dishonor, is
not to be imputed to iniquity, but to judgment. That God recompenseth due
punishment to them whom he reprobateth, and on those whom he calls, bestows
undeserved grace: he is freed from all accusation; by the example of a Creditor
in whose power i^ is to remit one, and to exact his debt of the other. The Lord
then can give grace to whom he will, because he is merciful; and not give to
all, because he is a just judge. By giving to some that which they deserve not,
he shows his free grace; by not giving to all, he declares what all do
deserve. For when Paul writes, that God has shut all under sin, that he
might have mercy upon all; we areto add withal, that he is debtor to none,
because none has given to him first, that he should exact a recompense. And
Calvin upon John, chap. 15. 16. has these express words to confirm (...) in
Ioh. cap. 15. ver. 19.
the former. Si ^lecti fuerunt ex mundo, etc. If the Elect were chosen out of
the world, it follows that they were a part of the world, and separated from
the rest that perish, by the only mercy of God: Moreover by the name of world,
Christ in this place, notes all those, which arenot regenerate by the holy
Ghost.

This is so evident to clear Calvin from all calumniation concerning this
point, that it retorts a just censure upon those, that taking a man's saying by
snatches, and not reading and waighing the whole thoroughly, do bewraye rather
want of judgment and charity in themselves, while they would clap their own
bitter censures, and sinister interpretations upon others; then either of
unsettled judgment, or unfound learning in those, whom they so rashly and
impiously traduce. But for the Appealer, I can blame him no more for dealing
thus with Calvin, and with those whom he calls Caluinists, then he has done
the Reverend As the Bishop of ^ondon, and the Bishop of (...), Deane of Paul^.
Fathers of our Church forementioned, as also with Saint Augustine, in the
forecited sentence, which according to the Appealers lopping of it, begins with
Credendum est, etc. opposing one dismembered sentence of Saint Augustine,
against the whole current of his writings in that point: as he has one
misdeemed sentence of Reverend Master Calvin, against his sound judgment, in
sundry other places of his divine volumes, expressly set down. His doctrine
being none other, but the very same with that of the Church of England, Art.
17: so that all the Appealers calumniations cast upon Master Calvin, do
strongly reuerberate and rebut upon our deate mother Church of England: he not
sparing to smite her through the very loins of her dearest children, whose
names shall ever be renowned, both for learning and piety, while the world
stands.

Now what other irrespectiunesse of Gods irrespectiue decree, the Appealer
would so irrespectiuely fasten upon the learned and reverend Calvin, I cannot
conceive, unless he mean an irrespectiuenesse in Gods praedestinating,
without any respect or preuision of their works, as a grand error, which he
charge Calvin with; neither would I willingly, or wittingly, conceive or
conjecture of the Appealers extended sense otherwise than by himself is not
only intended, but clearly enough expressed; as may be seen in his 7. chapter
1. part, in sundry places. But for Master Calvin, we have sufficiently cleared
him from the Appealers calumny, notwithstanding he As page 64. and 74.
spend a great part of his said 7. chap. in heaping up testimonies of Fathers;
and all upon a false surmised ground, and so all to no purpose, except to vent,
(I would, to cure) the ouerflowing of that humor of the Gall, which has
caused his Appeal, to be all ouerspread with the yellow, yea, with the black
Iawndise. For Master Calvin holds with Saint Augustine, Gods election to be
out of the corrupt mass: and reprobation of the rest, already condemned by
that sentence of death; In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall dye the death.

But for the Appealers own opinion, concerning Gods decree of election and
praedestination, it may not be passed by in silence. First he says, There
must needs first be a disproportion, before there can be conceived Election,
or Derelection. Blasphemous heresye, and sacrilege.
What he means by disproportion, he tells a little after; namely, between
those, who now condemned in Adams laynes, God did forsee would accept of
deliverance offered them, in, and by Christ; and the rest, whom he foresaw,
Pelagian freewill maintained by the Ap^^^^^.
would reject this deliverance. His very words are, God out of his mercy, etc.
stretched out to them (that is, to all, now condemned in Adams loins)
deliverance in a Mediator, the Man Jesus Christ; and drew them out, that took
hold of mercy, leaving them there that would none of him. So that by the
Appealers saying here, no pradestination, without a disproportion, conceived to
go before: and this disproportion, between the parties to be elect and
reprobate, is discovered by Gods preuision of both their works; he foreseeing
that the one would receive and accept grace offered, and the other refuse it:
upon which preuision, the Appealer would build Gods decree of pr^destination,
and election; an opinion, no less graceless, then groundless, and if I
should call it, in plain terms, most impious and blasphemous against Gods
pure glory, and preciourgrace, although I should do the Appealer no wrong in
it, yet I should raise a Waspes nest about mine ears. But we must not fear
to speak the truth, and to oppose such blasphemy, because of men's mischievous,
and no less boundless, then groundless malice; especially in such a case,
wherein Gods glory is so deeply engaged.

This opinion of the Appealer is very plausible to flesh and blood; for man's
pride would still be arrogating something to it self, and be a fingering of
one of Gods special peculiars, his glory. This was that poison, which the
Serpent infused, and breathed into our first Parents, Eritis sicut Dii etc. Ye
shall be as Gods, selfe-wise, and selfe-sufficient; (...) ^^lacte ^^tricis
^r^orem suxi^se ^ideamur. Tuscul. Qu^st.
And this poison we have all sucked in with our Nurses milk: we will be at
least fellow-sharers with God in the work of our salvation. O, this pleases
us well. Saint Augustine himself confesses, that he was once of this
opinion, that God elected men out of his preuision and foresight of their
faith, etc. But this he imputes to his ignorance in his younger years, and
therefore in his riper judgment, and further insight into the mystery of God,
he retracteth his opinion, in his first book of Retractations cap. 23. yet
our age wants not gray heads, and white heirs, who with their gr^^n^ wits,
will rather approve of the opinion of young, then the judgment of old Saint
Augustine, and to retract his Retraction.

Now for this opinion, of Gods Election, ruled by his praescience, or
premission of works, if we seek some eminent authority, and venerable
antiquity for it, S. Augustine can best resolve us. For the Antiquity of it,
we have Saint Augustines time: for authority, the Pelagian heresy.
Praesciebat ergo, etc. He foreknew then (says the Pelagian) who would be holy
and immaculate, by their freewill, and therefore in that his praescience,
whereby he fore-knew they would be such, he Elected them before the foundation
of the world. Which opinion of Pelagius, now reviued Aug. de predest. lib. 1.
cap. 18.
by our Appealer and his, S. Augustine answers most divinely from the
Scriptures, Intueamur ergo, etc. Let us therefore peruse the words of the
Apostle, and let us see whether God did therefore choose us before the
foundation of the world, because we would become holy and immaculate, or that
we might be so? Blessed be God, says he, and the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us in all spiritual Ephesians. 1. 3.
blessings in heavenly places in Christ according as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love. Non ergo quia futuri eramus sed vt essemus, He chose us,
not therefore, because we would be such, but that we might be such: Nempe
certum est, etc. For it is certain, for it is manifest, that therefore we would
become such, because he chose us, predestinating us, that we should become such
by his grace. And mark (says he) what the Apostle adds. Secundum pl^citum,
etc. According to the good pleasure of his will, lest in so great a benefit of
the grace of God, we should glory in the pleasure of our own will. And much
more does this holy man sweetly apply to the same purpose, out of that heavenly
Chapter, the first to the Ephesians, whereof he says, Nimis longum est de
singulis disputare, It were too long to traverse every circumstance. And he
concludes, Cer^itis autem proculdubio, etc. You see then doubtless, you see
with what evidence of Apostolic eloquence, this grace of God is defended,
against which, humanie merits are advanced, as if man gave something first,
that he should be recompensed. Romans 11. 35.
Elegit ergo, etc. God therefore chose us in Christ, before the foundation of
the world, praedestinating us unto the Adoption of sons; not because we would
of our selves become holy and blameless, but be elected and praedestinated
us, that we might be such. And this he did according to the good pleasure of
his will, that no man should glory of his own, but of Gods good will toward
him Out of this purpose of God, is that calling, which is proper to the Elect,
to whom all things cooperate for good, because, according to his purpose, not
their own, they are called to be Saints, etc.

And to clear this point yet more, he induces an objection of some, who,
though adversaries in part to the Pelagians, yet they would impute
Praedestination to Gods praescience in regard of faith. The Pelagians (say Aug.
Ibid. cap. 19
they) are of opinion, that receiving once the commandment of God, we become
holy and immaculate of our selves, by our free will, which God foreseeing, did
therefore, before the foundation of the World, elect and praedestinate us in
Christ, whereas the Apostle says, Not because he foreknew we would be such,
but that we might be such by the election of his grace, whereby he has made
us accepted in his beloved Son. When therefore he praedestinated us, he knew
his own work, who makes us holy and immaculate. So that the Pelagians error
is rightly confuted by this testimony. But we say: (say these half-
Pelagians, to mince the matter) that our God foreknew not, save only our
faith, whereby we begin to believe, and therefore elected us to be holy, etc.
To whom Saint Augustine answers. Sed audians and ipsi etc. But let these also
hear in this testimony, where he says, In whom, (that is, in Christ) we have
obtained an inheritance, being praedestinated according to the purpose of him,
who works all things, after the counsel of his own will; that we should be
to the praise of his glory, who first trusted in Christ Whence the holy man
concludes, that seeing the Father works all things, therefore also faith, the
first seed whereof the Apostle ascribes to the praise of Gods glory. And
again, Not of works, but of him that calls; when he might have said, (says
Augustine) But of him that believes. Non enim etc. For not because we
believed, but that we might believe, he chose us, lest we should be said to
have chosen him first; and so that should be false, (which God forbid) you have
not chosen me, but I have chosen you. And that faith is the gift of God, the
Apostle says, Ephess. 2. 8. Ioh. 15. 16.
and Phil. 1. 29. also Heb. 12. 2. Jesus Christ, the Author and finisher of
our faith; besides sundry other places cited by Saint Augustine, so that this
good man leaves no corner vnhunted for this Pelagian Heresy to lurk in;
proving and concluding evidently, and inuincibly from Scripture, that Gods
election and praedestination is, most free, not depending upon any his
foresight of faith or grace to be in us, but merely according to his own
purpose and grace, whereupon our whole sanctification and salvation depends.
According to that of the Apostle, As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed: belief, being a confequent Act.
fruit of praedestination to eternal life. And that of Christ, ye believe
not, because ye are not of my sheep; that Ioh. 10. 26.
is of the number of Gods elect. Audiant hac, etc. says Saint Aug. Let them
hear those things, and other more, omitted Aug. Ibid. cap.
by us, whereby is showed, that God does prepare and convert men's wills to the
kingdom of heaven, and to eternal life. As the same Father says elsewhere,
I^^i cum Christo reg^abunt, etc. They shall raighe with Christ, whom God by his
free Aug Deside ad Pet. Diaconum cap. 20.
goodness has praedestinate to the kingdom: for because by praedestinating
such, he has prepared them that they should be meet for the kingdom: he has
prepared them also to be called, according to his purpose, that they may obey:
he has prepared them to be justified, that receiving grace, they may rightly
believe, and live well: he has prepared them also to be glorified, that being
made co-heires with Christ, they may possess the kingdom of heaven without
end. And so he concludes his former book, M^lta diximus, etc. we have said
many things, and yet we speak to such good wits, to whom as if dull of
understanding, even that which is too much, is not enough.


Babylonius. But does not the Apostle say plainly, that those whom God
forekn^w, he predestined? Therefore Rom 8. 29.
did not God praedestinate men, according as he foresaw they would receive (or
reject) grace offered?


Orthodoxus. Indeed this, and such like places of Scripture, do the
Arminians, our new Pelagians, pitifully pervert. But neither this place, nor
the analogy it has with other Scriptures will admit of any such sense. It is
plain, that this foreknowledge in God of those, whom he would praedestinate to
life, is no other, but his very act of electing of them; as the same Apostle
expresses it fully, Ephesians. 1. 4. 15. According as he has chosen us in Him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love; having praedestinated us unto the adoption of children by
Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, etc. For
Gods foreknowledge, of those whom he would save, is his eternal act of love in
electing them, or his gracious pleasure and purpose, or decree^n saving them.
We know that Scitum, which comes of Scio, to know, is used for a Decree, as
Plebiscitum, the peoples decree, so Gods foreknowledge here, is his foredecree.
So also whom God is said to know in Christ, is always taken for his approving
or liking, or accepting them in Christ. This is his knowledge of approbation,
whereby he knows only his elect. So Psa. 1. 6. The Lord knows the way of the
righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish. The Lord knows, that is,
approves and allows the way of the righteous. But does not the Lord know the
way of the wicked also^yes, by his knowledge of apprehension, but not, of
approbation. For he says (in Math. 27. 23.) to the wicked, I never know you;
depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Gods knowing of his therefore, is his
loving of them. Christ says to Nath^^iel, Before that Philip called thee, when
thou wast under the f^gge (...), I saw that. Under the Ioh. 1. 48. Aug. in
Psalm. 31. (...). 2. and de verbis (...), ser. 40.
fig tree, what is that? that is, says August. in Adams ^oines, clothed
with his fig-leaues, in the state of sin: then and there Christ saw
Nathaniel, that is, his true Israelites, his chosen; he saw him, that is, he
took pity on him, says he. As the Lord says in Ezechiel, 16. 6. I saw thee,
when thou wast polluted in thy blood, and said unto thee live. Which place even
the Appealer himself understands of Gods Election out of the corrupt mass.

Again, the Apostle in Romans 8. 28. and 29. ver. by you cited, says expressly,
that Gods foreknowledge is his purpose: for having said, v. 28, We know that
all things work together for good, to them that love God, being the called
according to his purpose, he adds, For whom he foreknew; those he also
praedestinated, etc.

Note again, he says not, those, whose wills he foreknew, but, whom he
foreknew: he speaks of their persons, not of their qualities.

And the Apostles next words do overthrow this Pelagian opinion, that God
foreknowing man's freewill, did accordingly praedestinate. For says the
Apostle, whom he did foreknow, he did also praedestinate to be conformed to
the image of his Son. So that, to be made conformable to the image of Christ,
is not of man's will foreseen, but of Gods Praedestination, foreknowing or
foreelecting in his Son, those whom he pleased. Therefore as Nescire Dei,
reprobare est (as Gregory says) as Gods not knowing is to reprobate; alleging
Luk 13. 27. Depart from me, I know Greg. moral. lib. 2. cap. 4.
you not: so on the contrary, Gods knowing, or foreknowledge of his, is to
elect them. This is the foundation of God which stands sure, and has this
seal, The Lord 2. Tim. 2. (...).
knows them that are his. I could be more copious to illustrate this, but
this may suffice to satisfy those that be not quarrellous.


Babylonius. But Sir, howsoever you may conclude, that Gods Election is
absolute, without any respective foreknowledge, of any good or grace in us, in
accepting grace offered: yet the same cannot so well be said of reprebation,
that God should reprobate any, but with a respect and foreknowledge of their
disobedience and infidelity. For else, God should be unjust, to cast away and
condemn any without just cause in themselves.


Orthodoxus. Sir there is the same reason of reprobation, that is of Election,
for both were out of the corrupt mafle wherein all men were equally condemned:
whereof some God called, and chose out to life, the rest he left as he found
them, guilty of eternal death, and upon whom the sentence of death had now
passed and seized, Genesis 2. 17 So that for God to leave some, whom he would,
wallowing in their blood, it is an act of his justice: as to free others, an
act of his mercy. Which Saint Augustine very pregnantly exemplifieth by a
Creditor, in whose power it is to acquit some of his Debtors, and to exact of
the rest to the uttermost, as we noted before. This is setforth also in the
types of the elect and reprobate, Jacob and Esau, who being yet in the womb,
before they had done good or evil, that the purpose of God, according to
election might stand, not Rom 9. 12.
of works, but of him that calls, It was said to her, the elder shall serve
the younger. As it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated: Yet
both Jacob and Esau were equally culpable in the womb, of original sin, and
so were children of death, as all were, in the womb of our first Parents: but
the election comes, and that makes a separation, and puts a difference,
mercifully loving one, and justly hating another, and that before they had
actually done good or evil, that the purpose of God might stand according to
election, not of works, but of him that calls. So that the disproportion,
alleged by the Appealer, was not between the elect and reprobate, before the
act of election, but the election caused the disproportion, not through any
foreknowledge, or foresight of any good or evil actually to be done of either
(as the Appealer would infer) but Gods mere mercy on the one side, and his
justice on the other, caused the disproportion. And even that place quoted by
the Appealer out of Ezechiell, makes altogether against himself, though Ezech.
16. Page 64 part. 1.
otherwise rightly alleged; for if we were in our blood, if cast out, if
loathed, if dead; and yet, if in this contemptible condition, God said unto
us, live, yea, when we were in our blood (it is twice repeated, ver. 6.) he
faide unto us, live; where is then that praescience of any good in us, moving
God to pull us out of this miserable estate? I am sure, no mention of it is in
Ezechiel, no not in the whole Book of God; but the contrary, as we have
proved; no nor yet does his pretended Goddess, indeed his nothing in the
world, the Church of England, any where teach the same; so nakedly, yet
shamlesly peremptory is this assertion of the Appealer, having none to father
his opinion upon, but Pelagius, and his Disciples. So weak and windy are his
aspersions, which he casts upon Calvin, or upon those whom he calls
Puritans, for maintaining nothing, but what the Scriptures plainly teach,
against his groundless and graceless opinion: so that he fights against God
and his truth, against Gods glory, and his grace, against his Church, yea the
Church of England also.


Babylonius. But Sir, if the act of Election and Reprobation be without any
respective foreknowledge in God of any actual good or evil in man, then what
place is left for freewill? or how can God be just in punnishing the
rebellious, seeing he has rejected them, and denied them grace?


Orthodoxus. Of freewill I suppose occasion will be given anon to speak of it
by it self. For the rebellious reprobate, as he is justly rejected for his
sin in Adam, so he is never but justly condemned and punished for all his
actual sins, springing from that cursed root. Nor does his reiection
necessitate him to rebel the more against Cod; his rebellion is from his own
perverse will. Nor is God bound to give him grace. But against all contentious
quarrellers at the Doctrine of God, we cannot shape, nor are we bound to give
a better answer, (melius enim non invenimus says St. August. many times
against such cauellers) for we find not a better, then that of the Apostle
upon the very same occasion, Thou wile say then, why does he yet complain? for
who has resisted his will? Nay but o man! who art thou that replyest against
God? shall the thing formed, say to him that formed it, why have thou made Rom
9.
me thus? Has not the Potter power over the clay, of the same lump, to make
one vessel unto honor, and another to dishonor? etc. The comparison is very
pregnant: God is the Potter, we the lump, of filthy, and foul clay, cast out
as the clay in the streets; yet if the Potter will, may he not take some of
the clay, and make of it, vessels of honor, and make of the rest, (foul and
filthy as he finds it) to dishonor? seeing it was in his power to put the
whole lump, and that justly, to baser uses. But as the Apostle says, God
makes some, vessels of his mercy, to make known the riches of his glory;
leaving the rest to be vessels of wrath, sitted for destruction, to make known
his justice and power. In a word, if Gods election be an act of mere mercy,
then it excludes all respect to any good, that he could foresee to be in us:
for (as the Apostle says) There is at Romans 11. 5. 6.
this present a remuant, according to the election of grace: And if by grace,
then it is no more of works; otherwise, grace is no more grace. But if it be
of works, then it is no more grace; otherwise work is no more work. What
then? Israel has not obtained that which he seeks for, but the election has
obtained it, and the rest were blinded.

I will conclude with Saint Aug. Non solum etc. Therefore by the preaching of
Pradestination, the Elect is not only Aug (...) perseuerant ^ib. 2. cap. 17.
not hindered from this work, to wit, of sanctification, but also is furthered
thereunto, that when he glories he may glory in the Lord. The Pelagians could
say, Si^^^ etc. If ye will not Ibid. cap. 19.
have the obedience, to which you incite and inflame us, to freeze in our
hearts; do not preach unto us that grace of God, which we confess God is the
giver of, and which you exhort us unto. But Saint Aug. meets with them: Ego
autem nolo etc. I ibid cap. 17.
will not exaggerate the matter with my words, but I rather leave it to them to
consider, that they may see what that is, which they have persuaded themselves,
that by the preaching of praedestination, the hearers are possessed rather with
desperation, then with exhortation; for this is all one, as to say, that then a
man despaireth of his salvation, when he has learned to put his hope not in
himself, but in God. Whereas the Prophet proclameth, Cursed is every one, that
puts his hope in man. Miror (says he) homines infirmitatis suae se malle
committere, Ier 17. 5. Aug. de praed^^^. Sa^ll. lib. 1. cap. 11.
quam firmitati promissionis Dei: I wonder, that men had rather commit
themselves to their own infirmity, then to the stability of Gods promise.

Therefore we must not measure the wisdom of God in his word, by the last or
model of our own brain. Indeed man's reason, when it stands alone, seems
very selfe-wise. But if it be compared, and set by Gods wisdom, then the
folly of it is by and by discovered. The Pontificians have a plausible reason
for their justification by works: because (say they) it is a means to stir
up men to good works. The Vniuersalists have their plausible reason also for
their universality of grace, as indifferenly offered to all men alike, if they
will but receive it: because (say they) all men may hereby be won to embrace
the grace offered, and so be saved. But we know, that neither the external
ordinary means are equally offered to all. For many thousands have not the
means at all, much less, in an equal measure. Again, the ordinary means
do of themselves work no more, but ordinary grace, as illumination, and
temporary faith, etc. But the effectual saving grace, though it be not wrought
simply by the ordinary means, but by the especial efworke of Gods Spirit in
and by the means, yet we know that the ordinary means are to be diligently
and reverently attended of all men, wheresoever God affords them. Howsoever,
in all this generality, Gods purpose and grace remains firm to all the seed
only; this is Gods wisdom. Therefore if Gods word satisfy not our carnal
reason, but cross it rather, shall we presume by straining and wresting, to
fit it to our own fancy, and not rather submit all our human wisdom unto
it? Even Heathen Cato, following Pompeis part against Caesar, because he took
it to be the juster, and seeing Pompeis side declining, and Pompey himself at
last beaten out of the field: he looked up to heaven, and cried, In rebus
diuinis magnam esse Caliginem, that in divine things there was a great deal of
darkness, which man's wit could not discover. As St. Augustine in his answer
to the Pelagians cavil, in quarrelling the Scriptures about the imputation of
sin, says, Quid si ego essem hebetior, nec statim possem has rations
diluere: an propterea minus deberem diuinae Aug.
Scripturae credere? Imo mullo magis conuenit, vt ego ruditatem meam agnoscam,
quam vt falsitatem sacris literis impingam. What if my dullness were such, as I
could not by and by disprove these reasons: must I therefore not believe the
divine Scripture? Nay so much the rather ought I to acknowledge mine own
ignorance, then to impute falsehood to Gods holy word. A rare humility and
candid ingenuitie of this holy man, captiuating all his carnal reason to Gods
profound wisdom in the holy Scriptures.


Babylonius. But Sir, give me leave a little to apologize in the Appealers
behalf. You say, his opinion is impious, as impugning the glory and mercy of
God. But does he not say in express words, that God did out of his mercy, in
his love, motu mero (they be his own words) and not otherwise, stretch out to
mankind, lying in their blood, in Adams corrupt loins, deliverance in a
Mediator, the Man Jesus Christ, and drew them out that took hold of mercy,
etc? so that you see, the Author does ascribe our deliverance to the mercy and
mere motion of Gods love to mankind. Therefore this his opinion is not so
impious as you would make it, as if guilty of high sacrilege against Gods
glory, and grace.


Orthodoxus. Indeed Sir, you say something for him, as he does for himself;
but that is said, is so far from acquiting, as it does deeply accuse the
Author of high treason against the Majesty of God, and the throne of his
grace. True it is indeed, that it was Gods incomprehensible love to mankind,
to ordain for him such a Redeemer, as was his own and only Son, to assume
our base nature, and therein to live and dye contemtibly. An exceeding great
favor of God toward man, to shape, make, and fit his Son Jesus Christ, as a
most glorious robe, to cover our nakedness; as some of this Pelagian race,
teachers of universal grace, make the comparison. All this is well thus far.
But is this all? If Gods mercy and grace stinte here, and go no further,
farewell deliverance, we may wallow in our blood still, we may wear our filthy
nakedness, as our best garment still. In vain Gods mercy, in vain Christ's
death, while it is left to us to receive, and accept this grace. In vain does
a man tell a blind man of a glorious sun in the firmament, which he wants
eyes to see: or a maimed man, without hands, of a goodly garment made up for
him, upon condition, that none but himself, must put it on? such is our
condition by nature, we perceive not, we receive not 1. Cor. 2.
the things of the Spirit of God, concerning Christ. Tell us of the glorious
sun of righteousness risen who has healing under his wings: we are blind,
we apprehend it not, we are not affected with it, as not sensible of our
spiritual Mal. 4.
diseases. Tell us of the Robe of Christ's righteousness, dipped and dyed in
his blood: we want the hand of Esa. 63 1. 2.
faith to put it on; yea, we cannot duly prize it, we disesteeme it, we count
it no better, then that poor coare of his, which the Soldiers cast lots for;
yea, we hide our faces from him, he was despised, and we esteemed him not,
says Esaias. Yea, we are by nature like those L^odiceans, we say, we are rich,
and increased in goods, and have need of nothing: and know not, that we are
wretched, and I^^. 53.
miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Reu 3. 17. But, as God is the good
Physician, who of his mere grace and favor, prepares and prouides a remedy
for our deadsicke souls: so he alone out of his free mercy must apply this
remedy, else we can reap no more benefit by it, then a sick Patient of a
sovereign Cordial, while it is close kept in the Apothecaries box, whereof he
sees the inscription and title only. We have a pregnant example hereof, in
that man, that fell among thieves, who stripped, wounded, and left him half
dead, unable to help himself; Luke 10.
whom the Priest and Leuite pass by on each side, without remorse; but a
Samaritan seeing him, comes to him, takes compassion on him, binds up his
wounds, powers in oil and wine, lifts him up on his Beast, and prouides all
things necessary Aug. de verbis Dom sermon. 37. ^^m. 10.
for him. The case is ours, Totum geuus humanum est homo ille, qui iacet in via
seminivus, etc. says August. All mankind is that man, which lies in the way,
half dead; and though Christ the good Samaritan, come and take compassion of
us, and bring oil and wine to heal our wounds; yet unless his compassion
extend it self to apply them, we should still be wallowing in our blood, and
so perish. Yet as Saint Augustine says, Sunt homines iugrati gratiae, multum
tribuentes inopi, sauciaeque naturae: Men are ungrateful ^ug. de verbis (...).
ser. 2. ^^m. 10.
to grace, attributing much to poor and wounded nature. Verum est, magnas
arbitrij liberi vires, homo cum conderetur accepit, sed peccando amisit. True
it is; Man when he was created, received a greater power of freewill, but by
sinning lost it. And this does St. Augustine apply to the man fallen among
thieves, helped and healed by the merciful Samaritan.

Well, how then come we to be made partakers of Christ? Namely by the free
gift of Christ. It is of Gods free favor and mercy, that Christ is given, not
only for us, but to us: that Christ is not only appointed of the Father to be
a glorious garment to cover our shame, but also the hand of faith is given us
by the same grace of God, whereby we put him on, as the Father in the Gospel
commanded the best robe to be fecht, and to be put upon his convert prodigal
son; by the same grace our eyes are opened, to behold the glorious son of
righteousness, risen in our horison, bringing life and health unto us. And as
Christ came unto us, so we must come unto him: But how? by the same grace and
mercy that he came unto us, we come unto him. So Christ says, No man can come
unto me, except the Father which has sent me, draw him: and ver. 45. And they
shall all be Ioh. 6. 44.
taught of God. Every man therefore that has board, and has learned of the
Father, comes unto me. And ver. 65. No man can come unto me, except it were
given unto him of my Father, upon which words St. Augustine says, Trahi Aug.
de prede^^. san^^oru^. lib. 1. cap. 8.
a Patre ad Christum, etc. For a man to be drawn by the Father to Christ, and
to hear and learn of the Father, that he may come to Christ, is no other,
then to receive a gift of the Father, whereby he believes in Christ. And
again, Quando Ibid.
Pater intus anditur, etc. When the Father is inwardly heard, and teaches men
to come to his Son, he takes away their stony Ezech. 11.
heart, and gives them a heart of flesh. For so he makes the sons of
promise, and vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Why then does
he not teach all, that they may come to Christ? but that because all whom he
teaches, in mercy he teaches; and whom he teaches not, in judgment he
teaches not: because he shows mercy on whom he will; and whom he Romans 9
will, he hardneth; but, he shows mercy, bestowing that which is good: he
hardneth, recompensing that which is due. whereupon he concludes, H^nc est quod
verbum crucis pereuntibus stulitia est: his autem qui salui flunt, virtus Dei
est. Aug ibid.
Hence it is, that the preaching of the Cross, is to them that perish,
folishnesse: but to them which are saved, it is the power of God. This truth is
so clear, it needs no further testimony. So that to ascribe part of our
salvation to God, and part to man, is artificially to rob God of his glory, and
man of salvation: seeing not only for the Father to appoint his Sons, to be
the Mediator and Redeemer of mankind, but also effectually to give him to all
his elect, giving them grace and faith whereby to receive him, are two noble
inseparable branches growing from one and the same root of Gods free mercy.
Neither can the one stand without the other; for take away this latter act of
Gods mercy, inabling us to receive Christ, and the former, of appointing Christ
to be the deliverer, would be altogether frustrate, as depending upon man's
will to receive, or reject him, as the Vniuersalists falsely affirm. Therefore
give God his whole glory, or else ye rob and strip him of all. So that I may
say of the Appealers dealing herein, as our learned Master Hooker in his tract
of Justification, says of the Romish Church in the matter of our Redemption by
Christ. They grant (says he) that Christ alone has performed the work of
Redemption sufficiently for the salvation of the whole world; but in the
application of this inestimable treasure, that it may be effectual to their
salvation: how demurely soever they confess, that they seek remission of
sins, no otherwise then by the blood of Christ, using humbly the means
appointed by him, to apply the benefit of holy blood; they teach indeed so
many things pernicious in Christian faith, in setting down the means, whereof
they speak, that the very foundation of faith, which they hold, is thereby
plainly overthrown, and the force of the blood of Jesus Christ extinguished.
So he. The very like may be applied to the Appealer. For he, with his
Arminians, howsoever they acknowledge the mere mercy of God, in providing such
an all-sufficient Savior to redeem mankind; yet they mar all in their
applying this plaster of mercy, while they would do it with the hand of
freewill, the foresight whereof was (forsooth) the first mouer of Gods mere
mercy. Sure if so, they must needs abate no small part from mere mercy. For
how is it mere mercy, if any good in us foreseen, first caused it, that it
should offer a Savior to us?


Babylonius. Now see, you seem to touch upon the Freewill.
point of Freewill, which my Author treats of in the next Chapters, the 8,
9, and 10. following in order that, which has hitherto been discussed. And to
my simple understanding, that which he writes of it is very Catholic, and
such as wherein he ascribes, the receiving of grace offered, not simply to
Freewill, but primarily to Gods grace, preparing and stirring up the will unto
it. But I desire to hear your opinion of this point also, as he has handled
it.


Orthodoxus. With a good will. But for as much as by the Authors own words,
it is accounted, a Question of perplexed obscurity, I purpose not to tread the
whole maze, wherein the versatilous wit of man has made infinite windings, I
will be very brief, omitting his various and copious allegations of Authors
opinions. So that passing by the eighth Chapter, as empty: the ninth also, as
full of quotations; I will touch only one or two passages in his tenth
Chapter: In the second page whereof, whereas he says, that in Adam, and
through his fall, we have not lost nature but grace; this seems to imply, that
Adam in his innocence, had grace. For else, no man can be said to loose, what
he never had. But what grace? The grace that comes by Jesus Christ, which is
the only grace the Scripture speaks of? Surely, that, he had not; for
August. de corrept: ^t gratia.
before his fall, he needed not Christ; as Augustine says; yet he adds,
Adam, non habuit gratiam? imo habuit magnam, sed disparem. Had not Adam grace?
yes, great grace, but far unlike that which comes by Jesus Christ. He might
be said rather to have natural graces; that is, all ornaments, and endowments
of an absolute and complete natural man, as he was; then simply that which
the Scriptures calls grace; for grace came by Jesus Christ. But this by the
way.

The two principal things I note, is first his allegation of the Council of
Trent, touching freewill: the second, his approbation of it, seconded with his
own d^fini^iue sentence, tanquam in Cathedra. So that howsoever he seem to
hold with the Church of England, and of Protestants in the point of freewill,
yet the whole concatenation of his other Doctrines with this, (as of falling
from grace total or final, praedestination upon a Preuision of man's
willingness to receive grace universally offered, and the like) does
necessarily conclude, that he holds, the very freewill of the Pelagians, and
not only that of the Pontificians. For all these Heresies are so combined
together, as so many members compact in one in^^re body, or as so many wheels
in a rack, each receiving motion from other. But for brevity, because he makes
no difference between the Decree of the Council of Trent, and his own, yea,
and the Tenent of the Protestants Church: therefore it shall suffice to touch
upon the Council of Trent only; and so, if that prove sound, well and good.
For then the Protestant Church, holding therein with the Council of Trent, will
prove to be beholden to the Appealer: else, but a little, for shuffling us in
the same pack of Trents freewill.

I take his words, page 98. quoted out of his former book of the Gagge, for
which he is taxed: Our conclusion (says he to the Popish Gagger) and yours, is
all one: we cannot, we do not deny freedom of will in man: whose does so, is
no Catholic. I add, no, nor Protestant. These be his words. Now all the
controversy about freewill, is it not in regard of the grace of Christ, with
relation unto it? Else, what needs all the stir about it? For that is the
(...); therein lies the state of the Question. For all confelle, as well
Protestants, as Papists, that the natural man has some reliqu^e^ left of
Adams natural freewill, we yield it, not to be altogether extinct, no more
then his other faculties of the soul. But the Protestant Church, the Church of
England, denies, that by nature we have any freewill dispositiue to grace. But
this is the mark, which the Council of Trent, the standard rule of the Romish
Church, shoot at, namely to advance man's natural freewill unto grace: only
confessing, it is so weakened and maimed by the fall of Adam, that it needs
some divine help to enable it the better to receive grace. As St. Augustine
notes of some more refined Pelagians, who Aug de bono perseuerant. lib. 2.
cap. 16.
though they will not confess, that those are Praedestinate, which by Gods
grace are made obedient, and permanent, yet they confess a kind of preventing
grace. But how? Ideo vtique etc. No otherwise, but least grace should be
thought to be given gratis, as the truth speaks, but rather according to the
merits of man's precedent will, as the Pelagian error gainsayeth, against. This
being also the Doctrine of the Council of Trent, howsoever the Appealer iumpe
with them, and join the right hand of fellowship: yet (for ought I know) he
must go alone with them, for any consent or countenance the Church of England
will give him in this his confederation. For all orthodox, and true Protestants
deny and disclaim any freewill at all in a natural, or unregenerate man, unto
grace; I mean, the saving grace of Christ. Natural men have it not, no nor
Adam in his purest naturalls, ever had such a freewill. For the will must
follow the understanding, seeing it cannot affect good, unless first the
understanding apprehend it. For Ignoti nulla cupido. That which a man knows
not, he desires not. That the eye sees not, the heart sueth not after. To this
purpose, Aquinas says well, that, Those things, which pertain to faith, do
exceed Aqu. Si^. 22. q 6. 1. (...). Ea qua sunt fides, excedunt rationem,
humanam. and, Homo, assentiendo his, quae sunt fidei, eleuatur supra naturam
suam.
human reason. And, Man, by assenting to those things, which are of faith, is
elevated above his nature. And again, ^b. q. 114. 2. c.
Hoc est ex institutitione diuinae prouidentiae etc. This is by the appointment
of divine providence, that nothing should work beyond its proper virtue. But
eternal life (says he) is a certain good, exceeding the proportion of
created nature, because it also transcendeth the knowledge and desires of it.
And he concludes, that not even Adam could attain to eternal life, without
a supernatural grace. What needs then all that ado about the quantity and
measure of natural freewill remaining ^n man, when it wants the qual^^y and
property, to qualify it any way toward grace? There is in us, as natural
men, a natural freewill still; it is no more lost, then other natural
faculties, the poor relics of Adams perfections: but this will is but
natural, it reaches no higher, then to natural objects. So that while the
Church of Rome, or the Council of Trent, so much adoring her Gods Freewill,
yet withal is forced to acknowledege a debility and lamnesse in it: they would
feign persuade the world, that there is yet in our nature some antique
venerable relics of freewill, disposing unto grace. Hence it is that they
have a whole chapter of Preparation unto grace, wherein they touch upon
freewill, as being the ground (sandy though it be) of their preparatory works
unto faith and justification, as also of all their meritorious works. And
therefore are they so eager to maintain and treasure up, at least some
Relics of Adams freewill; least all should be attributed to Grace, and
nothing to Nature, and then farewell all Merit, either of congruity, by
preparation to grace, or of condignity to glory. So that, for this very reason,
they anathe^ze all those, that say, Freewill is altogether lost. Wherein, if
they will not confess, that they which say so, mean, that a man unregenerate
has no freewill unto grace, then they cunningly equivocate. But the case is
plain, all that their Doctrine drives at, is to advance man's natural
freewill unto grace, as much as is possible. Therefore they say, that these
remains of freewill in man, though much lessened, and sore bruised with Adams
fall, yet need but a kind of stirring up, and awakning as it were, oriogging
on the elbow, or helping up being down. So that it shares stakes with their
first grace, as they term it, though in hypocrisy they would seem to give
most to God. Therefore if this be that, which the Appealer sticks not to
approve in the Council of Trent, I will be bold to say as Saint Jerome did to
the Pelagians * It is the Churches victory, that you utter your (...), co^tra
P^lagianos. (...). 1. tract. 2. (...). 13.
minds plainly; Sententias vestras prodidisse, superasse est: to discover
your opinions, is to discomfit them. And for him to say, that God provided a
Mediator for all such, whom he foresaw would receive him, to wit, by the
freedom of their will, were a mere absurdity, if man have not an absolute
freedom to grace. And by the Appealers approbation of the Council of Trent in
the point of freewill, he must confess, that man in his Naturalls has at
least some freewill to grace. Which will agree well with that he said before,
touching Gods foresight of those would lay hold on grace; otherwise it implies
a flat contradiction. For if there be no freewill in a natural man toward
grace: then what willingness did God foresee in men to receive his Son,
unless that, which himself did purpose wholly to work in them? Although not
Gods own work, which he purposed to work in man, by giving him faith and
grace, was that, which foreseen, moved him to elect and praedestinate to
salvation; for then the means should in Gods first intention to save mankind,
have taken place of the end it self, which in the priority of order, is the
first in intention, though last in execution; yea, have taken place also of
Gods eternal free love, the prime motion, and sole absolute cause, that moved
him to make his election of those whom he would, not who would him.

But the Council of Trent, and who so take part with it, deals coldly, and
comes far short in giving Gods grace, the due praise in the work of man's
salvation. So that while they advance man's will, too high, and too much
depresse Gods grace, they so part the stakes, that they give the right hand
rather to freewill, then to grace. For what says the Council? Si quis dixerit
etc. If any Cencil. Trid. Sess. 6. can 4. Si quis d^x^rit, etc.
man shall say, that man's freewill, moved and stirred up of God, does cooperate
nothing, by assenting to God stirring up, and calling, whereby it may dispose
and prepare it self to obtain the grace of justification etc. Let him be
accursed. In this very Cannon is inuolued a great part of the mystery of
iniquity. For note here Romes Legierdemam in iuggling with Gods grace. She
ascribes to God two things: 1. a work of moving and stirring up the will. 2.
Touching the object, or end of this work, that the will may, by the
cooperation of a free and self assenting, dispose and prepare it self to
obtain the grace of justification. Examine we the words a little. Note what a
slight and slender work they here attribute to God; it is with them, but a
moving and stirring up, just like the confederate Arminians lenis suasio, some
gentle motion; as if the will were but a little dull and lazy, and must be
spurred, or sleepie and drowsy, and must be awakened, as Elias bad Baals
Prophets to cry alowd, to awake their sleepie God. Yet this moving and shirring
up, their Schoolmen, and in particular, Andrew Vega, and Dominick Soto, two
grand sticklers in that Council, and who being the two standard bearers of two
strong different factions in that Council, the one of the Dominicians, the
other See Hist. Council. (...).
of the Franciscans, bore a great swinge, and sway in it, and have written
large Commentaries upon that sixth, the main and masterpiece- Session of that
Council; as also Catharinus, of that Council too; and so Bellarmine and others
of that crew: they express this Motion (I say) and stirring up of the will, to
be understood, as an act of the This 1. grace, is called by the Council, their
preventing grace. S^^^, 6. cap. 5.
first grace; a grace which the subtle Schoolmen have devised, distinct from
their second grace. Which Schoolediuinity and subtle Sophistry, is the yery
ground work of all the maine Decrees of the Council, especially of those,
contained and most cunningly contrived in that sixth session, concerning
Justification. Well. But what may this first grace be? Truly no other, by
their own Doctrine, but such, as a man may have, and yet never attain to
justification, and so to salvation, yet such a grace they say it is, as by
moving and stirring up, the will cooperates to give assent, and to dispose and
prepare it self to receive justification, to wit, an infusion of inherent
grace, which they call the Second grace; and so the will, by giving free assent
by disposing and preparing it self, does merit of Congruity the second grace;
although the Council confesses, that the first grace is given freely without
any precedent merit Ibid.
in man. By which one devise of a poor (I wot not what) first grace, whereby a
man is not at all (by their own confession) justified, and so will scarce
prove worth God have mercy: they would elude and evacuate the Scriptures, which
so much advance and magnify the work of Gods free and effectual grace, in
our first conversion and justification; as Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely
by his grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus. For they turn
the cat in the pan; and because they cannot deny the express Scripture, so
pregnant and plentiful in setting out the free and undeserved grace of God in
man's salvation, but are forced at least in words to confess it: therefore they
have no other shift, but to restrain this free gift of Gods effectual saving
grace, to that only which they call their first grace, though no iustifiying
grace at all. Whereas the Apostle expressly in the forementioned place, speaks
of the free gift of saving grace, whereby we are indeed actually justified.
But the Trent Council says no where, that that grace, whereby a man is
justified, which they call their second grace, is freely given. No, they have a
freewill, whose cooperating assent with their first grace, produces a merit of
Congruitie, to procure, that their justification may not be freely given, but
merited of Congruity. For whereas they say (chap. 8.) ^ess. 6. cap. (...).
that a man is said therefore to be justified freely, because none of those
things, which go before justification, whither faith or works, do merit the
grace it self of Justification; for if it be of grace, it is no more works;
otherwise (as the Apostle says) grace, is now no more grace; as the Council
hypocritically alleges: yet we must understand, that the Council means
no other here, but to exclude merit of condignity from going before her
justification, but not the merit of congruity. And thus by her cunning
equivocation, she both keeps good quarter with her Schoolmen, and satisfies
the contrary opinions of Vega and Soto, about the merit of Congruity in
justification, as ye may see in the History of the Trent Council. yea, and
thus also the Church of Rome quits scores with the Scriptures, which exclude
all merit of man from justification; and all by her futile distinction of a
first and second grace, and subtle equivocation of Merit, of congruity and
condignity. This is Romes sophistry, and the very Mystery of iniquity.

In the next place; by their wills assenting upon Gods moving of it, they mean
an assent of belief of the truth revealed in the Scriptures, namely a general
and historical faith: as Sess. 6. chap. 6. And as * Soto plainly commenteth
upon (...) na^. and gra. li. 2. c. 7.
it; so And. Vega also. For by the way it is to be observed, that in that whole
Session, there is not once the least mention made of credere in Deum, to
believe in God, which is the Act of true iustifiyng faith. And therefore no
marvel, if the Council be not ashamed to confess, in the front and title of
the 15 chap. and so in the chapter it self, that by Quelibet mortal peccate,
a^^^i^ti gratiam, viz iustificationis, sed non fidem.
every mortal sin, the grace of justification is lost, but not faith. So that
their Roman Catholic faith is one thing, and their grace of justification
another. Now sum up all this together, concerning this work of God upon man's
freewill, and the total is. That God does no more, but move and stir, and
call upon the will, not by that inward and effectual calling according to his
purpose, but by an outward, ordinary, common calling, which is no more, but as
a kind of Monitor to the will. Nor is God here said, by this grace, to give
faith, but to stir the will to an historical assent of faith; generally
believing the things revealed to be true, by their wills cooperation with their
first grace, which is no more any saving grace, then their faith occasioned by
it, any justifying faith. Thus we see, how the Church of Rome, by her crafty
mincing, and malicious mangling of the grace of God in man's free justification,
how by robbing from the work of Gods grace, to ^^rich their Freewills
co-worke: she utterly frustrateth Gods grace, and euacuateth his glory, making
a mere mock of both.

For do but weigh these two together in the scales one against the other, Gods
grace, and Man's freewill, and the difference according to Romes unjust
estimate, will easily appear. Grace only stirs and moves, say they, but
the will is active, and by its cooperation assenteth: grace, only calls,
after a common and ordinary manner, just like the universal grace; but the will
disposes and prepares it self; grace, is freely given, only in this
respect, by preventing the will in stirring and moving, but not in justifying
the sinner: but the wills selfe-disposition and preparation to justification,
is a merit of congruity, meriting the second grace, to wit, of justification, a
far greater grace (I wis) then the first grace, the only grace freely given
of God. So that Romes merit of congruity, arising from her well disposed
freewill, is of more value and virtue, then Gods free mercy; for this, gives
only the first grace freely, a sorry and slender grace: but that, meriteth a
far greater grace, even of justification it self.

Here then every man may easily judge of Romes egregious hypocrifie, insolent
sacrilege, and false-fingering, who while she would seem to give the
preeminence to Gods grace, only by coloring it over with the title of grace,
as of first grace, and preventing grace, and the like: in the mean time she
aduanceth her own freewill above the skies, yea above grace, above God and
all. Fulfilling that, which Bernard says, It is high impiety, to attribute to
God, that which is less, and to our selves that which is more excellent. Bern.
degra. and lib. arbit. Nef^^ est, etc.
Now if a man should never so much seem to ascribe the praise of Sampsons Acts
against the Philistims, to Dalilah, because she awakened, and stirred him up;
will any believe him? It is against all reason. The case here is alike between
grace and freewill. Freewill is a sleep, bound hand and foot in the cords of
sin: but grace comes, and awakenes it, bids it arise; whereupon the will
begins Sampson-like to rowse it self, to shake of the bands, to prepare and
dispose it self to the atchieument of some great work. Whither then deserves
greater praise, grace awakening, or, freewill so bravely acting? Though I
confess my shallow wits would never have been able to have sounded the depth
of this profound mystery, to have discerned a clear difference between their
first grace, given of gratuity, and their freewills merit of congruity, but
that they have told us plainly without equinocating, that the second grace,
which they obtain by their merit of congruity, is of far greater value, then
the first grace, though bestowed of free gratuity.

But I fear, I have exceeded the bounds of my promise, and purpose for
breuity. But pardon me. I have been in the perplexed Labyrinth of the Council
of Trent. Now by that we have said, we may see, what reason any man (at
leastwise so mighty lie protesting and professing himself to be no Papist, as
the Appealer does) has, so much to countenance, yea to plead for the Council
of Trent in the point of freewill (so, as I dare say, no Lawyer would do, in a
case so corrupt, not for the best fee; though I know not what fee or feeling
Master Mountagu has, for playing Romes Proctor, except it be his blind
affection, and some pale faced hope) since therein Rome has laid the foundation
of that her Babylonish fabric of the mystery of iniquity, and of all her
meretricious merits. So that I cannot see, how such men can be excused from
high impiety against God, and even joining hands of fellowship with that most
impious and blasphemous confederacy against the glory of God, and the grace and
truth of Jesus Christ.


Babylonius. Good words, I pray you. A man might speak as much for the
Council of Trent, as you do against it; but for my part, I will not undertake
that quarrel now. I desire that you will show the true difference, between
the Council of Trents Doctrine of freewill, and that which you take to be the
true Doctrine. For is there any other Doctrine of freewill, then that of the
Church of England, and of the Protestants, which the Appealer makes all one
with the Doctrine of the Council of Trent?


Orthodoxus. Sir, for my words, they are the words of truth and soberness. For
our Protestant Doctrine of freewill, to be all one with the Council of Trent;
God forbid it, we deny it: for Romes Doctrine to be all one with ours, Rome
forbids, denies, and accurseth. Nor do I see, how the Appealer will escape the
Popes direful excommunication, Bulla confirmationis Council. Trid. Pi^. 4.
for daring so to comment upon the Trent Council, expressly forbidden by the
Pope, without special authority. But I know not what special authority he
may have from the Pope to do this. Nor can the Council of Trent have any
other patronage, then colorable pretense, and sophistical shows, which are
the best arguments the Appealer is able to bring for Trents Doctrine; whereas
the allegations against it fear no colors, since armed with truth it self.
But to satisfy your desire, according to my weak capacity, I am not
unwilling.

As I noted before; man's will in the state of nature, has such a vast
disproportion to the grace of Christ, as it has no disposition at all unto it.
This is a mystery hid from Nature, a Transcendent far above the capacity of
Natures reach. To this grace, nature is not bleareeyd, but blind: not a
sleep, but dead: not lame, but a senseless stock. So that, more then a
slender moving or stirring up of (I wot not what) first grace, (I wot well, no
grace) is requisite to set the will a foot, to the settling of it in the state
of grace: of that grace (I say) of true justification, to which Romes first
grace has no more proportion, then her freewill in her pur^st naturalls.

But the grace, whereof the Scripture speaks, and the work of it in man's
conversion, is no such grace, as Romes first grace; for that is no other, but
the true, and effectual, saving, justifying, and sanctifying grace of God: the
first act and work whereof in the souls conversion to God, is not a faint and
impotent moving and stirring, or awakening of the sleepy will, which then
begins to dispose it self to grace: but it is a powerful and effectual work
upon the will, and the whole soul, with every faculty thereof, and that not to
the disposing unto, but to the present possessing of the state of grace, and
true justification, apprehended by saving faith, the free gift of this grace.
Besides this effectual grace of God for man's conversion, the Scripture knows
none. Nor is the Scripture acquainted with such ieiune and faint terms, as
Rome uses, in setting forth the work of grace in our conversion. The
Scripture flies in a more lofty style, to give Gods grace the full praise in
the effectual work of our conversion. Ezech. 11. 19. I will give them one
heart, and will put a new spirit within you; I will take the stony heart out of
their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my
statutes. So Ezech. 36. 26: A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you, etc. and cause you to walk in my statutes. And this is
(as Augustine says) the taking away of our stony heart, and the giving of a
heart of flesh, when the Father is heard Aug. de predest. sanctoru^. lib. 1.
cap. 8.
within, and teaches us to come, and draws us to his Son, by giving us a
saving faith in Christ. By which places we see what a noble and powerful
work of grace is wrought in us by Gods holy Spirit in our conversion; not a
bare stirring up, or moving, or helping the old, decrepit, stiff-limd will of
the natural man's stony heart, but a mighty removing of removing the evil
qualities, not the substance.
it clean away, and instead thereof, putting a new heart, a heart of flesh, a
flexible, and obedient heart, and a new spirit into us, by the virtue and power
whereof, we are effectually enabled to walk in Gods statutes, and to keep
them. And this work of grace, where begins it? but at the very first act of
our effectual calling and conversion, of our justification, and sanctification
from our sins, and against our sins? As in the forecited place of Ezechiel,
Then will I sprinkle pure water upon you, and ye shall be clean from all your
filthiness; for a new heart will Ezech. ^6. 25
I give you etc, so in Jeremy, The Lord ioynes his grace, and remission of
sins together; saying, I will put my law in their (...).
inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they
shall be my people. For I will forgive their iniquity and will remember their
sins no more. The Lord in the Gospel compares the state of a natural man
unregenerate, to a house possessed by a strong man. This strong man is Satan,
the spirit that rules in the children of disobedience, such as all
unregenerate are, who in that state are dominered over, and captiuated of the
tyrant Devil at his will. Who then shall bind this strong man, and dispossess
him of his house and strong hold, even the heart of a natural man
unregenerate? Surely none, but a stronger then he, even Christ. And is this
done so slightly, as by stirring up the will by some first grace? No more but
so? The strong man will not so easily forgo his hold. He must be driven out
by strong hand. When the Disciples could not by all their delegated power,
Christ must be feign to put to his immediate power and authority to drive the
Devil out. A sinner unregenerate is as Peter Act. 12.
fast asleep, and fast chained in the dungeon. And to free him, did the Angel
no more but with a iogge awake him? How fell his chains so easily of? How came
the prison doors open? How the iron gate, leading into the city, to open of it
own accord? Surely here was no small power used. Nay the unregenerate is like
Lazarus, fast bound, and lying dead in the grave. And is it so easy a matter
to raise him up, to give him life, and to free him from the bonds of death? But
you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins; wherein once ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the Prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience;
among whom also we had our conversation in time past, in the lusts of our
flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. etc. Ephesians. 2. 1 etc.
Our will being then captiuated, chained, imprisoned in the dungeon of death,
kept and possessed by the strong man the Devil: are we so easily freed? Saint
Chrysostom amplifieth this by an excellent comparison, or two: All men (says
he) before sin (as once Christ. in Mat. 21. hom. 37.
in Adams loins before his fall) have free will, to follow the Devils will, or
not; but when once by sin, we have captiuated our selves to his works, we
cannot now free our selves, But as a ship, the rudder being broken, is carried
whither the tempest will; so man, having by sin lost the help of divine
Grace, does not that which himself wills, but which the Devil wills; and
unless God with a strong hand of mercy loose him, he shall abide in the bonds
of his sins even unto death. And in the same place, he compares man's will
before sin (namely, in the state of Adams innocence) to a free people or
stare, in whose power and election it is, to choose what King they will; but
having once chosen him whom they best like, it is not now in their power, upon
any dislike to depose him again, although he tirannize over them never so
much; none can free them from this grievous bondage, but only God. So it being
once in the power of man's will, in the free state of innocence, to choose a
King, God, or the Devil, having once by consent of sin made choice of the
Prince of darkness, who tyrant-like rules in the children of disobedience: it
appertains now only to the mighty power, and infinite goodness of God to
set free these miserable captives out of that tyrant Pharaohs more then
Egyptian bondage.

Again in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said, that our hearts are
purified by faith; which some, as Aquinas, understands of illuminating the
understanding by faith; others, of the purification of the soul and heart from
sin by faith; as we are said also to be sanctified by faith that is in Act
15. 9
Christ. Now this faith is the first work of Gods grace, Act ^6. 18.
wrought in the heart, that is, in the whole soul, in our first conversion; by
which faith, the understanding is enlightened, and with it, the will, and all
the other faculties of the soul are sanctified. For the heart in Scriptuee is
taken oftentimes, for the whole soul, with all the faculties of it. As
Ephesians 1. 18. (...): the vulgar Latin renders it word for word, Illuminatos
oculis cordis vestri: the eyes of your heart being illuminated, that is, the
eyes of your understanding. And Math. 13. 15. Least they understand with their
heart. So for ^^e will: Act. 7. 39. The Israelites in their hearts turned back
into Egypt, that is, in their wills. So Acts 11. 23. Bernabas exhorts, that
with purpose of heart, that is, of will, they would cleave unto the Lord. The
heart is also taken for the memory, as Luke 1. 66: All that heard, laid up
those things in their hearts. So Deuteronomy. 11. 18: Ye shall lay up these my words
in your hearts. Sometime for the affections, as love, fear, and the like. So
Mat. 6. 21: Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also, your love,
your joy, your hope, yea and fear too. And Psa. 62. 10: If riches increase,
set not your heart upon them. Thus we use to reduce all these streams of the
soul to the heart, as the prime fountain: as when we say, an understanding
heart, a wise heart, a willing heart, a valiant heart, an humble heart, a
loving heart, and the like. Now the heart being taken for the soul, and all
the faculties of it, and being the very seat and subject wherein faith
resides, (for with the heart man believes to righteousness; and Christ dwells
in Romans 10. Ephesians. (...). 17.
our hearts by faith,) then the heart being purified, being sanctified by
faith, consequently the whole soul, with all the faculties, the understanding,
will, memory, affections, are at the same instant with the heart purified, and
sanctified by faith, as the first act and work of Gods grace in us.

Hence it is evident, that the prime work of Gods grace in the conversion of a
sinner, is not a slight and slender work, as a bare stirring, moving, or
helping of the will to prepare and dispose it self to receive the grace of
justification: but it is a mighty and powerful work, so that thereby the
stony heart, harder and heavier then the hardest rock, or highest mountain,
is removed, and a new heart, a new understanding, a new will, a new memory, new
affections, all new in the qualities of them, are put instead thereof. By this
prime work of grace, that most excellent grace of faith is wrought in the
heart, whereby the whole man is sanctified.


Babylonius. Sir, by the way, now you touch upon a point, which, as I have
heard, is much controuerted among Divines, namely about the subject, or seat of
faith, in what faculty, or power of the soul it resideth; some placeing it in
the understanding only, some in the will only, but few, as you do, in the
whole soul, and every power of it; as the soul is said by the Philosopher, to
be whole ^nima est (...) in toto, and tota in quali^^^ pante.
in the whole body, and whole in every part of it.


Orthodoxus. And you give a very pregnant example, to illustrate this truth,
that faith does so fill and quicken every faculty of the soul, as the soul
does the body. And the comparison holds well; for Saint Augustine calls faith
the soul of the soul: because it gives life to the whole soul, as the soul
to the whole body. And the Scripture says, that we live by faith, and faith
by Christ; as Gal. 2. 20.

Indeed those of the Church of Rome, are of different opinions in this point.
Dominicus Soto sets it down as a definitive decree of the Trent Council, It
is decreed, that the intellectual power is the subject or seat of says. And
this ^^to. de Not. and gr^. lib. 2 cap. 7. Designatur, subiect^m (...)
intellect^ua parentiam.
suits well with Romes faith, being historical, and so, proper to the
understanding faculty. Notwithstanding, when they consider of the danger of
placing faith in the understanding, least it should follow, that therefore
faith ought not to be an implicit, and ignorant, blind faith; but a clear and
understanding faith: they fly to the will rather, placing faith in that, not
for any good will, but to suppress the knowledge of faith, which Romes
Owle-eyed religion cannot brook. And therefore Bellarmine would ^.
have faith, to be defined rather from ignorance, then from knowledge: and so
shuts it out of the understanding, and shuffels it into some blind corner of
the will. But see the mischief of it: while they would avoid the gulf, they
fall ^.
upon the rock. For if they place faith in the will, they must of necessity
allow it one special property of saving faith, namely, assiance, and
considence in Gods promises in Christ, a thing most hateful to the Church of
Rome: therefore in conclusion, of two evils choosing the less, that they may
rather exclude confidence from faith, then science (since they can noe otherwise
choose) they rather pitch upon the understanding, then the will* wherein to
place their faith. So that by their good wills, they could be content, for the
avoiding of the inconveniences of an illuminate and confident faith, to crowd
it into some corner of the inferior part of the soul. But for sure work,
they have taken a safer course, by excluding and banishing not only from the
soul or any faculty of it, but out of the verge, and lists of their Roman
Catholic Church, and that with a direful Anathema, the true saving and
justifying faith.

But whereas you say, few Divines place faith in the whole soul, and in every
power of it: they are neither few, nor those of small authority. The
provincial Council Enchirid. C^ucil. Colon. prouine. de Sacra^ent^ paenit pa.
87. ^ri^^ted at Paris, 1554.
of Colen, (which was a little before the Council of Trent, although charged
by Andreas Vega to speak too broad, and too Protestant-like in the point of
faith and justification by imputation) says, that true justifying faith, is
seated not only in the understanding, but also in the will The learned and
ingenious Cardinal Contarenus, about the same time, writing of justification,
says, that the first act or motion of Card. Contar de Iustificat Mo^^^ ^^dei
incipit a voluntate, etc.
faith begins at the will, which obeying God and faith, causes the
understanding to assent to the things delivered of God, without doubting, and
so, to trust in Gods promises, and of them to conceive a firm affiance. which
pertaines to the will, and that this faith, as it were in a circle, begins at
the will, and ends in the will. So that he confineth not faith to the
understanding only, or to any one faculty of the soul, though he place it
principally in the will, in regard of those native and inseporable qualities of
true saving says, namely confidence, and affiance in Gods promises. So that I
wonder how this Doctrine of that good Cardinal has escaped the flames of
their Purgatory Index. But his own life paid for it, when he with his fellow
Cardinal Fregosus, being suspected Sleidan. Com^^tar. lib. 14.
too much to favor the Doctrine of Luther, were both quickly taken out of the
way, non sine veneni suspicione, not without suspicion of poison.

But those Divines that lived in more ancient ages, contented themselves with
the most simple, but most e^phaticall terms of the Scripture, not troubling
their heads with quirks and questions of this nature, whether faith were in the
understanding, or in the will etc, but with the Scripture they include
altogether in the heart, the seat and confluence of all the powers of the
soul. Bern de Ordine v^t^. Primum sinc^ra radix sancae fides etc.
Bernard says, that first, the s^^ncere root of holy faith is planted in the
ground of man's heart, and when faith is fully grown up, it becomes as a great
tree, having in it sundry sorts of apples, wherewith the soul being full of
God, is refreshed. St. August. takes no more care, but to place faith in the
soul. Under and whence comes death in the soul? because faith is not there;
(...)* in (...). 45* and de (...). (...) vire. cap. 37.
whence in the body? because the soul is not there; therefore the soul of the
soul is faith. Again, Fides quae credit in Deum, vita anima existit, and per
hanc iustus viuit: Faith which believes in God is the life of the soul; and
by it the just man lives. And speaking of the understanding, he says,
Intellectus merces est sides etc. The understanding is the reward of faith;
Aug. in Ioh. (...). 29.
do not then seek to understand, that thou may believe: but believe, that
thou may understand. And again, Intellectui fides viam aperit, infidelitas
claudit: faith opens the way to the Sement. Aug. 128.
understanding, but infidelity shuts it. And speaking of the will, he says,
(...)* ex (...). ^15 (...). 139. (...).
Fides excitat ad exercitium voluntatem: Faith stirs up the will to
exercise. And in a word, Fides sic est in anima, vt radix bona, quae pluuiam
in fructum ducit: Faith is so in the (...), as a good root, which peoduceth
the rain into fruit. I might add many others; but this may suffice.


Babylonius. But Sir, whereas you seem to oppugn the Council of Trent: does
it not also acknowledge faith to be the root of all other graces? Do the
Church of Rome right, I (...) you.


Orthodoxus. God forbid else. The proverb is, Give the Devil his due. Indeed
the Trent Council confesses, (...). 6. cap 8.
that faith is the beginning of man's salvation, the foundation and root of all
justification. But under this painted Sepulcher, she buries the bones of true
saving faith, which she has slain, there to ly rotting; as the Jews did with
Gods Prophets, whom their Fathers had slain; and upon the foundation they
erect the Monument and Trophe of their Pageantfaith. For undertaking to gl^sse
upon the Apostles words, A man is justified by faith, and gratis, freely: she
says, These words are to be understood in that sense, which the perpetual
consent of the Catholic Church has holden, and expressed; to wit, that we
are said therefore to be justified by faith, because it is the beginning of
man's salvation, the foundation and root of all justification. So that they
attribute justification to faith, not simply for it self, but relatiuely as it
has reference to the fruits, whereof they say faith is the root, namely,
their inherent righteousness. But the truth is, this restrained, yea
constrained sense of theirs, is most absurd and senseless, as having neither
foundation, nor root of reason to support and maintain it. All is but words.
They neither mean, nor will, nor can, maintain it. For how is faith a
beginning of grace, if grace be no necessary consequent of their faith? For
they confess, they may have faith, and want grace; which is the Devils case.
Or how is faith the root of grace and justification, since it is impossible for
this root to produce any fruit at all? For how can a dead root bring forth
any liue-fruite? And they confess their faith to be a dead and dry root of it
self, until the sap of charity be powered into it, to actuate and quicken
this, otherwise dead root. So that by Babylons Doctrine, the fruit must give
life to the root, not the root to the fruit. And yet forsooth, faith must be
the root of justification, the foundation of man's salvation. Surely the
Proverb may here well be verified, Dignum patella operculum: like root, like
justification, both dead: like foundation, like building, both sandy, yea mere
aerie and imaginary.


Babylonius. But is not faith dead, and unformed, until it be inliued, and
formed by charity? Does not St. James say, that as the body without the spirit
is dead, so faith without works, is dead also? Therefore the good works of
charity give life unto faith, as the soul to the body.


Orthodoxus. Does charity give life to faith? How is then faith the root? your
own reason may teach you the contrary, as we have showed. But to that place
of Saint James: it is too commonly abused. For mark, first, he says not, As
the body without the soul is dead; but, as the body without the spirit, is
dead. The spirit is the breath, by which the body is known to live. So that
the body receives life from the soul, but shows it by the spirit, which it
breaths. The spirit then is an effect and sign, not a cause of the life of
the body. So charity, and the works thereof, are a fruit and effect breathing
from saving faith, testifying that it is a living faith, not causing it so to
be; for that were to turn the tree vpside down, as if the root, which is
faith, should receive life, sap, and grows from the branches. And it is
plain, by the whole analogy and tenure of the chapter, that the Apostle
speaks of good works, as they are demonstratiue signs and fruits of a living
faith, not as causes of it. Again, he puts a distinct difference between
the true saving faith, which always shows it self to live, by the fruits of
it; for it is that faith, ever working by love: and between a false
counterfeit faith, such as is dead, and known to be so, by the not breathing
out of good works.

So that the true saving justifying faith, is that, which works by love. So
the Apostle says. But how by love? as by the efficient moving cause of the
working of it, or rather as the isntrumental cause, moved by the hand of
faith? Love is faiths instrument, whereby it works. Yea it is an inseparable
quality of saving faith, whereby faith works: as the heat is the inseparable
quality of the fire, whereby the fire works. This is the Doctrine also of the
ancient Fathers. They so make faith the root, as that all other graces are
radically in faith, and spring from it. They make all other holy graces to be
inherent in saving faith, as the native qualities of it, essential and
inseparable, not as accidents which are seperable. Saint Augustine says, What
is it to believe in him? By believing to love him, by believing to affect him,
by believing Aug. de verbis (...). ser. 33. ^^chirid. cap. 8.
to go unto him, and to be incorporated into his members. And again, Paulus
fidem etc. Paul approves and commends that faith, which works by love,
which cannot be without hope; therefore neither is love without hope, nor hope
without love, nor both without faith. And which we cited before, Faith is so on
the soul, as a good root, which brings forth the fruit. S. Chrysostom
says, Faith is the foundation of the most holy religion, Chrysostom. d^ (...)
Abraham.
the bond of charity, the supply and succor of love; it confirms sanctity, it
strengthens chastity, it gouernes all sexes, it promotes all degrees, it
observes all offices; faith keeps the Commandments, practices the
precepts, accomplisheth the promises. And much more to this purpose, according
to his fluent golden elegancy. Saint Ambrose, There are in faith Ambros. in
Psalm 118. ser. 22.
great prerogatives; what be they? piety, justice, sobriety, charity,
discipline, or good government. And to conclude with St. August. In ipsa fide
sunt omnia opera, quae diligit Deus: in faith Aug. in Psalm. 32.
it self are all those works, which God loves.

Nor need this point seem so strange. Moral Philosophy can teach us, that
there is such an inseparable combination of all moral virtues, as he, that has
one, has all. And shall we deny then this inseparable conjunction of
Spiritual graces, whereof Faith is the Radical and principal? Though it is a
marveile, that these Philosopers, Aristotle, and Tully, have escaped the fiery
purgatory-Index, since not even Romes own Gratian, for saying no more in
Divinity, then those in Morality, has had the grace to escape their Singe or
Sponge. For where he says, Sed commodo, etc. De consecratione. did. 4 gloss.
sol^ts etiam.
But how can I have such a faith, (to remove mountains) and not charity? Since
he that has one virtue has all. I could not have it but miraculously. All
these words must out, as may be seen in Collat. censurae in gloss. iuris
canonici vum. 84. Such a hatred they have to the living saving faith, as though
a Princess, they will not allow her any necessary attendance and co^comitancy
of other graces. Whereas Bernard says, To believe in God, is to hope in him,
and to love him. And Bern. slores de side. De iustitia. lib. 1.
Hieronymus Osorius, Faith contains all religion, and piety; for all virtues
are by faith consorted, and combined together, and with it are connexed and
intwined in a most holy knot. But Deleantur haec verba, let these words be
cancelled, says the Index expurgatorius. Also these words of his, Ergo cum
fides etc. Therefore seeing faith does govern the whole soul, and draw it to
the study and love of Gods word, it follows necessarily, that it is proved
not only in believing, but also in obeying. And those words also of Osorius,
must pass ^^id.
their purgatory, Tune igitur vere fideles sumus, cum Dei verbo audiontes
sumus. Therefore then are we truly faithful, when we are obedient to the
word of God. I will conclude, with the golden saying of our Royal Paraphrase
upon the King James, in his Paraphrase on the Revelation cha. 20.
Revelation: God by faith only justifies man, which notwithstanding is done
according to his works, because they, as the fruits of faith, cannot be
separated from it, and be are witness of the same to men of the earth.

I might seem to have digressed all this while from the point of freewill, in
speaking of faith, But partly you have moved me, and the more willingly have I
followed you, it being very pertinent to set forth and discover the Council of
Trents egregious hypocrisy in her Doctrine of grace and freewill. For unto what
is the will stirred, moved, assisted by grace? Parturient montes; we expect
some wonderful consequent. Thereby (forsooth) the will conceiueth faith by
hearing the word, and prepares and disposes it self to justification. And
what faith is this, thus conceived? Nascetur ridiculus Mus: behold a ridiculous
Mouse, in steed of a young Mountain. For of their freewill is conceived by
hearing, not that justifying, saving, living faith, whereof the Apostle, Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17; that faith whereof rightcousnesse is, ver. 5.
that which believes to righteousness, ver. 10; that, which believes, In D.
Ies^m, in the Lord Jesus, ver. 11: but this conceived faith of Rome is a bare,
historical, implicit, general, dead faith, like that of the Devils, no grace,
but such, as every wicked man may have, as their * fideles fornicarii, etc.
their faithful fornicaters, adulterers etc. And that grace of God, their first
grace, (...). (...). 6 cap. 15.
whereby they say the will is first moved to conceive (a dead) faith, is with
them, but an ordinary, common grace, in deed no grace: and by their own
confession no saving, sanctifying, justifying grace at all. Yea and though they
style it a preparatory grace, yet it never brings a man to true
justification, since they disclame that living saving faith, the only faith,
whereby, instrumentally we are justified. The summary conclusion then is: that
seeing the Trent Council has in her Doctrine of freewill so slily undermined
and ouerturned the fundamental doctrine of salvation, consisting in the
justifying, saving, living faith, powerfully wrought by the sanctifying grace
of Gods Spirit in the heart, even in the whole man, the soul, with all the
faculties, from which faith, as from a living and fructifying root, do spring
all other holy graces: therefore, for any man to go about, to excuse the
Council of Trent in the point, wherein for the maine, she is altogether to be
condemned, yea executed with Anathema Maran-atha: I see not, how such a one can
be excused, from being a reconciled confederate in all that damnable Doctrine
of Trent, about freewill. Is this the way to make us believe the Apppealers
profound protestations, that he is a Protestant of the Church of England, while
he so religiously pleads for the Council of Trents mystery of iniquity? and
that flatly against the Sea homily of salvation, and of true, justifying, and
saving says.
Doctrine of the Church of England. Does he thus persuade us, he is no Papist?
Fie, Master Mountagu, for shame, learn not thus of your Council of Trent, to
equivocate with your brethren, yea with your Mother Church of England. You hold
with the Stepmother of Rome in her most damnable Doctrines, whereby she
utterly euacuates Christ Jesus, and the whole mystery of our salvation: and yet
you are no Papist. Why? Because (forsooth) you do not hold those Doctrines to
be Popery, but catholic, with those of the Church of England. If you can
bring no better arguments to prove you a good Protestant: these you have
brought will sufficiently conclude you to be a reconciling reconciled English
Romane-catholicke.


Babylonius. Sir, to trouble you no longer for this time, and for a conclusion
of the first part of this Appeal, pass we to the last Chapter, touching the
Synod of Dort. It is but short; wherein the Author says; The Synod of Dort,
is not our rule. And, Private opinions, no rule. Does he not herein say truly?


Orthodoxus. Why then should his own private perverse opinions be reputed as
the rule of the Church of England? For it is true no doubt, that no Synod, or
Council, much less any private man's opinion, is the rule of our faith. Yet
all Synods and Councels, so far forth as their Decrees are grounded upon the
Scriptures, we are to embrace and reverence. But of all other passages in the
Appealers Appeal, I muse at none more, then this his eleuating and slighting
the Synod of Dort. And what spirit (trow we) is that man of, or possessed with,
that stands so much for the Council of Trent, and so little esteems the
Council of Dort? I wot well the Synod of Dort is an adversary to his Arminian
Pontifician opinions: and therefore no marvel, if he bear it no great good
will. But considering next under God, the prime and principal mouer of that
Synod, his late Excellent Majesty of eternal memory: yea how He promoued it,
what Princely and provident care, what liberal cost He was at, to adorn the
Synod with some of the choicest, and solidest Divines, that He had in His
Kingdom: what a zealous desire He had by that means to quench those fiery
flames of dissension, blown by the factious spirits of In^endiaries, which
threatened the ruin of those neighbor reformed Churches, the tails of which
smoking firebrands are not altogether quenched, but begin to revive, having for
want of vent till now lain smoathering even in our Church of England, the
smoke whereof has blinded a great many, and now the flames threaten to burn
more: what a religious care He took to establish true religion, and to abolish
that Arminian root of bitterness, springing up, and spreading abroad,
wherewith many were defiled: which one act of His Majesty, shall no less
eternize His name, then the most famous and unparalleled actions He achieved
in all His Princely government: this (I say) strikes me with an exceeding
wonderment, that the Appealer would ever suffer himself so far to be
transported with the spirit of contradiction, as to fall foul upon such a
learned Synod, a Synod of Protestants, a Synod of many reformed Churches, and
(which, if naught else, might have most moved him) a Synod, assembled, managed,
concluded, by the most auspicious Peacemaking spirit, zeal, welwishes, and
prayers, of His late Majesty: yea, and (to fill up the measure of his
all-daring hardiness) to presume to thrust this book in the name of An
Appeal, under the protection of our most Excellent patrizing Caesar; here I am
at a stand. What? so to disrepute the Synod of Dort? O spare it! either speak
not at all of it, or reverently, and honorably, at least for the thrice noble,
religious, zealous lover of the truth, King JAMES, He that so honored that
Synod, and embraced those orthodox conclusions of it, as that He advanced those
to Ecclesiastical honors, whom He had selected and sent, to represent the
Church of England. Which also, by the way, adds to my wonderment, that the
Appealer should, and that under the name of the Church of England, dare to
oppose the Council of Dort, if he had considered, that his late Excellent
Majesty did understand no other, but that all the conclusions of that
Council, did consent with the Doctrines of the Church of England; as also the
representiue Church of England, as they were of the number of the primest and
actiuest Agents in that Synod: so with the rest, they were the first still in
order, who by their subscriptions sealed up their unanimous assent to all the
Conclusions. Or can the Appealer tax the incomparable judgment of that famous
King of ignorance, either in the choice of that representative Church of
England, or in the state of the Doctrines of it? Far be it. His Majesty knew
as well the true state of the Doctrine of the Church of England, as the most
and greatest Scholars in England; that I may not disparadge his Excellency so
much as to say, He knew it better, then the Appealer himself. And if I might
pin my faith upon any man's sleeue, or refer the judgment of the Doctrine of
the Church of England, to my one man: I would have chosen His Majesty as the
^^pire, and oracle of it, before any man living. And yet He, that professed,
protested, writ, wrought, studied, lived, and dyed in the maintenance of that
one truth, wherein, by His auspicious unanimity, the Church of England, and the
Council of Dort, have confented, according to the rule of faith, Gods word:
shall He, He (I say) His sacred ashes be raised up again, and by an Appeal be
urged to recaut His former profession, to reuerse His judgment, and to cancel,
or to b^r^^ His books, which no antiquity, no injury of time, no elementary
flames, shall ever be able to abolish? I might better appeal to those, who
were so happy, as daily to hear the wisdom of that our Solomon, even at His
ordinary repast. They can testify, what zealous protestations He made for the
truth, and with what vehement derestation He had of the contrary. As for
instance: how did He abominate those that writ de apostasia Sanctorum? Which
very title of Bertius His Majesty often in His pious zeal professed His
indignation against, as a blasphemous doctrine. And as in His usual and
ordinary discourse at table, and at other times, He showed His Princely divine
spirit, in refuting and refelling all the vanities of Popery, and Pelagian
Arminianismo: so at His death He protested His own constancy, and final
perseverance in that truth, which He had formerly professed.

All this (I say) duly waighed, I am still in a muse, what should imbolden,
infatuate rather the Appealer, to insert any such passage, as the depressing
and deprizing the Synod of Dort, in his Appeal. Yet doing so, he is not more
guilty of ingratitude, toward our late Caesar, as also of ignorance, that I
may not say stark folly, in addressing this his Appeal to our present Caesar.
Does not the Appealer remember, that He is the Son, the only Son, of such a
Father? Yea a Son of that natural and pious affection to His Father, as (all
can witness with me) He might well be a Princely myrrour of filial piety to
many Sons, whose natural affection commonly descends, rather then ascends.
Nor only the Son, the only Son, the most naturally, and graciously pious
Son, but the very viue and express image of such a Father; inheriting not
only His Fathers Kingdoms and Crowns, but (which is the Crown of all, and
more precious then all His Kingdoms) His virtues, and graces, His wisdom, His
judgment, and, above all, His religion, yea His love, care, and zeal, in
maintaining the same. This religion He first sucked in with His Nurses milk,
therein also bred and brought up under a religious, and sound-hearted Tutor,
who (besides other learned and godly governors) ceased not, from His very
infancy, to instill into Him the deaw of all heavenly knowledge, and that
especially, by acquainting Him with the Scriptures, which according to His
daily task He missed not to read, by three or four chapters a day, being
able also, even when He was very young, not above seven years old, to give a
present account without book, of the principal things He had read. I speak
not by guess; I was so happy, as to be often an eye and eare-witnesse of it.
But above all those instructions He received from time to time from His Royal
Father, lighting upon a subject of such peerless indowments both of Nature
and Grace, have made Him a complete Prince in all excellent knowledge, and
worthy to be the only Son and Heir of such a Father. So that when He was
now grown to riper years, He was able even at table to discourse, and
discuss points of controversy between us and the Papists, to the great joy
of all His servants about Him. And yet after all this (see the luck of it)
must the Appealer have the hap to foist in his fardell of fancies, yea
falsities, and that by way of Appeal to His Excellent Majesty. And upon what
ground? I hope, if not presuming that His Majesty now, upon His first happy
entry into His Kingdoms, is so taken up with many weighty affairs, that He
will not have the leisure to peruse his Appeal, which is the Appealers
happiness; yea and Majesty's too, saving that His judgment is so settled upon
the truth, after so long and strong a seasoning, that uneath it were for Master
Mountagu to caul the li^uor of his musty caske to relish well in such an
vncorrupt Palate.

And for this Chapter, touching the Synod of Dort, one part of his Appeal:
wherefore does he in this, and other passages about this Synod, appeal?
Forsooth he appeals to His present Majesty King CHARLES, to indge and
determine, whither the Council of Dort be now to be holden in that esteem,
as it was by His late noble Father King JAMES; whither those conclusions of it,
be not now to be rejected, which His royal Father so much auowed and
approved; whither the Decrees thereof be not now to be holden as opposite
Doctrines to those of the Church of England, which the most judicious King
JAMES found to be so correspondent, and consonant, one to the other; or,
whither the Doctrine of the Church of England be not now quite changed, from
that it was, in the time of King JAMES his peaceable government; whither the
learned representatine Church of England (selected by the most judicious, and
learned King for that purpose) which in that Council swarued not from the
Tenants and grounds of their Mother Church, be rather to be admitted as
interpreters of our Church Doctrines, then singular Master Mountagu; whither
the Decrees of that Synod, being grounded upon express texts of Scripture, and
concluded by so many learned and grave Divines, be to be accounted private
opinions, rather then Master Mountagues own fancies, conceived of some
misunderstood Doctrines of the Church of England, and so, which of these should
be admitted of us rather for no rule. In a word, he appeals (I wisse) whither
the judgment of King JAMES, approving the Doctrine of the Synod of Dort, as
agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and both, to the holy
Scriptures: or his own judgment, in his disallowing and rejecting the Synod,
as not agreeable to his own fancies (for his words are, I have no part, nor
portion in them; either in them, that maintain the Decrees; or, in the Decrees
themselves) whither (I say) King JAMES His judgment, or his own, be rather to
be entertained and approved of His sacred Majesty His Son, whom God for ever
preserve in all integrity of judgment, and love of the Truth.


Asotus. Gentlemen, I thank you both, for your learned discourse, though much
of it above my capacity. It is now dinner time. If it please you to take the
pains to meet here again after dinner, about two of the clock, I shall be
glad to be informed further of some points in the Second part of the Appeal.


Babylonius. You have made a good motion, friend Asotus. I shall be ready at
the time appointed (if it please Master Orthodoxus) to receive further
satisfaction with you.


Orthodoxus. And seeing you have given so good proof of your patience thus
far, I am not unwilling to yield to your motion and desire, so far as God
shall in able me. So fare ye well.


Asotus. Babylonius. And you, good Master Orthodoxus.


Gentle Reader, I pray thee correct these faults with thy pen.
Page 7, Line 13, read Philistian. p. 13, l. 19, r. as his own. (...). 26,
his forced. l. 36, r. reverence. p. 21, l. 36, 1. the Rock. p. 31, l. 36, r.
recured. p. 38, l. 7, r. presumption. l. 12. r. audiun^. p. 40, in marg^nt,
r^guauiter. p. 41, l. 2, 1. or no. p. 45, l. 20, r. Iuterimsists. p. 48, l. 2,
for Dued, r. Quum. l. 36, r. done with the. p. 62, l. 30. r. great. p 69, l.
19, r. motive.

FINIS.

