THE NARROW WAY, AND THE LAST IVDGEMENT, Delivered in two Sermons: the first at
Paul's Cross, the other elsewhere, by G. B. Preacher of the word at Alphamston
in Essex.

2. TIM. 2.7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things.

LONDON, Printed for MATTHEW LOWNES. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL SIR WILLIAM VVALGRAVE KNIGHT, OF BVERS IN ESSEX.
RIght Worshipful, the general report of your worthiness, your peculiar
affection to the Author (as I understand) and the known dignity of this his
work, are the only motives of this my seeming boldness in committing this
Sermon to the general view, under your countenance and protection: which
though I confess I have done without his leave (as being modestly unwilling to
encounter censure, or to oppose himself an object to envy) yet in that it
has received the current stamp of approbation in the judgment of the wisest,
and your self (as I have heard) an auricular judge of the graceful delivery; I
have in my self dissolved doubt, and confidently thwart imputation with this
assurance, that it cannot but be grateful to the Reader, and come no less
acceptable to you. And though my self am utterly unknown to you, yet as one
bound to love virtue even in strangers, I honor it in you, and have been so
much the rather induced to this dedication, by how much (I am informed) you are
truly affected to this my dear friend, and a cherisher of his endeavors. Sir,
you cannot lose by it; for learning will still be pressed to honor her Mecaenas,
and such as favor Arts, chiefly those that labor in Gods vineyard, and (like
lamps) consume themselves to give light to others: I say such goodness and love
extended to religion and the professors thereof, is the treasure laid up in
heaven, and shall remain with the world of perpetual record. Thus having done
(as I think) a thankful office, not greatly fearing the Authors displeasure,
if you but approve my act, I refer you to the ensuing matter: resting

Yours in devotion, for your vertue-fauouring inclination, C. B.

MATTHEW. 7.14. And few there be that find it.


IT is the nature of every man to affect long life here in this world; and this
Almighty God knew well; and therefore when he commanded the Israelites, that
they should honor their parents, as a provocation to the performance of that
duty, he proposes this reward unto them, Exodus 20.12.
that their days should be long in the land which their Lord their God should
give them. But albeit we are desirous to live long, and to see many days here
in this life, yet because reason and experience teaches us, that though we
live long, yet at one time or other we shall be dissolved into our first dust;
for terraes, Genesis 3.19.
and in terram reuerteris, it was God his sentence against all flesh, Dust thou
art, and into dust thou shall again return: therefore the desire of man's
nature stretches it self further, and not only content with long life here in
this world, it affects a longer life, nay it affects an eternal life in the
world to come. S. Paul's earnest desire was this, I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ: Philip. 1.23.
and old Symeon when he had once seen our Savior in the flesh, he sung this
sweet requiem to his own soul, Lord, now let thy servant depart in peace.
Luke 2.29.
Albeit life were no doubt sweet unto these two Saints of God, yet their
desires aimed at a better thing; they were desirous to change corruption for
incorruption, mortality for immortality, a life temporal and full of
sorrows, for a life eternal and full of comfort. Now as this was the desire
of these Saints of God, so no doubt it is (or at least it should be) the desire
of all the sons of men: they should not only content themselves with the
present possession of this life temporal, but they should hope and look for a
life to come which is eternal. But in this it fares with the world, as with
those old Israelites which came with Moses out of Egypt; for though they were
for their number many thousands, and all of them had a longing desire to enter
into the land of Canaan, yet it was only granted but unto two of them, Numb.
14.30
unto Caleb and unto Iosuah: so in the Egypt of this world, in this place of
palpable darkness, though the desires of most men be to enter into the
kingdom of heaven, and to reign with Christ for ever; yet this heavenly
blessing is not granted to all: Math. 20.16.
for as Christ himself says, Many are called, but few are chosen; and as the
way is broad, and the gate wide, that leads to destruction, in the verse
going before, that is, as the way of sin, which leads men unto hell, is
easy, and many there be which enter in thereat: so in the beginning of this
verse, straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life; that
is, a holy and a religious conversation in this world, which is the high way to
lead men to the kingdom of heaven, is full of difficulties, and as our
Savior adds in the words which I have read, they are but few that find it.
To show you how a holy and religious conversation in this world, is that
straight gate and that narrow way that leads unto life, would be a discourse
both pleasing and profitable; but because that lies without the bounds and
limits of my text, and the drift of my text is only this, that few men and few
women do find out this way of life; therefore the sum of my discourse out of
these words must be this, to examine those lets and hindrances, why among so
many as seem to be in the way of a godly life, which is the way that leads
to eternal life, so few there be that find it, that if we have not found out
this way of life, we may now seek after it, and find it; and if we have already
found it, that then we may persevere and continue in it. The lets then and the
hindrances, why so few there are that do find the way of life, are of two
sorts, ex part quaerentis, and ex part retrahentium, they either concern our
selves which are to seek the way, or they are such as do allure us, and
withdraw us from the search of it. Hindrances in our selves that are to seek
the way, are especially these three: the first is coecitas rationis, the
blindness of our reason and understanding, which is not able of it self to
discern good from evil, the way of life from the way of death. The second is
peruersitas voluntatis, the peevishness and perverseness of our wills, which,
albeit we discern the way, refuses to walk in it. And the third is defectus
perseuerantiae, a want of perseverance. For although in our reason and
understanding we are able to discern good from evil, the way of life from the
way of death, and in our will are most ready to apprehend it; yet for want of
perseverance and continuance in so good a course, currimus and non
comprehendimus, many of us indeed do run, but few of us attain our iourneys
end. Of these three therefore in their order. And first for the blindness of our
reason, which being not able to discern the way of life from the way of death,
and by the fall of Adam prevailing over all the sons of Adam, is the first
maine let in us, why so few of us do find out this way of life.

1. Blindness of reason.
The time was, when in man there were these three things; wisdom of heart,
purity of life, strength of body: but the soul of man by the suggestion of
Satan, by the delectation which the apple promised, and by the consent which
man yielded, fell from that high and beautiful Trinity. His wisdom was
turned into blindness of heart, his strength was turned into weakness of
body, and the purity of his life was changed into unclean behavior: so that
concerning his strength, that is now no better then a broken reed, as Rabshakeh
spoke of Egypt; 2. King. 18.21
and therefore David most advisedly in the 28. Psalm and 7. verse, said, Thou
O Lord art my strength. The purity of his life, that, Esaias 64.6.
said Esaias, is like a stained and polluted cloth: and as for our reason and
understanding, it is clean decayed in Adam. All the knowledge and
understanding of man, is either moral, natural, or logical, all which three
in man by sin are perished. For the end of moral knowledge being this, to
prefer good things before evil things, man's reason in this is so corrupted
that the evil things of this world, which have but an appearance of good, are
preferred before good things indeed; and the good things indeed, they are
rejected. You shall see this in the example of King Saul; 1. Sam. 15.30.
for to be honorable in the sight of God, being true honor indeed, and to be
honorable in the sight of men, being bonum apparens, but an outward shadow or
an appearance of true honor; the reason of King Saul there is so blinded, that
he refuses to be honored in the sight of God, and he desires the Prophet
rather to honor him before the people. And whereas the end of our natural
knowledge, is to prefer those things which are most profitable for the use of
man; our reason for the most part is so blinded herein, that we prefer in our
judgments the things that are most hurtful. And lastly, whereas the end of
our logical or discoursing reason, is to discern truth from falsehood, vanity
from lies; this likewise is so corrupted in us, that we all, as the Prophet
David says, Psalm. 4.2.
follow vanity, and seek after leasing: so that man having thus wonderfully
lost his reason wherein he was created, that which God spoke in an Ironie
concerning man, the very beasts of the earth may say, and say truly, Genesis 3.22.
Man is become like one of us; and they have their warrant for it out of the
49. Psalm, and last verse, Man being in honor, understood not, but is like
the beasts that perish: nay in this he is far worse then the brute beasts,
Esaias 1.3.
for the Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but Israel has
not known, my people has not understood. Man's reason without Gods grace, is
even as Sampson without his guide when his eyes were out, Judge. 16.26.
without whose direction he could not find the pillars of the house; nor can
the natural and carnal man find any pillar or principle of his faith, without
Gods grace guiding his steps to it. Solomon says in the fourth of Ecclesiastes
and tenth verse, Vae soli, Woe be unto him that is alone: and in this it is most
true, for if man's reason be without Gods grace to guide it, woe be unto it; it
falls down, and there is none to help it up: and therefore our Savior makes a
manifest distinction between these two, Gods grace, and man's reason, in that
speech of his to Peter: Math. 16.17.
Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven. It was not flesh and
blood, it was not natural and carnal reason, but Gods grace from above
guiding his reason, that made Peter lay hold upon Christ the way of life, and
made Christ to pronounce him blessed. Therefore a little after, when as Gods
grace and man's reason were separated, and that Peter with carnal persuasions
sought to dehort Christ from his passion, verse. 22.
Sir, pity thy self, this shall not be unto thee: Christ then bids him
auant, not by the name of Peter, or the son of Jonas, or Cephas, but of
Satan himself, Come behind me Satan. Peter's reason was then alone, and the
light of Gods grace had withdrawn her influence, and therefore no marvel if
his counsel were such, as was both against his own and against the worlds
salvation. The Prophet David was well acquainted with this blindness of man's
reason, and therefore he does utterly reject it as his guide in the way of
life, and betakes himself wholly to the guidance of Gods good spirit: Psalm.
143.10.
Let thy good Spirit, O Lord, lead me into the way of righteousness: and
Psalm. 27. Thou, Psalm. 27.1.
O Lord, art my light and my salvation: my light against ignorance, my
salvation against impotencie: and in the 119. Psalm, Give me understanding O
Lord, and I shall keep thy law. For as it was not possible for the Israelites
to pass through the red sea, Exodus 14.
if God by a special miracle had not prepared their way, and made a passage
for them: Chrysostom. hom. 40. in Math.
so for man to pass from the ways of death unto the ways of life, from the
ways of sin to the ways of righteousness, without the special mediation and
help of divine grace it is not possible. This grace is that which is all in
all unto us, and of this may that of our Savior be most truly verified, John
15.5. Fulgent. de praed. ad Maxim. lib. 1.
Without me, you can do nothing. This is praeueniens, cooperans, subsequens; it
preuenteth us, that when we are down we may rise up, it accompanies us to
uphold us in our right course, and it must still follow us til we come to those
eternal beatitudes. For can we promise any more to our selves in finding out
this way of life, then David in the 119. Psalm? I will run O Lord (says he)
the way of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty. Can we
run with our feet, before our heart be prepared? or can we run with our
heart before God had enlarged it? Can we run the way without the way, which
is Christ Jesus, a way which we cannot see, till our eyes be enlightened? not
so: but when as God shall have opened the eyes of our understanding, then with
David may we see the wonderful things of Gods law, and then with him may we
run the way of his commandments, when as God shall have set our hearts at
liberty. But before, we do all (even the best of us) lie lame, and impotent,
like the cripple at the poole of Bethesda: John 5.5.
all the days and years of our times are spent like his without the case of
our infirmities, and the virtue of the waters of life like those waters in that
poole, can never comfort us. Seeing therefore that man's reason, since the fall
of our first father Adam, is so clean perished and decayed in it self, that
of it self it is not able to make choice of that which is good, it remains
for a truth, that unless Gods grace do accompany man's reason, as the Angel
did Toby, and do go before it as the star did before the wise men unto
Christ; man shall never be able to walk in the way, nay he shall never be able
to find out the way that should lead him unto life, but he shall go on like a
natural and carnal man in that broad beaten path which leads unto death.
So that you see man's reason, being not able to discern good from evil, the
way of life from the way of death, and by the fall of Adam prevailing over all
the sons of Adam, to be one maine let in us, why so few of us do find out
this way of life.

2. Perverseness of will.
But let us grant that man's reason were such in him, and so well rectified, as
that he could discern good from evil, the way of life from the way of death;
yet is there a second let and impediment in man, and that is peruersitas
voluntatis, the peevishness, the perverseness of his will. It was the error of
the old Manichees, and it is at this day the practice of many profane
Christians, evermore to cast their sins upon God, excusing themselves, and
accusing him as the author of their iniquities; but the Scriptures are all
directly against this; for as they make God to be the sole cause and author of
all happiness and good that befalls man: so do they make man the sole cause
and author of all evil that betides himself. It is Gods own speech in the
Prophet, Hosea. 13.9.
Perditio tua ex teo Israel, salus ex me; O Israel thy salvation is from me,
but thy destruction and ruin from thy self. As some locks there are, which
will lock without a key, but without a key they never can be opened; so without
a key, I mean without any other means then their own proper sins, men may
shut up the the gates of Gods kingdom against themselves; but without the key
of Gods mercy and gracious goodness to them, it never can be opened. And as
the Magitians of king Pharaoh had indeed power to bring plagues into the land
of Egypt, Exodus 7.
but had no power to remove the plagues thence: so men of them selves may be
the authors of death unto themselves, but to give unto themselves either the
life of grace, or the life of glory, they have no ability. God is so far from
barring up the gate of his kingdom against any, that he sets it wide open
unto all; I will not the death of a sinner, but that he live and be saved; and
in the Gospel, Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, Math. 11.28.
and I will refresh you; but such is the perverseness of man's will, such the
obstinacy and rebellion of his corrupt nature, that though God does offer
grace, yet man will not accept it, though he do as it were chalk him out the
way that should lead him unto life, yet he will not walk in it, yea though he
lay before him the crown of eternal glory, as his reward and recompense, yet
will he take no labor or pain for it. If then man by following the sway of
his crooked and corrupt will, and by rejecting the good means which God gives
for his salvation, do eternally perish, let him not lay the fault upon God, but
upon his own peevish and perverse will. You shall see the truth of this by a
most familiar example, and yet such a one, as a whole general Council has
thought fit for the illustration of it. If two men should fall out of a ship,
Con Colonien.
and there were no way to save them but by casting forth a rope unto them
whereby they might be drawn up; if one of them shall lay hold of it and be
drawn up, but the other in the peeuishnes and perverseness of his will shall
refuse the means of his deliverance; is it not a clear case that he which
lays hold upon the rope, is saved by the great kindness of him that threw it
out, but the other which obstinatly refuses it, perishes by his own perverse
will. Even thus and no otherwise does the case stand with us; for by one man
sin has entered into the world, and we are all cast out as it were from that
arc of innocence in which we were created: But behold the great mercy of God
unto man, he casts forth (if I may so speak) a rope to save us, he has sent
his son into the world, John. 3.16.
That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.
If then thou do lay hold upon this means of thy salvation, by the hand of a
lively faith, thou must acknowledge God to be the author thereof; but if in the
perverseness of thy will thou do refuse it, then thy perishing, it proceeds
from thy self, from thy obstinate and rebellious will. This Saint Austin knew
to be most true, and therefore he was bold to say, Non est punitor Deus
antequam peccator homo: God never does become a punisher, till man first
becomes a sinner, and we see it to be true in that speech of Samuel unto Saul,
1. Sam. 15.26.
thou have wilfully cast away the Lord, and this (says Samuel) is the cause of
thy reiection, why the Lord has cast away thee. This perverseness of will was
that, which in the days of our Savior kept the people of the Jews from
finding the way of life, and this is that which in these days of the Gospel
keeps many of us from finding it. As Christ said unto the^, Math. 23.37.
so may he not as truly say unto us, Quoties volui sed noluistis? How often
would I but you would not? has not God (to use that speech in the Gospel) piped
unto you by us, and you have not danced? Luke. 7.32.
has not he mourned unto you by us, and you have not wept? 2. King. 4.31.
have not we the Prophets, by the appointment of our master Christ, laid the
staff of Gods justice and Gods mercy upon you that are dead in sin, as
Gehezi did his masters staff on the dead child, and like him you are not
revived? has not God called early and late unto you (as unto his people the
Jews) for an absolute relinquishment of sin? has he not cried (even out of
this place) by the shrillest trumpets that our land had, to magistrates, do
justly, to officers, live not by bribes, to citizens, gain not by usury, to
country gentlemen, grow not great by your poor neighbors oppression, to all,
do unto others as you would be done unto? Verily all this has God done to
bring us to the ways of life, but with very bad success; for so voluntary an
opposition there is between man's perverse will, and this holy will of God, that
iniquity has the chair still, triuing writs are in most offices, Mammon is
the cityzens God; and the mortar, I may not say of al, but of many of your
goodly buildings abroad, are tempered with the tears of Orphans. In this man
reigns pride, in that man dissension, in a third envy, in a fourth
dissimulation, in some bribery, in some perjury, and in most hypocrisy; yea
the whole land is covered with a flud of sin, as the old world with a flud of
waters, and men swim up and down in it like fishes in the sea, by the motion
of their own passions: so that that speech which God takes up against the
Jews, he may fitly take up against us, and say, I have labored to purge thy
filthiness, but thou art not purged. God has called to the carnal man to
forsake his beastly pleasures, to the covetous man to relinquish his insatiable
desires, to the drunken man to forbear barrelling up Gods creatures in his
belly, to the blasphemers to leave their swearing, to the hypocrites to leave
dissembling, to all of us to leave sinning, and to run the way of his
commandments here in earth, that hereafter we might receive a crown of glory
in heaven: but what has bin our answer? surely from the frowardness of our
hearts, and from the obstinate rebellion of our perverse wills, we have cried
with Pharaoh, Quis est Dominus? Who is the Lord, that we should serve him? or
the God of Jacob, that we should regard him? If therefore we are desirous to
have this perverseness of our will removed from us, which we know in most of us
to be a great means to keep us from the ways of life, then our best course
is evermore to subject our wills unto the will of God. Now the subiecting of our
will unto Gods will, consists in these three: Bernard. sermon. contra pessimu^
vitium ingratitudinis.
first that we absolutely will those things which we certainly know God
wills; then that we absolutely nil those things which we certainly know God
nilleth: and lastly, that in those things whereof we are uncertain whether God
does will or nill them, neither must we altogether will them, neither must we
altogether refuse them: and so subiecting every way our will unto the will of
God, this perverseness of will, which in most of us is a second let to keep us
from finding the way of life, will be removed.

3. Want of perseverance.
Many there be which are willing and desirous to attain eternal life, but yet
they will take no pains in the performance of Gods commandments, not unlike
unto Naaman the Syrian, who coming to the Prophet to be cured of his
leaprosie, and the Prophet willing him only to wash in Jordan seven times and
he should be clean; he stomaketh the matter, and breaks out into these
words, 2 King. 5.
I thought (says he) that he would have come out unto me, and have called on
the name of his God, and have laid his hands upon me, and so I should be
healed. Here are three things which Naaman would have done for him: first he
will have the Prophet to come forth: secondly, to call upon his God: thirdly to
lay his hands upon him; but in the mean time there is not the least pains
mentioned to be undertaken by himself. And surely look how it was with Naaman
in the curing of his leaprous body; so it is with most of us in the curing of
our leaprous souls: we will have God to do all for us, but we will do nothing
for our selves; our desire shall be as great for the cleansing of our leaprous
souls, as Naamans was for the cleansing of his leaprous body: but if it once
come unto this, thou must wash thy self in Jordan seven times, that is, thou
must bathe thy sinful soul in the poole of repentance, and enter in at the
straight gate of a holy and religious life; then with Naaman we fall to
murmuring, and we stick not to say in effect as he said, that we look for a
more easy kind of cure in our conversion. But let us grant that we are willing
to perform whatsoever is prescribed unto us for the finding of this way of
life, yet unless we do persevere and continue even unto the end in that
course, it is to small purpose. To have the Ark of God for a while, 1. Sam. 5.
did more endanger the Philistines then benefit them: and so for men to serve
God for a while in a virtuous and religious course of life, will more hurt then
help them; 2. Pet. 2.21.
for better it is not to have known the way of truth, then not to persist in
it; and far more happy are those men, who have not entered at all into the
ways of life, then Judas and such wicked ones as he, whose ends are worse then
their beginnings. We do read in the Gospel, Math. 20.8.
that some men came into the vineyard in the morning, and that some came in at
noone, but none of these did receive the reward but such as stayed until
night; to give us to understand, that they are not initia Christianorum, sed
fines, not the good beginnings, but the good endings of Christians which the
Lord crowns. The Church of Thyatira in the Revelation, is much commended for
this virtue: Revel. 2.19.
I know thy faith, and thy works, and thy love, and that thy last works are
more then thy first: and the conclusion of the Epistle unto that Church, and of
all the other Epistles is this; not he that draws his sword, not he that
fights the battles of the Lord, not he that spends his blood and after
faints, but he that perseuereth and continues to the end, shall eat of the
tree of life. Bern. Epist. 129
For without perseverance, nec qui pugnat victoriam, nec palmam victor
consequitur; neither he which fights the Lords battles against sin and
Satan can have the victory, nor he which ouercometh can have the crown of
glory. It is a notable remembrance which our Savior Christ gives us in the
Gospel from the example of Lots wife, Luke 17.31.
and which Saint Bernard amplifieth very fitly to this purpose, Memento vxoris
Loath, Epist. 2.
de Sodoma quidem eiectae, quia Deo credidit, sed in via mutatae, quia retro
aspexit: Remember Lots wife, how she was brought indeed out of Sodom, because
she believed God, but was changed by the way into a pillar of salt, because she
looked back. God has commanded us as he did Lot and his wife, that we
should come out of Sodom, that is, that we should forsake our sins, and not
so much as look back unto sin, but run in have till we come into heaven
which is our Zoar. If therefore with Lots wife we will look back in our way to
the pleasantness of sin, we shall be sure with her to taste the bitterness
of her punishment; for as she, vbi respexit, Genesis 19.26.
ibi remansit, where she looked back, there she stood still, and came not unto
Zoar where her life should have been saved: so if once we have abandoned sin,
which is the broad way that leads unto death, and have entered into a holy
and religious course, which is this narrow way that leads unto life, if then
with Lots wife we go not forward, but look backward to our former delights of
sin, it is impossible for us to come to Zoar, that is unto heaven, where our
souls and bodies should be saved. They are our Savior Christ his own words,
in the ninth of Luke and the last verse, No man putting his hand unto the
plough and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. Exodus 16.26.
The Israelites were commanded, not once in a month, nor once in a week, but
every day to gather Manna, except upon the Sabbath day; to teach them and to
teach us, that till such time as we come unto that eternal Sabbath of our
everlasting rest in heaven, we must never stand still in the way of a godly
life, but every day be going forward. Apelles posie was, Nulla dies sine linea,
Let no day pass from me without drawing one line at the least: and Titus the
Emperor was wont to say, Sueton. in Tit. Amici, diem perdidimus. Ezech. 47.4.
that he had lost that day in which he did no good. As the waters in Ezechiel
rose by degrees, first to the ankles, then unto the knees, then unto the
loins, and lastly to the head; and as the wheat which Christ speaks of, Mark
4.28.
grew up riper and riper, first there was a blade, then the ear, then the full
corn, and lastly came the harvest: so like those waters we must grow higher
and higher, till we come unto our head Christ; and like that wheat we must
grow riper and riper, til we come to the harvest which is the end of the world.
There is in Persia a stone called Selenites, Plin. lib. vlt.
cuius interior candor cum Luna crescit and decrescit, whose inward whiteness
increases and decreaseth as the Moon. The devotion of Christians must not be
like this stone, still changing, and continuing no longer in one mood then a
sparrow lights upon the ground; but we must proceed in the way of
righteousness, even as Abraham went to Canaan, that is, we must eundo pergere,
still be going; and as those kine of the Philistines which bare the Ark of God, 1. Sam. 6.
though they were milch, and had calves at home, yet without turning either to
the right or left hand, they kept on their way to Bethshemesh: so having once
joined ourselves unto the yoke of Christ, and bearing the arc of his law upon
our shoulders in the way of a virtuous life, though we have many allurements to
draw us back, as those kine had their calves; yet without turning either to
the right or left hand, we must keep our way to Bethshemesh, that is, unto the
house of the Sun (for so the word signifies) where the Son of God reigns.
In the 13. of Saint Matthew, the kingdom of God is described in this manner;
It is as a grain of Musterdseed, at first the least of al seeds; Math. 13.31.
but when a man has sown it in his field, it becomes first an herb, then
the greatest of herbs, thirdly a tree, lastly the birds make arbours and
shades in the bows of it. Now why should the kingdom of God be compared unto
this seed which is still increasing? verily no better reason can be given for
it then this, that we may all learn, not to stand still in our Christian
growth, but to preseuere and go on from grace unto grace, till we become
perfect men in Christ Jesus. As the star never ceased going, Math. 2.9.
till it came unto the house where Christ was: so if we be once entered into the
way of a holy and religious life, we must never stand still, but continue still
going, till we come unto heaven where God is. If we have faith, we must then go
from faith to faith; if we have love, we must continue and abide in love; if we
have zeal, we must labor to be consumed with zeal; if we give alms, we must
go a step further, and give it with cheerfulness; and as God has continued a
chain of his good graces unto us, first by predestinating, secondly by
calling, Romans 8.30.
thirdly by justifying, fourthly by glorifying us: so must we continue a chain
of our graces toward God, by giving al diligence, 2. Pet. 1.5.6.
as the Apostle Saint Peter speaks, to join virtue with our faith, and with
our virtue knowledge, and with our knowledge te^perance, and with our
temperance patience, and with our patience godliness, and never leave joining
the linkes of that golden chain there joined, till our bodies and souls come
to be disioined. But (beloved) if the want of any virtue is to be lamented in
this age, it is the want of this virtue of all virtues, perseverance. For if we
take a view of all estates of men, even from the highest to the lowest, shall
we not be so far from finding any increase or growth in Christian duties, any
going forward in the way of righteousness from grace unto grace, Indies
deficit in agris agricola Cyp. con. Deem.
and from strength unto strength, that we shall rather find an universal
falling away and defection in them? Is there not now (as S. Cyprian justly
complained in his time) a daily defectio^ in the world, both of men, and of
men's manners? Is there not a defection of the husbandman in the field, of the
mariner at the sea, of citizens in towns, of townsemen in villages? Is there
not a defection of innocence in the court, of justice in judgment, of concord
in friendship, of workmanship in arts, of discipline in manners? Where is that
zeal unto the word, that hunger and thirst after the waters of the well of
life, that was wont to be among us? Do we still thirst after these waters of
the well of life, 2. Sam. 23.
as David for the waters of the well of Bethlem? Nay rather are we not come
unto that fullness and satietie, Numb. 11.7.
that we even loath these waters of life, as Israel loathed Manna? If it were
not so, then should we not see so many in all places to love better the
thresholds of their doors, and their benches in aleboothes, then they love the
courts and seats of the Lords temple. The time was, when with gladness we
have received this word upon al occasions, and entertained this heavenly food
of our souls (as Elias food for his body) with all thankfulness, 1. King. 17.
even then, when a black Raven has brought it unto us, I mean men but meanly
qualified. But now unto so low an ebb is our zeal and devotion come, that
though Angels from heaven bring it, I mean men excellently qualified, and able
sufficiently to perform the work of right faithful Evangelists, yet men
reject it, nay which is worse, they even resolve with Ahab not at all to hear
Michea; 1. King. 22.
not because Michea prophesies evil unto them and not good, 2. Kin. 13.14.
but because Michea is not a preacher qualified in all points according to
their humors. But to leave our love unto the word, let us descend unto our
love to those that labor in the word, and for which love many places in this
land have been much commended. True it is, we have bin as affectionate unto
them as king Ioas was to Elizeus, ascribing more unto them for the good of the
whole land, then to al our chariots and our horsemen. It is true, we have
entertained them as the Galathians did Saint Paul, not only as the Angels of
God, but as Jesus Christ himself, yea we have given no less honor unto them,
Gal. 4.13.
then the men of Lysia unto Barnabas and Paul, freely confessing of these, as
they confessed of them, Act. 14.11.
that gods were come down unto us in the likeness of men. I add yet more,
(that you may see unto what a fearful relapse we are now in this age come,
Aquin. in hunc locum. l^ct. 3.
) that double honor both of countenance, and maintenance, (of countenance for
their place, of maintenance for their service) which they that labor in the
word are worthy of, says S. Paul: 1. Timoth 5.17.
this double honor have we yielded and offered unto them as their due in the
amplest manner. But have we so continued, have we perseuered in this love? I
must be faithful in my masters house with Moses, and speak a truth without
flattery; I say boldly in the fear of God concerning this, as the Angel says
unto the Church of Ephesus; we are become changelings, Revel. 2.4.
and have lost our former love. For first for countenance; now every vpstart
that has scraped but a little pelf together by the patchings of his brain,
will be deadly opposite unto no man more then to Gods minister. And as for
maintenance, the time indeed was, when with the good Shunamite you have
provided for Elias a chamber, 2. King 4.
a stool, a table, and a candlestick, and have come unto the Prophets, as
Christ unto the lame man at the poole of Bethesda, John 5.6.
Vis sanus fieri? will thou be maintained? will thou be beneficed? But now so
are the times, and with the times so are men changed, that you take from Elias
his chamber, his stool, his table, and his candlestick. You do come unto the
Prophets, not as Christ to the man before mentioned, Vis sanus fieri? will thou
be beneficed? but as Judas to the high Priest, when he sold his master, Quid
mihi dabitis and ego tradam vobis? what will you give me and I will give you a
presentatio^? And though the visible judgment of God be upon such sacrilege,
for it thriues with them as the Ark of God among the Philistines, 1. Sam. 5.1.
and as the flesh which an Eagle sometime carried from an altar to her nest; a
coal of Gods wrathful indignation is carried with it, which in time consumes
them and their young: though I say, this visible judgment of God be upon such
sacrilege, yet the eyes in our heads may fail with the expectation of that
day, when the chambers of the Lord his house which Tobiah the Ammonite has
seized into his hands, Nehem. 13.
should be restored again to their ancient institution for the maintenance of
the Levites. What should I speak in particular of that steadfastness in faith,
that modesty in words, that uprightness in our actions, that mercy in our
works, that discipline in our manners, that love and unity among neighbors
and brethren, which in the Primitive Church was the glory of the first
Christians, and in some good measure has heretofore bin seen among us? Verily
our coldness in all these, as in the former, is a plain demonstration, that
albeit we have laid our hands unto the plough of the best husbandry in the
whole world, yet we have looked back; and albeit we have made some small
entrance into the way of a virtuous life, yet we have started aside, and fallen
from it again for want of perseverance. To draw this then to a conclusion. If
we look upon all the sons of Adam, who are bound by the commandment of God
to seek after the way of life, and in them if we well consider, first the
blindness of their reason, which is not able of it self without Gods
assisting grace, to discern the way of life from the way of death: secondly
the perverseness and obstinacy of their wills, which albeit they know the way,
yet refuses to walk in it: and lastly their backsliding and want of
perseverance, when happily they have begun; if (I say) we consider all these,
bearing sway for the most part with most of Adams sons, we may then say, and
say truly, even as our Savior Christ says in my text, They are few (yea very
few) that do find the way of life.

Now as this is a manifest and certain truth, that there be few that do find
the way of life, if we consider the hindrances in our selves that seek the
way; so in the next place, if we shall take a view of those things which do
retrahere, which do allure us and withdraw us from the search of this way, it
will appear more plain unto us. The things then which do usually detain and
keep us back from the search of this way of life, are these three old and
ancient enemies of man, Bern. medit. cap. 14.
Mundus, Caro, Diabolus: the world, the flesh, the devil: and these three
having drawn as many men unto their part, as the Dragon drew the stars of
heaven with his tail, Reuelat. 12.4. it must needs follow that their number
should be very small that go on in the way of life. I will touch them all three
in their order, and give you such caueats out of Gods book against each of
them, that if we be once entered into the way of a godly life, which is the
narrow way that must lead us to eternal life, neither the world with his
inticeme^ts, nor the flesh with her allureme^ts, nor the devil with his
suggestions unto sin, shall be able to withdraw us from it. First then for
the world, which is the first enemy that opposes us in the way of life.

The World.
The tribes of Ruben and Gad being allured by the beauty and fatness of the
ground on this side Jordan, Numb. 32.12.
thought the land of Canaan in goodness to be far inferior to it, and
therefore they did set up their rest there, and would go no further: and thus
it is with most men, who are or should be in this world travelers unto the
kingdom of heaven. For when they see the beauty and fatnes of this world
wherein they live, and that that is true of it which the citizens of Jericho
said once to Elisha concerning their city: Behold, the situation of the place
is fair, and the ground pleasant; therefore with those two tribes of Gad and
Ruben they will go no further; Math. 17.4.
but as Peter said in the mount beholding Christ's glory, so say they beholding
the glory of this world, Bonu^ est esse hic, It is good for us to be here. And
indeed as Ulysses soldiers having once tasted of that poisonous cup which the
Lotor phagi gave unto them, Hom. Odys. page 247.
they were never after desirous to go into their own country: so the greatest
part of men in the world being poisoned as it were with the pleasures and
delights of it, they desire to have their residence still in this life, and
they never look after that way that should bring them to eternal life. This
the Apostle Saint John knew very well, and therefore to withdraw the affections
of men from the inticements of the world, he gives this counsel, Love not the
world. 1. Epi. Ioh 2.1^
Upon which words of the Apostle, Sermon. in verba Petri. Ecce nos reliquimus
omnia
Saint Bernard makes this question, Vis nosse quis sit qui diligit mundum?
Will thou know who it is that does love the world? then mark (says he) what
the Apostle adds, Love not the world nor the things of the world; as if he
had said, they that love the things of the world, they are those that love the
world, and in loving them, they are drawn from the ways of life: for, August.
de verbis Dom. in Mat. sermon. 33.
amor rerum terrenarum viscus est spiritualium pennarum: The love of earthly
things is even as birdlime to the spiritual wings of men's souls that they
cannot mount to heaven. And as the spirit of God making David apt and fit for
the government of the kingdom, 1. Sam. 16.
was not upon David till the same spirit was departed from Saul: so the
spiritual blessings and graces of God cannot possibly rest upon men, till such
time as the love of this world is departed from them. And therefore our Savior
in the Gospel very fitly answers the man that was desirous to follow him but
to make a worldly gain by that profession, The foxes have their holes, Luke
9.58.
and the birds of the air their nests, but the Son of man has not where to
rest his head: meaning that worldly affections and desires had taken up the
possession of his heart, and that therefore there was no room in his heart for
the son of man to lodge in. Now if you would know of me what the things of the
world are which usually withdraw most of us from the ways of life, because to
speak thus of the world is too general, 1. Ep. Ioh. 2.16
I answer from the Apostle Saint John; they are ambition and pride of the
world, lust and concupiscence of the flesh, covetousness and insatiable desire
of filthy lucre; these 3. Ambition, Lust, and Covetousness, which are not of
the Father but of the world; these are the chief things of the world, and unto
which al other worldly things may be referred, which withdraw us from the way
of life. You shall see the truth of all these together in one chapter, Luke 14.
Where when a certain man had made a great supper, and bad many, (under whom is
shadowed out God the Father inuiting men unto the banquet of grace in this
life, and so consequently unto that eternal supper of glory in the world to
come:) the first excused himself thus, that he had bought a farm; in which,
say the expositors, are taxed the ambitious men of this world, whose whole
delight is to gather farms and Lordships into their hands, to be accounted
Kings on earth. The seconds excuse is, that he had bought a yoke of oxen, in
which are taxed the covetous men, whose whole time of life is spent and
employed in nothing else but in bargaining to get money. And the third man's
answer is, that he had married a wife, and therefore he could not com; by which
we see, that carnal concupiscence is a great hinderance unto men in following
the way of life. But of that by it self anon: I will now amplify a little
the other two in this first branch of the world. First then for the ambitious
affectation of worldly honors.

Ambition.
In that the devil in the fourth of Matthew did seek to persuade our Savior
Christ to fall down and to worship him, by promising him the kingdoms of the
world; it is a clear demonstration, considering the wisdom of the devil,
that honor and preferment is able to draw men out of the right way; for
although this temptation did not prevail with Christ who was both God and man,
yet it has, and does, and will prevail with men. Our mother Euah had honor and
royalty enough, she was lady of Paradise, and not only of Paradise, but of all
the earth besides; and yet neither the earth nor Paradise can content her mind,
but she must either be Similis altissimo, Genesis 3.
like unto the most high, she must be the Queen of heaven, or she will break
the commandment of God. Did not this think you, work strongly upon Balaam,
Numb. 22.
when it made him saddle up his ass, and in hope of high favors and
preferments from the king, to ride post with the Princes of Moab to curse Gods
people? Has not this caused Abimelek to become a butcher to his own brethren?
and Herod the king, Judge. 9.5. Joseph. lib. 15. Antiq. cap. 2.
that he might more peaceably enjoy that crown into which before most
ambitiously he had crept, not to regard the life, either of friends, of wife,
of children? 2. Sam. 15.
Did not this cause Absolon most unnaturally to thirst after the life and
crown of his own father? Hest. 3.6.
and Haman to thirst after the life not of one private man alone, but of all
the people of the Jews in the kingdom of Assuerus? The trap which the devil
set to ensnare our mother Eve, was hope of higher dignity, Genesis 3.5.
and this one subtlety of his, Eritis tanquam Dij, You shall be as Gods shining
in honor and glory above other men, it has heretofore been, and it is at this
day, the foundation and root of rebellions, treasons, murders, thefts, and of
such damnable machiauellia^ policies as are hardly to be found even among the
Gentiles; and as it was the speech of Agrippina the Emperor Neros mother, when
she heard that her son Nero should be Emperor, Sueton. in Nerone.
but yet should kill his mother in his Empire; Occidat, modo imperet, Let him
kill me, so he may be Emperor: so I pray God that by the persuasion of the
devil, it be not a settled resolution in the hearts of many, Let me perish, not
temporally with Agrippina, but eternally both in soul and body, if so be in
this life I may have places of preferment, either in church or commonwealth.

Riches.
Now for the wealth and riches of the world, that they likewise as well as
worldly honors are a means to draw us from the ways of life, it is a case
clearly decided by our Savior Christ in the 19. of Saint Matthew; Mat. 19.20.21
for when the young man had made this question unto Christ, Master, what shall
I do to attain eternal life? and Christ his answer was, Keep the
commandments; and his reply to that was, I have kept them from my youth up;
and Christ his replication to him again was, Yet thou want one thing, Sell
all that thou have, and give it to the poor: at that saying (says the text)
he departed sorrowful, and the cause of his sorrow is there noted to be this, He
had great possessions and was rich: and therefore our Savior is bold in the
23. verse to set down this as a conclusion, that a rich man shall hardly enter
into the kingdom of heaven. But were it not a case thus cleared by our Savior
Christ, yet if we will but look into the qualities and conditions of rich men,
we shall find their wealth to have been, and to be unto them an occasion of
many grievous and gross sins, by means whereof they are kept from the ways
of life. For to begin first with the sin of pride (a sin so hateful in
Gods eyes, that it cast our first parents out of Paradise, and Lucifer from
heaven to hell,) to begin (I say) with the sin of pride, mark it when you will,
you shall see that where store of wealth is, there commonly is store of pride:
and therefore among other charges which Saint Paul gives to Timothy, this is
not left out, 1. Tim. 6.17.
namely that he should charge rich men that they be not high minded. And the
heathen man Tully describing the qualities of the rich, In Orat. de lege Agrar
ad Quirit.
which for the most part are very intolerable, among others he sets down
pride for one, and his instance is in the men of Campania; Campani semper
superbi bonitate agrorum and fructuum: The men of Campania are ever high minded
and proud, in regard of the store of fruits, and of corn which their country
yields: and it is not only true in them, 2. Lib. Rhet.
but as Aristotle says, it holds in all rich men in all countries whatsoever.
But if this sin of pride did only accompany our earthly riches, it were
well; sed ecce venit Gad, behold there are a great company of sins more: for
as they do breed in us pride of heart, to the contempt of our poor neighbors;
so do they corrupt our memories to the forgetfulness of God. This Moses knew
to be true, and therefore he gives this caveat to the children of Israel:
Deuteronomy. 6.10.
When the Lord thy God has brought thee into the land which he swear unto thy
fathers to give thee, with goodly cities which thou buildedst not, with houses
full of all manner of goods which thou filledst not, with vineyards and Olive
trees which thou plantedst not; when thou have eaten and art full, then take
heed and beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God. Yea so common a thing it
is for worldly riches to make men forget God, that Solomon himself, though he
were wiser then other men, and so consequently better able to resist sin; yet
he makes it his earnest suit unto God, O Lord give me neither poverty nor
riches; Prou. 30.8.
not poverty, lest I steal, and take the name of my God in vain; and not
riches, least I be too full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? For albeit
I persuade my self, that there be many both in this city and in other places
of the land, who in a thankful remembrance of Gods goodness and bounty to
them, do confess with Jacob, Genesis 32.10.
I came over this Jordan with my staff, and lo I have now gotten two bands: I
came poor and without provision to this place, and lo I have not only gotten
great wealth, but such honor also, that I sit with Princes: yet look we
generally upon the courses of the rich, and we shall find it to be true, that
as the Moon when she is at the full, she is then farthest from the Sun, of whom
she does receive her light; so men, when they are fullest of earthly riches and
blessings, they are then commonly farthest from God, from whose fullness they
have received them. And as pride and forgetfulness of God do accompany our
earthly riches; so a third evil of them is, that they make men to offend and
sin in luxury. In the twelfth of Luke and 19. verse, the great rich man, whose
grounds brought forth fruit plentifully, he thinks on nothing but his belly;
Soul, now thou have much goods for many years, live at ease, eat, drink,
follow thy pleasure. And in the fifteenth of Luke, the younger of the two
brethren having received that portion of goods which belonged to him, he spends
it all in few days in gluttony, and venery. Fourthly, whereas the word of God
is a special means to bring us to salvation, these worldly riches choke the
word, and make it unfruitful. You may see it in the thirteenth of Saint
Matthew, Mat. 13.22.
where our Savior expounding the parable of the sower, says thus: He that
receives the seed among the thorns is he that hears the word, but the care of
the world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word in him, and he is
made unfruitful. Fifthly, whereas it is a true note of the true child of God,
evermore to be weary of this sinful world, Philip. 1.23.
and to desire with Saint Paul to be dissolved and to be with Christ; these
earthly riches do make those which have them loath to die, yea with a good will
a rich man would not so much as think of death: says the wise man: O death,
Eccles. 41.1.
how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest and ease in
his possessions? And as worldly riches are an occasion of these evils; so
lastly are they the cause of Idolatry, yea the covetous affectation of them,
says Saint Paul, Ephesians. 5.5.
is Idolatry. And that it is so, the Divines collect it thus: for whereas the
true worship and service of God does consist in these three, in diligendo,
honorando, Bonauen. Centiloq. part. 1. sect. 22.
and in ipso confidendo: In loving God, in honoring God, in putting our whole
confidence and trust in God. The Mammonists of this world do take all these
from God and give them to their riches. For first, though the precept run
thus, Deuteronomy. 6.5.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and with all thy might, yet do these men take this love from God, and bestow it
on their wealth: and therefore Saint John that he might meet with this, 1. Epi
Ioh. 2.15 Psalm. 62.2.
he gives this caveat: Love not the world; and the Prophet David: If riches
increase, yet (says he) do not set your hearts upon them. And for the second
which is honor, whereas it is the Angels speech unto us that dwell upon the face
of the earth: Revel. 14.7.
Honor and worship him that has made the heaven and the earth, the sea and the
fountains of waters; these men, as it is in the eight of Hosea and fourth
verse, Of their silver and their gold do they make them Idols, their silver and
gold is the god they worship. And lastly for confidence and trust, Prou. 16.20.
whereas the wise man says: Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord:
these are like unto the man of whom the Prophet David speaks: Psalm. 52.1.
Behold the man that took not God for his strength, but trusted in the
multitude of his riches. So that the riches of the world, as well as the honors
of the world, are occasions, you see, unto men of many sins, by which they
are drawn from the ways of life. If therefore we are desirous to prevent
these and the like inticements of the world, least by them we be deceived, and
so caused to err from the paths of life; our best course is evermore to
consider of this world as it is, and not as it seems. Caligula the Emperor
set golden loaves and other services of whole gold before his guests, and bad
them eat. Indeed they had a glorious show to look upon, but there was nothing
in them to eat and to drink, for the contentation of nature. And such, and no
other are the dainties which the world proposes unto us, both in wealth and
honor; they have (I confess) a glorious show to the eye, but the substance of
them being well considered is but vanity. First for honor, let Haman speak,
who was next unto the King, Ester 2.1.
and with him was alone invited to the banquet of Queen Hester; Ester 5.4.
and when he has said all that he can for his honor, yet the conclusion of all
must be this, that it was but vanity: for in that day in which he was
entertained with such royalty at the banquet of Queen Hester, Ester 7.1.10.
in that same day was he hung upon the gallows which he made for Mordecay; at
the commandment of the King, who before had highly honored him at the request
of the Queen, who before had invited him. How highly was our Savior graced
and dignified by the people of the Jews? In the 6. John 6.15.
of John they would have made him King; in the 12. John 12.13.
of John they cut down branches of palm trees, and meet him singing sweetly,
Hosanna, Blessed art thou that come in the name of the Lord: but see the
inconstancy of this people, and the mutabilitie of this worldly honor; they
who before had cried Hosanna, Blessed art thou that come in the name of the
Lord, not many days after, even the fifth day, In cap. 2. Mat.
as Saint Hierome has observed, they cry as earnestly against him, Crucifige,
let him be crucified. So true is that which Saint Bernard has concerning
worldly honor, Vanitas est huius seculi dignitas, cum magna expectatione
speratur vt veniat, sed non potest teneri cum venerit: The honors and
preferments of the world are but mere vanities, they are long looked for of
men to come with great expectation; but when once they have them, they are so
short and fleeting, that they cannot keep them. And for the wealth and riches
of the world, if you will not believe Solomon upon his word when he calls
them vanity, Eccles. 1.2.
yet believe them to be vanity, even for this, because they will have either
thy end, or their end; Job 1.
their end, as they had in Job, who from great wealth came unto a low ebb of
poverty: or thy end, as they had in the rich man, who when he sung a long
lasting requiem to his soul in the multitude of his riches, Luke 12.19.20
had his soul the same night taken away from him. And is there then (beloved)
such vanity in this world, and in the best things which this world proposes
both in wealth and honor; and shall we for the gaining of this, leave the
gaining of such a world as is not subject unto vanity? Shall we leave gold for
dross, pearl for glass, heaven for earth, the permanent and everlasting
joys of the one, for the momentary and transitory delights of the other? The
eyes of the brute beasts are turned downward to the earth, to seek for nothing
but meat for their bellies; At os homini sublime dedit; But the face and
countenance of man is lifted upward unto heaven, to behold God who has made
all for man, and man for himself: let us then leave the world and the things
of the world unto the beasts, to whom properly it belongs, and let us send up
the affections of our hearts unto heaven, where our inheritance is reserved.
Genesis 28.11.
And as Jacob in that his iourny unto Padan-Aram is said to sleep in the way;
so while we live here in this world, which is nothing else but a passage to a
better life, or if you will so call it, our way and journey to the heavenly
Canaan, let us sleep and be at rest from the desire of temporal things
whatsoever: let heaven become our object, and earth become our abject. The
desires of our hearts, let them be placed upon things above: as for things
beneath, let them be unto us as unto Saint Paul, Philip. 3.8.
even loss and dung in regard of the excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ; as
unto Chrysostom (...): a shadow and a dream, and lighter then these; as unto
Plato (...) nothing, and worth nothing. Let us say with Peter and with Peter's
affection, Behold master, Math. 19.27.
we forsake all and follow thee: let us say with Saint Paul I am non ego, sed
viuit in me Christus, Now it is not I, Galat. 2.20.
but Christ which lives in me; that is, as Saint Bernard expounds those words
very fitly to this purpose: Ad alia quidem omnia mortuus sum, non sentio, non
attendo, non curo; siqua vero sunt Christi, haec viuu^ inueniu^t and paratu^:
Concerning these earthly and worldly matters, I have no sense or feeling of
them, by my reason I condemn them, and from my heart I abandon them; but if
there be mention made of Christ, and of finding the ways of life, then my
decayed spirits gather strength, then all the powers and faculties of my soul
will me to cry with the Prophet David: Paratum est cor meum, Psalm. 57.7.
Domine: My heart is ready o Lord, my heart is ready. For otherwise if
cleaving, by an inordinate affection and love, to this world and the things of
it, we neglect and reject the ways of life; Deuteronomy. 3.27.
as Moses from the top of Pisgah might behold with his eyes the land of Canaan,
but might not enter into it: and as the Syrians did hear Elisha speak, whom
they desired to take, 2. King. 6.29.
but could not take him: so with the outward ears of our bodies we may hear
of the joys of another life, and with the intellectual eyes of our minds we
may see that great glory which the just shall have heareafter, but our selves
shall never come into heaven, our selves shall never be partakers of it. And as
Lysimachus king of Lydia, having yielded himself into the hands of his enemies
for a cup of cold water to quench his thirst, cried out; Plutarch.
O me hominem infoelicem, qui tantillae voluptatis gratia tantum amiserim
regnum, o miserable and wretched man that I am, who for so short a pleasure
have parted with so glorious a kingdom as the kingdom of Lydia: so when we
shall see in the last day that by yielding too much unto this world, and the
things of it, we have parted with the ways of life, and so consequently have
yielded up our selves into the hands of our spiritual enemies, we shall mourn
and lament, we shall sigh and wring our hands; and all the dreadful torments
which we shall then suffer, shall not wound and vex us so sore, as this one
consideration, namely when we shall call to mind, that for the momentary and
tra^sitorie pleasures of this word, we have parted with that same exceeding, 2.
Cor. 4.17.
eternal, surpassing weight of glory in the kingdom of heaven. And thus much
shall serve to have spoken of the world, and of the things of the world, which
is the first enemy that opposes himself against man to keep him from the way
of life. I com to the second enemy, and this is, Caro.

The carnal lusts and desires of the flesh.
^th. lib. 10. c. 5
Aristotle disputing of the nature and efficacy of pleasure, says this, that
a man which takes greater delight in isntrumental then in vocal music, if he
hear the same musician both to play upon his instrument and to sing; the
pleasure and delight which he conceiueth in hearing of the instrument, does so
lead away his affections, that he has no care at all of the voice: and as
this is true in music, so is it true (says he) in all other things, when we
intend two things at once, that which breeds the greater pleasure and
delight, for the most part does evermore exclude the less. There being then in
man two kinds of affections, carnal and spiritual, and all men for the most
part taking greater delight in their carnal, then in their spiritual
affections; of necessity it must come to pass, that their carnal affections
do swallow up their spiritual, and so consequently they are so far from
finding the ways of life, that there is in them no desire, no lust at all unto
it. The sect and company of the Epicures (who maintained carnal pleasure to be
the only summum bonum of this life) did swarm in greater abundance then any
other sect did: non quod very aliquid afferat, Lactan. de falsa sap. cap. 17.
sed quia multos populare nomen voluptatis inuitat; not because (says
Lactantius) there was any truth at all in their doctrine, but because the
popular name of carnal pleasure is able to draw a world of men to it. Saint
Paul confesses of himself, Romans 7.18.
that in his flesh there dwelt no good thing, and that he saw a law in his
members rebelling against the law of his mind; and not that only, verse. 23.
but that it led him away captive to the law of sin, insomuch that for very
grief of heart he breaks out into these words: Miser homo: verse. 24.
O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
Saint Hierome writes of himself, In Epist. ad Eustoch.
that albeit he led a most strict and austere life in the wilderness,
exercising himself continually in prayer, and bringing his body under by long
and often abstinence; yet notwithstanding that he was vehemently assaulted by
the lusts and desires of the flesh, even as Saint Paul was. And surely, if the
mortified flesh of these Saints of God, mortified no doubt by prayer, and by
long and often fasting, did notwithstanding as themselves confessed, lead away
their souls captive to the law of sin; then may we well conclude, that the
untamed flesh of us unbridled men, will forcibly and with violence misleade our
souls from the way of life. Our Savior Christ speaking of his own passion,
is so far from the fear of death in himself, that he armeth his disciples
against it, saying, that he would go to prepare a place for them; John 14.^.
but afterward when he was to die unto the world, and to go to his father,
then he seems to be of another mind; then transeat a me Calix, Luke 22.42.
Father if it be thy will, let this cup pass from me. And what was the reason
of this? surely that in the 26. of Matthew and 41. verse, The spirit is ready,
but the flesh is weak. The spirit indeed of many men is prone unto that which
is good, they desire so to run the race of a godly life here, that hereafter
they may receive a crown of glory; but so it is that man's life is as Job
speaks, Job 7.1. Gal. 5.17.
Militia super terra^, a warfare upon earth; the flesh still lusting against
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and that which is most to be
lamented, in most of us the flesh extinguisheth the spirit. Sampson was a
strong and valiant man, Judge. 14.6.
he encountered a Lion, and overcame him, but encountering with the fury of his
own lustful passions, he could not master them. Messes incendit alienas, Judge.
16.17. Ambros. in Apol. David.
and vnius ipse mulieris accensus igniculo, messem suae virtutis amisit: He set
fire indeed on the haruests of other men, but himself being inflamed with the
fire of lust, lost the harvest of all his virtues. Solomon built a goodly
Temple unto God, but in the mean time his own body, which should have been
(as the Apostle says of all our bodies) the temple of the holy Ghost, 1. Cor.
6.19.
was by lust made the member of a harlot. Genesis 3.6.
This is that Eve that persuades Adam to forbidden fruits: Genesis 39.7.
this is that Egyptian Putipharis that eggeth on innocent Joseph to filthiness:
Judge. 4.18.
this is that Iahel that seduceth Sisera with fained affection: this is that
Dalilah which lulleth Sampson asleep upon her knees, Judge. 16.19.
and delivers him up to the Philistines: this is that dancing daughter of
Herodias, Mark 6.25.
that cutteth off the head (the good beginnings) of many a John Baptist. In a
word, this is that talking damsel, at whose voice, Luke 22.56.57
with the Apostle Saint Peter, we do most of us deny our master Christ. I may
say truly in this case with that reverend father, Creed mihi, loquor coram
Domino, Augustine.
non mentior, Cedros Libani and duces gregum sub hac peste cecidisse reperi, de
quorum casu non minus dubitabam, quam Ambrosii vel Hieronymi: Believe me, I
speak before the Lord, I lie not; I have known the Cedars of Libanus, and the
leaders of the flocks to have fallen and sunk down violently under this
temptation, of whose fall I made no more doubt then I did of the fall of
Ambrose or of Hierom. There being then in man a double pleasure, carnis and
cordis, August. sermon. 33. de verbis secundu^ Luca^.
the pleasure of the flesh and the pleasure of the heart; the pleasure of the
flesh, when we give our selves over to fulfill the lusts thereof; the pleasure
of the heart, when we delight our selves in the Lord: therefore the carriage of
every Christian soul between these two pleasures must be such, that the
pleasure of the flesh be no let or impediment to the pleasure of the heart. But
you will say, how may this be, seeing there is continual enmity between
these, and the one of them (as the Apostle speaks) still lusts against the
other? Gal. 5.17.
I answer affirmatively, that it may well be, and I will show you how. G^egor.
dialog. lib 2.
I do read in the writings of Saint Gregory this relation concerning one
Benedict a religious man, that whenever he felt this conflict in his soul
between the flesh and the spirit, he would throng his body into a place where
nettles and briers grew, and sic per vulnera cutis, eduxite corpore vulnus
mentis, and so by those wounds which he inflicted on his body, he cured that
wound which would have infected his soul: his former inclination to fleshly
pleasure by this stratageme being turned into pain and sorrow. But if you
think this to be too hard and sharp a course for a carnal man to follow, I will
then give you a second, which is of no less consequent then that, but yet of
less molestatio^. Toby in the sixth chapter and second verse, when he washed
himself in the flood Tigris, a great fish leaped at him to have devoured him,
but by the Angels counsel having drawn the fish unto dry land, it was so far
from devouring him, that it yielded it self to be devoured of him. And so it
falls out in this conflict between the flesh and the spirit: for this flesh
of ours so long as it swims in pleasures, and is pampered up with delicacies,
so long is it ready to devour and extinguish our spirits: but if once we draw
it upon dry land from amidst her pleasures, by abstinence and fasting, it will
then have no power, or at least but small power to impugn the spirit. Gregor.
Pastor. ^urae. cap. 42.
Olla ebulliens duplex habet remedium, vel cum aqua frigida infunditur, vel cum
ab igne elongatur: A seething pot has but two remedies, either thou must power
in cold water, or else thou must remove it further from the fire: And so the
untamed flesh of men boiling with lust has but two remedies, either they must
power into their souls the water of repentance, and allay the heat of their
lust with the cold tears of contrition, or else they must remove it further
from the fire; the fire I mean not only of meats and of drinks (for gluttony
and drunkenness are the bellows of concupiscence, Sine Cerere and Baccho
friget Venus and venture mero aestuas spumat libidinem. Hieron.
and the belly boiling with wine fometh out lust, as Saint Hierome says) but
also of lascivious company, by which, as fire added unto fire, the lust of the
flesh is more intemperate. Unto this, if you please, as a means to restrain
these lustful passions, least by them with the common multitude we be led from
the ways of life, I may add the fearful end of this sin; fearful I call
it, not only in regard of those horrible diseases breeding in the body, and
in time consuming even the marrow in the bones; but fearful in regard of that
dreadful judgment which shall be inflicted in the last day both upon body and
soul in hell fire. For to the lustful sinner shall God say even as the Angel
said to Babel, Revel. 18.7.
Quantum glorificauit se in delicijs, tantum date illi tormentum and luctum: In
as much as he has glorified himself and lived in pleasure, so much give you
unto him torment and sorrow. There is a way that seems good, says Solomon,
but the end thereof is death: this way is the broad and common way of lustful
flesh and blood, the pleasures whereof though they be sweet in the mouth, yet
will they be bitter in the belly, like a cup of deadly poison. They are the
daughters of those locusts mentioned in the Revelation, Revel. 9.7.10.
which have faces fair as men, but killing stings in their tails: and I may
well resemble them to the herb Sardonia in Sardinia, of which Solinus writes,
that it makes the eaters thereof to look as if they laughed, but in their
laughing they die. Much more might be added unto this purpose, but (I take it)
this may be sufficient both to have shown you how these lusts of the flesh are
a great means to keep many from the ways of life, and also how we may
repress these lusts of the flesh when they are rebellious. And now I come to
the third and last enemy which opposes himself against man, and that is that
old Serpent the Devil, of whose subtilties in withdrawing us from the ways of
life, as in the rest, so in this I beseech you to hear a while with patience.

The Devil.
Exodus 17.
As Amaleck resisted the Israelites, and used all the means that possibly he
could devise, to keep them from coming into the earthly Canaan: so it is the
policy of that infernal Amalek the devil, to keep men from coming into the
Canaan of heaven. For the devil hating God with a perfect hatred, and being
not able to offer violence unto him, he does bend his force and strength
against man, that so he may persecute God in his creature. Saint Basil
resembles the rage and fury of the devil in this point, unto the rage and
fury of the wild Panthers; for as they carrying naturally a hatred against
man, if they see but the image and picture of a man, they run upon it, and
tear it in pieces, with no less fury then if it were man himself: so the
devil carrying a deadly hatred against God, because his proud assaults were
defeated by him, and his arrogance punished with the loss of heaven and
torment of hell, and being not able to do violence to God (as himself knows
by woeful experience) he sets upon man, who is the picture or image of God,
and he uses no less cruelty both against his body and his soul, then he
would (were he able) against God himself. Our Savior Christ tells the
Pharisees, Math. 23.15.
that they compass sea and land to make one of their profession, that is, to
make men superstitious, hypocritical, sinful as themselves were. That which
our Savior obiecteth there against them, the devil does in a manner confess of
himself. Job 1.7.
For when God asked him from whence he came, his answer was, that he came from
compassing the earth, and from walking to and fro in it. Now this walking of
the devil up and down in the earth, is not for any good which he intends
unto man, (for he walks not as Christ did, to do good, and to heal all
diseases both of body and soul among the people) but as the end of the
Pharisees co^passing of sea and land was to make men wicked like themselves: so
the end of the devils compassing the earth is to draw men out of the ways of
life, and to make them damned like himself. This was the Apostle Saint Peter's
meaning, when he gives this reason of Satan's compassing the earth, 1. Pet. 5.8.
He walks about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. Now among
those infinite means which the devil uses to devour us by drawing us from
the ways of life, I will insist briefly upon these few. The first whereof is
this, says Bernard.

Bernard. lib. de ordine vita.
and iudicially look into the natures and complexions of men, and according to
the predominant and ouerruling humor in man, he applies his temptation unto
this or that sin: (for in every man there is some one humor that is most
inclinable to some sin.) As for example: The men of a sanguin and bloody
complexion being naturally prone unto ambition and unchaste behauior; the devil
straight upon this their natural inclination will spend all his strength to
bring these men not only to an affecting, but also (if it be possible) to an
effecting of these sins. You shall see it in the examples of king David and his
son Absolon. First concerning David, the devil knowing that to be true which
was said of him, 1. Sam. 16.
that he was ruddy and of a good countenance, and observing that he did daily
from the top of his house behold the wife of Vrias washing her; he presently
takes the occasion, and suggesteth him to send for her; and this being once
done, he has soon drawn David out of the way of life, and made him an
adulterer. 2. Sam. 14.
And for Absolon his son, he being not unlike unto his father in that sanguine
and beautiful complexion; the devil working upon this, persuades him to both
to ambition and unclean behavior: for first he persuades him to affect a
kingdom, and rather then he should be without a kingdom, 2. Sam. 15.
he puts this in his heart, to deprive his own father. And for unchaste
behauior, so effectually did the devil work upon him, that he, spared not his
fathers concubines, 2. Sam. 16.
but defiled them, and himself with them, even on the top of the house, in the
sight of all the people. And as the devil provoke men of sanguin complexions
unto these sins, so he deals with men of other complexions; for if he find
that thou art flegmaticke, then will he suggest unto thy soul the sin of
idleness, and provoke thee unto those sins that are depending upon that. If
he see thee to be choleric, then he will persuade thee to hatred, malice,
anger, revenge, and such like. And if her perceive thy complexion to be
melancholic, the^ will he bend all the power and strength that he has to
drive thee to desperation. To prevent therefore the devil in this first
policy, as Solomon says unto the sluggard, Go to the Pismire, o thou sluggard,
Prouer. 6.6.
learn her ways and be wise; so say I unto you: go unto the devil himself,
learn his ways and be wise. The devils course (as you hear) is to look
diligently into the natures and complexions of men, and so to apply his
temptations unto those sins unto which naturally they are carried: do thou
then the like, look carefully into thy own body, consider diligently thy own
complexion, and withal those sins unto which thou art naturally carried: And
if thou find thy self naturally inclinable either unto wantonness, or unto
covetousness, or unto wrath, or unto envy, or unto drunkenness, or unto any
one sin more then other, be thou then sure to set a bar before the door of
thy soul, and keep Satan from entering in: for sin, Sermon. de sex
tribulationibus
as Saint Bernard well speaks, by the suggestion of Satan may stand at the
door of thy soul and knock, but unless thou open unto him by consent, he
cannot enter.

A second means which the devil uses to keep us from the way of life is
this: whereas our understanding by the fall of Adam is already blind and dark,
he corrupts it further, and makes us altogether unable to discern between
good and evil, causing us to commit wickedness with this strong conceit, that
our actions and works are just. And hence it is, that so many in these days
are overtaken and deceived with the sin of covetousness, because though they
be never so covetous, 1. Sam. 25.
yea as covetous as Naball was; yet the devil persuades them, and they easily
believe it, that it is not covetousness, it is but frugalitie. And hence it is
that we have so many lascivious people in the la^d; because though they be
never so much given to the lust of uncleanness, yea to lust after those they
should not, 2. Sam. 13.
as Amnon did after his own sister Thamar, yet the devil persuades them, and
they easily believe it, that it is not to be called lust, but rather love. And
thus our bad actions by the subtilty of the devil being covered and colored
with good names, we are damned in these and in many other sins, committing them
and that with greediness. But are we desirous to prevent the devil in this
his second policy? let us then use the same discretion for the preservation of
our souls, which we do for the preservation of our bodily health. It is a rule
in Physic: Pars maxima sanitatis est notitia morbi: the best means for a
sick man to recover his health, is to acknowledge his sickness. For if a man
which has the gout in his toe, will not take notice of it, but say it is
nothing but a tingling in his toe; and if a man has got the cough of the
lungs, and will not acknowledge it, but say it is nothing but a great cold which
he has taken: these diseases will grow so hard upon them, that at length it
will be hard or rather impossible to cure them; whereas notice being taken of
them in time, the danger is the less, and the cure more easy. And so the
Divines have the like rule: Pars maxima salutis est notitia peccati: The best
means for a sick man in soul to be recovered, is to acknowledge and take
notice of sin, which is the sickness of the soul. For the man that is
ouergrowne with covetousness, and says it is but frugalitie: which is
infected with the sin of uncleanness, and maintains it to be but love: the
man who like a swashbuckler is always drawing his sword, cutting and hacking
the harmless, and will have this to have no worse name then manhood and
fortitude: these and the like diseases will grow so hard upon the soul, that it
will be a plain miracle to remove them; whereas they being known and
acknowledged for sins, as they are indeed, the cure of them is easy, and the
danger of being drawn out of the ways of life by them, is quickly avoided.

Dominus non videt; though thou take them to be sins, yet says the devil,
the Lord does not see them: and with this have many been deceived. In the
eighth of Ezechiel and twelfth verse, it is Gods speech unto the Prophet: Son
of man, have thou seen what the Ancients of Israel do in the dark, every one
in the chamber of his imagery? for they say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord
has forsaken the earth. Almighty God shows the Prophet, that the ancients of
Israel had painted round about their walls every similitude of creeping things,
and abominable beasts; and he makes this to be the cause, a gross persuasion
that the Lord did not see them. But art thou desirous to prevent the devil in
this fallacian also? then for thy better instruction let me reason with thee
thus. He that could epsy our first parents hiding themselves among the thick
trees of the garden, Genesis 3.9.
cannot his eyes find out thy sin, though it be committed in a secret place?
Psalm 94.9.
He that planted the ear, shall not he hear, says David? or he that formed
the eye, shall not he see? As if he had said, Make no question, but whatsoever
you speak or do, God does hear it, God does see it. It is not with the sight
of God, as it is with the sight of man: if there be not a due and a
proportionate distance between the sight of man and the object, the eye of man
cannot possibly see it; but say God were circumscribed in some one place, and
grant it were in heaven, yet that great distance which is between heaven and
earth, even seven score and eighteen thousand, four hundred and sixty three
miles, as the Astronomers have coniectured; yet does not this great distance
hinder God from seeing our sins. Psalm. 14.2.
For the Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men; what to do? to
see if any would understand and seeeke after God: but looking down he saw that
all were gone out of the way, that there was none that did good, no not one.

August. in Psa. 144.
that he will not punish sin. It is Saint Augustines complaint, that there be
two sorts of men which do snatch occasions of sinning to themselves, the one
from the mercy, the other from the justice of God. One says, God will take so
strict and severe an account of our doings, that we shall not be able to answer
one for a thousand; and therefore (says he) being sure to be damned, cur non
facio quiquid volo? why do I not whatsoever I will? The other, he says Gods
mercy is above his works, and at what time soever I repent, though it be at
the last gasp, he will receive me with the arms of his mercy, as he did the
thief upon the cross; and therefore why do not I go on still in my
wickedness? Desperate ille vt peccet, sperat iste vt peccet, vtrumque
metuendum: the one despaireth, that he may sin still, the other hops, that
he may sin still, and both are to be feared. But for those which dream
altogether of Gods mercy, that this fallacian of the devils (by which many
thousands are drawn from the ways of life) may be prevented, let them
remember that God, as he is merciful, so he is just. In the 116. Psalm and
fifth verse, The Lord is merciful and just, says David; not merciful alone,
but just also. And as we cannot bide our sins from the all-seeing eye of God:
so we cannot be defended from the strong arm of his justice. In the 6. of
Genesis and 12. verse, it is said that God looked down upon the earth, and
seeing that all flesh had corrupted his ways, he says to Noah, An end of al
flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with cruelty through them,
and behold I will destroy them from the earth. In which words we may observe
first that God sees our sins; secondly, that though he sees sin, yet he is
merciful; and thirdly, that as he is merciful, so he is just. God looked
down upon the earth, and saw that all flesh had corrupted his way, there is
the first, Gods sight of sin: the earth is filled with cruelty, there is the
second, the mercy of God and long suffering: for he does not presently execute
judgment upon them, but stayed so long till the earth was full of cruelty.
And behold I will destroy them from the earth, there is Gods justice.

But if the devil by none of these be able to deceive us, and to draw us from
the ways of life, then he has a fifth, which shall be my last at this time. He
sets before our eyes the good and pleasure that does accompany our sin;
and indeed these are shrewd temptations unto flesh and blood. Psalm. 133.1.
The Prophet David makes choice of these two to draw us unto brotherly love
and unity: O how good and pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together
in unity: And so the devil he makes choice of both these to draw us to the
committing of iniquity, sometimes using but one of these, and sometimes joining
them both for the strengthening of his temptation. In the 22. of Numbers one of
these was sufficient to draw Balaam unto sin: for though he had received a
commandment from God that he should not go with the princes of Moab to curse
the people of Israel; yet when he considered that Balacks offers would prove
commodious to him, he resolves upon the journey with them, and his Asses
thrice revolt could not stay him. But in the third of Genesis there the devil
uses both, and with them both he prevailed against our mother Eve; for albeit
she knew well, that she should dye the death in eating of the forbidden tree,
yet because she saw that it was good for meat, and pleasant to the eyes, she
took thereof and did eat. That then these deceitful temptations of the devil
may be rejected: first that no commodity do draw thee from the ways of life to
sin, let that saying of our Savior Christ be always in thy mind; what shall
a man get if he win the whole world, Math. 16.26.
and loose his own soul? what shall a man get if by usury, oppression of the
poor, extortio^, false weights, false measures, and the like, he shall be able
to purchase much land, Luke 16.19.
and with the rich glutton go in purple and fine linen, and fare deliciously
every day; when as these commodious sins as he accounts them, shall bring
no less discommoditie upon him then hell fire? And secondly that no pleasure
preuail with thee, remember that sin, though it be sweet in the mouth, yet it
will be bitter in the belly; that though it be pleasant in the beginning, yet it
will be painful in the end: and that the devil deals herein with us, as
unconscionable Mercers and Drapers deal with their chapmen. For as they never
show unto their chapmen the middle part and fag end of their wares, which
perhaps are stark naught, but only the upper part thereof which commonly is
very good: so this master Mercer the devil, he shows always to his sinful
chapmen the upper part of his wares, namely the present pleasure, delectation,
and delight of sin; but as for the middle part of his wares, which is remorse
of conscience, and the fag end of his wares which is Gods vengeance, these he
never shows. For (beloved) if men should see before hand with the spiritual
eyes of their souls, either the middle part of sin, which is remorse of
conscience, or the end of sin which is Gods vengeance, either in this life,
or in the other; then out of doubt, when the devil shall offer his wares unto
the sale, (as to the covetous man his neighbors vineyard, to the adulterer his
neighbors wife, to the taylour long bills, to the retailer false weights, and so
in the rest) they will all answer, (if there be any spark of grace or
goodness in them) as the Athenian Orator did upon the like proffer; Non emam
tanti poenitere, I will not buy repentance so dear. And thus at last have you
seen those impediments and lets why so few do find the way of life. The
impediments ex part quaerentis, in our selves that seek the way are three,
blindness of reason, perverseness of will, and want of perseverance: and the
lets ex part retrahentium are three likewise; the world with his inticements,
the flesh with her allurements, and the devil with his suggestions unto sin.
And now to conclude, Hom. 1. ad pop. Antioch.
Saint Chrysostom in his first homily to the people of Antioch, does require a
reward for a sermon which he made against the blasphemers of Gods name. The
only reward (beloved) which I will crave for my sermon, is this, that it would
please Almighty God, so to work in the hearts of all you that have now been
partakers of it, that you may say, and say truly of my sermon, as Tully in his
Academicks says of Varros books: Nos in nostra vrbe peregrinantes tanquam
hospites, tui libri quasi domum deduxerunt; We who heretofore in this our city
of London, by the blindness of our reason, the perverseness of our wills, and
want of perseverance, have erred from the ways of life, and by the inticements
of the world, the allurements of the flesh, and the suggestions of the devil,
have wandered up and down in the plains of sin, and in the valleys of
iniquity, are thereby now brought home again unto the ways of life, and
reduced into the number of that little flock, whereof that great Shepherd and
Bishop of our souls, Christ Jesus is the head. The which God the Father grant
for his Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the blessed spirit, three in
Trinity but one in Unity, be ascribed all honor and glory for evermore.

FINIS.
THE LAST IVDGEMENT.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL JOHN BREVVSTER ESQVIRE.
SIR, among many patrons of virtue, and Theological endeavors, I presume to
rank your name; who as I know you not inferior to the best, for a Fautor of
learning and a lover of Piety; so I present you here with such a work best
fitting your addiction, and most worthy your patronage. And howsoever I may
seem officiously bold to publish these things without free consent of the
Author (as I confess I do:) yet out of earnest desire to raise him from
obscurity to a deserved eminence in the worlds account, and thoroughly moved
with pity, that so heavenly things should perish with the breath they were
delivered, (as if eternity should fade with a moment:) I have adventured to
give them longer life, seconding my boldness with a strong presumption, that I
shall frustrate needless doubts, and herein deserve your good opinion. And on
this hope I rest, committing the sequel to your serious view, and my attempt
in this to your favorable construction.

Yours in all affection and duty, C. B.

MATTHEW. 25.15. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour when
the Son of man will come.


AS when children having ouer-slept themselves, and begin to cry, as fearing
the correction of their severe masters; their indulgent mothers do commonly
comfort them with one of these two things, as first, that there is no time yet
past, and secondly, that their master is a gentle man and will forgive them:
In the very same manner do the carnal and careless worldlings of this age
deal with those their acquaintance and friends, who have fetched a long and a
deep sleep in sin and security. For whereas their counsel to them should
be that which Saint Paul has, Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and stand
up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: these men clean contrary,
to take away all fear of judgment to come in a sinner, they apply either one
or both these comforts to them; first, that nullum tempus poenitentiae
inidoneum, that no time is too late to come unto God by repentance: and if they
stagger in their hope notwithstanding this first comfort, then is it commonly
backed with this second, that God is Deus misericordiae, a God of mercy, and
will forgive them. And in this for the most part we are all like unto Benhadad,
2. King. 20. For as he fled from the King of Israel from place unto place, till
he was forced into a chamber; and when he could go no farther, thus he was
comforted, Reges Israel sunt Reges misericordes, The Kings of Israel are
merciful Kings. So men commonly when they are in health and strength of body,
they run on in iniquity and sin, and are impiously rebellious against the
holy one of Israel: but when they are chased as it were into their chambers
either by sickness or old age, and when there is no way but one, as we say,
but death with them; then this is their comfort, that Deus Israel est Deus
misericordiae, that the God of Israel will be then unto them a God of mercy. But
(beloved) let us neither flatter our selves with vain hopes, nor deceive our
neighbors with false comforts; for though God accepts of him who comes unto
him in his old age which is the evening of his life (as you may see by him who
had a penie given him, Math. 20.9. though he came at the end of the day to the
vineyard, and by the thief (Luke 25.43.) who was posted even from the cross
unto Paradise;) yet God had rather thou should come unto him in thy youth,
which is the morning of thy age. And to that end says the wise man, Eccles.
12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth: least our coming
unto God should be put off and deferred, he says, Remember now: and least we
should put off till old age or death, he adds in the days of thy youth. And
^^rely if there were no other reason for it, or if we had not the lamentable
example of the five foolish virgins in this chapter to direct us; who calling,
Lord, Lord, open unto us, when it was too late, were shut out and excluded from
the kingdom of heaven: yet this may be sufficient, that we see commonly in our
experience carnal and careless sinners, Justo Dei iudictio hac poena punitur
peccator, vt mortens obliuiscatur sui qui cu^ viueret oblitus est Dei. Augustine.
by the just judgment of God, to be punished with this kind of punishment;
namely in old age and at the hour of death to forget both themselves and God,
as before in their youth they had no care to remember him. And for the second
comfort, that God is Deus misericordiae, a merciful God: sure it is, that as
the women sung concerning Saul and David, 1. Sam. 18.7. Saul has slain his
thousand, but David his te^ thousands: So we may sorowfully sing and say truly,
that the despair of Gods mercy has slain thousands, but the gross
presumption of his mercy has slain ten thousands, it has sent ten times as
many more unto hell as the despair of his mercy. And therefore let us not
suffer our selves any longer to be deceived; for as it is true of God which the
Prophet David has, Psalm. 86.15. that the Lord is a pitiful God, merciful,
slow to anger, and great in kindness, (for all these does be heap together in
that verse:) yet have we no reason to be presumptuous upon these his mercies,
but we should rather look back unto the 18. Psalm and 26. verse, where the
Prophet speaking of God, he says thus; With the pure thou will show thy self
pure, and with the froward thou will show thy self froward: that is, as he will
mercifully receive and pardon those that are penitent, so he will justly repel
and severely punish those that are impenitent. In the verses which go before
from the beginning of this Chapter, we have the truth and proof of this
doctrine in the parable of the ten virgins: For as we see the five wise virgins
who had oil in their lamps, that is, whose good works and godly lives did
shine and give light unto others, as a lamp gives light unto those that are in
darkness; as we see these most mercifully to be received, and to enter in with
the bridegroom: so the five foolish virgins, who did slumber and sleep, and
had no care to expect the bridegroomes coming by a virtuous and godly life,
those we see most justly to be shut out. And our Savior Christ concludes and
shuts up that parable with this comfortable and sweet caveat unto us: Watch
therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man
will come. As if he should have said, seeing there will be a coming of the
Son of man to judgment; and his coming, as it will be joyful and
comfortable to the godly, so it will be fearful and terrible to the wicked,
and we know neither the day nor the hour when he will come: therefore slumber
not, sleep not, be not careless, be not secure in your sins, but watch,
that is, be prepared by a virtuous and godly life against his coming; that so
when he shall come, you may be received into heaven with the five wise virgins,
and not be excluded and shut out of heaven with the five foolish. Watch
therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man will
come.

In the right opening and handling of which words, I beseech you to observe
carefully with me these four particular considerations. First, that there will
be a coming of the Son of man to judgment: He will come. Secondly that
because he comes to judgment, therefore his coming will be fearful and
terrible. Thirdly that the time of his fearful and terrible coming unto
judgment is uncertain: We neither know the day nor the hour when he will
come. And lastly the use which we are to make of all these; and this is a
careful and vigilant preparation of our selves against his coming, in the
first words, Vigilate igitur, Watch therefore. Watch therefore, for you know
neither the day nor the hour when the Son of man will come. Now of all these
in their order. And first for the first consideration.

1. That there will be a coming of the Son of man to judgment. He will come.

It was the fond opinion of Aristotle that great Philosopher, that the world
had no beginning, Lib. 1. de coelo cap. 10.
and so consequently shall have no end; and that mankind with all other
creatures in the world, were always, and should be always. The which opinion
of his if it were true, then might men lawfully doubt, whether there should be
a general Sessions, a general calling or no, of men unto judgment. But the
best way to confute a heathen, is by a heathen. Plinius Secundus. August. de
ciu. dei. lib. 15. cap. 9.
It was therefore the true sentence of another heathen man, that the older the
world waxes, the bodies of men naturally, for stature are less, and for
strength are weaker; and this was the opinion of Homer himself a great Poet,
and no small Philosopher. For speaking of the battle which was fought between
Aeneas and Diomedes, he affirms that Diomedes cast a stone at Aeneas, so
heavy and of so great a weight, as fourteen men (says he) are not able to cast
the like, as men go now a days. And if as the world waxes in years, so man's
strength does decrease, then doubtless the world waxing still old, it will at
last come to nothing; and so consequently even in plain reason, the world and
men in the world will have an end. But me thinks I hear some godless and
profane Atheist reply thus. Suppose that the world and men in the world shall
have an end; yet I am of opinion that there is the same end of a man that there
is of a beast. A beast, when it dies, the flesh is consumed, and the soul
vanishes into the air, and there is his full period: and why may it not be so
with man? For the answer herunto: It was Plato his opinion (who deserved and
that justly, the name of a divine) that the souls of men did not die, but
live, being separated from their bodies, and that after this life ended they
should give an account of all their actions. And those fictions in the Poets,
concerning the Elisian fields and places of pleasure for good men after this
life, and places of punishment for evil men; what did they else show, but that
there has been among the wisest of the heathen a certain persuasion of the
souls immortality, and that after this life it should be judged? But because
the profane Atheist will not be drawn to a belief, either of the souls
immortality, or of the bodies resurrection in the day of judgment, unless we
can win them thereunto by the maine sway of reason, let us see whether in reason
we commit any absurdity or no, in believing the resurrection of the body.
Tertullian propounding the question for them: In Apol. cap. 45
Quomodo dissoluta materia exhiberi potest? How is it possible that the matter
of ma^s body being once dissolved, as it shall be in the grave, should ever
rise again, and be perfectly exhibited before the judgment seat of God? he
does answer their question thus: Quid tibi noui eueniet? qui non eras, factus
es, and cum iterum non eris, fies: What strange or new wonder is this? thou
which once were not, wast made by God, and so hereafter when thou shall not be,
thou shall be made again; for God can as easily restore thee being dissolved
into dust, as he could create thee at the first being nothing. In the first
Psalm and fifth verse we read it thus. The wicked shall not stand in
judgment: but the Caldey paraphrase has it thus, They shall not rise in that
great day, the day of judgment. In regard of which words, some Hebrew writers
have been bold to make this collection, that the wicked shall not rise, but
their bodies and souls at the hour of death shall perish and come to nothing.
But as in many points they are fantastically foolish: so in this are they most
erroneously heretical. For although it be there said, that the wicked shall not
rise in judgment, we must not thereby gather, Carere eos resurgendi natura, sed
resurgendi in iudicium perdidisse ordinem: We must not gather, that the nature
and property of rising shall be wanting unto the^, but that they have lost the
order of rising unto judgment. Now what the order of rising unto judgment is,
we may see in the third of Ioh. the 18. and 19. ver. where our Savior says
thus. He that believes in me shall not be judged, but he which believes not,
Iam iudicatus est, he is already judged. The which words of our Savior, happily
they may trouble the careless hearers, and the negligent readers thereof; for
in that he says, he that believes in me shall not be judged, there he
exempteth the faithful from judgment: and in that he says, he that believes
not, is already judged, he seems to teach that the Infidels shall not be
admitted unto judgment. And if the faithful are exempted from judgment to
come, and the Infidels are already judged; why then, Non videtur locus esse
relictus iudicio, It should seem there is no place left for judgment, and
that there are no persons to be judged. Yes says Hilary; for in the 18. verse,
our Savior having exe^pted the believers and unbelievers; the believers a
iudicio condemnationis, from the judgment of condemnation: and the Infidels
and unbelievers, because their judgment of condemnation is so certain, that it
is in the eternal decree of God already past, and there remains only at the
last day but the publication thereof. In the 19. verse he expresses the
parties to be judged, and the cause of their judgment; for thus he says: This
is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather then the light, because their deeds are evil. As if he had
said: There is a middle sort of people, which are neither altogether without
faith, nor absolutely faithful; the fear of God contains them in the
Church, but the vain vanities of the world draw them unto secular vices, Orant
quia timent, peccant quia volunt, they pray because they are afraid of God and
his judgments, but withal they commit sin, because they take a pleasure and
delight in it. These then which do love darkness rather then light, that is,
which are content to love Christ who is the light of the world, but withal
they prefer the evil deeds of darkness, these are they (let the Hebrew
writers fable what they will) which shall one day come to judgment. And that we
may the better conceive, and believe this; there are as you know, in our
assizes and sessions here upon earth, certain things necessarily required. As
first, there is required the person and presence of the Judge. Secondly,
certain upright Justices his assistants upon the bench. Thirdly, the citation
of the prisoners to the bar, with leave given them to plead for themselves.
Fourthly, the allegation or accusation of the witnesses. Fifthly, the Judges
verdit. Sixthly, the proceeding to sentence either of absolution or
condemnation. And lastly the execution of the sentence committed to the
sheriff or bayliffe. Of al which (beloved) that we may the better believe that
great sessions in that last and dreadful day of judgment, we have special
mention in the Scriptures. And first for the Judge, that is Jesus Christ the
second person in Trinity. Forhowsoeuer the whole Trinity have a stroke in the
action, yet the execution thereof is committed by them to the second person. So
Christ himself says ( John the 5.22.) The Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment to the Son. So Saint Paul says (Romans 14.10.) We must
all of us appear before the judgment seat of Christ. And Saint Austin gives a
reason of it thus, Vt ea natura iudicem agat, quae sub iudice stetit, That he
may act the office of a judge in that nature in which he stood before a judge.
Secondly, for his assistants upon the bench, they are his disciples ( Math.
19.28.) For when the son of man (says Christ) shall sit in the throne of his
majesty, ye which have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit also upon
twelve thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel. And thirdly, for the
bringing of the prisoners to the bar, ye have it in the 5. of John and 28.
verse. The hour shall come in which all that are in the graves shall hear the
voice of the son of God, and they shall come forth that have done good unto
the resurrection of life, but they which have done evil unto the resurrection
of condemnation. At which time the prisoner shall have free liberty to speak
what he can for himself; for so they on the left hand plead not guilty (
Math. 25.44.) Lord when have we seen thee an hu^gred, or athirst, or a
stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee? And
fourthly, for the witnesses, they are more then two. For first Christ who is
the Judge, he will witness against us. Ier. 29.23. Ego sum iudex and testis, I
am both a judge and a witness. And whereas men are often compelled and
enforced to bear witness to the truth; in the third of Malachy and fifth
verse: Ego sum testis velox, I am a swift witness. And if Christ should fail
in his testimony against us, yet his lawgiver Moses will not fail; for so
Christ says ( Ioh. 5.45.) Do not think that I will accuse you to my Father:
there is one that accuses you, even Moses in who^ you trust. And though Christ
and Moses both do fail in their witness, yet is there another who will not be
wanting, even the devil, in who^ many have trusted too much. For in the 12. of
the Revel. 10. v. Satan the accuser of the brethren is cast down, who
accuses them before God day and night. And thus, says Saint Augustine, will
he urge in the last day and enforce his accusation before God. Thine they were
O king of heaven by creation, but mine they are by transgression. Tui per
gratiam quam amiserunt, mei per culpam in qua decesserunt: Thine they were by
grace, which wilfully they have cast away, mine they are by sins, which has
cast them away: thine they were by the glorious merit of thy passion, mine they
are for want of charitable compassion: thine they were because thou diedst for
their sins, mine they they are because they died not, but lived unto sin. Nobis
ergo associentur in poenis qui co^formati sunt in culpis: and therefore o
supreme judge, it stands with equity and justice, that these should be
partakers in our punishments, who while they lived in the world, were
companions in our sins. But if Christ, and Moses, and the devil should fail
in their witness, though neither of these did know of thy sin, and so
consequently could not justly accuse thee; yet as Lactantius well says, Quid
prodest tibi non habere conscium, habenti conscientia^? What will the ignorance
of others avail thee, when as the testimony of thy own conscience will
prevail against thee? For as there are some which have a good conscience (Heb.
13.18.) so there are others which have a bad conscience, a conscience seared
with a hot iron (1. Timoth. 4.4.) And as they who in godly pureness and not in
fleshly wisdom, have their conversation in this world, the testimony of their
conscience shall cause them to rejoice (1. Cor. 1.12.) so they which have
followed the vain pleasures, and the pleasing vanities of this world, the
testimony of their conscience shall cause the^ to lament. And then a man's own
conscience acccusing him, there needs no jury to be impannelled: for the
party confessing the action, the Judge will immediately proceed to sentence, the
which sentence shall not be (like the Roman Romani tabellas seu literas in
vrnam solebant conijcere: literae fueru^t. A.C. A litera Absolutionis, C litera
condemnationis: talis in iud^cijs consuetudo apud Graecos. (...) respo^debat
Romanorum C. (...) Romanorum. A.
A) a sentence of Absolution, whereof mention is made ( Math. 25.34) Venite
benedicti, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. But it shall be (like that nigrum (...) of
the Greeks) a sentence of condemnation, whereof mention is made in the same
chapter and 41. verse. Ite maledicti, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, which
is prepared for the devil and his Angels. And then last of all follows the
execution of the sentence, the charge whereof shall be committed to the Angels.
For so says our Savior ( Math. 13.49.) At the end of the world, the Angels
shall go forth, and sever the bad from among the just, and shall cast them into
a furnace of fire, where shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. So then to
conclude this with that of the Preacher (Eccl. 11.9.) Rejoice o young man in
thy youth, let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, walk in the
ways of thy heart, and in the lusts of thine own eyes; but yet know that for
all these things God shall bring thee unto judgment. Be not therefore
deceived, neither flatter your selves with this vain imagination, that though
you commit sin with greediness, yet there will be no reckoning and account
for it. Say not within your selves, as it is in the 5. of Eccle. 4. I have
sinned and what evil has come unto me? For as it follows in the same place,
Dominus est Patiens redditor dicitur, quia peccata homin^m and patitur and
reddit. Nam quos Diu vt conuertantur tolerat, non conuersos durius damnat.
Greg. Hom. 13. in Euang.
patiens redditor: The Lord is a patient rewarder; that is, as he is patient
for a time and expects thy return from sin; so he is a rewarder, and will
not leave thee unpunished. Lento gradu ad vindictam ira diuina procedit, sed
tarditatem supplicij grauitate iudicij recompensat; The justice of God goes
slowly indeed, but it recompenseth the slacknesse of judgment with the
heaviness thereof. And therefore as Abraham said unto the rich man, ( Luke
16.25.) Hic bona, sed illic mala, Here thou receiuedst good things, but now
thou art tormented: so happily without any check or controlement, thou may
follow thy sinful pleasures and delights here in this world; but there will
one day come a time, when for those thou shall be brought before a Judge, and
the judge shall deliver thee to a iaylour, and the iaylour shall cast thee into
prison, from whence thou shall never be released. And therefore howsoever there
has heretofore been no impression in our hearts of this judgment to come, yet
hereafter as Saint Hierom confesses of himself, sieve comedas, sieve bibas,
whether thou eatest or drinkest, whether thou wakest or sleep, whether thou
walk abroad or stayest at home, let that be ever sounding in thy ears,
which was ever sounding in his ears: Surgite mortui, venite ad iudicium: Arise
o you dead, and come to judgment. Thus much for the first consideration: That
there will be a coming of the Son of man to judgment. I come to the second.

2. That this his coming unto Judgment will be terrible.

In the ninth of Esaias and sixth verse, the Prophet speaking of the coming of our
Savior Christ, he says thus: Paruulus natus est nobis: A child is borne unto
us, and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the everlasting Father,
the Prince of peace: and in the 21. of Matthew and fifth verse, there is the
prophecy fulfilled, Ecce Rex tuus venit tibi mansuetus: Tell ye the daughter of
Sion, Behold thy King comes unto thee meek. But that sets out his first
coming: but now we are to lay open his second coming. Then he came in
humility, but now we are to speak of his coming in glory. Then he came like
mild and little David, 1. Sam. 17.
to free us from the Devil that great Goliath; but hereafter he will come like
angry and armed David, 2. Sam. 25.
against ungrateful Nabals. Then he came with comforts in his right hand; for
he came not to call the righteous, Math. 9.13. John 5.29.
but sinners to repentance: but hereafter he shall come with terror in his
left hand, for he shall call the unrepentant sinners unto judgment. Then, that
the world might be crucified unto us, and we unto the world, Christ Jesus
vouchsafed to be crucified in the world: but hereafter because the preaching of
Christ his cross is accounted foolishness by the wicked world, therefore
Jesus Christ will come to crucify the world. Then the people shouted, Mat.
21.9. Mat. 24.30.
and distinctly cried Hosanna for joy, but hereafter the wicked shall yell and
make a confused noise for fear; yea so fearful will this his second coming
unto judgment be, that Saint Paul disputing of it before Felix, (as I now
before you) it made the very heart of Felix to tremble. Act. 24.26. And no
marvel, for if that first apparition of God was so fearful and terrible to
the people of the Jews (Exodus 20.18.) that Moses himself said, I fear and
tremble; and the people fled, and stood a far off, and said to Moses, Talk
thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God talk with us, least we die:
how fearful then and terrible will his second coming be? For at that first
appearing he came only to give them laws; but at this second he will come to
punish the transgressors of his laws. Hest. 15.10.
Surely if Hester fell upon the ground, and life for a time went out at the
gates of her body, when she beheld the majesty of Assuerus the King: Dan. 8.17.
if Daniel in the eight chapter of his prophecy, at the sight of an Angel
trembled and was sore afraid: Mat. 28.4.
if the keepers of the sepulcher in the day of our Savior his resurrection,
were terrified and became as dead men: if the Jews coming armed into the
garden to apprehend Jesus, John 18.6.
when they heard him but say, Ego sum, I am the man; if they fell backward upon
the ground, and became as dead men: O then what shall miserable men and women
do, when they shall see Jesus Christ not yielding up his body to be punished by
sinners as then, but coming in the clouds with power and great glory to
punish sinners? Luke 21.^9.


Indeed if there were the same means and such hopes of preserving men from
the judgment to come, as there are of preventing judgment and justice here
upon the earth, then the fear thereof were altogether needless: but you shall
see the case is far different. For first, here upon earth when men stand upon
life and death, intercession is made by others for the procurement of their
delivery: yea oftentimes speeches in commendation of the prisoner are admitted
by the bench; Plutarch.
for so was the custom among the Romans, till the law of Pompey took it
away. But in the day of the last judgment, there will be no place for
intercession, 2. Sam. 14. 1 Samuel 25
there shall then be no Ioab to entreat for Absalom, there shall then be no
Abigail to speak for Nabal. The truth of which doctrine is most evident in the
Scriptures: for look into the 22. of Matthew and 13. verse, and you shall
there see, that the party that had not on a wedding garment, was commanded
out of the bride-house, and cast into utter darkness, and no man did once
entreat for him. Look into the 25. of Matthew and 28. verse, and you shall
there likewise see, that the servant which had received but one talent, and
without any employment to his masters advantage had hid it in the earth, had
his talent taken from him, and was cast into utter darkness, and no man
entreated for him. Nay, look but into the verse going next before my text, and
you shall hear the five foolish virgins crying: Lord, Lord, open unto us. And
receiving this uncomfortable answer from the mouth of comfort it self: Ini
^^um Deus scit in examine, nescit in amore. Greg. in Job lib. 11 cap 7.
Nescio vos, I know you not; that is, I have rejected you, I have reprobated
you; and none, no not their late familiar friends and companions, the other
wise virgins, requested favor for them.

Again, here upon earth though no man entreat for an offender, yet oftentimes
the fresh memory of his ancestors good deeds, and the good demerits of his
friends that be living, may move the Judge to pity and compassion: but for a
man to trust to this favor in the day of judgment, were to lean upon a
broken reed; for the men that do best fulfill the commandments of God, are
termed in the 17. of Saint Luke and 10. verse, Serui inutiles, Unprofitable
servants. And then as the five wise virgins answered the five foolish, (Mat.
25.9.) We cannot give you of our oil, least peradventure there will not be
enough for us and you: so the best men that be, cannot lend their friends any
of their good works; for if they do, without all peradventure they will leave
too few for themselves.

And thirdly, though neither of these two do come to pass, yet many times the
subtlety of the offender, and his cunning contrived speech, do ouer-reach the
wisdom of the Judge: but this hope shall fail a sinner in the day of
judgment. Our first mother Eve, so much as in her lay, she did hide her sin
from God; and so did Cain the death of Abel: and happily says S. Ambrose,
Ambros. in Psa. 118.
in affectu habemus abscondere, non in effectu: we may with them affect the
hiding of our sins from God, but we never can effect it. In the 20. of S. Luke
and the 20. verse, the Scribes and Pharisees come with cunning contrived
speeches unto Christ, hoping to entrap him; but as cunning as they were, our
Savior was too cunning for them: for in the 23. verse, Quid tentatis
hypocritae? Why tempt you me, ye hypocrites? And surely if craft and subtlety
could not overtake our Savior when he came in humility, much less shall he
be overtaken thereby when he shall come in glory.

And fourthly, though neither of these three do happen in our earthly
judgments, yet we see by experience that witnesses are often kept back, and by
that means the prisoner is set free: but at Christ his coming unto judgment,
there is no such advantage to be expected. For, as Saint Bernard well observes,
in a man's own house, and in a man's own family, Deuotis. medit. cap. 13.
he shall not fail of his accuser, his witness, and his judge. Accusat
conscientia, testis est memoria, ratio index: his conscience that will be his
accuser, his memory that will be his witness, and his reason that will be his
judge to condemn him. And least it should be objected that a man's memory may
fail, and so consequently the witness, behold then a witness whom nothing
can cause to fail: Because they have done villainy in Israel, and committed
adultery with their neighbors wives, even I see it, and I testify it, says
the Lord. Ier. 29.23.

And fifthly, though neither of these fall out, yet if a man be nobly borne, and
descend from honorable and princely parents, then none almost dare meddle with
him, or once call his sins in question. But as Mordocay in the fourth of
Ester and 15. verse, said unto the Queen, when as the sentence of death was
past upon all the people of the Jews in the kingdoms of Assuerus; think not
with thy self that thou shall escape in the Kings house, more then all the
Jews: so at the day of judgment, when all our sins shall be laid open before
God, men, and Angels, it is not our noble and honorable blood, it is not a
Kings house, nor a Kings lineage that can exempt us. But may not money procure us
favor with the Judge, and be a means to stay the course of justice? Indeed I
confess that money may do much with earthly Judges; it may turn judgment into
mercy, and mercy into judgment: but it is not the multitude of gifts (says
Job in his 36. chap. and 18. verse) that can deliver thee from the wrath of the
Judge of heaven.

But say, none of all these do prevail in our earthly judgments, yet either
by the conniuencie of the Iailor, or the weakness of the prison, a condemned
man may escape: but after the sentence is once pronounced in this last
judgment, both these comforts will fail a sinner. For first the devil, who
is Iaylor, will be so vigilant, as no prisoner committed to his iayle shall
have leave to depart. And for the second, which is breaking of prison, that is
impossible for those who are bound hand and foot, and so are sinners bound
after judgment, Matthew. 22.13. Take him and bind him hand and foot, and cast
him into utter darkness. And yet suppose that they could unloose themselves,
as some that are bound may do, yet is there no hope of evasion: for in the 16.
of Luke and 26. verse, it is Abraham's speech unto the rich man in hell:
Between you and us there is a great gulf, so that we cannot come unto you,
neither can you come unto us. So that hitherto you see this coming of Christ
unto judgment to be terrible. But if we shall now a little farther consider
the rigor and severity of the sentence, which shall be thundered from the
mouth of the Judge against the wicked; I make no question but the terror
thereof will appear much greater. The sentence is set down in the 25. of
Matthew, and 41. verse, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. In which words, Poena damni.
first the punishment of loss, as the Divines term it, contained in these
words Depart from me, does declare the severity of the sentence. For if one
day in Gods courts be better then a thousand elsewhere, as the Prophet David
says in the 84. Psalm and 10. verse: then to be not only a thousand years,
but for ever elsewhere, and not one day in the courts of God, it must needs be
a grievous and a great punishment. For a man to lose his lands here in this
world, what a vexation and grief is it to many men? it does often times drive
men unto their wits end: how then think we will sinners be affected and
afflicted in mind, who when Christ Jesus by his most precious blood has
purchased for them no worse land then the land of the living, the kingdom of
heaven, they by their wilful rebellion will be the occasion of the loss of
it? Were not the Israelites grieved think you, when from a sorrowful heart
they told Moses that he had brought them from a land which flowed with milk
and honey, into a barren wilderness, to destroy them with famine? And will it
not be a greater torment to the wicked in the last day, when they shall hear
and see themselves banished from heaven, and the presence of God, in whose
presence, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 16. and last verse, there is fullness of
joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore; and then sent
into a place where there is a famine of all good things, a famine of joy, a
famine of ease, a famine of the comfortable presence of God? Surely if the
Apostles for that little time that Christ told them he was to be absent from
them, they were so sorrowful and sad, John 16.21. that Christ himself
measures their mourning by the mourning of a woman in her travel. And if
Peter, to whom Christ had said, John 13.8.
If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me, was so loath to part with
Christ, that he said, Lord, not my feet only, but my hands and my head also:
in what case shall miserable and accursed sinners be, who not for a time only,
but for all eternity are shut out and banished from the sight of God?

As then the rigor and severity of the Judicial sentence appears in the
punishment of loss, so is it greatly amplified by the punishment of sense;
Poena sensus.
for they are not only banished by the Judge from heaven, Depart from me; but
they are sent into a place of punishment, into hell fire. The Epicure, says
Tertullian, does estimate all sorrow and punishment after this manner: Modicus
cruciatus est contemptibilis, Tertul. aduers. Gentes. cap. 45.
magnus non est diuturnus: If the punishment be but small, then a man of any
spirit will contemn it; and if it be great, this is the comfort, that it
cannot last long. But (says he) the Epicure deceiues himself, because the
laws of God do promise either an everlasting reward to the obseruers, or a
perpetual punishment to the breakers. And therefore the sentence runs not thus,
Ite in ignem, Go into fire, though that had bin a great and a grievous
punishment; but to make it the more grievous and the more terrible, they are
commended in ignem aeternum, into everlasting fire. Grievous were the
punishments that were inflicted upon Adam for his sin, (Genesis 3.) for first he
was cast out of Paradise, and then he was sent into a place of thorns and
thistles, there to eat his bread in the sweat of his brow all the days of his
life: but far more grievous will be the punishment of Adams wicked children at
the day of judgment; for first they shall be deprived of heaven, a place more
beautiful then Paradise, and then they shall be cast into a burning lake,
which is a far worse place then a place of thorns and thistles. And whereas
Adam found this comfort in his punishment, that there was a donec in terram in
it, that at last there would be an end, the end of his life was the period of
his punishment: yet the punishment of his wicked posterity shall admit no
limitation of time, but they shall go (says the Judge) into everlasting fire,
that is, they shall burn for ever and ever in that lake of fire. Indeed is
were some comfort if they were to suffer this punishment no more thousands of
years then there be sands on the sea shore, or grass piles upon the ground,
or no more millions of ages then there are creatures in heaven, in earth, and
in the sea; for then were there some hope that at last there would be an end.
But to be sent in ignem aeternum, into everlasting fire, that is, continually
to burn, and never to be burned up, and after infinite millions of ages to be
as far from an end as at the first entrance into this torment, this is so
severe and rigorous a doom, as neither the tongues of Angels or of men are
able to express it.

And as the rigor of the doom appears, first by the punishment of loss, in
that they are commanded out of Gods presence, Depart from me; and secondly by
the punishment of sense, in that they are sent, not only into fire, but into
everlasting fire. So to make it every way complete, that nothing more might be
added to it; unto the former words of this sentence, Depart from me into
everlasting fire, the Judge does adioyne these latter, which is prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Men that are in misery, they are commonly of this
mind and nature, that they would not have their friends and acquaintance come
into the like misery; and therefore the purple glutton ( Luke 16.27.) being in
hell, makes this request unto Abraham: Father Abraham, send Lazarus I pray
thee to my fathers house, that he may testify unto my five brethren, least
they also come into this place of torment. And as men are loath to have their
friends companions in their misery; so are they as loath to have those their
companions who will help to augment and increase their miseries: but the
wicked, that their sentence of condemnation might appear the greater, they
shall not only always burn, but their companions in this fire shall be the
Devil and his Angels. When the Jews sat in judgment upon our Savior
Christ, they resolved upon these three things against him: first, that he must
be taken from among them; secondly, that he must die the shameful and
ignominious death of the cross; and thirdly, to do him the greater disgrace,
as they thought to vex him the more; he must die in the company of two
thieves. And therefore hereafter, when Christ shall come in his glory to judge
the sins both of Jews and Gentiles, he will resolve upon three the like for
them, which they resolved for him. For first, as they could not abide his
presence, and therefore they cried tollite take him away: so he will not abide
their presence, but will say unto them, Discedite a me Depart from me. And
secondly, as they resolved upon no honorable death for him, but such a death as
was inflicted upon vile and ignominious persons: so the manner of dying which he
allotteth unto the^ is such, as belongs only unto people that are cursed. And
last of all, as they which did die with Christ were no better then thieves: so
their friends in torment are the fiends, and their companions in fire are the
devil and his angels. And therefore for the conclusion of this point, remember
only that short, but sweet caveat which S. Austin gives, writing upon the
80. Psalm, Si non times mitti quo, vide cu^ quo, If thou art not afraid to
burn for thy sins in hell, yet be afraid to burn with such hellish
companions as are the devil and his Angels. And thus have you seen the terror
of Christ his coming unto judgment, as by other other circumstances, so
especially by the rigor and severity of the Judgment sentence; which first
depriueth them of heaven, Depart from me: and the^ adiugeth them to hell, Go
into fire. Thirdly, there to burn not for a time but for ever, into
everlasting fire; and that with no better companions then the devil and his
Angels. I come now to the third point, and this is:

3. That the time of this terrible coming unto judgment is uncertain. For we
know not, says my text, either day or hour when it will be.

In the third verse of the chapter going before, the 24. of Matthew, the
disciples of our Savior being desirous to be resolved of a double doubt, first
at what time the temple of Jerusalem should be destroyed, and secondly, when his
last coming unto judgment should be; our Savior Christ for their better
instruction tells them that there shall be wars, and rumors of wars,
that nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, that
there shall be pestilence, and famine, and earthquakes in diverse places. All
which signs with many other in that chapter, though some have restrained to
the first question of the destruction of Jerusalem: yet according to the
judgment of the most interpreters, they contain a mixed answer unto both, and
are signs not only of the particular desolation of Jerusalem, but also of the
final dissolution of the whole world in the day of judgment. And grant this,
yet no other collectio^ can fitly be gathered hence, but that which Saint
Austin long since observed, Modum patefecit, tempus celare voluit: He
concealeth the time, and expresses only the manner of his coming. And
therefore for any man to think himself sufficiently instructed of the time of
Christ his coming by reason of those prognosticke signs which our Savior has
set down, it is a gross and a foolish impiety. Yea says Saint Austin, Epist.
7 8.
to take a computation of times, that thereby we may know when the end of the
world and Christ his coming shall be; Nihil videtur aliud, quam scire velle,
quod Christus ait scire neminem posse: It is nothing else, but to be desirous
to know that, which our Savior Christ has said no man can know. For of that
day and hour knows no man, says Christ, Mat. 24.36. no not the Angels of
heaven, but my Father only. Nay, in the 13. of Saint Mark, and 32. verse, he
excepteth against himself, to leave the high knowledge thereof to his Father; Of
that day and hour knows no man, no not the Angels which are in heaven,
neither the Son himself, (as he is man only) save the Father. And therefore
that the world might be the better resolved in this point, in the uncertainty
of his coming unto judgment; besides those many watchwords of his to the world:
It is not for you to know the times and seasons which the father has put in
his own power. Math. 24.42. Math. 25.13. Mark. 13.33.
You know not what hour your master will come. You know not the day nor the
hour when the Son of man will come. Ye know not when the time is, and the
like: He has in the Gospel compared his coming unto three things, which come
most suddenly and before we are aware: and these are; a snare, a thief, and
the flood of Noah. In the 21. of Luke, and 34. verse, he resembles the day of
his coming unto judgment to a snare: Take heed unto your selves least at any
time your hearts be overcome with surfeiting, and drunkenness, and the cares
of this life, and least that day come on you at unawares; for as a snare shall
it come on all the^ that dwell on the face of the whole earth. A snare you know
enta^gleth on the sudden, and the birds and wild beasts whilst f^arelesse of
danger they are intentive to their food, they suddenly fall into it. And so it
is with man, says Solomon, he considers not his end, Eccles. 9.12. But as
the fishes which are taken in a net, and as the birds which are caught in a
snare; so are the children of men snared in the evil, when it falls suddenly
upon them. Men may feast it merrily with Jobs children, Job. 1.19. Dan. 5.3
and be frolic with their companions amidst their cups, with Balthassar; and
as it is in the 21. of Job, they may call for the Tabret and the Harp, and
rejoice in the sound of Organs: but on the sudden even before they be aware,
August. Epist. 80.
they go down into the grave, says Job, that is, they fall into the snare of
death, and so consequently into the snare of judgment. For, Qualis in die isto
quisque moritur, talis in die illo iudicabitur: as the day of man's death leaves
him, so the day of Gods last judgment shall find him. And as Christ for the
sodainesse and uncertainty of his coming, compares it to a snare; so he
compares it likewise to the coming of a thief. Math. 24.43. If the good man
of the house did know at what hour the thief would come, he would surely
watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through. And therefore be ye also
ready: for in the hour ye think not, will the son of man come. The Apostle
Peter in his second Epistle 3.10. makes the same resemblance. The day of the
Lord will come even as a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall
pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth
with the works that are therein shall be burnt up. And Saint Paul (1 Thessalonians.
5.2.) handling the same argument, has the very same. The day of the Lord shall
come as a thief in the night, and when men shall say peace and safety, then
shall come upon them sudden destruction, as the travel upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape. And as the day of Christ his coming is
compared for the uncertainty thereof unto a snare and a thief: so for the
same cause it is compared by him to the flood of Noah. Math. 24.36. As the
days of Noah were, so likewise (says Christ) shall the coming of the Son of
man be: For as in the days before the flood, they did eat and drink, mary,
(...) give in marriage, unto the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew
nothing til the flood came and took them all away: so shall also the coming
of the son of man be. And therefore that answer which our Savior gave to the
Pharisees question, Luke 17. and 20. v^^. may well be the conclusion of this
point. The kingdom of God comes not with observation, that is (says the
Gloss) it comes not with the observation of the time: as if he had said;
happily some Astronomer or other is so cunning as to tell you when the clouds
will drop: but at what time the Son of man shall come to judgment in the
clouds, no Astronomer is so cunning as to tell you that; for of that day and
hour knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, nor the Son himself, but
the Father only. Well then (beloved) these three points being thus cleared;
First that their will be a coming of the Son of man to judgment. Secondly
that this his coming unto judgment will be fearful, and terrible. And
thirdly that the time of this his coming is uncertain, we know not when: what
remains now but the use which we are to make of all these? and that is a
vigilant and careful preparation of our selves against his coming, prescribed
in the first words: Vigilate igitur: Watch therefore.

In the first of Jeremy, the Prophet at the first saw nothing but a rod, but
after (says the text) he beheld seething pot. And so the wicked and ungodly
people, happily they may see and feel in this world nothing but rods, light and
slight punishments: but the time will come when Salomons rods shall be turned
into Rehoboams Scorpions, and the Prophet Ieremies rod will prove a seething
pot. For as flesh is p^^ into a seething pot: so the bodies and souls of men,
in regard of their sins committed in the flesh, shall be cast into the
seething and boiling lake of hell. At which time they shall have nothing to
comfort them, either above them or beneath them, on the right hand or on the
left, within them or without them. Above them shall be the angry Judge, for
their wickedness condemning them; beneath them shall be hell open, and the
furnace boiling to receive them: on their right hand shall be their sins
accusing them, on their left hand the devils ready to execute Gods eternal
sentence on them; within them shall be their conscience gnawing, without them
the damned souls wailing, and round about them the whole world burning. Good
Lord, good Lord, says a devout father, what will a wretched sinner do
environed with all these miseries? how will his heart sustain these anguishes?
what way will he take? to go back (says he) it is impossible, and to go
forward, it is intolerable. And surely all this being true, and drawn by
necessary consequent from the word of God, me thinks now there should need no
watchword at all, and our Savior Christ his vigilate igitur in this place may
seem superfluous. The heathen man did both say and believe, Tul. de not. deor.
lib. 1.
that whosoever remembers that God will reward the godly and punish the
ungodly, he cannot but be godly. And if this be not true in us that are
Christians, then, as Clymacus well observes, Plus timebimus canem, qua^
Creatore^: we shall show our selves to be more afraid of our dog, then we are of
our God. If a thief do assault our house in the night, and our dog which is
within do but bark, we need no further vigilate, we (...) warning: (...) (...)
will ^ise, and we will (...) Our Savior Christ then haui^ (...) many times,
that he will on^ (...) that his coming will be (as (...) and terrible, and
that the time (...) is most uncertain, we know (...) now any further vigilate,
any (...) prepare our selves against this coming (...) ^ued) a very clear
case, that the barking of (...) will prevail more with us for the saving of
(...) then the voice of our God for the saving of (...) When Joseph had
forewarned Pharaoh and the (...) of Egypt of that great famine which was (...)
upon the land, there was no further (...) be vigilant. And if they (...) so
care^ (...) momentary death of body; ough^ (...) to be vigilant how to prevent
the e^ (...) of soul and body? Well then, how (...) our selves that our true
vigilancie man (...) thus, says Saint Bernard: Audisti edictu^ (...) dictum:
Have thou heard of the fearful (...) which God has determined to power up
(...) beware then of sin which will be the (...) punishment. But is this all?
no, the watc^ (...) well set: for the same spirit which says (Psalm. (...) Fly
from evil; immediately adds, and do (...) 14. of Luke and 31. verse: What
King (says (...) going to make war against another King, s^t^ (...) down
first, and takes counsel, whether he be ab^ (...) ten thousands to meet him
which comes ag^nst him with twenty thousands? or else while he is yet a
great (...) (...) (...) ^olicie betw^ (...) (...) ^rre better policy betw^
(...) (...) sins grieve God more (...) can vex his neighbor king (...) ^ter
disproportion between (...) the strength of God, then (...) of ten thousands,
and an ar^ (...) ^hou^ands. First then let us seriously (...) counsel, whether
we may boldly say with (...) 3. verse 18. Behold now, if I prepare me unto
(...), I know that I shall be justified. And if we can^ (...) this persuasion
in regard of our for^ (...) contempt of Gods commaunde^ (...) must be our
second course, even (...) off, that is, while his grace by (...) the Gospel is
offered unto us: (...) and unfeigned repentance as an (...) him, desiring him
that he would (...) ^om his throne of justice, and be^ (...) his throne of
mercy. That so in that (...) full day of his coming, we may not (...)
everlasting horror of our souls that fear^, (...) Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire which is (...) devil and his angels; but to the endless (...)
our souls, that other comfortable sen^ (...) ^^e ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the (...) ^dome prepared for you from (...) the beginning of the world.

FINIS.

