THE CVRE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH.

Showing the course Christians may take to be delivered from these fears
about death, which are found in the hearts of the most.

A Treatise of singular use for all sorts.

By NICHOLAS BIFEILD, Preacher of Gods Word at Isleworth in Middelsex.

HEB. 2. 15.

He died, that he might deliver them, who through the fear of death, were all
their life time subject to bondage.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for Ralph Rounthwaite at the Flower de-Luce and
Crown in Paul's Churchyard. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND NOBLE LADY THE LADY ANNE HARRINGTON, Grace and
comfort from God the Father, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST be multiplied.
MADAME,
WHen I had seriously bethought my self in what doctrine especially to imply
my Ministry, in the place in which the Lord had by so strong and strange a
providence settled me: Amongst other things I was vehemently inclined to study
the Cure of the Fear of Death; both because it may be usually observed, that
the most men are in bondage by reason of these fears; as also because I am
assured, that ourliues will become more sweet; yea, and more holy too, when the
fear of death is removed: And the rather was I incited hereunto, because I
have observed some defect about this point, in the most that have written about
Death. I am not ignorant of the censure, which many may give of this project,
as accounting it an impossible thing to be effected; but my trust is, that
godly and discreet Christians will restrain censure, when they have thoroughly
viewed my reasons.

My vnsaigned desire to do service unto GODS Church in releeuing such
Christians herein, as are not furnished with better helps, has emboldned me to
offer this Treatise also to the public view: I have presumed in your Honors
absence to thrust forth this Treatise under the protection of your Honors
name: and withal I desire heartily to testify my thankfulness for the many
favors showed unto me and mine, while your Honor was pleased to be my Hearer.
I should also much rejoice, if my testimony (concerning the singular graces God
has bestowed upon you, and the many good works in which you have abounded in
the places of your abode) might add any thing, either unto your Honors
praises in the Churches of Christ, or unto the establishment of the comfort of
your own heart in God, and his Son Jesus Christ.

I have not made choice of your Honor in this Dedication for any special
fitness in this Treatise; for your Honors condition, in respect of your age,
or absence in a place so far remote. For my earnest trust is, that God will
add yet many years to your happy life on earth; and besides I have had
heretofore occasion to know how little you were afraid to die, when the Lord
did seem to summon you by sickness.

That God, which has ennobled your heart with heavenly gifts, and so made you
an instrument of so much good, and contentment, unto that most excellent
Princess, with whom you now live, and toward whom you have showed so much
faithful observance, and dearenes of affection, and carfulness of
attendance: Even the Father of mercy, and God of all consolations, increase in
you all spiritual blessings, and multiply the joy of your heart, and make you
still to grow in acceptance, and all well-doing: Humbly craving pardon for my
boldness herein: I commit your Honor to God, and to the word of his Grace,
which will build you up to eternal life: resting

Your Honors in all humble observance, N. BIFEILD.
Isleworth, July 14. 1618.
The chief Contents of this Book.
THE drift is to show, how we may be freed from the fear of death. Page 1.
2. First, it is proved by eight apparent Arguments, that it may be attained
to, Page 4. to the 12. Secondly, it is showed by fifteen considerations, how
shameful and uncomely a thing it is for a Christian to be afraid to die, Page
12. to 28. Thirdly, the way how this fear may be removed, is showed: where
may be noted: An exhortation to regard the directions. p. 29. 30. Two ways of
Cure: 1. The one by Meditation; 2. The other by practice, p. 31. The
contemplations either serve to make us to like death, or else to be less in
love with life. p. 32. Seventeen Privileges of a Christian in death. page 33.
to the 52. The Contemplations that show us the misery of life, are of two
sorts: for either they show us the miseries of the life of nature: or else the
miseries that do unavoidably accompany the very life of grace. p. 53, etc. The
miseries of the life of nature, from page 54. to page 67. The miseries of a
godly man's life are twofold: 1. which appears both in the things he wants;
2. and in the things he has, while he lives, p. 67. etc. Six things, which
every godly man wants, while he lives. p. 68. to 75. What should make a godly
man weary of life, in respect of God. p. 75. to 85. And what in respect of
evil Angels. p. 85, etc. And what in respect of the world. p. 88, etc. And
what in respect of himself. p. 113, etc. Eight aggrauations of Gods
corrections in this life, p. 78. Eight apparent miseries from the world. p. 89,
etc. Fifteen manifest defects and blemishes in the greatest seeming felicities
of the world. p. 98. to 113. Many aggrauations of our misery in respect of
corruption of nature in this life. p. 113, etc. The remainders of the first
punishment yet upon us. Page 121. The remouall of the objections men make about
death, from whence their fear rises, and these objections are answered. 1.
About the pain of dying, where are ten answers, page 125. etc. 2. About the
condition of the body in death. p. 133. 3. About the desire to live longer yet.
p. 139. 4. About the pretense of desire to live long to do good. p. 145. 5.
About casting away of ones self. p. 149. 6. About parting with friends. p.
153. etc. 7. About leaving the pleasures of life. p. 159, etc. 8. About leaving
the honors of life. p. 162. 9. About leaving their riches. p. 168. etc. 10.
About the kind of death. p. 171. The second way of curing the fear of death is
by practice, where seven directions are given. From page 173. to the end.

THE CVRE OF THE FEAR OF DEATH.
CHAP. I.
Showing the Scope and Parts of this Treatise.

THAT, which I intend in this Treatise, is to show, how a godly man might order
The drift of the whole Treatise.
himself against the fear of death; or, what course he should take to live
so, as not to be afraid to die. This is a maine point, and exceeding necessary:
Life is thoroughly sweet, when The profit of following these directions
death is not feared: a man's heart is then like Mount Zion, that cannot be
moved. He can fear no enemy, that does not fear death. As death is the last
enemy, so it works the longest and last fears; and to die happily, is to die
willingly. The maine work of Preparation is effected, when our hearts are
persuaded to be willing to die.

Now in the explication The parts of the Treatise.
of this point, I would distinctly handle three things.

First, I will prove, that to live without fear of 1
death, is a thing may be obtained; one may be delivered from it as certainly,
as a sick man may be cured of an ordinary disease.

Secondly, I will show, how uncomely a thing it 2
is for a Christian to be afraid of death: that so we may be stirred up the
more to seek the cure for this disease.

Thirdly, I will show by what means we may be 3
delivered from the fear of death, if we use them. Of the two first more
briefly: and of the last at large.

CHAP. II.
Proving that we may be cured of the fear of death.

FOR the first: that the fear of death may be removed; and that we may Eight
Arguments to prove we may be helped against the fear of death.
attain to that resolution to be willing to die, without lothnesse, is
apparent diverse ways.

First, it is evident: Christ died to deliver us, not only from the hurt of
death, and from the devil, as the executioner: but also from the fear of
death too. Now Christ may attain to the end of his death, unless we will deny
the virtue of Christ, and his death, and think that notwithstanding it cannot
be obtained, Heb. 2. 14, 15. And the more apparent is this, because in that
place he shows, that there is virtue in the death of Christ, to cure this
fear of death in any of the Elect, if they will use the means: For as our
sins will not be mortified, though there be power in the death of Christ to
kill them; unless we use the means to extract this virtue out of the death
of Christ: so is it true, that the fear of death may be in some of Gods Elect:
but it is not because Christ cannot deliver them; but because they are
sluggish, and will not take the course to be rid of those fears. The
Physician is able to cure them, and usually does cure the same disease; but
they will not take his Receipts.

2. The Apostle entreating of the desire of death, says, That God has wrought
us unto the selfsame thing, 2. Cor. 5. 5. We are again created of God, that
we might in our selves aspire unto immortality; and are set in such an estate,
as if we answered the end of his workmanship, we should never be well, till
we be possessed of the happiness in another world: which he shows in those
words of being absent from the body, and present with the Lord, ver. 8.

3. The Prophesies have run on this point. For it was long since foretold,
that Christians knowing the victory of Christ over death, should be so far
from fearing death, that they should tread upon him, and insult over him: O
Death, Where is thy sting? etc. Isay 25. 8. Hos. 13. 14. 2. Cor. 15. 54, 55.

4. It is a condition, that Christ puts in, when he first admits Disciples,
that they must deny their owneliues: and not only be content to take up their
cross in other things, but their lives must not be dear unto them, when he
calls for it, Luke 14. 26.

5. We are taught in the Lords Prayer, to pray That Gods Kingdom may come:
And by his Kingdom he means the Kingdom of Glory, as well as the Kingdom of
Grace: Now in that we are taught to pray for the Kingdom, it shows we
should desire it, and that by prayer we should be more and more heated in our
desires.

6. We are borne again to a lively hope of our inheritance: Now if we be
afraid of the time of our translation thither, how do we hope for it after a
lively manner? A desire of going to heaven is a part of that seed cast into our
hearts in our regeneration, 1. Pet. 1. 3, 4.

7. We have the example of diverse men in particular, who have desired to die,
and were out of fear in that respect: Genesis 49. 18. Jacob waited for Gods
salvation: and Paul resolves, that to die, and to be with Christ, is best of
all for him: Phil. 1. 21. Yea, in Romans 7. 23. he is vehement; O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Simeon prays God to
let him die, Luke 2. 29. And the Prophet in the name of the godly, said long
before Christ: O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Syon, Psalm. 14.
7. And we have the example of the Martyrs in all Ages, that accounted it a
singular glory to die: And in 2. Cor. 5. 2, 7. the godly are said to sigh for
it, that they might be absent from the body, and present with the Lord; and so
do the first fruits of the Holy Ghost, those eminent Christians mentioned,
Romans 8. 21.

Lastly: not only some particular godly men have attained to this; but the
whole Church is brought in, in the 22. Chapter of the Reu. praying for the coming
of Jesus Christ, and desiring too, that he would come quickly: And 2. Tim. 4.
8. The love of the appearing of Christ, is the Periphrasis of the child of God.

Thus of the first point.
CHAP. III.
Showing how uncomely it is to fear death.

FOR the second, how uncomely a thing it is in Christians to fear death, may
appear many ways.

1. By the fear of death we shame our Religion; while we profess it in our
words, we deny it in our works: Let Papists tremble at death, who are
Fifteeene Reasons why it is an uncomely thing to be afraid to die.
taught, that no man ordinarily can be sure he shall go to heaven when he dies.
But for us; that profess the knowledge of salvation, to be astonished at the
passage to it, shows (at least) a great weakness of faith, and does outwardly
give occasion of disgrace to our Religion.

2 By that, which went before, we may see how uncomely it is to be afraid of
death: For thereby we disable the death of Christ: we frustrate the end of
Gods workmanship: we stop the execution of the Prophesies: we renounce our
first agreement with Christ: we mock God in praying that his Kingdom may
come: we obscure the evidence of our own regeneration; and we transgress
against the example of the godly in all ages.

3 Many of the Pagans greatly settled their hearts against the fear of death by
this very reason: Because there was no being after death; and therefore they
could no more feel misery then, then before they were borne: And shall we
Christians, that hear every day of the glorious salvation we have by Christ,
be more fearful then they were? Let them fear death, that know not a better
life.

Shall we be like wicked men? Their death is compelled* Shall ours be so too?
They by their good wills, would not lose their bodies in this life, nor have
their bodies in the next life: But since God has made us unlike them in the
issues of death; Shall we make our selves like them in the lothnesse to die? Let
Foelix tremble at the doctrine of death and judgment: Act. 24. 25. But let all
the godly hold up their heads, because the day of their redemption draws
nigh, Math. 24, etc.

5. Shall we be afraid of a shadow? The separation of the soul from God,
that is death, if we speak exactly: but the separation of the soul from the
body, is but the shadow of death. When see we men trembling for fear of
spiritual death? which is called the First Death; and yet this is far more
woeful then that we call the bodily death. But as if the death of the body
were nothing, the Scripture calls Damnation, The second death, never putting the
other into the number.

6. This fear is called a bondage here in this text: And shall we voluntarily
make our selves Vassailes? Or shall we be like slaves, that dare not come in
our Masters sight?

7. If we love long life: Why are we not much more in love with eternal
life, where the duration is longer, and the estate happier? Are not we
extremely infatuated, that when God will do better for us, then we desire, yet
we will be afraid of him?

8. Shall we be worse then children, or madmen? neither of them fear death;
And shall simplicity, or Ideotisme, do more with them, then reason or Religion
can do with us?

9. Do not all that read the Story of the Israelites (in their passion
desiring to be again in Egypt, and violently murmuring at the promise of going
into the Land of Canaan) condemn them of vile ingratitude to God, and folly in
respect of themselves? For what was it for them to live in Egypt, but to serve
cruel Taskemasters about brick and clay? And was not Canaan the place of
their rest, and a Land that flowed with milk and honey? Even such is the
condition of all those, that wish Life, and are afraid to Die. What is this
world but Egypt, and what is it to Live in this world, but to serve about
brick and clay? Yea, the Church, that is separate from the world, can find it
no better then a Barren Wilderness. And what is Heaven, but a Spiritual
Canaan? And what can Death be more, then to pass over Jordan; and victoriously
ouerco^ming all enemies, to be possessed of a place of matchless rest; of
more pleasures then Milk or Honey, can shadow out?

10. Adam might have had more reason to fear Death, that never saw a man die
an ordinary Death; but for us to be afrighted with Death, that see thousands
die at our right hand, and ten thousand at our left, and that daily, is an
inexcusable distemper. The gate of Death is continually open, and we see a
prease of people, that daily throng into it.

11. When Moses had cast down his Rod, it turned into a Serpent; and the Text,
noting Moses weakness, says, He fled from it: But the Lord commanded him to
take it by the Tail; and behold, it became a Rod again: Even so Death at the
first sight is terrible, like a new-made Serpent, and the godly themselves,
through inconsideration, fly from it: But if at Gods commandment, without
fear, they would lay hold upon this seeming Serpent, it will be turned into a
Rod again; yea, into a golden Scepter in our hands, made much better by the
change: Neither do we read, that ever at any after, Moses had any fear of
this Serpent, when he had once known the experience of it: And have we
often, by the eyes of faith, seen the experience of this great work of God,
and shall we still be running away?

12. It is said, Romans 8. 20. that all creatures groan, waiting for the liberty
of the sons of God. And shall we be worse then brute beasts? Does the
whole frame of nature, as it were, call for this time of change; and shall man
be so stupide, or carried with such senseless fears, as to shun his own
felicity?

13. Consider whether it be more commodious for us, that Death come to us, or
that we go to Death: For one thing is certain; It is in vain to shun that,
which cannot be avoided. For it is appointed unto all men once to die, Heb. 9.
24. What man is he, that lives, and shall not see death? Psalm. 89. Death is
the way of all flesh, Josh. 24. Now this being granted, let us consider of it,
Death is like an armed man, with whom we must once fight. Now if we be advised
and will go to death, we may get on our armor beforehand, and so the encounter
will be without danger to us, because the weapons of our warfare are mighty
through God, and we are assured of victory through Jesus Christ. Now on the
other side, to tarry till Death come unto us, is as if a man that knows he
must fight with a sore Adversary, would through slothfulness, go up and down
unarmed, till he fall into the hands of his enemy: and must thou fight with
him at such disadvantage?

14. It is most uncomely to fear that, which is both common and certain:
death, of all afflictions is most common. For from other afflictions it is
possible some might be free: but from Death can no man be delivered, and GOD
of purpose has made that most common which is most grievous, that thereby he
might abate of the vigor, and terror of it. It is monstrous foolishness to
strive in vain to avoid that which never man could escape. And to teach men
their unavoidable mortality, the Lord clothed our first Parents with the
skins of dead beasts, and feeds us with dead flesh: that as often as we
eat of slain beasts, we might remember our own end: and shall we be ever
learning, and never come to the knowledge of this truth? Is this such a lesson
as cannot be learned? shall we be so stupide, as daily to pass by the graves
of the dead, and hear their knells, and yet be untaught and unarmed?

15. Lastly, shall we be afraid of such an enemy as has been overcome hand to
hand, and beaten by Christ, and thousands of the Saints? especially if we
consider the assurance we have of victory. In this combat every Christian may
triumph before the victory, 1. Cor. 15. 55.

And thus much of the two first points.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing that a Christian is many ways happy in death.

NOW I come to the third point, which is the maine thing to be attended; and
that is the means how we may be cured of the fear of Death: and in this we
had need all to attend with great carfulness. The disease is stubborn, and
An exhortation to attend upon the means of cure.
men are sluggish, and extremely loath to be at the trouble of the cure, and
Satan by all means would keep us from remembering our later end; and the
world affoordes daily distractions to pluck us away from the school of Christ
herein, and our own hearts are deceitful, and our natures apt to be weary of
the doctrine, before we put in practice any of the directions; and we are apt
to a thousand conceits, that it is either impossible, or unnecessary to attend
this doctrine, or the like. Yea, it may be, it will fare with many of us, as it
does with those that are troubled with the raging pain of the teeth, their
pain will cease, when the Barber comes to pull out the tooth: so it may be you
may find this deceit in your own hearts, that you will not feel the fear of
Death, till the discourse of the medicine be over, and so let it be as water
spilt on the ground. But let us all awake, and in the power and strength of
Christ, that died to deliver us from the fear of death, let us al lay the
plasters close to the sore, and keep them at it, till they be thoroughly whole.

There be two ways Two ways of curing the fear of death.
then of curing this fear of Death: 1. The one is by contemplation: 2. The
other is by practice. There be some things if we did choose them out soundly to
think of them, would heal us wonderfully.

There be some things also to be done by us, to make the cure perfect. If
contemplation be not auailable, then practice will without fail finish the
cure.

The co^templations are of two sorts: 1. For either The ways of curing this
fear by conte^plation.
they are such meditations, as breed desire of Death by way of motive: 2. Or
they are such, as remove the objections, which cause in man's mind the fear of
Death. For the first, there be two things, which if they be soundly thought
on, will work a strange alteration in our hearts. 1. The one is the happiness
we have by Death. 2. The other, is the miseries we are in by Life.

Can any man be afraid to be happy? If our heads and hearts were filled with
arguments, that show us our happiness by Death, we would not be so senseless
as to tremble at the thought of dying.

Our happiness in Death may be set out in many particulars, and illustrated by
many similitudes, full of life and virtue, to heal this disease of fear.

1. Death makes an end of all the tempests and continual The happiness of a
Christian in death showed 17. ways.
storms, with which our life is tossed. It is the Haven and Port of rest: and
are we so mad, as to desire the continuance of such dangerous tempests, rather
then to be in the haven whither our journey tends?

2. Death is a sleep. For so the dead are said to be asleep, 1. These. 4. 14.
Look what a bed of rest and sleep is to the weary labourer, such is Death to
the diligent Christian. In death they rest in their beds from the hard labors
of this life, Esaias 37. 2. Reu. 14. 13. And was ever the weary labourer afraid
of the time, when he must lie down, and take his rest?

3. The day of Death, is the day of receiving wages, wherein God paies to every
godly man his penny. And does not the hireling long for the time, wherein he
shall receive wages for his work? Job. 7. 2. And the rather should we long for
this time, because we shall receive wages infinitely above our work, such
wages as was never given by man, nor can be, if all this visible world were
given us.

4. In death the servant comes to his freedom, and the heir is at his full
age and it is such a liberty as i^ glorious: never such a freedom in the
world, Romans 8. 21. Shall the heir desire to be still under age, and so still
under Tutors and Governors? or shall the servant fear the day of his freedom?

5. In death, the banished return, and the Pilgrims enter into their Fathers
house. In this life we are exiled men, banished from Paradise, and Pilgrims
and Strangers in a far Country, absent from God and heaven. In death we are
received to Paradise, and settled at home in those everlasting habitations in
our Fathers house, Luke 17. John 14. 2. Heb. 13. 11. And can we be so
senceless as to be afraid of this?

6. Death is our birthday; we say falsely, when we call Death the last day. For
it is indeed the beginning of an everlasting day: and is there any greeuance in
that?

7. Death is the funeral of our vices, and the resurrection of our graces.
Death was the daughter of Sin, and in death shall that be fulfilled: The
daughter shall destroy the mother. We shall never more be infected with sin,
nor troubled with ill natures, nor be terrified for offending. Death shall The
dissolution of the body, is the absolution of the soul.
deliver us perfectly whole of all our diseases, that were impossible to be
cured in this life, and so shall there be at that day a glorious resurrection of
graces: Our gifts shall shine, as the Stars in the Firmament; And can we be
so sottish as still to be afraid of Death?

8. In death the soul is delivered out of prison: For the body in this life is
but a loathsome, and dark prison of restraint. I say, the soul is restrained,
as it were, in a prison, while it is in the body, because it cannot be free to
the exercise of it self, either in natural, or supernatural things: For the
body so rules by senses, and is so fiercely carried by appetites, that the
soul is compelled to give way to the satisfying of the body, and cannot freely
follow the light either of Nature or Religion: The truth, as the Apostle says,
is withheld, or shut up, through unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. I say, it is a
loathsome prison, because the soul is annoied with so many loathsome smells of
sin, and filthiness, which by the body are committed. And it is a dark
prison; For the soul looking through the body, can see but by little holes, or
small casements. The body shuts up the light of the soul, as a dark Cloud
does hide the light of the Sun; or as the interposition of the earth does
make it night: Now death does nothing, but as it were a strong wind dissolve
this Cloud, that the Sun may shine clearly, and pulls down the walls of the
prison, that the soul may come into the open light.

9. The liberty of the soul in death may be set out by another similitude. The
world is the Sea: our lives are like so many Galleys at Sea, tossed with
continual Tides, or Storms: our bodies are Gally-slaues, put to hard service
by the great Turk the devil, who tyrannically, and by usurpation, does
forcibly command hard things. Now the soul within, like the heart of some
ingenuous Gally-slaue, may be free, so as to loathe that servitude, and
inwardly detest that tyrant; but yet so long as it is tied to the body, it
cannot get away. Now death comes like an irresistable Giant, and carries the
Galleys to the shore, and dissolues them, and lets the prisoners free: And
shall this glorious liberty of the soul be a matter of terror unto us? Had
we rather be in captivity still?

10. In this life we are clothed with rotten, ragged, foul garments: Now the
Apostle shows, that death does nothing else but pull off those ragged
garments, and cloth us with the glorious robes of salvation; more rich then
the robes of the greatest Monarch, 2. Cor. Chap. 5. Verse. 2, 3. It is true,
that the godly have some kind of desire to be clothed upon: They would have
those new garments, without pulling off their old; But that is not decent: for
a Prince to wear (without) gorgeous attire, and (underneath) base rags. To
desire to go to heaven, and not to die, is to desire to put on our new clothes
without putting off our old: and is it any grieuance to shift us by laying
aside our old clothes, to put on such rich garments? We are just like such
slothful persons, that love well to have good clothes, and clean linen: but
they are so sluggish, they are loath to put off their old clothes, or foul
linen.

11. In the same place the Apostle co^pares our bodies to an old mudwalled
house, and to a rotten Tent: and our estate in heaven to a most glorious and
Princely Palace, made by the most curious Workman that ever was; and it is such
a building too, as will never be out of repair. Now for a godly man to die, is
but to remove from a rotten old house, ready to fall on his head, to a
sumptuous Palace, 2. Cor. 5. 1. Does that Landlord do his Tenant wrong, or
offer him hard measure, that will have him out of his base Cottage, and bestow
upon him his own Mansion house? No other thing does God to us, when by Death
he remoues us out of this earthly Tabernacle of our bodies, to settle us in
those everlasting habitations, even into that building made without hands, in
heaven, Ioh. 14. 2. Luke 17.

12. A man, that had never seen the experience of it, perhaps would have
thought, that the seed cast into the ground had been spoiled, because it would
rot there: but Nature having showed the return of that grain with advantage,
a man can easily be cured of that folly: The Husbandman is never so simple, as
to pity himself, or his seed; he says not, Alas, is it not pity to throw
away and mar this good seed? Why brethren; what are our bodies, but like the
best grain? The bodies of the Saints are Gods choicest corn. And what does
Death more unto Gods Grain, then cast it into the earth? Do we not believe,
our bodies shall rise like the grain, better then ever they were sowed? and
are we still afraid?

Paul says, he would be dissolved, that he might be with Christ, Phil. 1. 21.
In which words he imports two things in death. First, that there is a
dissolution of the soul from the body: and secondly, that there is a
conjunction of the soul with Christ. Now which is better for us, to have the
body, or to have Christ? The same Apostle says elsewhere, that they are
confident in this, they had rather be absent from the body, and so to be
present with the Lord: then to be present with the body, and absent from the
Lord: 2. Cor. 5. 7, 8.

Now the true reason why men fear death, is, because they look upon the
dissolution only, and not upon the conjunction with Christ.

14. In the 1. Cor. 9. 24. our life is compared to a race, and eternal life to
a rich prize not corruptible, but an incorruptible Crown: Now death is the end
of the race, and to die is but to come to the goal, or race end. Was ever
runner so foolish, as to be sorry, that with victory he was near the end of
the race? And are we afraid of death, that shall end the toil, and sweat, and
danger of the running; and give us with endless applause so glorious a
recompense of reward?

15. In the Ceremonial Law, there was a year they called the year of
Iubilee; and this was accounted an acceptable year, because every man that had
lost, or sold his Lands, upon the blowing of a Trumpet returned, and had
possession of all again; and so was recovered out of the extremities in which
he lived before. In this life we are like the poor men of Israel, that have
lost our inheritance, and live in a manner and condition every way straightned:
now Death is our Iubilee, and when the Trumpet of death blows, we all, that
die, return, and enjoy a better estate, then ever we sold, or lost: Shall the
Iubilee be called an acceptable time? And shall not our Iubilee be acceptable
to us? Esaias 61. 2.

16. Death is the day of our Coronation; we are heirs apparent to the Crown
in this life: yea, we are Kings Elect, but cannot be crowned, till death, 2.
Tim. 4. 8. And shall not that make us love the appearing of Christ? Is a King
afraid of the day of his Coronation?

To conclude this first part of Contemplation: If we did seriously set before
our eyes the glory to come; could our eyes be so dazeled, as not to see, and
admire, and haste to it? Ask Paul, that was in heaven, what he saw; and he
will tell you, Things that cannot he uttered: Happiness beyond all language
of mortal man. If there were as much faith on earth, as there is glory in
heaven: oh! how would our hearts be on fire with fervent desires after it! But
even this faith is extremely wanting: It is our unbelief that undoes us, and
filles us with these servile and sottish fears.

And thus of the meditations, taken from the happiness we enjoy by death:
which should make us conclude with Solomon, Eccles. 7 1
That the day of Death is better, then the day when one is borne.

CHAP. V.
Showing the miseries of life in wicked men.

NOW it follows, that I should break open the miseries of life; the
consideration whereof should abate in us this wretched love of life.

The miseries of life The miseries of life two ways considered.
may be two ways considered; for they are of two sorts: First, either such
miseries, as load the life of Nature: secondly, or such miseries, as do molest
the very life of Grace.

The miseries, that accompany The miseries of a natural life showed three
ways.
the natural life of man, while he remains in the state of Nature only, who
can recount? I will give but a brief touch of some heads of them.

First, think of thy sins: and so three dreadful Three dreadful
considerations about sin.
things may amaze thy thoughts: For first, thou art guilty of Adams sin; For
by that man sin came in upon all men, even the guilt of his sin: Romans 5.
12. Secondly, thy nature is altogether vile, and abominable from thy birth,
thou wast conceived in sin, Psalm. 51. 4. And this stain and leprosy hangs
on fast upon thy nature, and cannot be cured, but by the blood of Christ
only, Heb. 12. 1. And this is seated in all the faculties of thy soul: For in
thy mind there is ignorance, and impotency to receive knowledge; and a natural
approving of evil and error, rather then the truth and sound doctrine. Those
ways seem good in thine eyes, which tend unto death: 1. Cor. 2. 14. Romans 8.
7. 2. Cor. 3. 5. Prou. 14. 12. And this thou may perceive by this, that thou
art not able to think a good thought, but can go free for days and weeks,
without any holy cogitation; and besides, thy mind is infinitely prone to
swarms of evil thoughts: Genesis 6. 5.

Again, if thou behold thy conscience, it is impure, polluted, without light,
or life, or glory in thee, shut up in a dungeon, excusing thee in many faults,
and accusing thee for things are not faults, but in thy conceit: and when it
does accuse thee for sin, it rages and falls mad with unbridled fury and
terrors, keeping no bounds of hope or mercy.

Further, if thou observe thy affections, they are altogether impotent in that
which is good, there is no lust in thee after that which is good, and yet they
are all out of order, and prone to continual rebellion against God, ready to
be fiered by all the inticements of the world, or the Devil: Phil. 2. 13.
Gala. 5. 24. Thirdly, unto these, add thy innumerable actual sins, which are
more then the hairs of thy head, multiplied daily in thought, affection, word,
and deed, the least of them deserving hell fire for ever, thy sins of Infancy,
youth, old age, sins of omission and commission: sins in prosperity and
adversity; sins at home and abroad; sins of infirmity and presumption. If
David looking upon his sins, could say, They have so compassed me, and taken
such hold of me, that I am not able to look up? Oh then, if thou had
sight, and sense! how might thou much more cry out of the intolerable
burden of them; and the rather, if thou observe, that many of thy corruptions
reign tyrannically, and have subdued thy life to their vassalage, so as thou
art in continual slavery to them.

Thus is thy life infested with these unspeakable inordinations: and thus of
the first part of thy infelicity in life.

Secondly, if thou observe, but how God has avenged himself upon them, and
what yet remains unto thee, how can thy heart sustain it self? For,

1. Thou art a banished man, exiled from Paradise, and made to live without
hope to return thither: The best part of the earth thou shall never enjoy.

2. The earth is cursed to thee, and it may be a woeful spectacle to see all
the creatures subject to vanity, and smitten with the strokes of God for thy
sin, and groaning daily round about thee.

3. Look upon thy most miserable soul; for there thy mind and conscience live
shut up with darkness and horror. The Devils have within thee strong holds, and
live entrenched in thy thoughts, Ephesians. 4. 17. 2. Cor. 10. 5. Thy heart is
spiritually dead, and like a stone within thee, Ephesians. 2. 1. Ezech. 36. 27.

4. Thy body is wretched through deformities, and infirmities, diversely noisome
to thee with pains that grieve thee, either in respect of labor, or diseases,
unto which thou art so prone; and there is no part or joint of thee, but is
liable to many kinds of diseases, Deuteronomy. 28. 21, 22. Genesis 3. 19. And of the
labors of thy life, which is but the least part of thy bodily miseries,
Solomon says, All things are full of labor, who can utter it? And for that
reason, life is but a vanity and vexation, Eccl. 1. 18.

5. If thou look upon thy outward estate in the world, with what fearful
frights may thy heart be griped? If thou consider

1. The common, or general, or public plagues with which God fights against
the world, as wars, famines, earthquakes, pestilence, and yearly diseases,
inundations of waters, and infinite such like.

2. The particular crosses, with which he vexes thee in particular, either
with losses of thy estate, or the troubles of thy family, Deuteronomy. 28. 15, 16, etc.

3. The praeterition of God, restraining many good things from thee, so as thou
want many of those blessings of all sorts, which yet God does bestow upon
others, Esa. 59. 1, 2. Iere. 5. 25.

4. The cursing of thy blessings, when God blasts the gifts of thy mind, that
thou can not use them for any contentment of thy life, or makes thy
prosperity to be the occasion of thy ruin, Mala. 2. 3. Eccles. 5. 13. This is
a sore evil.

Lastly, consider yet further what may fall upon thee, in respect of which thou
art in daily danger. There are seas of wrath, which hang over thy head, John
3. 36. and God may plague thee with the terrors of conscience, like Cain, Gene.
4. 14. Or with a reprobate sense, or the spirit of slumber, Ioh. 12. 4. Romans
11. 8. strong illusions, 2 These. 2. 11. or such other like dreadful spiritual
judgments: Besides many other fearful judgments, which thy heart is not
able to conceive of, as painful diseases in the body, or an utter ruin in
thy estate, or good name: but above al other things, the remembrance of the
fearful judgment of Christ, and the everlasting pains of Hell, with a
miserable death, should co^pel thee to cry out, O men, and brethren! what shall
I do to be saved, and get out of this estate?

But because it is my purpose here chiefly to persuade with godly me^, and
not with natural men, and because death it self is no ease unto such men,
that live in their sins without repentance, who have reason to loath life, and
yet no cause to love death, I pass from them, and come to the life of godly
men, and say, they have great reason to loath life, and desire the day of death.

CHAP. VI.
Showing the miseries of godly men in life.

NOW the miseries of the godly man's life are of two sorts: first, for either he
may consider what he wants: secondly, or what he has in life, for which he
should be weary of it.

I will give but a touch of the first. Consider of it: in this life there are
six things, among the rest, we want, and can never attain, while we live here.

The first, is the glorious presence of God, while Six things every godly man
wants, while he lives here in this world.
the body is present, the Lord is absent, 2. Cor. 5. 8. And is not this enough
to make us loath life? Shall we more esteem this wretched Carcass, then our
glorious God: whose only presence in glory shall fill us with eternal
delight? O the Vision of God! If we had but once seen God face to face, we
would abhor that absence that should hinder the fruition of such unspeakable
beauties, as would enamour the most secure heart to an unquenchable love.

The second thing we want in life, is the sweet fellowship with our best
friends: A fellowship matchless; if we either consider the perfection of the
creatures, whose communion we shall enjoy; or the perfect manner of enjoying
it: Who would be withheld from the Congregation of the firstborn, from the
society with innumerable Angels, and the Spirits of just men? Alas! the most of
us have not so much, as one entire and perfect friend in all the world, and yet
we make such friends, as we have, the ground of a great part of the contentment
of our lives: Who could live here, if he were not beloved? Oh! what can an
earthly friendship be unto that in heaven: when so many thousand Angels, and
Saints shall be glad of us, and entertain us with unwearied delight? If we had
but the eyes of faith to consider of this, we would think every hour a year,
till we were with them?

Thirdly, in this world we want the perfection of our own Natures: we are but
maimed and deformed creatures here; we shall never have the sound
understanding of men in us, till we be in heaven: our holiness of nature and
gifts will never be consummate, till we be dead.

Fourthly, in this world we want liberty: Our glorious liberty will not be had
here: A thing, which the Spirits of the best men have, with much sighing,
longed after: Romans 8. 21. 22. O who would live in a prison, a dungeon, rather
then a Palace of royal freedom? It has been implyedly showed before, that
we are many ways in bondage here.

Fifthly, we shall ever want here fullness of contentment. If a man live many
years, so that the days of his years be many, if his soul be not filled
with good, Solomon says, an untimely birth is better then he. And it is
certain, if a man live a thousand years twice told, he shall never see sollid
good to fill his heart, his appetite will never be filled, Eccles. 6. 3, 6, 7.
There is nothing in this life can give a man sollid, and durable contentment:
but a man finds by experience, vanity, and vexation of spirit, in what he
admires orloues most: and shall we be so sottish as to forget those rivers of
pleasures that are at Gods right hand? Psalm. 6. vlt.

6. The sixth thing we want in this world, is our crown, and the immortal
and incorruptible inheritance, bought for us with the blood of Christ: and
shall not our hearts burn within us in longing after possession? Can we desire
still to live in wants, and to be under age? What shall move us, if such an
incomparable crown cannot move us? We that sweat with so much sore labor for
the possession of some small portion of the earth: shall we, I say, be so
sluggish, as not to desire, that this kingdom, which our Father has given us,
might come quickly upon us? or are we so transported with spiritual madness,
as to be afraid to pass through the gate of death, to attain such a life? What
Prince would live uncrowned, if he could help it, and might possess it
without wrong or danger? and what great heir would be grieved at the tidings,
that all his Lands were fallen unto him?

CHAP. VII.
The miseries of a Christian in respect of God in this life.

THus, of what he wants in this life. Secondly, he ought to be as much
troubled to think what he has, and cannot avoid while he lives: and thus his
life is distressed, and made unlovely, either if he respect God, or the evil
Angels, or the world, or himself.

For first, if he respect God, there are two things Life bitter in respect of
God diverse ways.
should mar the taste of life, and make it out of liking. The first is the
danger of displeasing of God: who would live to offend God? or grieve his
Spirit? or any way to make him angry? Though this reason will move little in
the hearts of wicked men; Yet it is of singular force in the heart of an humble
Christian, who as he accounts Gods loving kindness better then life: so finds
nothing more bitter, then that he should displease God: that God (I say) who is
so great in Majesty, and has showed himself so abundant in mercy to him. It
would lie as a heavy load upon our hearts, to think of the displeasing of our
best friend; specially if he were a great person, or a Prince. How much more
should we desire to be rid of that condition, wherein we may displease our good
God; and to be there, where we are sure never to anger him more? The second
thing, that should make us look with less affection upon life, is, that God
does continually cross us in the things of this life: The Lord does of purpose
watch us, that when he sees us settle any contentment in life, he drops in
some thing, that makes all extremely bitter: And those corrections of God
should be the more noted, if we consider but diverse aggrauations about them,
as Eight aggrauations of the miseries of life, in respect of the corrections of
God.


1. That God will correct every son, whom he loves, none can escape, Heb.
12. 4.

2. That a man is usually most opposed and crossed in that he loves best.

3. That a man shall ever want, what he wishes, even in such things, as other
men do not want. There is a secret vexation cleaues unto man's estate, that
their hearts run upon such things which cannot be had, but in the Callings of
other men: The Countriman prayseth the Citizens life; and the Citizen is full
of the praises of the Country: And so is there in all men a liking of the
Callings of other men, with a dislike of their own, Eccles. 6.

4. That there is no discharge in that war, but that a man must every day
look for crosses. Every day has his grief, Eccles. 8. 8. Luke 9. 24. Math.
6. vlt.

5. That God will not let us know the times of our corrections, but executes
them according to the unchangeable purpose of his own counsel: so as they
come upon us, as a snare upon a Bird. For this reason Solomon says: That the
misery of man is great upon him, because there is a time for every purpose,
which cannot be avoided, nor can man know beforehand that, which shall be; for
who can tell him, when it shall be? Eccl. 8. 6, 7, 8. and 9. 12.

6. That no man knows either love, or hatred, by all that is before him: A
godly man can have no such blessings outwardly, but a wicked man may have them
in as great abundance, as he: nor does there any misery fall upon the wicked
in outward crosses, but the like may befall the godly. All things come alike to
all: there is one event to the righteous and to the wicked: to the clean, and
unclean, to him that swears, and to him that fears an oath, as is the
good, so is the sinner. This, says Solomon, is an evil among all things, that
are done under the Sun, that there is one event unto all, Eccle. 9. 1, 2, 3.

7. This bitterness is increased, because GOD will not dispose of things
according to the means, or likelihoods of man's estate. The race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches
to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance
happens to them all, Eccles. 9. 11.

8. That besides the present miseries, there are many miseries to come, so as
it is an argument to prove the happiness of the dead, that they are taken away
from the miseries to come, Esaias 57. 1, 2. which should likewise move us to
love life the less, because we know not, what fearful alterations may come,
either in our outward estate, or in matters of Religion. What case were we in,
if war should come upon us, with all the desolations and terrors that accompany
it? What if the Pestilence should come again, or we be left in the hands of
the violent? or God fight against our estates by fire, or inundations, or the
like? Who can tell what fearful alterations may be in Religion? And is it not
best to be in heaven, and then are we safe? Besides, the miseries may fall upon
our own bodies, or our children, or friends, etc. And these things should abate
the love of life, as we respect God.

CHAP. VIII.
The misery of life in respect of evil Angels.

NOW secondly, let us turn our eyes to the evil Angels, and then these things
may affright us.

First, that they are every The world full of devils.
where up and down the world, in the Earth, Air, Seas; no place free. Those
fiery Serpents are every where in the wilderness of the world. We lead our
lives here in the midst of innumerable dragons, yea they are in the most
heavenly places in this life: The Church is not free from them. A man can stand
no where before the Lord, but one Devil or other is at his right hand, Ephe.
2. 2. and 6. 13. Zach. 3. 1. Job 1.

And sure, it should make us like the place the worse where such foul spirits
are: the earth is a kind of Hell in that very respect.

2. Secondly, it should Our conflict with devils.
more trouble us, that we must of necessity enter into the conflict with these
Devils, and their temptations, and to be buffeted and gored by them.

A man that knew he must go into the field to answer a challenge, will be at
no great rest in himself. But alas! it is more easy a thousand fold to
wrestle with flesh and blood, then with these Principalities and Powers, and
Spiritual wickednesses, and great Rulers of the world, Ephe. 6. 13.

3. Besides, it adds unto the distress of life, to consider of the subtilty,
and cruelty of these Devils, who are therefore like the crooked Serpent, and
Leutathan, and Dragons, and roaring Lions, seeking whom they may devour. Though
these things will little move the hearts of wicked men, yet unto the godly mind,
the temptations of life are a grievous burden. Thus much of evil Angels.

CHAP. IX.
The misery of life in respect of the world.

3. THirdly, consider but what the World is, in which thou live; and that
either in the apparent miseries of this world, or in the vexations, that
accompany the best things the world has to offer or give thee. First, for the
apparent miseries;

1. It is exquisitely like a wilderness, no man but 9. Apparent miseries of life
in this world.
for innumerable wants, lives as in a Desert here.

2. It is a true Egypt to the godly, it continually imposes hard tasks, and
servile conditions. Life can never be free from grievous burdens, and
inexorable molestations.

3. This world is verily like Sodom, full of general and unspeakable
filthiness: all the world lies in wickedness, scarce one Lot to be found in
a whole City, or Parish. If God would seek but five righteous men, that are
truly or absolutely godly, they are not to be found in the most assemblies in
the world, nay in the Church too.

4. Yet more; this world is a very Pesthouse, spiritually considered. Every man
that a godly man comes near, has a mischievous plague sore running upon him;
yea the godly themselves are not without the disease: so as there is a
necessity as it were, to infect, or be infected still in all places, or
companies. Oh! who would love to live in a Pesthouse, that may dwell in a place
for ever free from all infection?

5. Yet more, this world, why, it is a very Golgotha, a place of dead men, we
live amongst the graves: Almost all we see, or have to deal with, are but men
truly dead. Alas! what should we reckon of the life of men's carkases, when In
this world the dead bury the dead.
their souls are dead? and both soul and body sentenced to eternal death?
Almost all that we meet with, are malefactors, under sentence, ready to be
carried to execution, the wrath of God hanging over their heads, and
unquenchable fire kindled against them; and shall we be so besotted, as to love
the dead more the^ the living? or the society of vile and miserable
malefactors in a prison, rather then the fellowship of the glorious Princes of
God, in their Palace of endless and matchless bliss?

6. Sixthly, why should we love the world that hates us, and casts us off, as
men dead out of mind? Are we not crucified to the world? Gala. 6. 14. and do
not wicked men hate us, and envy us, and speak all manner of evil sayings of
us, because we follow good? The World loves her own, but us it cannot love,
because we are not of this world. Can darkness love light? or the sons of
Belial oar for the sons of God? In this world we shall have trouble; and if
we found not peace in Christ, we were of al men most miserable, Ioh. 15. 19.
Ecclos. 4. 4. Ioh. 17. 14. 2. Cor. 6. 17. Ioh. 16. 33. And if they hate us for
well-dooing, how will they triumph if our foot do but slip? We should
desire death, even to be delivered from the fear of giving occasion to the
World to triumph, or blaspheme in respect of us. Yea, so extreme is the hatred
of the World, that a just man may perish in his righteousness, when a wicked
man prolongs his days in his wickedness, Eccl. 17. 16. and 8. 14.

7. Do we fall into any special misery in this world? Why, behold the tears
of the oppressed, and there is none to comfort them. We are either not pitied,
or not regarded: or the compassion of the world is like the morning deaw, it is
gone as a tale that is told, our misery will last, but there will soon be none
to comfort us. Miserable comforters are the most that can be had in this
world; and for this reason Solomon praised the dead, that are already dead,
above the living, that are yet alive, Eccles. 4. 1, 2.

8. There is usually no Christian, but in this world he has some special
misery upon him, either poverty, or debt, or disease in his body, or the
like, etc.

9. We daily suffer the loss of our friends, that were the companions of our
life, and the causes of contentment to us. Now who would tarry behind them, or
esteem of this world, when they are gone from us?

And thus much of the apparent miseries of this world.

CHAP. X.
The vanities of the seeming felicities of the world.

NOW it follows, that I should entreat of the vanities, that cleave to the
seeming felicities of the world: and prove, that there is no reason to be in
love with life for any respect of them.

The best things the world can make show of, What the seeming felicities of the
world are.
are Honors, Credit, Lands, Houses, Riches, Pleasures, Birth, Beauty, Friends,
Wit, Children, Acquaintance, and the like. Now there be many things, which
apparently prove, there can be no sound contentment, or felicity in these: For,

1. All things be full of labor, who can utter it? Fifteen Arguments to prove
the vanity of the best worldly things.
Ecclesiastic. 18. Men must gain the blessings of the earth with the swear of
their brows; there is seldom any outward blessing, but it is attained with
much difficulty, pains, or danger, or care, or grieuance some way.

2. How small a portion in these things can the most men attain? If the whole
world were posses sed, it would not make a man happy; much less those small
parcels of the world, which the most men can attain: Eccl. 1. 3.

3. It is manifest, men cannot agree about the chief good in these things.
Life is therefore apparently vain in respect of these things, because there
are almost infinite proiects, and variety of opinions: And in all these
successions of ages, no experience can make men agree to resolve: Which of
these things have felicity in them? Who knows what is good for a man in this
life, all the days of his vain life, which he spends as a shadow, Eccle. 6.
12.

4. In all these things here is nothing new, but it has been the same, or the
like to it. Now things that are common, are out of request, Eccl. 1. 9. 10. and
3. 15.

5. The world passes away, and the lusts thereof: the eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear with hearing. If a man live many days, his soul is
not filled with good; the desire after these things will vanish; men cannot
love them still: Our life is spent in wishing for the future, and bewailing of
the past; a loathing of what we have tasted; and a longing for that we have
not tasted: which, were it had* would never more satisfy us, then that which
we have had. Hence it is, that men weary themselves in seeking variety of
earthly things, and yet cannot be contented. The vexation, that cleaues unto
them still, breeds lothing; We are like men, that are Sea* sick, that shift
from room to room, and from place to place, thinking to find ease; never
considering, that so long as the same Seas swell, and Winds blow, and Humors
are stirred, alteration of place will not profit: So it is with us; so long as
we carry with us a nature so full of ill Humors, and that the pleasures of the
world have so much vanity in them, no change of place, or delights can satisfy
us: Seeing there are many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
Eccl. 6. 13.

6. How can these earthly things satisfy, when the nature of the^ is so vile
and vain? They are but blasts; a very shadow, which is some thing in
appearance, but offer to lay hold upon it, thou graspest nothing. Man walks
in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. He that loves silver,
shall not be satisfied with silver, Eccl. (...). 9. Psalm. 39.

7. Besides: There is a The amity of the world, is the enmity with God.
snare in all these earthly things, they are like pitch to defile a man; there
is ever one temptation or other lodged under them: and the fruition of them,
and desire after the, breeds many no isome lusts in the soul, 1. Tim. 6. 9.

8. These outward things are also all uncertain, and transitory: Riches have
wings, and will suddenly All subject to vanity or violence, Mat. 6. 19, 20.
They may be lost at the very seat of judgment, Eccl. 3. 16, 18. and 4. 1, 2
fly away; and Fame is but a blast: and the glory of man is but as the flower
of the field, which is to day, and to morrow withers: The fashion of this
world passes away: And at the last day, they shall all be burnt and consumed in
the fire: I mean these senseless things, we now set our hearts upon, Esaias 40.
6. 1. Cor. 7. 31.

9. There is no support in these things; in the evil day they cannot help us,
when the hour of temptation comes upon us.

10. A man may damn his own soul by too much liking of these things, the
abuse of them may witness against men in the day of Christ: Iam. 5. 1. and
Philip. 3. 18.

11. In these things there is one condition to all; as it falls to the wise
man, so does it to the fool, Eccl. 2. 14.

12. All things are subject to Gods unavoidable disposing: Let man get what he
can, yet God will have the disposing of it; and whatsoever God shall do, it
shall abide: To it can no man add, and from it can no man diminish, Eccl. 3. 1.

13. A man may have all abundance of these things, and yet not have a heart to
use them: Evil is so set in the hearts of the sons of men, and such madness
cleaues unto them here, that they cannot take the contentment of the things
they have; and so they be worse then an untimely fruit, Eccl. 6. 1, 7. and 9.
3.

14. Every day has his evil; and afflictions are so mingled with these
outward things, that their taste is daily marred with bitterness, which is
cast into them; no day without his grief: and usually the crosses of life are
more, then the pleasures of living; so as they that rejoice, ought to be as
though they rejoiced not.

15. Lastly, If all these considerations may not suffice, then remember, that
thou art mortal; thy life is short, it passes as a dream, it is but as a
span long thy days are few and evil; all these things are ged with a
necessity of dying: Life was given thee with a condition of dying, Genesis 47. 9.
Job. 14. 1. thy life passes like the wind: Job 7. 7. Yea, our days consume
like smoke, Psalm. 102. 3. All flesh is grass, Esaias 40. 6. And hence arise
Our mortality aggrauated by 4. considerations.
many considerations deduced from this head of our mortality: For

1. All these things are but the necessaries of thy Inn: Thou art a stranger,
and a pilgrim, and can enjoy them, but as a passenger, thou can carry
nothing out of this world, but in all points, as thou came into the world, so
must thou go hence, Eccl. 5. 13, 14, 15.

2. The time, place, and manner of thy death is uncertain, there is no time
nor place, but man may die in it; the Court, the Church, the Camp: yea the
very womb is not excepted. There is but one way to come into the world, but
there are a thousand ways to go out; and therefore the possession of all
things is wonderful uncertain.

3. When thou die, all will be forgotten, there is no more remembrance of
former things, nor shall there be any remembrance of things which are to come,
with those that shall come after, Eccl. 1. 11. That which was, in the days to
come, shall be forgotten, 1. Chr. 2. 16. Yea, a man shall be forgotten in the
City where he has done right, Eccles. 8. 10. For this very reason, Solomon
hated life, Eccles. 2. 17.

4. When thou die, thou shall die either without issue, or leave children
behind thee. If thou dye without issue, how have thou been infatuated in
seeking these outvvard things with so much care and toil, and could never
say to thine own soul, For whom do I travel, and defraud my self of
pleasure? Thou gatherest these things, and know not who shall enjoy them,
Eccles. 4. 8. If thou die and leave issue, thou may be frighted and amazed
with one of these things. For either thou may be despised while thou live,
of those for whom thou endurest sore travail, so as they that shall come after
thee, do not rejoice in thee, Eccles. 4. 15, 16. Or else thou may leave the
fruit of thy labors to a fool, or a wicked wretch. For who knows, whether
he that shall rule over thy labors, shall be a wise man, or a fool? This very
consideration made Solomon hate all his labor, which he had taken under the
Sun; and he went about to make his heart despair of all his labors, that
he should use all his wisdom and knowledge for attaining of great things,
and yet might be in danger to leave all for a portion to him, that has not
labored in wisdom: and all this is vexation of spirit, Eccles. a. 18. to 24.

Or else, thou may beget children, and thy riches perish before thy death,
and then there is nothing in thine hand to leave them, Eccles. 5. 14.

CHAP. XI.
The miseries of life in respect of our selves.

THus have we cause to be weary of life in respect of GOD, the evil Angels,
and the World. Now, if there were none of these to molest us, yet man has
enough in himself to mar the liking of this present life. For

1 The remainders of corruption of nature still The causes in our selves why
we should not be in love with life.
lie like a poison, a leprosy, a pestilence in thee, thou art under cure
indeed, but thou art not sound from thy sore: thou art Lazarus still. This very
consideration made Paul weary of his life, when he cried out, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death! Romans 7. And if in this
respect we be not of Paul's mind, it is because we want of Paul's goodness and
grace. And this corruption of nature is the more grievous, if we consider
either the generality of the spreading the infection, or the incurablenes of
it, or the ill effects of it.

1. For the first, this is a Leprosy that spreads all over. There is no sound
part in us, our minds, our memories, our wills, and affections; yea, our very
consciences are still impure within us, there is no good nature in us in any
one faculty of our souls, but there is a miserable mixture of vile infection.

2. Secondly, this is the worse, because this is incurable. There lies upon us
a very necessity of sinning, we cannot but offend. Of the flesh it was well
said, I can neither live with thee, nor without thee. The flesh is an
inseparable ill companion of our lives, we can go no whether to avoid it, etc.

Thirdly, if we consider but some of the effects of this corruption in us, as

1. The civil war it 4. Effects of corruption of nature in us.
causes in our souls, there is no business can be dispatched, that concerns
our happiness, without a mutiny in our own hearts. The flesh is a domestical
Rebel, that daily lusts against the Spirit, as the Spirit has reason to lust
against the flesh, Gal. 5. 17.

2. Secondly, the insufficiency it breeds in us for our callings. The greatest
Apostle must in this respect cryout, Who is sufficient for these things? Though
Gods work be all fair work, yet we see, that every man is extremely
burdened with the defects, and mistakings, and insufficiencies, which befall
him in his course of life.

3. It works a perpetual madness in the heart of a man, in some respects
worse then that of some lunatickes: For they are mad at some times of the
year, only, or chiefly; but man is seldom, or never free from this inward
madness of heart. Solomon says, The heart of the sons of men is full of
evil, and madness is in their hearts while they live, and after that, they go
to the dead. Now this madness appears in this, that men can never bring their
hearts to a settled contentment in the things they enjoy, but Death comes upon
them, before they know how to improve the joy of their hearts in the blessings
they enjoy, whether Temporal or Spiritual. This vile corruption of nature
diffuseth gall into althat a man possesses; so as it marreth the taste of
every thing.

4. It fills our hearts and lives with innumerable evils; it ingenders, and
breeds infinitely, swarms of evil thoughts, and desires, and abundance of
sins in men's lives and conuersations, so as godly David cries out;
Innumerable evils hauc compassed me about, and I am not able to look up. They
were more then the hairs of his head, therefore his heart failed him, Ps. 40.
12.

5. It is continually mad to betray us to Satan and the world, in all the
occasions of our life.

6. It will play the Tyrant, if it get any head, and lead us (...), and give
wretched Laws to the members: yea, every sin, which is the brat bred of this
corruption, is like a fury to fright and amaze us: there is a very race of
deu^s br^^ in us, when Satan and the Flesh engender together in us.

2. And as we are thus miserable in respect of the remainders of corruption, so
are we in respect of the remainders of the punishment of sin upon our
spirits: Our hearts were never fully free, since the first transgression, our
minds are yet full of darkness; that even godly men do seriously cry out, They
are but as beasts; they have not the understanding of men in them: And in many
passages of life they carry themselves like beasts, Prou. 3. 3. Ps. 139. Eccl.
3. 18. The joys of Gods presence are for the greatest part kept from us: our
consciences are still but in a kind of prison: when they go to the seat of
judgment to give sentence in any cause, they come forth with fetters upon
their legs, as prisoners themselves; besides the many personal scourges light
upon our souls in this life.

3. Lastly, the very condition of our bodies should not be ouer-pleasing to us:
our deformities, and infirmities, and the danger of further diseases, should
tire us out, and make us account it no lovely thing to be present in the body,
while we are absent from the LORD. And thus of the miseries of our lives also.
Now it remains, that I should proceed to the second sort of contemplations,
that is, those that are remouals: namely such meditations, as take off the
objections, which are in the hearts of men.

CHAP. XII.
Comforts against the Pain of death.

THere are in the minds of all men certain Objections, which if they could be
removed, this fear of Death would be stocked up by the very roots. I will
instance in some of the chief of the^; and set down the answers to them

1. Ob. Some men say they should not be afraid of death, considering the gain
of it, and the happiness after death, but that they are afraid of the pain of
dying: It is the difficulty of the passage troubles them.

Sol. For answer heereunto diverse things would be considered of, to show men
the folly of this fear.

First, thou like not Ten reasons to show the folly of me^ in pre tending the
fear of the pain of death.
death, because of the pain of it. Why, there is pain in the curing of a
wound, yet men will endure it. And shall death do so great a cure, as to make
thee whole of all thy wounds and diseases, and art thou so loath to come to the
cure.

Secondly, There is difficulty in getting into a Haven. Had thou rather be in
the Tempest still, then put into the Haven?

Thirdly, thou likest not Death, thou say, for the pain of it: Why then
likest thou life, which puts thee to worse pain? Men object not at the pains
of life, which they endure without death. There is almost no man, but he has
endured worse pains in life, then he can endure in death, and yet we are
content to love life still: Yea, such is our folly, that whereas in some pains
of life we call for death to come to our succors: yet when we are well
again, we love life, and loath Death.

Fourthly, we are manifestly mistaken concerning death: For the last gasp is
not death. To live, is to die: For how much we live, so much we die; every
step of life is a step of death. He that has lived half his days, is dead
the half of himself: Death gets first our infancy, then our youth, and so
forwards: All that thou have lived, is dead.

Fifthly, it is further evident, that in death there is no pain; it is our
life, that goes out with pain: We deal herein, as if a man after sickness,
should accuse his health of the last pains. What is it to be dead, but not to
be in the world? and is it any pain to be out of the world? Were we in any
pain before we were borne? Why then accuse we death, for the pains our life
gives us at the parting? Is not sleep a resemblance of Death?

Sixthly, if our coming into the world be with tears: Is it any wonder, if
our going out be so too?

Seventhly: Besides, it is evident that we make the passage more difficult, by
bringing unto death a troubled and irresolute mind: It is long of our selves
there is terror in parting.

Eighthly, Consider yet more, the Humors of the most men! Men will suffer
infinite pains for a small living, or preferment here in this world: Yea, we
see soldiers for a small price will put themselves into unspeakable dangers,
and that many times at the pleasures of others that command them, without
certain hope of advantage to themselnes. Will men kill themselves for things
of no value; and yet be afraid of a little pain to be endured, when such a
glorious estate is immediately to be enjoyed in heaven?

Ninthly, Let not men pretend the pains of death, that is but a fig leaf to
cover their little faith: For they will languish of the Gowte, or Stone, a long
time, rather then die one sweet death with the easiest conditions possible.

Tenthly, if none of these will persuade, yet attend, I will show thee a
Mystery: Fear not the pains of death: For first, Death is terrible, when it
is inflicted by the Law; but it is easy, when it is inflicted by the Gospel:
The curse is taken off from thee, thou art not under the Law, but under Grace:
And besides, for this cause did Christ die a terrible and a cursed death, that
every death might be blessed to us. And further: God that has greatly loved
thee in life, will not neglect thee in death. Precious in the sight of the
LORD, is the death of his Saints. What shall I say against the terror of
death, but this Text of the Apostle? Thanks be to God that has given us
victory through Jesus Christ. He has pulled the sting out of death: O Death,
where is thy sting? 1. Cor. 15. 55.

Lastly, thou have the Spirit of Christ in thee, which will succor and
strengthen, and ease thee, and abide with thee all the time of the combat. Why
should we doubt of it, but that the godly die more easily then the wicked?
Neither may we guess at their pain, but the pangs upon the body: for the body
may be in grievous panges, when the man feels nothing, and the soul is at
sweet ease in preparing it self to come immediately to the sight of God.

CHAP. XIII.
Comforts against the loss of the body in death.

2. Ob. OH! but in death a man is destroyed, he loses his body, and it must
be rotted in the earth.

Sol. 1. It has bin showed before, that the separation of the soul from God,
is properly death, but the separation of the soul from the body, is but the
shadow of death, and we have no reason to be afraid of a shadow.

2. The body is not the man, the man remains still, though he be without the
body. Abraham, Isaac, and Iacab, are proved to be living still by our Savior
Christ, though their bodies were consumed in the earth, and GOD was their God
still. It is true, Death seazeth on the body, but a Christian, at the most,
suffers, but aliquid mortis, a little of death.

Death is like a Serpent; the Serpent must eat dust: now death therefore can
feed upon no more, but our dust, which is the body, it cannot touch the soul:
whereas wicked men suffer the whole power of death, because it seazeth both upon
body and soul too, and in their case only it is true, that death destroys a
man.

3. Grant that we lose the body in death, yet that ought not to be terrible:
for what the body is, it has been before showed. It is but a prison to the
soul, an old rotten house, or a ragged garment. It is but as the bark of a
tree, or the shell, or such like; now what great loss can there be in any of
these?

4. This separation is but for a time neither; we do not for ever lose the
body, we shall have our bodies again, they are kept safe for us till the day
of Christ. Our graves are Gods chests, and he makes a precious account of the
bodies of his Saints, they shall be raised up again at the last day: GOD will
give a charge to the earth to bring forth her dead, and make a true account to
him, Reave. 20. And God has given us the assurance of this, not only in his
Word by promising it, but in his Son, whom he has raised from the dead. If
any say, What is that to us, that Christ's body is raised? I answer, It is a
full assurance of the safety, and of the resurrection of our bodies. For Christ
is our head. Now cast a man into a River, though all the body be under water,
yet the man is safe, if the head be above water. For the head will bring out
all the body after it. So it is in the body of Christ, though all we sink in
the river of death, yet our Head is risen, and is above water, and therefore
the whole body is safe.

5. It should yet more satisfy us, if we thoroughly consider, that we shall
have our bodies again much better then now they are. Those vile bodies we lay
down in death, shall be restored again unto us glorious bodies, like the body
of Christ now glorified, Phil. 3. 21. And therefore death loses by taking away
our bodies; we have a great victory over death. The graueis but a Furnace to
refine them, they shall come out again immortal and incorruptible.

CHAP. XIIII.
The desire of long life confuted.

3. Ob. OH! but if I might live long, I would desire no more, if I might not
dye till I were fifty, or threescore years old, I should be contented to dye
then.

Sol. There are many things may show the vanity and folly of men, in this
desire of long life: For

1. If thou art willing to 9. Arguments to show the vanity of men, in desiring
to live long.
dye at any time, why not now? Death will be the same to thee then, it is now.

2. Is any man angry and grieved when he is at sea in a tempest, because he
shall be so quickly carried into the Haven? Is he displeased with the wind,
that will soon set him safe in the harbor? If thou believe, that death will end
all thy miseries, why art thou careful to defer the time?

3. Till thy debt be paid time will not ease thee, thy care will continue, and
therefore thou were as good pay at the first, if thou be sure it must be paid
at all.

4. In this world there is neither young, nor old: When thou have lived to that
age thou desire, thy time past will be as nothing. Thou will still expect
that, which is to come, thou will be as ready to demand longer respite then,
as now.

5. What would thou tarry here so long for? There will be nothing new, but
what thou have tasted: and often drinking will not quench thy thirst, thou have
an incurable Dropsy in thy heart, and those earthly things have no ability to
fill thy heart with good, or satisfy thee.

6. Would not thou judge him a Sot, that mournes because he was not alive a
hundred years ago? And thou art no better: thou mournest, because thou can
not live a hundred years here.

7. Thou have no power of the morrow, to make it happy to thee. If thou dye
young, thou art like one that has lost a Dye, with which he might as well
have lost, as won.

8. Consider the proportion of time thou desire to thy self, reckon what
will be spent in sleep, care, disgrace, sickness, trouble, weariness,
emptiness, fear; and unto all this add sin: and then think, how small a
portion is left of this time, and how small good it will do thee. What can that
advantage thee with such mixtures of evil? It is certain, to live long, is
but to be long troubled, and to die quickly, is quickly to be at rest.

9. Lastly, if there were nothing else to be said, yet this may suffice, that
there is no comparison between time and eternity. What is that space of time to
eternity? If thou love life, why do thou not love eternal life? as was said
before.

CHAP. XV.
Of them that would live to do good.

4. Ob. BUT I would live long to do good, and benefit others, and to do God
service, and to benefit others by mine example.

Sol. 1. Search thine Six reasons against their pretense that would live long
to do good, as they say.
own heart: it may be, this pretense of doing good to others, is pleaded
only, because thou would further thine own good: Thou would not seek the
public, but to find thine own particular.

2. God, that set you to do his work, knows, how long it is fit for thee to
be at the same: he knows, how to make use of the labors of his worke-men.
He will not call thee from thy work, till he be provided to dispatch his
business without thee.

3. It may be, if thou be long at thy work, thou would mar all; thy last
works would not be so good as thy first; it is best to give over, while thou
do well, etc.

4. If God will pay thee as much for half a day, as for the whole: art thou
not so much the more to praise him?

5. It is true, that the best comfort of our life here, is in a religious
conversation: but thy Religion is not hindered by going to heaven, but
perfected: There is no comparison between thy goodness on earth, and that in
heaven: For though thou may do much good here; yet it is certain, thou do
much evil here too.

6. Whereas thou perswadest thy self, that by example thou may mend others,
thou art much mistaken: A thousand men may sooner catch the plague in an
infected Town, then one be healed. It is but to tempt God to desire
continuance(...) in this infectious world, longer then our time; for the best
way is to get far from the contagion. If diverse fresh waters fall into the
Sea; what does that to take away the saltness of the Sea? No more can two or
three Lots reform a world of Sodomites.

CHAP. XVI.
Why men may not make away themselves, to be rid of the miseries of life.

5. Ob. BUT then it seems by this, that it were a man's best course to cast away
life, seeing so much evil is in life, and so much good to be had in death.

Sol. 1. I think the most of us may be trusted for that danger. For though
the soul aspire to the good to come, yet the body tends unto the earth, and
like a heavy clog weighes men downwards.

2. That is not the course, Against self murder.
we must cast the world out of our hearts, not cast our selves out of the
world. It is both unseemly, and extremely unlawful. It is unseemly; for it is
true, we ought willingly to depart out of this world, but it is monstrous base,
like cowards to run away out of the battle* Thou art Gods soldier, and
appointed to thy standing, and it is a miserable shame to run out of thy
place. When Christ, the great Captain sounds a retreat, then is it honorable
for thee to give place. Besides, thou art Gods tenant, and do hold thy life
as a Tenant at will: the Landlord may take it from thee, but thou can not
without disgrace surrender at thy pleasure; and it is extreme slothfulnes to
hate life, only for the toiles that are in it. 2. And as it is unseemly, so
it is unlawful, yea damnable. It is unlawful: for the soldier that runs
away from his Captain, offends highly: so does the Christian that makes away
himself: and therefore, the commandment is not only, Thou shall not kill
other men, but generally, Thou shall not kill, meaning, neither thy self, nor
other men. Besides, we have no example in Scripture of any that did so, but
such as were notorious wicked men, as Saul, Achitophel, Judas, and the like.
Yea, it is damnable: for he that leaves his work before God calls him, loses
it, and besides, incurres eternal death. As the soldier that runs away,
dies for it when he is taken: so the Christian that murdereth himself,
perishes; I say, that murdereth himself, being himself.

CHAP. XVII.
Why we should not be troubled to part with our friends.

6. Ob. MIght some other say, I could more willingly dye, but me thinks it is
grievous unto me to part with friends, and acquaintance, I cannot willingly go
from my kindred, and my familiars, life is sweet in respect of their presence,
and love, and society.

Sol. It is true, that unto some minds this is the greatest contentment of life
of any thing, but yet many things must be considered: For

First, amongst a hundred men, scarce one can 6. Reasons about parting with our
friends in death.
by good reason plead that, I mean, cannot say, that he has so much as one
sound friend in the whole world, worthy to be reckned, as the stay of his life.

2. Those, that can plead felicity in their friends; yet what is it? one
pleasing dream has more in it, then a months contentme^t which can be reaped
from thy friends. Alas! it is not the thousand part of thy life, which is
satisfied with delight from them.

3. Thou see thy friends drop away from thee from day to day; for either they
die, or they are so far removed from thee, that they are as it were dead to
thee; and since they are gone, who would not long to go after them?

4. The friends that are left, are not sure to thee: men are mutable, as well
as mortal; they may turn to be thy foes, that now are dearest unto thee: or
if they fall not into terms of flat enmity, they may grow full, and weary of
thee, and so, careless of thee.

5. If none of these would satisfy thee, yet what are thy friends on earth, to
thy friends thou shall find in heaven? This is an answer beyond all exception.

6. Lastly, by death thou do not lose thy friends neither, for thou shall
find them, and enjoy them in another world to all eternity; and therefore thou
have no reason for thy friends sake to be loath to dye.

7. Ob. But might some one say, All my grief is to part with my wife and
children, and to leave them, especially in an unsettled estate.

Sol. 1. Have thou forgotten the consolation that says, God will be a father
to the fatherless, and a Judge, and a Protector of the widows cause? He will
relieve both the fatherless and the widow, as many Scriptures do assure us,
Psalm. 146. 9. and 68. 6. Prou. 15. 25.

2. Thou leauest them but for a time; God will restore the^ to thee again in a
better world.

3. Thou against the presence of God, and his eternal conjunction, who will be
more to thee, then many thousand wives, or children could be. He can be hurt by
the loss of no company, that finds God in heaven.

CHAP. XVIII.
Why we should not be sorry to leave the pleasures of life.

8. Ob. BUT might some other say, My heart is sorely vexed, because in death I
must part with the pleasures of life.

Sol. There are many things might quiet men's minds in respect of this
objection: For thy pleasures are either sinful pleasures, Five Arguments
against the pleasures of life.
or lawful pleasures: If they be sinful, thou show thy hatred of God by
loving them, and heapest up wrath upon thine own soul, by living in them. But
say, thy pleasures be lawful in themselves: yet consider,

1. That the pains of thy life are, and will be greater both for number and
continuance, then thy pleasures can be: No pleasure at once, ever lasted so
long, as the fit of an Ague.

2. Thou forgettest, what end they may have: For thy pleasures may go out with
gall. For either shame, or loss, or evil sickness may fall upon thee: or if
not, yet thine own heart will loath the^; as they are vanity, so they will
prove vexation of spirit: Thou will be extremely tired with them.

3. Thou art far from giving thy life for Christ, that wilt not forgo the
superfluity of life for him.

4. That in thy delights thou show the greatest weakness, so as thou may
say of Laughter, Thou art mad, Eccl. 2. 2.

5. That death does not spoil thee of pleasures: For it brings thee to the
pleasures, that are at Gods right hand for evermore, Psalm. 16. vlt.

CHAP. XIX.
Why we should not be loath to leave the honors of the world.

9. Ob. IF any other object, the lothnes to leave his honors, or high place in
the world: I may answer diverse things.

Sol. 1. Why should thou be so in love with the honors of this world, if
thou but consider how small thy preferment is, or can be? The whole earth Five
observations about the honors of this world.
is, but as the full point or center, in comparison with the circumference of
the whole world besides. Now in true judgment, it is almost impossible to
discern, how a man should rise higher in a Center. If thou had all the
earth, thou were no more exalted, then to the possession of a full point: a
little spot in comparison, and therefore how extremely vain is thy nature, to
be affected with the possession of less, then the thousand thousand part of a
little spot or point?

2. Consider seriously the thraldom, which thy preferment brings thee unto:
Thou can not live free, but still thou art fettered with the cares, and
fears, and griefs, that attend thy greatness. There is little difference
between thee and a prisoner; save that the prisoner has his fetters of iron,
and thine are of gold; and that his fetters bind his body, and thine thy mind:
He wears his fetters on his legs, and thou thine on thine head; and in this
thou art one way less contented, then some prisoners: for they can sing for
joy of heart, when thou art dejected with the cares and griefs of thy mind.
If thou have a Crown, it were but a Crown of thorns, in respect of the cares
it would put thee to, etc.

3. Say thou should get never so high, thou can not protect thy self from
the miseries of thy condition, nor preserve thy self in any certainety from
the loss of all thou enioyest. If thou were as high as the top of the Alps,
thou can not get such a place, but the clouds, winds, storms, and terrible
lightnings may find thee out, so as thou would account the lower ground to
be the safer place. Thou stand as a man on the top of a pinnacle, thou can
not know, how soon thou may tumble down, and that fearfully.

4. If thou should be sure to enjoy thy greatness of place in the world: yet
thou art not sure to preserve thine honor: For either it may be blemished with
unjust aspersions, or else some fault of thy own may mar all thy praises: For
as a dead fly may mat a whole box of ointment: so may one sin, thy glory,
Eccl. 10. 1.

5. Thou losest not honor by dying: for there are Crowns of glory in heaven,
such as shall never wither, nor be corrupted; such as can never be held with
care, or envy, nor lost with infamy.

CHAP. XX.
Why it should not trouble us to part with riches.

10. Ob. IF thou be infected with the love of riches, and that thou art loath to
die, because thou would not be taken from thy estate, and outward
possessions; then attend unto these considerations.

Sol. 1. Thou came naked into the world; and Seven mo ^ue to leave the love
of riches.
why should it grieve thee to go naked out of the world?

2. Thou art but a steward of what thou possessest: and therefore why should it
grieve thee to leave, what thou have employed, to the disposing of thy master?

3. Thou have tried by experience, and found hitherto, that contentment of
heart is not found, or had by abundance of outward things. If thou had all
the Pearls of the East, and were Master of all the Mines of the West, yet will
not thy heart be filled with good: by heaping up of riches, thou do but heap
up unquietness.

4. Riches have wings, thou may live to lose all by fire, or water, or
thieues, or suretiship, or injustice, or unthrifty children, or the like.

5. They are riches of iniquity. There is a snare in riches, and nets in
possessions, thy gold and silver is limed, or poisoned. It is wonderful hard,
and in respect of men, impossible for thee to be a rich man, but thou will be
a sinful man, especially if thy heart be grown to love money, and to haste to
be rich.

6. Thou must leave the^ once, and therefore why not now? Thou can not enjoy
them ever, and therefore why should thou trouble thy heart about them?

7. By death thou make exchange of them for better riches, and shall be
possessed of a more enduring substance. Thou shall enjoy the unsearchable
riches of Christ, thou can never be fully rich, til thou get to heaven.

11. Ob. Might some one say, I should not fear death, were it not, that I
know not, what kind of death I shall dye: I may dye suddenly, or by the hands
of the violent, or without the presence, or assistance of my friends, or the
like.

Sol. Since we must dye, it is the less matter what kind of death we dye; we
should not so much look how we dye, as whither we shall go when we are
dead.

2. Christ died a cursed death, that so every death might be blessed to us. For
he that lives holily, cannot dye miserably. He is blessed that dies in the
Lord, what kind of death soever it be.

CHAP. XXI.
Showing the cure of this fear of death by practice.

HItherto of the way of curing this fear of death by meditation. It remains
now, that I proceed to show how the cure is to be finished, and perfected 7.
Things that cure the fear of death in practice.
by practice. For there are diverse things to be heeded by us in our daily
conversation, which serve exceedingly for the extinguishing of this fear,
without which the cure will hardly ever be soundly wrought for continuance.

1. The first thing we must frame our lives to for this purpose, is the
contempt of the world: we must strive earnestly with our own hearts, to
forgo the love of worldly things. It is an easy thing to be willing to dye,
when our hearts are cleansed of the love of this world. We must leave the world,
before the world leave us, and learn that lesson heartily, To use the world,
as if we used it not. Neither ought this to seem too hard a precept. For they
that strive for mastery, abstain from all things, when it is but to obtain a
corruptible crown: how much more should we be willing to deny the delights of
this world, and strive with our natures herein, seeing it is to obtain an
incorruptible crown? 1. Cor. 9. 24.

We must learn of Moses, who brought himself to it willingly, to forsake the
pleasures of Egypt, and to choose rather to suffer affliction with Gods people,
then to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, Heb. 11. 26.

And to this end we should first restrain all needless cares, and business of
this world, and study so to be quiet, as to meddle with our own business, and
to abridge them into as narrow a scantling, as our callings will permit.
Secondly, we should avoid, as much as may be, the society with the
favorites and minions of the world, I mean such persons, as admire nothing
but worldly things, and know no other happiness the^ in this life: That speak
only of this world, and commend nothing, but what tends to the praise of
worldly things, and so to the intising of our hearts after the world. And
withal, we should sort our selves with such Christians, as practice this
contempt of the world as well as praise it, and can by their discourse, make us
more in love with heaven. 3. Thirdly, we should daily observe, to what things
in the world our hearts most run, and strive with GOD by prayer, to get down
the too much liking, and desire after these things. 4. Fourthly, we should
daily be pondring on these meditations, that show us the vanity of the world,
and the vileness of the things thereof. Thus of the first medicine.

2. Secondly, we must in our practice, soundly mortify our beloved sins: our
sins must dye, before we dye, or else it will not be well with us. The sting
of death is sin, and when we have pulled out the sting, we need not fear to
entertain the Serpent into our bosom. It is the love of some sin, and delight
in it, that makes a man afraid to dye, or it is the remembrance of some foul
evil past, which accuses the hearts of men: and therefore men must make sure
their repentance, and judge themselves for their sins, and then they need not
fear Gods condemning of them. If any ask me, how they may know when they
have attained to this rule, I answer, When they have so long confessed their
sins in secret to God, that now they can truly say, there is no sin they
know by themselves, but they are as desirous to have GOD give them strength to
leave it, as they would have God to show them grace to forgive it. He has
soundly repented of all sin, that desires from his heart to live in no sin. And
unto this rule I must add the care of an upright and unrebukable
conversation. It is a marvelous encouragement to dye with peace, when a man can
live without offense, and can justly plead his integrity of conversation, as
Samuel did, 1. Sam. 12. 3. and Paul, Act. 26. 26, 27. and 2. Cor. 1. 12.

3. Thirdly, assurance is an admirable medicine to kill this fear; and to
speak distinctly, we should get the assurance first of Gods favor, and our
own calling and election. For hereby an entrance will be ministered into the
heavenly kingdom, and therefore have I handled this doctrine of the Christians
assurance, before I meddled with this point of the fear of death. Simeon can
dye willingly, when his eyes have seen his salvation. Fear of death is
always joined with a weak faith, and the full assurance of faith, does
maruelously establish the heart against these fears, and breeds a certain
desire of the coming of Christ. Paul can be confident when he is able to say,
I know whom I have believed, and that he is able to keep that which I have
committed to him, 2. Tim. 1. 12.

Besides, we should labor to get a particular knowledge and assurance of our
happiness in death, and of our salvation. We should study to this end, the
Arguments that shows our felicity in death: And to this purpose it is of
excellent use to receive the Sacraments often: For Christ by his Will
bequeathed Heaven to us, Ioh. 17. and by the death of the Testator this Will is
of force, and is further daily sealed unto us, as internally by the Spirit, so
externally by the Sacraments.

Now if we get our Charter sealed and confirmed to us, how can we be afraid of
the time of possession? He is fearelesse of death, that can say with the
Apostle; Whether I live or die, I am the Lords, Romans 14. 8.

4. That charge given to Hezekiah, concerning the setting of his house in
order, Esaias 38. is of singular use for this Cure: Men should with sound advice
settle their outward estates, and dispose of their worldly affairs, and
according to their means provide for their wife, and children. A great part of
the fear and trouble of men's hearts is over., when their Wills are discreetely
made: but men are loath to die, so long as their outward estates are unsettled,
and undisposed. It is a most preposterous course for men to leave the making of
their Wills to their sickness; For besides their disabilities of memories or
understanding, which may befall them, the trouble of it breeds unrest to their
minds, and besides, they live all the time in neglect of their duty of
preparation for death.

5. We may much help our selves by making us friends with the riches of
iniquity: we should learn that of the unjust Steward, as our Savior Christ
shows, since we shall be put out of the Stewardship, we should so dispose of
them while we have them, that when we die, they may receive us into
everlasting habitations, Luke 16. An unprofitable life is attended with a
servile fear of death.

6. It would master this fear, but to force our selves to a frequent
meditation of death: To learn to die daily, will lessen, yea, remove the fear
of dying: Oh this remembering of our latter end, and learning to number our
days is an admirable rule of practices: It is the forgetfulness of death,
that makes life sinful, and death terrible, Deuteronomy. 32. 19. Psalm. 90. 12. Lam.
1. 9. And we should begin this exercise of meditation betimes; Remember thy
Creator in the days of thy youth, Eccl. 12. 1. This is that is called for,
when our Savior Christ requires us, and all men, so to watch: and herein lay
the praise of the five wise Virgins, Math. 25. 3. Thus Job will wait, till
the time of his change come, Job 10. 14. And of purpose has the Lord left the
last day uncertain, that we might every day prepare. It were an admirable
method, if we could make every day a life to begin and end, as the day
begins, and ends.

7. Lastly, because yet we may find this fear combersome, and our natures
extremely deceitful: there is one thing left, which can never fail to
prevail as far as is fit for us; and that is hearty prayer to God for this
very thing. Thus David prays, Psalm. 39. 4. and Moses, Psalm. 90. 12. and
Simeon, Luke 2. 32. And in as much as Christ died for this end, to deliver us
from this fear, we may sue out the privilege, and by prayer strive with God
to get it framed in us: It is a suite God will not deny them, that ask in the
name of Christ, because it is a thing that Christ especially aimed at in his
own death.

To conclude then: we have proved, that it is possible to be had, and most
uncomely to want it; and likewise the way has been showed, how both by
meditation and practice, this Cure may be effected: If then it be not wrought
in any of us; we may here find out the cause in our selves: For if we would
hereby be soundly advised and ruled, we might attain to it all the days of
our life, to sing with the Saints that triumphant song, mentioned both in the
Old and New Testament: Oh death, where is thy sting? Oh hell, where is thy
victory? Death is swallowed up into victory: so as we are now the conquerours
through him that loved us, and gave himself to death for us: even Jesus Christ
the righteous: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost be all praise in
the Churches, throughout all ages for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

