A SERMON PREACHED AT THE GENERAL ASSIZES IN WARWICK, the third of March,
being the first Friday in Lent. 1619.

By SAMVEL BVRTON, Archdeacon of Gloucester.

Seen and allowed by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter. 1620.

ROMANS 13. For he is the Minister of God to thee for thy good. But if thou do
evil, fear: for he bears not the sword in vain. For he is the Minister of
God to take vengeance on him that does evil.


THE light of the Gospel did no sooner begin to break forth of Jury and to
shine unto the Gentiles, but presently this scandal was raised against the
Professors of it, that they were Nouatores rerum, Innouators of States, and
Trumpeters of sedition. Of which scandal I cannot say, that it was merely
scandalum acceptum, a scandal taken by the Heathen. For indeed it was in some
sort, scandalum datum, a scandal given: Not by the true Professors of the name
of Christ, but by the Jews first. Who, because they were the seed of Abraham,
did therefore imagine themselves to be the true owners of the whole earth, and
the only men that ought to rule in it. And secondly, by some false Apostles,
blind and foolish Teachers, who, (because Christ in his life time had said to
his Disciples, Si filius vos liberauerit, vere liberi eritis; if the Son do
make you free, then are you free indeed: And because he said to Peter (as it is
recorded in the 17. of Matthew; Ergo liberi sunt filij, then are the children
free) did out of these two places deliver this for current Doctrine, That
Christians are and ought to be free from subjection, free from tribute.
Supposing that Christ in the former place had spoken of civil and corporal
freedom; and in the later, of all sorts of Christians: whereas it is plain
and evident, that in the former he speaks only of freedom from sin, and
from the curse of the Law; and in the later, only of himself; as he was the
Son of God and King of Israel. This Doctrine therefore being altogether false
and wicked, and the scandal that grew from it, like to prove pernicious to the
Church: was the cause (as Chrysostom tells us) that moved the blessed Apostle
to enter into this large and religious discourse concerning Magistrates, that
both the children of the Church might know their duty, and that the enemies of
it might understand, that Christ came not into the world to take away temporal
Kingdoms, (as Sedulius speaks) but to give eternal; that the Doctrine of
Christ teaches all due obedience and subjection to Authority, and that if any
had taught otherwise, they had not therein delivered the true Doctrine of the
Church, but their own false and foolish fancies.

Out of this discourse I have chosen this Verse (which I have read unto you)
for my Text at this time, as containing fittest matter for this presence. For
it contains two general heads: whereof the

1. First is, the dignity and high calling of the Magistrate.

2. And the second is, his duty.

His dignity appears in this, in that he is said to be the Minister of God
himself. Which word is twice repeated in this Verse. For he is said to be the
Minister of God for good: and he is said to be the Minister of God for
vengeance. Out of which partition of his Ministry, arise two several
branches of his duty. The first is, the reward of well-doing: and the second
is, the punishment of sin. The first is, the protection of the just and
innocent: and the second is, the co ertion of the lewd and wicked.

1. Concerning the first, the Apostle tells us, that he is the Minister and
Servant of God. And so, no doubt, is every faithful Christian in his several
calling. But specially and by prerogative is he that Minister of God, unto whom
is committed either the dispensation of the Word in the Church, or the use and
exercise of the Sword among the people. Now, if the service of God in the
lowest degree be an honorable service, and more to be desired then the command
of all the earth: then surely, the service of God in the highest degree, and
chiefest places, (which God has ordained here on earth) must needs be the most
honorable service, and require the greatest respect and regard amongst us. And
such is the state of Rulers and Governors; they are the Ministers of God; they
are his Deputies and Surrogats in the highest place, which is the seat of
Justice. And therefore, if that of the Prophet in the Psalm, may be rightly
applied to any sort of men, then most fitly to Princes and Magistrates. That
God has made them a little lower then the Angels, and crowned them with
glory, and worship. For he has set them in his own Chair and Judgment
seat; he has placed them in his own stead; he has armed them with his own
power; he has covered them with his own Garment and Robe of Estate; he has
girded them with his own Sword; and he has honored them with his own Name,
Ego dixi, vos Dij estis; I have said, ye are Gods; and ye are all the
children of the most High.

And if the dignity of this Ministry do not yet sufficiently appear unto us
from the Author: look further into the effects and fruits of it Omnium domos,
illius vigilia defendit; Omnium otium, illius labor; Omnium delitias, illius
industria; Omnium vacationem, illius occupatio. It is the Magistrate only, that
makes every man's house his Castle; his labor makes us all to live at ease; his
business makes us vacant; his trouble procures our peace; his industry
maintaynes our delight; his pains brings in our profit. That we sit safely in
our houses, that we sleep quietly in our beds, that we drink the water of
our own Cisterns, that we eat the labor of our own hands, and finally,
that we dwell without fear, like Judah and Israel in the days of Solomon,
every man under his own Vine, and his own Fig Tree; to whom are we bound,
and beholden under God for all this, but only to these Ministers of his (as the
Apostle terms them in this place) by whose eyes he watches over us, by whose
cares he hears our complaints, out of whose mouths he gives judgment, by
whose hands he smites the wicked, and under the shadow of whose wings he
covers the heads of the just and innocent?

But why do I enlarge and amplify this point? That the hearts of Magistrates
may be exalted, and lifted up? Surely no: It will rather humble them if it be
well considered of, and make them fear and tremble at their calling. For as
Hierome could say of the great and eminent places of the Church: Non est facile
stare loco Pauli, tenere gradum Petri: It is not so easy a matter, as a man
would think, to sit in Peter's Chair, or Paul's; (though Simon Magus perhaps
may think it a matter of ease only, and profit;) so we may say of these great
and eminent places in the Commonwealth, Non est facile stare loco Dauidis, It
is not an easy matter to sit in one of David's thrones: the bramble perhaps may
think it a thing of nothing, but the Fig Tree, the Olive, and the Vine, will
be afraid to venture on it. And why? Because they know what a burden and a
charge belongs unto it, and what accounts depend upon it. For unto whomsoever
much is given, of him shall much be required (says our Savior.) God when he
has once advanced men to places of honor and authority, when he has taken
them out of the dust and set them among Princes to inherit the seat of Glory
(as Hanna speaks:) when he has made them Pillars of the earth, and set the
world upon them: he looks that they should serve him more strictly then common
and ordinary men; he looks for more exact obedience from them, then any other.
There is no kind of benefit in the world, but brings a kind of bondage with it.
And much more this, the greatest of all earthly blessings. And therefore of all
men the Magistrate may best say, Beneficium accepi, libertatem amisi: God has
advanced me to this height, he has made me a Ruler and a commander over
others, and therefore I have lost a great deal of that liberty, that is left to
others. Caesari cui omnia licent, propter hoc ipsum multa non licent. Even
Caesar himself, because he is above law because he may do all things, for
this very cause may not do many things, (says the wise Seneca) many things
that other men may lawfully do. And as the respect of their high advancement
does abridge their liberty, so does it agrauate their sin. For what was it
else that made the sin of Saul so heinous and unpardonable in sparing Agag
and the best things, but only this circumstance of his advancement? For when
thou wast little in thine own eyes (says Samuel) thou wast made the head of
all the tribes of Israel. And so Nathan to David. God has anointed thee King
over Israel and delivered thee out of the hands of Saul and thou have slain
Vriah the Hittite with the sword, even thou, which wast so much bound unto God
for his love unto thee, thou which wast taken from the Sheepfold and from
following the Ewes to be made King over Israel, thou have done this
wickednesle. Hear therefore, O ye Kings, and understand; learn ye that be
Judges of the earth. Your places are high and honorable, your power is given
you of the Lord. But if you that be the Ministers of his Kingdom shall not
judge aright, nor keep the Law, nor walk after the counsel of God horribly,
and fearfully shall he come upon you. For a sharp judgment shall be to
them, that are in high places, mercy will soon pardon the meanest, but mighty
men shall be mightily tormented, (says the Author of the book of Wisdom.)

Let no man therefore be so idle to think, that where the dignity and high
calling of the Magistrate is treated of, there is or can be any intent, or
meaning in the speaker, to puff up his heart with the breath of vanity, or
that any wise Magistrate will suffer his heart to rise with it. There is
another end and purpose in it; which is our instruction, that we seeing the
height and excellency of his calling, and being assured that it is of God,
might learn thereby, what honor, and duty, and service, we owe unto him. This
is a point of duty, which the dignity and high calling of the Magistrate does
plainly teach us; and as the times now are, it is a point of duty, then which
there is nothing more needful to be taught and learned.

That I may speak therefore briefly and distinctly of it: As God requires at
our hands, not only outward obedience in our deeds and actions, but also that
we honor him with our words, and that our hearts be upright in his sight: so
the Magistrate (that sits in Gods Seat, and has his authority in his hands)
may justly challenge all these things from us. The very height and excellency
of his calling does enforce them all. For he is the Minister of God, (says the
Apostle) therefore we ought to obey him. He is the Minister of God, therefore
we ought not to reproach him, or revile him; but to speak all good of him. He
is the Minister of God, therefore we ought not to hate him, or despise him; but
to carry a reverent conceit and estimation of him.

1. Now for the first of these; You must understand that when we speak of
obedience to humane Laws, we do not mean obedience without exception, but
obedience under condition and limitation. So long as the Magistrate commands
nothing by his Laws, that is prejudicial to our duty toward God, so long we
must obey. But if he command us to do those things that are unlawful; in that
case, in stead of obedience we bring subjection. We must not be obedient then,
but even then we must be subject. In all other cases; in matters that are
apparently good, in civil offices, in affairs of the Commonwealth, in
matters of justice, and in all such things as are in their own nature
indifferent (and those are such, as are neither commanded nor forbidden in the
Word of God) we must not only be subject, but obedient also. Give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's (says Christ.) Submit your selves to all manner of
ordinance (says Peter.) Let every soul be subject to the higher powers
(says Paul in the beginning of this Chapter.) And in the third to Titus; Put
them in remembrance that they be subject to Principalities and Powers, and that
they be obedient to every good work. So then, we must be subject simply and
without exception; obedient only in those things that are good. Good for our
selves, good for the Church, or good for the Commonwealth wherein we live. And
we must not our selves be Judges what is good, but submit our own judgment
to the judgment of our Governors, except we find that the things commanded
be plainly and directly forbidden in the Word, in which case we must be
subject still, though not obedient. This was (you see) the Doctrine of Christ,
this was the Doctrine of Peter and Paul, no other Doctrine taught or thought of
in the Christian world, for six hundred years after Christ, as may appear,
not only by the Books and Writings of all the Fathers of those several ages,
but specially by the practice and example of all those noble and renowned
Martyrs, which lived in the very heat of the Furnace, in those long and
bloody times, containing the succession of ten several Persecutions, under
the most cruel Heathen Emperors. Against whom they never offered to make
head, never went about to practice treason, never attempted to take up arms;
notwithstanding that they were (as Tertullian witnesses) both more in number,
and greater in strength, then any other Nation or Kingdom in the whole world,
yet because they were otherwise instructed; where they could not yield
obedience, they yielded their subicction, never drawing any other sword against
their enemies, but only the sword of the Spirit; never putting on any other
armor for their defense, but only the armor of Patience; never thinking of
any other siege, but only how they might besiedge God with their tears and
prayers. How has the pride and tyranny of that Romish Antichrist despised
this Doctrine, and trod it under foot? while sitting in the Temple of God as
God; and exalting himself above all that is called God; he is not afraid to
tell the World that all power is given him, both in earth and heaven: and to
say with Satan (in the fourth of Luke.) All the Kingdoms of the world are
mine, and I give them to whom I will. In the height of which presumption, what
revel has he kept in the World? What Tragedies has he brought upon the
Stage? What sport has he made with the Scepters and Crowns of Princes?
setting his feet upon their necks, roaring against them in his Bulls,
discharging their Subjects of their allegiance, exposing their Persons to all
hazards, and proclayming it not only lawful but meritorious (when the Trumpet
is once blown and the sign given out of Peter's Chair) for every private man
to lay violent hands upon them and to kill them? For so Mariana the Spanish
Jesuit tells us; that it is a glorious thing to root out evil Princes from
the society of men, and that it is salutaris cogitatio, a wholesome thought,
for Princes in a morning, next their hearts, to think they live upon these
terms; that if they do not govern as they ought, they may not only
lawfully, but with a great deal of commendation be killed and murdered. See
here what a brawle and what a contrariety is grown betwixt the Apostles and
the Bishop of Rome, Saint Peter and Saint Peter's successors, as they call
themselves. Saint Peter and Saint Paul do charge and command the people to be
subject, even to the most wicked Heathen Tyrants that ever lived (and that not
only for fear of wrath, but even for conscience sake:) their successors in
these later times, labor nothing more then to steal away the hearts of the
people, and to withdraw their obedience and subjection from their natural and
true Christian Princes, and to lay them open to the sword of the wicked, if
once they refuse to receive their mark into their right hands, and to give
their Kingdoms to them. And this they have not labored without effect. Our
own age has showed us tragical examples in this kind, more then one; and
former stories tell us of so many, that, had they not been more insatiable then
the Grave or the Sea, they had surely been glutted long since with the blood
of Princes; there being no age since this mystery began to work, wherein they
have not made havoc of one or other. The time will not suffer me to pursue
these miscreants any longer in their bloody paths: and therefore I must leave
them to the just judgment of God, which has begun already with them, and
has made such a breach upon that Tower of theirs, whose strength and height
did (but in the former age) seem to terrify the earth, and threaten heaven;
that it begins, you see to totter, and is so battered on every side, that we
may easily perceive, it has but a small time to stand.

But in the mean season I am sorry, that our own desects and wants in this
very point of obedience, should call me froth them. Is it possible that in a
reformed Church; a Church wherein the Romish pride and tyranny is so justly
condemned; a Church wherein the Gospel is so plentifully preached; a Church
which has not locked up the Word of God: but laid it open, and put it into the
hands of all her children; there should be so little conscience made of
yielding obedience to a most Christian Magistrate, commanding honest and
lawful things? To speak nothing of the Ceremonies of our Church, (against
which there is such an head and opposition made by factious spirits) which
being in their own nature things indifferent, when once they be agrred upon by
the State, and commanded by authority, do cease to be indifferent to private
men, to take or leave; how are the very Civil Laws of our Land neglected,
nay, despised and scorned amongst us? It was wont to be said of our Laws (as
Solon said of his) that they were like unto Spiders webs; that great flies
brake through them at their pleasure, and little flies were only taken in them.
It is not now so well. Our Laws will not hold so much as the little flies. The
meanest that be, will not stick to break them. Let me give you but one
instance in this kind, by which you may judge of therest: And that is the Law
that is in force concerning abstinence from flesh during the time of Lent.
Which abstinence being enjoined, not out of a superstitious conceit of
holiness or merit, (for as I remember, there is another statute, that lays a
penalty upon all them which shall broach any such opinion) must needs be
acknowledged to be as honest a politic Law, as ever was devised, both for the
maintenance of Navigations, the preservation of the young breed of Cattle, and
the increase of plenty amongst us; yet how is this law contemned, and despised
and laughed at? It is not now broken (as it was wont: to be) by a few in
corners; but it is openly broken, by the poor as well as the rich, in every
man's house and sight, without any shame or fear, as if there were no Law at
all for it. You will say perhaps, that this proceeds from the negligence of
under officers, that look not better to it. Pardon me in that; I know the
Officers may be in fault: but this cuill has a deeper root. It is want of
knowledge, want of instruction that has brought the people to this liberty.
They are not plainly taught out of the Word of God; how far forth they are
bound in conscience to yield obedience to humane Laws. For although it be
true, that municipal Laws do not bind eternally, nor universally, nor under
pain of damnation; and therefore cannot be said to bind the conscience
directly, but by consequent only: yet I hope it will be granted on all hands,
that the fifth Commandment binds the conscience, by force whereof we are
bound to yield obedience to the Magistrate commanding lawful things, and
things profitable for the Commonwealth. And although in the use of meats and
drink, and all things else that are indifferent, we be left unto our
Christian liberty: yet we must not think that this liberty is a boundless
liberty. For God has set unto it four bounds which we cannot pass without
sin: The bound of Piety; the bound of Loyalty; the bound of Charity; the
bound of Temperance and Sobriety.

So that although all things be pure unto the pure, and all meats lawful:
yet we must not eat unseasonably, nor vnsanctifiedly, for then, we break the
bound of Piety. We must not eat to the offense of the Magistrate, for then we
break the bound of Loyalty. We must not eat to the offense of the weak, for
then we break the bound of Charity; We must not eat to excess and
surfeiting, for then we break the bound of Temperance and Sobriety. I could
therefore wish that those paineful and zealous Preachers, which seem? so
dearly to tender the instruction of the people, would for a time forbear
these May-poles and Morrice-dances, and other such trifles, upon which they
spend too much of their strength; and would press this point of Obedience more
closely to the Consciences of the people. And I wonder much how it comes to
pass, that thinking it so great a sin as they do, (if any thing that ought
to be known be kept back from the people) that they themselves, will keep
from them this point of truth, so needful to be known, and so profitable for
the Commonwealth to be observed. As I must needs profess I never heard any,
nor of any of that humor, that did ever tell his people, that they were bound
in Conscience to obey the Magistrate in observing Lent: But contrariwise I have
heard of many, that will not stick in their own persons to give ill examples,
even upon Friday nights in Lent and good Friday too. For they have a conceit,
forsooth, that they can never be sufficiently distinguished from Papists, nor
freed from superstition, except they seast when the Church appoints them to
fast; and fast, when the Church appoints them to feast: which barbarous
contempt of Law and order, joined with such intolerable pride and wantonness
of opposition, is not to be suffered in any government. And therefore my hope
is, that you which are in place, will look unto it. And now, if what I have
spoken concerning contempt in this particular, you will vouchsafe to apply to
all the rest, then may this suffice, for the first duty we owe unto the
Magistrate, which is, Obedience to his Laws.

2. Besides obedience to his Laws, we are bound to speak reverently and
dutifully of him, and not only of him that is supreme, but also of them that
are subordinate. For they are the Ministers of God, and therefore we ought to
speak well of them. God has set them in his own Seat, and therefore who can
open his mouth against them and be guiltless? They watch over us for our
good, and therefore we ought to know them and have them in singular reverence
for their work sake. We see what pains they take; they are up early and late,
they refuse no travail nor labor to keep us in peace and safety. All the
recompense we can make them, is only to pray for them and speak well of them.
And this is but a verbal recompense, and that is the poorest recompense that
can be, and therefore they must needs be vile and unthankful men, that
cannot afford them this. But much more vile and wretched they, who (where they
are bound by all the Laws of God and Man to speak all good) delight in
nothing more, then to whet and set the keenest edge upon their tongues, that so
they may shoot the poisoned arrows of their bitter words against them. Those
two Apostles Saint Peter and Saint Jude, noting a wicked and evil sort of men,
which are like clouds without water, and like corrupt trees twice dead and
plucked up by the roots; among other crimes do charge them with this as a most
heinous impiety, that they despise government, and speak evil of them that
be in dignity, contrary to the straight Commandment of God; Thou shall not
speak ill of the Rulers of thy people: and contrary to the example of his holy
Angel, which gave not railing words when he contended with Satan himself.
And if this be so heinous an impiety, how much has this age to answer for it,
which is, not a little addicted, but in a manner wholly given over unto it?
wherein we see how common a thing it is for children to presume against the
ancient; the young against the old, the vile against the honorable: Wherein
the tongue has set on fire the course of nature, and men's ears do itch after
nothing so much, as to hear the reproaches of their betters, both in Church and
Commonwealth. Two vices there are extremely opposite one unto another, and
both proceed from the tongue: which have always been justly accounted the
plague and bane of all Commonweales, which are Flattery and Railing. Of these
it is hard to say, whether is the worse. But the latter certainly is more
pestilentiall and infectious. For (as Tacitus a wise Heathen Writer says)
Ambitionem scriptoris facile aduerseris, Obtrectatio and liuor pronis auribus
accipiuntur. Every man's stomach begins to rise when he hears a Flatterer: but
railing and obtrectation, that's always willingly and delightfully heard. And
what is the reason? Adulationi foedum crimen seruitutis, (says he) malignitati
falsa species libertatis inest. Flattery does not only carry with it an odious
show of slavery, but it is slavish, there is true slavery in it indeed. And so
there is in railing also, for that is a base and a slavish humor too; but yet
it carries with it a false show of freedom: they that use it, are accounted
free spoken, and free spirited men. Therefore you see pasquils and infamous
libels, scurrilous inuectiues and bitter satyrs, are the only things, that
are now esteemed. These are thought to be sparks of truth, cast into the faces
of great Personages, by expert and skillful Markemen: but praises and Elogies,
though never so true, never so deserved, are harsh, and hateful in these
days. They are not well endured by some humors, no not when they are bestowed
upon the dead. For this is one of the reasons given us in print, why there
should be no funeral Sermons, because the dead are always praised and
commended in them. And therefore the book of Ecclesiasticus, must not be read
in Churches, wherein the Author says; Let us now praise famous men and our
fathers that begot us. And Plinies long Oration in the praise of Traian may be
packing out of the world: and so may Pacatus his too, that he made in the
praise of Theodosius; and that of Eusebius in the praise of Constantine:
Panegyricks are are not for this age. Poor Rosse his Idea will not sell. Such
books are in small request; but if a Iunius Brutus, or one of Buchanans
Dialogues, or a Leicesters commonwealth, or a Philopatris, or a Pruritanus, or
any thing else that has in it any touch or relish of the old Comedy chance to
appear out of darkness; we see what catching and snatching there is after
such books; such books never hang long upon the Printers hand. As I remember
well, when that most odious and infamous Libell came first our, which masked
under the name of Martin; a certain Booke-seller (who was known to have
dispersed many of them) being examined upon oath, (by some which were then of
greatest place and authority within this Kingdom) how many he had sold, made
answer upon his oath, that within the space of eight or ten weeks, he had
sold two thousand of them: adding further, that he could have uttered in the
same space, two thousand more, if he had had them, and that there was never any
book that pleased the people so well. Good people you must think they were
the while, the true brood of Cham, which could take such pleasure in a very
scurrilous and dull book, a book wherein in I will not say (as one does) that
wounds were ripped up with a laughing countenance: but a book wherein wounds
were inflicted upon the persons of reverend and renowned Prelates, by the pen
of the libeller, where indeed there were none at all. That people should show
themselves so willing to behold the nakedness of their spiritual fathers, and
that the reproaches which were laid upon them in that Libell (which they should
have lamented and bewailed with many tears, if they had been true) should
rejoice their hearts, and tickle them with delight and pleasure, being false
and feigned; this shows that they were led by the same spirit, that was in
Cham, and brought the curse upon him. Let us therefore take heed, how we
unloose our tongues, and set them at liberty to speak evil of them that are
in authority, or lend our ears to them that do it: for he that speaks,
someth out his own shame, and he that loves to hear it, loves to see the
nakedness of his own father, and both shall be in danger of wrath and
judgment for it.

3. The last point of duty that we owe to the Magistrate, goes down into the
heart, and there requires a reverent conceit and estimation of him. They that
have scanned the nature of those passions (that God has put into the heart of
man) observe, that reverence is a mixed affection, and is compounded of these
two, Love, and Fear; which are the two affections that God requires of us. The
one, as a Father; the other, as a Lord. If I be your Father, where is my love?
If I be your Lord, where is my fear? So then, we rouerence the Magistrate,
when we love him for his goodness; and for his greatness and power do fear
and stand in awe of him, being desirous to keep our credit and reputation with
him, and to be held in his good opinion, and fearing to give any the least
occasion, to be brought before him as evil doers. If this affection, this
reverend conceit of the Magistrates person, were (as it ought to be) truly
imprinted in the hearts of men, who sees not what good it would do, and what a
singular help and furtherance it would be to all order and government, both
in the Church and Commonwealth?) For although it be true that the fear of
God is the true Fountain of all virtue; yet as Saint Austen says of slavish
fear, that it is unto Charity, as a needle to the thread, it is many times a
means to bring in Charity; so we may say of the reverence of man: That though
it be not the true Fountain of virtue, yet it is many times a means to bring
us to the true Fountain. They that stand in fear of Men, may easily be led
on further to the fear of God. Again, the fear of Men (though it be not able
to breed true godliness:) yet it is a bridle to sin: For, Qui male agere non
verentur, videri tamen verecundantur: Men that are not afraid to sin, are yet
afraid and ashamed, that the world should see them sin. Now of such there is
some hope. But when men have lost modesty, which (as Bernard truly says) is
not only Gemma in vita and vultu adolescentis, a jewel of great price in the
life of a young man: but Omnium ornatus aetatum; a beauty to old men, and an
ornament to every age: Cum non verecundantur; when they are past all shame and
cannot blush; when they have not only paued their hearts with adamant; but also
covered their faces with brass; when they declare their sins, as Sodom, and
care not to hide them; no, not from the face of the Magistrate himself: when
they have proceeded so far in sin, that not only the fear of God, but also
the shame and reverence of the world, are fled together and departed from them:
such men are in a very dangerous estate, if not wholly desperate, there is
little hope of such, or none at all. Whereby we may perceive what a great
mischief it is in a Commonwealth, when the faces of those men are made vile,
which should be honorable amongst the people: and when contempt is by
Libellers and Raylers cast upon them: For when the fear of God and fear of
Man, are both taken away; then all the pales, that should keep men within the
compass of order and obedience, are utterly broken down, and a wide gap is
laid open to all manner of sin and liberty. And therefore they which have
the charge of this Commonwealth, as they love the beating down of sin, and
the growth of virtue, amongst us; so let them endeavor to maintain to the
utmost of all their power, that reverence which is due to the Princes seat:
and let them also be careful of their own credit and reputation. For by that
means (I am out of doubt) if not the heart of the wicked, yet his color and
his custom will be somewhat changed; and one of the pales of obedience (at the
least) shall be maintained amongst us, and kept standing. And let this suffice
for the first part of my Text, concerning the dignity and high calling of the
Magistrate, and our duties that depend upon it.

2. I am now at length come unto the second part concerning the duty of the
Magistrate, upon which part you shall not need to fear so long a discourse, as
you had upon the former. As the time will not bear it, so I hope there be not
the like need of it. The people, you see, had need to be taught their duty to
the Magistrates, and therefore I have stood the longer upon that point: but, I
hope I may presume, that the Magistrates (to whom I speak) in such abundance
of knowledge, wherewith God has endued them, and after so long experience, are
not now to learn their duty. And therefore it may suffice to put them in mind
of it. It consists, you see, on two parts: whereof,

1. The first is the protection of the just and innocent. For he is the
Minister of God (says the Apostle) for thy good. How for thy good? Not to
promote thee to honor; not to give thee land or living, or money out of his
purse (except he will himself.) For in these matters of bounty and charity,
the Magistrate has the same liberty that other men have, to open or shut his
hand, as he sees cause to lead him: But to preserve thee in thy right, to
maintain thee in thine own, to defend thee from wrong and injury: this is a
duty which the Magistrate does owe unto thee; a duty which he may not deny
thee; a duty unto which the supreme Magistrate (at the time of his Coronation)
and all that be under him (at the time of their admission unto their places)
be directly sworn; a duty for which God has ordained him; a duty which the
nature of his place exacteth of him. And therefore this must needs be the good,
which the Apostle means in this place. Now, though it be true, that the
Magistrate does owe this duty to all alike, and must give every man his own
without respect of persons: yet his care ought to be greatest for them which
are most subject to oppression, and by reason of their disabilitie to defend
themselves, lie open to wrong and injury. For, as for the great and mighty
men here on earth, the Magistrate needs not to be so careful for them: God
bless them all, and send them his grace to do right, for they will take no
wrong. They are able to bring all the learned council to the Bar at an
Assizes. They have Kindred and Alliance in every corner: they have witnesses
ready at hand to pleasure them with an oath: and Jurors at command (sure
Cards:) which (though they know not how to pray for them) know how to fast for
them, if need be. These be the helps which the great Ones of the world do
fetch out of Egypt (as the Prophet speaks) which makes them altogether
careless of taking wrong from their inferiors: and (I would to God) it did
not make them as careless of doing wrong unto them. For still they depopulate,
still they rack, still they oppress, and grind the faces of the poor. Not a
Cottage, not a School, not a College, not an Hospital can escape their
hands. And as for the Church, they make no manner of reckoning what they do
unto it. All other Robberies are done out of sight, but Sacrilege is committed
at noonday amongst us, in the sight and view of the whole world.

Now the eternal God professes, that he has a controversy with these
Nimrods and mighty Hunters, which (like unto the Oaks of the Forest) cry
out for more room, and will suffer nothing to grow up under them: which lay
the foundation of their houses in blood, and build them up with cruelty, and
fill them with the spoil of the poor and of the widow, making no difference
of right, or wrong, or conscience of any thing: I say the Lord has a
controversy, and as it were, a suite of law against these kind of men: and you
that be Magistrates and men of power and authority, are delegates and
arbitrators, and committies on Gods part. And therefore as in such cases, which
come before you, wherein the King is made a party, you are always earnest and
vehement, as you ought to be, in the Kings behalf, and will not suffer any man
to plead or speak against him; so in these causes, wherein it pleases God to
make himself a party, if you see either the poor Tenant, or the poor
Minister, or the poor Commoner, or the poor Widow to be oppressed, if you find
their causes to be just and honest, you ought not to be lukewarm, but hot and
earnest in them, and to interpose your authority against the mighty, and not
to suffer those learned Counsailors (that plead before you) to bestow their
eloquence in defense of wrongs. Non hos concessum munus in vsus, a gift that
was never bestowed upon them to that end: but to put them in mind of that
speech of the Apostle; Omnia possumus pro veritate, contra veritatem nihil
possumus; that so they may avoid that fearful Woe, which God (by the mouth of
the Prophet Esaias) has denounced against all them that call evil, good; or
good, evil. This if you do, your reward shall be sure in the hands of God,
and your persons shall be reverent and honorable in the sight of men. For
there is nothing in the world that procures a better opinion, and winnes more
honor and love to the Magistrate, then the defense and protection of the
poor. But if you shall neglect this duty (which God forbid:) remember what
Mordecay said to Hester; If thou hold thy peace, comfort and deliverance shall
appear to the Jews out of another place; but thou and thy house shall perish:
So, if you (that be Magistrates) shall hold your peace (when you see wrong and
oppression) God will send comfort and deliverance from some other place, and by
some other means. And so we see he does. For look upon the poor Townships
that have been depopulated. In whose hands are they now? I can name you forty
(for a need) within a great deal less then twenty miles of this place,
whereof there is not one at this day, that is in the possession of him, or any
of his name or blood, that did depopulate it. But as they have rooted poor men
out of their dwellings, so God has rooted them out of theirs. And so in every
other kind we see a curse still following goods ill got, and that commonly the
third Heir never enioyes them. But this is nothing to the Magistrate: if he
wink at wrong, if the seat of justice (that should be a Sanctuary to the
oppressed) do yield no comfort; if the cry of the poor, and tears of the
widow be constrained to forsake the earth, and to present themselves before the
Throne of God in heaven, when the matter is come to this pass, that all men
may justly say, Now, O Lord, it is time for thee to lay to thine hand; when the
weak and needy are constrained to cry, Help Lord! for there is no help in
man; when God is enforced to take the cause of the poor into his own hands,
then comfort comes from another place, and then you know what follows in the
speech of Mordecay. Give me leave therefore to shut up this point with the
same exhortation (which the Prophet Esaias used to the Magistrates of Judah and
Jerusalem.) Relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow:
that so these proverbs, Might ouercomes Right; and, As a man is friended, so
his cause is ended; and the like, may be utterly forgotten and remembered no
more amongst us.

2. The next point of the Magistrates office is to punish malefactors, and
evil doers. Whereunto you must not look, that we should exhort them as we
did unto the former, as earnestly to execute wrath upon the wicked, as to
protect the just and innocent. The Bishops in the primitive Church had
consuetudinem intercedendi pro reis; a custom to beg Prisoners, and to
entreat their pardon of the Magistrate; which being called in question, is
mightily defended by Saint Austin in an Epistle to Macedonius: (I will not take
upon me to judge, and censure that Epistle, whether it tend not to too much
lenity and remissness; yea, or no.) But if the manner of ancient Bishops was
to entreat and beg for pardon; it is not meet for us to call for vengeance
and blood out of the Pulpit. Besides, I know the old Rule which tells us; It is
better to answer God for mercy, then for justice; and safer for a Magistrate to
save the lives of many malefactors, then to cast away one innocent. For if a
malefactor chance to escape at one time, the Hand of God is able to reach him at
another: but if an innocent die, God may receive him into his mercy, and will,
if he die as a faithful Christian ought: but it lies not in the power of man
to make him satisfaction for the wrong. But notwithstanding all this, they
which are in authority had need to take heed, in what cases they show mercy.
For by the example of Joshua who destroyed Achan and his house, for stealing
the Babylonish garment contrary to the express commandment of God; by the
example of Moses, who caused the men of Israel to take vengeance one of
another, and every man to turn his sword into the bosom of his own brother,
for their cursed Idolatry; by the example of Phinees which slew the adulterer
and adulteress both together, and pierced them through with his Iaueline; (in
all which places the wrath of God was appeased toward the people, so soon as
the execution was done, and not before) I say, by these and many other
examples, that might be produced, it is plain and evident, that in horrible
transgressions, in heinous and crying sins, there is no way to remove the
wrath of God, and evil from a common State, but by remoouing and taking away
the evil and wicked persons from among the people. Take heed therefore and
beware and look to thy self, thou that art a transgressor of the Law. If thou
do evil, fear (says the Apostle) for he bears not the sword in vain:
like the picture of Saint Paul in a glasse-window, or like an Image in a stone
wall, in whose fingers there be no joints, and whose arms cannot be moved.
For he will draw it forth for the punishment of wickedness, and sin, and
smite through the loins of the ungodly. For as the great Roman Orator could
say of himself, Natura me clementem, respublica seuerum fecit. So truly I
make no question of our Magistrates generally through the whole Kingdom, but
that they have hearts of flesh: that their bowels are full of compassion, that
nature made them inclineable to mercy and pity.

-- Mollissima corda
Humano generi aare se Natura fatetur
Quae lacrimas dedit. --
We see they give judgment upon Malefactors many times with tears in their
eyes: and therefore no doubt their hearts are made of flesh: but the necessity
of the Commonwealth and the zeal of Gods glory in rooting out sin must make
them sometimes severe. And so we see they are, we cannot justly charge them
that they are any way defective in their duty for this point: a great number of
malefactors are cut off (at these two times of Assizes) within this Kingdom.
And a great number, at every monthly Sessions in the City of London. And yet
notwithstanding we see the Goales are no sooner empty, but presently they are
filled again, and the number of malefactors is great still; though by no
means, any way so great as it would be, if Justice were wanting. And therefore
I could wish, if it were possible, that there were some course taken for the
better breeding of this kind of people, that they were not suffered to live in
idleness, nor lurk in Alehouses (which we may call as well Pesthouses:) for
in my conscience they are the very plague and bane of this Kingdom, where all
malefactors take their chief infection: and that there were some course also
taken to compel them to come to Church. To which purpose (because I find that
such kind of people are seldom presented to the Ecclesiastical Courts, and
because there is nothing of force sufficient to keep people in order, and
obedience, if the fear of God be wanting) my desire and petition is, that the
Statute, which lays a forfeiture of twelve pence a day, on every one, that
comes not to his Parish Church, may be revived and duly executed. A matter
given in charge (I see) and much talked of, but as yet there is nothing done in
it. I am persuaded it would be a very great and powerful means to hinder the
growth of sin, and (as S. Austen says of the Donatists, that though they
were compelled to come to Church against their wills, yet being once there, they
were, many of them, taken in the net of Gods Word and made good Christians:) so
many of these idle persons being compelled to come in, might also be taken and
made profitable members: which now (for want of breeding and instruction) prove
nothing else but a burden to the earth that bears them, a reproach to their
parents, that begat them, and a plague to the Commonwealth, wherein they live.
And with this Petition I end.

FINIS.

