ISREAL'S FAST. OR, A MEDITATION Upon the Seventh Chapter of Joshuah; A fair
Precedent for these Times.

By H. B. Rector of S. Mathews Fryday-Street.

Joshua 7. 14. Up, sanctify the People, and say, Sanctify your selves against
to morrow: For thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in
the midst of thee, O Israel: Thou can not stand before thine Enemies, until
ye take away the accursed thing from among you. Printed at Rochel. MDCXXVIII.

To our Royal Joshua, and loyal Elders of Israel, now happily assembled in
Parliament, Grace, Mercy, Peace, Unity, Unanimity, Wisdom, Courage, Zeal,
for Christ, for Religion, for the Republic, for all ISRAEL.
MOst Noble Senate, blessed be God the Author, and our Joshua, his blessed
Instrument of this your happy assembling. And, what word Mordecai sent to
Hester in that deplored estate of Gods people, let me be bold to transfer to
you, in the like case: Who knows, whither you are come together for such a
time as this? The Mite, which here I presume to offer into the rich Treasury
of your grave wisdoms, is Isreal's Fast; A poor Meditation (conceived
formerly, but brought forth in this Season, I hope, in a good hour) which
though it be out of my penury, for want of better means of Expression, yet
springs it from the superabundance of my Zeal, and hearty well-wishing. And
this Fast being performed by Joshua, and the Elders of Israel, upon Isreal's
discomfiture: I knew not to whom more fitly to recommend it, then to You, our
Royal Joshua, and Noble Elders of Israel, now assembled in one entire Body
representative of this goodly Church and State. All this Fast was about the
trespass of one Achan: But if our Israel have many Achans in it, the more need
is there of Isreal's Fast. Yet not a Fast alone. It is but the Preparatiue to
the Purgative Potion, as here; nor as Iezebels Fast, to devour Naboths
Vineyard: But Isreal's Fast, to preserve Gods Vineyard, by purging out the
Troubler of Israel. This troubler was Achan, but unknown to Joshua and the
Elders, till found out by Divine L^^t. And are the Troublers of our Israel so
concealed, as we need Divine Lotts to discover them? Yet if so, God wants not
his Divines, those of his Lot, such, as of whom the good King Iohoshaphat said
to his people, 2 Cron. 20. 20
Believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper. I am the least, and unworthiest of
all Gods Prophets. And some must speak, least the crying of the senseless
Stones should convince us of unfaithful cowardice. Nor are we to look after
extraordinary Commissions, as the Prophets of Old, unless we had
extraordinary Inspirations. The Word is near us. Out of this Word is my
Message directed to you, O Joshua, and Elders of Israel. And this Word it is,
which must direct you at this time in the finding out of the Troublers of
Israel. Now Achan troubled Israel in two special respects: Josh. 7. 12.
First, * In dividing God from Israel: Secondly, Josh. 7. 3. compared with chapter
8. 1. where the division is made up again in a full March
* In dividing Israel from themselves. Thus all Diuiders are Troublers of
Israel. And to these two Heads may all the Achans, Troublers of Israel, be
reduced. Now forasmuch as they are many, and a mighty Confederacy: our
Joshua, and the Elders of Israel now assembled, and fast joined together, are
only all-together able to cope with them. Nor shall it be any prejudice to
your grave wisdoms to take a Precedent, for your easier Process in this
maine Business, out of Gods holy Word, and from the King and People of Israel.
King Asa, and his People being about a great Work of Reformation, for their
better God-speed, They enter into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
Fathers with all their Heart, and with all their Soul: That whosoever would
not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, whither small or
great, whither man or woman: And they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice,
and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets: And all Judah rejoiced
at the Oath, for they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with
their whole desire, and he was found of them: And the Lord gave them rest round
about. This worthy example I only name to your apprehensiue wisdoms, praying
from the bottom of my heart, that you would put it in speedy execution, as the
groundwork of whatsoever good we may hope or expect by the means of this
Noble Meeting. Thus upon such A solemn general Covenant sealed by particular
sacred Oath of each Member of the Three Estates in Parliament, the King, the
Nobles, and the House of Commons, either no dividing Achans will be found
lurking among you; or if any, they will the more easily be discovered, and so
discarded. Then in Gods Name go on, and prosper. Only let Joshua, and Isreal's
Elders go inseparably together; Let not the Achan-faction, by their privy
whisperings, divide them, by working disaffections. For if Achans may but come
between, they will put both into extremities. For as David said to Ioab and
Abishai, Ye are too hard for me, ye Sons of Zeruiah: So the Achan-faction may
prove too hard for our David, for our Ioshuah, without the joint assistance of
you the Elders of Israel. Like the Guisian-faction in France, who were too hard
for King Henry the Third. In such a case then it is necessary, that the Elders
stick close to Joshua, to free Israel out of Hucksters hands. It is Solomon's
advice, who was the wisest King, Pro. 25. 4, 5.
Take away the evil from the King, and his Throne shall be established in
righteousness. And the Wicked there he compares to the Dross, which being
taken from the Silver, there shall come forth a Vessel for the Finer. This
Dross, these Wicked, are the Achans, who so long as they are before the King,
it will be hard for his Throne to be established in righteousness. Now to take
them away (I say) the help of you the Elders is necessarily required. And does
not the King call you The great Council of Us, and of our Kingdom? And your
Council, was it ever more necessary, then now, wherein the Troublers of
Israel have almost gotten the upper hand?

Good God, what powerful Inchanters be these Achans, that presume they can
persuade the World, they are Ioshuahs faster friends, when they would most
divide him from the Elders of Israel? To persuade, they love the Head, when
they seek to pull it from the Body? To persuade they are for the King, when
they seek to strip him of his Subjects? To persuade, they are for the
Sheepherd, when against his Sheep? To persuade, they honor the Father, when
they would set him against his loving Children, and loyal Family? What a
Paradox is This? Wherein did Hushai more approve himself the Kings Friend,
then by his prudent frustraiting of Achitophels traitorous Counsel, and so,
reconciling and reuniting the revolted Subjects to their true Sovereign? What
needed posting, and packing of Parliament-Elections, if all they that falsely
pretend as faithful Service to the King, as Hushai did laudably to Absalon,
were as faithful Servants and Friends to the King, as Hushai was to David? Are
any afraid, least the Kings Liege people should choose such as are Popishly
affected, or of factious Spirits? But such will stand most for the Kings
supplies. They pretend so. But who do more hinder or prejudice the King in his
necessary and Royal Subsidarie Supplies, then such Factours? The Lord Jesus
separate such factious Factours, and miscreant Merchants both from the King and
Kingdom of Israel, that so this Noble Assembly of Joshua and the Elders, may
give and receive reciprocal and mutual Supplies interchangeably: Joshua the
Head, receiving from the inferior principal Parts plentiful nourishment
conveyed by the Natural and Vital Spirits: And Israel the Body, receiving
from Joshua their Head a due motion preportionable to the capacity of each
Member, conveyed by the Animal Spirits, sweetly governing, preserving, and
protecting, that so the Whole together may increase with the increase of God.
There is a Fountain of an exhausted Golden Mine in the Bowels of all
True-hearted English Israelites, which, as the Kings favor, like the
Sunne-beames, begets it in them, so upon all fit occasions they will be ready
in Golden streams abundantly to supply their Noble Joshua. He needs no
American-Slaues to dig and force it, nor the Roman merciless Sword to rip
it, as once out of the Captive- Jews Bowels: But it will freely flow from
Loyal Israel to their Royal Joshua. And now, O Noble Elders of Israel, I know
the Bees come not more laden with Honey to the Hiue, then you at this time
with enlarged affections to minister abundant supply to your Ioshuah. Do it on
Gods Name bravely, and like your selves. I am a poor Scholar, and am ready to
sell my richest treasure, my Books, rather then Ioshuah shall want. And do it
so, as, by Gods blessing upon Joshua, and you the Elders, and so upon us all by
you, many Parliaments may be called, wherein you may testify (if occasion
require) the copious and perennious Treasure of your love and loyalty in the
like kind. How is that? I mean not, Sparingly, but as Arannah like a Prince
gave to King David. For Vera liberalitas fundum non habet. But I mean (pardon
my Zeal, which makes me thus bold to speak) in the genuine and natural
Genius of your tender love and care for the safety and security of our Royal
Joshua, of the Crown, of the Kingdom, of Religion, and of Us all. But your
liberal Subsidies are given for that end. True. But alas (pardon still my
redenesse; I speak not as a Statesman, to advise such a grave Senate, but as a
poor Minister of Christ, and Watchman of Israel, to petition rather) What can
either Money, or Men, or Munition do, so long as Achans trouble Israel? There
is an accursed thing in the midst of thee, O Israel (says the Lord) Thou can
not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from
among you. Till this he done Is^ael must not look to prosper. We need no
better warrant, then Gods own Word for it. It is your Wisdom to follow it,
least the Canaanites prevail over us. And the utmost extreamitie of the state
of things calls upon you to do it instantly; It draws a circle about your
Assembly, as that brave Roman did with his Staff about King Mithridates, not
to stir, or step over it, till Ioshuas and Isreal's danger, the accursed
thing, be removed. It is impatient (I speak no more, then what you all know
far better then I) to abide the expectation of another Parliament: you see
all things are in such a Precipice, and Israel so dangerously sick, as if you
the great College of Physicians depart without curing of it, all will have
occasion to deem the case desperate, and irrecouerable, already drawing on a
pace to a Dissolution, unless the Great Physician do mercifully and
miraculously put to his Omnipotent hand. For the Achans, the Troublers of
Israel, hasten the ruin of all.

But who might those Achans be? Your wisdoms cannot be ignorant of them: yet
because they are a mystical knot of Iniquity, and have exceedingly insinuated
themselves into the good opinion of many; I humbly crave leave, that by the
divine Lot of Gods word, I may a little discover them. All Achans (as I said)
are Diuiders: first, between God and Israel: and secondly (as a consequence
thereof) between Israel themselves; and that especially, while they mainely
labor to divide the Head from the Body, Joshua from the Elders of Israel. And
(says Christ) A Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. These Achans,
which trouble our Israel, are of sundry sorts: as first, Iasuites and Seminary
Priests. These are the ring leading Achans: Of such the Lord says in
Deuteronomy, that because they seduce the people from God, they shall be put to
death. These, as they divide God from us hi^ servants, so they divide the
Subjects from the King. This was wont to be Treason, but now a days it would
pass for good Religion.

The second kind of Achans troubling Israel, are Idols; ^f Achans wedge, and
Babylonish garment troubled all Israel, as an accursed thing: how much more
Popish Idols? shall we halt between two opinions? between God and Baal?
Either go after the Lord only, if indeed he be God: or if Baal be He, go
only after him, said Eliah. King Asa spared not his own Mothers Grove, and
Idol; but brake them down, yea and for their cause deposed her from her
Regency. Oh for the like zeal for God! But certainly if these Idols and
Masses, Images and Popish Trumperies be not speedily abolished, thou can not
prosper, O Israel, nor stand before thine Enemies. Down therefore with Popish
Idols, O Joshua, and the Elders of Israel, which cease not to cry of our
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, even to the ground. Spare not these
Brats of Babylon, that dare perke up so near to God's Ark, threatening to
shoulder it out of doors. But you know what befell the Philistines Dagon; and
you may remember what befell the Romish Dagon in the Blackfriers upon their
fifth of November. So jealous is our God, He cannot brook a corriuall. But
some, having been Protestants formerly, in which Religion they were baptized,
coming afterward to be inueigled to Popery, and thereupon making a solemn
vow, sealed (as they call it) with the Sacrament of the Altar, never to alter
this their new covenant, make such a conscience hereof, as if it stood not with
faith and honesty to break it. But do they not know (unless Popery has
altogether blinded their eyes) that any such covenants or vows ought neither
to be made, nor much less to be kept, which have any commerce, or relation to
Idolatry? Does not our Precontract to Christ in our Baptism, to forsake the
Devil and all his works, frustrate and make void all second contracts with
Antichrist, for the setting up of Idolatry, one maine work of the Devil?
Nothing therefore ought to impeach our Christian Resolution and zeal, in the
casheering of these Troublers of Israel.

A third sort of Achans are Neutralizers; but so, as the Bias of their
affections, wheels and swayes them round to Popery. These are so much the more
pernicious plagues to Israel, in that under the seemly vale and masionlike
habit of the Church of England, they labor to bring in that old Babylonish
strumpet hoodwinkt, that we should all reacknowledge her for our Mother. As may
appear in a certain Book of Private Devotions (so called) published by
Authority: the maine scope thereof all along, being to reduce us all to one
Church, and that none other, but (forsooth) the holy Catholic Church of Rome.
But the whole Mystery of iniquity folded up therein, would require a more
particular unfolding. These Neutralizers, or Popish Arminians, or Arminian
Papists, or what ye will, under the name of the Church of England dare vent any
Arminian haeresie. As in a Book lately printed by Authority too, there is this
most blasphemous Arminian heresy, that there is a goodness obiectiue in the
Creature, which in order of Nature is precedent to the Act or exercise of Gods
will; thus, by necessary consequence making the Creature a God, having a
selfe-being independent, but only upon Gods bare Prescience, upon which, and
not upon that suprema causa causarum, Gods will, he hangs the being, and well
being of all the Creatures. And this sort and confederacy of Achans have gotten
such a high hand, that no Book may be set out, if it be directly against
Popery and Arminianisme; nor against Popery in special, but with some
qualification, or Ingredient, such as this: That the Church of Rome, though she
have many errors, yet is a true Church. And by this device they do, like
Balaam, mightily prevail, and that with great ones, Scholars and others, to
draw us to some friendly commerce and correspondence with that Whore. And they
are grown so much the more confident, becaue they have Authority in their
hand, either to approve, or prohibit, what Books they list. Whereas, if the way
were open, as formerly, freely to print Books by Authority against Popery and
her confederate Arminians, their Neutralizing Achans, as so many Owls, would
fly into their dark Cells, as not able to behold the sunbeames of the Truth.
But we hope and pray, that Joshua and the Elders of Israel will take such
order, that instead of Popish and Arminian Books, Orthodox books may be
freely published by Authority. And suffer me to speak, O noble Sages of
Israel (I am for God, and my King, for Religion, and my Country) if you O
Joshua, and the Elders of Israel purge not out these pestilent Acans, or close
clip their wings, they must needs bring utter confusion upon this state, ere it
be long. They daily creep into high favor in Court; they prevail mightily by
their plausible, insinuating, intoxicating flattery. They go about (as the
Prophet Osee speaks) to make the King glad with their lies. Their Theames and
Theorems are, that Kings are partakers of Gods* own Omnipotency; though this
be a divine Attribute, incommunicable to any Creature: That, justice can be no
Rule or Medium, whereby to give God, or the King his right. As if right were
not grounded upon justice, as the Rule of it. Take away Justice, and where is
Right? Or as if the service, which we perform to God, were not bounded upon
Gods Laws, which are holy, Just, and good. Yea, God neither commands, nor
accepts any other service at our hands, but such as his Law prescribes. And
thus our service becomes just and reasonable. Yet with such like glosings they
think, that Principibus placuisse viris non vltima taus est.

Great Potentates thus to applaud,
They reckon it no little laud.
Nor do they blush not only to preach these things to the face of the Court,
but dare also publish in Print this their shame to the open view of the world,
not without great dishonor both to God and the King.

Now the Lord Jesus deliver our good and gracious Joshua from these Achans,
that his sweet disposition may not be enchanted with their Syren-songs. Herein
the joint courage and zeal of you the Elders of Israel is required. Take away
these Achans from the King, and his throne shall be established in
righteousness.

Many other branches of the Achan-faction there are, whom your wisdoms can
more easily find out. But the masterpiece of your wisdom is, to find out (if
any such Monster be to be found in Rerum natura) where the maine Root and Head
of all these branches and members lurketh. That must be dug and stockt up;
else if it be but pruned, it will but sprout the thicker. If they go on thus,
Gods fearful judgments must needs fall heavy upon this Land: If we be
lukewarm, and have no courage for the truth, the Lord will spue us out of his
mouth. But God forbid, that base cowardice should suffer Gods Truth, Religion,
King, Crown, Kingdom, Church, every mothers son of us, to be by a pack of
traitorous Achans (and so many worthies in Israel, descended of the magnanimous
blood of the heroicke true-bred English, to look on with their thumbs under
their girdles) betrayed into the paws of the Beast, and cheated and nosewiped
even to their face, that the whole state, as one man, may take up that saying
in the Poet, Prudens, sciens, viuus, vidensque pereo. And that (I say) by
traitorous Achans. For whosoever are traitors to Gods Truth, and the Religion
established, whereon the Kings* Throne is firmly established, whether they be
direct Traitors to the State, I leave to your wisdoms to judge: but this I
dare boldly affirm, Traitors they are by necessary consequence, betraying us
into our enemies hands, by making God our Enemy, as too many disastrous
instances have proved, and as Achans instance in this Book will plainly show.

In the name of God therefore, O ye noble worthies of Israel, quit your selves
like men: God has now put a precious opportunity into your hands; The Lord
strengthen you to lay fast hold upon it, and so to husband it, that the issue
may be to his glory, to the preservation of our royal Joshua, and you his
loyal Counsel, and of all the Israel of God.

Not to importune your wisdoms further (unless for pardon of my importunity;
wherein yet your noble propensity will not easily brook to be importuned to
pardon errors of zeal and true affection) I will only crave leave (for
conclusion) to apply S. Aug. prayer in the siege of Hippo. Noueritis me hoc
tempore nostrae calamitatis Deum rogare, Posidon. de vita Augustine.
ve aut hanc ciuitatem ab hostibus circundatam liberare dignetur, aut si aliud
ei videtur, suos seruos ad praeferendam suam voluntatem fortes faciat, aut
certe vt me de hoc saculo ad se accipiat. Which I English thus: My prayer to
God in this time of Isreal's calamity is, that either it would please him to
deliver and free this Church and State from circumuenting Achans, or if
otherwise he see it good, that he would encourage his servants to prefer his
will, by standing up courageously for the truth to the very last, or else that
he would receive me to himself out of this wretched world, that I may not
live to be a miserable spectator of the woeful wrack of my sweet native
Country. Yet I hope better, and the best things, while Joshua and the Elders
of Israel join sweetly together in a mutual and inseparable sympathy for the
weal or woe of Israel, imitating Joshua and Isreal's Elders here throughout, as
follows in this ensuing Tract.

By the most unworthy, yet humble and faithful servant of Christ and of
Israel, of Joshua and the Elders, Henry Burton.

Errata.
Page 2. l. 29. blot out, Of the sun. l. 36. r. flight. and, safety. p. 6. l.
5. r. in the same engagement. p. 12. l. 10. r. posterity. p. 13. l. 35. r. in
sum. p. 19. l. 22. r. endeavor. p. 31. l. 34* r. my boldness. p. 32. l. 20. r.
reproved by Hanani. p. 34. l. 14. r. scrutiny. p. 35. l. 17. r. his face with
his mantle. p. 37. l. 25. for rage, r. ease.

Joshua 7. 6. etc. And Joshua rent his clothes, etc.
AS a solemn Fast is very precious, when duly and dutifully performed: so,
when otherwise, very perilous. That our Fast may prove no less acceptable to
God, then profitable and comfortable to ourselves, we cannot have a more exact
precedent for our imitation and instruction, then Joshua, with the Elders of
Israel.

And Joshua rent his clothes, etc. From this verse, to the end of the Chapter,
are contained these generals: 1 Ioshuahs Act, with the Elders of Israel, to the
10th verse. Secondly, Gods charge and direction to Joshua, from that to the
16th verse. Thirdly, Ioshuahs execution of it, from thence to the last verse.
Fourthly, the success thereof, laid down first in the Radical, So the Lord
turned from the fierceness of his anger, v. 26. Then in a particular branch
and fruit, Isreal's victory, Chap. 8.

First for Ioshuahs Act: It is a very sad humiliation, and may well stand for a
just platform of a solemn and religious fast, in all the parts and
appertinencies of it, as we shall see anon. But before we enter into this
house of mourning, the very first word in our Text, as the Porch, inviteth us
to pause, pointing us back, to look upon the occasion of this great and
grievous humiliation. And Joshua, etc. Or as some translations, Then Joshua,
etc. Or as the vulgar Latin, But Joshua, etc. All comes to one reckoning. It
is a word of coherence, with what went immediately before, namely Isreal's
discomfiture, the occasion of Ioshuahs discomfort.

But what might the discomfiture be, to move so great a mourning? Surely three
thousand Israelites had bravely undertaken to assault and surprise the City Ai:
but they were shamefully repulsed with the loss of six and thirty men. Alas!
Is this so great a matter to move the most courageous General Joshua to rent
his clothes? Yea, and those sage Elders of Israel with him? Far be it. Such
gesture may seem fitter for ignoble and imbellious spirits, then for the brave
Ioshuah, and the grave Rulers of Israel. It might seem to have beseemed Joshua
rather to have buckled on his Armor, then to have rent his clothes; to march
into the field, then to lie on his face; to fall upon the enemy, then upon the
earth; to be powdering the enemies pate with his steel, then his own noble
head with dust. What was the loss of 36 men? A flea-biting in comparison. And
the loss might be imputed either to the disproportion of the number, three
thousand to a whole city, or to the disadvantage of ground, for they of Ai
smote Israel in the going down of the Sun: or to the pride of those three
thousand, puffed up for their parts, with their late conquest of Jericho,
perhaps presuming, that, as of Jericho, so the walls of Ai would presently fall
down, and give them possession; or to the strait and extremity of the enemy,
now put to the last pinch, which might redouble their courage and strength, to
fight it out desperately, since in fight rather then in flight was safely; or if
in neither, best to dye bravely in the bed of honor, it is their last fight.
Now the likelyest way to cure all this, was for Joshua to give a fresh assault,
to double his files and his forces to regaine Isreal's loss. Yea, for Joshua
thus to deject himself upon so slight an occasion, might seem to argue him of
an abject and degenerous spirit, not beseeming the Captain of Gods people; it
might also provoke the Canaanite the more insolently to triumph, if in those
days there had been but a Jesuit lurking among Isreal's tents, to send secret
intelligence to the enemy.

But the noble Joshua saw more in this small discomfiture then so. For first,
though but 36 of the Israelites were slain, yet to Joshua, the life of one
Israelite was more precious, then ten thousand of the uncircumcised. Yea, have
not heathen Captains showed the like affection to their Citizens? It was
Pericles glory on his deathbed, that he never caused any of his Citizens to
wear mourning attire. And the great Scipio, when he was told by one, that he
might win such a city, if he would expose but 300 of his men to loss:
answered, he had rather preserve one Citizen, then kill a thousand Enemies. Why
not Joshua much more? If a Grecian or Roman Citizen were so dear to their
Emperors, how much more an Israelite to Joshua? But if Joshua and the Elders
were so affected for the loss of so few Israelites, what would they have
been, if many thousands of Gods people, had been spoiled by the Enemy? How
nearly would it have touched them, if the whole inheritance of their brethren,
the two Tribes and a half beyond Jordan, had been taken away by the Heathen?
We see here what kind of sport, pleasure, pastime, Joshua and Isreal's Elders
used, in so small a discomfiture of Gods people. They seek not now with some
mad mirth, as the hearing of a play, or seeing of a Mask, to conjure down
the spirit of a little sad Melancholy: but themselves are Actors in a most
tragic Scene.

Secondly, not only 36 had lost their lives, but upon this, all the Tribes and
Troops of Israel had lost their hearts. For thereupon the hearts of the people
melted, and became as water. They who but a little before were as Lions, are
now become like a sort of sheep. A fearful condition, and a sign of divine
desertion; for as Moses said, How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten
thousand to flight, except their Rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut
them up? Even as sheep in a pen, easy to be taken. What if the Enemy had
taken courage, and used this opportunity, in Isreal's consternatio^? High time
then for Ioshuahs Prostration to interpose it self. Prayers and tears were now
(as always) Isreal's best weapons.

Thirdly, this repulse was greatly to Isreal's reproach; no small touch to
Ioshuahs good heart. O Lord (says he) what shall I say, when Israel turns
their backs before their enemies? Now might the heathen begin to be of another
mind, that Israel was not invincible: and therefore might confederate against
Israel, and resolve, as once the Philistims, upon a former defeat given to
Israel, 1 Samuel 4.
Be strong, and quit your selves like men, O ye Philistims.

Finally, that which above all moved Joshua and the Elders thus to humble
themselves, was the glory of Isreal's God, now suffering by Isreal's repulse. For
now the heathen might say, Where is now their God? Now the Israelites
themselves might begin to doubt of the truth of Gods promises, wherein, upon
this occasion, such an interruption and breach was made. This was that which
troubled Joshua, that he said, And what will thou do unto thy great Name? v.
9. These were the motives of Ioshuahs mourning.

But what might be the cause of this discomfiture, and consternation of Israel?
v. 1. It was Isreal's sin. The children of Israel committed a trespass in the
accursed thing: for Achan, etc. took of the accursed thing, and the anger of
the Lord was kindled against the children of Israel. This may seem no less
strange to cause Isreal's discomfiture; then it slight, to occasion Joshua to
fall on the earth. But Israel had transgressed. Why Israel? Was it not Achan
alone? Again, what was Achans sin? Any more then the taking of a Babylonish
garment, 200 shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of 50 shekels? And was it
not of the spoil of Jericho? And was not Achan a Prince in Israel, of the
regal Tribe? Might not his person challenge so much of the spoil, at least for
his share? Might not so great a personage desire to reserve such a Babylonish
Relic for a monument? How so great a sin then? If some part at least, of
those 3000 sent against Ai had bin idolaters, Israel might, not without cause,
have suspected some disastrous issue. As if a Protestant state, should among
Protestant subjects (when it has enough) send such as are Popish idolaters for
soldiers and captains against a foreign enemy of the Popish religion, were it
not cause sufficient to defeat and frustrate the whole expeditio^, and to send
the scattered and defeated army home again with no less shame, then loss?
Much more if idols do, not as Achan, lurk at home, but dare with open face
perk up, as Dagon, cheek by iowle, by Gods Ark. Yet Achans one lurking sin was
provocation sufficient to cause Israel to turn their backs. How so? For the
Lord had given a special strict charge to the contrary, that no man should
reserve ought of Ierico to his proper use; all must be devowed to the fire,
only the gold and silver consecrated to Gods Tabernacle. Therefore no small sin,
which Gods severe command aggravats. Saul had a fair pretense of reserving
Agag, 1 Samuel 15.
and the fattest of the cattle, the spoil of Amalek, prete^ding the^ for
sacrifice; but it excused not his rebellion in disobeying Gods commandment for
the internecion of Amalek; yea it cost him his kingdom.

Yea, but though Achans sin were so great, yet it was his own. How does Israel
then stand charged with it? What reason, is this, V. ^.
Israel has transgressed; for Achan took of the accursed thing? Shall not the
judge of all the world do right? Shall Israel be culpable for one man's offense?
Far be it. Nay, more then that, this sin of Achan was secret, hid from
Joshua, and the Elders of Israel. Indeed if they had known of it, and not
punished it, they had made themselves accessaries, and so, culpable of it. The
whole Tribe of Benjamin (a memorable and remarkable example) came to be
extinct (except a 600, the poor 25000.
remnant of many thousands) only for conniving and countenancing a few sons of
Belial in Gibeah, who had abused the Levites wife. Let Israel read the whole
story, and learn to abhor such countenancing, such connivency of sin in the
sons of Belial. It was in those days, when there was no king in Israel. So it
was the less marvel, that open crying sins being countenanced, and walking
under protection (as then of a whole Tribe) should plainly argue, there was no
King in Israel. An open sin then, though but of one Achan unpunished, might
with some color of reason be said to involue Israel with the same engagement
with the author and actour of it: but Achans sin was yet concealed from
Israel, they knew not of it, much less connived at it, least of all
countenanced it. Indeed we read, that sacrifice was offered even for sins of
ignorance. And we know by experience, that an Impostume bred within the body,
unknown, unfelt, is no less dangerous to the whole, if not more, then an
outward known Gangreene, or Canker. Howsoever, we see here, that for Achans
sin, Israel is counted a transgressour: yea, all Israel smarts for it.

Here is then by the way a point of instruction for Israel, that one Achans
sin is enough to trouble, to endanger all Israel (secret though it were) till
it be removed. Nor goes this example alone. Jonathan, King Saul's Son, for but
tasting a little honey with the tippe of his rod, and that in his great
necessity, ignorant of any the Kings command to the contrary, caused Gods
Oracle to be silent, Jam. 1. 14.
a sign of Gods displeasure against Israel. Rachel, having stolen away her
Fathers Idols (not for any zeal of depriving her father of the means of his
Idolatry, but rather out of a blind love to her old Idole-acquaintance) how
did she endanger the whole Family of Jacob her husband, Genesis 31.
while Laban in zeal of his false gods (the most furious and bloody zeal of
all other) pursued him with all his power, but that the Lord interposed
himself by a monitory dream? Again, while these idols lurked still in Jacobs
house, unknown (good man) to him, was not he and all his in danger of his
brother Esaus inveterate hatred and armed malice, now marching against him, but
that Gods mercy came between, crowning Jacob with the name of Israel, which
he had so stoutly and devoutly Genesis 32.
wrastled for, telling him, that as he had prevailed with God, Hosh. 12. 4.
so he should with men, hereby arming him with assurance against his brother?
But you will say, this was upon an old quarrel. True. Yet Rachels Idols
might help to reviue it. For (observe it) Jacob had no security from dangers,
till his house was purged of such stuff. For no sooner was this brunt over,
but a third danger encounters him, to wit, the quarrel of the Sychemites and
their Confederates against Israel and his Family. It was foul on both sides;
but the lurking idols in Jacobs house (I dare be bold to say) ministers either
fire, or fuel, to cause it burn the fiercer. Note the issue well. Jacob
purposing with his Family to go and erect an Altar at Bethel, Genesis 34. and 35.
there to worship the Lord in purity without mixture, first purges his family
of al their idols. Then, then, I say, Genesis 35. 5.
and not before the fear of the Lord fell upon the cities round about, that
they pursued not the sons of Jacob. Till this time, we see, Israel had no rest,
nor security from his enemies. How much more is this verified of such sin, when
it is once come to a head and full height? For the purpose. What reign was
ever more famously peaceable, then that of Solomon? yet in his old age, doting
on his idols, by reason of his strange wives, 1 Kings 11.
how did this trouble Israel? God began to profane the glory of that
peaceable Kingdom, 1 Kings 12.
by raising up sundry adversaries to vex him. 1 Kings 14. 21.
And Rehoboam his son insisting in his Fathers steps of idolatry (his mother
being an Ammonitesse) and adding to his Fathers little finger his own loins
and oppressions, to his rods his own scorpions, was the cause of an incurable
rent in Israel, of an irrevocable defection of the ten Tribes, and of the
spoil of the treasure of the Lords House, and of all those goodly golden
vessels and vtensils of the Temple by the King of Egypt, though from thence
Solomon had married his wife. So little confidence is there in marriage, league
and alliance, where idolatry is a sticklar. In a word, in the Law of Moses, if
a man committed murder in shedding innocent blood, the whole Land stood guilty
of it, till it were expiated by the death of him that shed it. Numb. 35. 33.

But how stands this with reason or equity, that one man's sin ingages a whole
Land? Yes, very well. For every Kingdom is a body politic. And one member
gangreend, endangers the whole body, -- Immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum
est, ne pars sincera trahatur. Pereat potius vnus, quam vaitas.
if it be not prevented; and better the incurable member be cut off. Better,
says Christ, that one member perish, the^ the whole body be cast into hell
fire. Again, sin is of a leprous nature, it quickly spreads over the whole.

This being well waighed, it concerns every child of Israel to apply it to
himself, to smite upon his thigh, to examine his conscience, to find out the
traytor-sin, Achans sin, to wit, the close or open reigning sin, the sin of
maintenance, of course, of custom, of habit, the sin of rebellion and
contumacy, which else betrays himself, and Israel with him.

Secondly, this should stir up the whole state when they see and feel, that
nothing prospers, but all things go backward with Israel, to humble
themselves in sackcloth and ashes, and withal to search out the Achan, and
purge out the sin that troubles Israel. For till then, no peace, no prosperity
for Israel.

Thirdly, this should teach all true Israelites to condole the transgressions
of others, as wherein themselves are so deeply interessed: when thy neighbors
house is on fire, it concerns thee nearly to quench it. And we are
endangered not only by vicinity and neighborhood of nature and society, --
Paries cum proximus ardet, Tunc tuares agitur.
but much more, if we become Accessories of others sin, either by not
preventing it when we may, or not laboring for their remedy by prayer or
persuasion; or much more, by countenancing; applauding, and approving it, or
also in not cutting it off (when no other remedy will remove it) with Isreal's
sword of justice

In the last place Israel may gather by this one example of Achan, in what
state it stands. For if one Achans sin, and that unknown to Israel, proved
so disastrous, so dangerous: then how lamentable is the condition of Israel,
when the Land is full of Achans, and the sins of those Achans not so shamefast,
as to seek to hide themselves in corners, but dare display themselves upon the
open theater? Such as say, with our tongue will we prevail, our lips are our
own, who is Lord over us? Such as sit in the Chair of scorners. Such as sin
with a high hand, Cum privilegio. Then it is high time for Joshua, and the
Elders of Israel to rent their clothes, to fast and pray, and more then that
too, as we shall see anon.

Proceed we from Achans sin, the Cause, to the effect, Isreal's discomfiture,
the occasion of Joshua's discomfort, with the Elders of Israel. Achan now
perhaps (if his guilty conscience gave him leave) was a sleep in his Tent, as
Jonas in the ship, or his lust exercised his eyes in beholding of his new
Babylonish garment, his gold and silver wedges, the while his innocent brethren
smarted for it. But Joshua and the Elders of Israel, guided by another. Spirit,
then of supine and careless sensuality, were now in the deep of humiliatio^ for
Israel, and that upon so small an occasion in comparison, and to se to.

Here is then another lesson for Israel, to know and acknowledge it for the
greatest happiness, when in their affliction, or so, they have such a Joshua and
Elders, compassionate and tenderhearted toward their people, and such as are
heartily affected with, as chiefly, the least reproach done to Isreal's God, so
the least damage or despite done to Gods Israel by the enemy of both. Such
was Isreal's happiness here. Yea such was Egypts happiness, Gen, 41. 43.
when, next to Pharaoh, Joseph was set over them, before whom the King caused
to be proclaimed, Abrech, which is tender Father; the best Title, beseeming the
Governors of Israel. 2. Sam. 1. 17.
Such was David's affection, who mournes for Saul and Jonathan, and Isreal's
discomfiture by the Philistims, upon the mountains of Gilboa. Yea how was
David touched only for a disgrace his servants suffered from the King of Ammon,
whom he had sent in kindness to congratulate? Nor was it an imbellious sorrow,
but such as became the King of Israel to express in a noble revenge. Also this
King David, when through his default, his people were plagued, what an
humble spirit, and fatherly affection did he express toward them, when he
said to the Lord: 2. Sam. 24. 17.
Lo, I have sinned and done wickedly but these sheep, what have they done? Let
thine hand I pray thee be against me, and against my Fathers house. Under such
Joseph's, under such Ioshuas, and Elders, under such David's, Israel howsoever
afflicted, yet cannot perish, Filij istarum lachrymarum perire non possunt. The
Sons of such compassionate Fathers can never perish. There is ever hope for
Israel under such a Joshua and Elders. Israel was never carried captive, but
under wicked and cruel idolatrous Kings. A pious and well affected Prince,
being as a noble head, which ever keeping above water, preserues the body,
though under water, from sinking.

And how well does it become all Joshua's and Rulers of Gods people, to be
thus tenderly affected with the good or evil of Israel? For first, as they are
next unto and under God in their power and soveraignety over his people: so in
their Ioshua-like affection; they do most nearly imitate God himself, of
whom it is said, Esaias 63. 9. In all their afflictions he was afflicted. Again,
Princes and Rulers, though they be by calling and office called Gods, yet in
nature they are men, Psalm. 72.
and shall die like men, as King David says; they are of the same mould and
metal of their people, to knit them in a sympathy of affection with them.
Therefore even Christ the Son of God took our Nature, with the infirmities
of it, that he might be a merciful High Priest, and having experience of our
temptations, he might succor them that are tempted. Did*
As that noble Heathen. Queen said, Non ignara mali, miseris succurrere disco:
having experience of misery my self, I learn hereby to succor the miserable.
Patres Patriae, Fathers of their Country, whose subjects are not more their
servants in duty,

It is Isreal's office then always to pray for such Ioshuas, that such gracious
and pious Princes may ever reign over them. Secondly, Israel must be careful
to walk worthy of such Joshua's, Prove. 28. 2.
both for the obtaining, and the long enjoying of them. Thirdly, if Joshua and
the Elders of Israel be thus moved even for the least calamities of their
brethren; then how ought our whole Israel to be affected with the daily and
heavy calamities of Gods people, only divided from us in distance of place, not
in difference of participation with Christ our head? Fourthly, having such
Joshua's and Elders, who like good Fathers, are tenderly affected with the
least calamity of Gods people, how thankful ought we to be to God for them,
and to express this our thankefulnes in all pious offices, and liberal
beneficence, that nothing be lacking either for ornament to their princelike
port, or much more for the necessary support of the Crown and kingdom? In the
last place, if Israel have received far greater repulses, and reproaches, then
now Israel had done, Israel had need to be so much the more humbled, if
possible, then here Joshua and the Elders were. And so much of the occasion
moving Joshua with the Elders of Israel thus to humble themselves.

Come we now to their act it self. Therein consider 2. things. 1. The
Circumstances. 2. The Substance of it. The circumstances are 3. 1. Of the
Persons, the Actors, Joshua and the Elders of Israel. 2. Of the place, Before
the Ark of the Lord: 3. Of the time, until the eventide. The substance of the
act consists partly of Action and behavior, and partly of speech. Their actio^
or behavior was threefold: 1. They rent their clothes: 2. they fell to the
earth upon their faces 3. they put dust upon their heads. All this v. 6. Their
speech is a prayer or zealous and humble expostulatio^ with God. v. 7. 8. 9. Al
which being jointly considered, they represent unto us an exact pattern and
platform of solemn and public Fast. Which will the better appear, if we a
little open every piece a part.

First, for the Persons. Joshua for his person was of eminent gifts and graces.
He was one of the Twelve; that were sent to view the land of Canaan, one of the
two, that encouraged the people to go take possession, contrary to the
discouragements of the other ten. He only was with Moses in the holy Mount
those forty days and forty nights. He was a man most zealous of Gods glory,
in his pure worship and service. So that in his pious and pithy exhortation to
the people, Chap. 24. to fear the Lord, to serve him in sincerity; and in
truth, to abandon their strange Gods: he concludes, in case they would not,
saying: As for me, and my house, we will serve the Lord. Yea he made a
covenant with the people to put away their idols, and images, those strange
gods; set them a statute and ordinance, Chap. 24. 25. He erected also a stone
for a monument, and witness for perpetuity unto stosterity. A most excellent
Precedent for Princes he was, since the only rule of his Regiment was the word
of God, the wisest Counselor of Kings, if they would have their affairs to
prosper. As Josh. 1. v. 8. He took not his Precedent from his predecessor
Moses, though he were a wise and a good man, but so far as he was regulated
by the only rule of Gods word. The wisest politicians may foulely err in their
government, whose precedents may prove the more perilous to their followers,
when out of an admiration and high opinion of their wisdom, they withal
swallow down their great errors, digesting the^ as corrupt blood into all the
veins of the body politic; but they that follow Gods word, cannot err. This
made David wiser then his teachers, the^ the aged, the^ his enemies. Ps. 119.
98. In a word. Joshua is not noted of any vice in Scripture, as even Moses and
Aaron were.

Again, for his office and calling, he was Moses successor, appointed by God
to lead his people into the possession of the promised land. Herein also,
according to his name, Iehoshua or Jesus, which signifies a Savior, he was a
type of Jesus Christ, who conducts his people into the heavenly Canaan. Moses
and Aaron were defective and faulty, for which cause they might not conduct the
people into Canaan; which is also a mystery, signifying, that the law, those
legal and leviticall observances were defective, and so could not bring Israel
into Canaans possession: only Joshua, which is Jesus, (in whom no fault is
found, noted in Scripture; no more the^ Melchisedechs genealogy, to make him a
type of Christ's eternal Priesthood; though neither Joshua, as a man, was
void of all sin, nor Melchisedech with out Parents) Joshua (I say) a lively
type of Jesus Christ, was he, that must put gods people in the possession of
the promised land. This is that Iehoshua here who humbles himself, and with
him the Elders of Israel. whether they were the chief of the tribes or of the
families of Israel, or else those 70 Elders, mentioned Ex. 24. 1. The chief of
Israel they were without question. And the text says, he (to wit Joshua) and
the Elders of Israel jointly.

Hereby the way is a notable Emblem, and pattern of a well governed state,
where Joshua, the prime governor, goes not alone in his Counsels and actions,
but has his Elders with him. Even Solomon, for all his wisdom, had a grave
Senate of sage Elders, whose Counsel if his son Rehoboam had not forsaken,
preferring his brave younkers, before the grave Elders, his kingdom might long
have flourished.

Well what did Joshua and the Elders of Israel here? First, they rent their
clothes. To signify the renting of their hearts. So Joel. 2. 13. Rent your
hearts and not your garments. And the ceremony of renting the clothes was not
lightly to be used, but in case when Gods glory or name suffered; as Number. 14.
6. Joshua and Caleb rent their clothes, when their fellow spies had by their
misreport discouraged the people, causing them to distrust Gods laws and
promise. The like case is here. Secondly they fell to the earth on their faces;
importing a stupendous abjection full of zeal, as utterly regardlesse of
their dignity or persons, careless what became of them, so transported were
they with zeal for Gods glory, and people. Thirdly, they put dust upon their
heads, in sign of greatest humiliation, as dead men, on whom the earth or
mould is cast for burial. Hereunto add the other circumstances, as of the
time, how long, until the euentide, the just term of a solemn fast: as also
of the place, before the Ark of the Lord, the type of Gods presence in his
Sanctuary, before the mercy seat, the place of public worship: together with
their fervent invocation, and zealous prayer to God: and so in some we have a
full fast, in all the entire and maine parts of it.

Lo, then, what a noble precede^t of true piety is here exhibited to Gods
people! And does not our royal Joshua the like? what says the proclamation?
Note the words well: In this fast his Majesty in his royal Person, and with
his own family, and royal household, will give an example to the rest of his
people. Yea, that the pious and religious considerations, [namely of
deliverances past, of disasters present, and dangers imminent] have so wrought
in the Princely heart of the Kings most excellent Majesty, that he has not
only had recourse, to that great and Divine Majesty, who is the King of
Kings, in his private devotions, to implore his mercy, and favor to himself
and his people; but according to the example of all good Kings in former ages,
in the times of common calamities, which equally concern both Prince and
people, to command a solemn, a general, and a public fast etc: So run the
words. Which well observed, what hopeful fruits shall not such a fast
produce, when the first seeds thereof, even prayers, and tears, are begun
to be sown by our Royal Joshua? And though in that his preceding, and
private practice he seems to go alone: yet for the more grave and religious
form of solemnizing thereof, instead of the Elders of Israel, his most
excellent Majesty has consulted with his reverend Bishops. Which our noble
Joshua, and his reverend Elders, so far as they in this fast imitate Joshua
and the Elders of Israel, so let our Israel imitate them. Then doubt we not of
a hopeful welfare to attend and succeed this fast, wherein Joshua with the
Elders of Israel lead us the way in sincerity of their heart, and in the
precedencie of their pious examples. And note one fare proof and fruit of our
late general fast, upon the 2d of August, for the Country. That very day the
heavens began to restrain their unkindly influence of excessive unseasonable
famine-threatning wette, the Lord clearing up his cloudy countinance in the
face of the christaline sky, fair weather continuing from that day, to bring
us in a joyful and most plentiful harvest, to the regret of all ungrateful
misers and regrating cornmongers, but joy to all good hearts. The very like
change of weather fell upon the very day of the last years fast, which began
with the Court, and London fast. Thus God is pleased to grace our fasts,
showing how much he is delighted with true humiliation.

Now, by the example of Joshua, and the Elders of Israel here, we are taught
how to keep a right and religious fast to the Lord. First, as they rent their
garments, so we should our hearts with deep contrition and godly sorrow, for
Gods dishonor, displeasure, and Isreal's discomfitures. And if ever, now cause
there is to rent our hearts, for Isreal's fearful rents, both in Church and
state. These great schisms and rents are best cured and closed again, by this
one of the heart. If our hearts prove rocky, smite we them with Moses rod, by
the application of Moses Law, that so being rent and cleft a sunder, there may
issue out floods of living waters of repentance flowing from a lively faith,
which may supple and close the clefts and chaps of our parched Israel.

Secondly, as Joshua's, so our fast must be with exceeding humiliation of soul
and spirit, yea even to the dust, and that renouncing our selves, as dead men,
in whom is noe help or hope, being as it were buried under ground, as Joshua
under the dust, which he cast upon his head. We must go out of our selves, as
the soul out of the body, flying to God, who only can free us from our
evils, fealt or feared.

Thirdly, our fast must be constant as Joshua's, until the eventide. The day
of our fast is a holy day to the Lord, to be wholly spent in a religious
abstinence as from our ordinary food, so from any pleasure, or profit of our
own. The Lord reproues Israel for this, Esaias 58. ^.
saying: Behold in the day of your fast you find pleasure, and exact all your
labors. We must forbear all kind of food, or repast till the euentide. So did
Nineueh by the Kings commandment. Ion. 3. 8.

Fourthly, the special place wherein to celebrate our fast, is the place
appointed for public worship. Joshua's humiliation was before the Ark of the Lord. Our private houses have their use for private devotions: but in the time
of public service in Gods house, whereat we must, if we may be present, our
private devotions at home are of no other use, but to bring a curse in stead of
a blessing, while the public ministry is neglected, or contemned. And ever
in the public ordinance God does more manifest his presence in the
communication of his graces, then in our private families: yet by commending
the public, I exclude not the prinate: but ever the private must give place to
the public. The day of our fast, as also other the Lords Sabboths, allows
some time to be spent in our private families for the duties of the day, as
those vacant hours both before, between, and after the public service: but
the public worship must in no case be incroched upon by our private
devotions, much less by our worldly affairs, or affections: at that we must
be no less instant in coming then constant in continuing. So did Joshua
before the Lord's Ark. Yea in some places, specially in the Country, where
their Churches are greater, and their congregations lesser, being also upon a
working day, and in harvest time, if they be accommodated for Preachers,
agreeing upon it, the fast may be wholly spent in the Church, in the public
congregation. Not that there is more virtue in the Church-wals, or pewes, or
pillars, then in our private houses or closets: but the public Ordinance is
the most perfect beauty of holiness, ever to be preferred before private
devotions.

Fifthly, a religious fast must ever be joined with earnest and fervent prayer
to God, either for removing present evils, or preventing future: or else in
thanksgiving for benefits received and enjoyed.

Lastly, all this must be done in sincerity of heart, as in the sight and
presence of God, all hypocritical and Pharisaicall vayles removed from us.
Thus Joshua's humiliation, with the Elders of Israel, was before the Ark of the Lord, in the presence of God. Suffice it only to name these things as
brief rules and directions for our fast.

Only insist we upon two points, as most requisite to our present purpose. The
first is: that in our public fast, God does especially look upon the heart,
that it be single and sincere without hypocrisy. Nothing is more abominable in
the sight of God, than an hypocritical Fast: which the more solemn, the
hypocrisy is the more insolently and audaciously impious, as daring to play
mock-holiday with God upon the open stage. Such was Iezebels fast, a very pack
of hypocrisy; who to color and cover her craft, and cruel covetousnes, to
compass Naboths vineyard, she proclaims (forsooth) a solemn fast, having
her false witness in a readiness, suborned to accuse innocent Naboth, saying,
This man blasphemed God, and the King. Who would not imagine that this fast was
rather to expiate Naboths imaginary blasphemy, then to satiate Ahabs lust for
his hereditary vineyard? saving that it was not so easy a matter for Iezebel
and Ahab by subtle hypocrisy to impose upon, no not, their credulous simples.
The veil of hypocrisy is not for every ones wear. Iezebel and Ahab were
palpably and notoriously wicked, which, while they go about to hide under
hypocrisy, they do but dance in a net of too small a thread to hold such a
sish as Naboths vineyard, without the strong cords of a woman's lawless lust,
armed with Ahabs signet, with the awfulnes whereof she had taught the Elders
and Governors of Naboths City to be at a beck, 1. Kings. 21.
and to serve at all turns. Far unlike our Joshua, and Elders of Israel
here, in their Fast. But Ahabs kingdom was the revolted idolatrous house of
Israel. No marvel if they were no less absurdly hypocritical, then grossly
profane. But let not Judah sin. Yes Judah also was become an hypocrite. In
the 58. of Esaias The Lord bids the Prophet, Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgressions, and the house of
Jacob their sins. What sins? Hypocrisy stands in the forefront, v.: 2.
Wherein specially did they play the hypocrites? In their fasting; so v. 3.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? etc. The Lord answers,
v, 5. Is it such a fast, that I have chosen? A day for a man to afflict his
soul, is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloath, and
ashes under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?
Is not this the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to
undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye
break the yoke? etc. A religious fast then is to loose the bands of
wickedness: but hypocrisy fastneth them the more by fasting.

How so? For first, of an hypocritical fast comes no good, God regards it not,
as the people complained. Yea, says David, Esaias. 58. 3.
if I regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. Psalm. 66. 18.
And Psalm. 17. 1. Hear the right O Lord, attend unto my cry; give ear unto my
prayer, that goes not out of feigned lips. Implying that dissimulation with God
has no plea for acceptance. Yea, on the contrary, as it hardens a man in
evil, so it hastens greater judgments; especially in a solemn fast, it
turns even our prayers into sin, and brings a curse in stead of a
blessing; as Jacob feared, by having on his brothers garment, and pretending to
be Esau. Though never any dissimulation sped so well as that of Jacobs. And
not without cause. For the blessing belonged to him, by a double right: By Gods
donation and designement, and by purchase from Esau; so that in truth and
effect, Jacob, was Esau, to wit, the elder brother, to whom the blessing of
birthright belonged. This by the way. But false hearted hypocrisy is ever
disastrous and unhappy. And as no reformation can be expected of a solemn
hypocrite, but still greater obfirmation in evil: So he cannot hope of any
good from God; or if he do, his hope shall perish, as Job faith.

But Ahabs humiliation and fasting, ^biece.
though hypocritical, yet obtained favor of God.

True, Answer.
But what favor? He obtained the reprivall of his punishment for the time, but
not the pardon of his sin, nor consequently exemption from judgment. Gods
temporal, or temporary favor to an hypocrite, shows how much he delights
in a sincere heart. But Ahab was paid home at last for all his hypocrisy and
impiety. For as he had swallowed down at a morsel Naboths vineyard, whereof,
for all his humiliation, and crowching, he never made, nor ever meant
restitution, while he disfigured his face in a counterfeit fast: So at Ra^oth
Gilead, the Lords arrow hit him home, 1 Kings. 22.
and that in the same place, where Naboth was slain, and that also in Ahabs
disguised attire, whereby he thought to have frustated the truth of Micaiah's
prophecy. Well might Ahab by hypocrisy commit the evil of sin unseen of men,
but he could not thereby avoid the evil of punishment, seen of God, for all
his disguising.

This may teach us in our humiliation to look well to our hearts, how they
stand affected. The ancient Heathen used to look into the Entrals of their
Sacrifice, whether they were sound or no. Caesar observing his sacrifice to
want a heart, took it for an ill presage, as it proved. That which they did
in superstition, let Christians have in religious observation, namely to look
well to their heart, if sound and sincere: else such a sacrifice bodes no good.
Wherefore is there a price in the fools hand, to buy wisdom, and he wants a
heart. Prove. 17. 16.

Now an ill affected heart in our Fast-sacrifice, is either a wilful ignorance
of our sin, or if we know it, stubborn impenitency, having no thought or
purpose, much less desire and endeavous to reform it. This is a fast not for
sin, nor from sin, but in sin, and unto sin. Joshua's heart, and the
Elders of Israel, was not so. They were ignorant indeed of Achans sin, but
not wilfully or willingly. Besides, if they had known it, how ready would they
have been to purge or to punish it? as we shall see afterward? Otherwise,
their sacrifice had vvanted a heart, and so would have proved or procured a
greater plague unto Israel. But in their humiliation they were no way guilty
of Achans sin, nor as authors, nor as accessories, either by approving,
conniuing or patronizing of it. They dealt sincerely.

The second and last special point considerable in Joshua's act, is, that as
Joshua's, so our fast, should be holy to the Lord, and for the Lord. When ye
fasted, ye fasted not to me, but to your selves: Zach: 7. 5. They sought
themselves, their own wealth and welfare. No godamercy. Should ye not hear
etc? Esaias. 58. 3. That which Joshua and the Elders of Israel sought, was
principally Gods glory which suffered in Isreal's discomfiture. As v. 9. And
what will thou do unto thy great name? It was not their own profit, or
private ends, nor policy, but piety, that moved them to this humiliation.

Qui Dei solius gloriam quaerit, acquirit and suam:
Qui suam solius gloriam quaerit, perdit and Dei.
He that seeks Gods glory only, procures also his own:
He that seeks his own glory alone, loses also Gods.
Now the right seeking of Gods glory in our Fast, is to put the means in
practice. As, to remove the impediments, generally all men's personal sins,
particularly state-sins, as idolatry and heresy, which directly strike at Gods
glory, and ruinate Israel; as also oppression and bribery, which ruinate
kingdoms. Withal, to establish the true Religion, with justice distributive
and correctiue: so is Gods Israel, so the Kings throne established.

Many may the causes be of Isreal's fast, whereof Joshua and the Elders cannot
be ignorant. Yet if there were no more, Achans sin alone, though concealed,
is cause enough. But how shall Achan with his privy palliated sin, be found
out? This is Gods part in the next words, v. 10.

From this verse to the 16 is contained the Lords charge to Joshua, Get thee
up; wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, etc. It may
seem strange that God should bid Joshua surcease his sorrowing, alleging
withal the cause, Isreal's sin. If Israel has sinned, the rather have Joshua
and the Elders cause to continue their fasting and prayer. But we are not to
take this charge as a check. For the Lord did not interrupt Joshua's devotion,
till the eventide, the time of comfort after sorrow. So that being at a full
period, (And what will thou do to thy great name?) the Lord takes the hinte
and answers Joshua so, as Joshua might be partaker of that he prayed for.
Otherwise, Joshua and the Elders might have fasted and prayed long enough, with
small fruit, if the Lords speech had not stepped in. Something else must be done
besides a fast, before it will go well with Israel.

But was not Joshua's prayer and fasting aualeable? Was he not a holy and a
virtuous Prince? And does not the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avail much? Iam. 5. 16.
Again was not Joshua a type of Jesus Christ? And are not the prayers of Jesus
effectual? Can God be angry with his people, for whom Jesus prays? This is
Isreal's confidence, even ours, that we have Jesus entered into the heavenly
Canaan, there taking possession, there making intercession for us. Can any
thing then betide us, but good? If our Jesus pray, can we his Israel perish?
God forbid. Yet something is required on Isreal's part, to be made partakers of
Christ's prayers, to bring the blessing thereof down unto us. Israel had the
Oracles of God, his Arc, his special presence, a noble Joshua and Elders
praying for them: yet something was lacking on Isreal's part. Joshua, Jesus may
pray for Israel, yet Israel be in peril of perishing, if Israel have sinned.
But Israel has sinned says the Lord to Joshua; Wherefore lie thou thus upon
thy face? get thee up.

If Israel has sinned, Israel has an advocate with the Father, 1 Ioh. 2. ^.
Jesus Christ the righteous and he is the Propitiation for all our sins. What
more is required? yes, something. For, if we confess our sins, 1. Ioh. 1. 9.
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. If Israel confess his sin. Without this, not Joshua's
fasting and prayer will avail. Indeed our Joshua's prayer, Christ's prayer for
Israel, is an effectual means to work true faith, and to produce repentance
in a sincere confession of sins unto salvation. And therefore Joshua's prayer
is not spent in vain, but is a fore runner inducing and conducing to the
confession, and so to the purgation of Isreal's sin.

The point hence is: that all Isreal's fasting, prayer, humiliation, devotion,
is to noe purpose to prevent plagues, but rather to provoke and procure them,
if it be not attended with true repentance, and through reformation of Isreal's
sin. When you spread forth your hands (says the Lord) I will hide mine eyes
from you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Will not many
prayers serve the turn? No, not a beadroule of Prayers, Why? your hands are
full of blood. In prayer, pure, not bloody hands, must be lift up. God waighs
not prayers by their plurality, but by their purity. And this purity, is not in
a neat concatenation of Scripture phrases, or forms of speech, but in faith
and affections of a pure heart. Ezech. 14. 3.
In Ezechiels time Israel had set up an idol in their hearts. Some Idol sin
or other. Any beloved darling habitual sin, is an idol set up in the heart.
How much more the love of idols, and images themselves? Well, what of this?
Verse. 16.
The Lord there says: Though Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the land, as I live
says the Lord, they shall deliver neither sons nor daughters. Why? The idol
was set up in the heart.

What then does the Lord require in Isreal's fast? Surely Isreal's public and
solemn fast requires a public and solemn reformation of Isreal's sin. Joel.
2. 12. Turn ye unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with
weeping, and with mourning etc. Such was done in heathen Nineuchs fast. Ion. 3.
7.
The King caused to be proclaimed through Nineueh, (by the decree of the King
and his nobles) Let neither man nor beast, heard nor flock, great nor small,
old nor young taste any thing, but let man and beast be covered with sackcloth,
and cry mightily unto God: Yea, let them turn every one from his evil way,
and from the violence that is in their hands.

Is this the condition required in Isreal's fast? O then what a terror and
horror is it for Israel, when in the solemn fast, not only some Achans privy
sin is not looked into, to be purged and punished, Esa 1.
but open * crimson, scarlet colored sins go disfigured for a day, to no
other end, but that (as Romes images at Easter, after their mourning in black
all the Lent) they may spring out in a fuller vigor and luster; using a fast,
as the rose does the sable night, to cause the fayrer gloss?

Yet here is comfort to the true Israel of God. What if Achans sins be not
expiated? shall all Israel perish? God forbid. Shall not the judge of all the
world do right? But if Israel be pertaker of Acans sin, Israel must perish
with Achan. True, but Israel fasteth, Israel prays, so Joshua, so the Elders.
What if many in Israel play the hypocrites in their fast? yet every Noah,
Daniel, and Job fasting and praying with and for Israel, shall be preserved.
Joshua and the Elders of Israel, fasting, praying, should have been preserved
(who ever else had perished) though Achans sin had not been purged, so it had
not been through their default. In Isreal's fast then, let all true Israelites
comfort themselves, if first they be purged themselves, by renewing their
covenant with God, and if they cry mightily to God for the purgatition of
Achans sin, whatsoeur, whosoever it is, that troubles Israel: howsoever
Achans sin remain unpurged, to the peril of Israel; yet the labor of such
shall not be in vain, Mal. 3. 17.
in the Lord. In the day when the Lord makes up his Jewels, he will spare them
as a man spares his own son, that serves him. Then shall ye return (says
the Lord) and discern between the righteous and the wicked: between him that
serves God, and him that serves him not.

But what was Achans sin? It is laid down verse the 11. and laid to Isreal's
charge, as before. Israel has sinned, and they have transgressed my covenant,
which I commanded them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and
have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even amongst their
own stuff. So, Achans sin was sacrilege, theft, dissimulation, mingling
the accursed thing with Isreal's stuff. This accursed thing was a Babylonish
garment, a wedge of gold, of 50 shekels, and 200 shekels of silver. It is
called accursed in a threefold respect: first because it was Babylonish and
Chanaanitish stuff, abominable to Israel. Secondly, because the Lord had
expressly forbidden Israel to make or meddle with it, for their own private
use. Thirdly, because meddled withal against the commandment, and intermedled
with Isreal's stuff, it caused Israel to be accursed, and all they took in
hand v. 12. For therefore (says God) the children of Israel could not stand
before their enemies, because they were accursed: neither will I be with you
any more, except ye destroy the accursed from among you.

Here then we might take occasion to speak of the sins of sacriledg, and such
kind of sacred-profane theft, of hypocrisy, and dissimulation, of mingling
execrable things with Isreal's stuff: but it might prove tedious. Only for a
touch by the way, Israel may learn thus much: that if the stealing of a
Babylonish garment were so heinous: What had been then the bringing in of
idolatrous relics with all Babylonish equipage and furniture, to set up the
Babilonian Religion in Israel: in case also it had been done not secretly, as
Achans Babylonish garment, (which might therefore have seemed to excuse
Israel,) but openly and in the sight of the Sun, like Zimri and Cosbi in the
open tent? If it were so heinous to steal privily a wedge of gold, and silver,
of so small value in comparison, which though it were sacrilege, yet the
Tabernacle of the Lord was not as yet possessed of them: what then had it
been, even with a high hand of sacrilege and simony, in every corner and high
mountain of Israel, to rob and cheat God of his portition and Patrimony,
the only Leuiticall inheritance for his ministry, to the great desolation of
many thousand souls in Israel? What if Israel herein had been guilty? How
would they have weighed such stolen sacred wedges in the balance of the
sanctuary? What a snare would they have found it, to have devoured so much
sanctified, and after the vow so to have inquired?

Again, if one Achans dissimulation were so heinous, how then had the
condition of Israel been, if her fairest face, and most beautiful body had
been covered over with hypocrisy, as with a leprosy, so that from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot, there had been no sound part? In
a word, if it were imputed to Israel for such a heinous sin, that Achan mingled
the Babylonish garment with Isreal's stuff, then how had Isreal's case stood, if
Babylonish lees had been by prodigious Achans mingled among Isreal's pure wine,
if Canaanitish heresies had been not only put with, but for, and in stead of
Isreal's most precious stuff, her purest doctrines? If these had been Isreal's
sins, no marvel if they had caused Isreal's affairs to fare so ill; no
marvel if they had caused Isreal's GOD to estrange himself from Israel, and
to take the Canaanites part against her; no marvel if they had caused Israel
to be contemned of the Canaanite, to whom she was wont to be terrible, and
accounted invincible; no marvel if they had caused GOD not to go out with
Isreal's Armies, to suffer his Truth to be trampled on, yea to threaten utter
desolation and dereliction, as v. 12.

Is Isreal's case no better? Poor Israel, what will thou do? Fast and pray? It
is high time indeed. For Israel has sinned. But yet the Lord bids Joshua* and
the Elders of Israel to rise up from their prostrations, because Israel had
sinned. Why so? For, as we have showed, something else is required besides a
Fast, to purge Isreal's fault. What is that? The Lord shows v. 13. etc. Up,
sanctify the people, and say, sanctify your selves against to morrow: for
thus says the Lord God of Israel, There is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee, O Israel: thou can not stand before thine enemies, until ye take away
the accursed thing from among you. In the morning therefore ye shall be
brought, etc. And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing,
shall be burnt with fire, he, and all that he has, because etc. In these
words of GOD to Joshua, is first set down the cause of Isreal's discomfiture,
the accursed thing: Secondly, The ill condition of Israel, until this cause
be removed; no standing for them before their Enemies. These we have already
handled. Thirdly, a direction to Joshua, for the finding out of the Delinquent,
and for his punishment: He and his, must all perish. 4ly Israel must be
sanctified, to fit them for the execution. This sanctification was partly
external and ceremonial in the body, Exodus 19. 14. 15
by washing their clothes, or abstinence from pleasures; partly internal by
faith and repentance, signified by the external. (...)
The word also in the original, for to sanctify, signifying also to prepare.
So that the Israelites were now to prepare themselves in holiness, for the
execution of a notable piece of Justice, wherein all the people was to have a
hand. Before they were to inquire into, and punish another sins, they must
first purge themselves of their own sins. As Christ says in the Gospel,
concerning the adulterous woman, to those that accused her, He among you that
is without sin, cast the first stone at her: So that they that are to cast a
stone at Achan, must first be sanctified and cleansed from their sins, by
faith and repentance. Also in this their sanctification they might be
understood to have commended themselves and the cause to God, with prayer, that
God would find out for them the Troubler of Israel, that he would bless and
direct the lot for that end.

And here is a good lesson for all Judges and Iurers, and Executioners of
Justice, in matters of life and death, that they be sanctified first themselves
by faith, and repentance, before they pass their verdict upon others.

Otherwise without this sanctification and due preparation, for men to rush
upon the censuring and punishing of others sins, is the way to bring Gods
displeasure upon themselves. We have a famous example hereof in the
Israelites themselves, when they were to take revenge upon the Tribe of
Benjamin, Judge. 19* 20.
for that foul fact committed by a few sons of Belial upon the Levites wife,
but much more, (which aggravated the fact beyond measure) for the Beniamites
not only not punishing of it, but countenancing and defending it. That the
rest of the Tribes all combined as one man to punish such an unheard of
impiety, and insolency, even in their brethren the Beniamites, no doubt, was
both laudable with men, and acceptable with God. Insomuch as they consulting
with God, Iud. 20.
had his direction and approbation. Their consulting with God was good and
requisite, and the only way to speed well in their enterprise. Yet (which is to
be well noted) they prospered not against Benjamin, till they had thoroughly
sanctified themselves. For, First their consulting with God, was not whether
they should go up against Benjamin, or no; but having resolved on it among
themselves, they ask of GOD, which of the Tribes shall go up first? Here was
yet no due sanctification of Israel to prepare them to the battle, and so
they sped accordingly; for the first day, the joint Tribes lost twenty and two
thousand chosen men. A fearful discomfiture. Well, they reinforce the
battle the second day, but withal go a little more warily to work, then
before. They weep before the Lord until even, which was a good piece of a
public Fast. And good reason they had to weep, that had lost so many of the
thousands and worthies of Israel. But this as yet was but a carnal weeping.
Yet they ask counsel of the Lord, saying, Shall I go up again to battle
against the children of Benjamin my Brother? And the Lord said, Go up against
him. Yet for all this, Israel was foiled the second day, and lost again 18
thousand men. Why? Did not the Lord bid them go? Yes: For the Lord would be
avenged on the obstinate Beniamites. How then came the Tribes to be beaten
again? Surely as yet they had not duly sanctified themselves. So that, though
the Lord bade them go, yet, because they had not sanctified themselves, the
Lord as yet makes them no promise of good success. But upon this second
disaster, then all the children of Israel, and all the people went up, and came
into the House of God, and wept, and sat there before the Lord; and fasted
that day until even, and offered burnt offerings, and peace offerings before
the Lord. This is to the purpose indeed. Here is a second Fast, not only
public, but general, of all the children of Israel, and all the people, of
all ages, and sexes, and not only the swordmen, and men of war. They come
to the House of God, they weep, they fast till even, yea they offer burnt
offerings, and peace offerings. All which together was a due and orderly
sanctification of Israel, when to their weeping and fasting they added burnt
offerings, and peace offerings, whereby they made their atonement and peace
with God, for all their own sins. Well, having thus sanctified themselves, what
follows? They withal ask counsel of the Lord, whether they should go up
again, against Benjamin, or surcease. Still it was Isreal's constant course to
ask counsel of the Lord in all their enterprises, to take their God-speed
with them. And now the Lord not only bids them go, but gives them his
express promise to deliver Benjamin into their hands, which he did not
before. It is not enough to ask counsel of God, but to obtain his favor and
promise for good speed in our undertakings. And we are sure of his blessing
upon us, if first our enterprise be just and warrantable, as this of Isreal's
was: and if withal it be undertaken with a good conscience, seeking therein
the glory of God principally, having first humbled our selves before him,
consulted the Oracle of his Word, offered him burnt offerings and peace
offerings, by renewing our faith and repentance, to be at peace with God. All
this done, we have God on our side, his blessing and Promise attends our
Enterprises. Now Israel being first thoroughly sanctified, go on, and prosper
in the execution of Justice upon their refractary and too too audaciously
insolently impious Brethren, as we see in the rest of the Chapter.

Would Israel then proceed well, and prosper in their execution of Justice upon
those that trouble Israel? Israel must be sanctified first from her own
sins by fasting and prayer, by faith, and repentance, by consulting with GOD,
by seeking his glory in all. Then Israel, go on, and prosper; the day is
thine. Otherwise, Israel does but puzzle and perplexe her self with
sollicitous, industrious, but vnsuccessefull undertakings. Even obstinate
Benjamin gets the better of his better Brethren, seeking his reformation,
before they were duly sanctified to take a just revenge.

Now Israel, thou fastest, thou prayest, thou weepest, thou lamentest thy
unhappy successes at home and abroad; thou would feign have cured the maine
cause (as thou imaginest) and have procured thine own peace and contentment.
But thou have labored in vain; thy best purposes and intendments for Isreal's
good have been frustrate. But examine the cause of all this. Have thou been
sufficiently sanctified, when thine Elders were assembled? Yes, you prayed* you
mourned, you desired at least a solemn fast for your good speed. But did you
therein seek Gods glory first? Yes. But did you offer your peace offerings,
seeking your peace with God in the purgation of your own sins, even the sins
which not a little trouble Israel? What be those? In special Sacrilege and
Simony, the great corrupters of Church and Religion. The one has swept away
the maintenance from Ministers: the other has turned Ministers into Merchants:
and both together cause prophecyings to fail, the people to perish, and
Idolatry to spread it self. The authors and actors of these, are Isreal's
Achans, enough to alienate God from his people. But you were about good Laws
to cure their maladies, so far as the iniquity of the times would suffer; by
restoring at least some part of the long detained portion of Tithes, Gods own
inheritance, which might be some co^petent pittance to maintain a painful
Minister: and by restraining (if possible) the Leprosy of Simony from tainting
the small remnant of the Leviticall body, least armed necessity should enforce
either honest men to purchase the Church with money, or to permit thieves and
robbers to possess all, entering into the sheepfold another way. This you
aimed at. And why did it not succeed well? It was among other things thought
of. What if it had bin not only thought of, but concluded and enacted, not
among, but before all other things? Dimidium facti qui been coepit, habet. A
thing well begun, is half done. The heathen began always their great
reformations and enterprises with GOD; they were first for Religion, then for
the Republicke. Omnia post Religionem ponenda semper nostra Civitas duxit; Val.
Max. lib. 1. cap. 1. de Religione.
says one of Heathen Rome. Our City ever judged all things to be ranked after
Religion. A Jove principium Musae, sang the Poet. And, Dii caeptis aspirate
meis, etc. should not Israel much more? Did the Shunamite loose any thing by
serving the Prophet first of her handful of meal, and poor remnant of oil in
her ^ruse, notwithstanding her present extremity? Yea, has it not been the
ancient customs of Parliaments in England, ever to begin not only to treat,
but to conclude of, and settle the state of Religion, before matters of the
Republicke came to be handled? If we revolue the Annals of those ancient
times of Egyptian darkness, and ignorance, in comparison of the present
resplendent light of Israel, we shall find therein such noble steps of piety
toward God in this kind, as may make our Israel to blush, if it do not
kindle an emulous zeal of imitation in a parallel at the least. Let me for the
purpose here insert the words of that precious Bishop Jewel. Defense of the
Apology, Part. 6. chap. 2. Divis. 1. page 5 22. Princed 1611.
Neither is it (says he) so strange a matter to see Ecclesiastical matters
debated in Parliament. Read the Laws of King Inas, King Alfred, King Edward,
King Athelstane, King Edmund, King Edgar, King Canute; and ye shall find that
our godly forefathers the Princes and Peers of this Realm, never vouchsafed
to entreat of matters of Peace, or war, or otherwise, touching the common
state, before all controversies of Religion, and causes Ecclesiastical had bin
concluded. King Canute in his Parliament holden at Winchester upon Christmas
day, after sundry laws and orders made, touching the Faith, the keeping of
holy days, public prayers, learning of the Lords Prayer, Receiving the
Communion thrice in the year, the manner and form of Baptism, Fasting, and
other matters of Religion; in the end thereof says thus: Iam sequitur
Institutio legum saecularium. Now follows an order for Temporal Laws.

Thus we see (says the good Bishop) that the godly Catholic Princes in old
times thought it their duty before all other affairs of the Commonweal,
first to determine matters of Religion, and that even by the Parliaments of
this Realm.

Such were the ancient Princes and Elders of this Kingdom in times past.
Their care of Religion in the first place in their Parliaments, was the only
way to bring on the better success for their Civil affairs. Wherein also the
reverend Prelates furthered all good Acts by their counsel, when required,
although they had not negative voices in Parliament; Part. 3. within two leaves
of the end.
as D Jewel in the foresaid place, and also Bishop Bilson in his book of
Christian subjection, and Antichristian Rebellion, do plainly show; the
Parliaments of this Land having ever had this power as well in matters of
Religion, as of civil Policy, to establish good and wholesome Laws for both.
Not that our Parliaments have power to make new Articles of the Faith, to
establish what Religion they please; but it is in their power, yea and their
duty too, taking the Word of God for their guide and rule, to establish the
true Religion taught therein, and to abolish all false Religions contrary
thereunto. Where then should a Parliament begin but with God, but with
Religion, if ever they look that GOD should give a happy success to their
civil affairs therein? Especially the Parliaments of these our times, wherein
the clouds of Pelagian heresy, mounting to the top of man's aerie
imagination, by casting a false shadow upon the pure doctrines of the Church
of England, derived unto us from the Fountains of Scripture, by the Conduits
of the prime Reformers of Religion, and continued unto us ever since by the
uninterrupted pipes of the most learned and illustrious Martyrs, Prelates, and
Doctors of our Church, would bring our Meridian light of the Gospel, to a
twylight, by intermingling with it the Egyptian fogs of the Church of Rome. So
that if our Parliaments would repair the ruinated Edifice of the Republicke,
let them begin to make good, and strengthen the maine pillars and Foundation
whereon it stands, and that is, Gods Temple, Religion, which through
undermining Pioners is shrewdly shaken, who go about to erect the tower of
Babel instead thereof. In the Name of GOD therefore (pardon by boldness: some
must speak out, else the stones would cry; yet I take not upon me to teach
the Elders of Israel; They can best judge of what I say; and the Lord give them
understanding in all things) whenever the Elders of Israel shall meet again
in Parliament, (and I trust God will put it into the heart of our Joshua in due
time to summon a Parliament for the glory of God, and the good of Israel) I
trust to see both Joshua and the Elders of Israel agree in one in the first
place to establish the Religion of Christ, so long and happily hitherto avowed
and maintained in the Church of England. The establishment whereof necessarily
depends upon the abolishment of two maine troublers of Israel, to wit,
Antichristian Idolatry, and Arminian heresy. While these two stand, never let
Israel look for any good. To omit many godly Kings of Israel, as Iehosnaphat,
Ezechiah, Josiah, who destroying Idolatry, prospered: remarkable is the
example of Asa, who in rooting out of Idolatry, 2. Chron. 15. and 16.
spared not his own Mother Maachah, removing her from being Queen, because
she had made an Idol in a grove, and Asa cut down her Idol, and stamped it,
and burnt it. Insomuch as King Asa prospered in war, and his Land had peace
to the 35 year of his reign, until he made a league with the King of Syria,
not relying on the Lord, and being depraved by Hanani the Seer, he put him in
prison, and oppressed some of the people. Again, so long as Arminian books
are unpurged, and the Truth vnpriviledged to pass abroad, your Parliaments O
Israel, cannot prosper, To the repurgation of these, if you add out of every
Impropriation a sufficient maintenance to the Ministry, if you castigate
Simony (if possible) by some wise and godly restrictions better executed; if
with these reformations you conclude your first Session of Parliament, without
any mixture of your own civil matters, all other grievances shall fall mole
sua, as the walls of Jericho at the voice of the rams horns: Our Joshua shall
be honored with subsidiary streams of love and duty, flowing from the hearts
of the best subjects in the World, out of whose oary bowels the King of England
may dig richer Mettalls, then the King of Spain can out of all his Indies. The
King of Englands Subjects will for love sweat his Majesty more gold, then all
the King of Spaines poor slaves can for fear dig out of the bowels of their
senseles mother-earth: this done, I say, what can be reciprocally desired
either of the Subjects by the King, or of the King by his Subjects, that shall
not have a full confluence, each striving to satisfy other with all wished
contentments? Gods cause being first acquitted, and our Mother Church of
England asserted to her own ancient Catholic Tenants, then Joshua and the
Elders, and all Israel with them shall from their celestial Father, and their
spiritual Mother receive such a blessing, as shall be admired of all their
friends, envied of all their enemies.

And you Lady Metropolis of Israel, the beloved City, the darling Mount Sion,
when you send your Agent-Burgesses to join with Isreal's great assembly, as you
look to have a part in the blessing thereof. Be persuaded to sanctify
yourselues, and reform your City-Achans. Search them out; you need not
lanthornes for it. Your love and liberality to the Gospel, and to the
Ministry thereof, both at home and abroad, cannot be paraleld by any Church in
any age. Only your Achans, as so many clouds, eclipse the glory, and
(otherwise) the unstained beauty thereof. A little leaven (ye know) leaveneth
the whole lump. Purge it out therefore, that ye may be altogether a new
lump. This we heartily desire, even your perfection.

Now then O Israel, you have had your fast, ye are washed, ye are sanctified,
ye are justified from your own particular sins by your faith testified by
your repentance, and the truth of your repentance testified by your
reformation; now you are clear and clean, but not all. In the next place, ye
are to find out the Achans, that trouble Israel, least ye be all wrapped in
Achans sin. So did Joshua and the Elders of Israel; after their own
humiliation, after their sanctification of the people, the very next morning
early they go about to find out the Troubler of Israel.

First note Joshua's diligence and vigilancie with the Elders and people of
Israel to execute justice. They rose early in the morning. And good reason.
Delay is dangerous in such cases; it might have hastened many bad consequences;
for now the newly fleshed Canaanites might have won time to confederate, and
band against Israel, while Gods displeasure was not removed. Besides, delay
and neglect in doing justice brings the Judges within the compass of
Accessaries.

For as he that prevents not a sin in another when he may, commits it: so
he that punishes it not, when he may and ought, defends it, and makes it
more his own. But prudent and provident Joshua, with the Elders of Israel, and
the people, prevent the danger of delay* they rise early in the morning.

But how do they go about the scruting to find out the troubler of Israel?
Achan with his Babylonish garment, and wedges, were lurking in the Tent, among
the thousands of Israel. He had conveyed his Sacrilege and theft so cleanly,
by his dissimulation, as no man was privy to it, to accuse him* Who then shall
find him out? yes, the Lord takes this task upon him. And where the Lord
makes the search, Psalm. 44. 20. 1.
what place for lurking? If we have forforgotten the name of our God, and
holden up our hands to any strange God. Shall not God search this out? for he
knows the secrets of the heart, says David. But by what means does God
search out Achan? By a strange and admirable means, even by lot, a thing of it
self of a casual and contingent nature, yet which the all disposing God can
command to produce the most certain effects of his own will. 1. Sam. 10.
Thus by lot he elected Saul for King, among all the Tribes of Israel, from
among all the families of Benjamin, after that Samuel had already by Gods
assignement anointed him. 1. Sam. 14.
Thus by lot was Jonathan, Saul's son, found out, for but tasting a little
honey. Yea God can make the fowls of the air to reveal the most hidden
sin.

Well, Joshua following the Lords direction, finds out Achan by lot. This
done, note Ioshuah's behavior to Achan verse. 19. My Son, give I pray thee,
glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and tell me now,
what thou have done, hide it not from me. Joshua here like a tenderhearted
Father uses a Fatherly compellation to Achan, My Son. He breaks not out
into sudden anger and passion, now to add more terror to Achans conscience,
or to show the greatness of his own authority. For what need authority and
power be armed with impotent hasty passion? And it is the gentle Sun-beame,
not the rough wind, that causes the offender to lay aside the cloak of
dissimulation. It is the goats milk of mild mercy, not the hard stroke of
the hammer, that dissolues the adamantine heart. It is the warm fire of loving
entreaty, not the frost of a frowning brow, that causes the ycie obdurate
conscience to melt, and drop into tears. It was the soft still voice, not the
whirlewind, and earthquake, that caused Elias to cover his face and his mouth.
My son, was the seemeliest rack for Joshua to use, whereby gently to draw
confession from Achan. For Joshua was Pater Patriae, the Father of Israel Gods
people, the affection whereof he puts not off, while now he puts on the office
of Judge. Mercy and truth preserve the King (says Solomon) and his throne is
vpholden by mercy: mercy and truth are the two supporters of the Kings Arms.
The herb Basil (a proper emblem for a Prince) ge^tly stroakt on the hand,
yields a pleasant smell: but crushed upon it, unsavory.

My Son, says Joshua. What then? Give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of
Israel, and make confession unto him, etc. The first thing that Joshua seeks,
is the glory of the Lord God of Israel. How? By Achans confession. How should
that redound to Gods glory? Yes: three ways in Achan: first, by showing the
Lord to be just and true in finding him out thus miraculously by lot; while
Achan confessed himself to be the man thus divinely pointed out. Secondly, by
a faithful, humble, and penitent confession of his sin against God and his
people, to the end, God might glorify his mercy in pardoning his soul, though
his justice in punishing his body. Thirdly, that Gods act in Isreal's
discomfiture might appear to all the world to be upon just cause.

Nor does Joshua here remit Achan to make his private auricular confession to
the Priest. For so Achans sin had never come to light; but had gone close
mantled under the stole and seal of confession. So had God lost his glory two
ways: First by Achans private confession, in stead of a public: Secondly, by
taking his absolution from a Priest, which none can give, but God only.
Therefore, says Joshua, Give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him.

Here note, that a public sin must have a public confession to Gods
glory.

Objection. But Achans sin was private.

Answ. Though it were privately committed, yet by being publicly punished by
the divine hand, God had now branded it for a public sin. Thus did God make
David's sin public by an exemplary punishment, which he had committed
privately. 2. Sam. 12. 12.
And therefore to glorify God in the public confession of it, how many
penitential Psalms did David pen and leave recorded, as monuments of his own
frailty, and Gods mercy.

Well: upon Joshua's fatherly exhortation, Achan makes confession of all, v.
20. 21. This was the way for Achan to find mercy with the Lord, even in the
midst of Justice.

Upon Achans confession, V. 22. etc.
Joshua presently sends, and finding all to be true, he and all Israel speed
them to the execution, for the making up of Isreal's breach again. Note here,
though Joshua tendered him as a father the son, yet this his affection to
Achan did not make Joshua to forget he was a Judge, to do justice, in so
weighty a cause, that so highly concerned Gods glory, and Isreal's good; yea
although Achan were one of the Tribe-royall, namely of Judah, a great Prince in
Israel, yet impartial justice must proceed against him, for the expiation of
that sin, which troubled Israel: Insomuch as Joshua says unto him: Why have
thou troubled us. The Lord shall trouble thee this day.

Again, note the severity of Justice in the punishment of Achans sin; not
only himself, but his sons and daughters, his oxen and Asses, his sheep
and tent and all that he had, Verse. 15.
were by the Commandment of the Lord stoned with stones by all Israel, and
burned with fire in the valey of Achor; so called upon that occasion in
perpetuam rei memoriam. The valley of trouble; because he had troubled Israel.
Nor may this piece of justice seem unjust. Verse. 16.
First, because god commanded it. And shall not the judge of all the world do
right? His judgments are often secret, but never unjust. Yea reason makes for
the approving of it. For he that by his sin troubled all Israel, and brought
them in danger of destruction, did he not justly pull destruction upon
himself, and his whole house, to be executed by all Israel? Nor goes this
example alone. The like we see executed upon Chorah and his company Numb. 16.
Here an end then of Achan and his sin.

What follows? A happy success for Israel. For, verse. 26. No sooner was the
heap of stones raised over Achan, but Gods favor like the Sun from under a
thick cloud breaks forth afresh to Isreal's comfort. So (says the Text) the
Lord turn a from the fierceness of his anger. And for proof hereof, ye have
Isreal's victory over Ai. Chap. 8. And that by a stratageme of the Lords own
devising, to take away from the Chanaanites all conceit, that Israel fled away
at the first for fear, but rather in policy to entice them out afterward,
and so utterly with more rage to destroy them: as the reader may observe by
Isreal's second flying of purpose to enclose the Aians.

Whence note first, that stratagemmes in war are lawful, as to fly for
advantage, to lie in ambush and the like; yet not to lie for advantage. Faith
once made must be kept with the Chanaanites, Josh. 9.
as Joshua did with the Gibeonites; though they were justly made Isreal's slaves
and drudges, for their false dealing, pretending to come from a far country
showing their moldy bread and old shoes, as Papists make oste^tation of their
moldy pretended antiquity. So that only the league with the Gibeonites stood
firm (though with qualification as is noted) because both it was done of
ignorance (the Lord not being foreconsulted) a dangerous and disgraceful thing
for Israel, to enter into leagues, and not ask counsel of the Lord) and also
it was done not by Joshua alone but all the Princes and Elders of Israel with
him ratifyed it, Josh. 9. 15.
with common consent and oath. And it was the more firm, because they
becoming Isreal's servants, were thereby brought of necessity to be of Isreal's
Religion.

Again, note from the Lords stratageme for Isreal's victory, that when Israel
pleases the Lord, he not only gives them power, but prudence also and godly
policy to deal with, and overcome their enemies. It is a bad sign, and bodes
little good to Israel, when Israel manageth not their affairs by good
counsel. It was one of the curses of Elies house, that there should not be an
old man in it. But Israel is ever in good state, while guided by grave
counsel. It is a token of Gods blessing upon Israel: otherwise of a curse:
For, Quos perdere vult Deus, hos prius dementat. And a woe is to that land,
whose Rulers are children as the wise man says.

In a word, Israel now prospers, whithersoeuer their armies march; now, that
Achans sin, which troubled Israel, is purged out: Now that the Babylonish
garment, with the relics of Canaanitish idolatry is purged with fire, as Rome
was wont to purge Isreal's Saints and Martyrs: Now, that the golden wedge of
sacrilege is expiated by a kind of restitution. Now, does God go forth with
Isreal's armies: Now may Israel say boldly, Exurgat Deus, dissipentur inimici,
stamping it not in their coin, but in their colors: Now, less Nauies by Sea,
less Armies by land shall be terrible to the enemy, which before returned
home in their derision. Now shall one of Israel chase a thousand, and two put
ten thousand to flight: For their Rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies
themselves being judges. Deuteronomy. 32.


Thus have we seen Isreal's fast, and Isreal's fact. Isreal's discomfiture moved
Joshua and the Elders of Israel to a fast: their fast so piously performed,
moved the Lord to stir them up to remove the cause of Isreal's trouble: the
cause being removed, made Israel prosperous in all their enterprises. Thus
Israel do, thus Israel have; which the God of Israel grant to his Israel, for
the intercession of Isreal's Joshua* at Gods right hand, even Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father, and their Spirit, three Persons and one everliving God be
rendered of Israel, as most due, al honor and glory, power and praise, dignity
and dominion for evermore Amen.

FINIS.

