THE SEVERAL SPEECHES AND Songs, at the presentment of Mr BVSHELLS ROCK TO THE
QVEENES Most Excellent Majesty.

Aug. 23. 1636.

HER HIGHNESS being Graciously Pleased to Honor the said ROCK, not only with
HER ROYAL Presence; BUT COMMANDED THE SAME to be called after her own
Princely name HENRIETTA.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD.

M.DC.XXXVI.

The Hermits speech ascending out of the ground as the KING entered the Rock.
WITH bended knees thus humbly do I pray,
You blessed powers, that glorify this day,
And to my frozen lips have utterance given,
Speak, O speak the Commands you bring from heaven!
For by times Emblem that since Noah's flood,
I thus have grasped, my soul has understood,
The world no farther Journey has to sail
Then is betwixt this Serpents head, and tail. Hold Serpe hand

If then before the Earths great funeral,
Most glorious SIR, you hither come to call
The Inmates of this solitary place
To strict accoumpt, for Heavens sake daigne the grace
To lend your patience, and a gentle ear
To what I ought to speak, and you may hear:
A Prodigal profuse in vast expense,
That nothing studied, but to please his sense,
Trimming a glorious outside, whilst within
He cherisht naught, but propagating sin,
That multiplied so fast, there was no place
Allowed for virtue, or for saving grace;
God of his mercy pleased was at last
A gracious Eye upon his soul to cast,
Which being so near a final rack as now
His only care, his study is, but how
He may redeem the years he lost in sin
And live as he to live did now begin.
What followed next must be conceau'd of course,
Confession, contrition, and remorse,
These guides to heaven he happily persu'd,
Viewed his past life, and that again reviewed:
And to that end he purchased at a price
This field, then sterill, now his Paradise;
Where he as man of old, by God being bound
With Adam, wrought, and dig'd, and dressed the ground.
Here are no Rivers such as Eden had,
Nor were these banks with trees or flowers clad
TO invite a stay, the Owl, not Philomell
Within this solitary place did dwell.
And I, the Genius of this obscure Cave
Since the great deluge, lived as in a grave,
Chained to this ROCK, my Toumb-stone in despair
Of freedom, or to view such beams, as are
Shot from your Virtues: All my days were night,
Until the humble Owner brought to light
These eyes of mine, and forced great nature show
This masterpiece, a grace she did not owe
To any age before, and sooth to say,
I think it was created against this day.
If then you be the God of Britains earth,
And rule this I Will, (as sure you are by birth)
Vouchsafe a blessing, such a one as may,
Preserve this ROCK, my mansion from decay.
For envy would expel me from my home,
And sinck me in the ruins of my own.
But let the true Possessor, to whom heaven
For pure devotion-sake this place has given,
Let him in peace enjoy it, that he may
Build Altars here, and daily offerings pay
For his preseruers health grant this, and then
I that lived long with stones, will live with men:
And think the golden age is now begun,
In which no injuries are meant or done:
Such Innocents as yet remain with us
That do inhabit here, and humbly thus
We mean to live, having no other fare
Then uncurst water, uncorrupted air.
Vouchsafe to enter, and you here shall find
Nothing but what may please a displeased mind.
My bold Commission's done, and I return
Down to my humble grave, my peaceful urne.
Mr BVSHELL his Contemplation upon the Rock.
GReat nature, had I not a Soul, that spies
A greater power enthroned above the skies,
I should adore thee, and should Idolize
This maister-peece of thine, and sacrifice
The fat of Bullocks to thy memory,
But we forbidden are to deifie
What may be seen; since that it is revealed
The face of what is divine must be concealed
From mortal eyes, until that greatest light
Be quite put out that severs day from night.
Where are the Muses, that were wont to sing
Their well tuned note about Parnassus spring?
Where is that Masterpiece of Poets now
That had a Laurel wreath to crown each brow?
Where are those paper-spoylers, that can part
With many sheets to paint out painted Art
In praising faces, features such as be
In beauty poor, if once compared to thee?
Shall I not think the world on's deathbed lies,
And summoned to his funeral obsequies,
The souls departed hence, when thus I see
Nature unlocke her richest treasury.
And in this doting age discover more
Then in six thousand years that past before.
You, that can sequester your selves from men,
And buried be alive, in Cave, or den,
In hollow ROCK, or in a desert grove,
That the sad note of murmuring water love;
I Will bring you to a ROCK, that for it is pleasure,
The Indies cannot purchase with their treasure,
Where none but virgin silence lives there
And sweetest Music charms the chastest ear
The fountains times do keep to birds that sing,
And on the plain song uttered by each spring
The ayerie Choristers division run;
The solid ROCK that various streams has spun
Even into strings as small as smallest wyre,
Seems to consort, and so make up a quire
Such as the holy virgins sweetly raise
When their choice Hymns do sing on holy days.
So that devotion here is kept on wing,
And rather raised, then checked by whispering
Of springs with ROCKS, or ROCKS with light heel'd streams
Night swimmes away in rest, the day in dreams,
So that the watchful HERMIT needs no clock,
There are perpetual Chymes within this ROCK,
That will not let his contemplation sleep,
Would he be sad, there he may learn to weep
Of every object offered to his eye;
The humble pavement never shall be dry,
But moystened still, with tears that there are shed,
From the rich fountain of the ROCKS curled head.
This my Propheticke soul foretells shall be,
ENSTON, the honor, that shall dwell with thee.
A Sonnet within the pillar of the Table at the Banquet.
I.
COme away blessed souls no more
Feed your eyes with what is poor.
It Is enough that you have blessed
What was rude; what was undrest,
And created in a trice
Out of Chaos paradise.
Come away and cast your eyes
On this humble sacrifice.
2.
We no golden apples give,
Here Is no Adam, here is no Eve:
Not a Serpent dares appear,
Whilst your Majesty's stay here,
Oh then sit, and take your due,
Those the first fruits are that grew
In this Eden, and are thrown
On this Altar as your own
3.
Set a chair for earth's Jove.
Bring another for his love.
Come away, vouchsafe to taste
What was gathered up in haste,
If we live another year
By your grace and favor here,
Italy, and France, and Spain
Of their fruits shall boast in vain.
Mr BVSHELL presenting the Rock by an Echo sung to the KING and QVEENES
Majesty.
The Echo.
I charge thee answer me to what I ask, ask
Has ought presented to these Princes pleased? pleased
Pleased? O gentle Echo speak that word again, again
How have they liked our Rock, our Cave, our Well? well
Well! proud would their Host be should I tell him tell him
Tell him Echo, I will that he despair not Spare not
What shall we give them by way of thankfulness? thankfulness
That, like thee, is air; we would give what is real all
All, why all that we have is but this Rock, this Rock
Give them this poor Rock, Echo mean you so? so
To which of them, to the King or to the Queen? the Queen
What to the King, if this be given the Queen? the Queen
The Queen, there is naught more precious: it is true: true
Can nothing more be added to his bliss? bliss
Bliss, the bliss of Heaven Echo you mean sure; sure
Sure be it to them both as this our blessing; sing
Sing gentle Echo, is that thy desire? desire
THen blessed be this pair
On the earth, in the air,
Blessed in their Girls, and Boys,
Let them live to hear it told,
Their grand-Grandchildren are grown old.
Let her beauty ever last,
And his vigor never wast.
Let the sea, that bounds these Isles,
Ebb at least ten thousand miles:
And return no more, but leave
New kingdoms for them to bequeath
To the many heirs they get;
And when they pay natures debt,
Let their bodies not be found
Dwelling in the sluttish ground,
But translated to those thrones,
Only built for blessed ones.
Echo let these prayers be
Poasted up to Heaven by thee
And if granted let us know,
Gentle Echo answer so so
So, then it is agreed above above
That this pair shall live, and love: and love
And for ever happy be happy be
In their blessed posterity. posterity
Echo, for this news I Will give give
Leave that thou shall ever live live
In this Paradise of theirs, theirs
Theirs Echo, it is no more mine, mine
Theirs, and thine, Echo ever, ever
Fates decrees alter never. never
A Sonnet sung to the KING and QVEENE at Mr Bushells Rock.
1.
Hark, hark, how the stones in the Rock
Strive their tongues to unlock,
And would show,
What they know,
Of the Joy here has been
Since the King and the Queen
Daigne to say
They would pay
A visit to this cell:
But all tongues cannot tell;
Nor language express
Our full thankefullnesse.
2.
Hark, hark, how the streams roll along,
And for want of a tongue
Vent in tears
All their fears
Least the King, least the Queen
Being come, having seen,
What we have
In this cave,
That nothing can delight
That is brought to their sight,
Or fully express
Our hearts thankefullnesse.
3.
Hark, hark, how the Birds in the groves
Strive to tender their loves,
For the Spring,
That the King,
And the Queen bring along:
Do but see how they throng
With their notes
In their throats,
On each Banck, in each Bush
sits a Lark, and a Thrush,
That feign would express
Their hearts thankefullnesse.
4.
Hark, hark, we humbly do entreat
How your Hosts heart does beat,
How it pants,
Cause it wants
What he gladly would bring
To the Queen, and the King,
Daigne to speak,
Least it break,
Let him know you are pleased
That his heart may be eased
Or this Rock or this cave
Is his Tomb or his grave.
The Music to these songs was composed by SIMON IVE.
FINIS.

