THE ANATOMY OF MELANCHOLY, WHAT IT IS. WITH ALL THE KINDS, CAUSES,
SYMPTOMS, PROGNOSTICKES, AND SEVERAL CVRES OF IT. IN THREE MAINE PARTITIONS
with their several SECTIONS, MEMBERS, and SVBSECTIONS. PHILOSOPHICALLY,
MEDICINALLY, HISTORICALLY, OPENED AND CVT UP. BY DEMOCRITVS Junior.

With a Satyricall PREFACE, conducing to the following Discourse.

MACROB. Omne meum, Nihil meum. AT OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and JAMES
SHORT, for HENRY CRIPPS. Anno Dom. 1621.

HONORATISSIMO DOMINO NON MINVS VIRTVTE SVA QVAM GENERIS SPLENDORE,
ILLVSTRISSIMO GEORGIO BERKLEIO, BARONI DE BERKLEY, MOVBREY, SEGRAVE, Do DE
BRVSE, ET GOVR.

DOMINO SVO Multis Nominibus Obseruando, HANC SVAM MELANCHOLIAE ANATOMEN, D. D.
DEMOCRITVS Junior.

DEMOCRITVS IVNIOR to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I presume thou will be very inquisitiue to know what personate
Actor this is, that so insolently intrudes upon this common Theater, to the
worlds view, arrogating another man's name, whence he is, why he does it, and
what he has to say? Although, as Seneca in ludo in mortem Claudii Caesaris.
he said, Primum sinoluero, non Respondebo, quis coacturus est? I am free
borne, and may choose whether I will tell, who can compel me? And could here
readily reply with that Egyptian in Lib. de curiositate.
Plutarch, when a curious fellow would needs know what he had in his basket,
quum vides velatam, quid inquiris in rem obsconditam, it was therefore covered
because he should not know what was in it. Seek not after that which is hid,
if the contents please thee, Modo haec tibi vsui sint quemuis authorem fingito.
Wecker.
and be for thy use, suppose the man in the Moon, or whom thou will to be
the Author; I would not willingly be known. Yet in some sort to give thee
satisfaction, which is more then I need, I will give a reason, both of this
usurped Name, Title, and Subject. And first of the name of Democritus, least
any man by reason of it should be deceived, expecting a Pasquill, a Satyr, or
some ridiculous Treatise (as I my self should have done) or some prodigious
Tenent, or paradox of the earths motion, of infinite worlds in infinito vacuo,
ex fortuita Atomorum collisione, in an infinite wast, so caused by an
accidental collision of motes in the Sun, all which Democritus held,
Epicurus and their master Leucippus of old maintained, and are lately revived
by Copernicus, Brunus, and some others. Besides it has been always an
ordinary custom, as Lib. 10. c. 12. Multa a malee fer alis in Demo riti nom^n
commenta data, nobili^ati^ auto ritatisque eius perfugio ^^^tibus.
Gellius observes, for later writers and impostors, to broach many absurd and
insolent fictions, under the name of so noble a Philosopher as Democritus to
get themselves credit, and by that means the more to be respected. It Is not so
with me, Martialis ^. 10. ^^^g 14.
Non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas, Harpyasque
I^^enies, hominem pagina nostra sapit.
No Centauros here or Gorgons look to find,
My subject is of man, and humane kind.
Thou thy self art the subject of my Discourse.
Iuv. Sat ^.
Quisquid agunt homines, votum, timor, ira, voluptas,
Gandia, discursus, nostri farrago libelli.
What e're men do, vows, fears, in ire in sport,
Joys, wanderings, are the sum of my report.
My intent is no otherwise to use his name, then Mercurius Gallobelgicus,
Mercurius Britannicus, use the name of Mercury, and Democritus Christianus,
etc. Although there be some other circumstances for which I have masked my
self under this visard, and some peculiar respects, which I cannot so well
express, until I have set down a brief character of this our Democritus,
what he was, with an Epitome of his life.

Democritus, as he is described by Hip. epist. Damaget.
Hippocrates and Laert lib. 9.
Laertius, was a little wearyish old man, very melancholy by nature, au^rse
from company in his latter times, Hortulo sibi cellulam seligensibique seipsum
includens vn^ eusque solitarius.
and much given to solitariness, a famous Philosopher in his age, Floruit
Olympiade 80.7^0 annis post Troiam.
Coaevus with Socrates, wholly addicted to his studies, at the last, and to a
private life, writ many excellent works. A great Divine, according to the
divinity of those times, an expert Physician, a Politician, an excellent
Mathematitian, as his Diacos^^, quod cunctis operibus facile excell^t. L^^t.
Diacosmus, and the rest of his works do witness. He was much delighted with
the studies of husbandry, Volucrum voces and linguas intellig^^e se dicit.
Abderitani epist. Hpp^c.
says Col. lib. 1 cap. 1.
Columella, and often I find him cited by Constant. lib. de agricult. passim.
Constantinus and others treating of that subject. He knew the natures,
differences of all Beasts, Plants, Fishes, Birds, and as some say, could
understand the tunes and voices of them. In a word he was Omnifariam doctus, a
general Scholar, a great student, and to that intent that he might better
contemplate, Sabellicus exempl. lib. 10. oculis se priuauit vt melius
contemplationi (...) daret, sublimi vir ingenio prosunde cogitationis etc.
I find it related that he put out his eyes, and was voluntarily blind, and
yet saw more then all Greece besides, and Naturalia, Moral^a, Mathematica,
liberales desciplinas arti^m^ (...) um ^e itiam callebat.
writ of every subject, Nihil in toto opificio naturae de quo non scripsit. A
man of an excellent wit, profound conceit, and to attain knowledge the better
in his younger years, he traveled to Egypt and Veni Athenas and nemo me
nouit.
to Athens to confer with learned men, Idem contemptui and admirationi habitus.
admired of some, despised of others. After a wandering life, he settled at
Abdora a town in Thrace, and was sent for thither to be their lawmaker,
Recorder, or Towne-clearke as some will, or as others, he was there bread and
borne. Howeuer it was, there he lived at last in a garden in the suburbs,
wholly betaking him to his studies, and to a private life. Solebat ad portii
^nb^la^e (...), Hippocrates epit. Dameg.
Saving that sometimes he would walk down to the haven, Per^etiso (...)
pul^o^^^^ agitare solebat Democritus. ^ven. Sat 7.
and laugh heartily at such variety of ridiculous objects which there he saw.
Such a one was Democritus.

But in the mean time how does this concern me, or upon what reference do I
usurp his habit? I confess indeed, that to compare my self unto him for
ought I have yet said, were both impudency and arrogance. I do not presume to
make any parallel, antistat mihi millibus trecentis, Non sum dignus praestare
matellam. Mart.
paritus sum nullus sum. Yet thus much I will say of my self, and that I hope
without all suspicion of pride or self conceit, that I have lived a silent,
sedentary, solitary, private life, mihi and musis in the University this
twenty years, and more, penned up most part in my study. And though by my
profession a Divine, yet turbine raptus ingenij, as Scaliger.
he said, out of a running wit an inconstant, unsettled mind, I had a great
desire (not able to attain to any superficial skill in any) to have some
smattering in all, to be aliquis in omnibus, nullus in singulis, which In
The^^et.
Plato commends, and out of him Psis. Stoic. l 3. diff. 8. Dogma cupidis and
curiosis ingeniis imprimendum, vt sit talis qui nulli rei seruiat, aut exact
vnum aliquid elaboret, alia negligens, vt artifices, etc.
Lipsius approues and furthers, as fit to be imprinted in all curious wits, not
be a slave of one science, or dwell altogether in one subject, as most do, but
to roue abroad, centum puer artium. And to have an ore in every man's boat,
Delibare gratum de quocunque cibo and pittisare de quocunque dolio i^cundum.
to taste of every dish, and sip of every cup, which says Essais lib 3.
Montagne; was well performed by Aristotle, and his learned country man Adrian
Turnebus. This rouing humor (though not with like success) I have ever had,
and like a ranging Spaniel that barks at every bird he sees, leaving his
game, I have followed all saving that which I should, and may justly complain,
and truly, which Praefat. bibliothec.
Gesner did in modesty, that I have read many books but to little purpose, for
want of good method, I have confusedly tumbled over many Authors in our
Libraries, with small profit, for want of art, order, memory, judgment. I
never traveled but in a Map or Card, in which mine vnconfined thoughts have
freely expatiated, as having ever been especially delighted with the study of
Cosmography. Ambo fortes and fortunati Mars idem magisterii dominus iuxta
primam Leouicii regula^.
Saturn was Lord of my geniture, culminating, etc. and Mars principal
significator of manners, in partile conjunction with mine Ascendent; both in
their houses, etc. I am not poor, I am not rich; nihil est, nihil deest: I
have nothing, I want nothing; all my Treasure is in Mineruas Tower. Preferment
I could never get, although my friends providence care, alacritic and bounty
was never wanting to do me good, yet either through mine own default,
infelicity, want or neglect of opportunity, or iniquity of times, preposterous
proceeding, mine hopes were still frustrate, and I left behind, as a Dolphin on
shore, confined to my College, as Diogenes to his tubbe. Saving that sometimes
as Diogenes went into the city, and Democritus to the Haven to see fashions, I
did for my recreation now and then walk abroad, and look into the world, and
could not choose but make some little observation, not as they did to scoff or
laugh at all, but with a mixed passion, Hor.
Bilem saepe, iocum vestri mouere tumultus, I did sometime laugh and scoff
with Lucian, and Satyrically tax with Menippus, weep with Heraclitus,
sometimes again I was Per.
petulanti spleen cachinno, and then again Hor. Secundum moenia locus erat
frondosis populis opacus, vitibusque sponte natis tenuis prope aqua defluebat
placide murmu^ans, vbi sedils and domus Democriti conspiciebatur.
vrerebilis ecur, I was much moved to see that abuse which I could not amend.
In which passions howsoever I may sympathise with him or them, it is for no such
respect, I shroude my self under his name, but either under an unknown
habit, to assume a little more liberty and freedom of speech; or if you will
needs know, for that reason and only respect, which Hippocrates relates at
large in his Epistle to Damogetus, wherein he does express how coming to
visit him one day, he found Democritus in his garden at Abdera, in the
subburbes, i under a shady bower, Ipse composite consedebat supergenua volumen
habens and vtrinque alia patentia parata dissectaque animalia cismulatim strata
quorum viscera rimabatur.
with a book on his knees, busy at his study, sometimes writing, sometime
walking. The subject of his book was Melancholy and Madness, about him lay
the carcasses of many several beasts, newly by him cut up and Anatomised, not
that he did contemn Gods creatures as he told Hippocrates, but to find out the
seat of this atra bilis, or Melancholy, whence it proceeded, and how it was
engendered in men's bodies, to the intent he might better cure it in himself,
and by his writings and observations, Cum mundus extra se fit and mente captus
sit and nesciat se languere vt medelam adhibeat.
teach others how to prevent and avoid it: which good intent of his Hippocrates
highly commended, and Democritus Junior is therefore bold to imitate, and
because he left it imperfect, to prosecute and finish in this Treatise.

You have had a reason of the Name, if the title or inscription offend your
gravity, were it a sufficient justification to accuse others, I could produce
many sober Treatises, even Sermons themselves, which in their fronts carry more
fantastical names. Howsoever it is a kind of policy in these days, to
prefixe a fantastical title to a book which is to be sold, for as larkes
come down to a day-net, many vain Readers will tarry and stand gasing like
silly passengers, at an Anticke picture in a painters shop that will not
look at a judicious piece. And indeed as Scaliger epist. ad Patisonem nihil
magis lectorem iunitat quam inopinatum argumentu^, neque vendibilior merx est
quam petulans liber.
Scaliger observes, nothing more inuites a Reader then an Argument unlooked
for, Lib. 20. ca. 11. miras sequuntur inscription^ festiuistates.
unthought of, and selles better then a scurrile Pamphlet. Many men says
Gellius, are very conceited in their inscriptions, and able (as Praefat. Not.
hist. patriobstetri cem parturienti filiae accersenti moram inijcere possunt.
Pliny quotes out of Seneca) to make him loyter by the way, that went in haste
to fetch a midwife for his daughter, now ready to lie down. For my part I
have honorable Anatomy of Popery. Anatomy of immortality, Angelus Scalas,
Anatomy of Antimonie etc.
presidents for this which I have done. I will cite^one for all, Anthony Zara
pap.episc. his Anatomy of wit, in four Sections, Members, Subsections etc. to
be read in our Libraries.

If any man accept against my Subject, and will demand a reason of it, I can
allege more then one, I write of Melancholy, by being busy to avoid
Melancholy. There is no greater cause of Melancholy then idleness, no better
cure then business as Cont. li. 4. ca. 9 non est cura melior quam labor.
Rhasis holds: and howbeit stuitus labor est ineptiarum, to be busied in toys
is to small purpose, yet hear that divine Seneca, better aliud agere quam
nihil, better do to no end, then nothing. I write therefore as Non quod de
nouo quid addere aut a veteribus pretermissumsed propriae exercitationis causi.
P. Aegineta confesses of himself, not that any thing was unknown or
omitted, but to exercise my self, which course if some took, I think it
would be good for their bodies, and much better for their souls: when I first
took this task in hand, this I aimed at; Erasmus.
vel vt lenirem animum scribendo, to ease my mind by wrtting, for I had t
grauidum cor, faetum caput, Which I was very desirous to be unladen of, and
could imagine no fitter evacuation then this. Besides I could not well
refrain, for vbi dolor ibi digitus, one must needs scrat where it itcheth. I
was not a little offended with this Malady, and for that cause, as he that is
stunge with a Scorpion, I would expel clavum clavo, Otium otio dolorem dolor
sum solatus.
comfort one sorrow with another, idleness with idleness: or as he did, of
whom Obseruat. li. 1
Foelix Plater speaks, that though he had some of Aristophanes frogs in his
belly, still crying Brecec'ekex coax coax, oop, oop, oop, and for that cause
studied Physic seven years, and traveled over most part of Europe to ease
himself: to do my self good I turned over such Physicians our Libraries
would afford, and have taken this pains. And why not? Cardan professes he
writ his books De consolatione after his sons death, to comfort himself, so
did Tully write of the same subject with the same intent, after his daughters
departure, if it be his at least, or some impostors put out in his name, which
Lipsius probably suspects. Concerning my self I can peradventure affirm that
which Marius did in Salust, Que illi audi^e etc ligere solent eorum partim vidi
egomet, alia gessi, quae illi literis ego militando didici nunc vos existimate
faci^a an dicta pluris sint
that which others hear of or read of, I felt and practiced my self, they got
their knowledge by bo^kes, I mine by melancholising, Expert^ creed Roberto.
Something I can speak out of experience, and with her in the Poet, Dido Verg.
Haudignara malimiseris succurrere disco. I would help others out of a fellow
feeling, and as that virtuous Lady did of old, Camden Ipsa elephantiasi
correpta elephantiasis hospitium construxit.
being a leaper her-selfe, bestow all her portion to build an H^spitall for
leapers I will spend my time and knowledge which are my greatest fortunes, for
the common good of all. Yea but you will infer, that this is Iliada post
Homer^m.
actum agere, an unnecessary work, crambe^ bis coctam apponere, the same
again and again in other words How many excellent Physicians have written
just Volumes and elaborate Tracts of this subject? no news at all, all that
which I have is stolen from others, Martialis.
Dicitque tibi tua pagina fur es. I hold up my hand at the bar amongst the
rest, and am guilty of felony in this kind, habes consitentem reum, I am
content to be pressed with the rest. It Is most true, tenet insanabile multos
scribendi Cacoethes, and Eccles. vlt.
there is no end of writing of books, as the wiseman found of old, in this
Libros eunuchi gignunt, steriles pariunt.
scribing age, especially wherein D. King praefat. lect. Jonas, now the right
Reverend I., Bishop of London.
the number of books is without number, as a worthy man says, Presses be
oppressed, and out of an itching humor, that every man has to show himself
Homines famelici gloriae ad oftentationem eruditionis vndique congerunt.
Buchananus.
desirous of fame and honor, he will write no matter what, and scrape together
it boots not whence. Effascinati etiam laudis amore etc. Iustus Baronius.
Bewitched with this desire of fame, etiam medi^s in morbis to the
disparagement of their health, and scarce able to hold a pen, they must say
something, Ex ruinis aliene existimationis sibi gradum ad famam struunt.
and get themselves a name says Scaliger, though it be to the downfall and
ruin of many others. They commonly pretend public good, but as Omnes sibi
famam quaerunt and quovis modo in orbem spargi contendunt vt nouae alicuius rei
habeantur Authors. Praefat. Bibliothec.
Gesner observes, it is pride and vanity that eggs them on, no news or ought
worthy of note, but the same in other terms. As Apothecaries we make new
mixtures every day, and power out of one vessel into another, and skimme of
the cream of other men's wits, pick out the choice flowers out of their tild
gardens, to set out our own sterill plots. A fault that every writer finds as
I do now, and yet faulty themselves, Plautus.
trium literarum homines, all thieves pilfer out of old writers to stuff up
their new comments, scrape Ennius dunghills and out of E. Democriti puteo.
Democritus pit. By which means it comes to pass, Non tam refertae
bibliothecae quam cloacae.
that not only Libraries and shoppes, are full of our putid papers, but every
close-stoole and iakes; they serve to put under pies, to Et quicquid chartis
amicitur ineptis.
lap in spice, and keep rostemeat from burning. With us in France says
Epist a^ Petas. In regno Franciae omnibus seribendi datur libertas, paucis
facultas.
Scaliger, every man has liberty to write, but few ability, Olim literae ob
homines in precio nunc sordent ob homines.
heretofore learning was graced by judicious scholars, but now noble sciences
are vilified by base and illiterate scriblers, that either write for
vainglory, or need, or to get money, or as parasites to flatter and collogue
with some great man, Inter tot mill volumina vix unus a cuius lectione quis
melior euadat, immo potius non peior.
amongst so many thousand Authors, you shall scarce find one by reading of whom
you shall be any whit better, but rather much worse. Lib. 5 de sap.
Cardan finds fault with Frenchmen and Germans for this scribbling to no
purpose, non inquit ab edendo deterreo, modo novum aliquid inueniant, he does
not bar them to write, so that it be some new invention of their own; but we
weaue the same web still, and twist the same rope again and again, or if it
be a new invention, it is but some babble or toy, and who so cannot invent?
Sterile opertet esse ingenium quod in hoc scripturientum pruritu. etc.
He must have a barren wit, that in his scribbling age can forge nothing.
Cardan praefat ad consol.
Princes show their armies, richmen vaunt their buildings, soldiers their
manhood, and scholars vent their toys they must read, they must hear whether
they will or no. So that which Principibus and doctoribus deliberandum
relinquo, vt arguantur authorum furta and millies repitita tollantur, and
temere scribendi libido coerceatur aliter in infinitum progressura.
Gesner so much desires, if a speedy reformation be not had by some Princes
edicts and grave superuisors, to restrain this libertie', it will run on in
infinitum. Who shall read them? as already, we shall have a vast Chaos and
Onerabuntur ingenia ne^^o legendis sufficit.
confusion of books. For my part I am one of the number, I do not deny it, I
have only this of Macrobius to say for my self, Omne meum nihil meum, it is
all mine and none mine. As a Be gathers wax and honey out of many flowers, and
makes a new bundell of all, I have laboriously Quicquid obique been dictu^
facio meum, and illud nunc meis ad compendium nunc ad fidem and authoritatem
alienis exprimo verbis, omnes authors meos clientes esse arbitror etc.
Sarisburiensis ad Policrat. prol.
collected this Cento out of many Authors, the method only is mine own, and I
must usurp that of Praefat. ad Syntax. med.
Wecker e Terentio, nihil dictu^ quod non dictu^ prius, metho^dus sola
artificem ostendit, we can say nothing but what has been said^, the
composition and method is ours only, and shows a scholar. Oribasius, (...),
Auicenna, have all out of Galen, but to their own method, our Poets steal
from Homer, Divines use Austins words verbatim still, and our story-dressers
do no other; Nec araneara textus ideo melior quia exse fila gignuntur, nec
noster ideo vilior quia ex alienis libamus vt apes. Lipsius aduersus dialogist
and it is no more prejudice for me to write after others, then for Aelianus
Montaltus that famous Physician, to write De morbis capitis after Jason
Pratensis, Hernius, Hildishem, etc. one Logitian, one Rhetoritian after
another. Oppose what thou will I solue it thus. And for those other faults of
Barbarism Nec araneara textus ideo melior quia exse fila gignuntur, nec noster
ideo vilior quia ex alienis libamus vt apes. Lipsius aduersus dialogist
Doricke dialecte, extemporanean style, ^autologies, apish imitation, a
rapsodie of several rags gathered together from several dunghills, and
confusedly tumbled out: without art, invention, judgment, wit, learning,
harsh, absurd, insolent, indiscreet, ill composed, vain, scurrile, idle, dull,
and dry; I confess all, thou can not think worse of me then I do of my
self. All I say is this, that I have Vno absurdo dato mill sequuntur.
presidents for it, others as absurd, vain, idle, illiterate; etc. and
perhaps thou thy self, Nonimus and qui te etc. we have all our faults,
scimus and hanc venia^ etc. Non dubito multos lectores hic fore stultos
thou censurest me, so have I done others, and may do f thee, Caedimus inque
vicem, etc. it is lex talionis, quid pro quo. Go now censure, criticize, scoff
and rail. Martial. 13.2
Nasutus sis vsque licet sis denique nasus etc.
Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas,
Ipse ego quam dixi, etc.
Wer'st thou all scoffs and flouts, a very momus,
Then we our selves, thou can not say worse of us.
Thus as when women scold have I cried whore first, and in some men's censures,
I am afraid I have ouershot my self, Laudare se vani, vituperare stulti, as I
do not arrogate, I will not derogate. Be it therefore as it is, well or ill, I
have assaid. Pro captu lectoris habent sua fata libelli, let the world judge,
and so it will, and when all is done: laudamur ab his culpamur ab illis. It Is
the common fate of all writers, and I must endure it.

One or two things yet I would have amended if I could, That is, first to have
reuised the copy, and amended the style which now floues ex tempore, as it was
first written: but my leisure would not permit, Feci nec quod potui nec quod
volui. For the rest it went against my Genius, to prostitute my muse in
English, my intent was to have it exposed this more cotract in Latin, but I
could not get it printed. Any scurrile pamphlet is welcome to our mercenary
Printers in English, but in Latin they will not meddle with it, which is one of
the reasons that Aut artis inscij, aut quaestui, magis qua^ literis student.
hab Cantab. and Land. excus. 1576
Nicholas Carre in his Oration of the paucity of English writers gives, that so
many flourishing wits are smothered in oblivion, lie dead and buried in this
our nation.

That last and greatest exception is, that I being a Divine have meddled with
Physic. -- Heautont act. 1. sc^. ^.
tantumne est ab re tua otij tibi
Aliena vt cures, eaque nihil quae ad te attinent.
As Menedemus told Chremes have I so much leisure or little business of mine
own, as to look after other men's matters which concern me not? Hear me
speak. There be many other subjects I do easily grant, both in humanity and
divinity fit to be treated of, and of which had I written ad ostentationem
only, to show my self I should have rather chosen, and in which I could have
more willingly luxuriated, and better satisfied my self and others; but that
at this time I was fatally driven upon this rock of Melancholy, and carried
away by this by stream, which as a rillet is deducted from that maine channel
of my other studies, in which I have pleased and busied my self at idle
hours, as a subject most ne^essary and commodious. Not that I prefer it
before Diui^^ty, which I do acknowledge to be the Q^eene of professi^ns, and
to which all the rest are but as handmaids, but that (...) Divinity I saw no
such great need. For had I written posi^^uely, there be so many books in that
kind, so many Com^entators, Treatises, Pamphlets, Expositions, Sermons, that
^hole teemes of Oxen cannot draw them, and had I-been as ^^rward or ambitious
as some others, I might have happily ^^inted a Sermon at Paul's Cross, a
Sermon in S. Mary's ^xon, a Sermon in Christchurch, or a Sermon before the
right ^onorable, a Sermon before the right Worshipful, a Ser^on, a Sermon,
etc. But I have ever been as desirous to sup^esse my labors in this kind, as
others have been to press ^d publish theirs. To have written in controversy,
had bin (...) cut of an Hydra's head, Et inde catena quaedam fit quae haeredes
etiam ligat. Cardan.
lis litem generat, one begets ano^^er, so many duplications, triplications,
and swarms of que^^ons, that having once begun, I should never make an
(...), and that with such eagerness and bitterness in such que^^^ons they
proceed, that as Hor. ep^d. lib. od. 7.
he said, furor ne caecus, an rapit (...) acrior, an culpa, responsum date?
Blind fury or error, or ^^hnesse, or what it is that eggs them I know not,
I am ^^re many times, which Epist 86. Casulano presbit.
Austin perceived long since, tempe^^te contentionis serenitas charitatis
obnubilatur, with this ^^mpest of contention, the serenity of charity is
ouerclowded, ^^d there be too many spirits coniured up already in this ^^nde
in all sciences, and more then we can tell how to lay: and ^^e so furiously
rage and keep such a racket, that as Lib. 12. cap. 1, mutos nasci, and omni
scientia egere satius fuisset, quam sic in propriam perniciem insanire.
Fabius ^^d, it had been much better for some of them to have bin borne ^^mbe,
and altogether illiterate, then so far to dote to their ^^ne destruction.
It Is a general fault, as Seuerinus the Dane ^^mplaines. Infoelix mortalitas
inutilib^ quaestionibus ac disceptationibus vitam traducimus naturae principes
thesauros in quibus grauissimae morborum medicinae collocatae sunt interim
intactos relinquimus. Nec ^ ipsi solum relinquimus sed and alios prohibemus,
impedimus, condemnamus ludibriisque afficimus.
Unhappy men, as we are, we spend our days in ^^profitable questions and
disputations, leaving in the mean ^^e those chiefest treasures of nature
untouched, wherein the (...) medicines for all manner of diseases are to be
found, and do (...) only neglect them our selves, but hinder, condemn, forbid
and scoff at others, that are willing to enquire after them. These motives at
this present have induced me to make choice of this medicinal subject. If any
Physician in the mean time shall infer, Ne suitor vltra crepidam, and find
himself grieved that I have intruded into his profession; I will tell him in
brief, I do not otherwise by them, then they do by us. If it be for their
advantage, I know many of them which have taken orders in hope of a Benefice,
it is a common transition, and why may not a mela^choly Divine, that can get
nothing but by Simony, profess Physic? Drusianus an Italian ( Crusianus, but
corruptly, Tr^themius calls him) Quod in praxi minime fortunatus esset
medicinam reliquit, and ordinibus initiatus in Theologia postmodu^ scripsit.
Gesner Bibliotheca.
because he was no^ fortunate in his practice, forsook his profession, and
writ afterward in Divinity. Marsilius Ficinus was semel and simul, (...)
Priest and Physician at once, and P. Iunius.
T. Linacer in his old age took Orders. The Jesuits profess both at this
time, many o^ them permissu superiorum, Surgeons, Panders, Bawds, and midwiues,
etc. Many poor country Vicars for want of other means are driven to their
shifts, to turn Mountibanckes. Quacksaluers, Empirickes, and if our greedy
Patrons hol^ us to such hard conditions, as commonly they do, they will make
some of us at last turn Taskers, Costermongers, se^^ Ale as some do or worse.
Howsoever in undertaking this task, I hope I shall commit no great error or
indecorum, if all be considered aright. I can excuse my self with In
Hegiasticon, neque enim haec tractatio alienae videri debet a Theologo. etc
agitur de morbo animae.
Lessius the Jesuit in like case, it is a disease of the Soul, on which I am
to treat, and as much appertaining to a Divine as to a Physician; and who
knows not what an agreement there is betwixt these two professions? A good
Divine either is o^ ought to be a good Physician, a Spiritual Physician at
least as our Savior calls himself, and was indeed, Matt. 4.23. Luke 5.18.
Luke 7. and 8. They differ but in object, the one o^ the Body, the other of the
Soul, and use diverse medicines (...) to cure; One the vices and passions of
the Soulei, Anger Lust, Desperation, Pride, Presumption, etc. by applying tha^
Spiritual Physic; as the other use proper remedies to bodily diseases. Now
this being a common infirmity of Body and Soul, and such a one as has as
much need of a Spiritual as a corporal cure, I could not find a fitter task
to busy my self about, a more apposite Theme, so necessary, so commodious,
and generally concerning all sorts of men, that should so equally participate
of both, and require a whole Physician. A Divine in this compound mixed malady
can do little alone, a Physician in some kinds of Melancholy much less, both
make an absolute cure. s Alterius sic altera poscit opem, and it is proper to
them both, and I hope not unbeseeming me, who am by my profess on a Divine, and
by mine inclination a Physician. I had Jupiter in my sixth house, etc. In the
Theoricke of Physic I have taken some pains, not with an intent to practice,
but to satisfy my self, which was a cause likewise of the first undertaking
of this Subject.

If these reasons do not satisfy thee good Reader, as Alexander Munisicus
that bountiful Prelate, sometimes Bishop of Lincoln, when he had built six
Castles, ad inuidiam operis eluendam says Mr. In Newarke in Nottinggamshire.
Cum duo edificasset castella ad tollendam structionis inuidiam and expiandam
maculam duo instistituit caenobia and collegis religiosu impleuit.
Camden, to take away the envy of his work, (which very words Nubrigensis has
of Roger that rich Bishop of Salisburie, that in King Stephens time built
Shirburne Castle, and that of Devises) to take away the scandal or imputation,
which might be thence inferred, built so many Religious houses. If this my
Discourse be too medicinal, or savor too much of humanity, I promise thee
that I will hereafter make thee amends in some Divine Treatise. But this I hope
shall suffice when you have more fully considered of the Reasons following,
which were my chief Motives. The generality of the Disease, the necessity of
the cure, and the commodity or common good, that will arise to all men by the
knowledge of it, as shall at large appear in the ensuing Preface. And I doubt
not but that in the end you will say with me, that to Anatomise this humor
aright, through all the members of this our Microcosinus, is as great a task,
as to find out the Quadrature of a Circle, or all the Creekes and sounds of the
North-East or North-West passage, and all out as great a Discovery, as that
Hungry Ferdinando de Quir. anno. 1612 Amsterdami impres.
Spaniards of Terra Australis Incognita, as much trouble as to perfect the
Motion of Mars and Mercury, which so much crucifies our Astrologers, or to
rectify the Gregorian Calendar. I am so affected for my part, and hope as
Praesat ad Characteres spero enim (^ Policles) libros nostros meliores inde
futuros quod istiusmodi memoriae mandata reliquerimus ex praeceptis and
exemplis nostris ad vitam accomodatis vt se inde corrigant.
Theophrastus did by his Characters, that our prosteritie o friend Policles,
shall be the better for this which we have written, by correcting and
rectifying that which is amiss in themselves by our examples, and applying our
precepts and cautions to their own use. But I am ouertedious, I proceed.

Of the necessity and generallity of this which I have said, if any man doubt,
I shall desire him to make a brief Suruay of the world, as Epist 2. lib. 2. ad
Donatum paulisper te creed subduci in ardui montis verticem celsiore, speculare
inde rerum iacentium facies, and oculis in diuersa porrectis fluctuantis mundi
turbines intuere, iam simul tu videbis aut misereberis.
Cyprian advises Donat, supposing himself to be ^ra^sported to the top of
some high mountain, and thence to behold the tumults and chances of this
wavering world, and he cannot choose but either laugh at it or pittio it. S.
Hierome out of a strong imagination, being then in the wilderness, conceived
with himsele that he then saw them dancing in Rome, and if thou shall either
conceive, or clime to see, thou shall soon perceive all the world is mad,
that it is melancholy, dotes: that it is (which Epichthonius Cosmopolites
expressed not many years since in a Map made like a Fools head, with that
Motto) Caput Heleboro dignum, a cras^d head, and needs to be reformed; That
Kingdoms and Provinces are Melancholy, Cities and Families, all Creatures,
Vegetall, Sensible, and Rational, and that all Sorts, Sects, Ages and
Conditions, from the highest to the lowest, have need of Physic. For indeed
who is not a fool Melancholy, mad? and folly Melancholy madness are but one
disease; Dementiae sit actio nota in patrem and suium luxuriosos. Seneca
controuersi. lib. 2. cont. 7 aut in eum qui filio diem dixit luxurioso lib 6.
cont 7 etc. 3. lib. 10. But Portius Latro pleads against us all. sit actio
dementiae generalis
Delirium is a common name to all. Alexander, Gordonius, Jason Pratensis,
Sauanorola, Guiaenerius, Montaltus, confound them, as differing More or less,
some madder then some.
secundum magis and minus, so does David Psalm. 37.50. I said unto the fools
deal not so madly, and it was an old Stoicall Paradoxe, omnes stultos insanire,
Idem Hor. lib. 2. Sat. 3. Damasippus Stoicus probat omnes stultos insanire.
all fools are mad. And who is not a fool, who is free from Melancholy? who
is not touched more or less in habit or in disposition? If in disposition,
ill dispositions begette habits if they persevere says Tom. 2. sympos. lib. 5.
cap. 6 animi affectiones, si duitius inhaereant, prauos generant habitus.
Plutarch, hab^ts either are or turn to diseases, It Is the same which Tully
mainetaines in the second of his Tusculanes, omnium insipientum animi in morbo
sunt, and perturbatorum, al fools are sick, and all that are troubled in
mind, for what is sickness but as Lib. 28 cap. 1. Syntax. art. mirab. morbus
nihil est aliud qua^ dissolutio queda^ ac perturbatio faederis in corpore
existentis, sicut and sanitas est consentientis been corporis consummatio
quaedam.
Gregory Tholosanus defines it, a dissolution or perturbation of the bodily
league, which health combines: and who is not sick or ill disposed, in whom
does not passion, anger, envy, discontent, fear and sorrow reign? who labors
not of this disease; give me but a little leave, and you shall see by what
testimonies, confessions, arguments I will euince it, that most men are mad:
that they had as much need to go a Pilgrimage to the Anticyrae, (as in Lib. 9.
Geograph. plures olim gentes nauigabant illuc sanitatis causa.
Strabos time they did as in our days they go to Compestella our Lady of
Sichem, or Lauretta to seek for help: that it is like to be as prosperous a
Voyage as that of Guiana, and that there is much more need of Hellebor then of
Tobacco.

That men are so misaffected, Melancholy, mad, hear the testimony of Solomon,
Ecces. 2.1 2. And I turned to behold wisdom, madness and folly, etc. And
verse. 23. All his days are sorrow, and his travel grief, and his heart
takes no rest in the night. So that take Melancholy in what sense you will,
properly or improperly, in disposition or habit, for pleasure or for pain,
dotage, discontent, fear, sorrow, madness, for part or for all, truly or
metaphorically, it is all one. The hearts of the sons of men are evil, and
madness is in their hearts while they live, Eccles. 9.3. Wisemen themselves
are no better, Eccles. 1.18. in the multitue of wisdom is much grief, and he
that increases wisdom, increases sorrow, cap. 2.17. he hated life it self,
nothing pleased him, he hated his labor, all as Eccles. 1. 14.
he concludes, is sorrow, grief, vanity, vexation of spirit. And though he
were the wisest man in the world, sanctuarium sapientiae, and had wisdom in
abundance, he will not vindicate himself, or justify his own actions, Surely
I am more foolish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man in me,
Prou. 30.2. Be they Solomon's words, or the words of Agur, the son of Iakeh,
they are Canonical, David a man after Gods own heart, confesses as much of
himself, Psalm. 73.21. and 22. so foolish was I and ignorant, I was even as a
beast before thee, and condemns all for fools, Psalm. 93. and 32.9. and 49.20.
he compares them to beasts, horses and mules in which there is no
understanding. The Apostle Paul accuses himself in like sort. 2. Cor. 11. and
ver. 21. I would you would suffer a little my foolishness, I speak foolishly.
The whole head is sick says Esaias, and heart is heavy, cap. 1.5. and makes
lighter of them, then of oxen and asses, the ^xe knows his owner, etc. read
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Iere. 4. Amos 3.1. Ephesians. 5.6. be not mad, be not deceived, foolish
Galathians who has bewitched you? how often are they branded with this
Epithete of madness and folly? No word so frequent amongst the Fathers of the
Church and Divines, you may see what an opinion, they had of the world, and how
they valued men's actions.

I know that we think far otherwise, and hold them most part wise men that
are in authority, Princes, Magistrates, Iure haereditario sapere iubentur
Euphormio. Satyr
richmen, they are wisemen borne, all Politicians and Statesmen must needs be
so, for who dare speak against them: and on the other, so corrupt is our
judgment, we esteem wi^emen fools. As Democritu^ well signified in an
Epistle of his to Hippocrates: Apud quos virtus insania and furor esse dicitur.
The Abderites account virtue madness. Many good men have no better fortune in
their ages: Achish 1. Sam. 21.14. held David for a mad man. 2. Reg. 7.
Elisha and the rest were no otherwise esteemed. David was derided of the
common people. Psalm. 9.7. I am become a monster to many: and generally we are
accounted Fuerunt alij similis amentiae, etc. quod de Christianis Plinius lib.
10. epist 97.
fools for Christ, 1. Cor. 14. We fools thought his life madness, and his
end without honor. Wisd. 5.4. Christ and his Apostles were censured in like
sort, John 10. Mark 3. Acts 26. It Is an ordinary thing with us, to account
honest, devout, religious, plainedealing men, idiots, asses, that cannot lie
and dissemble, shift, temporise as other men do, Quis nisi mentis inops etc.
take bribes, etc but fear God and make a conscience of their doings. But the
Holy Ghost that knows better how to judge, he calls them fools, The fool
has said in his heart, Psalm. 53.1. and their ways utter their folly. Psalm.
49.14. Quid insanius quam pro momentanea ^^^icitate aeterais te mancipare
supplicus.
For what can be more mad, then for a little wordly pleasure to procure unto
themselves eternal punishment? as Gregory and others inculcate unto us.

And all those great Philosophers, the world has ever had in admiration, and
whose works we do so much esteem, that gave precepts of wisdom to others,
inuentors of Arts and Sciences, Socrates the wisest man of his time by the
Oracle of Apollo, whom his two scholars In fine Phaedonis. Hic finis fuit
amici no^tri o Eucrates nostro quidem iuditio omni^m quos e^pe ti^ mus opti^i
aepprime s^p tissimi ^ (...) ssimi.
Plato and Xe^^^^nti 4 de dictis Socratis ad finem. talis fuit Socrates quem
omniu^ optimum and faelicistimum statuam.
Xenophon so much extol and magnify, with those honorable titles, of best and
wisest of all mortal men, the happiest and most just. Those seven wise men of
Greece, those Brittan Druides, Indian Brachmanni, Ethiopian Gymnosophists,
Magi of the Persians, Apollonius of whom Philostratus, non doctus sed natus
sapiens, wise from his cradle, Epicurus, so much admired by his scholar
Lucretius. Qui genus humanum ingenio superauit, and omnes
Restrinxit stellas exortus vt aetherius So^.
Whose wit exce'ld the wits of men as far,
As the Sun rising does obscure a star.
And all those, of whom we read such Auaxegoras olim men's dictus ab antiquis.
Hyperbolicall elogiums, as of Aristotle that he was wisdom it self in the
abstract, Regula naturae, naturae miraculum, ipsa eruditio, daemonium hominis,
sol scientiarum mare, Sophia, antistes literarum and sapientiae, vt Scioppius
olim de Scalig. and Hensius, Aquila in nubibus, Imperatur literatoru^, columen
literarum, abyssus eruditionis.
a miracle of nature, breathing libraries, as Eunapius of Longinus, lights of
nature, giants for wit, quintescence of wit, Divine Spirits, Eagles in the
clouds, fallen from heaven, Gods, Spirits, Lamps of the world, Dictators,
Monarchs Miracles; Superintendents of wit and learning, etc. as Aelian said of
Protagoras and Gorgias, we may say of them all, tantum a sapientibus abfuerunt,
quantum a viris pueri; they were children in respect, infants, not Eagles, but
Kites, nouices, illeterate Eunuchi sapientia, Lib. 3. de sap. cap. 17. and 20.
omnes Philosophi aut stulti aut insani, nulla anus nullus aeger ineptius
delirauit.
Lactantius in his books of Wisdom, proves them to be disards, fools and
asses, madmen, and so full of absurd and ridiculous tenants and positions, that
to his thinking never any old woman or sick person doted worse. Democritus a
Leucippo doctus haereditate stattitia reliquit Epicure.
Democritus took all from Leucippus, and left says he, the inheritans of his
folly to Epicurus, Hor. 1. epicureae.
insanionti dum sapientiae etc. The like he says of Socrates, Aristippus and
the rest, making no difference Nihil interest inter hos and bestias nisi quod
loqua^tur de sap. lib. 26. cap. 8.
betwixt them and beasts, saving that they could speak. Cap de virt.
Theodoret in his Tract De cur. grec. affec. does manifestly euince as much of
Socrates, held wisest of the rest, that of all others he was most sottish, a
very madman in his actions and opinions. If you desire to hear more of
Apollonius that great wiseman, sometime paralelled by Julian the Apostate to
Christ, I refer you to that learned Tract of Eusebius against Hierocles, and
for them all to Lucians Piscator, Icaromenippus, Neciomantia their actions,
opinions ingeneral were so prodigious, absurd, ridiculous, which they broched
and maintained, as he said. Nescio an Anticyram ratio illis destinet omnem. I
think all the Anticyrae will not restore them to their wits, Ab vberibus
sapientiae lactati caecutire non possunt.
If these men now, that had Cor Zenodoti and iecur Cratetis.
Zenodotus heart, Crates liver were so sottish, and had no more brains then so
many Beetles, what shall we think of the commonalty? what of the rest?

Yea, but will you infer, that is true of Heathens, if they be conferred with
Christians, 1. Cor. 3.19. the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God,
earthly and devilish as James calls it, 3.15. they were vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness. To. 1.21. and 22.
ver. when they professed themselves wise became fools. In some sense,
Christiani Crassiani, Christians are Crassians, and if compared to that
wisdom no better then fools. God is only wise, Romans 16. only good as
Austin well contends, Lib de not. boni.
and no man living can be justified in his sight. God looked down from heaven
upon the children of men, to see if any did understand, Psalm. 53.2.3. but all
are corrupt, err, Romans 3.10.
none does good, no not one, Job aggregates this 4.18. behold he found no
stedfastnes in his servants, and laid folly upon his Angels, 19. how much more
on them that dwell in houses of clay? In this sense we are all as fools, and
the Hic profundissimae Sophiae fodinae.
Scripture alone is Arx Mineruae, we and our writings are shallow and
imperfect. But I do not so mean, but even in our ordinary actions, we are no
better the^ fools. All our actions as Panager. Traiano. Omnes actiones
exprobrare stultitiam videntur.
Pliny told Traian, vpbraid us of folly, our whole course of life is but
matter of laughter: we are not soberly wise, and the world it self, which
ought at least to be wise by reason of his antiquity, As Ser. 4^. in domi Pal.
mundus qui ob antiquitatem deberet esse sapiens semper stultizat and nullis
flagellis alteratur sed vt puer vult rosis and floribus coronari.
Hugo de Prato Florido will have it, semper stultizat, is every day more
foolish then other, the more it is whipped the worse it is, and as a child will
still be crowned with roses and flowers. Iouianus Pontanus Antonio Dial, brings
in some laughing at an old man, that by reason of his age was a little fond,
but as he admonishes there, Ne mireris mi hospes de hoc seen, marvel not at
him only, for tota haec ciuitas dilirium, al our town dotes in like sort,
Insanum te omnes pueri claemantque puc^ae. Hor.
we are a company of fools. Ask not with him in the Poet, Plautus Aulular.
Laruae hunc intemperiae insaniaeque agitant senem? what madness ghostes this
old man, but what madness ghostes us all? for we are all as bad as he, and not
senex bis puer, but say it of us all, semper pueri, young and old, all dote, as
Lactantius proves out of Seneca, and no difference betwixt us and children,
saving that maiora ludimus, and grandioribus pupis, they play with babies of
clouts and toys, and we play with greater babies. We cannot accuse or condemn
one another being faulty our selves, or as Adelph. Act. 5 scen. 8.
Mitio vpbraided Demea, insanis aufer te, for we are as mad our own selves,
and it is hard to say which is the worst. And it is universally so, when Ant dial.
Supputius in Pontanus, had traveled all over Europe, to confer with a
wiseman, he returned at last without his arrand, and could find none. Lib. 3.
de sap. pauci vt video sanae mentis sunt
Cardan concurres with him, few there are (for ought I can perceive) well in
their wits. So does Tully Stulte and incaute omnia agi video.
I see every thing to be done foolishly and unadvisedly. Ille sinistrorsum hic
dextrorsum, vnus vtrique,
Error, sed varijs illudit partibus omnes.
One reeles to this, another to that wall,
It Is the same error that deludes them all.
Insania non omnibus eadem. Erasmus chil. 3. cent. 10 nemo mortalium qui non
aliqua re desipit, li^et alius alio morbo laboret hic libidinis ille auaritiae,
ambitionis inuidiae.
They dote all but not alike, (...), not in the same kind, one is covetous, a
second lascivious, a third ambitious, a fourth envious, etc. as Damisippus the
Stoicke has well illustrated in the Poet, Hor lib. 2. sat. 3.
desipiunt omnes atque ac tu. It Is an inbred malady in every one of us, there
is seminarium stultitiae, a seminary of folly, which if it be stirred up or get
an head, will run in infinitum, and infinitely varies, as we our selves are
severally addicted, says Li 1. de aulico. Est in vno quoque nostrum seminarium
ali quod stultitiae, quod siquando excitetur in infinitum facile excrescit
Balthazar Castilio: and cannot so easily be rooted out, it takes such fast
hold, as Tully holds, altae radices stultitiae, Tibullus. stulti praetereunt
dies. their wits are a woolgathering.
so we are bred, and so we continue. Some say there be two maine defects of
wit, Error and Ignorance, Primaque lux vitae prima suvoris erat.
to which all others are reduced, by Ignorance we know not things necessary, by
Error we know them falsely. Ignorance is a privation, Error a positive Act, from
Ignorance comes vice, from Error heresy etc. But make how many kinds you will,
divide and subdiuide, few men are free, or that do not impinge on some one
kind or other. So fools commonly dote.
Sic plerumque agitat stultos inscitia, as he that examines his own and other
men's actions, shall find.

Charon in Lucian, as he wittily faines, was conducted by Mercury to such a
place, where he might see all the world at once, and after he had
sufficiently vewed and looked about, Mercury would needs know of him, what he
had observed, he told him that he saw a vast multitude and a promiscuous, he
could discern cities like so many Hiues of Bees, wherein every Be had a
sting, and they did naught else but sting one another, some dominering like
Hornets bigger then the rest, some like filching wasps, others as Drones. Dial.
contemplantes. Tom. 2.
Over their head were houering a confused company of perturbations, hope,
fear, anger, avarice, ignorance, etc and a multitude of diseases hanging over,
which they still pulled on their heads. Some were brawling, some fighting,
riding, running, for toys and trifles, and such momentary things. In
conclusion he condemned them all, for madmen, fools, idiots, asses. O stulti
quaenam haec est amentia? O fools o madmen he exclaimes, insana studia, insani
labores, etc. mad endeavors, mad actions, mad, mad, mad. Heraclitus the
Philosopher, out of a ser^ous meditation of men's actions fell a weeping, and
with continual tears bewailed their miseries, madness, and folly. Democritus
on the other side fell a laughing, their whole life to him seemed so ridiculous,
and he was so far carried with this Ironicall passion, that the citizens of
Abdera took him to be mad, and sent therefore Ambassadors to Hippocrates the
Physician, that he would exercise his skill upon him. But the story is set
down at large by Hippocrates himself, in his Epistle to Damogetus, which
because it is not impertinent to this Discourse, I will insert verbatim almost,
as it is delivered by Hippocrates himself, with all the circumstances
belonging unto it,

When Hippocrates was now come to Abdera, the people of the city came all
flocking about him, some weeping, some entreating of him, that he would do his
best. After some little repast, he went to see Democritus, all the people
following him, whom he found (as before) in his garden in the suburbs all
alone, Subramosae platano sedentem. Solum, discalceatum, super lapidem, valde
pallidum ac macilentum promissa barba, librum super genibus habentem.
sitting upon a stone under a plane tree, without hose or shoes, with a book
on his knees, cutting up several beasts and busy at his study. The people
stood gazing round about to see the congresse, Hippocrates after a little
pause, saluted him by his name, whom he resaluted, ashamed almost that he could
not call him likewise by his name, or that he had forgot it. Hippocrates
demanded of him what he was doing? He told him that he was De furo^e mania
melancholiae scribo vt sciam quopacto in hominibus gignatur, fiat, erescat,
cumuletur, minuatur, haec inquit animalia que vides, propterea seco non dei
opera perosus, sed fellis bilisque naturam disquirens.
busy in cutting up several beasts, to find out the causes of madness, and
melancholy. Hippocrates commended his work, admiring his happiness and
leisure. And why, quoth Democritus, have not you that leisure? Because, replied
Hippocrates, domestical affairs hinder me necessary to be done, for our
children, expenses, diseases, frailties and mortalities which happen, wife,
children, servants, and such business which deprive us of our time. At this
speech Democritus profusely laughed (his friends and the people standing by
weeping in the mean time and lamenting his madness) Hippocrates asking the
reason why he laughed: he told him at the vanities and fopperies of the time.
To see men so empty of all virtuous actions, to hunt so far after gold,
having no end of ambition, to take such infinite pains for a little glory, and
to be favored of men, to make such deep mines into the earth for gold, and
many times to find nothing, with loss of their lives and fortunes. Some to
love dogs, others horses, some to desire to be obeyed in many provinces
Austin lib. 1. in Genes. Iumenti and seruitui obsequium rigide postulas, et tu
nullum praestas alijs nec ipsi deo.
and yet themselves will know no obedience. Vxores dutunt mox for as eijciunt.
Some to love their wives dearly at first, and after a while to forsake and
hate them, begetting children, with much care and cost for their education, yet
when they grow to man's estate, Pueros amant mox fastidiunt
to despise them, neglect and leave them naked to the worlds mercy. Quid hoc ab
insania deest.
Do not these behauiours express their intolerable folly? When men live in
peace they covet war, detesting quietness, Reges elegunt, deponunt.
deposing kings and advancing others in their stead, murdering some men to
beget children of their wives. How many strange humors are in men? When they
are poor and needy they seek riches, and when they have them they do not
enjoy them, but hide them under ground, or else wastfully spend them. O wise
Hippocrates, I laugh at such things being done, but much more when no good
comes of them, and when they are done to so ill purpose. There is no truth or
justice found amongst them, for they daily plead one against another, Contra
parents, fratres ciues perpetuo rixantur, and inimicitias agunt.
the son against the father and the mother, brother against brother, kindred
and friends of the same quality, and all this for riches, whereof after death
they cannot be possessors. And yet notwithstanding they will defame and kill
one another, commit all unlawful actions, contemning God and men, friends and
country. They make great account of many senseless things, esteeming them as a
great part of their treasure, statues, pictures, and such like moueables, dear
bought, and so cunningly wrought, as nothing but speech wants in them, Idola
inanita amant animata odio habent sic pontificij.
and yet they hate living persons speaking to them. Others affect difficult
things, if they dwell on firm land, they will remove to an Island, and thence
to land again, being no way constant in their desires. Credo equidem viuos
ducent e marmore vultus
They commend courage and strength in wars, and let themselves be conquered
by lust and avarice, they are, in brief, as disordered in their minds, as
Thersites was in his body. And now me thinks O most worthy Hippocrates, you
should not reprehend my laughing, perceauing so many fooleries in men: Suam
stultitiam perspicit nemo sed alter alterum dexidet.
for no man will mock his own folly, but that which he sees in another, and
so they justly mock one another. The drunckard calls him a glutton, whom he
knows to be sober, many men love the Sea, others husbandry, briefly they
cannot agree in their own trades and professions, much less in their lives
and actions.

When Hippocrates heard these words, so readily uttered without premeditation
to declare the worlds vanity, full of ridiculous contrariety, he made answer
that necessity compelled men to many such actions, and diverse wills ensuing
from divine permission, that we might not be idle, being nothing is so odious
to them as sloth and negligence. Besides men cannot foresee future events, in
this uncertainty of humane affairs, they would not so marry, if they could
foresee the causes of their dislike and separation, or parents if they knew the
hour of their child's death, so tenderly provide for them: or an husbandman
sow, if he thought there would be no increase; or a merchant adventure to sea,
if he foresawe shipwreck; or be a magistrate, if presently to be deposed.
Alas, worthy Democritus, every man hopes the best, and to that end he does it,
and therefore no such cause of laughter.

Democritus hearing this excuse, laughed again alowd, perceauing he did not
well understand what he had said concerning perturbations and tranquillity of
the mind. Insomuch, that if men would govern their actions by discretion and
providence, they would not declare themselves fools, as now they do, and he
should have no such cause of laughter, but, quoth he, they swel in this life as
if they were immortal, for want of understanding. It were enough to make the^
wise, if they would but consider the e mutability of this world, and how it
wheels about, nothing firm and sure, he that is now above, to morrow is
beneath, he that sat on this side to day, to morrow is hurled on the other:
and not considering these things they fall into many inconveniences and
troubles, coveting things of no profit, and thirsting after them, tumbling
headlong into many calamities. So that if men would attempt no more then what
they can bear, they should lead contented lives, and learning to know
themselves would limit their ambition, Denique sit finis quaerendi cumque
habeas plus, pau periem metuas minus and finire laborem incipias, partis quod
auebas, vtere. Hor.
they would know then that nature has enough without seeking such
superfluities, and unprofitable things, which bring nothing with them but
grief and molestation. As a fat body is more subject to diseases; so are rich
men, there are many that take no heed what happens to others by bad
conversation, and therefore overthrowe themselves in the same manner through
their own fault, not foreseeing dangers manifest. These are things (o more then
mad quoth he) that give me matter of laughter, by suffering the pains of your
impieties, as your avarice, envy, mutinies, vnfatiable desires, conspiracies,
and other incurable vices; besides your Astutum vapido seruat sub pectore
vulpem. Et cum vulpe positus pariter vulpinarier. Cretisandu^ cum Crete.
dissimulation and hypocrisy, bearing deadly hatred one to the other, and yet
shadowing it with a good face, flying out into all filthy lusts, and
transgressions of all laws, both of nature and ciuility. Many things which
they have left off, after a while they fall to again, husbandry, navigations,
Dirruit aedificat mutat quadrata rotundis.
and leave of again, fickle and unconstant as they are, when they are young
they would be old, and old young. Qui fit maecenas vt nemo quam sibi sortem seu
ratio dederit seu sors adiecevit illa contentus viuat, etc. Hor.
Princes commend a private life, private men itch after honor, a magistrate he
commends a quiet life, a quiet man would be in his office, and obeyed as he is,
and what is the cause of all this but that they know; not themselves. Some
delight to destroy, one to build, another to spotle, one country to enrich
another and himself. Qua qui inre ab infantibus differunt, quibus men's and
sensus sine ratione i^est quicquid sese bis offert volupe est.
In all these things they are like children, in whom is no judgment or
counsel, and resemble beasts, saving that beasts are better then they, as
being contented with nature. Idem Plutare.
When shall you see a Lion hide gold in the ground, or a bull contend for a
better pasture, when a Bore is thirsty he drinks what will serve him and no
more, and when his belly is full he cease to eat: but men are immoderate in
both; as in lust, they covet carnal copulation at set times, men always
ruinating thereby the health of their bodies. And does it not deserve laughter,
to see an amorous fool torment himself for a wench, weep, howl for a
misshapen slat, a dowdy, sometimes that might have his choice of the finest
beauties? Is there any remedy for this in Physic? I do anatomise and cut up
these poor beasts, Vt insaniae causam disquiram bruta macto and seco cum hoc
potius in hominibus inuestigandum esset.
to see the cause of these distempers, vanities, and follies, yet such proof
were better made on man's body, if my kind nature would endure it. Totus a
natiuitate morbus est.
Who from the hour of his birth is most miserable, weak and sickly, when he
sucks he is guided by others, when he is grown great practices unhappiness,
In vigore furibundus; quum decrescit insanabilis.
and is sturdy, and when old a child again and repents him of his life past.
And here being interrupted by one that brought books, he fell to it again,
that all were mad, careless, stupid. To prove my former speeches, look into
Courts or private houses. Cyprian ad Donatum. qui sedet crimina iudicaturus, etc.
Judges give judgment according to their own advantage, doing manifest wrong
to poor innocents to please others. Notaries alter sentences, and for money
loose their deeds, some make false moneys, others-counterfeit false weights,
some abuse their parents, yea corrupt their own sisters, others make long
libells and pasquills, defaming-men of good life, and extol such as are lewd
and vicious, some rob one, some another. Tu pessimus omnium latro es as a
thief told Alexander in Curtius. damnat for as iudex quod intus operatur.
Cyprian.
Magistrates make laws against thieves, and are the veriest thieves themselves.
Some kill themselves, others despair not obtaining their desires; some dance,
sing, laugh, feast, and backbite, whilst others sigh, languish, mourn and
lament, having neither meat, drink, nor clothes. Vultus magna cura magna animi
incuria. Am. Marcellinus.
Some pranke up their bodies and have their minds full of execrable vices: some
trot about to bear Horrenda res est vix duo verba sine rmendacio proferuntur:
and quamuis solenniter homines adveritatem dicendam inuitentur, peierare tamen
non dubitant vt ex december testibus vix un us verum dicat. Calu. in 8, Ioh. sermon.
1.
false witness, and say anything for money, and though Judges know of it, yet
for a bribe they wink at it, and suffer false contracts to prevail against
equity. Women are all day a dressing, to please other men abroad, and go like
sluts at home, not caring to please their own husbands whom they should.
Seeing men are so fickle, so sottish, so intemperate, why should I not laugh at
those to whom Sapientiam insaniam esse dicunt.
folly seems wisdom, and will not be cured, and perceive it not? It grew
late, and Hippocrates left him, and no sooner was he come from him, but all the
citizens came about him flocking to know how he liked him^ he told them in
brief, that notwithstanding those small neglects of his attire, body, diet,
Siquidem sapientiae suae admiratione me compleuit.

Democritum offendi sapientissimum virum qui solus potest omnes homines
prudentiores redder^


the world had not a wiser man, a more learned, a more honest man, and they
were much deceived to say that he was mad.

Thus Democritus esteemed of the world in his time, and this was the cause of
his laughter: and good cause he had. Egraec. Epig.
Olim iure quidem, nunc plus Democrite ride,
Quin rides? vitae haec nunc mage ridicula est.
Democritus did well to laugh of old
Good cause he had but now much more,
This life of ours is more ridiculous
Then that of his or long before.
Never so much cause of laughter as now, never so many fools and mad men.
Plures Democriti nunc non sufficient, opus Democrito qui Democritum rideat
Eras. mor.
It Is not one Democritus will serve turn to laugh in these days, we have now
need of a Democritus to laugh at Democritus, one iester to flout at another,
one fool to fleare at another; A great Stentorean Democritus as big as that
Rhodian Colossus. For now as Policrat. lib. 3. cap. 8. e Petron.
Salisburionsis said in his time, totus mundus histrionem agit, the whole world
plays the fool, we have a new Theater, a new Scene, a new comedy of errors,
a new company of personat Actors If Democritus were a live now, he should see
strange alterations, a new company of counterfeit visa^ds, whislers, Cumane
Asses, Maskers, Mummers, painted puppets, outsides, phantasticke shadows,
Gulls, Butterflies, Monsters, giddy heads, etc. Many additions, much increase
of madness, were he now to travel, or could get leave of Pluto to come see
fashions as Charon did in Lucian, to visit our cities of Moronia Pia, and
Moronia foelix, sure I think he would break the rimme of his belly with
laughing. Iuuen.
Si foret in terris rideret Democritus seu etc. A Satyrrical Roman in his time
thought all vice, folly, and madness were at a full sea, Innen.
Omne in praecipiti vitium stetit: but we flow higher in madness, fa^re beyond
them. Hor.
Mox daturi progeniem vitiosiorem, Father Angelo the Duke of Ioyoux going
barefoot over the Alps to Rome etc.
and the latter end (you know whose Oracle it is) is like to be worst: but
speak of times present. If Democritus were alive now, and should but see the
superstition of our times, our Superstitio est insanus error.
Religious madness as Lib 8. hist. Belg.
Meteran calls it, Religiosam insaniam. If he should meet a Cappuchine, a
Fransciscan, a Jesuit, a shauedcrowned Monk in his robes, a begging Friar, or
their threecrowned Sovereign Lord the Pope, poor Peter's Successor, servus
seruorum dei, to depose kings with his foot, to tread on Emperors necks,
make them stand bare foot and barelegged at his gates, hold his bridle and
stirrupe etc. If he should see a Si cui intueri vacet quae patiuntur
superstitiosi, inueniet tam ind^cora honestis tam indigna liberis, tam
dissimiliae sanis vt nemo fuerit dubitaturus furere, eos fi cum paucioribus
furerent Seneca.
Prince creep so devoutly to kiss his toe, what would he say, coelum ipsum
petitur stultitia. Had he met some of our devout Pilgrims going barefoote to
Jerusalem, Rome, Saint Iago, Saint Thomas Shrine, to creep to those
counterfeit and maggot-eaten Relics, had he been present at a Mass, and
seen those kissing of paxes, crucifixes, cringes, duckings, their several
attires and ceremonies, pictures of Saints, Quid dicam de eorum indulgentijs,
oblationibus, votis solutionibus ieiunijs caenobitis, vigiliis somniis, horis
organis, cantilenis, campanis, simulachris missis, purgatoriis, mitris,
breuiarijs, bullis, lustralibus aquis, rasuris, vnctionibus candelis,
calicibus, crucibus, mappis, cereis, thuribulis, incantationibus, exorcismis,
sputis, legendis, etc. Baleus de actis Romans Pont.
Indulgences, ceremonies, Pardons, Vigils, fasting, feasts, praying in
gibberish, and mumbling of beads, had he heard an old woman say her prayers in
Latin, their sprinkling of holiwater, and going a precessio^, etc. Their
breuiaries, bulls, hollowed, beans exorcismes, pictures, curious crosses,
fables and bables. Had he read the Golden Legend, the Turks Alcoron, or Jews
Talmud, the Rabbines comments, what would he have thought? How do thou think
would he have been affected? Had he more particularly examined a Jesuits life
amongst the rest, he should have seen an hypocrite profess poverty, Dum
simulant spernere acquisiuerunt sibi triginta annorum spacio bis centena millia
librarum annua. Arnoldus.
and yet possess more goods and lands then many Princes, to have infinite
treasures and revenues: Et quum interdiu de virtute loquuti sunt sero in
latibulis clunes agitant labor nocturno. Agrippa.
Vow virginity, talk of holiness, and yet ind^ed a notorious bawd and famous
fornicator, Monks by profession, and such as give over the world and the
vanities of it, and yet a Machiauellian rowt,^ interested in all matters of
state: holy men, peacemakers, and yet composed of envy, lust, ambition, hatred,
and malice, firebrands, adulta patriae pestis, traitors, assassinats, haec itur
ad astra, 1. Tim. 3. 13. but they shall prevail no longer, their madness shall
be evident to all men.
and this is to supererogate, and merit heaven for themselves and others. Had
he seen on the other side some of our nice and curious Schismatics in another
extreme, abhor all ceremonies, and rather loose their lives and livings then
do or admit any thing they have formerly done, though things indifferent:
Formalists ready to embrace and maintain all that is o^ shall be proposed, in
hope of preferment: Another Epicurean company lying at lurch as so many
vultures, watching for a prey of Church goods, and ready to rise by the
downfall of any: As Quid tibi videtur facturus Democritus si horum spectator
contigisset?
Lucian said in like case, what do thou think Democritus would have done,
Benignitatis sinus solebat esse nunc litium officina curia Romana. Budaeus,
had he been spectator of these things?

Or had he but observed the common people follow like so many sheep, one of
their fellows drawn by the horns over a gap, some for zeal, some for fear,
ready to dye before they will abjure any of those ceremonies, to which they
have been accustomed; others out of hypocrisy frequent Sermons, knock their
breasts, turn up their eyes, pretend zeal, desire reformation, and yet
professed usurers, gripes, monsters of men, harpyes, devils, in their lives to
express nothing less.

What would he have said to see, hear, and read so many bloody battles, so
many thousands slain at once, o vnius ob noxam furiasque, without any just
cause, to satisfy one man's private spleen, lust, avarice? etc. proper men,
able both in body and mind, sound, led like so many Bellum rem plane belluinam
vocat Morus, Vtop. lib. 2.
beasts to the slaughter and in the flower of their years, and full strength,
as it were, sacrificed to Pluto as so many sheep, 40000 at once. Pater in
siliu^, affinis in affine^, amicus in amicum, etc.

Regio cum Regione, regnu^ regno colliditur. Populus populo in mis tuam
pernitiem belluarum instar sanguinolente ruentium.


Father to fight against the son, brother against brother, kinsman against
kinsman, kingdom against kingdom, province against province, Christians
against Christians, infinite treasures consumed, towns burned, flourishing
cities sacked and ruinated, goodly countries depopulated and left desolate,
old inhabitants expelled, maids deflowred, etc. and whatsoever torment,
misery, mischief, the devil, fury and rage can invent, to their own ruin
and destruction. Had he been present at those late civil wars in France,
Gallorum decies centum millia ceciderunt, Ecclesiarum 20 millia fundamentis
excisa.
Wherein less then in ten years ten hundred thousand men were consumed,
says Collignius, 20 thousand Churches overthrown: or at our late Pharsalian
fields in the time of Henry the sixth, betwixt the houses of Lancaster and
York, an hundred thousand men slain, Pont Huterus.
one says, Comineus, vt nullus non execretur and admiretur crudelitaetem and
barbaram insaniam, quae inter homines eodem sub caelo natos eiusdem linguae,
sanguinis, religionis exercebatur.
another ten thousand families overthrown; that no man can but marvel, says
Comineus, at that barbarous immanity, for all madness, committed betwixt men
of the same nation, language and religion. Lucan.
Quis furor o ciues? Why do the Gentiles so furiously rage, says the Prophet
David, Psalm. 2.1. But we may ask why do the Christians so furiously rage?
Unfit for Gentiles, much more for us so to tyrannize, as the Spaniard in the
East Indies, that killed up in 42 years (if we may believe Bishop of Cusco
an eye witness.
Bartholomeus a Casa their own Bishop) 12 Millions of men with stupend and
exquisite torments, neither should I ly, says he, if I said 50 Millions. I
omit those French Massakers, Sicilian Euensongs, Read Meteran, of his stupend
cruelties
the Duke of Aluas tyrannies, our Gunpowder machinations, and that fourth fury,
as Hensius Austriaco.
one calls it, the Spanish Inquisition, which quite obscures those ten
persecutions. Is not this Iansenius, Gallobelgicus, 1596. Mundus Furiosus
inscripsio libri.
Mundus furiosus, a mad world, as he terms it, would this, think you, have
enforced our Democritus to Laughter, or rather have made him turn his tune and
alter his tone, and weep with Fleat Heraclitus an rideat Democritus.
Heraclitus, or rather howl and Curae leaves loquuntur ingentes stupent.
roar and tear his hair in commisseration or stand amazed, or as the Poets
feign, that Niobe was for grief quite stupefied and turned to a stone. I have
not yet said the worst. That which is more absurd and Arma amens ^apio nec sat
rationis in armis
mad, In their tumults, civil and unjust wars, (for all are not to be
condemned) tumults, broils, etc. They commonly call the most harebraine
bloodsuckers, Crudel^ssimos saeuissi^^^que latrones fertissim^^ haberi pro
pugn^^o^^ fidissimos d^^^ habent, bruta persuasione donati.
strongest thieves, the most desperate villains, treacherous rogues, inhumane
murderers, cruel and dissolute caytiffes; courageous and generous spirits,
heroical and worthy captains, Eobanus Hessus, qui^us omn^ in his vita pla^et
non vlla iuvat nisi morte nec vllam esse putant vitam quae non assu^sceret
armis.
brave men at arms, valiant and renowned soldiers, possessed with a brute
persuasion of false honor, as Pontus Huter in his Burgundian history
complains. Boterus in Amphitheatridion.
And that which is more to be lamented, they persuade them that by these bloody
wars, as Busbequius Turk epist per cedes and sanguin^m patere hominibus
ascensum in coelum putant. Lactant. de falsa relig. lib. 1. cap 8.
Turks do their Commons, to incorage them to fight, If they die in them they
go directly to heaven, and shall be canonized for Saints: no greater honor
then to die in the field: as Africanus is extolled by Ennius, and Mars and
Herculi cade^ porta ad coelum p^tu^t, qui mag^^m generis hum^ i partem perdidit.
Hercules, and I know not how many besides of old, went this way to heaven,
that were indeed bloody butchers, prodigious monsters, hellhounds and ferall
plagues, and deuourers, common executioners of humane kind, as Lactantius
truly proves, and Cyprian to Donat. Madet orbis mutuo sanguine, the earth
wallowes in her own blood, and for that, which if it be done in private, a man
shall be rigorously executed, Homicid um quum committunt singuli, crimen est;
quum public geritur, virtus vocatur, Cyprian. Prosperum and foelix scelus
virtus vocatur.
and which is no less then murder it self, if the same fact be done in
public, in wars it is called virtue, and the party is honored for it.
Iuvenal. Crucem tulit hic diadema.
One is crowned for that which another is hanged for, and made a Knight, a
Lord, an Earl, a Duke (as De vanit. scient. de princip. nobilitatis.
Agrippa notes) for which another should have hung in gibbets, as a terror to
the rest. A poor sheep-stealer is hanged for stealing victuals, compelled
peradventure by necessity of that inexorable cold, hunger and thirst, to save
himself from staruing: but a Pansa rapit quod Natta reliquit. Tu pessimus
omnium latro es, as a thief told Alexander in Curtius.
great man in office may securely rob whole provinces, undo thousands, pill
and pole, oppress ad libitum, flea, grind, tyrannize, enrich himself by
spoils of the commons, and be uncontrollable in all his actions, and after all
be recompensed with turgent titles, honored for his good service, and no man
dare find fault, or Non ausi mutire, etc. Aesop.
mutter at it.

How would our Democritus have been affected to see a wicked caitiffe, or
Improbum and stulium si diuitem multos bonos viros in seruitute habente^, ob id
duntaxit quod ei continget aureorum numismatu^ cumulus vel appendices and
additamenta numismatum. Morus Vtopia.
fool, a very idiot, a funge, a monster of man, to have many good men,
wisemen, learned men to attend upon him with all submission, as an appendix to
his riches, for that respect alone, because he has more wealth and money,
Eorumque detestantur Vtopienses insaniam qui diuinos honores ijs impendunt quos
sordidos and auaros agnoscunt non alio respectu honorantes quam quod d^tes sint
Idem lib. 2.
and to honor him with divine titles, and bumbast Epithets, whom they know to
be a disard, a fool, a covetous wretch, etc. because he is rich. To see a
filthy loathsome ca^casse, a Gorgons head puffed up by parasites, assume this
unto himself, glorious titles, in worth an infant, a Cuman ass, a painted
sepulcher, an Egyptian temple. To see a withered face, a diseased, deformed,
ca^kred complexion, a viperous mind, and Epicurean soul set out with orient
pearls, Jewels, diadems, perfumes curious elaborate works; and a goodly person
of an angelical divine countenance, a Saint, an humble mind, a meek spirit
clothed in rags, beg and now ready to be starued. To see a silly
contemptible slouen in apparel, ragged in his coat, polite in speech, of a
divine spirit, wise: another neat in clothes, spruce, full of courtesy, empty
of grace, wit, talk non sense.

To see so many lawyers, advocates, so many thousand suits in one Court
sometimes so violently followed. Cypr. 2. ad Donat epist. Vt reus innocens
pereat sit ^^cens Iudex damnat for as quod intu^ operatur.
A Lamb executed, a Woolfe pronounce sentence, latro arraigned, and fur sit on
the bench, the Judge severely punish others, and do worse himself. Laws
altered, misconstered, interpreted pro and con, as the Ergo Iudicium nihil est
nisi publica merces. Petronius. Quid faciant leges vbi sola peounia reguat.
Idem.
Judge is bribed or affected, as a nose of wax, good to day none tomorrow: or
firm in his opinion, cast in his. Sentence prolonged, changed ad arbitrium
Iudicis, still the same case, Hic arcentur haereditatibus liberi, hic donatur
bonis alienis falsum consulit alter testamentum corrumpit etc. Idem.
one thrust out of his inheritance another falsely put in by favor, false
forged deeds or wills. Incisae leges negliguntur, laws made and not kept, or
if put in execution, Vexat censura columbas.
they be some silly ones that are punished. As put case it be fornication, ^
father will disinherit or abdicat his child quite casseere him (out villain
be gone, come no more in my sight) a poor man is miserably tormented with
loss of his estate perhaps, goods, fortunes, good name, for ever disgraced,
forsaken, and must do penance to he utmost: but in a great person it is no
offense at all, a common and ordinary thing, no man takes notice of it; he
iustifies it in public, and peradventure braggs of it. Quod tot sint fures and
mendici magistratuum culpa fit qui malos imitaxtur praeceptores qui discipulos
libentius verberant quam docent. Morus vtop. l 1
Many poor men, younger brothers, etc. by reason of bad policy, and idle
education, are compelled to beg or steal, and then hanged for theft.
Libentius verberant quam docent, as Schoolmasters do, rather correct their
pupills, then teach when they do amiss, Decernuntur furi gravia and ^orrenda
supplicia quum potius prouidendum multo soret ne fures sint ne cuiquam tam dira
furandi aut pereundi sit necessitas. Idem.
They had more need provide there should be no more thieves and beggars, as
they ought by good policy, and take away the occasions, then let them run on,
as they do, to their destruction. And take away likewise those occasions of
wrangling, a multitude of liers, and compose controversies by some more
compendious means. Whereas now for every toy and trifle they go to law,
Boterus de augment. vrb. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Mug it litibus insanum forum, and saeuit inuicem discordantium rabies, they
are ready to pull out one another throats, and for matters of commodity, E
fraterno cord sanguinem eliciunt.
to squise blood, says Hierom, out of their brothers heart, diffame, lie,
disgrace, backbite, rail, sw^are and forswear, fight and wrangle, spend their
goods, Milvus rapit ac deglubit.
lives, fortunes, friends, undo one another, to enrich an Harpy Advocate, that
prays upon them both, and cries Eia Socrates, Multitudo perd^ntium aut
pereuntium (Plutarch) huc coeunt non vt dys sacra faciani, sed vt contentiones
hi^perag^nt.
Eia Xantippe; or some corrupt Judge, that like the Kite in Aesop, while the
Mouse and Frogge fought, carried both away. Generally they pray one upon
another, as so many ravenous birds, brute beasts, devouring Fishes, no medium,
Petronius de Crotone ciuitate.
omnes hic aut captantur aut captant, aut cadauera quae lacerantur, aut corui
qui lacerant, either deceive or be deceived; tear others or be torn in pieces
themselves. Every man for himself, for his own ends, his own guard, No
charity, Nemo coelum nemo iusiurandum nemo Iouem plus^is facit sed om^nes
apertis oculis bona sua computant. Petronius.
love, friendship, fear of God, alliance, affinity, consanguinity,
Christianity can contain them, but if they be any ways offended, or that
string of commodity be touched they fall foul. Old friends become bitter
enemies on a sudden, for toys and small offenses, and they that erst were
willing to do all mutual offices of love and kindness, now revile and
persecute one another to death, with more then Vatinian hatred, and will not be
reconciled. So long as they are behouefull they love or may bestead each other,
but when there is no more good to be expected, as they do by an old dog hang
him up or casseire him; instead of recompense, revile him, and when they have
made him an instrument of their villainy, make him away. In a word, every man
for his own ends: our summum bonum is commodity, and the Goddess we adore is
Dea moneta, Queen Money, to whom we daily offer sacrifice, which steeres our
hearts, hands, Paucis charior est sides quam pecunia. Salust.
affections, all: that most powerful Goddess, by whom we are reared,
depressed, elevated, Prima fere vota and cunctis etc.

Et genus and formam Regina pecunia donat.


esteemed, the sole commandresse of our actions, for which we pray, run,
ride, go and come, labor and contend as fishes do for a crumme that falls
into the water. It is not worth, wisdom, learning, honesty, religion, or any
sufficiency for which we are respected, but Quantumquisque sua nummorum seruat
in arca tantum haebet and fidu^.
money: honesty is accounted folly, knavery policy; Non a peritiased ab ornatu
and vulgi vocibus habemur excellentes. Cardan l. 2. de cons.
men admired out of opinion, not as they are, but as they seem to be: such
shifting, lying, cogging, plotting, counterplotting, cosening, dissembling,
Periurata suo postponit numina lucro mercator. Vt necessarium sit vel Deo
displicere, vel ab hominibus contemni, vexari, negligi.
that of necessity one must highly offend God if he be conformable to the
world, or else live in contempt, disgrace and misery. One takes upon him
temperance, another austerity, a third an affected kind of simplicity, when as
indeed he, and he, and he, and the rest are Qui Curios simulant and Bacchanalia
vivunt.
hypocrites, ambodexters, outsides, Tragelapho similes vel centauris sursum
homines deorsum equi.
like so many turning pictures, a lion on the one side, a lamb on the other.
How would Democritus have been affected to see these things?

To see a man turn himself into all shapes like a Camelion, or as Proteus to
act twenty parts at once for his advantage, to temporize and vary like Mercury
the planet, good with good, bad with the bad; of all religions, humors.
inclinations, to fawn like a Spaniel, rage like a Lion, bark like a Curre,
fight like a Dragon, sting like a Serpent, as meek as a Lamb, and yet again
grinne like a Tygre, weep like a Crocodile, insult over others, and yet others
insult over him, here command, there crouch, tyrannize in one place, be baffled
in another, a wise man at home, a fool abroad to make others merry.

To see a man protest friendship, kiss his hand, Arridere homines vt saeuiant
blandiri vt fallant. Cypr. ad Donatum.
smile with an intent to do mischief, or cosen him whom he salutes, Love and
hate are like the two ends of a perspectiue glass, one multiplies, the other
makes all things less,
magnify his friend unworthy with hyperbolical elogiums, his enemy albeit a
good man to vilify and disgrace him with the utmost liuor and malice can
invent.

To see men wholly led by affection, admired and censured out of opinion without
judgment: an inconsiderate multitude, like so many dogs in a village, if one
bark all bark without a cause; if a man be in favor, or commended by some
great man, all the world applauds him, Odit damnatos. Iuu.
if in disgrace in an instant all hate him.

To see a man Agrippa epist 28. lib. 7. Quorum cerebrum est in ventre ingenium
in patinis.
to wear his brains in his belly, his guts in his head, an hundredth Oaks on
his back, to devour an hundred Oxen at a meal, nay more, to devour houses,
or as those Anthropophagi, Ps. They eat up my people as bread.
to eat one another.

To see a man role himself up like a snow ball from base beggary, to right
worshipful and right honorable titles, iniustly to screw himself into honors
and offices; another to starve his Genius to gather wealth, Distinguit
pauimentum lae^ior h^res, Hor.
which his prodigal son melts and consumes in an instant.

To see a Scholar crouch and creep to an illiterate pesant for a meals meat.
A Scriuener better paid for an Obligation; a Faukner receive better wages then
a Student; a Lawier get more in a day, then a Philosopher in a year, better
paid for an hour, then a Scholar for an years study.

To see a fond mother like Aesopes A^e, hug her child to death, a Doctus
spectare lacunar.
wittall wink at his wives ho^^esty; and too perspicatious in all other
affairs; one stumble at a straw, and leap over a block; penny wise, pound
foolish; Tullius. Est enim proprium stultitiae aliorum cernere vitia obliuisci
suorum. Idem Aristippus Charidemo apud Lucianum. Omnino stultitiae cuiusdam
esse puto, etc.
find fault with others and do worse himself.

To see wise men degraded, fools preferred, horses ride in a Coach, men draw
it; dogs devour their masters; Towers build Masons; Children rule; old men
go to school; women wear the breeches, Oves olim mite pecus nunc tam
indomitum and edax vt homines deuorent oppida diruant, etc. Morus Vtop. lib. 1.
sheep demolish towns, devour men, etc. And in a word, the world turned
vpside downward. Diuersos varijs tribuit natura furores.
To insist in every particular were one of Hercules labors, there is so many
ridiculous instances, as moates in the Sun. Quantum est in rebus inane? And
who can speak of all? Crimine ab vno disce omnes, take this for a taste.

But these are obuious to sense, triuiall and well known, easy to be
discerned. How would Democritus have been moved, had he seen Democrit. ep.
pred. Hos deierantes and potantes deprehenderet, hos vomentes illos verberantes
alios litigantes, insidias molientes suffragantes ve^ena miscentes, in amicorum
accusationem subscribentes, hos glo^ia illos ambitione, cupiditate, mente
captos, etc.
the secrets of their hearts? If every man had a window in his breast, which
Momus would have had in Vulcans man, or that which Tully so much wished, it
were written on every man's forehead, quid quisque de repub. sentiret, what he
thought or that it could be effected in an instant, which Mercury did by Charon
in Lucian, by touching of his eyes, to make him discern semel and simul
rumores and susurros. Spes hominum caecas, morbos, votumque, labores,
Et passim toto volitantes aethere curas.
Blind hopes and wishes, their thoughts and affairs,
Whispers and rumors, and those flying cares.
That he could cubiculorum obductas fores recludere, and secreta cordium
penetrate, which Ad Donatum ep. 2. l. 2. O siposses in specula sublimi
constitutus, etc.
Cyprian desired, open doors and locks, shoots bolts, as Lucians Gallus did
with a feather of his tail: or Gyges invisible ring, or some rare perspectiue
glass, or Otacousticon, which might so multiply species, that a man might
hear and see all at once, Cuckolds horns, forgeries of Alcumists, the
Philosophers stone, etc. and all those works of darkness, foolish vows,
hopes, fears, and wishes, what a deal of laughter would it have afforded? he
should have seen windmills in one man's head, an Hornets neast in anoother. Or
had been present with Icaromenippus in Lucia^ at Jupiters whispering place, O
Jupiter contingat mihi aurum haereditas, etc. M^ltos da Jupiter ann^s. Dementia
quanta est hominum turpissima vota dijs insusurrant si quis admouerit aurem
conticescunt and quod scire homines nolunt Deo narrant Senec. ep 10. l. 1.
and had heard one pray for rain, another for fair weather; one for his
wives, another for his fathers death, etc. how would he have been confounded?
Would he, think you, or any man else say that these men were well in their
wits, haec sani esse hominis quis sanus iuret Orestes? Can all the Hellebor in
the Anticyra cure these men?

And that which is more to be lamented, they are mad like Senecas blind
woman, and will not acknowledge it, or Eoque grauior morbus quo ign^tior
periclitanti.
seek for any cure of it. Que ledunt oculos festinas demeresi quid est animum
differs curandi tempus in annu^. Hor.
If our leg or arm offend us, we seek by all means possible to redress
it, Si cap^t crus dolet brachium etc. Medicum accersimus, recte etc honest si
par etiam industria in animi morbis poneretur. Ioh. Peletius Iesuita, lib. 2.
de hum. affec. morborumque cura.
and if we labor of a bodily disease we send for a Physician; but for the
diseases of the mind, we take no notice of them: lust harroes us on the one
side, anger, envy, ambition, on the other: We are torn in pieces by our
passions as so many wild horses, one in disposition, another in habit, and one
is melancholy, another mad, Et quotusquisque tamen est qui contra tot pestes
medicum requirat vel aegrotare se agnoscat? ebullit ira etc. Et nos tamen agros
esse negamus. Incolumes medicum recusant. Praesens aetas stultitiam priscis
exprobrat. Budaeus de ass lib. 5.
and which of us all seeks for help, or does acknowledge his error, or knows
he is sick? Every man thinks with himself, egomet videor mihi sanus, I am
well, I am wise, and laughs at others. And it is a general fault amongst us
all, that f which our forefathers have approved, diet, apparel, opinions,
humors, customs, manners, we deride and reject in our time as absurd, Senes
pro stultis habent iuvenes. Balthazar Castilio.
old men account Iuniors all fools. Turks deride us, we them. Italians
Frenchmen, accounting them light headed fellows; the French scoff again at
Italians, and at all their several customs, Greeks have condemned all the
world but themselves of Barbarism, the world as much vilifies them now. We
account Germans heavy dull fellows, explode many of their fashions; they as
contemptibly think of us: Spaniards laugh at all, and all again at them. So
are we fools and ridiculous, absurd in all our actions, carriages, diet,
apparel, customs, and consultations, and Clodius accusat maechos.
scoff and point one at an other, and in conclusion we are all fools. A
private man if he be resolved with himself, or set of an opinion, accounts all
idiots and asses that are not affected as he is, that think not as he does,
and scorns all in respect of himself, Statim sapiunt, statim sciunt, nemine^
reuerentur, neminnem imitantur, ipsi sibi exemplo. Pli. epist. l. 8.
will imitate none, hear none but Nullus alteri sapere concedit ne desipere
videatur, Agrip.
himself. As Pliny said, a law, and example unto himself: and that which
Hippocrates in his Epistle to Dionysius reprehended of old, is verefied in our
times, Quisque in ali^ superfluvm esse censet, ipse quod non habet nec curat,
that which he has not himself or does not esteem, he accounts superfluity,
an idle quality, August. qualis in oculis hominu^ qui inuersis pedibus ambulat
talis in oculis sapientum and Angelorum qui sibi placet aut cum passiones
dominantur.
a mere foppery in another. Thus not acknowledging our own errors,
imperfections, we securely deride all others, as if we alone were free and
spectators of the rest, accounting it an excellent thing as indeed it is:
Aliena optimum frui insania, to make our selves merry with other men's
obliquities, when as he himself is more faulty then the rest, mutato nomine
de te fabula narratur, he may take himself by the nose for a fool, he is a
convict madman, as Austin well inferres, in the eyes of wisemen and Angels he
seems like to one that to our thinking walks with his heels upward. So thou
laughest at me, and I at thee, both at a third, and he returns that of the
Poet upon us both. Plautus Menechim.
Hei mihi insanire me aiunt, quum ipsi vltro insaniant. We accuse others of
madness, of folly, and are the veriest disards our selves, or else
peradventure in some cases we are Nunc sanitatis patrocinum est insanientium
turba. Seneca.
all mad for company, and so it is not seen, Necesse est cum insanientibus
furere nisi solus relinqueris. Petronius.
no notice taken of it. Nimirum insanus paucis videatur, eo quod
Maxima pars hominum morbo iactatur eodem.
When all are mad, where all are like oppressed,
who can discern one madman from the rest?
But put case they do perceive it, and some one be manifestly convict of
madness, Ho^. quoniam non est genus vnum stultitiae qua me insanire putas?
he now takes notice of his folly, be it in action, gesture, speech, a vain
humor he has in building, spending, courting, scribbling, for which he is
ridiculous to others, Stultum me fateor liceat concedere veris atque etiam
insanum. Hor.
on which he dotes, he does acknowledge as much: yet with all the Rhetoric
thou have, thou can not so recall him, but to the contrary notwithstanding he
will persevere in his dotage. It Is amabilis insania, and mentis gratissimus
error, so pleasing so delitious, that he Odi nec possum cupie^s non esse quod
odi. Ovid. errore grato libenter omnes insanimus.
cannot leave it. He knows his error but will not seek to decline it, tell
him what the event will be, beggary, sorrow, sickness, disgrace, shame,
loss, madness, yet Amator scortum vitae praeponit iracundus vindictam fur
praedam parasitus gulam ambitiosus honores auarus opes etc. odimus hec et
accersimus. Cardan. lib. 2. de consol.
an angry man will prefer vengeance, a lascivious his whore, a thief his
booty, a glutton his belly before his welfare. Tell an Epicure, a Co^etous
man, an ambitious man, of his irregular course, weine him from it a little, pol
me occidistis amici, he cries anon, you have undone him, and as Pro. 26. P 1.
a dog to his vomit, he returns to it again: no persuasion will take
place, no counsel say what thou can Clames licet and mare coelo confundas,
surdo narras demonstrat, as Plutarch. Gryllo. suilli homines. So Clemens
Alexandrinus calls the^
Elpenor and Gryllus and the rest of Ulysses companions, those swinish men, he
is irrefragable in his humor, he will be a hog still, bray him in a mortar,
he will be the same. If he be in an heresy or some perverse opinion, settled as
some of our ignorant Papists are, convince his understanding show him the
several follies, and absurd fopperies of that faction, make him say, veris
vincor, make it as clear as the sun, non persuade bis etiamsi persuaseris?
he will err still, peevish and obstinate as he is, and as he said, Tu^llie.
si in hoc erro, libenter erro, nec hunc errorem auferri mihi volo; I will do
as I have done, as my predecessors have done, Malo cum illis insanire qua^ cum
aliis been sentire.
and as my friends now do: I will dote for company. Say now, are these men Qui
inter hos enutriuntur non magis sapere possunt quam qui in culina been olere.
Petron.
mad or no, are they ridiculous? cedo quemuis arbitrum, are they sanae mentis,
sober, wise, and discreet? have they common sense? I am of Democritus opinion
for my part, I hold them vesanum exagitant pueri innuptaeque puellae
worthy to be laughed at, a company of disards, that they may go ride the
ass, or all sail along to the Anticyrae, in the ship of fools for company
together. I need not much labor to prove this which I say otherwise then
thus, or make any solemn protestation, of swear, I think you will believe me
without an oath, say at a word, are they fools? I refer it to you (though
you be likewise fools your selves.) I Will stand to your censure, what think
you?

But for as much as I undertook at first, that Kingdoms, Provinces, Families,
were Melancholy as well as men, I will examine them in particular, and that
which I have hitherto dilated ar random, and in more general terms, I will
now particularly insist in, and prove with more special and evident Arguments,
Testimonies, Illustrations, and that in brief. Hor. lib. 2. Sat. 2.
Nunc accipe quare desipiant omnes aeque ac tu. My first Argument is borrowed
from Solomon, an arrowe drawn out of his Sententious quiner, Prou. 3.7. Be not
wise in thine own eyes, and 26.12. See thou a man wife in his own conceit;
more hope is of a fool then of him. Superbam stultitiam Pliny calls it. 7.
epist. 21. quod semel dixi fixum ratu^ que sit.
Isay pronounces a woe against such men, cap. 5.21. That are wise in their
own eyes, and prudent in their own sight. For hence we may gather that it is
a great offense, and men are much deceived that think too well to themselves,
and an especial Argument to convince them to folly. Many men says multi
sapientes proculdubio fuissent, si se iam non putassent ad sapientiae summum
peruenisse.
Seneca, had been without question wise, had they not had an opinion before
hand, that they had attained to perfection of knowledge already, before they
had gone halfeway. They had too good a conceit of themselves, and that marred
all; of their Worth, Art, Learning, Judgment, Eloquence, their good parts, all
their Geese are Swannes, and that manifestly proves them to be no better then
fools. In former times they had but seven wise men, and now you can scarce
find so many fools, nostra vtique regio says Tam praesentibus plena est
numinibus vt facilius possis deum quam hominem inuenire.
Petronius, Our time is so full of deified spirits, divine souls, that you may
sooner find a God then a man amongst us, we think so well of our selves, and
that is an ample testimony of much folly.

My second Argument is grounded upon the like place of Scripture, which though
before mentioned in effect, now again for some reasons is to be repeated.
Fools says David by reason of their transgressions, etc. Psalm. 107.17. Hence
Museulus inferres all trangressours must needs be fools. So we read Romans 2.
Tribulation and anguish is on the solue of every man that does evil, but all
do evil. And Isay 65.14. My servants shall sing for joy, Malefactors
and ye x shall cry for sorrow of heart, and vexation of mind. It Is ratified
by the common consent of all Philosophers. Dishonesty says Cardan is nothing
else but folly and madness, Hor
Probus quis nobiscum viuit? show me an honest man, Nemo malus qui non stultus,
it is Fabius Aphorism, In Ps. 49. qui momentanea sempiternis qui d^la pidat
heri absentis bona, moxin ius vocandus et damnandus.
to the same end. If none honest, none wise, all fools. And well may they be
so accounted, for who will say that he is a wiseman (says Musculus) that
preferres m^mentary pleasures to eternity, that spends his masters goods in
his absence, forthwith to be condemned for it? Who will say that a sick man is
wise, that eats and drinks to overthrow the temperance of his body? can you
account him wise or discreet, that would willingly have his health, and yet will
do nothing that should procure or continue it? per quam ridiculu^ est homines
ex animi sententia viuere and quae Diis ingrata sunt exequi, and tamen a solis
Diis velle saluos fieri, quum propriae salutis curam abiecerint. Theodoret ca.
6. de prouid. lib. de curat. grec. affec.
Theodoret out of Ptolimus the Platonist, holds it a ridicul^us thing for a
man to live after his own laws, to do that which is offensive to God, and
yet to hope that he should save him, and when he voluntarily neglects his own
safety, and contemnes the means, to think to be delivered by an other: Who
will say these men are wise.

A third Argument may be derived from the precedent, Sapiens sibi qui
imperiosus quem neque pa^peries, nec mors nec vincula terrent. Responsare
cupidinibus contemnere houores sortis and in seipso totus teres atque rotundas.
Hor. 2. ser. 7.
all men are carried away with passion, discontent, lust, pleasures, etc,
Therefore more then Melancholy, quite mad, bruit beasts, and void of all
reason, as Chrysostom contends, or rather dead or buried alive, as Conclus.
lib. de vic. offer. certum est animi morbis laborantes pro mortuis censendos.
Philo Iudaeus concludes it for a certeinty, of all such that are carried away
with passions, or labor of any disease of the mind: where is fear and sorrow,
there Lib. de sap. vbi timor adest sapientia adesse nequit.
Lactantius stiffely mainetaines, wisdom cannot dwell. Seneca and the rest of
the Stoikes are of opinion that where is any the least perturbation, wisdom
cannot be found. What more ridiculous as Quid insanius Xerxe Hellespontum
verberante, etc.
Lactantius urges, then to hear how Xerxes whipped the Hellespont, threatened
the mountain Athos, and the like. To speak ad rem, who is free from passion?
Ecclus. 21.12. Where is bitterness, there is no understanding. Prou. 12.16. an
angry man is a fool.
Mortalis nemo est quem non attingit dolor, morbusue, as 3. Tusc. Ininria in
sapientim non cadit.
Tully determines out of an old Poem, no mortal man can avoid sorrow and
sickness, and sorrow is an inseperable companion of Melancholy. In hom. 6. in
2. epist. ad Cor. cap. 3. hominem te agnoscere nequeo cum tanquam asinus
recal^itres, lasciuias vt taurus hin nias vt equus post mulieraes, vt vrsus
ventri indulgeas, quum rapias vt lupus, etc. at inquis formam hominis habeo, id
magisterret, quum feram humana specie videre me putem.
Chrysostom pleades farther yet, that they are more then mad, very beasts
stupefied and void of common sense: For how says he shall I know thee to be a
man, when thou kickest like an ass, neyghest like an Horse after women, rauest
in lust like a Bull, rauenst like a Bear, stingest like a Scorpion, rakest
like a Wolf. as subtle as a Fox, as impudent as a Dog; shall I say thou art
man that have all the Symptoms of a beast? how shall I know thee to be a man
by thy shape? that affrights memore, when I see a beast in likeness of a man.

Beroaldus will have drunkards; and such as more then ordinarily delight in
drink to be mad. The first pot quenches thirst, the second makes them
merry, the third for pleasure, quarta ad insaniam, the fourth makes them mad.
If this position be true, what a Catalogue of madmen shall we have? what shall
they be that drinks four times four? Nonne supra omnem furorem, supra omnem
insaniam reddent insatissimos? I am of his opinion, they are more then mad.
worse then mad.

The Epist. Demageto.
Abderites condemned Democritus for a madman, because he was sometimes sad, and
sometimes again profusely merry. Hac patria says Hippocrates, ob risum furere
and insanire dicunt, his country men hold him mad, Declamat.
because he laughes, Amicis nostris Rhodi dicito, ne nimium rideant aut nimium
tristes sunt
and therefore he desires him to advise all his friends at Rhodes that they
do not laugh over much, or be over sad; Had those Abderites been conversant
with us, and had but seen what Per multum risum poteris cognoscere stultum.
flering and grinning there is in this age, they would certainly have
coucluded we had been all mad.

Aristotle in his Ethickes holds, Foelix Idemque sapiens to be wise and happy
are reciprocal terms, bonus idemque sapiens honestus, Tully. But no man is
happy in this life, none good, therefore no man wise. Offic. 3. cap. 9^.
We may peradventure usurp the name, or attribute it to others for favor, as
Carolus Sapiens etc. and describe the properties of a wise man, as Tully does
an Orator, Xenophon Cyrus, Castilio a Courtier, Galen Temperament, An
Aristocrasie is described by politicians, but where shall such a man be found?
Vir bonus and sapiens qualem vix repperit vnum,
Millibus e multis hominum consultus Apollo?
A wise, a good man in a million,
Apollo consulted could scarce find one.
A man is a miracle of himself, but Trismegistus adds, Maximum miraculum homo
sapiens, a wise man is a wonder.

Alexander when he was presented with that rich and costly Casket of king
Darius, and every man advised him what to put in it, he reserved it to put in
Homers Works, as the most precious Jewel of humane wit, and yet Hypercrit.
Scaliger vpbraides Homers Muse, Vtmulier aulica nullius pudens.
Nutricem insanae sapientiae, a nurcery of madness, impudent as a Court Lady,
that blusheth at nothing. Iacobus Mycillus, Gilbertus Cognatus, Erasmus, and
almost all posterity admire Lucians luxuriant wit, and yet Scaliger reiects
him in his censure, and calls him the Cerberus of the Muses. Socrates whom all
the world so much magnified, is by Lactantius and Theodoret condemned for a
fool. Plutarch extolls Senecas wit beyond all the Greeks, nulli Secundus: yet
Epist. 33. quando fatuo delectari volo non est long quaere^dus, me video.
Seneca says of himself, when I would solace my self with a fool, I reflect
upon my self, and there I have him. Lib. 1. de sap.
Cardan and Saint Bernard, will admit none into this Catalogue of wise men,
Vide miser homo quia totum est vanitas, totu^ stultitia totum dementia,
quicquid facis in hoc mundo praeter id solum quod propter Deum facis.
but only Prophets and Apostles; how they esteem themselves you have heard
before. We are worldly wise, admire our selves and seek for applause, but
hear Ser. de miser. hum.
Saint Bernard, quanto magis for as es sapiens, tanto magis intus stultus
efficeris etc. in omnibus es prudens, cura teipsum insipiens: the more wise
thou art to others, the more fool to thy self. I may not deny but that there
is some folly approved, a Divine fury, an Holy madness, even a spiritual
drunkenness in the Saints of God themselves. Sanctam insaniam Bernard calls it,
(though not as blaspheming dum iram et odium Deo reuera ponit.
Vorst us, In. 2. Platonis dial. 1. de iusto.
would infer it as a passion incident to God himself) but familiar to good
men, as that of Paul, 2 Cor. he was a fool, etc. and Romans 9. he wishes
himself to be anathematised for the^. Such is that drunkenness which Ficinus
speaks of, Virg. 1. ecl. 3.
when the soul is elevated and ravished with a divine taste of that heavenly
Nectar, and which Poets deciphered by the sacrifice of Dionysius, and in this
sense with the Poet insanire lubet, as Austin exhortes us, ad ebrietatem se
quisque paret, lets all be mad and Ps. inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus.
drunk. But we commonly mistake, and go beyond our commission, we reele to
the opposite part, In psalm. 104. Austin.
we are not capable of it, In Platonis Tim. sacerdos Aegyptius.
and as he said of the Greeks, Vos Graeci semper pueri, vos Britanni, Galli,
Germani, Itali, etc. you are a company of fools.

Proceed now a partibus ad totum, or from the whole to parts, and you shall
find no other issue, the parts shall be sufficiently dilated in this following
Preface. The whole must needs follow by a Sorites or Induction. Every multitude
is mad, Hor. vulgus insanum.
bellua multorum capitum, precipitate and rash without Judgment, a roaring
rout. Roger Patet ea diuisio probabilis etc ex. Arist. Top. lib. 1 cap. 8. Rog.
Bac. epist. de secret. art. and not. cap 8. non est iudicium in vulgo.
Bacon proves it out of Aristotle, Vulgus diuidi in oppositum contra sapientes,
quod vulgo videtur verum, falsum est; that which the commonaltie accounts true,
is most part false, they are still opposite to wise men: begin them where you
will, go backward or forward, choose out of the whole pack, and you shall
find them all alike, never a barrel better herring.

Copernicus is of opinion the earth is a plannet, moves and shines to others,
as the Moon does to us. Digges, Gilbert, Keplerus and others defend this
Hypothesis of his in sober sadness, and that the Moon is inhabited; if it be
so, that the Earth is a Moon, then are we all lunaticke within it.

I could produce such arguments till dark night, but according to my promise,
I will descend to particulars. This Melancholy extends it self not to men
only, but even to vegetall and sensible creatures; I speak not of those
creatures which are Saturnine, Melancholy by nature, as lead and such like
Minerals, or those Plants, Rue, Cypress, etc. and Hellebor it self, of which
De occult philos. lib. 1. cap. 25. and 19. eiusd. lib.
Agrippa treates, Fishes, Bird^^, and Beasts, Hares, Conies, Dormise etc.
Owls, Batte^, Nightbirds, etc. but that artificial, which is perceived i^
them all. Remove a Plant, it will die for fullen, which is (...) specially
perceived in Palm trees, as you may read at (...) in Lib. 10. cap. 4
Constantin's husbandry, that Antipathy betwixt the (...) and the Cabbage, Vine
and Oil etc. Put a bird in a cage he will die for fullennesse, or a beast in a
pen, or take his young ones or companions from him, and see what effect it
will cause? but who perceiues not these common passions of sensensible
creatures, fear, sorrow, etc. Of all other dogs are most subject to this
disease, in so much that some hold they dream as men do, and through violence
of Melancholy run mad, I could relate many stories of dogs that have died for
grief, and pined away for loss of their masters, but they are common in every
See Lipsius epist.
Author.

Kingdoms, Provinces, and Politic bodies are likewise sensible and subject to
this disease, as De politia illustrium lib. 1. cap. 4. vt in humanis corporibus
variae accidunt mutationes corporis animique sic in repub. etc.
Boterus in his Politikes has proved at large. As in humane bodies says he,
there be diverse alterations proceeding from humors, so there be many diseases
in a Commonwealth, which do as diversely happen from several distempers, as
you may easily perceive by their several Symptoms. For where, you shall see
the people civil, obedient to God and Princes, judicious, peaceable and quiet,
rich, fortunate, Vbireges philosophantur. Plato.
and flourish, to live in peace, in unity and concord, a country well tilled,
many fair built and populous Cities, vbi incolae nitent, as old Lib. de reru.
Cato said, the people are neat, polite and terse, that Country is free from
Melancholy: As it was in Italy in the time of Augustus, now in China, now in
many other flourishing Kingdoms of Europe. But whereas you shall see poverty,
barbarism, beggary, plagues, wars, rebellions, seditions, mutinies,
contentions, Idleness, Riot, Epicurisme, the land lie untilled, waste, full of
bogges, fennes, deserts, etc. Cities decayed, villages depopulated, and the
people squalid, vglye, vnciuel, that kingdom, that country must needs be
discontent and Melancholy, has a sick body and had need to be reformed. Now
that cannot well be effected, till the causes of these maladies be first
removed, which commonly proceed from their own default, or some accidental
inconvenience: as to be site in a bad clime, too far North, sterill, barren
place, as the deserts of Lybia, deserts of Arabia, places void of waters, as
those of Lop and Belgian in Asia, or in a bad air, as at Alexandreta, Bantan,
Pisa, etc. or in danger of the Seas continual inundations, as in many places
of the Low Countries, and else where, or near some bad neighbors, as
Hungarians to Turks, Polonians to Tartars, or almost any bordering Countries,
they live in fear still, and by reason of hostile incursions are often times
left desolate. So are Cities by reason Mantua vae misero, nimium vicina
Cremonae
of wars, fires, plagues, inundations, wild beasts, decay of trades, barred
havens, the Seas violence, as Antwerpe may witness of late, Syracuse of old,
Brundusium in Italy, Dover with us, Interdum a feris vt olim Mauritana etc
and many that at this day suspect the Seas fury and rage, and labor against
it as the Venetians to their inestimable charge. But the most frequent maladies
are such as proceed from themselves; as first when Religion and Gods Service is
neglected, they do not fear God, obey their Prince, where Atheism,
Epicurisme, Sacrilege, Simonie, etc. and all such impieties are freely
committed, that Country cannot prosper. When Abraham came to Geraris, and saw a
bad land, he said sure the fear of God was not in that place. Delitijs
Hispaniae an. 1604 nemo malus nemo pauper, optimus quisque atque ditissimus.
Pie sancteque viueba^t summaque cum veneratione and timore, diuina cultui
sacrisque rebus incumbebant.
Cyprian Echouius a Spanish Corographer, above all other Cities of Spain
commendes Barcino, in which there was no beggar, no man poor, etc. but all
rich and in good estate, and he gives the reason, because they were more
Religious then their neighbors; why was Israel so often spoiled by their
enemies, led into captivity, etc. but for their Idolatry, neglect of Gods
word, for sacrilege, even for one Achans fault? and what shall we expect that
have such multitudes of Achans, Churchrobbers, simoniacall Patrons, etc. how
can they hope to flourish, that neglect Divine duties, that live most part like
Epicures.

Other common grieuances are generally noxious to a body politic observed by
Aristotle, Bodine, Boterus, Iunius, Arniseus, etc. I will only point at some
of the chiefest. Boterus polit. lib. 1. cap. 1. cum nempe princeps rerum
gerendarum imperitus, segnis oscitaus, suique mun^ris immemor, aut fatuus est.
Impotentia gubernand^, ataxia, confusion, ill government, which proceeds from
unskillful, slothful, griping, covetous or tyrannising magistrates, when they
are fools, idiots, children, proud partial, indiscreet, oppressors, tyrants,
not able or unfit to manage such offices, Non viget respub. cuius caput
infirmatur. Salisburiensis cap. 22.
many noble Cities and flourishing Kingdoms by that means are desolate, the
whole body groans under such heads, and all the members must needs be
misaffected, as at this day those goodly Provinces in Asia Minor, etc. groan
under the burden of a Turkish government, and those vast kingdoms of
Muscouia, Russia. See D^. Fletchers relation and Alexander Gaguinus history.
under a tyrannising Duke. Who ever heard of more civil and rich populous
countries then those of Greece, Asia, and that miracle of countries, Not above
200. miles long 60. broad according to Adricomius.
the Holy Land, that in so small a compass of ground could mainetaine so many
Towns, Cities, produce so many fighting men? Egypt another Paradise, now
barbarous and desert and almost waste, by a despoticall government of an
imperious Turk, that spoils all wheresoever he comes, insomuch that
Sabellicus. si quis incola vetus, non agnosieret. si quis peregrinus,
ingemisceret.
an Historian complains, if an old inhabitant should now see them, he would
not know them, if a traveler or a stranger, it would grieve his heart to see
them. Whereas Aristotle notes, nouae exactiones, noua onera imposita, new
burdens and exactions daily come upon them, Polit l. 5 e 6 crudelitas principum
impictas scelerum violatio legum peculatus pecuniae publicae, etc.
they must needs be discontent, R. Dallington 15^6^ conclusio libri.
as a judicious countriman of ours observed not long since in a Suruaye of that
grear Duchy of Tuscany, that the people lived much discontent, as appeared by
their manifold and manifest complainings in that kind. That the state was like
a sick body which had lately taken Physic, whose humors are not yet well
settled and weakened so much by purging, that nothing was left but Melancholy.

Whereas the Princes and Potentates are immoderate in lust, Hypocrites,
Epicures, of no Religion, but in show. Quid hypocrisi fragilius? what so
brittle and unsure, what sooner subverts their estates then wandering and raging
lust, on their subjects wives, daughters, to say no worse. They that should
facem praeferre lead the way to all virtuous actions, they are the
ringleaders, oftentimes of all mischief and dissolute courses, and by that
means their countries are plagued, Boterus. lib. 9. cap. 4 polit. Quo fit vt
aut rebus desperatis exulent aut coniuratione subditorum crudelissime tandem
trucidentur.
and they themselves often ruined, banished or murdered by conspiracy of their
subjects, as Sardanapalus was, Dionysius Junior, Heliogabalus, Periander,
Pisistratus, Tarquinius, Timocrates, Childericus, Appius Claudius, Andronicus,
Galeacius Sforcia, Alexander Medices, etc.

Whereas the Princes or great men are malicious, envious, factious, ambitious,
emulators, they tear a commonwealth asunder, as so many Guelfes and
G^bellines, and disturb the quietness of it, Mutuis odiis and caedibus
exhausti etc.
and with mutual murders let it bleed to death, our histories are too full of
such barbarous inhumanities, and the miseries that issue from them.

Whereas they be like so many horseleaches, hungry, griping, Lucra ex malis
sceleratisque causis.
covetous, or such as prefer their private before the public good. For as
Salust.
he said long since, res priuatae publicis semper offecere. Or whereas they be
illiterate, ignorant, wise only by inheritance, and in authority by
birthright, there must needs be a fault, Imperium suapte sponte corruit.
a great defect: because as an Apul. primus Flor. Ex innume rabilibus pauci
Senatores genere nobil^s, e consularibus pauci b^ni, e bonis adhuc pauci
eruditi.
old Philosopher affirms, such men are not always fit. Of an infinite number,
few alone are Senators, and of those few, fewer good, and of that small number
of honest good and noble men, few that are learned, wise, discreet and
sufficient, able to discharge such places, it must needs turn to the confusion
of a state.

For as the Non solum vitiae concipiunt ipsi principes sed etiam infundunt in
ciuitatem plusque exemplo quam peccaeto nocent Cic. 1. de legibus.
Princes are, so are the people, qualis rex talis grex. If they be lascivious,
riotous, Epicures, factious, covetous, ambitious, illiterate, so will the
Commons most part be. Idle unthrifts and prone to lust, drunkards, and
therefore poor and needy and upon all occasions ready to mutine and rebel;
discontent still, complaining, murmuring, grudging, apt to all outrages,
thefts, treasons, murders, innouations, in debt, cosoners, shifters, outlawes,
Profligatae famae ac vitae. It was an Salust. Semper in ciuitat e quibus opes
nullae sunt bonis inuident, vetera odere, noua ex^ptant odio suarum rerum
mutari omnia petunt.
old Politicians Aphorism, They that are poor and bad, envy rich men, hate
good men, abhor the present government, wish for a new, and would have all
turned topsie turuie. When Catiline rebelled in Rome, he got a company of such
deboshed rogues together, they were his familiars and coadiutors, and such were
all your rebels most part in all ages, Jack Cade, Tom Straw, Kette and his
companions.

Where they be generally riotous, and contentious, where there be many
diseases, many discords, many laws, many law suits, many lawyers, and many
Physicians, it is a manifest sign of a distempered Melancholy state, as 3. De
legibus prosligatae in repub. disciplinae est inditium, Iurisperitorrum numerus
and medicorum copiae.
Plato long since maintained: for where such kind of men swarm, they will make
work for themselves, and make that body Politic diseased, which was otherwise
found. A general mischief in these our times, an insensible plague, and never
so many of them: which are now multiplied (says In praef. s^ud. Iuris.
multiplicantur nunc in terris vt l^custae, non patriae parents s^d pes^es,
pessimi homin^s m^ore ex part superciliosi contentiosi, etc. licitum
latrocinium exercent.
Mat. Geraldus a Lawyer himself) as so many locusts, not the parents bu^ the
plagues of a Country, and for the most part. a supercilious, bad, covetous,
litigious generation of men. Dousa epid loqunteleia turha vultures t^gati.
Crumenimulga natio, etc. A purse-milking nation, a clamorous company, gowned
vulters, thieves, and Seminaries of discord, that take upon them to make peace,
but are indeed the very disturbers of our peace, a company of irreligious
Harpyes, scraping, griping Catchpoles (I mean our common hungry Pettifoggers,
rabulae forenses, love and honor in the mean time, all good laws, and worthy
Lawyers, that are as so many Iuris consulti domus oraculum ciuitatis Tully.
Oracles, and pilots of a well governed Commonwealth.) Without Art, without
Judgment, that do more harm as Lib. 3.
Liuie said, Quam bella externa, flammae, morbiue, then sickness, wars and
diseases. And as Iuye does by an Oak, embrace it so long, until it have got
the heart out of it, so do they by such places they inhabit, no counsel at
all, no justice, no speech to be had nisi eum praemulseris, he must be fed
still, or else he is as mute as a fish, better open an Oyster without a knife.
Experto creed (says Policrat. lib.
Salisburiensis) in manus eorum millies incidi, and Charon immitis qui nulli
pepercit vnquam, his long clementior est. I speak out of experience, I have
been a thousand times amongst them, and Charon himself is more gentle then
they, Is stipe contentus and hi asses integres sibi multiplicari iubent.
he is contented with his single pay, but multiply still, they are never
satisfied. And besides they have damnificas linguas, as he terms it, nisi
funibus argenteis vincias, they must be feed to say nothing, Plus accipiunt
tacere quam nos loqui.
and get more to hold their peace, then we can to say our best. They will
speak their clients fair, and inuit them to their tables, but as he follows
it, ^otius iniustitiae null^ capitalior quam little qui cum maxim decipium id
agu^t vt honi viri esse videantur.
of all injustice there is none so pernicious as that of theirs, which when
they deceive most, will seem to be honest men. They take upon them to be
peacemakers, and fouere causas humilium, to help them to their right,
patrocin^ntur afflictis, Nam quocunque modo causa procedat hoc semper agitur vt
loculi impleantur etsi au^ritia nequit satiari.
but all is for their own good, vt loculos pleniorum exhauriant, they plead
for poor men gratis, but they are but as a stale to catch others. If there be
no jar, Camden in Norfolk qui si nihil sit litium e iuris apicibus lites
tamen serere callent.
they can make a iarie, and out of the law it self find still some quirke or
other, to set men at odds, and continue causes so long, till they have
enriched themselves, and beggered their clients. Lib. 2. ce Heluet. repub. no^
explicandis sed moliendis controuersiis opera^ dant ita vt lites in multos
annos extrahantur summa cum molestia vtriusque partis and dum integra
patrimonia exhauriantur.
Simlerus complains amongst the Suissers of the Advocates in his time, that
when they should make an end, they begin controversies and protract their
causes many years, persuading them their title is good, till their patrimonies
be consumed, and that they have spent more in seeking then the thing is worth,
or they shall get by the recovery. So that he that goes to law, as the Proverb
is, Lu^um auribus tenent.
holds a wolf by the ears, or as a sheep in a storm runs for shelter to a
brier, prosecute his cause, he is consumed, if he surcease his suite he loses
all, what difference? Hor.
Quid refert ferro pereamue ruina? They had wont heretofore says Austin to end
matters, per communes arbitros; and so in Switserland we are informed by Lib.
de Heluet. repub. Iudices quocunque pago constituunt qui amica aliqua
transactione si fieri possitlites tollant. Ego maiorum nostrorum simplicitatem
admiror qui sic causas grauissimas composuerint, etc.
Simlerus) they had some common arbitrators, or dayesmen in every town, that
made a friendly composition betwixt man and man, and he much wonders at their
honest simplicity, that could keep peace so well, and end such great causes
by that means. Our forefathers as Camden.
a worthy Corographer of ours observes, had wont Pauculis cruculis aureis, with
a few golden crosses and lines in verse, make all conueiances, assurences; and
such was the candor and integrity of succeeding ages, that a Deed (as I have
often seen) to conueye a whole Manor, was implicit contained in some twenty
lines or thereabouts. But now many skins of Parchment will scarce serve
turn, he that buys and selles a house, must have a house full of writings,
there be so many circumstances, so many words, such Tautologicall repetitions
of all particulars (to avoid cauillation they say) but we find by our woeful
experience, that to subtle wits it is a cause of much more contention and
variance, and scarce any Conueiance so accurately penned by one, which another
will not find a crack in, or cauell at, if any one word be misplaced, any
little error, all is disanulled. That which is law to day is none tomorrow,
that which is found in one man's opinion, is most faulty to another; that in
conclusion, hear is nothing amongst us but contention and confusion, new stirs
every day. mistakes, errors, cauills, and at this present, as I have heard in
some one court I know not how many 1000 causes: no person free, no title almost
good, with such bitterness in following, so many flights, procrastrinations,
delays, forgery, such cost, violence and malice, I know not by whose fault,
Lawyers, Clients, laws, both or all: but as Paul reprehended the 1. Co. 6.5.6.
Corinthians long since, I may more appositely infer now. There is a fault
amongst you, and I speak it to your shame, Is there not a Sulti quando demum
sapictis. Psalm. 49.8.
wise man amongst you, to judge between his brethren, but that a brother goes
to law with a brother?

I could repeat many such particular grieuances which much disturb a body
politic, to shut up all in brief, where good government is, prudent and wise
Princes, there all things thrive and prosper, peace and happiness is in that
land, where it is otherwise, all things are ugly to behold, inculte, barbarous,
uncivil, a paradise is turned to a wilderness. This Island among the rest,
our next neighbors the French and Germans may be a sufficient witness, that
in a short time by that prudent policy of the Romans was brought from
barbarism; see but what Caesar reports of us, and Tacitus of those old
Germans, they were once as uncivil as they in Virginia, yet by planting of
Colonies, and good laws, they became from babarous outlawes, Saepius bona
materia cessat sine artifice Sabellicus de Germania si quis videret Germaniam
vrbibus hodie excultam, non diceret vt olim tristem cultu asperam coelo, terram
informem.
to be full of rich and populous cities, as now they are, and most flourishing
kingdoms; and so might Virginia, and those wild Irish have been ciuilised
long since, if that order had been heretofore taken, which now begins of
planting Colonies etc. I have read a By his Majesty's Attorney General there.
Discourse printed Ao. 1612. Discovering the true causes, why Ireland was never
entirely subdued or brought under obedience to the crown of England, until
the beginning of his Majesty's happy reign. But if his reasons were thoroughly
scanned by a Iuditious Politition, I am afraid he would not altogether be
approved, but that it would turn to the dishonor of our nation, to suffer it
to lie so long wast. Yea, and if some traveler should see (to come nearer
home) those rich united Provinces of Holland, Zeland, etc. over against us;
those neat Cities and populous Towns, full of most industruous Artificers, As
Zeipeland Bempster in Holland etc. See Bertius descript: Hol.
so much land recovered from the Sea, and so painefully preserved by those
Artificial inventions, From Gaunt to Sluice, from Bruges to the Sea etc.
so many nauigable channells, from place to place, made by men's hands, etc. and
on the other side so many thousand acres of our fennes lie drowned, our Cities
thin, and those vile, poor and ugly to behold in respect of theirs, our
trades decayed, our still running rivers stopped, and that beneficial use of
transportation wholly neglected, so many havens void of Ships and Towns, so
many Parkes and Forests for pleasure, barren Heaths, so many Villages
depopulated etc. I think sure he would find some fault.

I may not deny but that this nation of ours, does been audire apud exteros, is
a most noble, a most flourishing kingdom by common consent of all Ortelius,
Boterus, Mercator, Meteranus etc.
Geographers, Historians, and has many such honorable Elogiums. And as a
learned countriman of ours right well has it, Iam inde non belli gloria qua^
humanitatis, cultu inter florentissimas orbis christiani gentes imprimis
floruit, Camden, Britt. de Normannis.
Ever since the Normans first coming into England, this country of ours, both
for Military matters, and all other matters of civility, has been paralelled
with the most flourishing kingdoms of Europe, and our Christian world, a
blessed, a rich country, and one of the fortunate Isles. And for some things
Geog. Kicker.
preferred before all other countries, for expert Seamen, and our laborious,
discoueries, art of Navigations, true Merchants, they carry the bell away from
all other nations, even the Portingales and Hollanders themselves, Tam hieme
quam aestate intrepide su^cantt Oceanum and duo illorum duces non minore
audacia quam fortuna totius orbem terrae circumnauigarunt. Amphitheatridi.
Boterus.
without all fear says Boterus, furrowing the Ocean, Winter and Summer, and
two of their Captains with no less valor then fortune, have sailed round
about the world. We have besides A Fertile soil, good air, etc. Tin, Lead,
Wool, Saffron, etc.
many particular blessings which our neighbors want, the Gospel truly
preaced, Church Discipline established, long peace and quietness, free from
exactions, foreign fears, invasions, domestical seditions, well manured,
Tota Britannia vnica vel^t arx. Boterus.
fortified by art and nature, and now most happy in this fortunate union of
England and Scotland, which our forefathers have much labored to effect, and
desired to see: But in which we excel all others, a wise, a learned, a
religious King, another Numa, a second Augustus, a true Iossah, most worthy
Senators, a learned Clergy, an obedient Commonalty, etc. Yet amongst many
Roses some Thistles grow, some bad weeds and enormities which much disturb the
peace of this Body politic, and Eclipse the honor and glory of it, fit to be
rooted out, and withal speed to be reform^d.

The first is idleness, by reason of which we have many swarms of rogues and
beggars, thieues, drunkardes, and discontented persons, many poor people in
all our Towns, Civitates ignobiles as Lib. 1. hist.
Polidore calls them, base Cities, inglorious, poor, small, and rare in
sight, and thin of inhabitants. Our land is fertile we may not deny, full of
all good things, and why does it not then abound with Cities, as well as
Italy, France, Germany, the Low countries, because their policy has been
otherwise, and we are not so thrifty, circumspect, industrious; idleness is
the malus Genius of our nation. For as Increment. vrb. lib. 1. cap. 9.
Boterus justly argues, fertility of acountry is not enough, except art and
industry be joined unto it. Many kingdoms are fertile, but thin of
inhabitants, as that Duchy of Pedemont in Italy, which Leander Albertus so
much magnifies, for Corn, Wine, Fruits, etc. yet nothing near so populous as
those which are more barren. Anglia excepto Londino nulla e^t ciuitas
memorabilis licet ea natio rerum omnium copia abundet. Boteras.
England says he,( London only excepted) has never a populous city, and yet
a fruitful country. The low Countries have three cities at least for one of
ours, and those far more populous and rich, and what is the cause but their
industry and excellency in all manner of trades? Their commerce which is
maintained by a multitude of tradesmen, so many excellent Channels made by art,
and opportune havens, to which they build their cities: All which we have in
like measure, or at least may have. But their chiefest lodestone, which draws
all manner of commerce and merchandise, which maintains their present estate,
is not fertility of soil, but industry that enricheth them, the gold mines of
Peru, or Noua Hispania may not compare with them. They have neither gold nor
silver of their own, wine nor oil, or scarce any corn growing in those
united Provinces, little or no wood, Tin, Lead, Iron, Silk, Wool, or any
stuff almost, or any mettle: and yet Hungary, Transiluania, that brag of
their Mines, fertile England cannot compare with them. I dare boldly say that
neither France nor Italy, Velence in Spain, or that pleasant Andalusia with
their excellent fruits, wine and oil, two haruests, no nor any part of Europe
is so flourishing, so rich, so populous, so full of good ships, of well built
cities, so abounding with all things necessary for the use of man. It Is our
Indies an Epitome of China, and all by reason of their industry and commerce.
Industry is a lodestone to draw all good things, that alone makes countries
flourish, cities populous, Populi multitudo diligenti cultura saecundat solum.
Boterus lib. 8. cap. 3.
and will enforce by reason of much manure, which necessarily follows a barren
soil to be fertile, and good. Tell me Politician why is that fruitful
Palaestina, noble Greece, Egypt, Asia Minor so much decayed, and fallen from
that they were? The ground is the same, but the government is altered, the
people are grown slothful, idle, their good husbandry and industry is decayed.
May a man believe that which Aristotle in his Politics, Puusanias, Stephanus
relates of old Greece? where are those 400 cities of Egypt, those 100 cities
in Creet? are they now come to two? What says Pliny of old Italy? Bosius and
Machiauell, both prove them now nothing near so populous, and full of cities
as of old. Many will not believe but that our Island of great Britain is now
more populous then ever it was: but let them read Beda, Leland, and others, and
it most flourished in the Saxon Heptarchy, and in the Conquerers time was far
better inhabited, then at this present. See that Domesday book, and show me
now those thousands of parishes, which are now decayed, cities ruined,
villages depopulated, etc. The lesser the Territory is, commonly the richer it
is, Paruus sed been cultus ager. As those Imperial cities and free States of
Germany may witness, Suitsers, Rheti, Wallownes, Tuscany, Pedemont, Mantua,
Venice in Italy, Raguse, etc. That Prince therefore, as Polit. lib. 3. c. 8
Boterus advises, that will have a rich country, and fair cities, let him
get good trades, privileges, and painful inhabitants, artificers, and suffer
no rude matter unwrought, as Tin, Iron, wool, Lead, etc. To be transported
out of his country. For dying of clothes, and dressing, etc.
A thing in part seriously attempted amongst us, but not effected. And because
industry of men, and multitude of trades so much auailes to the ornament and
enriching of a kingdom, Selym the first Turkish Emperor, procured a thousand
of good artificers to be brought from Tauris to Constantinople. The Polanders
indented with Henry Duke of Aniou their new chosen King, to bring with him an
hundred families of artificers into Poland. Edward the third, our most renowned
king, to his eternal memory, brought clothing first into this Island,
transposing some families of Artificers from Gaunt hither. How many goodly
cities could I reckon up, that live wholly by trade, where thousands of
inhabitants live singular well by their fingers ends; as Florence in Italy, by
making cloth of gold; great Millan by silk and all curious works; many
cities in Spain, many in France, Germany have none other maintenance,
especially those within the Land. Noremberge in Germany sited in a most barren
soil, yet a noble imperial city, by the sole industry of Artificers; and so
is Basil, Spire, Cambray, Francfurt, etc. It is almost incredible to relate
what Lib. edit. a Nicholas Tregaul. Belga Ao 1616. de Christ. exped. in Sina^.
Mat. Riccius the Jesuit and some others, relate of the industry of the Chinese
most populous countries, not a beggar, or an idle person to be seen, and how by
that means they prosper and flourish. We have the same means, able bodies,
pliant wits, matter of all sorts, Wool, Flax, Iron, Tin, Lead, wood, etc.
Many excellent subjects to work upon, only industry is wanting. In most of our
cities (some few excepted) like Spanish loyterers, we live wholly by tippling,
Innes and Alehouses, Malting are their best ploughs, their greatest traficke to
sell ale. Lib. 13. Belg. hist Non tam laboriosi vt Belge, sed vt Hispani
otiatores vitam vt plurimu^ otiosam agentes. arts manuariae quae plurimum
habent in se laboris and difficultatis, maioremque requirunt industriam, a
peregrinis and exteris. exercentur, habitant in piscosissimo mari, interea
tamen tantum non piscantur quantum insulae ^ufficerit, sed a vicinis emere
coguntur.
Meteran, and some others object to us, that we are no whit so industrious as
the Hollanders: Manual trades, says he, which are more curious or
troublesome, are wholly exercised by strangers, they dwell in a Sea full of
fish, but they are so idle they will not catch so much as shall serve their
own turns, but buy it of their neighbors. Pudet haec opprobria nobis, and
dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli, I am ashamed to hear this objected by
strangers, and know not how to answer it. Amongst our cities there is only
Vrbs animis numeroque potens et robore gentis. Scaliger.
London that bears the face of a city, Camden.
Epitome Britanniae, a famous Emporium, second to none beyond seas a noble
Mart. But sola crescit decrescentibus alijs, and yet in my slender judgment,
defective in some things. The rest ( York, Bristow, Norwich, Worcester, etc.
some few except) are in mean estate; poor and full of beggars, by reason of
their decayed trades, idleness of their inhabitants, and riot, which had
rather beg or loyter, and be ready to starve then work. I may not deny but
that something may be said in defense of our cities, Mr Gainsfords argument
because Gentlemen dwell with us in the country villages, our cities are less
is nothing to the purpose put 300 or 400 Villages in a Shier^, and every
village yield a Gentleman, what is 4000 families to increase one of our cities
or to contend with theirs which stand thicker, and whereas ours usually
consist of 7000. theirs consist of 40000 inhabitants.
that they are not so fair, thick sited, populous, as in some other
countries, we want Wine and Oil, their two haruests, we dwell in a colder
air, and therefore must a little more liberally Maxima pars victus in carne
consistit. Polid. lib. 1. hist.
seed of flesh, as all northern countries do. And our provision will not
therefore extend to the maintenance of so many: yet notwithstanding we have
matter of all sorts, an open ^ea for traffic as well as the rest, goodly
Havens. And how can we excuse our negligence, our riot, drunkenness, etc. and
such enormities that follow it. We have excellent laws enacted, you will say,
severe statutes, houses of correction, etc. to small purpose it seems, it is
not houses will serve, but cities of correction, Ref^enate monapolii licentiam
pauciores aelantur ocio, reddatur agricolatio lanisicium instauretur vt sit
honestum negotium quo se exerceat otiosa illa turba. Nisi his malis medentur,
frust^a exercent iustitiam. Mor. Vtop. lib. 1.
our trades generally ought to be reformed, wants supplied. In other countries
they have the same grieuances I confess, tumults, discords, contentions,
law-sutes, many laws made against the^ to repress those innumerable brawles
and law suits, excess in apparel, diet, decay of tillage, Regiae dignitatis
non est exercere imperium in mendicos sed in opulentos. Non est regnisecus sed
carceris esse custos. Idem.
especially against rogues and beggars, Egiptian vagabonds (so termed at
least) which have Collunies hominum mirabiles excocti sole, immundi vest,
faedi visu, furtis imprimis acres, etc.
swarmed all over Germany, Poland, as you may read in Cranzius and Aventinus;
As those Tartars and Arabians at this day do in all those Eastern countries.
Nemo in nostra civitate mendicus esto, says Plato, he will have them purged
from a Seneca. Haud minus turpia principi multa simplicia, quam medico multa
funera.
comonwealth, Ac pituitam and bilem a corpore.
as a bad humor from the body, they are like so many ulcers and boyles, and
must be cured before the melancholy body can be eased. What Carolus Magnus, the
Chinese, the Spaniards, Duke of Saxony, and many other states have decreed in
this case, read Arniseus cap. 19. Boterus lib. 8. cap. 2. Osorius de rebus
gest. Eman. lib. 11. When a country is ouerstored with people, as a pasture is
often ouerlaid with cattle, they had wont in former times to disburden themselves
by sending out Colonies, or by wars, as those old Romans, or by employing them
at home about some, public buildings, as bridges, rode ways, for which those
Romans were famous in this Island: As Augustus Caesar did in Rome, the Spaniards
in their Indian Mines: See Lipsius Admiranda.
Aqueducts, bridges, those stupend works of Trainn, Claudius, those Appian and
Flaminian ways may witness, and rather then they should be idle, as those
Amasis Aegypti rexlege^ promulgauit vt omnes subditi quotannis rationem
redderent vnde viverent.
Egyptian Pharoes, to task their subjects to build unnecessary piramids,
channels, lakes, etc. to divert the^ from rebellion, riot, drunkenness, etc.

Another eyesore, is that want of conduct, and nauigable rivers, a great
blemish, as Lib. 1. de Increm. vrb cap. 6.
Boterus, Cap. 5. de Increm. vrb. Quas flumen lacus aut mare alluit.
Hippolitus a Collibus and other politicians hold, if it be neglected in a
commonwealth. Admirable cost and charge is bestowed in the Low countries on
this behalf, in the Duchy of Millan, Territory of Padua in Incredibilem
commoditatem vectura mercium tres flunij nauigabiles etc. Boterus de Gallia.
France, Italy, China, and so likewise about corriuations of waters to moisten
and refresh barren grounds, to dreane fennes, bogges and moors. Massinissa
made many inward parts of Barbary and Numidia in Afric, before his time
inculte and horrid, fruitful and battable by this means. Great industry is
generally used all over those Eastern countries in this kind, especially in
Egypt, about Babylon, and Damascus, as Vertomannus relates, about Bercelona,
Segonia, and many other places of Spain: by reason of which their soil is
much improued, and infinite commodities arise to the ininhabitants. The Turks
of late attempted to cut that Istmos betwixt Afric and Asia which some
Pharoes of Herodotus.
Egypt had formerly undertaken, but with ill success, and Serres the French
historian speaks of a famous Aqueduct in France, intended in Henry the fourths
time from the Loyre to the Seane and from Rhodanus to Loyre. The like to which,
was formerly assaied by Domitian the Emperor, Charles the great went about to
make a chanel from Rhine to Danubius. Bil. Pirkimerus descrip. Ger. the ruins
are yet seen about Wessenberg: from Rednich to Altimul.

Vt nauigabilia inter se occidentis and septentrionis littera fierent.


from Arar to Mosella which Cornelius Tacitus speaks of in the 13 of his
Annalls, by Charles the great and others. Much cost has formerly been
bestowed in either new making or amending decayed havens, which Claudius the
Emperor with infinite cost attempted at Ostia, our Venetians at this day to
preserve their city. Many excellent means to enrich their Territories, have
been fostered, invented in most Provinces of Europe, as planting some Indian
plants amongst us, Silkwormes, Maginus Geogr.
the very Mulbery leaves in the plains of Granado, yield 30000 crowns per
annum to the King of Spaines coffers, besides those many trades and artificers
that are busied about them. In France a great benefit is raised by salt, etc.
Whether these things might not be as happily attempted with us, and with like
success it may be controuerted. Silkwormes, Vines, Firtrees, etc. Cardan
exhorts Edward the 6. to plant Olives, and is fully persuaded they would
prosper in this Island. With us nauigable rivers are most part neglected, our
rivers are not great I confess, by reason of the narrowness of the Island, yet
they run smoothly and even, and might as well be repaired many of them (I
mean Wie, Trent, Ouse, Thamisis at Oxford (the defect of which we feel in the
mean time) as the river of Lee from Ware to London. Camden in Lincolnshire
Fossedike.
Bishop Atwater of old made a Channel from Trent to Lincoln nauigable, which
now, says Mr Camden is decayed, and much mention made of Ankors, and such like
monuments found about old Near S. Albones.
Verulamium, ships have formerly come to Exeter, and many such places, whose
Channels, Havens are now barred and rejected. We contemn this benefit of
carriage by waters, and are therefore compelled in the inner parts of this
Island, because carriage is so dear, to eat up our commodities, our selves, and
live like so many Boares in a stye, for want of vent and utterance. We have
many excellent havens, royal havens, Falmouth, Porchmouth, Milford, etc. which
have few ships in them, little or no traffic or trade, which have scarce a
Village on them, able to bear great cities, sed viderint politici. I could
here justly tax many other neglects, abuses, errors, defects amongst us and
in other countries, depopulatio^s riot, drunkenness, etc. and many such, quae
nunc in aurem susurrare non libet, but I must take heed, ne quid grauius dicam
that I do not ouershoot my self. I am forth of my element, and sometimes
veritas odium parit, as he said, veriuice and ^atemeale is good for a Parret.

We have good laws, I deny not, to rectify such enormities, and so in all
other countries, but it seems to small purpose many times. We had need of
some general visiter in our age, that should reform what is amiss: another
Attila Tamberlin, Hercules to strive with Achelous, Augeaestabulum purgare, to
subdue tyrants, as Lilius Giraldus. Not. Comes.
he did Diomedes and Busiris: to expel thieves as he did Cacus and Lacinius;
to vendicate poor captives, as he did Hesione: to pass the torrid zone, and
the deserts of Lybia, and purge the world of monsters and Centaures. Or another
Theban Crates to reform our manners, to compose quarrels, end controversies,
as in his time he did, and was therefore adored for a God in Athens. Apuleius.
l. 4 Flor. Lar familiaris inter homines aetatis suae cultus est litium omnivm
and iurgiorum inter propinquos arbiter and disceptator. Aduers. iracundiam
inuidiam, auaritiam, libidinem caeteraque animi humani vitia, and monstra
Philosophus iste Hercules fuit. Pestes eas mentibus exegit omnes, etc.
And as Hercules purged the world of monsters and subdued them, so did he fight
against Envy, lust, anger, avarice, etc. and all those ferall vices and
monsters of the mind. It were to be wished we had some such visitor, or if
wishing would serve, one had such a ring or rings as Timolaus desired in Votis
Nauig.
Lucian, by virtue of which he should be as strong as ten thousand men, or an
army of Giants, go invisible, open gates and Castle doors, have what treasure
he would, transport himself in an instant to what place he would, alter
affections, cure all manner of diseases, that he might range all over the
world, and reform all distressed states and persons, as he would himself. He
might reduce those wandering Tartars into order that infest China on the one
side, Muscouy, Poland on the other; and tame those vagabond Arabians that rob
and spoil all those Eastern countries, that they should never use more
Carauans or Ianisaries to conduct them. He might root out Barbarism out of
America, and fully discover Terra Australis Incognita, find out all those
Northeast and North west passages, dreane those mighty Moetian fennes, cut down
those Hircinia^ woods, irrigate those barren Arabian deserts, etc. Cure us of
our Epidemicall diseases, Scorbutum, plica, morbus Neapolitanus, etc. End all
our idle controversies, cut of our tumultuous desires, inordinate lusts, root
out heresy, schism and superstition, which now so crucifies the world. Purge
Italy of luxury and riot; Spain of superstition and iealosie, Germany of
drunkenesse, and all our Northern countries of gluttony and intemperance. But
as L. Lacinius taxed Timolans, you may us. These are vain absurd and
ridiculous wishes, not to be hoped: all must be as it is, there is no remedy
for it, it may not be redressed.

Because therefore it is a thing so difficult, impossible, and far beyond
Hercules labors to be performed; let them be as they are, let them Stultum
Iubeo esse libenter. Et qiu sordidus est sordescat adhuc.
tyrannize, Epicurize, oppress, luxuriate and consume themselves, live in
riot, misery rebel, wallow as so many swine in their own dung, and live in a
reprobate sense. I will yet to satisfy and please my self, make an Vtopia of
mine own, a poetical commonwealth of mine own, in which I will freely
domineere, build cities, make laws, statutes, as I lift my self. And why may
I not? Hor.
Pictoribus atque poetis, etc. You know what liberty Poets have ever had, and
besides my predecessor Democritus was a Politician, a Recorder of Abdera, a law
maker, as some say, and why may not I presume as much as he did? Howsoever I
will adventure. For the Site if you will needs urge me to it, I am not yet fully
resolved, it may be in Terra Australis Incognita, there is room enough (for of
my knowledge neither that hungry Spaniard, Ferdinando de Quir. 1612.
nor Mercurius Britannicus have yet discovered half of it) or else one of
those floting Islands in Mare del Sur, which like the Cyanian Isles in the
Euxine Sea, alter their place, and are accessible only at set times, and to
some few persons. There is room enough in the inner parts of America, and the
Northern coasts of Asia. But I will choose a site whose latitude shall be 45
degrees, in the midst of the temperate zone, or under the Equator the
longitude for some reasons I will conceal. It shall be divided into 12
Provinces, and those by hills, rivers, rodewaies, or some more eminent limits
exactly bounded. Each Province shall have a Metropolis, which shall be so
placed as a Center almost in a circumference, and the rest at equal distances,
12 miles asunder, and in them shail be sold all things necessary for the use of
man, no market towns, markets, or faires, for they do but beggar cities (no
village shall stand above eight miles from a city) except those emporium's
which are by the Seaside, general Marts. as Antwerpe, Venice, Bergen of old,
London, etc. cities most part, shall be situate upon nauigable rivers or lakes,
creekes, havens, and for their form regular, round, square, or long square,
with fair and straight streets, houses uniform built of brick and stone,
like Bruges, Bruxells, Regium Lepidi, Millan, Mantua, Crema, Cambalu in
Tartary, described by M. Polus, or that Venetian Palma. I will admit very few
or no suburbs, and those of baser building, walls only to keep out man and
horse, except it be in some frontier towns, or by the Sea side, and those to
be fortified With walls of earth, etc.
after the latest manner of fortificatihn, and site upon convenient havens, or
opportune places. Ne tantillum quidem soli incultum relinqui tur, vt verum sit
ne pollicem quidem agri in his regionibus sterile^ aut insaecundum reperiri.
Marcus Hemingius Augustanus de regno Chinae. l. 1. c. 3
I will have no bogges, fennes, marshes, vast woods, deserts, heaths, commons,
but all enclosed, for that which is common and every man's, is no man's: the
richest countries are still enclosed, as Essex, Kent, with us, etc. Spain,
Italy, and where enclosures are least in quantity, they are best husbanded, as
about Florence in Italy, Damascus in Syria, etc. which are liker gardens then
fields. I will not have a barren aker in all my Territories, not so much as the
tops of muntaines, where nature fayles it shall be supplied by art,
Incredibilis nauigiorum copia nihilo pauciores in aquis quam in continenti
commorantur, M. Riccius expedit in Sinas, lib. 1. c. 3.
lakes and rivers shall not be left desolate, All public high ways, bridges,
corriuations of waters, Aqueducts, Channels, public works, buildings, etc. out
of a common stock cuririously maintained and kept, no depopulations,
ingrossings, alterations of wood, arable, but by the consent of some common
superuisors that shall be appointed for that purpose, Ita lex agraria olim
Romae.
and shall foresee what reformation ought to be had in all places, what is
amiss, how to help it, Hic segetes illic veniunt faelicius vuae, arborei
faetus alibi atque iniussa virescunt gramina Virg. 1. Georg.
Et quid quaeque ferat regio and quid quaeque recuset. What ground is aptest
for wood, what for c corn, what for cattle, what for gardens, orchards,
fishponds; etc. what for Lords, Tenants, etc. and in what quantity how to be
manured, tilled, rectified, and what proportion is fit, because private
possessors are many times idiots, ill husbands, oppressors, covetous, and know
not how to improve their own, or else wholly respect their own, and not
public good.

Vtopian parity is a thing to be wished for rather then effected, and Platoes
community in many things impious, absurd, and ridiculous, it takes away all
splendour and magnificence, I will have several orders, degrees of nobility,
and such a proportion of ground belonging to every Barony, So is it in the
kingdom of Naples and France, etc.
he that buys the land shall buy the Barony, he that by riot consumes his
patrimony, and ancient demeanes, shall forfet his honors. My form of
government shall be Monarchical, etc. few laws but those severely kept, and
plainly put down and in the mother tongue, that every man may understand.
Every city shall have a peculiar trade or privilege by which it shall be
maintained, Herodotus Erato lib. 6 cum Aegyptiis Lacedemonij in hoc congruunt
quod eorum praecones tibicines coqui and reliqui artifices in paterna artificia
succedunt and coquus a coquo gignitur and paterno opere perseuerat. Idem Marcus
Polus de Quinsay. I Would Osorius de Emanuele rege Stufitano. Riccius de Synis.
and parents shall teach their children one of three, and bring them up and
instruct them in the mysteries of their trade. Common granaries shall be in all
towns, public schools. I will have certain ships sent out for new
discoueries every year, and certain discreet men appointed to travel into
all neighbor kingdoms by land, which shall observe what artificial
inventions, good laws are in other countries, customs, alterations, or ought
else, concerning war or peace, which may tend to the common good.
Ecclesiastical discipline, penes Episcopos, subordinaet as the other. No
impropriations, no lay patrons of Church livings, or one private man, but those
Rectors of Benefices to be chosen out of the Universities, examined and
approved as the literati in China. No parish to contain above a thousand
Auditors. Simlerus in Heluetia.
Of Lawyers, Aduocats, Physicians, Surgeons, etc a set number, Vtapienses
tausidicos excludunt qui causas callide and vafre tractent and disputent
Iniquissimum censent hominem vllis obligari legibus quae aut numerosiores sunt,
quam vt perlegi queant, aut obscuriores quam vt a quouis possint intelligi.
Volunt vt suam quisq, causam agat, eamque referat ludici quam narraturus fuerat
patrono, sic minus erit ambagium, and veritas facilius eticietur, Morus Vtop
lib. 3.
and every man, if it be possible to plead his own cause, to tell that tale to
the Judge which he does to his Advocate. Those advocates Medici ex-publico
victum sumunt, Boterus lib. 1. cap. 5. de Aegyptiis.
and Physicians which are allowed, to be maintained out of the common treasure,
no fees to be given or taken, upon pain of loosing their places, and those
officers aptly to be disposed in all Provinces, villages, cities, as common
arbitrators to hear all causes and end all controversies, no controversy to
depend above a year. These and all other inferior magistrates to be chosen
Mat. Riccius expedit. in Sinas lib. 1. cap. 5. de examinatione electionum
copiose agit, etc.
as the literati in China, or by those exact suffrages of the Contarenus de
repub. Venet.11.
Venetians, and those again not be eligible, or capable of magistracies,
honors, offices, Osorius lib. 11. de rebus gest. Emanuelis. Qui in literis
maximos progressus fecerint maximis honoribus afficiuntur, secundus honoris
gradus militibus assignatur postremi ordinis mechanicis doctorum hominum
Iudicijs in altiorum locu^ quisque praefertur, and qui a plurimis approbatur,
ampliares in repub. dignitates consquitur. Qui in hoc examine primas habet,
insigni per totam vitam dignitate insignitur, marchioni similis, aut duci apud
nos.
except they be sufficiently qualified for learning, manners, and that by the
strict approbation of deputed examinators, Cedant arma togae.
first Scholars to take place, then Soldiers, and he that inuents any thing
for public good in any art or science, writes any treatise, or performs any
noble exploit at home or abroad, Ad regendam rempub soli literati admittuntur,
nec ad eam rem gratia magistratuum aut regis indigent, omnia ab explorata
cuiusque scientia and virtute pendent. Riccius lib. 1. cap. 5.
shall be accordingly enriched, In defuncti locum eum iussit subrogari qui
inter maiores virtute reliquis praeiret non fuit apud morta'es vllu^
excellentius certamen aut cuius victoria magis esset expetenda; non enim inter
celeres celerrimo non inter rebustos Robustissimo, etc. Nullus mendicus apud
Sinas, nemini san^ quamuis oculis turbatus sit, mendicare permitiitur, omnes
pro viribus laborare coguntur, caeci molis trusatilibus versandis addicuntur,
soli hospitiis gaudent, qui ad labores sunt inepti, Osor, li. 11. de reb. gest
Emanuelis. Hemingius de regno Chinae lib. 1 cap. 3. Gotardus Arthus Oriental,
Ind. descript.
honored, and preferred.

I will suffer no x Beggars, Rogues, Vagabonds, or idle persons, that cannot
give an account of their lives, If they be impotent, lame, blind, they shall be
sufficiently maintained in Hospitalls built for that purpose, and highly
rewarded for their good service they have formerly done, if able, they shall be
enforced to work. For I see no reason ( Quae haec iniustitia vt nobilis
quispiam aut faenerator qui nihil agat, lautam and splendidam vitam agat, otio
and delitijs, quum interim auriga, faber, agricola quo respub. carere non
potest, vitam adeo miseram ducat, vt peior quam iumentorum sit eius conditio.
Iniqua Respub. 'quae dat parasitis, adulatoribus, inanium voluptatum
artificibus, generosis and etiosis tanta munera prodigit, at co^tra agricolis,
carbonarijs, aurigis, fabris, etc. nihil prospicit, sed eorum abusa labor
florentis aetatis fame penset and ^rumnis. Morus Vtop. lib. 2.
as he said) why an Epicure or idle drone, a rich glutton, an usurer, should
live at ease and do nothing, and live in honor, in all manner of pleasures and
oppress others, when as in the mean time a poor laborer, a smith, a
carpenter, an husbandman that has spent his time in continual labor, as an
Ass to carry burdens, to do the commonwealth good, and without-whom we cannot
live, shall be lef^ in his old age to beg or starve, and lead a miserable
life, worse then a iument. As In Segouia nemo otiosus nemo mendicus nisi per
aetatem aut morbum opus sasere non po^est nulli deest vnde victum quaerat aut
quo se exerceat. Cyprianus Echouius Delit. Hispaniae, nullus Geneuae otiosus ne
septennis puer, Paulus Henzner Itiner.
all conditions shall be tied to their task, so none shall be over tired, but
all shall have their set times of recreations and Holidaies, indulgere Genio
even to the meanest artificer, or basest servant, once a week to sing or
dance, or do whatsoever he shall please, like those Saturnalls in Rome, as
well as his master, murder, adultery, shall be punished by death, Pa^peres non
peccant quum extrema necessitate coacti rem alienam capiunt Ma^donat, summula
quaest. 8. art. 3. Ego cum illissentio, qui licere putant a diniteclam
accipere, qui tenetur pauperi subnenire. Emanuel Sa. Aphor. confess.
but not theft, except it be some more grievous offense, or notorious offenders.

No man shall marry until he Aliter Aristoteles a man at 25. a woman at 30.
Polit.
be 25, no woman till she be 20. Lex olim Lycurgi body Chinensium, vide
Plutarchum, Riccium, Hemingium, Arniseum, Neuisanum and alios, de hac
quaestione.
nisi aliter dispensatum fuerit, and because many families are exhaust and
undone by great dowres, Apud Lacones olim virgins sine dote nubebant. Boter,
Lib. 3. c 3.
none shall be given at all, or very little, and that by superuisers rated,
they that are foul shall have a greater portion, if fair none at all, or very
little, Lege cautum non ita pridem apud Venetos ne quis patritius dotem
excederet 1500 coronatorum.
howsoever not to exceed such a rate as those superuisers shall think fit. And
when once they come to those years, poverty shall hinder no man from marriage,
or any other respect, Buxdorsius Sinagog. Ind. sic Judei Leo Afer Africa
descript ne sint aliter incontinentes, ob reipub. bonum. Vt Augustus Caesar
orat, ad coelibes Romanos olim edocuit.
but all shall rather be enforced then hindered. Morbo laborans qui in prolem
facile diffunditur ne genus humanum foeda contagione ledatur, iuuentute
castratur, muliere tales procul a consortio virorum ablegantur etc. Hector
^oethius hist. lib. 1. de veterum Scotorum moribus.
Except they be deformed, infirm ^or visited with some grievous haereditary
disease, in body or mind, in such cases upon a great pain, or mulct, man or
woman shall not marry, other order shall be taken for them, if people over
abound, they shall be eased Vt olim Romani, Hispani hodie, etc.
by colonies.

Riccius lib. 1. cap. 5. De sinarum expedit. fro Hispani cogunt Mauros arma
deponere.
No man shall wear weapons in any city. The same attire shall be kept, and
that proper to several callings, by which they shall be distinguished.

I will have no private Monopolies, waights and measures the same throughout,
and those rectified by the Prim. Mob. and Suns motion, threescore miles to a
degree according to observation, 1000 geometrical pases to a mile, 5 foot to a
pace, 12 inches to a foot, etc. and from measures known it is an easy matter
to rectify waights, etc. to cast up all and resolve bodies by Algebra,
Stereometry. sed quo feror hospes? To prosecute the rest would require a
volume. Manum de Tabella, I have been over tedious in this subject, I could
have here willingly ranged, but these straights wherein I am included, will not
permit.

From Commonwealths and cities, I will descend to families, which have as many
coarsiues and molestations, as frequent discontents as the rest. Great affinity
there is betwixt a Political and Oeconomicall body, as they have both likely
the same period, as Lib. 4. de rep. cap 2.
Bodin holds, offiue or six hundred years so many times they have the same
means of their vexation and overthrows, as namely riot, a common ruin of
both, riot in building, riot in profuse spending, riot in apparel, etc. be it
what kind soever, it produces the same effects. Camden in Cheshiere.
A Chorographer of ours speaking obiter of ancient families, why they are so
frequent in the North, continue so long, and are so soon extinguished in the
South, and so few; gives no other reason but this, luxus omniae dissipauit,
riot has consumed all. Fine clothes and curious buildings came into this
Island, as he notes in his annalls, not so many years since, non sine
dispendio hospitalitatis, to the decay of hospitality. Howbeit many times that
word is mistaken, and under the name of Bounty and Hospitality; is shrouded
Riot, and prodigality, and that which is commendable in it self well used, is
now become by his abuse the bane and utter ruin of many a noble family. For
many a man lives like the rich glutton, consuming himself and his substance by
continual feasting and inuitations, like Iliad. 6. lib.
Axilon in Homer, keeps open house for all comers, giving entertainment to all
that visit him, Vid. Puteani Comum. Goclenium de portentosis caenis nostrorum
temporum.
keeping a table beyond his means, and a company of idle servants, he is
blown up on a sudden, and as Actaeon was by his hounds, devoured by his
kinsmen, friends and multitude of followers. Mirabile dictuest quantum
obsoniorum vna domus singulis diebus absumat ste^nuntur mensae in omnes pene
horas calentibus semper eduliis descript. Britainie.
It is a wonder, what Paulus Iouius relates of our northern countries, what an
infinite deal of meat we consume on our tables; that I may truly say it is not
bounty, not hospitality, as it is often abused, but riot in excess and
prodigality, it brings in debt, want and beggary, hereditary diseases, consumes
their fortunes, and overthrows the good temperature of their bodies. To this I
might here well add their inordinate expense in building, those fantastical
houses, turrets, walks, parkes, etc. gaming, excess of pleasure, and that
prodigious riot in apparel, by which means they are compelled to give up
house, and creep into holes. But o^ this elsewhere. As it is in a man's body, if
either head, heart, stomach, liver, spleen, or any one part be misaffected,
all the rest suffer with it, so is it with this Oeconomicall body. If the head
be naught, a spendthrift, a drunkard, a whoremaster, a gamester, how shall the
family live at ease? Adelph. act. 4. sc, 7.
Ipsa si cupiat salus seruare prorsus non potest hanc familiam, as Demea said
in the comedy, safety her self cannot save it. A good honest painful man
many times has a shrew to his wife, a sickly, dishonest, a slothful, foolish,
careless woman to his wife, a proud peevish flurt, a liquorish prodigal
Queen, and by that means all goes to ruin: or if they differ in nature, he
is thrifty, she spends all, he wise, she sottish and soft, what agreement can
there be, what friendship? Like that of the thrush and Swallow in Aesope.
Instead of mutual love, kind compellations, whore and thiese is heard, they
fling stools at one another heads. Amphit: Plauti.
Quae intemperies vexat hanc familiam? All enforced marriages commonly produce
such effects, or if on their behalfes all be well, man and wife agree well
together, they may have disobedient unruly children, that take il courses to
disquiet them, Paling Filius aut fur.
their son is a these, daughter a whore, C^tus cum mure duo galli simulin
aede and glotes binae nunquam viuunt sine lite.
a stepmother, or a daughter in law distempers all, Res augusta domi.
or else for want of means, many tortures arise, debts, dues, fees, dowries,
legacies to be paid, by means of which they have not where withal to
maintain themselves in that pomp as their predecessors have done, or bring up
or bestow their children to their callings, to their birth and quality, When
pride and beggary meet in a family they roar and howl, and cause as many
flashes of discontents, as fire and water when they meet make! thunder claps in
the skies.
and will not descend to their present fortunes. Often times too, to aggrauate
the rest concur many other inconveniences, unthankful friends, bad
neighbors, negligent servants, casualties, taxes, mulcts, loss of stock,
enmities, emulations, losses, suretiship, sickness, death of friends, and that
which is the gulf of all, improuidence, ill husbandry, disorder and confusion,
by which means they are drenched on a sudden in their estates, and at unawares
precipitated insensibly, into an inextricable labyrinth of ca^es, woes, want,
grief, discontent, and melancholy it self.

I have done with families, and will now briefly run over some few sorts and
conditions of men. The most secure, happy, Iouiall and merry in the worlds
esteem, are Princes and great men, free from melancholy, but for their cares,
miseries suspicions, Iealosies and discontents. I refer you to Xenophous
Tyrannus, where king Hieron discourses at large with Simonides the Poet, of
this subject. Of all others they are most troubled with perpetual fears,
anxieties, insomuch, that as he said in Lib. 7. cap. 6.
Valerius, if thou knew with what cares and miseries this robe were stuffed,
thou would not stoop to take it up. Or put case they be secure and free
from fears and discontents, yet they are void Pellitur in bellis sapientia,
vigeritur res.
of reason too often, and precipitate in their actions, read all our histories,
and what is the subject, Stultorum regum and populorum continet aestus. How mad
they are, how furious, and upon small occasions, rash and inconsiderate in
their proceedings, every pag^ almost will witness, delirant reges, plectuntur
Achiui.

Next in place, next in miseries and discontents, in all manner of harebraine
actions are great men, procul a Jove procul a fulmine, the nearer the worse. If
they live in Court they are up and down, ebb and flow with their Princes
favors, Ingenium vultu statque caditque su^, now aloft to morrow down Lib. 5.
hist. Romans Similes abaculorum calculis secundum computantis arbitrium modo
aerei sunt modo aurei ad nutum regis nunc beati sunt nunc miseri
as Polybius describes them, like so many casting counters now of gold, to
morrow of silver, that vary in worth as the computant will, now they stand for
units, to morrow for thousands, now before all and anon behind. Beside they
torment one another with mutual factions, emulations: one is ambitious,
another enamored, a third in debt, ouerrunnes his fortunes, aerumnosique
Solones. In Sa 3
a 4th sollicitous with cares, etc. But for these men's disco^tents anxieties, I
refer you to Lucians Tract, de mercede conductis De miser. curialium.
Aeneas Sylvius, Agrippa, and others.

Of Philosophers and Scholars, I have already spoken in general terms, those
superintendents of wit and learning, and Minions of the Muses. -- 1. Dousa
epid. lib. 1. car. 13.
mentemque habere queis b^nam

Et esse Hoc cognomento cohonestati Romae qui cat^ros mortales sapie^^ia
praest^rent tesis Plin. lib. 7. cap. 31.
corculis datum est. -- Insanire parant certa ratione modoque mad by their book
they
Those acute and subtle Sophisters so much honored, have as much need of
Hellebor as others. Read Lucians Piscator, and tell how he esteemed them?
Agrippas tract of the vanity of sciences, nay read their own works, their
absurd Tenants, prodigious paradoxes, and risum teneatis amici? you shall find
that of Aristotle true, nullum magnum ingenium fine mixtura dementiae, they
have a worm as well as others. And they that teach others wisdom, patience,
meekness, are the veriest disards, harebraines and most discontent. Solomon.
In the multitude of wisdom is grief, and he that increases wisdom,
increases sorrow. I need not quote mine author, they that laugh and contemn
others, and condemn the world of folly, are as ridiculous, and lie as open as
any other. Communis i^risor stultitiae.
Democritus that common flowter of folly, was ridiculous himself; and barking
Menippus, scoffing Lucian, satyricall Lucilius, Petronius, Varro, Persius, etc.
may be censured as well as others. Bale, Erasmus, Hospinian, Viues, explode as
a vast Ocean of Obs and Sols. School divinity, Wit whether wilt^
A labyrinth of intricable questions, unprofitable contentions. If divinity be
so censured, and corculum Theologiae Thomas himself, what shall become of
humanity? Ars stulta, what can she plead? What can her followers say for
themselves. Much learning (...).
cere-diminuit-brum. has cracked their sconce, and taken such root, that tribus
Antyceris caput insanibile, Hellebor it self can do no good. Rhetoritians,
Orators can persuade other men what they will, quo volunt vnde volunt, move,
pacify, etc. but cannot settle their own brains. Lib. 2 ca. 13. multo
anbelitu iactatione furentes pectus, frontem caedentes etc.
Fabius esteems no better of most of them, either in speech, action, gesture,
then as men beside themselves. In Naugerio.
Fracastorius a Poet himself, freely grants all Poets to be mad, and so does
Sifuror sit Lyaeus etc quoties furit, furit, furit, amans, bibe^s, and Poeta,
etc.
Scaliger and who does not: aut insanit homo, aut versus facit, Hor. Sat. 7. l.
2. You may give that ce^sure of them in general, which Sr. Tho. Moore once did
of Germanus Brixius Poemes in particular. -- vehuntur In rate stultitiae,
syluan habitant Furiae. Budeus in an Epistle of his to Lupsetus, will have
Civil Law to be the Tower of wisdom, another honors Physic the
Quintescence of nature, a third rumbles them both down, and sets up the flagge
of his own peculiar science. Your supercilious Critickes Notemakers,
Antiquaries find out all the ruins of wit amongst the rubbish of old writers,
Morus vtop. lib. 1.
Pro stultis habent nisi aliquod sufficiant invenire, quod in aliorum scriptis
vertant vitio, all fools with them that cannot find fault, they correct
others, and are hot in a cold cause, puzzell themselves to find out how many
streets in Rome, houses, gates, towers, etc. what clothes the Senators did
wear in Rome, what shoes, how they sat, where they went to the closestoole,
how many dishes in a mess; what sauce: which for the present for an historian
to relate is very ridiculous, is to them most precious elaborate stuff, and
they admired for it, Quosuis authors absurdis commentis suis percacant and
stercorant one says, they bewray and daube a company of books and good
Authors with their absurd Comments, a company of foolish Notemakers, that with
their deleatur d. alij legu^t sic, meus codex sic habet etc. make books dear,
themselves ridiculous, and do no body good. But I dare say no more of, for,
with, or against them, because I am liable to their lash as well as the rest.

That Delirus and amens dicatur merito, Hor. Seneca.
lovers are mad I think no man will deny, Amare simul and sapere ipsi Ioui
non datur, Jupiter himself cannot intend both at once, Ovid. met.
Non been conueniunt, nec in vna sede morantur, may as and amor. Tully when
he was invited to a second marriage, replied he could not, simul amare and
sapere, he could not do both together. Plutarchus Amatorio. est amor insanus
Est orcus ille, vis est immedicabilis, est rabies insana, love is madness, a
hell, an incurable disease, unpotentem and insanam libidinem, Epist. 39.
Seneca calls it, an impotent and raging lust. I shall dilate this subject
apart, in the mean time let lovers sigh out the rest.

Syluae nuptialis lib. 1 number. 11 omnes mulieres vt plurimu^ stultae.
Neuisanus the Lawier holds it for an axiom, most women are fools, Seneca
men, I could cite more proofs and a better Author, but for the present let one
fool point at another. Lib. 4 number. 11 sapientia and diuitiae vix simul
possideri possunt.
Neuisanus has as hard an opinion of They get their wisdom by eating piecrust
some.
richmen, wealth and wisdom cannot dwell together, stultitiam patiuntur opes,
(...). opes quid^m mortalibus sunt amentia. Theogonis.
and they do commonly infatuare cor hominis, besot men, and as we see it,
fools have fortune. For besides a natural contempt of learning, which
accompanies such kind of men, and all arts which should excolere mentem,
polish the mind, they have most part some gullish humor or other, by which
they are led, one is an Epicure, an Atheist, a gamester, a third a whoremaster,
Insanagulae, Insanae substructiones insanum venandi studi um discordia demens.
Aene. Virg.
one is mad of hawking, hunting, cocking, another of carousing, horseriding,
spending: a fourth of building, fighting, etc. Insanit veteres statuas
Damasippus emendo. Damasippus has a humor of his own, to be talked of.
Heliod. insanus Carthaginensis ad extremum orbis sarcophago testamento me hoc
iussi condier and vt viderem an quis insanior ad me visendum vsque ad haec loca
penetraret. Ortelius in Gad.
Heliodorus the Carthaginian another. In a word, as Scaliger concludes of them
all, they are statuae erectae stult^tiae, the very statues or pillars of folly.
Choose out of all stories, him that has been most admired, Alexander a worthy
man but furious in his anger, overtaken in drink; Caesar and Scipio valiant
and wise, but vain glorious, ambitious: Vespatian a worthy Prince, but
covetous. Liuye. Ingentes virtutes, ingentia vitia.
Hannibal as he had mighty virtues, so had he many vices, as Machiauell of
Cosmus Medices, he had two distinct persons in him, I will determine of all,
they are like double pictures, they are wise on the one side, and fools on the
other. I will say nothing of their diseases, emulations and such miseries, let
poverty plead the rest in Aristophanes Plutus.

Covetous men amongst the rest are most mad, c they have all the Symptoms of
Melancholy, fear, sadness, suspicion, etc. as shall be proved in his proper
place. Danda est Hellebori multo pars maxima auaris, I might say the like of
angry, peevish, envious, Hor. Quisquis ambitione mala aut argenti pallet amore,
quisquis luxuria tristique superstitione.
ambitious, pers.
Anticyras melior sorbere meracas. Epicures; Atheists, Schismatikes, Heretics,
hi omnes habent imaginationem laesam, says Orat. de Imag. ambitiosus and audax
nauiget Antic^ras.
Nymannus, and their madness shall be evident. 2. Tim. 3.9.

Cap. de alienat. mentis.
Foelix Platerus is of opinion, all Alcumists are mad, out of their wits,
Dipnosophist. lib. 8.
Athenaeus says as much of Fiddlers, dance^s, Tibicines mente capti Erasmus
Chil. 4. cent. 7.
Musitions, omnes Tibicines insaniunt, vbi semel esslant, auolaet illico men's,
in comes Music at one ear, out goes wit at another. Proud and vaineglorious
persons are certainly mad. and so are Brou. 30. Insana libido. hic rogo non
furor est non est haec mentula demens Mart epig. 74. lib. 3.
lascivious, I can feel their pulses beat hither, horn mad some of them, to
let other lie with their wives, and wink at it.

To insist Mill puellarum and puerorum mill furores.
in all particulars, were an Herculean task, to Vter est insanior horum Hor.
Ovid. Virg. Pli.
reckon up insanas substructiones, insanos labores; mad labors, endeavors,
carriages, ridiculous actions, gestures, insanam gulam, insaniam villarum,
insana iurgia, as Tully terms them: madness of villages, hypocrisy,
inconstancy etc. braules, contentions, would ask an expert Vesalius to
anatomise every member. Shall I say? Jupiter himself, Apollo, Mars, etc.
doted, and monster-conquering Hercules that could subdue the world and help
others, could not relieve himself in this, but mad he was at last. And where
shall a man walk, converse, with whom, in what Province, City, not meet with
Segnior Deliro, or Hercules Furens, Maenades and Corybantes? Their speeches say
no less. Ovid. 7. met. E fungis nati homines, vt olim Corinthi primeni illius:
loci accolae, quia stolidi and fatui fungis nati dicebantur, idem and alibi
dicas.
E fungis nati homines, or else they fetched their pedigree from those that were
struck by Sampson with the Iawbone of an ass. Or from Deucalion and Pyrrha's
stones, for Durum genus sumus, we are too stony hearted, and savor too much of
the stock, as if they had all heard that enchanted horn of Astolpho that
English Duke in Ariosto, which never sounded but all his Auditors were mad, and
for sear ready to make away themselves; Arianus periplo maris Euxini, portus
cius meminit. and Gillius ^ h. 3. de Bospher. Thracio and laurus insana quae
allata inconuiuium conuiuas omnes insana affecit. Guliel. Stukius coment, etc.
or landed in that mad haven in the Euxine Sea of Daphnis insana, all mad. Whom
shall I except? Stoikes? Sapiens Stoicus, and he alone is subject to no
perturbations, never dotes, never mad, never sad, drunk, because virtue cannot
be taken away as Illum contendunt non iniuria affici non insamia non inebriari
quia virtus non eripitur ob constantes comprehensiones Lipsius psys. Stoic.
lib. 3. diffi. 18.
Zeno holds, by reason of a strong apprehension, but he was mad to say so.
Tarreus Hebus epig. 102. l. 8
Anticyrae coelo huic est opus aut dobebra, he had need to be bored, and so had
all his fellows, as wise as they will seem to be. Chrysippus himself
liberally grants them to be fools, as well as others, at sometimes, upon some
occasions, Amitti virtutem ait per ebrietatem, aut atribilarium morbum, it may
be lost by drunkenness or Melancholy, he may be sometime crased as well as the
rest, Hor.
ad summum sapiens nisi quum pituita molesta. I should here except that
omniscious, only wise fraternity Fratres sanctae Roseae crucis.
of St Roses Cross, if at least there be any such: as Hen. An sint quales s^nt
vnde nomen illud asciuerint.
Neuhusius makes a doubt of; and Elias artifex their Theophrastian master; For
they are all Solus hic est sapiens alij voli tant velut vmbrae.
betrothed to wisdom, if we may beleene their disciples and followers. I must
needs except Sapientiae desponsati.
Lipsius, and the Pope, and expunge their name out of the Catalogue of fools.
For Lipsius says of himself, that he was In epist. ad Balthas. Moretum.
humani generis quidam poedagogus voce and stilo, a grand Segnior, a Master, a
Tutor of us all, and for thirteen years he bragges, how he sowed wisdom in
their Low Countries, Reiectiuncula^ ad Batauum.
cum humanitate literas and sapientiam cum prudentia: he shall be Sapientum
octavus. The Pope is more then a man, as Felinus cum r^li^uis.
his parasites often make him, a demi-god, and besides he cannot err: and yet
some of them have bin Magitians, Heretics, Atheists, and as Platina says of
John the 22. Etsi vir literatus, multa stoliditaetem and leuitatem prae se
ferentia egit, stolidi and socordis vir ingenij, a scholar sufficient, yet
many things he did foolishly, lightly. I can say no more then, but they are all
mad, their wits are euaporated, and as Ariosto faines lib. 34. kept in iarres
above the Moon. Some loose their wits with love, some with ambition,
Some following lords, and men of high condition.
Some in fair jewels rich and costly set,
Others in Poetry their wits forget.
Another thinks to be an Alchumist.
Till all be spent and that his numbers' mist.


Convict fools and madmen upon record; and I am afraid past cure: many of
them, Plautus Menecisin.
crepunt ingenia, the Symptoms are manifest, they are all of Gotam parish: Iu.
Sat. 14.
Quum furor haud quum sit manifesta phrenesis, what remains then, Or to send
for a cook to Anticyrae to make Hellebor pottage sett^braine pottage.
but to send for Lorarios officers to carry them al together for company to
Bedlam.

If any man shall ask in the mean time, who I am, that so boldly censure
others, tu nullane habes vicia? have I no faults. Aliquantulu^ tam en inde me
solabor quod vna cum multis and sapientibus and celeberimis viris ipse
insipiens sim quod de se Menippus Luciani in Necyomantia
Yes more then thou have whatsoever thou art. Nos numerus sumus, I confess I
am as foolish, as mad as any one.

Petronius in Catalect.
Insanus vobis videor non deprecor ipse,
Quo minus insanus, -- I do not deny it.
To conclude, this being granted that all the world is Melancholy or mad,
dotes, and every member of it, I have ended my task, and sufficiently
illustrated that which I took upon me to demonstrate at first. At this present
I have no more to say, His sana^ mente^ Democritus, I can but wish my self,
and them a good Physician, and all of us a better mind.

And although for these above named reasons, I had a just cause to undertake
this subject, to point at these particular species of dotage, that so men might
acknowledge their imperfections, and seek to reform what is amiss, yet I
have a more serious intent at this time, and to omit all impertinent
digressions, to say no more of such as are improperly Melancholy, or
mataphorically mad, lightly mad, or in disposition: my purpose and endeavor is,
in this following discourse to Anatomise this humor of Melancholy, through all
his parts and species, as it is an habit or an ordinary disease, and that
philosophically, medicinically, to (...) causes, symptoms, and several cures
of it, that it may (...) better avoided. Moved thereunto for the generality of
it, and to do good, it being a disease so frequent, as Haec affectio nostris
temporibus frequentissima.
Mercurialis observes in these our days, so often happening, says Cap. 15. de
Mel.
Laurentius, in our miserable times, as few there are that feel not the smart
of it, of the same mind is Aelian Montaltus, De anima, nostro hoc saeculo
morbus frequentissimus.
Melancthon, and others. Consult 98. adeo nostris temporibus frequenter ingruit
vt nullus fere ab eius labe immunis reperiatur, and omnium fere morborum
occasio existat.
Julius Caesar Claudinus calls it the fountain of all other diseases, and so
common in this crased age of ours, that scarce one of a thousand is free from
it: and that Hypocondriacall wind especially, which proceeds from the short
ribs. Being then as it is a disease so grievous, so common, I know not how to
do a more general service, and spend my time better, then to prescribe means
how to prevent and cure so universal a malady, and Epidemicall disease, that
so often, so much crucifies the body and mind.

If I have ouershot my self in this which has bin hitherto said, or that it
has bin, which I am sure some will object too light and Comicall for a Divine,
too Satyricall for one of my profession, I will presume to answer with Mor.
Encomsi quis calumnietur leuius esse quam decet Theologum, aut mordacius qua^
deceat Christianum.
Erasmus, in like case, it is not I, but Democritus, Democritus dixit, you must
consider what liberty those old Satyrists have had, it is a Cento collected from
others, not I, but they that say it.

Hor. Sat. 4 l. 1
Dixero si quid forte iocosius, hoc mihi iuris,
Cum venia dabis. --
If I do a little forget my self, I hope you will pardon it, and to say
truth, why should any man be offended, to take exceptions at it? -- Licuit,
semperque licebit
Parcere personis, dicere de vitijs.
It lawful was of old, and still will be,
To speak of vice, but let the name go free.
If any be displeased, or take ought unto himself, let him not expostulate or
cavil with him that said it (so did Epist. ad Dorpium de Moria siquispiam
offendatur and sibi vindicet, non habet quod expostulet cum eo qui scripsit,
ipse si volet, secum agat iniuria^ vtpote sui proditor qui declarauit hoc ad se
proprie pertinere.
Erasmus excuse himself to Dorpius, (si parua licet componere magnis) and so
do I) but let him be angry with himself, that so betrayed and opened his own
faults in applying it to himself, Siquis se lesum clamabit, aut conscientiam
prodit suam aut certe metum.
If he be guilty and deserve it, let him amend who ever he is, and not be
angry. He that hates correction is a fool. Prou. 12.1. If he be not guilty,
it concerns him not, it is not my freeness of speech, but a guilty conscience,
a gauled back of his own that makes him winch. I deny not this which I have
said savors a little of Democritus, Hor.
Quamvis ridentem dicere verum quid vetat? one may speak in jest, and yet
speak truth. Object then and cavil what thou will, I ward all with Vt lubet
feriat, abstergam hos ictus Democriti Pharmaco.
Democritus buckler, his medicine shall salve it, strike where thou will and
when. Democritus dixit, Democritus will answer it. It was written by an idle
fellow, at idle times about our t Saturnalian or Dionysian feasts, when as he
said nullum libertati periculum est, servants in old Rome had liberty to say
and do what them list. When our Countrymen sacrificed to their goddess
Rusticorum dea preesse vacantibus and otiosis putabatur cui post labores
agricola sacrificabat Plin. li. 3. cap. 12. Ovid. lib. 6. Fast. lam. quoque cum
fiunt antiquae sacra Vacunae. Ante Vacunales sta^tque sedentque focos. Rosinus.
Vacuna, and set turning an apple with a pot of ale and a toste by their
Vacunall fires, I writ this and published this. The time, place, persons, and
all circumstances apologize for me, and why may I not then be idle with others?
speak my mind freely, If you deny me this liberty, upon these presumptions I
will take it: I say again, I will take it.

No, I recant, I will not, I confess my fault and acknowledge a great offense,
I have ouershot my self, I have spoken foolishly, rashly, unadvisedly,
absurdly, I have anatomized mine own folly. And now me thinks upon a sudden I
am awaked as it were out of a dream, I have had a rauing fit, and ranged up
and down, in and out, I have insulted over most kind of men, abused some, and
offended others, wronged my self, and now being recovered, and perceiving mine
error, cry with Ariosto. lib. 39 Staf. 58.
Orlando, Soluite me. Pardon that which is past, and I will make you amends in
that which is to come; I promise you a more sober discourse in my following
Treatise.

If through weakness, folly, passion, discontent, ignorance, I have said
amiss, let it be forgotten and forgiven, and to every private man. As z Iu.
Caesar Scaliger besought Cardan, Si quid vrbaniuscule lusum a nobis, per deos
immortoles te oro Hierom. Cardane ne quid mali de me suspiceris. I beseech him
in his words, that he would not mistake me, or think amiss. And if hereafter
in Anatomising this sirlie humor, my hand slip, and as an vnskilfuil prentise,
I lance too deep, and cut through skin and all at unawares; or make it
smart, or cut awry, Quas aut iniuria fudit aut humana parum cauit natura. Hor.
pardon a rude hand, an unskillful knife, it is a most difficult thing to keep
an even hand, a perpetual tenor, and not sometimes to lash out; difficile est
Satyram non scribere, there be so many objects to divert, inward perturbations
to molest, and the very best may sometimes err, aliquando bonus dormitat
Homerus; it is impossible not in so much to ouershoot: opere in longo fas est
obrepere somnum. But what needs all this? I hope there will no such cause of
offense be given; if there be, I presume of thy good favor and gracious
acceptance, and out of an assured hope and confidence thereof, I will begin.

Lectori male feriato.
TV vero caueas edico quisquis es, ne temere sugilles authore^ huiusce operis,
aut cauillator irrideas. Imo ne vel ex aliorum censura, tacit obloquaris (vis
dicam verbo) nequid nasutulus inepte improbes, aut falso fingas. Nam si talis
reuera sit, qualom praese fert Junior, Democritus seniori Democrito saltem
affinis, aut eius Genium vel tantillum sapiat; actum de te, censorem aeque ac
delatorem Si me commorit me ius non tangere clamo. Hor.
aget econtra ( petulanti spleen cum sit sufflabit te in iocos, comminuet in
sales, addo etiam and Deo Risui te sacrificabit.

Iterum moneo, ne quid cauilleris, ne dum Democritum Iuniorem conuicijs
infames, aut ignominiose vituperes, de te non male sentientem, tu idem audias
ab amico cordato, quod olim vulgus Abderitanum ab Hippoc. epist. Damageto,
accersitus sum, vt Democritum tanquam insanu^ curarem, sed postquam conueni non
per Iouem desipientiae negotium sed rerum omnium receptaculu^ deprehendi
eiusque ingenium demiratus sum. Abderitanos vero tanquam non sanos accusaui
veratri potione ipsi potius eguisse dicens.
Hippocrate, conciuem been meritum and popularem suum Democritum, pro insano
habens. Ne tu Democrite sapis, stulti autem and insani Abderitae. Mart.
Abderitanae Pectora plebis habes. Haec te paucis admonitum volo (male feriate
Lector) abi.

THE SYNOPSIS of the first Partition.
In Diseases consider. Sect. 1. Memb. 1. Their Causes Subsect. 1 Impulsive,
sin, concupiscence, etc. Isntrumental, intemperance, all second causes, etc.
or Definition, Member, Division, Subs. 2. Of the Body 300, which are
Epidemicall, as Plague, plica, etc. Or Particular, as Gout, Dropsy, etc.
Or Of the head or mind. Subs. 3. In disposition, as all perturbations, evil
affections, etc. Or Habits as Subs. 4. Dotage. Frenzy. Madness. Ecstasy.
Lycanthropia. Chorus sancti Viti. Hydrophobia. Possession or obsession of
Devils. Melancholy. See.



Melancholy, in which consider. Its Aequiuocations, in Disposition, improper,
etc. Subs. 5. Memb. 2, To its explication a digression of anatomy in which
observe parts of Subs. 1. Body has parts Subs. 2. Contained as Humors 4.
blood, fleame, etc. Spirits, vital, natural, animal,
Or Containing Similar, spermaticall, or flesh, bones, nerves, etc. Subs. 3.
Dissimular, brain, heart, liver, etc, Subs 4.

Or Soul and his faculties, as Vegetall. Subs. 5. Sensible. Subs. 6.7.8.
Rational. Subs. 9.10.11.

Memb. 3. Its Definition, name, difference, Subs. 1. The part and parties
affected, affection, etc. Subs. 2. The matter of melancholy, natural,
unnatural, etc. Subs. 4.
Species or kinds which are Proper to parts, as Of the head alone,
Hypocondriacall, or windy melancholy. Of the whole body. with their several
causes, symptoms, prognostics, cures. Or Indefinite, as Love melancholy, the
subject of the third Partition.
Its Causes in general. Sect. 2. A. Its Symptoms or signs. Sect. 3. B. Its
Prognostics or Indications. Sect. 4.4. Its Cures, the subject of the second
Partition.
A Sect. 2, Causes of Melancholy are either General, as Memb. 1.
Supernatural. As from God immediately, or by second causes, Subs. 1 Or from the
Diu ell immediately, with a Digression of the nature of Devils. Subs 2. Or
mediatly by Magitians, Witches. Subs. 3.
Or Natural Primary as stars, p^oued by Aphorisms. Signs from Phisiognomy,
Metoposcopy, Chiromancy, Subs. 4. or Secundary, as Congenit inward from Old
age, Temperament, Sub. 5. Parents, it being an hereditary disease. Subs. 6.
or Outward or adventitious which are Evident, outward, remote, adue^titious,
as Necessary, see. Or Not necessary as M. 4. Sect. 2. Nurses, Sub. 1.
Education, 2. Terrors, affrights, 3. Scoffs, calu^nies, bitter jests, 4. Loss
of liberty, servitude, impriso^me^t. 5 Poverty and want. 6. An heap of other
accide^ts death offrie^ds loss, etc. 7.

Or Continent Inward, antecedent, nearest. Memb. 5. Sect. 2. In which the body
works on the mind and this malady is caused by precedent diseases, as agues,
pox, etc, or temperature innate, Sub. 1. Or by particular parts distempered, as
brain, heart, spleen, liver, Mesentery Pylorus, stomach, etc. Subs 2.




Particular to the three Species. See.
Particular causes. Sect. 2. Memb. 5. Of head Melancholy are Subs. 3. Inward
Innate humor, or from distemperature adust. A hot brain, corrupt blood in the
Brain. Excess of venery or defect. Agues or some precedent Disease. Fumes
arising from the stomach, etc.
Or Outward Heat of the Sun immoderate A blow on the head. Overmuch use of
hot wines, spices, garlic, onyons, hotbaths, overmuch waking, etc. Idleness,
solitariness, or overmuch study, vehement labor, etc. Passions,
perturbations, etc.

Of hypocondriacall or windy melancholy are Inward Default of spleen, belly,
bowels, stomach, mysentery, meseriack veins liver, etc. Months, or hemrods
stopped, or any other ordinary Euacuation.
Or Outward Those six non-naturall things abused.

Over all the body are Subs. 5. Inward Liver distempered, stopped, over hot,
apt to engender melancholy, Temperature innate. Or Outward. Bad diet,
suppression of Haemrods etc. and such euacuations, passions, cares etc. those
six nonnaturall things abused.

. Necessary causes as those six non-naturall things which are. Sect. 2. Memb.
2. Diet offending in Subs. 1. Substance Bread, course and black, etc. Drink
thick, thin, sour, etc. Water unclean, milk, oil, vinegar, wine, spices,
etc. Flesh Parts, heads, f^et, entrals, fat, bacon, blood, etc. Kinds Beef,
Porke, Veneson, Hares, Gotes, Pigeons, Peacocks, Fenfoule, etc.
Herbs, Fish, etc. Of fish, all shellfish, hard and slimy fish, etc. Of
herbs, pulse, cabbage, mellons, garlic, onions, etc. Al roots, raw fruits,
hard and windy meats.

Quality as in Preparing, dressing, sharp sauces, salt meats, Indurate soweed,
fried, broyld, all made dishes, etc; Quantity. Disorder in eating, immoderate
eating, or at unseasonable times, etc. Subs. 2. Custom, delight, appetite
altered, etc. Subs. 3.

Retention and Evacuation, Sub. 4. Costiuenesse, hot bathes, sweating, issues
stopped, Venus in excess, or in defect, phlebotomy, purging, etc Air, Hot,
cold, tempestuous, dark, thick, foggy, moorish, etc. Subs. 5. Exercise Subs.
6. Unseasonable, excessive, or defective of body or mind, solitariness,
idleness, a life out of action, etc. Sleep and waking, unseasonable,
inordinate, overmuch, ouerlittle, etc. Subsect. 7. ^emb 3. Sect. 2 Passions and
perturbations of the mind. Subs. 2. With a digression of the force of
imagination. Sub. 2. and division of passions into Sub 3. la^scible Sorrow
cause and symptom, Sub. 4. Fear cause and symptom, Subs. 5. Shame, Repulse,
disgrace, etc. Subs. 6. Envy and malice Subs. 7. Emulation, hatred, fact on,
desire of revenge. Subs. 8. Anger a cause. Subs. 9. Disconte^ts, cares,
miseries, etc. Sub. 10.
or concupiscible Vehement desires, ambition, Subs. 11. Covetousness, (...).
Subs. 12. Love of pleasures, gaming in excess, etc. Subs. 13. Desire of
praise, pride, vaineglory, etc. Sub. 14. Love of learning, study in excess,
with a digression of the misery of Scholars, and why the Muses are melancholy.
Subs. 15.


B. Symptoms of melancholy are either. Sect. 3. General as of Memb. 1. Body as
ill digestion, crudity, wind, dry brains, hard belly, thick blood, much
waking, heaviness and palpitation of heart, leaping in many places, etc. Subs.
1. or mind common to all or most Fear and sorrow without a just cause,
suspicion, iealosie, discontent, solitariness, irksomenesse, continual
cogitations, restles thoughts, vain imaginations, etc. Subs. 2. or Particular
to private persons according to Sub. 3. and 4. Caelestiall influences, as of...
etc. parts of the body, heart, brain, liver, spleen, stomach, etc Humors
Sanguine are merry still, laughing, pleasant, meditating on plays, women,
music, etc. Phlegmatic, slothful, dull, heavy, etc. Choleric, furious,
impatient, subject to hear and see strange apparitions, etc. Black, solitary,
sad, they think they are bewitched, dead etc.
Or mixed of these 4 humors adust, or not adust, infinitely varied, etc. Their
several custo^ms conditions inclinatio^s, discipline, etc. Ambitious thinks
himself a king, a lord; covetous runs on his money; lascivious on his
mistress. Religious has revelations, visions, is a Prophet, or troubled in
mind. A Scholar on his book, etc. Continuance of time, as the humor is
intended or remitted, etc. Pleasant at first, hardly descerned, afterward
harsh, and intolerable, if inueterate. Hence some make three degrees 1. Falsa
cogitatio. 2. Cogitata loqui. 3. Exequi loquuta.
By fits or continuat as the object varies, pleasing, or displeasing.
Simple, or as it is mixed with other diseases, Apoplexies, gout, Caninus
appetitus, etc. so the symptoms are various.


Particular to the three distinct species. See Memb. 2.
Particular Symptoms to the three distinct species. Sect. 3. Memb. 2. Head
Melancholy. Sub. 1. In Body Headache, binding, heaviness, vertigo, lightness,
singing of the ears, much waking, fixed eyes, high color, red eyes, hard
belly, dry body, no great sign of melancholy in the other parts. or In mind
Continual fear, sorrow, suspicion, discontent superfluous cares, solicitude,
anxiety perpetual cogitation of such toys they are possessed with, thoughts
like dreams, etc.
Hypocondriacall or windy melancholy. Subs. ^. In Body Wind, rumbling in the
guts, belly ache, heat in the bowels, conuulsions, crudities, short wind, sour
and sharp belchings, cold sweat, pain in the left side, suffocation,
palpitation, heaviness of the heart, singing in the ears, much spittle and
moist, etc. or In mind. Fearful, sad, suspicious, discontent, anxiety etc.
Lasc^uious by reason of much wind, troublesome dreams, affected by sits, etc.
Over all the Body. Sub. 3 In Body Black, most part lean, broad veins,
gross, thick blood, their haemoerodes commonly stopped, etc. or In mind
Fearful, sad, solitary, hate light, auerse from company, fearful dreams,
etc.
A reason of these symptoms. Memb. 3. Why they are so fearful, sad,
suspicious, without a cause, why solitary, why melancholy men are witty, why
they suppose they hear and see strange voices, visions, apparitions. Why they
prophecy, and speak strange languages, whence comes their crudity, rumbling,
convulsions, cold sweat, heaviness of heart, palpitation, cardiaca, fearful
dreams, much waking, prodigious fantasies.

C Prognostics of melancholy. Sect. 4. Tending to good as Morphew, Scabbes,
Itch, Breakings out, etc Black Iandise. If the Hemrods voluntarily open. If
varices appear.
Tending to evil as Leanenesse, dryness, holloweyed, etc. Inueterate
melancholy is incurable. If cold, it degenerats often into Epilepsie,
Apoplexy, Dotage, or into Blindness. If hot, into madness, Despaire^ and
violent death.
Corollaries and questions The grieuousnesse of this above all other Diseases.
The diseases of the mind are more grievous then those of the Body Whether it
be lawful in this case of melancholy for a man to offer violence to himself.
Neg. How a melancholy or mad man offering violence to himself, is to be
censured.


THE FIRST PARTITION
THE FIRST SECTION.
THE FIRST MEMBER.
THE FIRST SVBSECTION. Man's Excellency, Fall, Miseries, Infirmities. The causes
of them.
MAN, Man's Excellency.
the most excellent, and most noble creature of the World, the principal and
mighty work of God, and wonder of nature, as Zoroastes calls him, the Magnum
miraculum.
marvaill of marvaills, as Plato, the Mundi Epitome, natura delitie.
Abridgment and Epitome of the World, as Pliny terms him, Microcosmus, a
little World, a model of the World, Finis rerum omnium cui sublunaria seruiunt
Scaliger. exerc. 365. sec. 3. valef. de sacr. Phil. c. 5.
Sovereign Lord of the Earth, and sole Commander and Governor of all the
Creatures in it: to whose Empire they are all subject in particular, and yield
obedience, far surpassing all the rest, not in body only, but in soul, Vt in
numismate Caesaris Imago, sic in homine Dei.
Imaginis Imago, Genesis 1.
created to Gods own Imago mundi in corpore, Dei in anima. Exemplumque dei
quisque est in imagine parva.
Image, to that immortal and incorporeall substance, with all the faculties
and powers belonging unto it, was at first pure, divine, perfect, happy, Ephel.
4.24.
Created after God in true holiness and righteousness: Deo congruens, free
from all manner of infirmities, and put in Paradise, to know God, to praise
and glorify him, to do his will. V^ dijs consimiles parturiat Deos; as an old
Poet says, to propagate the Church. But this most noble creature, Heu tristis
and lachrimosa commutatio ( Palanterius.
one exclaimes) O pitiful change^ is fallen from that he was, and forfeited
his estate, become miserabilis homuncio, a castaway, a caitiffe, one of the
most miserable creatures of the World, if he be considered in his own nature,
an unregenerate man, and so much obscured by his fall (that some few relics
excepted) he is inferior to a beast. Ps. 49.20. Man's fall and misery.
Man in honor that understands not is like unto beasts that perish, so David
esteems him: a monster by a stupend Metamorphosis, Lasciuia superat Equum,
impudentia canem, astu Vulpem furore Leonem. Chrysostom. 23. Genesis
a Beast, a Dog, a Hog, what not? Quantum mutatus ab illo? How much altered
from that he was, before blessed and happy, now miserable accursed: Genesis 3.17.
He must eat his meat in sorrow, subject to death and all manner of
infirmities, all kind of calamities. Ecclus. 40.1
Great travel is created for all men, and an heavy Yoke on the sons of Adam,
from the day that they go out of their mother's womb unto that day they
return to the mother of all things. Namely their thoughts, and fear of their
hearts, and their imagination of things they wait for, and the day of death. To
him that sits in the glorious throne, to him that sits beneath in earth
and ashes, from him that is clothed in blew silk, and wears a crown, to
hi^ that is clothed in simple linen. Wrath, envy, A description of Melancholy.
trouble, and unquietness, and fear of death, and rigor, and strife, and such
things come to both Man and Beast, but seauenfold to the ungodly. All this
befalls him in this life, and peradventure aeternall misery in the life to come.

The impulsive cause of all these miseries in man, this privation or
destruction of Gods Image, Impulsive cause of man's misery and infirmities.
the cause of death and diseases, of all temporal and aeternall punishments,
was the sin of our first parent Adam, Genesis 3.17.
in eating of the forbidden fruit, by the Devils instigation and allurement.
His disobedience, pride, ambition, intemperance, incredulity, curiosity, from
whence proceeded original sin, and that general corruption of mankind, as
from a fountain flowed all bad inclinations, and actual transgressions, which
cause our several calamities, inflicted upon us for our sins. And this belike
is that which our fabulous Poets have shadowed unto us in the tale of Iila
cadens reginen manibus decussit and vna pernitiem immisit miseris mortalibus
atr^. Hesiod. 1. oper.
Pandoras box, which being opened through her curiosity; filled the world full
of all manner of Diseases. It is not curiosity alone, but all other crying
sins of ours which pull these several plagues and miseries upon our heads.
For Vbi peccatum* ibi procella, as Him 5 ad populum Antioch.
Chrysostom well observes. Ps 107.17.
Fools by reason of their transgressions, and because of their ini^^ities are
afflicted. Prove 1* 27.
Fear comes like sudden desolation, and destruction like a whirlewind,
affliction and anguish because they di not fear God. Quod autem crebrius
bellae concutiant, quod sterilitas and fames sollicitudinem cumulent, quod
saevientibus morbis valetudo frangitur, quod humanum genus luis populatione
vastatur ob peccatum omnia. Cyp.
Are you shaken with wars, as Cyprian well urges to Demetrius, are you
molested with dearth and famine, is your health crushed with raging diseases?
is mankind generally tormented with Epidemicall maladies, it is all for your
sins. Haggei the 1.9.10. Amos the 1. Ier. 7. God is angry, punishes and
threatens, because of their obstinacy and stubburnesse, they will not turn
unto him, Si raro desuper pluvia descendat, si terra situ pulveris squaleat, si
vix ^eiunas and pallidas herbas sterilis gleba producat, si turbo vineam
debilitet etc. Cyprian.
If the earth be barren then for want of rain, if dry and squalid, it yield no
fruit, if your fountains be dried up, your wine, corn, and oil blasted, if
the air be corrupted, and men troubled with diseases, it is by reason of your
sins. Which like the blond of Abel cry loud to Heaven for vengeance, Lament.
Ier. cap. 5.15. that we have sinned, therefore our hearts is heavy, Isay.
59.11.12. We roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves, and want health, etc.
for our s^^nes and trespasses. But this we cannot endure to hear, or to take
notice of it. Ier. 2.30. We are smitten in vain, and receive no correction.
and cap. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not sorrowed, they have
refused to receive correction, they have not returned. Mar. 14.3.
Herod could not abide John Baptist, and Philostratus lib. 8 Vit. Apollonij
iniustitiam eius, and sceleratas nuptias and caetera quae praeter rationem
fecerat morborum causas dixi^.
Domitian could not endure Apollonius tell the causes of the plague at Ephesus,
his injustice, his incest, adultery, and the like.

To punish therefore this blindness, and obstinacy of ours as a concomitant
cause and principal agent, is Gods just judgment in bringing these calamities
upon us, to chastise us, I say, for our sins, and to satisfy Gods wrath. For
the law requires obedience or punishment, as you may read at large, Deuteronomy.
28.15. If they will not obey the Lord, and keep his Commandments and
Ordinances, then all these curses shall come upon them. 16.
Cursed in the town and in the field etc. 18.
Cursed in the fruit of thy body etc. 20.
The Lord shall send thee trouble and shame, because of thy wickedness. And a
little after, Verse. 17.
The Lord shall smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and with Emrods, and with
Scab and Itch, and thou can not be healed. 28. Deus quos diligit castigat.
And with madness, blindness, and astonishing of heart. This Paul seconds.
Romans 2.9. Tribulation and anguish on the soul of every man that does evil. Or
else these chastisements are inflicted upon us for our humiliation, to exercise
and try our patience here in this life, to bring us home, to make us know God
and our selves, to inform us, and teach us wisdom. Isay. 5.13. Ver 15.
Therefore is my people gone into captivity, because they had no knowledge,
therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled against this people, and he has
stretched out his hand upon them. He is desirous of our salvation, Nostre
salutis auidus contineter aures vellicat, ac calamitate subinde nos exercet
L^uinus Lemn. l. 2. c. 29. de occult. not. mir.
Nostrae salutis auidus, says Lemnius, and for that cause pulls us by the ear
many times, to put us in mind of our duties. Vexatio dat intellectum. Isay.
28.13.
That they that erred might have understanding (as Isay speaks 29.21. and so
be reformed. I am afflicted and at the point of death, as David confesses of
himself, Psalm. 88.15. and ver. 9. mine eyes are sorrowful through mine
affliction. And that made him turn unto God. Great Alexander in the midst of
all his prosperity, and by a company of Parasites deified, and now made a God,
when he saw one of his wounds bleed, remembered that he was but a man, and
remitted of his pride, In morbo recolligit se animu^, as Lib. 7^ cum iuditio
(...) and facta recog^^cit and se intuetur. Dum fero lenguorem fero religionis
amore^, expers languoris non sum, memor huius amoris.
Pliny well perceived, In sickness the mind reflects upon it self, and with
judgment suruayes it self, and abhorres his former courses, insomuch that he
concludes to his friend Marius, Summum esse totius Philosophiae, vt tales esse
perseueremus, quales nos futures esse infirmi profitemur.
that it were the period of al Philosophy, if we could so continue being sound,
or perform but (...) of that which we promised to do being sick. Who so is
wis^ ^hen will consider those things, as David did, Ps. 1 44. verse. last. And
whatsoever fortune befall him, make use of it. If he be in sorrow, need,
sickness, or any other adversity, seriously to consider with himself, why
this or that malady, misery, this or that incurable disease is inflicted upon
him; it may be for his good, Petrarch.
sic expedit, as Peter said of his daughters ague. Bodily sickness is for his
souls health, perijsset nisi perijsset, had he not been visited, he had
utterly perished Prove. 3.12.
for the Lord corrects him whom he loves, even as a father does his child in
whom he delights. If he be safe and sound on the other side, and free from
all manner of infirmity, Hor. epist. lib. 1.4.
and cui Gratia, forma, valetudo contingat abunde,
Et mundus victus non deficiente crumena,
And that he have grace, beauty, favor, health,
The World at his command, abound in wealth.


Yet in the midst of all his prosperity, let him remember that Caveat of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 8.11. Qui stat videas necadat.
beware that he do not forget the Lord his God, that he be not puffed up, but
acknowledge them to be his good gifts and benefits, and use them aright.

Now the isntrumental causes of these our infirmities, Isntrumental cause of
our infirmities.
are as diverse, as the infirmities themselves, stars, heavens, elements,
etc. and all those creatures which God has made, are armed against sinners.
They were indeed once good in themselves, and that they are now many of them
pernicious unto us, is not in their nature, but our corruption, which has
caused it. For from the fall of our first parent Adam, they have been changed,
the earth accursed, the influence of stars altered, the four elements,
Beasts, Birds, Plants, are now ready to offend us. The principal things for
the use of man is Water, Fire, Iron, Salt, Meal, Wheat, Honey, Milk, Oil,
Wine, Clothing, good to the Godly, to the Sinners turned to evil. Ecclus
39.26. Fire, and Hail, and Famine, and Death, all these are created for
vengeance, Ecclus 39.29. The Heavens threaten us with their Comets, Stars,
Planets, with their great conjunctions, Ecclipses, oppositions, quartiles, and
such unfriendly aspects. The air with his Meteors, Thunder and Lightning,
intemperate heat and cold, mighty winds, tempests, unseasonable weather; from
which proceeds, dearth, famine, plague, and all manner of Epidemicall diseases;
consuming infinite myrriads of men. As at Cairo in Egypt every third year, it
is related by Boterus de In: vrbium.
Boterus and others, 300000. of the plague, and 200000. in Constantinople,
every fifth or seventh at the utmost. How does the earth terrify and oppress
us with those terrible Earthquaks, which are most frequent in Lege hist
relationem Lod. Frois de rebus Iaponicis. ad annum 1596.
China, Iapan, and those Eastern Climes, swallowing up sometimes 6. Cities at
once. How does the water rage with his inundations, irruptions, flinging down
Towns, Cities, Villages, Bridges, etc. beside shipwracks, whole Islands are
sometimes suddenly overwhelmed with all their inhabitants, as in Guicciard.
descrip. Belg. anno 14*21.
Zeland, Holland, and many parts of the continent drowned, as the Giraldus
Cambrens.
lake Ern^ in Ireland. Ianus Dousa ep. lib. 1. car. 10.
Nihilque praeter arcium cadauera patenti cernimus freto. How does the fire
rage that merciless element? Consuming in an instant whole Cities. What town
of any antiquity or note, has not been once, again and again, by the fury
of this merciless element defaced, utterly ruinated, and left desolate. To
descend to more particulars, how many creatures are at deadly fuid with me^?
Lions, Wolves, Bears, etc. Some with Hoofes, Horns, Tusks, Teeth, Tails: How
many noxious Serpents and venomous creatures, ready to offend us with stings,
breath, sight, or quite kill us? How many pernicious fishes, plants, gammes,
fruits, seeds, flowers, etc. could I reckon up on a s^ddaine, which by their
very smell many of them, to^ch, taste, ca^se some grievous m^lady, if not death
it self. Some make mention of a thousand several poisons: but these are but
trifles in respect. The greatest enemy to man, is man himself, Homo homini
lupus, homo homini demon.
who by the Devils instigation, is still ready to do mischief to himself
and others, his own executioner, a Wolf, a Devil to himself, and others.
Sometimes by the Devils help, as Magitians, Miscent oconita nouercae.
Witches: sometimes by impostures, mixtures, poisons, stratagemmes, single
cumbats, wars. We hacke and hew one another, as if we were ad inter^^^ionem
^^ti, like C^dmu^ soldiers borne to consume one another. It Is an ordinary
thing to read of an 100000, and two hundred thousand men sla^ne in a battle.
Besides all ma^^r of tortures, br^sen bulls, racks, wheels, strappadoes,
gunnes, enginnes, etc. Lib. 2. epist. 2. ad Donatum.
Ad vnum corpus humanum supplicia plura, quam membra. We have invented more
torturing instruments, then there be several members in a man's body, as
Cyprian well observes. To come nearer yet, our own parents by their offenses,
indiscretion, and intemperance are our mortal enemies. Ezech. 18.2.
The fathers have eaten sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge.
They cause our grief many times, and put upon us haereditary diseases,
inevitable infirmities: They torment us, and we are as ready to iniure our
posterity. -- Hor lib. 3. Od. 6.
mox daturi progeniem viciosiorem, and the latter end of the world, as 2. Tim.
3.2.
Paul foretold, is still like to be worst. We are thus bad by nature, bad by
kind, but far worse by art, every man the greatest enemy unto himself. We
study many times to undo our selves, abusing those good gifts which God has
bestowed upon us, Health, Wealth, Strength, Wit, Learning, Art, Memory, to our
own destruction, Ezech. 18.31.
Perditio tua ex te. As Macc. 3.12.
Judas Machabeus killed Apollonius friends with his own weapons, we arm our
selves to our own overthrows, and use Reason, Art, Judgment, all that should
help us, as so many instruments to undo us. As S. Austin confesses of
himself in his humble Confessions, promptness of Wit, Memory, Eloquence, they
were Gods good gifts, but he did not use them to his glory. If you will
particularly know how, and by what means, consult Physicians, and they will
tell you, that it is in offending in some of those six non-naturall things, of
which I shall after Part 1. Sec. 2 Memb. 2.
dilate more large; they are the causes of our infirmities, our surseting and
drunkenness, our immoderate insatiable lust, and prodigious riot. Plures
crapula, quam gladius, it is a true saying, the board consumes more then the
sword. Our intemperance it is, that pulls so many several incurable diseases
upon our heads, that hastens Nequitia est que te non sinet esse senem.
old age, perverts our temperature, and brings upon us sudden death. And last
of all, that wuich crucifies us most, is our own folly, want of government,
our facility and pronenesse in yielding to our several lust, and giving way to
every passion and perturbation of the mind, by which means we metamorphize
our selves, and degenerate into beasts. As that Homer. Il.
Poet observed of Agamemnon, that when he was well-pleased, and could moderate
his passion, he was -- os oculosque Iovi par: like Jupiter in feature, Mars in
valor, Pallas in wisdom. another god; but when he was angry, he was a Lion, a
Tiger, a dog, etc. there was no sign or likeness of Jupiter in him; so we,
as long as we are ruled by reason, as long as we correct our inordinate
appetite, and conform our selves to Gods word, are as so many living Saints,
but if we give reins to Lust, Anger, Ambition, Pride, and follow our own
ways, we degenerate into beasts, transform our selves, overthrow our
constitutions, Intemperantia, luxus, Ingluvies, and infinita huiusmodi
flagitia, quae divinas poenas merentur. Crato.
provoke God to anger, and heap upon us this of Melancholy, and all manner of
incurable diseases, as a just and deserved punishment of our sins.

SVBSEC. 2.
MEMBR 1.
Definition Number Division
of Diseases.
WHat a Disease is, almost every Physician defines. Fern. Path. lib. 1. cap. 1.
morbus est affectus contra naturam corpori insidens.
Fernelius calls it an Affection of the Body, contrary to Nature. Fuch.
Institut. lib. 3. sec. 1. cap. 3 a quo primum viciatur actio.
Fuchsius and Crato, an hinderance, hurt, or alteration of any action of the
Body, or any part of it. Dissolutio foederis in corpore vt sanitas est
consummatio.
Tholosanus, a dissolution of that league which is between Body and Soul, and
a perturbation of it: as health is the perfection, and makes to the
preservation of it. Lib. 4 cap. 2. morbus est habitus contra naturam, qui vsum
eius, etc. Number of Diseases.
Labeo in Agellius, an ill habit of the Body, opposite to nature, hindering
the use of it. Others otherwise, all to this effect.

How many Diseases there are, is a question not yet determined. Cap. 11. lib. 7.
Pliny reckons up 300. from the Crown of the Head, to the sole of the Foot:
elsewhere he says, morborum infinita multitudo, their number is infinite.
Howsoever it was in those old times, it boots not; in our days I am sure the
number is much augmented: for besides many Epidemicall diseases unheard of, and
altogether unknown to Galen and Hippocrates, as Scorbutum, Small pox, Plica,
Sweating Sickness, Morbus Gallicus etc. we have many proper, and peculiar
almost to every part. No man amongst us so sound, of so good a constitution,
that has not some impediment of Body or Mind. No man free from some Disease
or other.
quisque suos patimur manes, we have all our infirmities, first or last, more
or less. There may be peradventure in an age, or one of a thousand, like
Zenophilus the Musician in Cap. 50. lib. 7. centum and quinque vixit annos sine
vllo incommodo.
Pliny, that may happily live 105. years, without any manner of impediment. A
Pollio Romulus, that may preserve himself Intus mulso for as oleo.
with wine and oil. A man as fortunate as Q. Metellus, of whom Valerius so
much bragges. A man as healthful as Otto Herwardus, a Senator of Ausburrow in
Germany, whom Exemplis genitur: praefixis Ephemer. cap. de infirmitat.
Leouitius the Astrologer brings in for an example, and instance of certainty
in his Art, who because he had the significators in his geniture fortunate,
and free from the hostile aspects of Saturn and Mars, being a very old man,
Qui quoad pueritiae vltimam memoriam recordari potest, non meminit se aegrotum
decubuisse.
could not remember that ever he was sick. Lib. de vita longa.
Paracelsus may brag, that he could make a man live 400 years or more, if he
might bring him up from his Infancy, and diet him as he lift; and some
Physicians hold, that there is no certain period of man's life; but it may
still by temperance, and Physic, be prolonged. We find in the mean time, by
common experience, that no man can escape, but that of Oper. and dies.
Hesiod is true: (...)
(...)
(...). --
The Earth is full of maladies, and full the Sea, Division of Diseases.

Which set upon us both by night and day.


If you require a more exact division of these ordinary Diseases, which are
incident to men, I refer you to See Fernelius Path. lib. 1. cap. 9.10.11.12.
Fuchsius institut. lib. 3. sec. 1. cap. 7 Wecker. Syntax.
Physicians; they will tell you of Acute and Chronicke, First and Secundary,
Lethales Salutares, Errant Fixed, Simple Compound, Connexed, or Consequent,
belonging to parts, or the whole, in Habit, or in Disposition, etc. My division
at this time (as most befitting my purpose) shall be into those of the Body and
of the Mind. For those of the Body, a brief Catalogue of which Fuschius has
made, Institut. lib. 3. sec. 1. cap. 11. I refer you to those voluminous Tomes
of Galen, Areteus, Rhasis, Avicenna, Alexander, Paulus, Aetius, Gordonius,
Guianerius: And those exact Neotericks, Savanarola, Capiuaccius, Donatus
Altomarus, Hercules de Saxonia, Mercurialis, Victorius Faventinus, Wecker,
Piso, etc. that have methodically, and elaborately written of them all. Those
of the Mind and Head, I will briefly handle, and apart.

SVBSEC. 3. Division of the Diseases of the Head.
THese Diseases of the Mind, forasmuch as they have their chief seat, and
Organs in the Head, are commonly repeated amongst the diseases of the Head,
which are diverse, and vary much according to their site. For in the Head, as
there be diverse parts, so there be diverse grievances, which according to that
division of Praefat. de morbis capitis. In capite vt variae habitant parts,
ita variae querela ibi eveniunt.
Hernius, which he takes out of Arculanus, are inward or outward (to omit all
others which belong to the Eyes and Ears, Nostrils, Gummes, Teeth, Mouth,
Palate, Tongue, Wesell, Choppes, Face, etc.) belonging properly to the Brain,
as baldness, falling of hair, furfair, lice, etc. Of which read Hernius
Montaltus, Hildisheim, Quercetan, lason Pratensis etc.
Inward belonging to the skins next to the Brain, called durae, and Pia
matter, as all headaches, etc. or to the Ventricles, Caules, Kells, Tunicles,
Creekes, and parts of it, and their passions, as Caro, Vertigo, Incubus,
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness. The diseases of the Norues^;, Crampes, Stupor,
Convulsion, Tremor, Palsye: or belonging to the excrements of the Brain, as
Catars, Sneezing, Rhumes, Distillations: or else those that pertain to the
Substance of the Brain it self, in which are conceived, Frensye, Lethargye,
Melancholy, Madness, weak Memory. Sapor, or Coma, Vigilia and vigil Coma. Out
of these again I will single such as properly belong to the Fantasy, or
Imagination, or Reason it self, which Cap. 2. de Melanchol.
Laurentius calls the Diseases of the Mind; and Hildisheim, morbos
Imaginationis, aut Rationis laesae, which are three or four in number,
Frensye, Madness, Melancholy, Dotage, and their kinds: as Hydrophobia,
Lycanthropia, Chorus sancti viti, morbi daemoniaci: which I will briefly touch
and point out, insisting especially in this of Melancholy, as more eminent then
the rest, and that through all his kinds, causes, symptoms, prognostics,
cures. As Lonicerus has done de Apoplexia, and many others, of many such
particular diseases. Not that I find fault with others which have written of
this subject before, as Jason Pratensis, Laurentius, Montaltus, T: Bright, etc.
they have done well in their several kinds and methods, yet that which one
omits, another may happily see; that which one contracts, another may enlarge.
To conclude with Cap. 2. de Phisiologia sagarum, quod alij minus recte fortasse
dixerint, nos examinare, melius diiudicare, corrigere studeamus.
Scribanius, that which they have neglected, or perfunctoril y handled, we may
more thoroughly examine, that which is obscurely delivered in them, may be
perspicuously dilated and amplified by us; and so may be made more familiar
and easy for every man's capacity, and common good, which is the chief end of
my Discourse.

SVBSEC. 4. Dotage, Frenzy, Madness, Hydrophobia, Lycanthropia, Chorus
sancti viti, Extasis.
DOtage, Fatuity, or Folly, Defirham, Detage.
is a common name to all the following Species, as some will have it. Cap. 4.
de Mol.
Laurentius and Art. Med. cap. 7
Altomarus comprehend Madness, Melancholy, and the rest, under this name, and
call it the summum genus of them all. If it be distinguished from them, it is
natural or in^^^^^^, which comes by some defect of the Organs, and ouermoist
Brain, as we see in our common-fooles; and is for the most part intended or
remitted in most men, and thereupon some are wiser then other: or else it is
acquisite, an Appendix or Symptom of some other disease, which comes or goes,
or if it continue, a sign of Melancholy it self.

Phrenitis, Frenzy.
which the Greeks derive from the word (...), is a Disease of the Mind, with a
continual Madness or Dotage, which has an acute fever annexed, or else an
inflammation of the Brain, or the Membranes or Kells of it, with an acute
Fever, which causes Madness, and Dotage. It differs from Melancholy and
Madness, because their Dotage is without an ague: this continual, with
waking, or Memory decayed etc. Melancholy is most part silent; this clamorous,
and many such like differences are assigned by Physicians.

Madness, Madness.
Frenzy, and Melancholy are confounded by many Writers, as Celsus: others
leave out Frenzy, and make Madness, and Melancholy but one Disease, which
Plerique Medici vne complexu perstringunt hos duos morbos, quod ex eadem causa^
oriantur, quodque magnitudine and modo solum distent, and alter gradus ad
alterum existat. Jason Pratensis.
Jason Pratensis especially labors, and that they differ only secundum maius
or minus, in quantity, the one being a degree to the other, and both proceeding
from one cause. They differ intenso and remisso gradu, says Lil. Med.
Gordonius, as the humor is intended or remitted. Of the same mind is Pars
maniae mibi videtur.
Areteus, Alexander Trallianus, Guianerius, Savanarola, Hernius, and Galen
himself writes promiscuously of them both, by reason of their affinity, but
most of our Neotericks do handle them apart, whom I will follow in this
Treatise. Madness is therefore defined to be a vehement Dotage, or rauing
without a fever, far more violent then Melancholy, full of anger, and clamor,
horrible looks, actions, gestures; and troubles the Patient with far greater
vehemence both of Body and Mind, without all fear and sorrow, with such
impetuous force, and boldness, that sometimes three or four men cannot hold
them. Differing only in this from Frenzy, that it is without a Fever, and
their Memory is most part better. It has the same causes as the other, as
Choler adust, and Blood incensed, Brains inflamed etc. Insanus est, qui state
debits, and tempore debito per se non momentaneam and fugacem, vt vini, solani,
Hyoscyami sed confirmatamhabet impotentiam been operandicirca intellectum. lib.
2. deintellestione.
Fracastoriu^ adds a due time and full age to this definition, to distinguish
it from children, and will have it to be a confirmed Impotency, to separate it
from such as accidentally come and go again, as by taking Henbane,
Nightshade, Wine, etc. Of this Fury there be diverse Of which read Faelix
Plater cap. 3. de mentis alienatione.
kinds, Extasis, Enthusiasmes, Revelations, and Visions, so often mentioned by
Gregory and Beda in their Works; Obsession, or Possession of devils, Sybilline
Prophets, and Poetical Furies: such as come by eating noxious Herbs,
Tarantulas stinging, etc. which some reduce to this. The most known are these,
Lycanthropia, Hydrophobia, Chorus sancti viti.

Lycanthropia, which Avicenna calls Cucubuth, Lycanthropia.
others Lupinam insaniam, or Woolfe madness, when men run howling about
graves and fields in the night, and will not be persuaded but that they are
Wolves, or some such beasts. Lib. 6. cap. 11.
Aetius and Lib. 3. cap. 16.
Paulus call it a kind of Melancholy, but I should rather refer it to
Madness, as most do. Some make a doubt of it, whether there be any such
Disease. Cap. 9. art. med.
Donat ab Altomari says, that he saw two such in his time: and De praestig.
damonum. lib. 3. c. 21.
Wieru^ tells a Story of such a one at Padua 1541, that would not believe to the
contrary, but that he was a Woolfe. He has another Story of a Spaniard, that
thought he was a Bear. Observat. lib. 10. de morbis cerebri. cap. 25.
Forestus confirms as much by many examples, one amongst the rest, of which he
was an eyewitness, at Alemar in Holland, of a poor Husbandman, that still
haunted about graves, and kept in Churchyards, of a pale, black, ugly, and
fearful look. Such belike, or little better, were King Praetus Hippocrates.
lib. de Insania.
Daughters, that thought themselves Kine: And Nebuchadnezzar in Daniel, as some
Interpreters hold, was only troubled with this kind of Madness. And this
Disease perhaps gave occasion to that bold assertion of Lib 2. cap. 8. homines
interdumlupos fieri, and econtra.
Pliny, that some men were turned into Wolves in his time, and from Wolves to
men again. And to that fable of Pausanias, of a man that was ten years a
Wolf, and afterward returned to his former shape. And Met. lib. 1.
Ouide tale of Lycaon. He that is desirous to hear of this Disease, or of more
examples, let him read Austin in his 1^. Book^ de Cevitate Dei. cap. 5.
Mizaldus cent. 5.77. Sckenkius lib. 1. Hildesheim spicel. 2. de Mania. Forestus
lib. 10. d^ de m^rbis cerebri, Olaus Magnus, etc. This Disease, says Avicenna,
troubles men most in February, and is now-a-dayes most frequent in Bohemia and
Hungary, says Cap. de Mania.
Hernius. They lie hid most part all day, and go abroad in the night, barking,
Vicerata crura sitis ipsis adest immodica, pallidi lingua sicca.
howling at graves and deserts, they have usually hollow eyes, and scabbed
legs and thighs, very dry and pale, says Cap. 9. art. Hydrophobia.
Altomarus: he gives a reason there of all the symptoms, and sets down a
brief cure of them.

Hydrophobia, is a kind of Madness, well known in every Village, which comes
by the biting of a mad dog, or scratching, says Lib. 3. cap. 9.
Aurelianus, or touching, or smelling alone sometimes, as Lib. 7. de Venenis.
Skenkius proves, and is incident to many other creatures as well as men: so
called, because the parties affected, cannot endure the fight of water, or any
liquor, supposing still they see the picture of a dog in it. And that which
is more wonderful, though they be very dry, (as in this malady they are) they
will rather dye, then drink. Lib. 3. cap. 13. de morbis acutis.
Caelius Aurelianus, an ancient Writer, makes a doubt whether this Hydrophobia,
be a passion of the Body, or the Mind. The part affected is the Brain, the
cause, poison that comes from the mad dog, which is so hot and dry, that it
consumes all the moisture in the body. Spicel. 2.
Hildesheim relates of some that died so mad, and being cut up, had no water,
scarce blood, or any moisture left in them. To such as are affected, the fear
of water begins at 14. days after they are bitten, to some again, not till
40. or 60. days after: commonly says Hernius they begin to rave, fly
water, and glasses, to look red and swell in the face, some ^0. days after
(if some remedy be not taken in the mean time) to lie awake, to be pensive
sad, to see strange Visions, to bark and howl, to fall into a sown, and
sometimes sittes of the Falling sickness. Skenkius 7. lib. de Venenis.
Some say, little change like whelps will be seen in their vrines. If any of
these signs appear, they are past recovery. Many times these symptoms will
not appear, till six or seven months after, says Lib. de Hydrophobia.
Codronchus, and sometimes not till seven year, and 18. years, Guisnerius,
12: Albertus: six or eight months after, Galen, Baldus the great Lawyer died
of it, an Austin Friar, and a woman in Delph^, that were Observat. lib. 10.25.
Forrestus Patients, were miserably consumed with it. The common cure in the
Country (for such at least as dwell near the Sea side) is to ducke them over
head and ears in Sea water; some use charms, every good wife can prescribe
Medicines. But the best cure to be had in such cases, is from the most
approved Physicians: they that will read of them, may consult with Diascorides
lib. 6. cap. 37. Hernius, Hildisheim, Capinaccius, Forrestus, Sckenkius, and
before all others Codronchus an Italian, who has lately written two Books of
this Subject.

Chorus sancti Viti, or Saint Vitus dance, Chorus Sancti Viti.
the lascivious dance. Lascivam choream. To. 4. de morbis amentium. Tract. 1.
Paracolsus calls it, because they that are taken with it, can do nothing but
dance till they be dead. It is so called, for that the parties so troubled,
were wont to go to Saint Vitus for help, and after they had danced there a
while, they were Eventu vt plurimu^ remipsa^ comprobante.
certainly freed. It Is strange to hear how long they will dance, and in what
manner, over stools, forms, tables, even great bellyed women sometimes (and
yet never hurt their child) will dance so long, that they can stir neither
hand nor foot, but seem to be quite dead. One in red clothes they cannot
abide. Music above all things they love, and therefore the Magistrates in
Germany will hire Musicians to play to them, and some lusty sturdy companions
to dance with them. This Disease has been very common in Germany, as appears
by those relations of Lib. 1. cap. de Mainaa.
Sckenkius, and Para^els^^ in his book of Madness, who bragges how many
several persons he has cured of it. Faelix Platter, de mentis alienat, cap.
3. reports of a woman in Basil whom he saw, that danced a whole month
together. The Arabians call it a kind of Palsye, Bodi^e in his 5. Book de
Repub. cap. 1. speaks of this infirmity, and Monauius in his last Epistle to
Scoltzius, and in another to Dudithus, where you may read more of it.

Cap. 3. de mentis alienatione.
Fuschius institut. lib. 3. sec. 1. cap. 11. Faelix Plater. Cap. 4. de Mel.
Laurentius add to these another Fury that proceeds from Love, and another
from Study, another divine or religious Fury, but these more properly belong to
Melancholy; of all which, I will speak PART. 3.
apart, intending to write a whole Book of them.

SVBSEC. 5. Melancholy in disposition, improperly so called. Aequivocations.
MElancholy, (...) subject of our present Discourse, is either in Disposition,
or in Habit. In Disposition, is that transitory Melancholy, which goes and
comes upon every small occasion of sorrow, need, sickness, trouble, fear,
grief, passion, or perturbation of the Mind, or any manner of care,
discontent, or thought, which causes anguish and vexation of the Spirits, any
ways opposite to pleasure, mirth, joy, delight, or causing frowardness in us,
or a dislike; In which Aequivocall and improper sense, we call any man
Melancholy, that is dull, heavy, sad, sour; lumpish, ill-disposed, solitary,
or any way moved, or displeased. And from these Melancholy Dispositions, De
quo homine securitas? de quo sertum gaudium? quocunque, se cenvertis in
terrenis rebus amaritudinem animae inveniet. Au^^^ in Psalm. 85.
no man living is free, no Stoicke, none so wise, none so happy, so patient, so
generous, so godly, so divine, that can vindicate himself, so well composed,
but more or less, sometime or other, he feels the smart of it. Job. 1.14.
Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, and full of troble.
Zeno, Cato, Socrates himself, whom Omni tempore Socratem eodem vultu videri
sive domum rediret, sive domo egrederetur.
Aelian so highly commends, for a moderate temper, that nothing could disturb
him, but going out, and coming in still Socrates kept the same countenance,
what misery soener befell him: if we may believe Plato his Disciple, was much
tormented with it Q. Metellus, in whom Lib. 7. cap. 1, natus in florentissima
totius Orbis ciuitate, nobiliss^^ parentibus, corporis vires habuit, and
rarissimas animi dotes, uxorem, conspicuam, pudicom, (...), liberos, consulare
decus, sequentes triumphos etc.
Valerius gives an instance of all happiness, the most fortunate man then
living, borne in that most flourishing city of Rome, of noble parentage, a
proper man of person, well qualified, healthful, rich, honorable, a Senator,
a Consul, happy in his wife, happy in his children, etc. yet this man was not
free from Melancholy, he had his share of sorrow. Aelian.
Polycrates Samius, that flung his ring into the Sea, because he would
participate of discontent with others, and had it miraculously restored to him
again shortly after, by a fish taken as no angled, was not free from
Melancholy dispotions. No man can secure himself, the very gods had bitter
pangs, and frequent passions, as their own Homer. Il.
Poets put upon them. In general, Lipsius cent. 3. ep. 45. vt coelum, sic nos
homines sumus illud ex intervallo nubibus obducitur and obscuratur.

In rosario flores spinis intermixti.

Vita similis aeri, vdum modo sudum, tempestas, serenitas, ita vices rerum sunt
praemia gaudiis, and sequaces curae.


as the heaven it self is, so is our life, sometimes fair, sometimes
ouercast, tempestious, and serene; as in a rose, flowers and prickells, in the
year it self, a temperate Summer sometimes, a hard Winter, a drought, and
then again pleasant showers: so is our life intermixed with joys, hopes,
fears, sorrows, calumnies: Invicem cedunt dolor and voluptas, there is a
succession of pleasure and pain. -- Lucretius. lib. 4.1124.
medio de font leporum,
Surgit amari aliquid quod in ipsis floribus angat.
Even in the midst of laughing, there is sorrow, as Prove. 14.3. extremu^
gaudii luctus occupat.
Solomon holds: even in the midst of all our Feasting and Iollity, as
Natalitia inquit celebrantur, nuptiae bic sunt at ibi quid celebratur quod non
dolet, quod non transit?
Austin infertes in his Com. on the 41. Psalm, there is sorrow and discontent.
Nothing so prosperous and pleasant, but it has Apuleius 4. florid. nihil
quicquam homini tam prosperum, divinitus datum, qu^in ei admixtum sit aliquid
difficultatis, vt etiam in amplissima quaqua laetitia, subsit quapiam vel parva
quarimonia, coniugatione quad^^ mellis, and fellis.
some Gall in it, some complaining, some grudging, it is alla (...), a mix't
passion. We are not here as those Angels, and celestial Powers, and Bodies,
Sun and Moon, to finish out course without all offense, with such constancy,
to continue for so many ages: but subject to infirmities, miseries, interrupt,
tossed and tumbled up and down, carried about with every small blast, often
molested and disquieted upon every small occasion, Caduca nimiru^m and
fragilia, and pueril^bus consen^anea crepundiis, sunt vta que vires and
opes-humanae vocantur, affluun^ sub^to, repent d^^abuntur, nullo in loco null
la^n persona, stabilibus nixa radicibus consistunt, sed incertissimo flatu
fortunae, quos in sublime extulerunt improviso recursu destitutos in profundi
miseriarum valle miserabiliter immergunt, Valerius lib. 6. cap. 11.
uncertain, brittle, and so is all that we trust unto. huic saeculo parum
aptus es aut potius omnium nest^orum conditionem ignoras, quibus reciproca
quodam nexu etc. Lorchanus Gallobelgicus. lib. 3. ad annum ^598.
And he that knows not this, and is not armed to endure it, is not fit to live
in this World, (as one condoles our time) he knows not the condition of it,
where with a reciprocal tie, pleasure and pain are still united, and succeeds
one another in a ring. Exi e mundo, get thee gone hence if thou can not
brook it, there is no way to avoid it, but to arm thy self with Patience,
with Magnanimity, to Horsum omnia studia dirigi debent, vt humana fortiter
feramus.
oppose thy self unto it, to suffer affliction as a good Soldier of Christ;
as 2 Timothy 2.
Paul advises, constantly to bear it. But for as much as so few can embrace
this good counsel of his, and use it aright, but rather as so many brute
beasts, give way to their passions, and voluntarily subject and precipitate
themselves into a Labyrinth of cares, woes, miseries; and suffer themselves to
be overcome by them, and cannot arm themselves with that patience as they
ought to do, it falls out oftentimes that these Dispositions become Habits,
and many Affects contemned, as Epist. 96 lib. 10. affectus frequentes
contemptique morbum faciunt, sicut Distillatio vna nec adhuc in morem adducta,
tussim facit, assidua and vetut phusim.
Seneca notes, makes a Disease. Even as one Distillation not yet grown to
custom, makes but a cough, but continual and inveterate, causes a
consumption of the lungs: so do these our Melancholy provocations, and
acco^ding as the humor it self is intended, or omitted in men, or that their
temperature of Body, or Rational soul is better able to make resistance; so
are they more or less affected. For that which is but as a flea-biting to one,
causes vns^fferable torment to another, and that which one by his singular
moderation, and well-composed carriage can happily overcome, a second is no
whit able to sustain: but upon every small occasion of grief, disgrace,
loss, cross, rumor, etc. yeeldes so far to passion, that his complexion is
altered, his digestion hindered, his sleep gone, his spirits obscur^d, and his
heart heavy, his Hypocond^ies missaffected, wind, crudity on a sudden overtake
him, and he himself overcome with Melancholy. So that as the Philosophers make
Calidum ad octo: frigidum ad octo.
eight degrees of heat and cold. We may make 88. of Melancholy, as the
parties affected are diversely seized with it, or have been plunged more or
less into this Infernal gulf, or waded deeper into it: but all these
Melancholy fits howsoever, pleasing at first, or displeasing, violent and
tyrannizing over those whom they sease on for the time, yet these men are but
improperly so called, Vna hirundo non fac^t aestatem.
because they continue not; but come and go, as by some objects they are
moved. This Melancholy on which we are to treat, is an Habit, morbus
sonticus, or Chronichus, a Chronick or continuate disease, a settled humor, as
Lib. 1. cap. 6.
Aurelianus, and Fuchsius lib 3. sec. 1. cap. 7. Hildisheim fol. 130.
others call it, not errant, but fixed, and as it was long increasing, so now
being (pleasant, or painful) grown to an habit, it will hardly be removed.

SEC. 1.
MEMB. 2.
SVBSEC. 4. Digression of Anatomy.
BEfore I proceed to define the Disease of Melancholy what it is, or to
discourse farther of it, I hold it not impertinent to make a brief Digression
of the Anatomy of the Body, and Faculties of the Soul, for the better
understanding of that which is to follow; because many hard words will often
occur, as Myrache, Hypocondries, Haemrods etc. Imagination, Reason, Humors,
Spirits, Vital, Natural, Animal, Nerves, Veins, Arteries, which of the
Vulgar will not be so easily perceived, what they are, how sited, and to what
end they serve. And besides, it may peradventure give occasion to some men, to
examine more accurately, and search farther into this most excellent Subject,
that have time and leisure enough, and are sufficiently informed in all other
worldly businesses; as to make a good bargain, buy, and sell, to keep and make
choice of a good Hawk, Hound, Horse etc. but for such matters as concern the
knowledge of themselves, they are wholly ignorant and careless, they know not
what this Body and Soul are, how combined, of what parts and Faculties they
consist, or how a man differs from a dog. And what can be more ignominous and
filthy (as De Anima, Turpe enim est homini ignorare sui corporis vt ita dicam
aedificium, praesertim cum ad valetudinem and mores, haec cognitio plurimum
conducat.
Melancton well inveighes) then for a man not to know the structure and
composition of his own Body, especially since the knowledge of it, tends so
much to the preservation of his health, and information of his manners. To
stir them up therefore to this study, to pervse those elaborate works of
Galen, Avicen, Bauhinus, Plater, Vesalius, Falopius, Laurentius, etc. which
have written copiously in Latin; or that which some of our industrious
Countrymen have done in our Mother Tongue, not long since, De vsu partium.
as that translation of History of Man.
Columbus, and D'Crooke.
Microcosmographia, in 13. books, I have made this brief Digression. Because
that which Syntaxi.
Weaker, De Anima.
Melancton, Institut. lib. 1.
Fernelius, Phisiol. lib. 1. and 2.
Fuschius, and those Tracts De Anima (which have more compendiously handled,
and written of this Matter) are not at all times ready to be had. To give them
some small taste, or notice of the rest, let this suffice.

SVBSEC. 2. Division of the Body. Humors, Spirits.
OF the parts of the Body, there be many Divisions: The most approved is that
of Anat. l.1. c. 18.
Laurentius, out of Hippocrates: That is, into parts Contained, or Containing.
Contained; are either Humors, Humors.
or Spirits.

A Humor is a liquid or fluent part of the Body, comprehended in it, for the
preservation of it, and it is either innate and borne with us, or adventitious
and acquisite. The Radical or innate, is daily supplied by nourishment, which
some call Cambium, and make those secundary Humors of Ros and Gluters to
maintain it: or acquisite, to maintain those four first primary Humors,
coming and proceeding from the first Concoction in the Liver, by which means
Chilus is excluded. Some divide them into profitable and excrementitious
Humors, Pituita and Blood profitable; the other two excrementitious. But In
Micro succos, sine quibus animal sustentari non potest.
Crato out of Hippocrates will have all four to be juice, and not excrements,
without which no living Creature can be sustained: which four, though they be
comprehended all in the Mass of the Blood, yet they have their several
affections, for which they are distinguished from one another, and from those
adventitious peccant, or Morbosos humores.
diseased humors, as Melancton calls them.

Blood, is a hot, sweet, temperate, red humor, Blood.
prepared in the Miseriacke veins, and made of the most temperate parts of the
Chilus in the liver, whose office is to norrish the whole Body, to give it
strength and color, being dispersed by the veins, through every part of it.
And from it Spirits are first begotten in the Heart, which afterward by the
Arteries, are communicated to the others parts

Pituita, or Fleame, is a cold and moist humor, Fleame.
begotten of the colder part of the Chilus, (or white juice coming of the
meat digested in the Stomach) in the Liver, his office is to nourish, and
moisten the Members of the Body, which as the tongue, are moved, that they be
not over-drye.

Choler, is hot and dry, bitter, Choler.
begotten of the hotter parts of the Chilus, and gathered to the Gall: it
helps the natural heat, and senses, and serves to the expelling of
excrements.

Melancholy, cold and dry, thick, black, sour, Melancholy
begotten of the more faeculent part of nourishment, and purged from the
Spleen, is a bridle to the other two hot Humors, Blood, and Choler,
preserving them in the Blood, and nourishing the Bones: These four Humors have
some Analogy with the four Elements, and to the four Ages in Man.

To these Humors, you may add Serum, Serum, Sweats, Tears.
which is the matter of Urine, and those excrementitious Humors, of the third
Concoction, Sweat, and Tears.

Spirit, is a most subtle vapor, Spirits.
which is expressed from the Blood, and the Instrument of the Soul, to
perform all his Actions, a common tie or medium, betwixt the Body and the
Soul, as some will have it, or as Spiritalis anima.
Paracelsus, a fourth Soul of it self. Melancthon holds the Fountain of these
Spirits to be the Heart, begotten there, and afterward convayed to the Brain,
they take an other nature to them. Of these Spirits there be three kinds,
according to the three principal parts, Brain, Heart, Liver; Natural,
Vital, Animal. The Natural are begotten in the Liver, and thence dispersed
through the Veins, to perform those natural actions. The Vital Spirits are
made in the Heart of the Natural, which by the Arteries, are transported to
all the other parts: if these Spirits cease, the Life cease, as in a Syncope
or Swouning. The Animal Spirits are formed of the Vital, brought up to the
Brain, and diffused by the Nerves, to the other Members, give sense and motion
to them all.

SVBSEC. 3. Simular Parts.
COntaining Parts by reason of their more solid substance, Simular parts.
are either Homogeniall, or Hetrogeniall, Simular, or Dissimular: so Aristotle
divides them, lib. 1. cap. 1. de hist. Animal. Laurentius cap. 20. lib. 1.
Simular or Homogeniall, are such, as if they be divided, are still divided into
parts of the same nature, as water into water. Of these, some be Spermaticall,
some Fleshy, or Carnal. Laurentius cap. 20. lib. 1. Anat.
Spermaticall are such as are immediately begotten of the Seed, which are Bones,
Grisles, Ligaments, Membranes, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Skins, Fibers, or
Strings, Fat.

The Bones are dry and hard, Bones.
begotten of the thickest of the Seed, to strengthen and sustain the other
parts: some say there be 304, some 307, or 313 in a Man's body. They have no
nerves in them, and are therefore without sense.

A Gristle, is a substance softer then Bones, and harder then the rest,
flexible, and serves to maintain the parts of motion.

Ligaments, are they that tie the Bones together, and other parts to the Bones,
with their subseruing tendons: Membranes office is to cover the rest.

Nerves or sinews, are Membranes without, Nerves.
and full of Marrow within, they proceed from the Brain, and carry the
Animal Spirits for sense and motion. Of these some be harder, some softer; the
softer serve the senses, and there be seven pair of them. The first be the
Opticke Nerves, by which we see; the second move the Eyes; the third pair
serve for the Tongue for taste; the fourth pair for taste in the Palate; the
fifth serve the Ears; the sixth pair is most ample, and runs almost over all
the Bowels; the seventh pair move the Tongue. The harder Sinews serve for
the motion of the Inner parts, proceeding from the Marrow in the Back, of whom
there be thirty Combinations, seven of the Neck, twelve of the Breast, etc.

Arteries, are long and hollow, Arteries.
with a double skin to convay the vital spirits, to discern which the better,
they say that Vesalius the Anatomist was wont to cut up men alive. In these
they observe the beating of the Pulse.
They arise in the left side of the heart, and are principally two, from which
the rest are derived, Aorta and Venosa. Aorta is the root of all the other,
which serve the whole body; the other goes to the lungs, to fetch air to
refrigerate the Heart.

Veins, are hollow and round like pipes, Veins.
arising from the Liver, carrying blood and natural spirits, they feed all the
parts. Of these there be two chief, Vena porta, and Vena Caua, from which the
rest are corrivated. That Vena porta is a Vein, coming from the concaue of
the liver, and receiving all those meseriacall veins, by whom he takes the
Chilus from their stomach and guts, and conveies it to the Liver. The other
convaies blood from the liver to nourish all the other dispersed members. The
branches of that Vena porta, are the Meseriacall and Haemorroides. The branches
of the Caua, are inward, or outward. Inward seminall or emulgent. Outward in
the head, arms, feet, etc. and have several names.

Fibrae or strings, white and solid dispersed through the whole member,
Fibrae, Fat, Flesh.
and are right, oblique, transuerse, all which have their several uses. Fat,
is a simular part moist without blood, composed of the most thick and unctuous
matter of the blood. The Cutis est pars simularis a vi cutifica, vt interiora
muniat. Capiuacc Anat. page 252.
skin couers the rest, and has Cuticulam or a little skin under it. Flesh
is soft and ruddy, composed of the congealing of blood, etc.

SVBSECT. 4. Dissimular parts.
DIssimular parts, are those which we call Organicall or Isntrumental, and
they be Inward or Outward. The chiefest outward parts are situate forward or
backward. Inward, the crown and forepart of the head, scull, face, forehead,
temples, chinne, eyes, ears, nose, etc. neck, breast, chest, upper and lower
part of the belly, hypocondries, navell, groyne, stanks, etc. Backward, the
hinder part of the head, back, shoulders, sides, loins, hyp-bones, os sacrum,
buttockes, etc. Or joints, arms, hands, feet, legs, thighs, knees, etc. Or
common to both, which because they are obuious and well known, I have
carelessly repeated, eaque praecipua and grandiora tantum, quod reliquum, ex
libris de anima, qui volet, accipiat.

Inward Organicall parts which cannot be seen, are diverse in number, and have
several names, functions, and divisions, but that of Anat. lib. 1 c. 19,
Celebris est and pervulgata partium divisio in principes and ignobiles parts.
Laurentius is most famous, into Noble or Ignoble parts. Of the noble there be
three principal parts to which all the rest belong, and whom they serve,
Brain, Heart, Liver. According to whose site, three Regions, or a threefold
division is made of the whole Body. As first of the Head in which the Animal
Orgaines are contained, and Brain it self, which by his Nerves gives sense
and motion to the rest, and is as it were a privy Counselor, and Chancellor
to the Heart. The second Region is the Chest, or middle Belly, in which the
Heart as king keeps his court, and by his Arteries communicates life to the
whole body. The third Region is the lower Belly in which the liver resides, as
a legate a latere, with the rest of those natural Organes, serving for
concoction, nourishment, expelling of excrements. This lower Region is
distinguished from the upper by the Midriffe, or Diaphragma, and is subdivided
again by D. Crook out of Gallen and others.
some into three concauiti^s, or regions, upper, middle, and lower. The upper
of the Hypocondries, in whose right side is the Liver, the left the Spleen.
From which is denominated Hypocondriacall Melancholy. The second of the Navell
and Flancks, divided from the first by the Rimme. The last of the watercourse,
which is again subdivided into three other parts. The Arabians make two parts
of this Region, Epigastrium, and Hypogastrium. Upper or lower. E^igastrium they
call Mirach, from whence comes Myrachialis Melancholia, sometimes mentioned of
them. Of these several Regions I will treat in brief and apart. and first of
the third Region, in which the natural Organs are contained.

But you that are Readers in the mean time, Suppose you were now brought into
some sacred Temple, or maiesticall Palace (as Vos vero veluti in templum ac
sacrarium quoddam vos duci putetis, etc Suauis and vtilis cognitio. The lower
Region Natural Organs.
Melanthon says) to behold not the matter only, De anima,
but the singular art and workmanship, and counsel of this our great Creator.
And it is a pleasant and profitable speculation, if it be considered aright. The
parts of this Region which present themselves to your consideration and view,
are such as serve to nutrition or generation. Those of Nutrition serve to the
first or second concoction. As the oesophagus or Gullet which brings meat and
drink into the Stomach. The Ventricle or stomach, which is seated in the
midst of that part of the belly beneath the Midriffe, the kitchen as it were of
the first concoction, and which turns our meat into Chilus: It has two
mouths, one above, another beneath. The upper is sometimes taken for the
stomach it self; the lower or nether door (as Wecker calls it) is named
Pylorus. This stomach is sustained by a large Kell or Ka^ll, called Omentum.
Which some will have the same which Paeritoneum, or rimme of the belly. From
the Stomach to the very Fundament, are produced the Guts or Intestina, which
serve a little to alter and distribute the Chilus, and convey away the
excrements. They are divided into small and great, by reason of their site and
substance, slender or thicker. The slender is Duodenum or whole gutte, which is
next to the stomach, some twelve inches long, says Lib. 1. cap. 12. Sect. 5.
Fucshius. I^iunum or empty gutt continuate to the other, which has many
Meseriacke Veins annexed to it, which take part of the Chilus to the liver
from it. Ilion the third, which consists of many crinckles, which serves with
the rest to receive, keep, and distribute the Chilus from the Stomach. The
thick guts are three, the Blind gut, Colon, and Right gut. The Blind is a
thick and short gut, having one mouth in which the Ilion and Colon meet: It
receaues the excrements, and convayes them to the Colon. This Colon has many
windings, that the excrements pass not away to fast. The Right gut is
straight, and convayes the excraments to the Fundament, whose lower part is
bound up with certain Musckles, called Sphincteres, that the excrements may be
the better contained, until such time a man be willing to go to the stool.
In the midst of these guts is situated the Mysenterium or Midriffe, composed of
many Veins, Arteries, and much fat, serving chiefly to sustain the guts. All
these parts serve the first concoction. To the second, which is busied either
in refining the good nourishment, or expelling the bad, is chiefly belonging
the Liver, like in color to congealed blood, the shop of blood, situate in the
right Hypocondry, in figure like to an half moon, Generosum membrum,
Melancton styles it; a generous part, it serves to turn the Chilus to blood,
for the nourishment of the body. The excrements of it are either Choleric or
Watery, Which the other subordinate parts convay. The Gaul placed in the
concaue of the Liver, extracts Choler to it, the Spleen. Melancholy, which is
situate on the left side overagainst the Liver, a spungy matter, which draws
this black choler to it by a secret virtue, and seeds upon it, convaying the
rest to the bottom of the stomach, to stir up appetite, or else to the guts
as an excrement. That watery matter the two Kidneys expurgate, by those
emulgent veins, and Vreteres: The emulgent draw this superfluous moisture
from the blood, the two Vreteres convay it to the Bladder; which by reason of
his site in the lower belly, is apt to receive it, having two parts, neck and
bottom: the bottom holds the water, the neck is constringed with a muscle,
which as a porter keeps the water from running out against our will.

Members of generation are common to both sexes, or peculiar to one; which
because they are impertinent to my purpose, I do voluntarily omit.

Next in order is the middle Region, Middle Region.
or chest which comprehends the vital faculties and parts: which as I have
said is separated from the lower belly, by the Diaphragma or Midriffe, which is
a skin consisting of many nerves, membranes, and amongst other uses it has,
it is the instrument of laughing. There is also a certain thin membrane full
of Sinews, which covers the whole chest within, and is called Pleura, the
seat of the disease called Pleurisy, when it is inflamed; some add a third
skin, which is called Mediastinus, which divides the chest into two parts,
right and left. Of this Region the principal part is the Heart, which is the
seat and fountain of life, of heat, of spirits, of pulse and respiration, the
Son of our body, the king and sole commander of it: The seat and organe of
all passions and affections, Primum viuens vltimum moriens, it lives first and
dies; last in all creatures. Of a paramidicall form, and not much unlike to a
Pineapple, a part worthy of Haec res est praecipue digna admiratione, quod
tanta affectuum varietate cietur cor, quod omnes restristes and laetae statim
corda feriunt and mouent
admiration, that can yield such variety of affections, by whose motion he is
dilated or contracted, to stir and command the humors in the body. As in
sorrow, melancholy; in anger, choler; in joy to send the blood outwardly, in
sorrow to call it in; moving the humors as Horses do a Chariot. This Heart
though it be one sole member, yet it may be divided into two creekes; Right
and Left. The Right is like the Moon increasing, bigger then the other part,
and receaues blood from Vena Caua, distributing some of it to the Lunges to
nourish them, the rest to the left side to engender spirits. The left creek
has the form of a Cone, and is the seat of life: which as a torch does oil,
draws blood unto it, begetting of it spirits and fire; and as fire is in a
torch, so are spirits in the blood, and by that great Artery called Aorta, he
sends vital spirits all over the body, and takes air from the Lungs, by that
Artery which is called Venosa; So that both creekes have their vessels, the
right two Veins, the left two Arteries, besides those two common aufractuous
ears which serve them both, the one to hold blood, the other air, for
several uses. The Lunges is a thin spungy part like an Ox huffe, says
Phisiol. l. 1. c. 8.
Fernelius, the town Clarke or Crier ( Vt orator Regi: sic pulmo vocis
instrumtum annectitur cordi, etc. Melancthon.
one terms it) the instrument of voice, as an Orator to a King annexed to the
Heart, to express his thoughts by voice. That it is the instrument of voice,
it is manifest, in that no creature can speak, or utter any voice that wants
these lights. It is besides the instrument of respiration, or breathing: and
his chief office is to cool the Heart, by sending air unto it, by the
Venosall Artery, which vein comes to the lungs by that aspera arteria, which
consists of many grisles, membranes, nerves, taking in air at the nose and
mouth, and by it likewise exhales the fumes of the Heart.

In the upper Region serving the animal faculties, upper Region
the chief Organ is the Brain, which is a soft marrowish and white substance,
engendered of the purest part of seed and spirits, included by many skins, and
seated within the skull or braine-pan, and it is the most nobled Organe under
Heaven, the dwelling house and seat of the soul, the habitation of wisdom,
memory, judgment, Reason, and in which man is most like unto God, and
therefore nature has covered it with a skull of hard bone, and two skins or
membranes, whereof the one is called dura matter or meninx, the other pia matter.
The dura matter is next to the skull, above the other, and includes and protects
the brain. When this is tataken away the pia matter is to be seen, a thin
membrane, the next and immediate cover of the brain, and not covering only but
entering into it. The Brain it self is divided into two parts, the fore and
hinderpart; the forepart is much bigger then the other, which is called the
little brain in respect of it. This forepart has many concavities,
distinguished by certain ventricles, which are the Receptacles of the Spirits,
brought thither by the Arteries from the Heart, and are there refined to a more
heavenly nature, to perform the actions of the Soul. Of these ventricles
there be three, Right, Left, and Middle. The Right and Left answer to their
site, and beget animal spirits; if these be any way hurt, sense and motion
cease. These ventricles moreover, are held to be the seat of the common
sense. The Middle ventricle, is a common concurse and cauity of both; and has
two passages, the one to receive Pituita, the other extends it self to the
fourth creek, in this they place Imagination, and Cogitation, and so the three
ventricles of the forepart of the Brain are used. The fourth Creek behind
the head is common to the Cerebell or little brain, and marrowe of the
backbone, the least and most sollid of all the rest, which receaues the animal
spirit from the other ventricles, and convaies them to the marrowe in the
back, and is the place where they say the memory is seated.

SVBSECT. 5. Of the Soul and his faculties.
ACcording to 2 -De anima cap. 1.
Aristotle, the Soul is defined to be (...), perfectio and actus primus
corporis Organici, vitam habentis in potentia: the perfection or first Act of
an Organicall Body, having power of life, which most Scaliger. exercit. 307.
Tollet. in lib. de anima cap. 1. etc.
Philosophers approve. But many doubts arise about the Essence, Subject, Seat,
Distinction, an subordinate faculties of it. For the Essence and particular
knowledge of it, of al other things it is most hard (be it of Man or Beast) to
discern, as 1. De anima cap. 1.
Aristotle himself, Tuscul. quaest.
Tully, Lib. 6. Doctor Val. Gentil. c. 13. page 1216.
Picus Mirandula Aristot.
Tolet, and other Neotericke Philosophers confess. Anima quaeque intelligimus,
and tamen quae sit ipsa intelligere non valemus.
We can understand all things by her, but what she is we cannot apprehend.
Some there fore make one Soul, divided into three principal faculties,
others, three distinct Souls. Which question of late has bin much
controuerted by Picolominaeus, and Zabarel Spiritualem animam a reliquis
distinctam, tuetur, etiam in cadauere inhaerentem post mortem per aliquot
menses.
Paracelsus will have four Souls, adding to the three granted faculties, a
Spiritual Soul. And Coelius lib. 2. cap. 31. Plutarc. in Grillo. Lips. Cent.
1. epist. 50 Jossius de Risu and Fletu.
some again, one soul of all Creatures whatsoever, differing only in Organs.
And that Beasts have reason as well as Men, though for some defect of Organs
not in such measure. Some make a doubt whether it be all in all, and all in
every part, which is amply discussed in Zabarel amongst the rest. The Philip.
de anima cap. 1. Coelius 20 antiquit. cap. 3. Plutarch. de placit. Philos.
common Division of the Soul, is into three principal faculties; Vegetall,
Sensitive, and Rational, which make three distinct kind of living Creatures:
Vegetall Plants, Sensible Beasts, Rational Men. How these three principal
faculties are distinguished and connected, Humano ingenio inaccessum videtur;
is beyond humane capacity, as De vit. and mort. part. 2 c. 3. prop. 1. De vit.
and mort 2. c. ^2. Vegetal soul. Subsect 2.
Taurellus, Philip, Flauius, and others suppose. The inferior may be alone, but
the superior cannot subsist without the other; as Sensible includes Vegetall,
Rational both, which are contained in it, says Aristotle, vt Trigonus
tetragono. As a Triangle in a Quadrangle.

Vegetall, the first of the three distinct faculties, is defined to be a
substantial Act of an Organicall body, by which it is nourished, augmented,
and begets another like unto it self. In which definition three several
operations are specified, the first is Nutritio est alimenti transmutatio viro
naturalis, Scal exerc. 101. Sec. 17. Attraction.
Nutrition, whose object is nourishment, meat, drink, and the like, his Organ
the Liver in sensible creatures, in Plants the root or sap. His office is, to
turn the nutrime^t into the substance of the body nourished, which he
performs by natural heat. This nutritive operation has four other
subordinate functions, or powers belongiug to it, Attraction, Retention,
Digestion, Expulsion. See more of Attraction in Scal. exerc. 343.
Attraction is a ministering faculty, which as a Lodestone does Iron, draws
meat into the stomach, or as a lamp draws oil, and this attractiue power is
very necessary in Plants, which suck up moisture by the root, as another mouth
into the sap, or another stomach. Retention keeps it being attracted into the
stomach, Retention.
until such time it be concocted, for if it should pass away straight, the
body could not be nourished. Digestion, Digestion.
is performed by natural heat, as the heat of a torch consumes oil, wax,
tallowe: so does it alter and digest the nutritive matter. Indigestion is
opposite unto it, for want of natural heat. Of this Digestion there be three
differences, Maturation, Maturation.
Elixation, Assation. Maturation, is especially observed in the fruits of
trees: which are then said to be ripe, when the feeds are fit to be sown
again. Cruditie is opposed to it, to which gluttons, Epicures, and idle
persons are most subject, which use no exercise to stir up natural heat, or
choke it, as to much wood puts out a fire. Elixation, Elixation.
is the boiling of meat in the stomach, by the said natural heat, as meat is
boiled in a pot to which corruption or putrefaction is opposite. Besides these
three several operations of Digestion, Order of concoction fourefold.
there is a fourefold order of concoction, Mastication or chewing in the mouth,
C^ylification of this so chewed meat in the stomach: The thitd is in the Liver
to turn this Chylus into blood. The last is Assimilation, which is in every
part. Expulsion.
Expulsion is a power of Nutrition, by which he expells all superfluous
excrements, and relics of meat and drink by the gutts, bladder, pores; as by
purging, vomiting, spitting, sweating, urine, hairs, nails, etc.

As this Nutritive faculty serves to nourish the Body, Augmentatis.
so does the Augmenting faculty (the second operation or power of the Vegetall
faculty) to the increasing of it in quantity, according to all Dimensions,
long, broad, thick, and to make it grow, til it come to his due proportion
and perfect shape: which has his period of augmentation, as of consumption and
that mo^^ ^ertaine, as the Poet observes: Stat sua cuique dies breue and
irreperabile tempus
Omnibus est vitae. --
A term of life is set to every man,
Which is but short; and pass it not one can.


The last of these Vegetall faculties is Generation, Generation.
which begets another, by means of seed like unto it self, to the perpetual
preservation of the Species. To this faculty they ascribe three subordinate
operations: The first to turn nourishment into seed, etc.

Life and death concomitants of the Vegetall faculties.
Necessary concomitants or affections of this Vegetall faculty is life, and
his privation death. To the preservation of life the natural heat is most
requisite, though siccitie and humidity, and those first qualities be not
excluded. This heat is likewise in Plants, as appears by their increasing,
fructifying etc. though not so easily perceived; In all bodies it must have
radical Vita consistit in calido and humido.
moisture to preserve it, that it be not consumed, to which preservation our
clime, country, temperature, and the good or bad use of those six non natural
things avail much. For as this natural heat and moisture decay, so does our
life it self, and if not prevented before by some violent accident, or
interrupted through our own default, is in the end dried up by old age, and
extinguished by death for want of matter, as a lamp for want of oil to
mainetaine it.

SVBSECT. 6. Of the sensible Soul.
NExt in order is the Sensible Faculty, which is as far beyond the other in
dignity, as a Beast is preferred to a Plant, having those Vegetall powers
included in it. It is defined an Act of an organicall Body, by which it lives,
has sense, appetite, Judgment, breath, and motion. His object ingenerall is a
sensible or passible quality, because the sense is affected by it. The
general Organ is the Brain, from whom principally the sensible operations be
derived. This Sensible Soul is divided into two parts, Apprehending, or
Moving. By the Apprehensiue power we perceive the Species of Sensible things
present or absent, and retain them as wax does the print of a Seal. By the
Moving, the Body is outwardly carried from one place to another: or inwardly
moved by Spirits and Pulse. The Apprehensiue faculty is subdivided into two
parts, Inward, or Outward. Outward as the five senses. Of Touching, Hearing,
Seeing, Smelling, Tasting; to which you may add Scaligers sixth sense of
Titillation, if you please. Inward are three; Common sense, Fantasy, Memory.
Those five outward Senses, have their object in outward things only, and such
as are present, as the eye sees no color except it be at hand, the Ear sound.
Three of these Senses are of commodity, Hearing, Sight, Smell: Two of
necessity, Touch, and Taste, without which we cannot live. Besides the
Sensitive power is Active, or Passive, Active, as in sight, the eye sees the
color; Passive as it is hurt by his object, as the eye by the Sunne-beames.
According to that Axiom, Visibile forte destruit sensum. Or if the object be
not pleasing, as a bad sound to the ear, a stinking smell to the nose, etc.
Sight.
Of these five Senses, Sight is held to be most precious, and the best, and
that by reason of his object, it sees all the body at once, by it we learn,
and discern all things, a sense most excellent for use. To the Sight three
things are required, the Object, the Organ, and the Medium. The Object in
general is Visible, or that which is to be seen, as colors and all shining
bodies. The Medium is the illumination of the air, which comes from Lumen est
actus persp^cui. Lumen a luce prouenit lux in corpore lucido,
light, commonly called Diaphanum, for in dark we cannot see: the Organ is the
Eye, and chiefly the apple of it; which by those opticke Nerves, concurring
both in one, convayes the sight to the common sense. Betwixt the Organ and
Object a true distance is required, that it be not too near, or too far of.
Many excellent questions appertain to this sense, discussed by Philosophers,
as whether this sight be caused Intra mittendo, vel extra mittendo, etc. By
receiving in the visible Species, or sending of them out, which Satur. 7. c. 14.
Plato, In Phaedon.
Plutarch, Lac. c 8. de opif. de 1.
Macrobius, De pract. Philos. 4.
Lactantius, and others dispute. And besides it is the subject of the
Perspectiues, of which Alhasen the Arabian, Vitell^, Roger Bacon, Baptista
Porta, Guidus Vbaldus, etc. have written whole volumes.

Hearing, Hearing.
a most excellent outward sense, by which we learn and get knowledge. His
object is sound or that which is heard; the Medium the air, the Organ the
ear. To the sound which is a collision of the air, three things are required;
a body to strike, as the hand of a Musician, the body stricken, which must be
solid and able to resist; as a bell, lute-string, not wool or sponge: the
Medium, the air, which is Inward or Outward; The Outward being stroke or
collided by a solid body, still strikes the next air, until it come to that
inward natural air, which as an exquisite Organ is contained in a little
skin formed like a drum head, and struck upon by certain small instruments
like drum-stickes, conuayes the sound by a pair of Nerves, appropriated to
that use, to the common sense, as to a judge of sounds. There is great variety
and much delight in them, for the knowledge of which consult with Boethius, and
other Musicians.

Smelling.
Smelling, is an outward sense which apprehends by the Nostrills drawing in
air. And of all the rest it is the weakest sense in men. The Organ is the
Nose, or two little hollow pieces of flesh a little above it: the Medium the
air to men, as water to fish: the Object, Smell, arising from a mixed Body
resolved, which whether it be a quality, fume, or vapor, or exhalation, I will
not now dispute, or of their differences, and how they are caused. This sense
is an Organ of health, as Sight and Hearing, says Lib. 19. cap. 2.
Agellius, are of discipline, and that by avoiding bad smells, as by choosing
good, which do as much alter and affect the body many times, as Diet it self.

Taste.
Taste, a necessary sense, which perceaues all sauors by the Tongue and pallet,
and that by means of a thin spittle, or watery juice. His Organ is the
Tongue with his tasting nerves, the Medium a watery juice, the Object, Taste, or
savor, which is a quality in the juice, arising from the mixture of the things
tasted. Some make eight Species or kinds of sauors, bitter, sweet, sharp,
salt, etc. all which sick men (as in an ague) cannot discern, by reason of
their Organs misaffected.

Touch, the last of the senses and most ignoble, Touching.
yet of as great necessity as the other, and of as great pleasure. This sense
is exquisite in men, and by his nerves dispersed all over the Body, perceaues
any tactile quality. His Organ the Nerves: his Object is those first qualities,
hot, dry, moist, cold, and those that follow them, hard, soft, thick, thin,
etc. Many delightsome questions are moved by Philosophers about these five
senses; their Organs, Objects, Mediums, which for breuity sake I omit.

SVBSEC. 7. Of the Inward Senses.
INner Senses are three in number, so called because they are within the
braine-panne, as Common Sense, Fantasy, Common Sense.
Memory. Their objects are not only things present, but they perceive the
sensible Species of things to Come, Past, Absent, such as were before in the
sense. This common sense is the Judge or Moderator of the rest, by whom we
discern all differences of objects; for by mine eye I do not know that I
see, or by mine ear that I hear, but by my common sense, who judges of
Sounds, Colors: they are but the Organs to bring the Species to be censured,
so that all their objects are his, and all their offices his: The forepart of
the brain is his Organ or seat.

Fantasy, or Imagination, which some call Aestimatiue, Fantasy.
or Cogitatiue, confirmed, says Phis. l. 5. c. 8.
Fernelius, by frequent meditation, is an inner sense, which does more fully
examine the Species perceived by common sense, of things present or absent, and
keeps them longer, recalling them to mind again, or making new of his own.
In time of sleep this faculty is free, and many times conceaues strange,
stupend, absurd shapes as in sick men we commonly observe. His Organ is the
middle cell of the Brain, his Objects all the Species communicated to him by
the Common sense, by comparison of which he faines infinite other unto
himself. In Melancholy men this faculty is most powerful and strong, and
often hurt, producing many monstrous and prodigious things, especially if it be
stirred up by some terrible object, presented to it from common sense, or
memory. In Poets and Painters Imagination forcibly works, as appears by their
several fictions, Antickes, Images: As Ovids house of sleep, Psyches palace
in Apuleius, etc. In men it is subject and governed by Reason, or at least
should be, but in Brutes it has no superior, and is Ratio Brutorum, all the
reason they have.

Memory.
Memory lays up all the Species which the Senses have brought in, and records
them as a good Register, that they may be forth-comming when they are called
for by Fantasy and Reason. His object is the same with Fantasy, his Seat
and Organ the back part of the brain.

The affections of these Senses, are Sleep and Waking, common to all sensible
creatures. Sleep is a rest or binding of all the outward senses, and of the
common sense, for the preservation of body and soul, Affections of the Senses,
Sleep, and Waking.
as Exercit. 280.
Scaliger defines it. For when the common sense rests, the outward senses
rest also. The Fantasy alone is free, and his commander Reason, as appears
by those Imaginary dreams, which are of diverse kinds, Natural, Divine,
Daemoniacall, etc. Which vary according to humors, Diet, Actions, Objects,
etc. of which Artimedorus and Cardan have written great volumes. This ligation
of senses proceeds from an inhibition of Spirits, the way being stopped by
which they should come, which stopping is caused of vapors arising out of the
stomach, which fill the Nerves, by which the spirits should be convayed. When
these vapors are spent the passage is open, and the spirits perform their
accustomed duties, so that Waking is the action and motion of the senses, which
the spirits dispersed over all parts, cause.

SVBSECT. 8. Of the Moving Faculty.
THis Moving Faculty, is the other power of the Sensatiue soul, which
causes all those Inward, and Outward animal motions in the body. It is divided
into two faculties, the power of Appetite, and of Moving from place to place.
Appetite.
This of Appetite is threefold, as some will have it, Natural, as it signifies
any such inclination, as of a stone to fall downward, and such actions as
Retention, Expulsion, which depend not of sense, but are Vegetall, as the
Appetite of meat, and drink, hunger, and thirst. Sensitive is common to Men
and Brutes. Voluntary the third or intellectiue which commands the other two
in men, and is a curb unto them, or at least should be: but for the most part
is captiuated and overruled by them, and men are led like beasts by sense,
giving raines to their concupiscence, and several lusts. For by this appetite
the Soul is led or inclined, to follow that good which the senses shall
approve, or avoid that which they hold evil, his Object being good or evil,
the one he embraces, the other he rejects. According to that Aphorism,
Omnia appetunt bonum, all things seek their own good, or at least seeming
good. This power is inseparable from sense, for where sense is, there is
likewise pleasure and pain. His Organ is the same with the Common sense, and
is divided into two powers, or inclinations, Concupiscible or Irascible: or as
T.W. Jesuit, in his passions of the mind.
one translates it, Coveting, or Anger-inuading, Impugning. Concupiscible
couets always pleasant and delightsome things, and abhorres that which is
distasteful, harsh, or unpleasant. Irascible, Velcurio.
quasi aversans per iram and odium, as avoiding it with anger and indignation.
All affections and perturbations arise out of these two fountains, which
although the Stoics make light of; we hold natural, and not to be resisted.
The good affections are caused by some object of the same nature, and if
present they procure joy, which dilates the Heart, and preserues the body: If
absent, they cause Hope, Love, Desire, Co^cupisce^ce. The Bad are Simple, or
mixed: Simple for some bad object present, as sorrow which contracts the Heart,
macerates the Soul, subuerts the good estate of the body, hindering all the
operations of it, causing Melancholy, and many times death it self: or future
as Fear. Out of these two arise those mixed affections, and passions of anger,
which is a desire of revenge, Hatred which is inveterate anger, Zeal which is
offended with him which hurts that he loves, and (...) a compound affection of
Joy and Hate, when we rejoice at other men's mischief, and are grieved at
their prosperity, Pride, Self-love, Emulation, Envy, Shame, etc. of which
elsewhere.

Moving from place to place, is a faculty necessarily following the other. For
in vain were it otherwise to desire and to abhor, if we had not likewise
power to prosecute or eschew, by moving the body from place to place: by this
faculty therefore we locally move the whole body, or any part of it, and go
from one place to another. To the better performance of which three things are
requisite. That which moves, by what it moves, that which is moved. That which
moves is either the efficient cause or end. The end is the object, which is
desired or eschewed; as a Dog to catch a Hare, etc. The efficient cause in man
in Reason, or his subordinate Fantasy, which apprehends this good or bad
object, in Brutes Imagination alone which moves the Appetite, the Appetite this
faculty, which by an admirable league of nature, and by mediation of the
spirits, commands the Organe by which it moves: and that consists of Nerves,
Muscles, cords, dispersed through the whole body, and contracted and relaxed
as the Spirits will, which move the Muscles, or Nerui a spiritu mouentur,
spiritus ab anima, Mela^cthon.
Nerves in the midst of them, and draw the cord, and so per consequens the
joint to the place intended. That which is moved is the body, or some member
apt to move. The motion of the body is diverse, as going, running, leaping,
dancing, sitting, and such like, referred to the predicament of Situs. Worms
creep, Birds fly, Fishes swim: and so of parts, the chief of which is
Respiration or breathing, which is thus performed, the outward air is drawn
in by the vocal Artery, and sent by mediation of the Midriffe to the Lungs,
which dilating themselves as a pair of bellows, reciprocally fetch it in and
send it out to the heart to cool it: and from thence now being hot convay it
again, still taking in fresh. Such a like motion is that of the Pulse, of
which because many have written whole books, I will say nothing.

SVBSEC. 9. Of the Rational Soul.
IN the precedent Subsections, I have anatomised those inferior Faculties of
the Soul; the Rational remains, a pleasant, but a doubt full Subject, as
Velcurio. Iucundum and anceps subiectu^.
one terms it, and with the like brevity to be discussed. Many erroneous
opinions are about the Essence and Original of it, how it comes into the Body.
Some hold that it is ex traduce, as Phil. 1. de Anima, Tertullian, Avicenna,
and many Goclenius in (...) page 302. Bright. in Phis. Scrib. lib. 1. etc.
late Writers, that one man begets another, Body and Soul: or as a candle from
a candle, to be produced from the Seed. Lib. an mores sequantur. etc.
Galen holds the Soul Crasin esse, to be the Temperature it self. The Read
Aeneas Gazeus Dial, of the immortality of the Soul.
Pythagorians hold Metempsychosis, and Palingenesia, that Souls go from one
body to another, as men into Wolves, Bears, Dogs, Hogs, as they were
inclined in their lives. In Gallo.
Lucians Cock was first Euphorbus a Captain, a Horse, a Man, a Sponge,
Nicephorus hist. lib. 10. cap. 35.
Julian the Apostata, thought Alexanders Soul was descended into his Body.
Plato in his Phaedon, for ought I can perceive, differs not much from this
opinion, that it was from God at first, and knew all, but being enclosed in the
Body, it forgets, and learnes anew, which he calls Reminiscentiam, or recalling,
and that it was put into the Body at first for a punishment, and thence it goes
into a beasts, and after Phaedro.
10000 years, is to return into the former body again. Others deny the
immortality of it, which Pomponatius of Padua decided out of Aristotle, not
long since. Plinius Auunculus cap. 7. lib. 2. and lib. 7. cap. 55. Lucretius
lib. 1. Averroes. Others grant the immortality of it, but they make many
fabulous fictions in the mean time of it, after the departure from the Body.
Like Plato's Elisian Fields, and that Turkey Paradise, the Souls of good men
they deisied; the bad says Bonorum Lares, malorum vero larvas and Le mure^
Austin, became devils, as they supposed; with many such absurd tenets, which
Austin has confuted, Hierom, and the other Fathers of the Church, which hold,
that the Soul is created of nothing, and so infused in the Child or Embrio in
his Mothers womb, six months after the Some say at 3. days, some six weeks,
others otherwise.
conception, not as those of brutes, which are ex Traduce; and dying with them,
vanish into nothing. This Reasonable Soul, which Austin calls a Spiritual
substance, moving it self, is defined by Philosophers to be the first
substantial Act of a Natural, Humane, Organicall Body, by which a man lives,
perceiues, and understands, freely doing all things, and with election. Out of
which Definition we may gather, that this Rational Soul includes the powers,
and performs the duties of the two other, which are contained in it, and all
three Faculties make one Soul, which is inorganicall of it self, although it
be in all parts, and incorporeall, using their Organs, and working by them. It
is divided into two chief parts, differing in office only, not in Essence.
The Understanding, which is the Rational power apprehending: the Will, which
is the Rational power moving, to which two, all the other Rational powers are
subject and reduced.

SVBSEC. 10. Of the Understanding.
Understanding, is a power of the Soul, Melancton.
by which we perceive, know, remember, and Judge as well Singulars as
Vniversals, having certain Innate notices or beginnings of arts, a reflecting
action, by which it judges of his own doings, and examines them. Out of this
Definition besides his chief office, which is to apprehend, judge all which he
performs, without the help of any Instruments or Organs, three differences
appear betwixt a man and a beast. As first, the sense only comprehends
Singularities, the Understanding vniversalities. Secondly, the sense has no
innate notions, thirdly Bruts can not reflect upon themselves. Bees indeed make
neat and curious works, and many other Creatures besides, but when they have
done, they cannot judge of them. His object is God, Ens; all nature, and
whatsoever is to be understood: which successively it apprehends. The object
first moving the Understanding, is some sensible thing, after by discoursing
the Mind finds out the corporeal substance, and from thence the spiritual.
His actions, some say, are Apprehension, Composition, Division, Discoursing,
Reasoning, Memory, which some include in Invention, and Judgment. The common
Divisions are of the Understanding, Agent, and Patient. Speculatiue, and
Practicke. In Habit, or in Act. Simple, or Compound. The Agent is that which
is called the Wit of Man, acumen or subtilty, sharpness of invention, when he
does invent of himself without a Teacher, or learnes anew, which abstracts
those intelligible Species from the Fantasy, and transferres them to the
passive Understanding, Nihil in intellectu, quod non prius fuerat in sensu.
because there is nothing in the Understanding, which was not first in the
sense: that which the Imagination has taken from Sense, this Agent judges of,
whether it be true or false; and being so judged, he committes it to the
Passible to be kept. The Agent is a Doctor or Teacher, the Passive a Scholar;
and his office is to keep, and farther judge of such things as are committed
to his charge: as a bare and rased table at first, capable of all forms and
notions. Now these Notions are twofold, Actions or Habits: Actions, by which
we take Notions of, and perceive things; Habits, which are durable lights and
notions, which we may use when we will. Velc.
Some reckon up eight kinds of them, Sense, Experience, Intelligence, Faith,
Suspicion, Error, Opinion, Science, to which are added Art, Prudency, Wisdom:
as also The pure part of the Conscience.
Synterisis, Dictamen rationis, Conscience; so that in all there be 14 Species
of the Understanding, of which some are innate, as the three last mentioned,
the other are got by doctrine, learning, Use. Plato will have all to be
innate, Aristotle reckons up but five intellectual Habits; two speculatiue, as
that Intelligence of the Principles, and Science of conclusions: Two practicke,
as Prudency, whose end is to practice, Art to fabricate, Wisdom to comprehend
the use and experiments of all notions, and habits whatsoever. Which Division
of Aristotle, if it be considered aright, is all one with the precedent; for
three being innate, and five acquisite; the rest are improper, imperfect, and
in a more strict examination excluded. Of all these I should more amply dilate,
but my subject will not permit. Three of them I will only point at, as more
necessary to my following Discourse.

Syntherisis, or the purer part of the Conscience, is an innate Habit, and does
signify a conservation of the knowledge of the Law of God and Nature, to know
good or evil. And as our Divines hold, it is rather in the Understanding, then
in the Will. This makes the mayor proposition, in a practicke Syllogism. The
Dictamen rationis, is that which does admonish us to do Good, or Evil, and is
the minor in the Syllogism. The Conscience is that which approues Good or
Evil, justifying or condemning our Actions, and is the Conclusion of the
Syllogism: as in that familiar example of Regulus the Roman, taken prisoner
by the Carthaginians, and suffered to go to Rome, on that condition he should
return again, or pay so much for his ransom. The Syntherisis proposes the
question, his word, oath, promise is to be religiously kept, although to his
Enemy, and that by the Law of Nature. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne
feceris.
Do not that to another, which thou would not have done to thy self,
Dictamen applies it to him, and dictates this or the like: Regulus thou would
not another man should falsify his oath, or break promise with thee.
Conscience concludes, therefore Regulus, thou do well to perform thy
promise, and ought keep thine oath. More of this in Religious Melancholy.

SVBSEC. 13. Of the Will.
WIll, is the other power of the Rational Soul, Res ab intellectu monstratas
recipit vel reiicit, approbat vel improbat. Philippus Ignoti nulla cupido.
which couets or avoides such things as have been before judged, and
apprehended by the Understanding. If good, it approues it, if evil, it
abhorres it; so that his object is good, or evil. Aristotle calls this our
Rational Appetite; for as in the Sensatiue, we are carried to good or bad by
our Appetite, ruled and directed by Sense: so in this we are carried by Reason.
Besides, the Sensatiue Appetite has a particular object, good or bad, this an
universal immateriall, that respects only things delectable and pleasant,
this Honest. Again, they differ in liberty. The Sensual appetite seeing an
object, if it be a convenient good, cannot but desire it; if evil, avoid it:
but this is free in his Essence, Melancton. Operationes plerumque ferae, etsi
libera sit illa in essentia sua.
much now depraved, obscured, and falue from his first perfection, yet in some
of his operations still free, as to go, walk, move, at his pleasure, and to
choose whether it will do, or not do, steal, or not steal. Otherwise in
vain were Laws, Deliberations, Dehortations, Exhortations, Counsels,
Praecepts, Rewards, Promises, Threats and punishments: and God should be the
Author of sin. But in In civilibus libera, sed non in spiritualibus. Osiander.
spiritual things we will no good, prone to evil, (except we be regenerate,
and led by the Spirit) we are egged on by our natural concupiscence, and there
is (...), a confusion in our powers, Tota voluntas aversa a Deo. Omnis homo
mendax.
our whole Will is averse from God, and his Law, not in natural things only,
as to eat and drink, lust, to which we are led headlong by our temperature,
and inordinate Appetite, Virg.
nec nos obniti contra, nec tender tantum
sufficimus. --
we cannot resist, our concupiscence is originally bad, our Heart evil, the
seat of our affections, captivates and enforces our will: So that in
voluntary things we are averse from God and goodness, bad by nature, Vel
propter ignorantiam, quod bonis studiis non fit instructa men's vt debuit, aut
divinis praeceptis exculta.
ignorance, worse by Art, Discipline, Custom, we get many bad Habits, and
suffer them to domineere and tyrannize over us, and the Devil is still ready,
and at hand, with his bad suggestions to tempt our depraved will to some
ill-disposed action, to praecipitate us to destruction: except our Will be not
swayed and counterpoised again, with some divine Praecepts, and good motions
of the Spirit; which many times restrain and hinder us, and check us when we
are in the full careire of our dissolute courses. So David corrected himself,
when he had Saul at a vantage. Revenge and Malice were as two violent oppugners
on the one side, but Honesty, Religion, Fear of God, withheld him on the
other.

The Actions of the Will are Velle, and Nolle, will and nill: which two words
comprehend all, and they are, Good or Bad, accordingly as they are directed:
and some of them freely performed by himself, although the Stoics absolutely
deny it, and will have all things inevitably done by Destiny, imposing a fatal
necessity upon us, which we may not resist; yet we say that our will is free
in respect of us, and things contingent, howsoever in respect of Gods
determinate counsel, they are inevitable and necessary. Some other actions of
the Will are performed by his inferior powers, which obey him as the Sensatiue
and Moving Appetite, as to open our eyes, to go hither and thither, not to
touch a Book, to speak fair or foul, but this Appetite is many times
rebellious in us. It was, as I said, once well agreeing with reason in us, and
there was an excellent consent and harmony betwixt them, but that is now
dissolved, they often jarre, Reason is over-borne by Passion. Fertur equis
auriga, nec audit currus habenas. as so many wild horses run away with a
chariot, and will not be curbed, we know many times what is good, but will not
do it, as she said, Medta Ovid.
Trahit invitam nova vis, aliudque cupido,
Men's aliud suadet. --
lust counsels one things, reason an other, there is a new reluctance in me. We
cannot resist, but as Phaedra confessed to her nurse, Seneca Hippol.
quae loqueris, vera sunt, sed furor suggerit sequi peiora. she said well and
true, and she did acknowledge it, but headstrong passion and fury, made her to
do that which was opposite. So David knew the filthiness of his fact, what a
loathsome, foul, crying sin Adultery was, yet not withstanding he would
commit murder, and take away another man's Wife, enforced against Reason,
Religion, to follow his Appetite.

Those Natural and Vegetall powers, are not commanded by Will at all; for who
can add one cubit to his stature? These other may, but are not, and thence
come all those headstrong Passions, and violent perturbations of the Mind; And
many times vicious Habits, customs, ferall Diseases, because we give so much
way to our Appetite, and follow our inclination, like so many beasts. The
principal Habits are two in number, Virtue, and Vice, whose peculiar
Definitions, Descriptions, Differences, and kinds are handled at large in the
Ethics, and are indeed the Subject of Moral Philosophy.

MEMB. 3.
SVBSEC. 1. Definition of Melancholy. Name, Difference.
HAving thus briefly Anatomized the Body and Soul of Man, as a preparatiue to
the rest; I may now freely proceed to treat of my intended Subject, to most
men's capacity, and after many ambages, perspicuously define what this
Melancholy is, his Name and Difference. The Name is imposed from the matter,
and the Disease denominated from the material cause: as Bruel observes, (...),
quasi (...), from black Choler. And whether it be a cause or an effect, a
Disease, or Symptom, let Donatus Altomarus, and Salvianus decide, I will not
contend about it. It has several Descriptions, Notations and Definitions
Melancholicos vocamus, quos exuperantia vel pravitas Melancholiae ita male
habet, vt inde insaniant, vel in omnibus, vel in pluribus iisque manifestis,
sive ad rectam rationem voluntatem pertinent, vel electionem, vel intellectus
operationes.
Fracastorius in his second Book of Intellect. calls those Melancholy, whom
abundance of that same depraved humor of black Choler has so misaffected,
that they become mad thence, and dote in most things, or in all, belonging to
election, will, or other manifest operations of the Understanding. Pessimum and
pertinacissimum morbum, qui homines in bruta degenerarecogit.
Melanelius out of Galen, Ruffus, Aetius describe it to be a bad and peevish
Disease, which makes men degenerate into beasts. Galen, a privation or
infection of the middle cell of the Head, etc. defining it from the part
affected, which Panth. Med.
Hercules de Saxonia approues lib. 1. cap. 16. calling it a depravation of the
principal function: and Fuchsius lib. 1. cap. 23. Arnoldus Breuiar. lib. 1.
cap. 18. Guianerius and others: By reason of black Choler, Paulus adds.
Haliabbas simply calls it a commotion of the mind. Arateus, An^^r anim^ in vn^
contentione defixus absque febre.
a perpetual anguish of the soul, fastened on one thing, without an ague:
which Definition of his, Mercurialis de affect. cap. lib. 1. cap. 10, taxes:
but Aelianus Montaltus defends, lib. de morb. cap^ap. 1. de Melan: for
sufficient and good. The common sort define it to be a kind of dotage, without
any fever, having for his ordinary companions, fear and sadness, without any
apparent occasion. Laurentius, cap, 4. Piso, lib. 1. cap. 43, Donatus Altomarus
cap. 7. art. medic. Iacchinus in com. in lib. 9. Rhasis ad Almansor cap. 15.
Valecius exerc. 17. Fuschius institut. 3. sec. 1. cap. 11. etc. Which common
definition, howsoever approved by most Cap. 16. lib. 1.
Hercules de Saxonia will not allow of nor David Crusius, Theat. morb. Herm.
lib. 2. cap. 6. he holds it insufficient: as Eorum definitio morbus quid, non
sit potius, quam quid sit explicat.
rather showing what it is not, then what it is: as omitting the specificall
difference, the fantasy and Brain: but I descend to particulars. The summum
genus is Dotage, or Anguish of the Mind, says Areteus, of a principal part,
Hercules de Saxonia adds, to distinguish it from Cramp and Palsy, and such
diseases as belong to the outward sense and motions ( depraved) to distinguish
it from Folly and Madness (which Montaltus makes angor animi to separate) in
which, those functions are not depraved, but rather abolished, ( without an
ague) is added by all to sever it from Frenzy, and that Melancholy, which is
a pestilent Fever. ( Fear and Sorrow) make it differ from Madness (without a
cause) is lastly inserted to specify it from all other ordinary passions of
Fear and Sorrow. We properly call that Dotage, as Cap. 4 de Mel.
Laurentius interprets it, when some one principal faculty of the mind, as
Imagination, or Reason is corrupted, as all Melancholy persons have. It is
without a Fever, because the humor is most part cold and dry, contrary to
putrefaction. Fear and Sorrow are the true Characters, and inseparable
companions of Melancholy, as hereafter shall be declared.

SVBSECT. 2. Of the part affected. Affection. Parties affected.
SOme difference I find amongst Writers, about the principal part affected in
this disease, whether it be the Brain or Heart, or some other Member. Most are
of opinion, that it is the Brain, for being a kind of Dotage, it cannot
otherwise be, but that the Brain must be affected, as a Simular part be it by
Per conscensu^, sive per Essentia^.
consent or Essence, not in his Ventricles or any obstructions in them, for
then it would be an Apoplexy, or Epilepsie, as Cap. 4. de Mel.
Laurentius well observes; but in a cold, dry distemperature of it in his
substance, which is corrupt, and become too cold, or too dry, or else too hot,
as in madmen, and such as are inclined to it: and this Sec. 7. de mor. vulgar.
lib. 6.
Hippocrates confirms, Galen, Arabians, and most of our new Writers. Marcus de
Oddis, in a consultation of his, quoted by Specel de Melancholia.
Hildisheim, and five others there cited, are of the contrary part, because
Fear and Sorrow, which are passions, are seated in the Heart: but this
objection is sufficiently answered by Cap. 3. de Mel. pars affecta cerebrum,
sive per conscensum, sieve per cerebrum contingat, and procerum auctoritate and
ratione stabilitur.
Montaltus. Who does not deny but that the Heart is affected, but not
principally. The Heart indeed is affected, as Lib. de Melancholia, cor vero
vicinitatis ratione vna afficitur, ac septum transuersum ac stomachus cum
dorsali spina. etc.
Melanelius proves out of Galen, by reason of his vicinity; and so is the
M^driffe, and many other parts. They do compati, and have a fellow feeling by
the Law of Nature: but forasmuch as this malady is caused by precedent
Imagination, and the Appetite, to whom Spirits obey, are subject to those
principal parts, the Brain must needs be primarily misaffected, as the seat
of Reason, and then the Heart, as the seat of Affection. Lib. 1. cap. 10.
Subiectum est cerebrum interius.
Capiuaccius, and Mercurialis have copiously discussed this question, and both
conclude the subject is the Inner Brain, and from thence it is communicated to
the Heart, and other inferior parts, which sympathize and are much troubled,
especially when it comes by consent, and is caused by reason of the Stomach,
or myrache, as the Arabians term it, or whole Body, Liver, or Raro quisqua^
tumorem effugit lienis, quihoc morbo afficitur. Piso.
Spleen, which are seldom free, Pylorus, Mesariacke, Veins, etc. For our Body
is like a Clock, if one wheel be amiss, all the rest are disordered, the
whole Fabric suffers: with such admirable Art and Harmony is a man composed,
such excellent proportion, as Lodouicus Vives in his Fable of a man has
elegantly declared.

Quis affectus.
As many doubts almost arise about the Sea Donatum ab Altomar.
Affection, whether it be Imagination or Reason alone, or both. Hercules de
Saxonia proves out of Galen, Aetius, and Altomarus, that the sole fault is in
Facultas Imaginandi, non cogitandi, nec memorandi laesa hic.
Imagination. Bruel is of the same mind: Montaltus in his his second Chapter of
Melancholy, confutes this Tenet of theirs, and illustrates the contrary, by
^any examples, as of him, that thought he was a shellfish, of a Nun, of a
desperate Monk, that would not be persuaded, but that he was damned. Reason
was in fault as well as Imagination, which did not correct this Error; they make
away themselves oftentimes, Lib. Med. cap. 19. part. 2.7. rac. 15. cap. 2.
and suppose many absurd and ridiculous things. Why does not Reason detect the
Fallacy, settle and persuade if she be free? Lib. 3. Fen. 1. Tract. 4. cap.
18.
Avicenna therefore holds both corrupt, to whom most Arabians subscribe. The
same is maintained by Lib. 3. cap. 5.
Areteus, Gordonius, Guianerius etc. To end the controversy, no man doubts of
Imagination, but that it is hurt and mis-affected here; for the other I
determine with Hildisheim spicel. 2. de Melanchol. fol. 2.7. and fol. 127.
Quandoque etiam Rationalis si affectus inveteratas sit.
Albertinus Bottonus, a Doctor of Padua, that it is first in Imagination, and
afterward in Reason, if the Disease be inveterate, or as it is more or less
of continuance.

To the part affected, I may here add the parties, Parties affected.
which shall be more opportunely spoken of els-where, here only signified.
Such as have the Moon, Saturn, Mercury misaffected in their genitures, such
as live in over-cold, or overhot Climes: Such as are borne of Melancholy
parents: as offend in those 6. non-naturall things, are black, or of an high
Sanguine complexion, Qui parvum caput habent, insensati plerique sunt. Arist.
in Physiognomia
that have little heads. That have a hot Heart, moist Brain; hot Liver, and
cold Stomach, have bin long sick: such as are solitary by nature, great
Students, given to much contemplation, idle, lead a life out of action, are
most subject to Melancholy. Of Sexes both, but men more often, yet Areteus lib.
3. cap. 5.
women when they are, far more violent, and grievously troubled. Of seasons
of the year, the Autumn is most Melancholy. Of peculiar times, old age, from
which it is almost an inseparable accident; and this Malady is most frequent in
such as are of Qui prope statum sunt. Areteus.
middle age. Some assign 40 years, Gariopontus 30, Iobertus excepts neither
young nor old: Medijs convenit aetatibus. Piso.
Aetius and Areteus ascribe into the number not only Pronus ad Melancholiam,
non tam moestus, sed and hilares, iocosi, chachinna^tes, irrisores, and qui
plerumque praerubri sunt.
discontented, passionate, and miserable persons, swarty black, De quartana.
but such as are most merry and pleasant, scoffers, and high colored. Generally
says Rhasis, Qui sunt subtilis ingenij, and multae perspicacitatis de facili
incidunt in Melancholiam. l. 1. cont. Tract. 9.
the finest wits, and most generous spirits, are before others obnoxious to it;
so that I cannot except any of any complexion, of any condition, sex, or age;
but Nunquam sanitate mentis excidit, aut dolor capitur. Erasm.
fools and Stoics, which according to In laud. caluit.
Sinesius, are never troubled with any manner of passion. Erasmus vindicates
fools from this Melancholy Catalogue, because they have most part moist
brains, and light Hearts, Vacant conscientiae carnificina, nec pudefiunt, nec
verentur, nec dilacerantur millibus curarum, quibus tota vita obnoxia est.
they are free from ambition, envy, shame and fear, they are neither troubled
in conscience, or macerated with care, to which our whole life is so much
subject.

SVBSECT. 4. Of the Matter of Melancholy.
OF the Matter of Melancholy, there is much question betwixt Avicen and Galen,
as you may read in Lib. 1. Tract. 3. contradic. 18.
Cardans Contradictions, Lib. 1. cont. 21.
Valesius controversies, Montanus, Prosper Calenus, Capivaccius, Bright cap. 16
Bright, Lib. 1. cap. 6. desanit, tuenda.
Ficinus, that have written either whole Tracts, or copiously of it, in their
several Treatises of this Subject. Quisve aut qualis sit humor, aut quae
istius differentiae, and quomodogignantur in corpore, scrutandum, hac enim in
re multi veterum laboraverunt, nec facile accipere ex Galeno sententiam ob
loquendi varietatem. Leonart. Iacchinus com. in 9. Rasis. cap. 15. Cap. 16. in
9. Rasis.
What this humor is, or whence it proceeds, how it is engendered in the Body,
neither Galen, nor any old Writer has sufficiently discussed, as Iacchinus
thinks: the Neotericks cannot agree. Montanus in his consultations, holds
Melancholy to be material or immateriall: and so does Arculanus: the material
is one of the four humors before mentioned, and natural or adventitious,
acquisite, redundant, unnatural, artificial. Paracelsus wholly reiects and
derides this division of four humors and complexions, but our Galenists
ingenerally approve of it, subscribing to this of Montanus.

This natural Melancholy is either Simple, or Mix't, offending in Quantity or
Quality, varying according to his place, where it setleth, as Brain, Spleen,
Meseriacke veins, Hear, Womb, and Stomach: or varying according to mixture of
those natural humors amongst themselves, or four unnatural adust humors, as
they are diversely tempered and mingled, If natural Melancholy abound in the
Body, which is cold and dry, so that it be more Secundum magis aut minus si in
corpore fucrit ad intemperiem plusquam corpus salubriter far poterit: inde
corpus morbosum efficitur.
then the Body is well able to bear, it must needs be distempered says
Faventinus, and diseased: and so of the other, if it be depraved, whether it
arise from that other Melancholy, or Choler adust, or from Blood, produces the
like effects, and is as Montaltus contends, if it come by adustion of humors,
most part hot and dry. Some difference I find, whether this Melancholy matter
may be engendered of all four humors, about the color and temper of it. Galen
holds it may be engendered of three alone, excluding Fleame or Pituitae, whose
true assertion, Lib 1. controvers. cap. 21.
Valesius and Menardus stiffly maintain, and so does Lib. 1. sec. 4. cap. 4.
Fuchsius, Montaltus, Consil. 26.
Montanus. How say they should white become black? But Hercules de Saxonia, and
Cardan, are of the opposite part: it may be engendered of Fleame, etsi raro
contingat, Lib. 2. contradict. cap. 11.
it seldom comes to pass: so is De feb. Tract. 4. diff. 2. cap. 1. non est
negandum ex hac fieri Melancholicos.
Guianerius and Laurentius cap. 14. and Melancthon in his book de Anima, and
Chapter of humors, he calls it asininam, dull, swinish Melancholy, and says
that he was an eyewitness of it: so is In Syntax.
Wecker. From Melancholy adust arises one kind, from Choler another, which is
most brutish: another from Fleame, which is dull; and the last from Blood,
which is best. Of these some are cold and dry, others hot and dry, Vary
aduritur and miscetur, vnde variae amenti^m species. Melancthon.
varying according to their mixtures, and as they are intended and remitted. If
the humor be cold, it is says Humor frigidus delirij causa: furoris calidus
etc.
Faventinus, a cause of dotage, and produces milder symptoms, if hot, they
are rash, rauing mad, or inclining to it. If the Brain be hot, the animal
spirits are hot, and madness follows, and violent actions: if cold, fatuity
and sottishness, Lib. 1. cap. 10. de affect cap.
Capivaccius. Nigrescit hic humor, aliquando supercalefactus, aliquando
superfrigefactus. cap. 7.
The color of this mixture varies likewise according to the mixture, be it
hot or cold, it is sometimes black, sometimes not. Altomarus. The same Humor
hic niger aliquando praeter modum calefactus, and alias refrigeratus evadit:
nam vrentibus carbonibus ei quid simile accidit, que durante flamma,
pellucidissime candent, ea extincta prorsus nigrescunt. Hippocrates.
Melanelius proves out of Galen: and Hypocrates in his book of melancholy, if
at least it be his, giving instance in a burning coal, which when it is hot,
shines, and when it is cold, looks black, and so does the humor. This
diversity of Melancholy matter, produces diversity of effects. If it be within
the Guianerius. diff. 2. cap. 7.
body, and not putrified, it causes black Iaundise: if putrified, a Quartan
ague: if it break out to the skin, Leprosy; if to parts, several Maladies,
as Scurvy etc. If it trouble the mind, as it is diversely mix't, it produces
several kinds of Madness and Dotage, of which in their place.

SVBSECT. 5. Of the species or kinds of melancholy.
When the matter is diverse and confused, how should it otherwise be, but that
the Species should be diverse and confused? Many new and old Writers have
written confusedly of it, confounding Melancholy and Madness, as Non est Mania
nisi extensa Melancholia.
Hernius, Guianerius, Gordonius, Salustius Salvianus, Jason Pratensis,
Savan^rola, that will have Madness no other then Melancholy in Extent,
differing, as I have said, in degrees. Some make no distinct Species, as Ruffus
Ephesius an old Writer, Areteus, Cap 6. lib. 1.
Aurelianus, Paulus Aegineta: others acknowledge a multitude of kinds, and
leave them indefinite, as 2 Ser. 2. cap. 9 Morbus hic est omnifarius.
Aetius in his Tetrabiblos, Species indefinitae sunt.
Avicenna lib. 3. Fen, 1. Trac, 4. cap. 18. Arculanus cap. 16. in 9. Rasis.
Montanus med. part. 1. Si aduratur naturalis Melancholia, alia fit species, si
sanguis, alia, si flava bilis alia diversa a primis: maxima est inter has
differentia, and tot Doctorum sententiae, quot ipsi numero sunt.
If natural melancholy be adust, it makes one kind, if blood, another; if
choler, a third, differing from the first, and so many several opinions there
are about the kinds, as there be men themselves. Savanorola Rub. 11. Tract.
6. cap. 1. de aegritud. Cap. will have the kinds to be infinite, one from the
myrache, called myrachialis of the Arabians; another stomachalis, from the
stomach, another from the liver, heart, womb, haemrods: Quaedam incipiens,
quaedam consummata.
one beginning, another consummate. Melancthon seconds him, Cap. de humor. lib.
de Anima vary aduritur and miscetur ipsa Melancholia, vnde variae amentium
species.
as the humor is diversely adust and mixed, so are the Species diverse: but what
these men speak of species, I think ought to be understood of symptoms, and
so does Cap. 16. in 9. Rasis.
Arculanus interpret himself: Infinite species and symptoms: and in that
sense, as Io. Gorrheus acknowledges in his medicinal definitio^s, the species
are infinite, but they may be reduced to three kinds, by reason of their seat,
Head, Body, and Hypocondries. This threefold division is approoved by
Hippocrates in his book of Melancholy (if it be his, which some suspect) by
Galen lib. 3. de loc. affectis cap. 6. by Alexander lib. 1. cap. 16. Rases lib.
1. Continent. Tract. 9. lib. 1. cap. 16. Avicenna, and most of our new Writers.
Th. Erastus makes two kinds; one perpetual, which is Head melancholy, the other
interrupt, which comes and goes by fits, which he subdivides into the other two
kinds, so that all comes to the same pass. Some again makes four or five
kinds, adding Laurentius cap. 4. de Melan.
Love melancholy to the first, and Lycanthropia. The most received division is
into three kinds. The first proceeds from the sole fault of the Brain, and is
called Head melancholy: the second sympathetically proceeds from the whole
Body, when the whole temperature is Melancholy: The third arises from the
Bowels, Liver, Spleen, or Membrane, called Mesenterium, named Hypochondriacall,
or windy melancholy, which Cap. 13.
Laurentius subdivides into three parts, from those three Members, Hepaticke,
Splenaticke, M^sariacke. Love melancholy, which Avicenna calls Ilishi, and
Lycanthropia, which he calls Cucubuthe, are commonly included in Head
Melancholy: but of this last, which Gerardus de Solo calls Amoreos, and most
Knight melancholy, with that of Religious melancholy, and all the other kinds,
of Love melancholy, I will speak of apart by themselves, in my third
Partition. The three precedent species are the subject of my discourse, which I
will anatomize, and treat of, through all their causes, symptoms, cures,
together, and apart, that every man that is in any measure affected with this
malady, may know how to examine it in himself, and apply remedies unto it.

It is a hard matter I confess to distinguish these three species, one from
the other, to express their several causes, symptoms, cures, being that they
are so often confounded amongst themselves, having such affinity, that they can
scarce be discerned, by the most acuratest Physicians themselves; and so often
intermixed with other diseases, that the best experienced have been plunged.
Montanus consil. 26. had a patient that had this disease of Melancholy, and
Caninus Appetitus both together. And consil. 23. with Vertigo. 4.89. and 116.
consult. consil. 12
Julius Caesar Claudinus, with Stone, Gout, Iandice. Trincauellius with an
Ague, Iandice, Caninus appetitus, etc, Hildesheim spic. 2. fol. 166.
Paulus Regolius a great Doctor in his time consulted in this case, was so
confounded with a confusion of Symptoms; that he knew not to what kind of
Melancholy to refer it. Trincauellius Tom. 2. consil. 15 and 16.
Trincauellius, Fallopius, and Francanzanus, three famous Doctors in Italy, all
three conferred with about one party at the same time, gave three different
opinions. And in another place Trincauellius being demanded what he thought of
a melancholy young man, to whom he was sent for, ingeniously confessed he was
indeed melancholy, but he knew not to what kind to reduce it. In his 17.
consultation, there is the like disagreement about a melancholy Monk.
Sometimes they cannot well discern this Disease from others. In Reinerus
Solenanders counsels, Sect. 3. consil. 5. He and D. Brande, both agreed that
the patients disease was Hypochondriacal melancholy, D. Matholdus said it was
Astma and nothing else. Guarion. cons. med. 2.
Solenander and Guarionius, lately sent for to the melancholy Duke of Cleue
with others, could not define what Species it was, or agree amongst themselves.
The Species are so confounded as in Caesar Claudinus his 44. consultation for a
Polonian Count. In his judgment Laborauit per essentiam and a toto corpore.
he labored of head melancholy, and that which proceeds from the whole
temperature both at once. I could give instance of some that have had all three
kinds, semel and simul, and some successively. In such variety of Symptoms,
causes: How difficult a thing is it to treat of several kinds apart; to make
any certainty amongst so many casualties, distractions, when seldom two men
shall be like affected per omnia? It Is hard I confess, yet nevertheless I
will adventure through the midst of these perplexities, and led by the clewe or
thread of the best writers, extricate my self out of a labyrinth of doubts and
errors, and so proceed to the causes.

SECT. 2.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Causes of Melancholy. God a cause.
IT is in vain to speak of Cures, or think of remedies, until such time as
we have considered of the causes, as Primo artis curatiuae.
Galen prescribes Glauco, and the common experience of others confirms, that
those cures must needs be imperfect and lame to no purpose, wherein the causes
have not first been searched, as Nostri primum fit propositi affectionum
causas indagare, res ipsa hortari videtur, nam alioqui earum curatio manca and
inutilis esset.
Prosper Calenius well observes, in his tract de Atra bile to Cardinal
Caesius. Insomuch that Path. lib. 1. cap 11. rerum cogn^scere causas medicis
imprimis necessarium, sine qua nec morbum curare, nec praecauere licet.
Fernelius puts a kind of necessity in the knowledge of the causes, and
without which it is impossible to cure, or to prevent any manner of disease.
Empericks may ease, and sometimes help, but not thoroughly root out, sublata
causa tollitur effectus, as the saying is, if the cause be removed the effect
is likewise vanquished. It is a most difficult thing I confess, to be able to
discern these causes whence they are, and in such Tanta enim morbi varietas ac
differentia, vt non facile dignoscatur, vnde initium morbus sumpserit,
Melanelius e Galeno.
variety to say what the beginning was. Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere
causas.
He is happy that can perform it aright. I will adventure to guess as near
as I can, and rip them all up, from the first to the last General and
particular, to every Species, that so they may, the better be discried.

General causes, are either supernatural or natural. Supernatural are from
God and his Angels, or by Gods permission from the Devil and his ministers.
That God himself is a cause for the punishment of sin, and satisfaction of
his Justice, many examples and testimonies of holy Scriptures make evident unto
us. Psalm. 107.17. Foolish men are plagued for their offense, and by reason of
their wickedness. Gehezi was stricken with Leprosy, 2. Reg. 5.27. David
plagued for numbering his people. 1. Par. 21. Sodom and Gomorah swallowed up.
And this Disease is peculiarly specified. Psalm. 107.12. He brought down their
heart through heaviness. Deuteronomy. 28.28. He stroke them with madness,
blindness, and astonishment of heart. 1. Sam. 16.14
An evil spirit was sent by the Lord upon Saul to vex him. Dan. 5.21.
Nabucadnessar did eat grass like an Ox, and his heart was made like the
beasts of the field. Heathen stories are full of such like punishments.
Lycurgus because he cut down the Vines in his Country, was by Bacchus driven
into madness, so was Pentheus and his mother Agaue for neglecting their
sacrifice. Gaguinus, lib. 3 cap. 4. quod Dionysii corpus discoperuerat ^n
insaniam incidit
Lactaut. instit lib. 2. cap. 8.
Censor Fuluius ran mad for vntiling Juno's Temple, to cover a new one of his
own, which he had dedicated to F^rtune, Mente captus and summo animi maerore
consumptus.
and was consumed to death with grief and sorrow of heart. If we may believe
our pontificiall writers, they will relate unto us as many-strange and
prodigious punishments in this kind, inflicted by their Saints. As how
Clodoueus sometime king of France, the son of Dogebert lost his wits for
uncovering the body of S. Dennis: and how a Idem lib. 9. sub. Carol. 6.
sacrorum contemptor templi foribus effractis du^ D. Iohannis argenteum
simulachrum rapere contendit, simulachrum auersa facie dorsum ei versat, nec
mora sacrilegus sit mentis ^nops, atque in semet insan ens in proprios artus
desaeuit.
sacrilegious Frenchman, that would have stolen away a silver Image of S. John
at Birburge, became frantic on a sudden, raging and tyrannizing over his
own flesh. Of a Giraldus Ca^brensis lib. 1. c. 1. Itinerar. Cambriae.
Lord of Rhaduor that coming from hunting late at night, put his Dogs into
S. Auans Church ( Llan-Auan they call it) and rising betimes next morning, as
Hunters use to do, found all his Dogs madd, and himself suddenly stricken
blind. Of Tyridates an Armenian King, for violating some holy Nuns* that was
punished in like sort, with loss of his wits. But Poets and Papists may go
together for fabulous tales, let them free their own credits. How soever they
feign of their Nemesis, and of their Saints, or by the Devils means may be
deluded, we find it true, that Vltor a tergo Deus, He is God the Auenger, as
David styles him, and that it is our crying sins that pulls this and many
other maladies upon our own heads. Delrio Tom. 3*l6 sec. 3. quaes 3.
That he can by his Angels, which are his Ministers, Ps. 44.1.
strike and heal, says Lib. 8. Cap. de Hierar.
Dionysius, whom he will, that he can plague us by his creatures; Sun, Moon,
and Stars, which he uses as his instruments, as a husbandman, says
Zanchius, does an Hatchet, Hail, Snow, Winds. etc. Claudian.
Et coniurati veniunt in Classica venti. as in Iosuah's time, as in Pharaohs
time in Egypt, they are but as so many Executioners of his Justice: He can
make the proudest spirits stoop, and cry out with Julian the Apostat, Vicisti
Galilee; or with Apolloe's Priest in De Babila Martyr.
Chrysostom, O Coelum, o Terra vnde hostis hic. What an enemy is this? And
pray with David, acknowledging his power, I am weakened and sore broken, I roar
for the very grief of mine heart, mine heart pants, etc. Psalm. 38.8. O Lord
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy wrath, Psalm. 38.1.
make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice, Psalm. 51.8. and ver. 12. Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and
stablish me with thy free spirit. For these causes belike Lib. 1. cap. 5. prog.
Hyppocrates would have a Physician take special notice, whether the disease
come not from a divine supernatural cause, or whether it follow the common
course of nature. Paracelsus holds that such spiritual diseases (for so he
calls them) are spiritually to be cured, or not at all, But this is farther
discussed by Lib. 1. de Abditis reru^ causis
Fernelius, and Respons. med. 12. Res.
I. Caesar Claudinus, to whom I refer you, how this place of Hyppocrates is
to be understood.

SVBSEC. 2. A Digression of Devils, and how they cause Melancholy.
HOw far the power of Devils does extend, and whether they can cause this or
any other Disease, is a serious question and worthy to be considered, for the
better understanding of which, I will make a brief digression of the nature of
Devils. And although the question be very obscure, according to Lib. 1. cap.
7. de orbis concordia. In nulla re mayor fuit altercatio mayor obscuritas,
minor opinionum concordia, quam de daemonibus and substantiis separatis.
Postellus, full of controversy and ambiguity, yet as in the rest, I will
adventure to say something of it. In former times as we read, Acts 23. The
Sadducees denied that there were any such spirits, or Devils or Angels. So
did the Peripateticks, and Aristotle himself, as Pomponatius stiffly
maintains, and Scaliger in some sort grants. Epicures and Atheists are of the
same mind in general, because they never saw them. Plato, Plotinus,
Porphyrius, Iamblicus, Proclus, insisting in the steps of Trismegistus and
Socrates, make no doubt of it: Nor Stoics but that there are such spirits,
though much erring from the truth. Concerning the first beginning of them, the
Pererius in Genesin lib. 4. in cap. 3. ver. 23.
Thalmudists say that Adam had a wife called Lilis, before he married Eve, and
of her he begat nothing bnt Devils. The Turks See Strozzius Cicogna
omnifariae Mag. lib. 2. cap. 15. Io. Aubanus, Bredenbachius.
Alcoron is altogether as absurd and ridiculous in this point, but the
Scripture informs us Christians, how Lucifer the chief of them, with his
associats, Angelus per superbiam seperatus a Deo qui in veritate non stetit.
Austin. Nature of Devils.
fell from heaven for his pride, and ambition, created of God, placed in
heaven, and sometimes an Angel of light, now cast down into Hell, and
delivered into Chains of darkness, Pet. 2.2.4. to be kept unto damnation.
That foolish opinion in the mean time, of those which will have them to be
nothing, but the souls of men departed, Nutriuntur and excrementa habent, quod
pulsata doleant solido percussa ^orpore.
Proclus confutes at large, in his book de Anima and Doemone.

He lived 500 years since.
Psellus a Christian, and sometimes tutor says Cuspinian to Michael
Parapinatius, Emperor of Greece, a great obseruer of the nature of Devils,
holds that they are Apuleius: spiritus animalia sunt animo passibilia, mente
rationalia, corpore aeria, tempore sempiterna.
corporeal, and have aeriall bodies, that they are mortal, live and dye, that
they are nourished and have excrements, that they feel pain if they be hurt
(which Cardan confirms) or stricken: and if their bodies be cut, with admirable
celeritie they come together again. Austin in Genesis lib. 3. de lib. arbit.
holds as much, Mutata casu corpora in deteriorem qualitatem aeris spissioris.
That in their fall their bodies were changed into a more aeriall and gross
substance. That they can assume all manner of shapes at their pleasures,
appear in what likeness they will themselves, that they are most swift in
motion, and can pass many miles in an instant, and so likewise Cyprian in
Epist. montes etia^ and animalia-transferre possunt: as the devil did Christ
to the top of the Pinnacle: and Witches are often translated. See more in
Strozzius Cicogna, lib. 3. cap. 4. Omnif. Mag. Per era subducere and in
sublime corpora far possunt, Biarmannus. Percussi dolent and vruntur in
conspicuos cineres, Agrippa. l. 3. c. 19. de occult. Philos.
transform bodies of others into what shape they please, and with admirable
celerity remove them from place to place. Zanchius, Bodine, Spondanus and
others are of opinion, that they can cause a true Metamorphosis, as
Nebucadnezar was really translated into a Beast, Lots wife into a pillar of
salt; Ulysses companions into Hogs and Dogs by Cyrces charms: Turn
themselves and others, as they do witches into Cats, Dogs, Hares, Crows, etc.
Strozzius Cicogna has many examples. lib. 3. omnif. mag. cap. 4. and 5. which
he there confutes. That they can be seen when and in what shape, and to whom
they will, says Psellus, Tametsi nil tale viderim nec optem videre: Though he
himself never saw them nor desired it; and use sometimes carnal copulation (as
elsewhere I shall Part. 3. Sect. 2 Memb. 1. Sub. 1. Love Melancholy.
prove more at large) with women and men. Many will not believe that they can
be seen. Marcus of his credit told Psellus that he had often seen them.
Paracelsus confesses that he saw them diverse times, and conferred with them,
and so does Alexander. ab Genial dieru^. Ita sibivisum and compertum quu^ prius
an essent ambigeret.
Alexandro, that he so found it by experience, when as before he doubted of it.
Many deny it, says Lauater de spectris, part. 1. c. 2. and part. 2. c. 11.
because they never saw them themselves. But as he reports at large all over his
book especially cap. 19. part. 1. they are often seen. Cardan lib. 19. de
subtle relates of his father Facius Cardan; that after the accustomed
solemnities, Fidem suam liberet.
Ao 1491. 1^. August. he coniured up seven Devils in Greek apparel. about 40
years of age, some ruddy of complexion, and some pale, as he thought, he
asked them many questions, and they made ready answer, that they were aeriall
Devils, that they lived and died as men did, saving that they were far longer
lived (7. or. 8. hundred Sic Hesiodus de Nymphis vivere dicit 10. aetates
phaenicu^ vel 9.7.20.
years) and that they did as far excel men in dignity, as we do iumentes,
and were as far excelled again of those that were above them, they knew all
things, but might not reveal them to men, and ruled and domineered over us, as
we do over horses, the best Kings amongst us, and the most generous spirits,
were not comparable to the basest of them. Sometimes they did instruct men, and
communicate their skill, and sometimes again terrify them to keep them in
awe, as they thought fit.

That they are mortal, besides these testimonies of Cardan many other Divines
and Philosophers hold. The Cibo and potu vti and venere cum hominibus ac tandem
mori. Cicogna 1. part. l. 2. c. 3
Platonists and many Rabbines, Porphyrius and Plutarch, as appears by that
relation of Thamus. Plutarch de defect. oraculorum.
The great God Pan is dead. Apollo Pithius ceased; and so the rest. S. Hierome
in the life of Paul the Ermite tells a story, how one of them appeared to S.
Anthony in the wilderness, and told him as much. Lib. de Zilphis and Pigmeis.
Paracelsus of our late writers stiffly maintains that they are mortal, and
live and die, as other creatures do. But these paradoxes of their mortality,
taking of shapes, transposing bodies, and carnal copulations are sufficiently
confuted by Zanc. cap, 10. lib. 4. Pererius in his Comment, and Tostatus
questions on the 6. of Genesis Th. Aquin. S. Austin, Wierus, Th. Erastus, Delrio.
To. 2. lib. 2. quaesh. 29. They may deceive the eyes of men, but none take true
bodies, or make a real Metamorphosis: but as Cicogna proves at large they are
Omnia spiritibus plena and ex eorum concordia and discordia omnes boni and mali
effectus promanant omnia humana reguntur. paradox. veteru^ de quo Cicogna.
omnif. mag. lib. 2 cap. 3.
Illusoriae and praestigiatrices transformationes ominif. mag. lib. 4. cap. 4.
mere illusions and cosenings; yet thus much in general. Thomas, Durand, and
all the rest grant, that they have understanding far beyond men, and can
probably conjecture, and Austin in lib. 2 de Genesis ad literam cap. 17. partim
quia subtilioris sensus acumine, partim scientia callidiore vigent and
experientia, propter magnam longitudinem vitae, partim ab Angelis discunt. etc.
foretell many things, they can cause and cure most diseases, that they have
excellent skill in all arts and sciences, And that the most illiterate Devil
is Quovis homine scientior, as Lib. 3. omnif. mag. cap. 2.
Cicogna maintains out of others. They know the virtues of Herbs, Plants,
Stones, Mineralls, etc. Of all Creatures, Birds, Beasts of the 4. Elements,
Stars, Planets, and can aptly apply them and make use of them as they see
good: knowing the causes of all Meteors, and the like. Quum tanta sit and tam
profunda spirituum scientia mirum non est tot tant^sque res visu admirabiles ab
ipsis patrari, and quidem rerum naturalium open quas multo melius intelligunt,
multoque peritius suis locis and temporibus applicare norunt quam homo, Cicogna.
They can produce miraculous alterations in the air, and most wonderful
effects. But that which Bodine lib. 4. Theat. not. thinks that they can tell
the secrets of a man's heart is most false. His reasons are weak, and
sufficiently confuted by Zanchius lib. 4. cap; 9. and others.

As for those orders of good and bad Devils, which the Platonists hold, is
altogether erroneous, and those Ethnicks, Orders.
boni and mali Genij, are to be exploded. That which De Deo Socratis, adest
mihi divina sort daemonium quoadam a prima pueritia me sequutum, saepe
dissuadet impellit nunquam instar vocis. Plato.
Apuleius, Xenophon and Plato contend of Socrates Daemonium, is most absurd.
That which Plotinus of his, that he had likewise Deum pro Daemonio, and that
which Porphiry concludes of them all in general, if they be neglected in their
sacrifice they are angry, and send many plagues amongst us; but if pleased then
they do much good, is as vain as the rest, and confuted by Austin lib. 9.
cap. 8. de Civit. Dei. Eusebius lib. 4. praeparat. Evangel. cap. 6. and others.
Yet thus much I find, that our Schoolmen and Agryppa lib. 3. de occul. ph. c.
18 Zanch. Pictorius Pererius, Cicogna l. 3. c. 1. etc.
other Divines make nine kinds of bad Devils, as Dionysius has done of Angels.
In the first rank are those false Gods of the Gentiles, which were adored
heretofore in several Idols, and gave Oracles at Delphos and elsewhere, whose
prince is Beelzebub. The second rank is of Liers, and Aequivocaters, as Apollo
Pythius, and the like. The third are those vessels of anger, inventers of all
mischief, Vasa irae. c. 13
as that Theutus in Plato. Esa calls them vessels of fury; their prince is
Beliall. The fourth are malicious revenging Devils, and there prince is
Asmodeus. The fifth kind are coseners, such as belong to magitians and witches,
their prince is Satan. The sixth are those aeriall Devils that Quibus datu^ est
nocere terrae and mari, etc.
corrupt the air and cause plagues, thunders, fires, etc. spoken of in the
Apocalips, and Paul to the Ephesians names them the princes of the air,
Meresin is their prince. The seventh is a distroyer, captain of the furies,
causing wars, tumults, combustions, vproares, mentioned in the Apocalips, and
called Abaddon. The eight is that accusing or calumniating Devil, whom the
Greeks call Diabolus, that drives us to despair. The ninth are those tempters
in several kinds, and their prince is Mammon. Psellus makes six kinds, but
none above the Moon: but Gazeus cited by Phisiol. Stoichorum e Senec. lib. 1
cap. 28.
Lipsius will have all places full of Angels and Devils, above and beneath the
Moon, aetheriall and aeriall, which Austin cites out of Varro lib. 7. de
ciuitat. Dei cap. 6. Vsque ad luna^ animas esse aethereas vocarique heroas,
lares, genios.
The celestial Devils above, and aeriall beneath: or as some will Gods above,
Semidei, or half Gods beneath, Lares, Heroes, Genij, which clime higher, if
they lived well as the Stoics held, but grouel on the ground as they were
baser in their lives, nearer to the earth: and are Manes, Lemures, etc. Mart.
Capella.
They will have no place void, but all full of spirits, devils, or some other
inhabitants. Plenum coelum, aer, aqua, terra, and omnia sub terra, says Nihil
vacuum ab his vbi vel capillum in aere vel aqua iaceas.
Gazeus. Not so much as an hair breadth empty in heaven, earth, or waters,
above or under the earth. The earth is not so full of flies in summer, as it is
at all times of invisible Devils, this Lib. de Zilph.
Paracelsus stiffely maintains, and that they have every one their several
Chaos. Lib. 7. cap. 3.4 and 5. Syntax. art. mirab.
Gregorius Tolosanus makes seven kinds of aetheriall Devils, according to the
number of the seven Planets. Saturnine, Iouial, Martial, etc. which live
about them, and as so many assisting powers cause their operations, and will
have, in a word, as many of them as there be stars in the skies. Comment. in
dial, Plat. de amore, cap. 5. Vt sphaera qualibet super nos ita praestantiores
habet habitatores suae spherae consortes, vt habet nostra.
Marcilius Ficinus seems to second this opinion out of Plato, or from himself
I know not, as every Sphere is higher, so has it more excellent inhabitants:
which belike is that Galileus a Galileo, and Kepler aims at in his nuncio
Syderio, when he will have Saturninas and Iouial accolas.
Saturnine and Iouial inhabitants. And Ticho Brahe does in some sort touch or
insinuate in one of his Epistles, but these things In loca detrusi sunt infra
coelestes orbs in aerem scilicet and infra vbi Iudicio generali reservantur.
Zanchius explodes, cap. 3. lib. 4.

So that according to these men, the number of these Spirits must needs be
infinite. For if that be true that some of our Mathematitians say: that if a
stone should fall from that starry heaven, or eight Sphere, and should pass
every hour an hundredth miles, it would be 65. years or more before it would
come to ground, by reason of the great distance of heaven from earth, which
contains, as some say 170 Millions 803 miles, besides those other heavens,
whether they be Christalline or watery which Maginus ads, which peradventure
hold as much more, how many such spirits may it contain? And yet for all this
^.63. art. 9.
Thomas, and Albertus, and most hold that there be far more Angels then
Devils.

But be they more or less, Quod supra nos nihil ad nos. We are only to speak
in brief of these sublunary Devils, for the rest, Sublunary devils and their
kinds.
our Divines hold that the Devil has no power over stars, or heavens. Virg.
8. eg.
Carminibus coelo possunt deducere lunam etc. those are poetical fictions, and
that they can Aen. 4.
sistere aquam fluvijs, and vertere sidera retro, etc. as Canidia in Horace,
it is all false. Austin: hoc dixi ne quis existimet habitare ibi mala daemonia,
vbi Solemn and I unam and Stellas Deus ordinauit. and alibi. nemo arbitraretur
Daemone^ coelis habitare cum Angelis suis. vnde lapsum credimus. Idem Zanchius
l 4. c. 3. de Angelis malis. Pererius in Gen cap. 6. lib. 8. in ver. 2.
They are confined until the day of judgment, to this sublunary world, and
can work no farther then the four Elements, and as God permits them.
Wherefore of these sublunary Devils, Psellus makes six kinds, fiery, aeriall,
terrestrial, watery, and subterranean Devils, besides those Fairies, Satyrs,
Nymphs, etc.

Fiery Devils are such as commonly work by blasing stars, fire-drakes, and
counterfeit Suns and Moons, which never appear, says Cardan, but they
signify some mischief or other to come unto men: Our stories are full of such
apparitions. Some think they keep their residence in that Hecla, mountain in
Island, Aetna in Sicily. Lypera, Vesnuius, etc. These Devils were worshipped
heretofore by that superstitious (...), and the like.

Aeriall Devils are such as keep quarter most part in the Domos diruunt muros
Deijciunt immiscent se turbinibus and procellis and pulverem instar columnae
evehunt Cicogna. l. 5. c. 5.
air, cause many tempests, thunder, and lightnings, tear Oaks, fire Steeples,
Houses, strike Men and Beasts, make it rain stones as in Liuies time, wool,
Frogs, etc. Counterfeit armies in the air, as at Vienna before the coming
of the Turks, and many times in Rome, as Quest. in Liu.
Machivell has illustrated by many examples. These can corrupt the air, and
cause plagues, cause tempests, shipwracks, fires, inundations. At Mons Draconis
in Italy there is a most memorable example in De bello Neapolitano. lib. 5.
Ionianus Pontanus. And nothing so familiar if (we may believe those relations
of Saxo Grammat. Olaus Magnus, Damianus A-Goes) as for Witches and Sorcerers,
in Lapland, Suffitibus gaudent Idem Just. Mart. in Apol. pro Christianis.
Lituania, and all over Scandia, to sell winds to Mariners, and cause
tempests, as Marcus Polus the Venetian relates likewise of the Tartars. These
kinds of Devils are much delighted in Sacrifice, says Porphyrius, and held all
the world in awe, and had several names, Idols, Sacrifices in Rome, Greece,
Egypt, and at this day tyrannise over and deceive those Ethnicks and Indians,
being adored and worshipped for In Dei imitationem. says Eusebius.
Gods. And are now as much respected by our Papists, says Et nunc sub diuorum
nomine coluntur a pontificiis.
Pictorius, under the names of Saints. These are they which Cardan thinks
desire so much carnal copulation with Witches, transform bodies, and are so
very cold, that serve Magitians. His father had one of them, as he is not
ashamed to Lib 18. de rerum var.
relate, an aeriall Devil bound to him for 20 and eight years. As Agrypa's
dog had a devil tied to his collar, some think, and Paracelsus (or else
Erastus belies him) had one confined to his sword pummell: others wear them in
rings etc. Iannes and Iambres did many things of old by their help, Simon
Magus, Cinops, and Tritemius of late, that showed Maximilian the Emperor his
wife after she was dead, and verrucam collo eius, says Lib. 3. cap. 3. de
magis and vene ficis, etc. Nereides.
Godelman, so much as the wart in her neck. Delrio lib. 2. has many examples
of their feats: And Cicogna lib. 3. cap. 5. Wierus in his books de praestig.
daemonum, etc.

Water devils, are those Naiades or water Nymphs, which have been heretofore
conversant about Waters and Rivers. The water, as Paracelsus thinks, is their
Chaos, wherein they live, some call them Feries, and say that Habundia is their
Queen, these cause inundations, many times shipwracks, and deceive men
several ways, as Succubae or otherwise. Lib. de Zilphis
Paracelsus has several stories of them, that have lived and bin married to
mortal men, and so continued for certain years with them, and after upon
some dislike have forsaken them. Such a one was Aegeria with whom Numa was so
familiar, Diana, Ceres, etc. Lib. 3.
Olaus Magnus, has a long narration of one Hotherus a King of Sueden, that
having lost his company, as he was hunting one day, met with these water
Nymphs or Fayries, and was feasted by them. And Hector Boethius, of Mackbeth
and Banco, two Scottish Lords, that as they were wandering in the Woods, were
told their fortunes by three strange women. To these heretofore they did use to
sacrifice, by that (...), or divination by waters.

Terrestrial Devils, are those Pro salute hominum excubare se simulant sed in
eorum pernitiem omnia moli^^tur. Aust.
Lares, Genij, Faunes, Satyrs, Dryades, Oreades, Hamadryades.
wood-nymphs, Foliots, Fairies, Robin good fellows, Trulli etc. Which as they
are most conversant with men, so they do them most harm. Some think it was
these alone that kept the Heathen people in awe of old, and had so many Idols,
and Temples erected to them. Of this range was Dagon amongst the Philistines,
Beli amongst the Babylonians, Eluas Olaus vocat. lib. 3.
Astartes amongst the Sydonians; Baal amongst the Samaritans; Isis and Osyris
amongst the Egyptians, etc. Some put our Fairies into this rank, which have
been in former times adored with much superstition, with sweeping their
houses, and setting of a payle of clean water, good victuals and the like, and
then they should not be pinched, but find money in their shoes, and be
fortunate in their enterprises. These are they that dance on heaths and
greenes, as Part. 1. c. 19.
Lauater thinks, and Lib. 3. cap. 11. Eluarum choreas Olaus lib. 3. vocat.
saltum adeo profunde in terras imprimu^s vt locus insigni deinceps virore
orbicularis sit, and gramen non pareat.
Olaus Magnus, and are sometimes seen by old women and children. Hieron.
Pauli, in his description of the city of Bercino in Spain, relates how they
have been familiarly seen near that town, about fountains and hills. Lib.
de Zilph. and Pigmeis. Olaus lib. 3.
Paracelsus reckons up many places in Germany, where they do usually walk in
little coats, some two foot long. A bigger kind there is of them, called with us
Hobgoblins, and Robin good fellows, that would in those superstitious times,
grind Corn for a mess of milk, cut wood, or do any manner of drudgery
work: They would mend old Irons, in those Aeolian Isles of Lypara, in former
times, and have been often seen and heard. Lib. 7. cap, 14. qui and in
famulitio viris and faeminis inseruiunt
Tholosanus calls them Trullos and Getulos, and says that in his time they
were common in many places of France. Dithmarus Bleskenius, in his description
of Islande, reports of a certainty, that almost in every family they have some
such familiar spirits. And Faelix Malleolus in his book de crudelitate
demonum, affirms as much, that these Trolli, or Telchiues, are very common in
Norway, and Ad ministeria vtuntur.
seen to do drudgery work. To draw water, says Wierus, lib. 1. cap. 22.
dress meat or any thing. Another kind of these there are, which frequent
forlorn Where treasure is hid, as some think, or some murder, or such like
villainy committed.
houses, which the Italians call Foliots, most part in^oxious, Lib, 16. de
rerum varietat.
Cardan holds: They will make strange noyses in the night, fling stones, rattle
chains, shave men, fling down platters, stools, chests, sometime appear in
the likeness of Hares, Crows, Frogs, Dogs, etc. Epist. lib. 7.
Plinius Secundus remembers such a house at Athens, which Athenodorus the
Philosopher hired, which no man durst inhabit for fear of Devils. Whether I
may call these Zim and Ophin which Isay cap. 13.21. speaks of I make a doubt.
These kind of Devils many times appear to men, and afright them out of their
wits sometimes walking at Meridionales daemones Cicogna calls them, or
Alastores, l. 3 cap. 9.
noone day, sometimes at nights, cou^terfeiting dead men's Ghosts, as that of
Caligula, which, says Suetonius, was seen to walk in Lauinia's gardens; and
are frequently seen circa sepulchra and Monasteria. Lauat. lib. 1, cap. 19. In
Monasteries and about Churchyards, and foretell men's deaths, by several
signs, as knocking, gronings, etc. See more of these in the said Lauater.
Thyreus de locis infestis, part. 3. cap. 58. Pictorius, Delrio, Cicogna, lib.
3. cap. 9. Negromancers take upon them to raise and lay them at their
pleasures. And so likewise those which Mizaldus calls Ambulones that Lop a
Desert in Asia, noted for such walking spirits, by M. Polus.
walk about midnight on great Heathes and desert places, which, says Part. 1.
c. 19^ Abducunt eos a recta via, and viam iter facientibus intercludunt.
Lauater, draw men out of the way, and lead them all night a by-way, or quite
bar them of their way: these have, several names in several places.
Hieronim. Pauli in his book of the hills of Spain, relates of a great Mons
sterilis and nivosus vbi intempesta nocte vmbrae apparent.
hill in Cantabria where such spectrums are to be seen. Lauater and Cicogna
have variety of examples, of Spectrums and walking Devils in this kind.

Subterranean Devils, are as common as the rest and do as much harm. Olaus
Magnus lib. 6. cap. 19. makes six kinds of them, Some bigger some less. These,
says In Cosmograp.
Munster, are commonly seen about mines of metals, And are some of the^
innoxious, some again do harm. The mettal-men in some places account it good
luck, and a sign of treasure, and rich Ore when they see them. Georgius
Agricola, in his book de subterraneis animantibus, cap. 37. reckons up two more
notable kinds of them, which he calls Vestiti more metallicorum gestus and
opera eorum imitantur.
Getuli and Cobali, which are clothed after the manner of mettal-men, and will
many times imitate their works. Their office, as Pictorius and Paracelsus,
think, is to keep treasure in the earth, that it be not all at once
revealed: and besides Immisso in terrae carceres vento horribiles terraemolus
efficiu^t quibus saepe non domus modo et turres sed civitates integrae et
insule haustae sunt Their offices, operations, studdie.
Cicogna averres, that they are the cause many times of horrible Earthquakes.
Which swallow up sometimes not houses only, but whole Islands and Cities, in
his 3 book, cap. 11. he gives many instances.

Thus the Devil reigns, and in a thousand several shapes As a roaring Lion
still seeks whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5. by Earth, Sea, Land, Air, as yet
vnconfined, he rages while he may to comfort himself, as Lanctantius 2 de
origin erroris cap. 15. hi maligni spiritus per omnem terram vagantur, and
solatium perditionis sua perdendis hominibus operantur.
Lactantius thinks, with other men's falls, he labors all he can to bring
them into the same pit of perdition with him. For Mortalium calamitates epulae
sunt malorum demonum. Synesius.
men's miseries, calamities, and ruins, are the Devils banqueting dishes. By
many temptations and several engines, he seeks to captiuate our souls. The
Lord of lies, says Dominiss men dacis a seipso deceptus alios decipere cupit,
adversarius humani generis, Inventor mortis, superbiae institutor, radix
malitiae, scelerum caput, princeps omnium vitiorum, surit inde in Dei
contumeliam, hominem pernitiem. de horum conatibus and operationibus lege
Epiphanium, 2. Tom lib. 2. Dionysium cap. 4. Ambros. Epist. lib. 10. ep. 8. and
84. August. de Civ. Dei lib. 5. cap, 9, lib 8 cap. 22 lib 9*18 lib. 10*21.7
Theophil. in 12. Mat. Basil ep. 141. Leonem Ser 60. Theodoret in 11. Cor. Ep 2.
Chrysostom, hom. 53. in 12 Genes. Greg. in 1. Cap. Ioh. Barthol. de prop. l 2. c.
20. Zanchium lib 4. de malis angelis. Perer. in Genesis lib. 8. in cap. 6.2.
Origin. saepe preliis intersunt itinera and negotia nostra quaecunque, dirigunt
cladestinis subsiliis optatos saepe praebent successus.
Austin, as he was deceived himself, he seeks to deceive others, the
ringleader to all naughtiness, as he did by Eve and Cain, Sodom, and Gomorah,
so would he do by all the world. Sometimes he tempts by covetousness,
drunkenness, pleasure, pride, etc. he studies our overthrow, and seeks our
destruction. And although he pretend many times humane good, and venditate
himself for a God, by curing of several diseases, aegris sanitatem, and
caecis luminis visum restituendo, as Austin declares, lib. 10. de Civ. Dei,
cap. 6. as Apollo, Aesculapius, Isis of old have done, divert plagues, and
assist them in wars, portend our good, yet nihil his impurius, scelestius,
nihil humano generi infestius, nothing so impure, nothing so pernicious, as may
well appear by their tyrannical, and bloody sacrifices of men to Moloch, and
which are still in use amongst those Barbarous Indians, their several deceits
and cosenings to keep men in obedience, their superstitious impositions of
fasts, penury, etc. heresies, superstitions, observations of meats, times, etc.
by which they Et velut mancipia circumfert, Psellus.
crucify the souls of mortal men, as shall be showed in our Treatise of
Religious Melancholy. Medico adhuc tempore finitur malignari, as Lib. de
transmut. Malac. epis.
Bernard expresses it, by Gods permission he rages awhile, hereafter to be
confined to hell and darkness, Godelmanus cap. 3. lib. 1. de Magis, Idem
Zanchius lib. 4. cap. 10. and 11. de malis angelis
which is prepared for him and his angels, Mat. 25.

How far their power does extend, it is hard to determine, we find by
experience, that they can hurt not our fields only, cattle, goods, but our
bodies and minds. At Hammel in Saxony. Ao 1484.20. Iunij, The Devil in the
likeness of a pied piper, carried away 130. children, that were never after
seen. Many times men are Nociva Melancholia furiosos efficient, and quandoque
penitus intersiciunt. G. Picolomineus Idemque Zanchius cap. 10. lib 4. si Deus
permittat corpora nostra mouere possunt, alterare, quouis morboru^ and malorum
genere afficere, imo and in ipsa penetrare and saevire.
afrighted out of their wits, carried away quite sometimes, and severally
molested by his means. Plotinus the Platonist, lib. 14. adversus Gnost.
laughes them to scorn, that hold the Devil can cause any such diseases. Many
think he can work upon the body, but not upon the mind. But experience
pronounces otherwise, that he can work both upon body and mind. Tertullian
is of this opinion, cap. 22. Inducere potest morbos and sanitates.
that he can cause both sickness and health, and that secretly Viscerum
actiones potest inhibere latenter and venenis nobis ignotis corpus inficere.
Taurellus adds, by clancular poisons he can infect the bodies, and hinder the
operations of the bowels, though we perceive it not, closely creeping into
them, says Irrep^ntes corporibus occulte morbos fingunt, mentes terrent,
membra distorquent. Lips. Phil. Stoic. lib. 1. c. 19
Lipsius, and so crucify our souls. For being a spiritual body, he struggles
with our spirits, says Rogers, and suggests according to De rerum var. l. 16.
c. 93.
Cardan, verba sine voce, species sine visu, envy, lust, anger, etc. As he sees
men inclined. The manner how he performs it, Biarmannus in his Oration against
Bodine sufficiently declares, He Quum men's immediate decipi nequit primum mouet
phantasiam and ita obfirmat vanis conceptibus vt ne quem facultati aestimatiue,
rationiue locum relinqu^t. Spiritus malus inuadit animam, turbat sensus, in
furorem coniicit. Austin de vit, B^at.
begins first with the fantasy, and moves that so strongly that no reason is
able to resist. Now the Fantasy he moves by mediation of humors: Although
many Physicians are of opinion that the Devil can alter the mind, and produce
this disease of himself. Quibusdam medicorum visum, says Lib. 3. Fen. 1.
Tract. 4. cap. 18.
Avicenna, quod Melancholia contingat a daemonio. Of the same mind is Psellus,
and Rhasis the Arab. lib. 1. Tract. 9. Cont. a daemone maxim proficisci, and
saepe solo.
that this disease proceeds especially from the devil, and from him alone. And
Arculanus cap. 6. in 9. Rhasis, Aelianus Montaltus in his 9. cap. confirms as
much, that the devil can cause this disease; by reason many times that the
parties affected prophecy, speak strange languages, but non sine interuentu
humoris, not without the humor as he interprets himself, no more does
Avicenna, si contingat a daemonio, sufficit nobis vt convertat complectionem ad
choleram nigram, and sit causa eius propinqua cholera nigra, the immediate cause
is choler adust: and there upon belike this humor of melancholy, is called
Balneum Diaboli, the Devils Bath: the Devil spying his opportunity of such
humors, drives them many times to despair, fury, rage, etc. mingling himself
amongst those humors. And this is that which Lemnius goes about to prove,
Immiscent se mali genij prauis humoribus, atque atrae bili, etc. And Cap. de
mania lib. de morbis Cerebri Daemones quum sint tenues and inco^prehensibiles
spiritus se insinuare corporibus humanis possunt and occulte in visceribus
operti valetudinem vitiare, somniis animas terrere and mentes furoribus
quatere. Insinuant se melancholicorum penetralibus intus ibique considunt and
delitiantur tanquam in regione clarissimorum sideru^ coguntque animum furere.
Jason Pratensis that the Devil being a slender incomprehensible spirit, can
easily insinuate and wind himself into humane bodies, and cunningly couched
in our bowels, vitiate our healths, terrify our souls with fearful dreams,
and shake our mind with furies. And in another place. These unclean spirits
settled in our bodies, and now mixed with our melancholy humors, do triumph as
it were, and sport themselves, as in another heaven. Thus he argues, and that
they go in and out of our bodies, as Bees do in a hiue, and so provoke us and
tempt us as they perceive our temperature inclined of it self, and most apt to
be deluded. Lib. 1. cap. 6. occult. Philos.
Agrippa and Part. I. cap. 2. de spectris.
Lauater are persuaded that this humor invites the Devil to it, wheresoever
it is in extremity, and of all others Melancholy persons are most subject to
diabolical temptations, and illusions, and most apt to entertain them) and
the Devil best able to work upon them. But whether by obsession, or
possession, or otherwise, I will not determine, it is a difficult question.
Delrio the Jesuit Tom. 3. lib. 6. Springer and his Colleague mall. malef. P.
Thyreus. Hieroninus Mengus Flagel. daem. and others of that rank of
pontificiall writers, it seems by their exorcismes and coniurations approve of
it, having forged many stories to that purpose. A Nun did eat a lettice Sine
cruce and sanctificatione sic a daemone obsessa. dial. Greg pap. cap. 9.
without grace, or signing it with the sign of the Cross, and was instantly
possessed. Durand. lib. 6. Rational. cap. 86. number. 8. relates that he saw a
wench possessed in Bononia with two Devils, by eating an unhallowed
Pomegranet, as she did afterward confess, when she was cured by exorcismes.
And therefore our Papists do sign themselves so often with the sign of the
Cross, ne demon ingredi ausit, and exorcise all manner of meats, as being
unclean or accursed otherwise, as Bellarmine defends. Many such stories I
find amongst Pontificiall writers, to prove their assertions, let them free
their own credits: some few I will recite in this kind out of most approved
Physicians. Cornelius Gemma lib. 2. de not. mirac. cap. 4. relates of a young
maid, called Katherine Gualter a Coupers daughter, Ao 1571. that had such
strange passions and conuulsions, that three men could not sometimes hold her,
she purged a live Eele, which he saw a foot and a half long, and touched
himself, but the Eele afterward vanished, she vomited after some 24l of black
stuff of all colors, twice a day for fourteen days: and after that she
vomited great balls of hair, pieces of wood, pigeons dung, parchment, Goose
dung, coals; and after them 2 pound of pure blood, and then again coals, and
stones, of which some had inscriptions, bigger the^ a walnut, some of them
pieces of glass, brass, etc. Besides strange paroxismes of laughing, weeping,
and ecstasies, etc. Et hoc inquit cum horrore vidi, this I saw with horror. They
could do no good on her by physic, but left her to the Clergy. Marcellus
Donatus lib. 2. cap. 1. de med. mirab. has such another story of a country
fellow, that had four knifes in his belly, Instar serrae dentatos indented
like a saw, every one a spanne long, and a wreath of hair like a globe, with
much baggage of like sort, wonderful to behold. How it should come into his
guts, he concludes, Certe non alio quam daemonis astutia and dolo. Langius
epist. med. lib. 1. epist. 38. has many relations to this effect, and so has
Christophorus a Vega. Wierus, Skenkius, Scribanius, all conclude that they are
done by the subtilty and illusion of the Devil. If you shall ask a reason of
all this, it is to try us and our faith, it is for our offenses, and for the
punishment of our sins, by Gods permission they do this, Carnifices
vindictae iustae Dei, as Lib. 28. cap. 26. To. 2.
Tholosanu^ styles them, Executioners of his will: or rather as David, Psalm.
7^. ver. 49. He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, indignation,
wrath, and vexation by sending out of evil angels. So did he afflict Job,
Saul, The lunaticks and daemoniacall persons whom Christ cured, Mat. 4.8. Luc.
4.11. Luc. 13. Marc. 9. Tobit. 8.3. etc. This I say happens for a punishment
of sin, for their want of faith, incredulity, weakness, distrust, etc.

SVBSEC. 3. Of Witches and Magitians how they cause melancholy.
YOu have heard what the Devil can do of himself, now you shall hear what
he can perform by his instruments, who are many times worse (if it be
possible) then he himself, and to satisfy their revenge and lust, cause more
mischief, multa enim mala non egisset demon, nisi provocatus a sagis, as De
Lamijs.
Erastus thinks; much harm had never been done, had he not been provoked by
Witches to it; He had not appeared in Samuels shape, if the Witch of Endor had
let him alone; or represented those serpents in Pharao's presence, had not the
Magitians urged him unto it: nec morbos vel hominibus, vel brutis infligeret:
Erastus maintains, si sagae quiescerent; men and cattle might go free, if
these Witches would let him alone. Many deny Witches at all, or if there be
any, they can do no harm: of this opinion is Wierus lib. 3. cap. 53 de
praestig. daem. Austin Lerchemer a Dutch writer, Biarmanus, Ewichius, Euwaldus.
our countriman Scot: but on the contrary are most Lawyers, Divines, Physicians,
Philosophers, Austin. Hemingius, Daneus, Chytreus, Zanchius, Aretius, etc.
Delrio, Springer, Cuiatius, Bartolus, consil. 6. To. 1. Bodine daemomant. lib.
2. cap. 8. Godelman, Damhoderius, etc. Paracelsus, Erastus, Scribanius,
Camerarius, etc. The parties by whom the Devil deals, may be reduced to these
two, such as command him in show at least, as Conjurers, or such as are
commanded as Witches, that deal ex part implicit, or explicit, as the Rex
Iacobus Daemonol. l. 1. c. 3
King has well defined; Many subdivisions there are, and many several Species
of Sorcerers, and Witches, Inchanters, Charmers etc. and have been tolerated
heretofore some of them; and Magic has been publicly professed in former
times, in An University in Spain in old Castile.
Salamancae, and some other places, though after censured by several Oxford
and Paris, see fine^. P. Lumbardi.
Universities, and now generally contradicted. That which they can do, is as
much almost as the Devil himself, who is still ready to satisfy their
desires, to oblige them the more unto him. They can cause tempests, storms,
which is familiarly practiced by Witches in Norway, Island, as I have proved.
They can make friends enemies, and enemies friends, Steriles nuptos and
inhabiles.
by philters, Erastus.
turpes amores conciliare, enforce love, hurt, and infect men and beasts,
vines, corn, cattle, make wo^en abortiue, not to conceive, barren, men and
women, unapt and unable, married and unmarried, 50 several ways, says
Bodine: fly in the air, meet when and where they will, as Cicogna proves,
and Lauat. de spect. part. 2. cap. 17. make men victorious, fortunate,
eloquent. And therefore in those ancient Milles.
Monamachies and combats, Adolphus Scribanius.
they were searched of old, they had no Magical charms; they can make D.
Luther. in primum praeceptum.
stick-free's, such as shall endure a rapiers point, or musket shot and neu'r
be wounded, Lauater Cicog.
represent dead men's shapes, alter and turn themselves and others into
several forms, at their pleasures: And last of all cure, and cause most
diseases, Erastus.
to such as they hate, and this of Virg. Aeneid. 4. incantatricem describens:
Haec se carminibus promittit soluere mentes: Quas velit ast alijs duras
immittere curas.
Melancholy amongst the rest. Paracelsus To. 4. de morbis amentium. Tract. 1.
in express words affirms, multi fascinantur in melancholia^, many are
bewitched into Melancholy, out of his experience. The same says Daneus lib. 3.
de sortiarijs. Vidi inquit, qui melancholicos morbos gravissimos induxerunt: I
have seen those that have caused Melancholy in the most grievous manner,
Godelmannus cap 7. lib 1. nutricum mammas praesiccant, solo tactu podagram,
Apoplexiam, Paralisin, and alios morbos quos medicina curare non poterat.
dried up women's pappes, and cured gout, palsy, this and Apoplexy, Falling
Sickness, which no Physic could help: solo tactu, by touch alone. Ruland in
his 3. Cent. cura. 91. gives an instance of one David Held a young man, who by
eating cakes which a Witch, gave him mox delirare coepit; began to dote on a
sudden, and was mad, F.H.D. in Factus inde Maniacus, spic. 2. sol. 147.
Hildisheim, consulted about a Melancholy man, thought his disease was partly
Magical, and partly natural, because he vomited pieces of iron and lead,
and spoke such Languages as he had never been taught: but such examples are
common in Scribanius, and others. The means by which they work, are commonly
Char^es, Images, as that in Hector Boethius of King Duffe: characters stamped
of sundry metals, and at such and such constellations, knots, amulets, words,
Philters, etc. which generally make the parties affected melancholy, as Omnia
Philtra etsi inter se differant, hoc habent common, quod hominem efficiant
melancholicum. ep. 231. Scolzij.
Monauius discourses at large in an Epistle of his to Acolsius, giving
instance in a Bohemian Baron that was so troubled, by a Philter taken. Not that
there is any such power at all, in such spells, charms, and barbarous words,
but that the devil does use such means to delude them.

SVBSEC. 4. Stars a cause. Figures from Phisiognomy, Metoposcopi, Chiromancy.
Natural causes, are either Primary and Universal, or Secundary and more
Particular. Primary causes are the Heavens, Planets, Stars, etc. by their
influence, as our Astrologers hold, producing this and such like effects. I
will not here stand to discuss obiter, whether Stars be causes, or signs,
or to apologize f^r Judicial Astrology. If either Sextus Empericus, Picus
Mirandula, Sextus ab Heminga, Pererius, Erastus, Chambers, etc. have so far
prevailed with any man, that he will attribute no virtue at all to the
Heavens, or to Sun and Moon, more then he does to their signs, at an
In-keepers post, or Tradesmans shop, or generally condemn all such
Astrologicall Aphorisms, approved by experience, I refer him to Bellantius,
Pirouanus, Marascallerus, Goclenius, Sr Christopher Heydon etc. If thou shall
ask me what I think. I must Cum illo dicam, doctis hisce erroribus versatus
sum.
answer, they do incline, but not compel; no necessity at all: Astra regunt
homines, and regit astra Deus.
Agunt, non cogunt: and so gently incline, that a wise man may resist them;
sapiens dominabitur astris: they rule us, but God rules them. All this me
thinks Chirom. lib. 5. Quaeris a me quantum operantur astra, dico in nos nihil
astra vrgere, sed animum proclives trahere, qui sic tamen liberi sunt, vt si
ducem sequantur rationem, nihil efficient, sin vero naturam, id agere quod in
brutis fere.
Johan. de Iudagine has comprised in brief. Quaeris a me quantum in nobis
operantur astra? etc. Will thou know how far the stars work upon us? I say
they do but incline us, and that so gently, that if we will be ruled by
reason, they have no power over us; but if we follow our own nature, and be
led by sense, they do as much in us, as in brute beasts, and we are no better.
So that I hope I may justly conclude with Caelum vehi culum divinae virtutis,
euius mediante motu, lumine, and influentia, Deus elementaria corpora ordinat
and disponit. Th. de Veio Caietanus in Psalm. 104.
Caretan, that Caelum is vehiculum divinae virtutis etc. that the Heaven is
Gods Instrument, by mediation of which, he governes and disposes these
elementary bodies, or a great book, as one calls it, wherein are written many
strange things, for such as can read, Mundus iste quasi lyra ab
excellentissimo quodam artifice concinnata, que^ qui norit, mirabiles eliciet
harmonias. I. D^e Aphorismo 11.
or an excellent harp, made by an eminent workman, of which he that can but
play, will make most admirable music. But to the purpose.

Medicus sine caeli peritia nihil est, etc, nisi genesim sciverit, ne tantillum
poterit. Lib. de podagra.
Paracelsus is of opinion, that a Physician, without the knowledge of stars,
can neither understand the cause, or cure of any disease, either of this, or
gout, no not so much as toothache: Except he see the peculiar geniture and
Scheame of the party affected. And for this proper Malady, he will have the
principal and primary cause of it proceed from the Heaven, ascribing more to
sta^res then humors, Constellatio in causa est: and influentia caeli morbum
hunc movet, interdum omnibus alijs amotis. Et alibi. Origo eius a caelo petenda
est. Tr. de morbis amentium.
and that the constellation alone many times produces melancholy, all other
causes set apart. He gives instance in Lunatic persons, that are depraved of
their wits by the Moons motion; and in another place, referres all to the
Ascendent, and will have the true and chief cause of it to be sought from the
Stars. And it is not his opinion only, but many Galenists and Philosophers,
though they not so stiffly and peremptorily, maintain as much. This variety of
melancholy-symptomes, proceed from the stars, says Lib. de anima cap. de
humorib. Ea varietas in Melancholia, habet caelestes causas.
Melancthon. The most generous melancholy, as that of Augustus comes from the
conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Libra: the bad, as that of Catilines from
the meeting of Saturn and the Moon in Scorpio. Iouianus Pontanus in his 10.
book, and in.
and 13. Chap. de rebus caelestibus,, and in.
discourses to this purpose at large. Ex atra bile varij generantur morbi etc.
Ex atra bile varij generantur morbi, per inde vt ipse multum calidi aut frigidi
in se babuerit, quum vtrique suscipiendo qua^ aptissima sit, tamet si suapte
natura frigida sit. An non aqua sic afficitur a calore vtardeat, ^ a frigore,
vt in glaciem concrescat, and haec varietas distinctionum alij flent, rident,
etc.
many diseases proceed from black choler, as it shall be hot or cold: and
though it be cold in his own Nature, yet it is apt to be heated, as water may
be made to boil, and burn as bad as fire: and made as Ice, and thence proceed
such variety of symptoms, some mad, some solitary, some laugh, some rage
etc. The cause of all which intemperance, he will have chiefly and primarily to
proceed from the Heavens, Hanc ad intemperantiam gignendam plurimum confert
and positio etc.
from the position of Mars, Saturn, and Mercury. His Aphorisms be these:
Quoties alicuius genitura in and adverso signo positut horoscopum portiliter
tenuerit, atque etiam a vel radio percussus fuerit, natus ab insania vexabitur.
Mercury in any geniture, if he shall be found in Virgo, or Pisces his opposite
sign, and that in the Horoscope, irradiated by those quartile aspects of
Saturn or Mars, the child shall be mad or melancholy. Again, Qui and habent,
alterum in culmine, alterum imo caelo, cum in lucem venerit melancholicus erit,
a qua sanabitur, si illos irradiarit.
He that shall have Saturn or Mars, the one culminating, the other in the 4.
house, when he shall be borne, shall be melancholy, of which he shall be cured
in time, if Mercury behold them. Hac configuratione natus, aut lunaticus,
autmente captus.
If the Moon be in conjunction or opposition at the birth-time, with the
Sun, or Saturn, or Mars, or a quartile aspect with them, ( e malo caeli
loco, Leouitius adds) many diseases are signified, especially the Head and
Brain is like to be mis-affected with pernicious humors, to be melancholy,
lunaticke, or mad. Cardan adds quarta luna natos, Eclipses, Earthquakes.
Garceus and Leovitius will have the chief Judgment to be taken from the Lord of
the Geniture, or when there is no aspect betwixt the Moon and Mercury, and
neither behold the Horoscope: or Saturn and Mars shall be Lord of the
precedent conjunction or opposition in Sagittary, or Pisces, of the Sun or
Moon, such persons are commonly Epilepticke, dote, Daemoniacall, Melancholy:
but see more of these Aphorisms in the aboue-named Pontanus. Garceus cap. 23.
de Iud. genitur. Sconer. lib. 1. cap. 8. which he has gathered out of
Ptolomeus centiloquio, and quadripartito tribuit omnia melancholicorum
symptomata syderum influentijs.
Ptolomy, Albubater, and some other Arabians, Iunctine, Ranzovius, Lindhout,
Origan etc. but these men you will reject peradventure, as Astrologers, and
therefore partial Judges: but hear the Testimony of Physicians, Galenists
themselves. Art Medica, accedunt ad has causas affectiones syderum. Plurimum
incitant and provocant influentiae caelestes. Velcurio lib. 4. cap. 15.
Crato confesses the influence of stars to have a great hand in this
Disease, so does Jason Pratensis, Lonicerus praefat. de Apoplexia, Ficinus,
Fernelius, etc. Hildesheim spicel. 2. de Mel.
P. Cnemander acknowledges the stars an universal cause, the particular
from parents, from the use of these 6. non-naturall things. Baptista Portae
mag. lib. 1. cap. 10.11.15. will have them causes to every particular
individuum. Instances and examples to evince the truth of these Aphorisms, are
common amongst those Astrologian Treatises. Cardan in his 37. geniture, gives
instance in Math. Bologinus. Camerarius hor. natalit. centur. ^. genit. 6, and
7. of Daniel Gare, and others: but see Garceus cap. 33. Luc. Gauricus Tract. 6.
de Azemenis, etc. The time of this Melancholy is, when the significators in any
geniture are directed according to Art, as the Hor: moon, Hylech etc. to the
hostile beams or terms of and especially, or any fixed star of their
nature, or if by his revolution, or transitus, shall offend any of those
radical promissors in the geniture.

Other signs there are taken from Phisiognomy, Metoposcopy, Chiromancy, which
because John de Indagine, and Rotman, the Landsgraue of Hassia his
Mathematician, not long since in his Chiromancy; Baptista Porta in his
celestial Physiognomy, have proved to have great affinity with Astrology: to
satisfy the curious, I am more willing to insert. The general notions
Polemus. Adamantus. Io de Indag. c. 9. Montaltus c. 22.
Physiognomers give, be these: Black color argues natural melancholy: so does
leanness, hirsutnesse, broad veins, much hair on the brows, says Caput
paruum qui habent, cerebrum habent and spiritus plerumque angustos, facile
incidunt in Melancholiam rubicundi, Aetius. Idem Montaltus cap. 22. e Galeno.
Gratanorolus cap, 7. and a little head, out of Aristotle, high sanguine, red
color, argues head melancholy: those that stutter, and are balde, will be
soonest melancholy, as Avicenna supposes, by reason of the dryness of their
brains: but he that will know more of the several signs of humors, and wits
out of Physiognomy, let him consult with Antony Zara, anat. ingeniorum. sec. 1.
memb. 13. and 14. Chiromancy has these Aphorisms to foretell melancholy.
Tasneir lib. 5. cap. 2. who has comprehended the sum of John de Indagine:
Tricassus, Coruinus and others in his book, thus has it: Saturnina a Rascetta
per mediam manum decurrens, vsq ad radicem montis Saturni, a parvi^ lineis
intersecta, arguit Melancholicos. Aphoris. 78.
The Saturnine line going from the Rascetta, through the hand, to Saturnes
mount, and there intersected by certain little lines, argues melancholy: so if
the Vital and Natural make an acute angle. Aphoris. 100. The Saturnine
Epaticke, and Natural lines, making a gross triangle in the hand, argue as
much: which Goclenius cap. 5. Chiros. repeates verbatim out of him. Ingenerally
they conclude all, that if Saturnes mount be full of many small lines and
intersections, Agitantur miserijs, continuis inquiet udinibus, neque vnquam a
solitudine liberi sunt, auxie affliguntur amarissimis intra cogitationibus
semper tristes, suspitiosi, meticulosi, cogitationes sunt velle agrum colere,
stagna amant and paludes etc. Io. de Indagine lib. 1.
such men are most part melancholy, miserable, and full of disquietnesse, care,
and trouble, continually vexed with anxious and bitter thoughts, always
sorrowful, fearful, suspicious, they delight in husbadry, buildings, pooles,
marshes, springs woods, walks etc. Thaddeus Haggesius in his Metoposcophia,
has certain Aphorisms derived from Saturnes lines in the forehead, by which
he collects a melancholy disposition: and Caelestis Physiog. lib. 10.
Baptista Porta makes observations from those other parts of the body, as if a
spot be over the spleen; Cap. 14. lib. 5. Idem, maculae in vn^^lu nigrae,
lites, rixas, melancholiam significant ab humore in cord tali.
or in the nails, if it appear black, it signifies much care, contention,
grief, and melancholy: The reason, he referres to the humors, and gives
instance in himself, that for seven years space, had such continual black
spots in his nails, and all that while was in perpetual Lawsutes,
controversies for his inheritance, fear, loss, of honor, banishment, grief,
care etc. and when his miseries ended, the black spots vanished. Cardan in his
book de libris proprijs, tells such another story of his own person, that a
little before his Sons death, he had a black spot which appeared in one of
his nails, which dilated it self, as he came nearer to his end. But I am
over tedious in these toys, which howsoever in some men's too severe censures,
they may be held absurd and ridiculous, I am the bolder to insert, as not
borrowed of circumforanean roagues and Gypsies, but out of the writings of
worthy Philosophers, and Physicians, yet living some of them, and Regious
Professors in famous Universities, who are able to patronize that which they
have said^, and vindicate themselves from all cavillers and ignorant persons.

SVBSECT. 5. Old age a cause.
SEcundary, peculiar causes, efficient, so called in respect of the other
precedent, are either congenitae, internae, innatae, as they term them,
inward, innate, and inbred: or else outward and adventitious, which happen to us
after we are borne: congenit or borne with us, are either natural, as old
age, or praeter naturam, as Lib. 1. Path. cap. 11.
Fernelius calls it, that distemperature, which we have from our Parents seed,
it being an hereditary disease. The first of these which is natural to all,
and which no man living can avoid, is Venit enim properata malis inopina
senectus. Et dolor aetatem iussitinessemeam. Boethius met. ^. de consol. Philos.
old age, which being cold and dry, and of the same quality as melancholy is,
must needs cause it by diminution of spirits and substance, and increasing
adust humors. And therefore Cap. de humoribus lib. de Anima.
Melancthon averres out of Aristotle as an undoubted truth, senes plerunque
delirasse in senecta, that old men familiarly dote ob atram bilem, or black
choler, which is then super-abundant in them. And Rhases that Arabian Physician
in his Cont. lib. 1. cap. 9. calls it, Necessarium accidens decrepitis and
insepabile.
a necessary and inseparable accident, to all old and decrepit persons. After
Psalm. 90.10.
70. years (as the Psalmist says) all is trouble and sorrow, and common
experience confirms the truth of it, in all weak old persons, especially in
such as have lived in action all their lives, and have had great employment,
much business, much command, and many servants, to oversee, and leave off ex
abrupto: as Meteran. Balg. hist. lib. 1.
Charles the fifth did to King Philip, resign up all on a sudden: they are
overcome with melancholy in an instant. Or if they do continue in such
courses, they dote at last, senex bis puer, and are not able to manage their
estates, through common infirmities incident to their age, full of ache, sorrow
and grief, children again, disardes the Carle many times as they sit, and
talk to themselves, they are angry, waspish, displeased with every thing,
suspicious of all, wayward, covetous, hard, says Tully Sunt morosi anxij and
iracundi, and difficiles senes, si quaerimus etiam avari. Tully de senectute.
selfewilled, superstitious, selfe-conceited, braggers, and admirers of
themselves, as Lib. 2. de aulico. Senes avari, moresi, iactabundi, philauti,
deliri, superstitiosi, suspitiosi etc.
Balthazar Castilio has truly noted of them. This natural infirmity is most
eminent in old women, and such as are poor solitary, and live in base esteem
and beggary, and such as are witches: In so much, that Lib. 3. de Lamijs cap.
17. and 18.
Wierus, Baptista Porta, Vlricus Molitor, Ewichus, do refer all that witches
are said to do to Imagination alone, and this humor of melancholy: and whereas
it is controverted, whether they can bewitch cattle etc. to death, ride in the
air upon a cowlstaffe, out of a chimny top, transform themselves into
cattes, dogs, etc. translate bodies from place to place, meet in companies,
and dance as they do, or have carnal copulation with the Devil, they ascribe
all to this redundant melancholy, which domineeres in them, to Solanum op^^
lupi adeps, lac asini etc. sanguis infantium etc.
somniferous potions, and natural causes, the Devils policy. No^ laedunt
omnino says Wierus, aut quid mirum faciunt de Lamijs lib. 3. cap, 36. vt
putatur, solam vitiatam habent phantasiam: they do no such wonders at all,
only their Corrupta est ijs ab humore Melancholico phantasia. Nymanus.
Brains are crazed. Putant se laedere, quando non laedunt.
They think they are witches and can do hurt, but do not. But this opinion
Bodine, Erastus, Daneus, Scribanius, explode: and Lib. 3. cap. 4. omnif. mag.
Cicogna confutes at large. That witches are melancholy, they deny not, but not
out of a corrupt fantasy alone, so to delude themselves and others, or to
produce such effects.

SVBSEC. 6. Parents a cause by propagation.
THat other inward inbred cause of Melancholy, is our temperature in whole or
part, Vt arthritici Epilept. etc.
which we receive from our parents, which Lib. 1. cap. 11. path.
Fernelius calls praeter naturam, or unnatural, it being an haereditary
disease: for as he iustifies, quale parentum maxim patris semen obtigerit,
tales evadunt similares, spermaticaeque parts, quocunque etiam morbo pater
quum generat tenetur, cum semine transfert in prolem: Such as the temperature
of the father is, such is the sons; and look what disease the father had
when he begot him, such his son will have after him, Vt filij non tam
possessionum quam morborum ^aeredes sint.
and is as well inheritor of his infirmities, as of his lands. And whereas the
complexion and constitution of the father is corrupt, there says Epist. de
secretis artis and naturae cap. 7. nam in hoc quod patres corruptisunt,
generant filios corruptae complexionis, and compositionis, and silij eorum
eadem de causa se corrumpunt, and sic deriuatur corruption a patribus ad filios.
Roger Bacon, the complexion of the son must needs be corrupt, and so the
corruption is derived from the father, to the son. Now this does not so much
appear in the composition of the Body, according to that of Non tam inquit
Hippocrates gibbos and cicatrices ora and corporis habitum agnoscis ex ijs, sed
verum incessum, gestus, mores, morbos etc.
Hippocrates: in habit, proportion, scarres, and other lineaments, but in
manners and conditions of the Mind: Et patrum in natos abeunt cum semine
mores. Seleucus had an anchor on his thigh, and so had his posterity, as Trogus
records, lib. 15. Lepidus in Pliny. lib. 7. cap. 17. was purblind, and so was
his son. That famous family of Aenobarbi, were known of old, and so surnamed
from their red beardes, as the Austrian lip at this day, and those Indians
flat noses are propagated, the Bavarian chinne, and goggle eyes amongst the
Jews, as Sinagog. ^ud.
Buxendorfius observes: their voice, pace, gesture, looks, is likewise
derived, and all the rest of their conditions and infirmities; such a mother,
such a daughter; their very Affectus parentum in faetus transeunt, and puerorum
malitia parentibus imput anda. lib. 4. cap. 3. de occult. not. mirac.
affections Lemnius contends to follow their seed, and the malice and bad
conditions of children, are many times wholly to be imputed to their parents. I
need not therefore make any doubt of Melancholy, but that it is an hereditary
disease. Ex pituitosis pituitosi, ex biliosis biliosi, ex lienosis and
melancholicis, melancholici.
Paracelsus in express words affirms it lib; de morb. amentium. To. 4. Tract.
1. and so does Epist. 174. in Scoltzius. nascitur nobiscum illa aliturque and
vna cum parentibus habemus malum hunc assem. Io. Peletius lib. 2. de cura
bumanor^ affectuum.
Crato in an epistle of his to Monauius. Montaltus proves cap. 11. out of
Hippocrates and Plutarch, that such hereditary dispositions are frequent, and
(hanc inquit) fieri reor ob participatam melancholicam intemperantiam, speaking
of a patient: I think he became so by participation of Melancholy. Lib. 10.
observat. 15.
Forestus in his medicinal observations, illustrates this point, with an
example of a Merchant his patient, that had this infirmity by inheritance.
Lodovicus Mercatus a Spanish Physician, in that excellent Tract, which he has
lately written of hereditary diseases. Tom. 2. oper. lib. 5. reckons up
Leprosy, as those Maginus Geog.
Galbots in Gascony, hereditary Lepers, Pox, Stone, Gout, Epilepsie etc. and
amongst the rest, this, and Madness after a set time, comes to them, which he
calls a miraculous thing in Nature, and sticks for ever to them as an
incurable Habit. And that which is more to be wondered at, it skippes in some
Families the Father, and goes to the Son, Saepe non eundem, sed similem
producit effectum, and illaeso parente transit in nepotem.
or takes every other, and sometimes every third in a lineall descent, and does
not always produce the same, but some like, and a symbolizing disease. And
these secundary causes so derived, are commonly so powerful, that as Dial.
praefix. genituris Leouitij.
Wolfius holds, saepe mutant decreta siderum, they do often alter the primary
causes, and decrees of the heavens. For these reasons belike the Church and
commonwealth, humane and divine Laws, have conspired to avoid hereditary
diseases, forbidding such marriages as are any whit allied; and as Mercatus
advises all Families, to take such, si fieri possit quae maxim distent
natura, to make choice of those that are most differing in complexion from
the^: if they love their own, and respect the common good. And sure I think,
that it has been ordered by Gods especial providence, that in all ages there
should be, as usually there is, once in Bodine de rep. cap. de Periodis reip.
600 years, a transmigration of Nations, to amend and purify their brood, as
we alter seed upon our land, and that there should be, as it were, an
inundation of those Northern Goths and Vandales, Scythians, and many such
like Nations, which came out of that continent of Scandia, and Sarmatia, as
some suppose, and ouerranne as a deluge, most parts of Europe and Afric, to
alter for our good, our complexions, which were much defaced with hereditary
infirmities, which by our lust and intemperance we had contracted. A sound
generation of strong and able men were sent amongst us, as those Northern men
usually are, and innocuous, free from riot, and free from diseases. To qualify
us, and make us as those poor naked Indians are generally at this day; and
these about Brasile, as a late Claudius Abauille Capuchian, in his voyage to
Maragnan 1614 cap. 45. Nemo fere aegrotus sano omnes and robusto corpore vivunt
annos 120. 140. sine medicina. Idem Hector Boethius de Insulis Orchid Damianus
a Goes de Scandia
Writer relates) in the Isle of Maragnan, free from all hereditary, or other
contagion, where as without help of Physic they live commonly 120 years, or
more. And such are the common effects of temperance, and intemperance; but I
will descend to particulars, and show by what means, and by whom especially
this infirmity is derived unto us.

Filij ex senibus natiraro sunt firmi temperamenti, old men's children are
seldom of a good temperament, as Scoltzius supposes, consult. 177, and
therefore most apt to this disease: and as Lib. 4 cap. 3. de occult. not. mir.
Tetricos plerunque filios senes progenerant, and tristes r^^ius exhileratos.
Levinus Lemnius farther adds, old men beget most part wayward, peevish, sad,
melancholy sons, and seldom merry. He that begets a child upon a full
stomach, will either have a sick child, or a crased son: as Coitus super
repletionem pessimus, and filii qui tum gignuntur, aut morbosi sunt, aut
stolidi.
Cardan thinks. Contradic, med. lib. 1. tract. 5. contradic. 18. or if the
parents be sick, or have any great pain of the head, as megrim, headache, as
Hieronimus, Dial. praefix. Leovitio.
Wolfius does instance in a child of Sebastian Castilio's, or if a drunken man
get a child, it will never likely have a good brain. Gellius lib. 12. cap. 1.
ebrij gignunt ebrios, one drunkard begets another, says Lib. de educ. liberis.
Plutarch: whose sentence De occult. not. mir. temulentae and stolidae mulieres
liberos plevumque producunt sibi similes.
Lemnius approues lib. 1. cap, 4. foolish, drunken, or hairebraine women, most
part bring forth children like unto themselves: and so likewise, he that lies
with a menstruous woman. Intemperantia veneris quam in nautis prasertim in
sectatur Lib. 2. cap. 8. de occult. not. mir. Good Master Schoolmaster do not
english this.
Lemnius, qui vxores ineunt, nulla menstrui decursus ratione habita, nec
observato interlunio, praecipua causa est noxia, pernitiosa, and quarta luna
concepti, infaelices plerumque and amentes, deliri, stolidi, omnibus bonis
corporis atque animi destituti: ad laborem nati, inquit Eustathius vt Hercules,
and alij. Buxendorfius cap. 31. Synagog. Iud. Ezekiel. 18.
Iudaei maxim insectantur foedum hunc, and immundum apud Christianos
concubitum, and vt illicitum abhorrent, apud eos prohibent: and quod Christiani
toties leprosi, amentes, tot morbilli, tam multi morbi epidemici acerbi, and
venenosi sint, in hunc immundum concubitum reijciunt, and crudeles illos in
pignora vocant, qui quarta luna profluente hac mensium illuvie concubitum hunc
non perhorrescunt. Damnavit olim divina lex, and morte mulctavit huiusmodi
homines, Levit. 18.20. and inde nati si qui deformes aut mutili, pater
delapidatus quod non contineret ab Drusius obseru. lib. 3. cap. 20.
immunda muliere. Gregorius Magnus petenti Augustino nunquid apud Beda eccl.
hist. lib. 1. cap. 27. respons. 10.
Britannos huiusmodi concubitum toleraret, severe prohibuit, viris suis tum
misceri faeminas in consuetis suis menstruis etc, I spare to English this which
I have said. Another cause some give inordinate Diet, as if a man eat
garlic, onions, or fast overmuch, or study too hard, or be over-sorrowfull,
dull, heavy, their children, says Nam spiritus cerebri si tum male
afficiantur, tales procreant, and quales fuerint aff^ct^s, tales filiorum: ex
tristibus trist^s ex iucundis nascuntur. etc.
Cardan subtle. lib. 18. will be subject to madness and melancholy: for if the
spirits of the brain be fusled, or mis-affected by such means, at such a
time, their children will be fusled in the brain: they will be dull, heavy,
discontented all their lives. Some are of opinion, and maintain that Paradoxe
or Problem, that wise men beget commonly fools, and which Fol. 129 mor.
Socrates children were fools. Sabel.
Erasmus maintains in his Moria, fools beget wise men. Cardan subt. lib. 12.
glues this cause, quoniam spiritus sapientum ob studium resolvuntur, and in
cerebrum feruntur a cord: because their natural spirits are resolved by
study, and turned into animal, drawn from the heart, and those other parts to
the brain. Lib. 1. cap 4. de occult. not. mir.
Lemnius subscribes to that of Cardan, and assigns this reason quod persoluant
debitum languide, and oscitanter, vnde faetus a parentum generositate
desciscit: they pay their debt, as Paul calls it, to their wives but sparingly
and remissely, do their business, by which means their children are
weakelings, and many times idiots and fools.

Some other causes are given, which properly pertain to, and proceed from the
mother: If she be ouer-dull, heavy, angry, peevish, discontented, and
Melancholy, not only at the time of conception, but even all the while she
carries the child in her womb, says Fernelius path. lib. 1. cap. 11. her
son will be so likewise affected, and worse. de occult. not. mir.
Lemnius ads, lib. 4. cap. 7. if she grieve overmuch, be disquieted, or by any
casuality be affrighted and terrified by some fearful object, heard or seen,
she endangers her child, and spoils the temperature of it: Pica morbus
mulierum.
for the strange Imagination of a woman, works effectual upon her child,
that as Baptista Porta proves, Phisiog. coelestis, lib. 5. cap. 2. she leaves a
mark upon it, which is most especially seen in such as long for such and such
meats, the child will love those meats, says Fernelius, and be addicted to
those humors: Baptista Porta loco praed. Ex leporum intu itu plerique infantes
edunt bifido superiore labello.
If a great-bellied woman see a Hare, her child will often have an Hare lip,
as we call it. Garceus Iuditijs genitur arum cap. 33. has a memorable example
of one Thomas Nickell, borne in the city of Brandeburge A^ 1551. Quasi mox in
terram collapsurus, per omnem vitam incedebat cum matter gravida, ebrium bomine^
sic incedetem viderat.
that went reeling and staggering all the days of his life, as if he would
fall to the ground, and all was because his mother being great with child, saw
a drunken man so reeling in the street. So many several ways are we plagued
and punished for our fathers defaults: In so much, that as Fernelius truly
says, Optimum been nosci. Maxima pars felicitatis nostrae been nasci, quam
ob-rem praeclare bumano generi consultum videretur, si soli parents been
habiti and sani liberis operam darent.
it is the greatest part of our felicity to be well borne, and it were well for
humane kind, if only such parents as are sound of body and mind, should be
suffered to marry. An husband man will sow none but the best and choicest
seed upon his land, he will not rear a bull or an horse, except he be well
shapen in all parts, or permit him to cover a mare, except he be well assured
of his breed: we make choice of the best rams for our she^pe, and rear the
neatest kine, keep the best dogs, quanto id diligentius in procreandis
liberis observandum? and how careful then should we be in begetting of our
children? In former times some Infantes infirmi praecipitio necati Bohems lib.
3 cap. 3. apud Lacones olim. Lipsius epist. 85. cent. ad Belgas. Dionisio
Villerio. si quos aliqua membrorum part inutiles notaverint, necari iubent.
countries have been so chary and provident in this behalf, and so stern,
that if a child were crooked or deformed in body or mind, they made him away:
so did the Indians of old, by the relation of Curtius, and many other well
governed commonwealths, according to the Discipline of those times. Heretofore
in Scotland, says Lib. 1. Daveterum Scotorum moribus- morbo comitialidementia,
mania, lepra, etc. aut simili labe, quae facile in prolem transmittitur,
laborantes inter eos ingenti facta indagine inuentos, ne gens foeda contagione
lederetur, ex ijs nata, castraverunt, mulieres huiusmodi procul a virorti
consortio allegarunt, quod si harum aliqua concepisse inveniebatur, simul cum
faetunondum aedito, desodiebatur viva.
Hector Boethius, if any were visited with the falling sickness, or madness,
gout, leprosy, or any such dangerous disease, which was likely to be
propagated from the father to the son, he was instantly gelded: a woman kept
from all company of men, and if by chance having some such disease, she were
found to be with child, she with her brood were buried alive: and this was
done for the common good, lest the whole nation should be injured or corrupted.
A severe doom you will say, and not to be used amongst Christians, yet more to
be looked into then it is. For now by our too much facility in this kind, in
giving way to all to marry that will, our too much liberty and indulgence in
tolerating all sorts, there is a vast confusion of hereditary diseases, no
family secure, no man almost free from some grievous infirmity or other, when
no choice is had, but still the eldest must marry, as so many stallions of the
Race, or if rich, be they fools or disardes, lame or maimed, unable,
intemperate, dissolute, exhauste through riot, as he said, Euphormio Satir.
iure hereditario sapere iubentur; they must be wise and are by inheritance, it
comes to pass that our generation is corrupt, we have many weak persons both
in body and mind, many ferall diseases raging amongst us, pocky families, out
fathers bad, and we are like to be worse.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 1. Bad diet a cause. Substance. Quality of meats.
ACcording to my proposed method, having opened hitherto these secundary
causes, which are inbred with us, I must now proceed to the outward and
adventitious, which happen unto us after we are borne. And those are either
Evident, Remote, or inward Antecedent, and the nearest: Cont^nent causes some
call them. These outward, remote, praecedent causes are subdivided again, into
necessary and not necessary. Fecit omnia delicta quae fieri possunt circa res
sex non-naturales, and eae fuerunt causae extrinsecae, ex quibus postea ortae
sunt obstructiones.
Necessary (because we cannot avoid them, but they will alter us, as they are
used, or abused) are those six non-naturall things, so much spoken of amongst
Physicians) and which are principal causes of this disease. For almost in
every consultation, where as they shall come to speak of the causes, the fault
is found, and this most part objected to the patient, peccavit circa res sex
non naturales: he has still offended in one of those six. Montanus consil.
22. consulted about a Melancholy Jew, gives that sentence, so did Frisemelica
in the same place: and in his 244. counsel, censuring a melancholy soldier,
he gives that cause of his malady, that he offended in all those six
non-naturall things, which were the outward causes, from which came those
inward obstructions: and so in the rest.

These six non-naturall things, are Diet, Retention, and Evacuation, which are
more material then the other, because they make new matter, or else are
conversant in keeping or expelling of it. The other four are Air, Exercise,
Sleeping and Waking, and perturbations of the Mind, which only alter the
matter. The first of these is Diet, which consist's in meat and drink, and
causes Melancholy, as it offends in Substance or Accidents, that is, quantity,
quality, or the like. And well it may be called a material cause, since that
as Path. lib. 1. cap. 2. Maximum in gignendis morbis vim obtinet, pabulum,
materiamque morbi suggerens: nam nec ab atre, nec a perturbationibus, vel aliis
evi: dentibvs causis morbi sint, nisi consentiat corporis praeparatio, and
humorum constitutio. Vt semel dicam vna gula est omnium morborum matter, etiamsi
alius e^^ genitor. Ab hoc morbi sponte saepe emanant, nulla alia cogente causa.
Fernelius has it: It has such a power in begetting of diseases, and yeeldes
the matter and sustenance of them, for neither air, nor perturbations, nor any
of those other evident causes take place, or work this effect, except the
constitution of body, and preparation of humors do concur. That a man may
say, This Diet is the Mother of Diseases, let the father be what he will, and
from this alone Melancholy, and many other maladies arise. Many Physicians I
confess, have written copious volumes of this one Subject, of the nature and
qualities of all manner of meats, as namely Galen, Isaac the Jew, Haliabbas,
Avicenna, Mesue Arabians, Gordonius, Villanouanus, Wecker, Johannes Bruerinus
syttologia de Esculentis, and Poculentis, Michael Sanavorola, Tract. 2. cap. 8.
Anthony Fumanellus lib. de regimine senum. Curio in his comment on Schola
Salernae, Godefridus Stekius art Med. Marsilius Cagnatus. Ficinus, Ranzovius,
Fonseca, Lessius, Magninus, regim. sanitatis, Frietagius, Hugo Fridevallius
etc. besides many other in Cogan, Eliot.
English, and almost every peculiar Physician, discou^seth at large of all
particular meats in his Chapter of Melancholy: yet because these books are not
at hand to every man, I will briefly touch what kind of meats engender this
humor, through their several species, and which are to be avoided. How they
alter and change the matter, spirits first, and after humors, by which we are
preserved, and the constitution of our body, Fernelius and others will show
you: I hasten to the thing it self. And first of such Diet as offends in
substance.

Beef, a strong and hearty meat, (cold in the first degree, Beef.
dry in the second Galen lib. 3. cap, 1. de alim. sac.) is condemned by him,
and all succeeding Authors, to breed gross melancholy blood: Good for such as
are sound, and of a strong constitution, for laboring men, if ordered aright,
corned, young, of an ox, (for all gelded meats in every species are held best)
or if old, Frietagius.
such as have bin tired out with labor, are preferred. Aubanus and Sabellicus
commend Portingall Beef to be the most savory, best, and easiest of digestion;
we commend ours: but all is rejected, and unfit for such as lead a resty life,
or any ways inclined to melancholy, or dry of complexion: Tales Galen thinks,
de facili melancholicis aegritudinibus capiuntur.

Porke, of all meats is most nutritive in his own nature, Porke.
but altogether unfit for such as live at ease, or are any ways unsound of
body or mind: Too moist, full of humors, and therefore noxia delicatis says
Sanavorola, ex earum vsu vt dubitetur, an febris quartana generetur: naught for
queasie stomachs, Isaacke.
in so much, that frequent use of it, may breed a quartan ague.

Savaenarola discommends Goats flesh, Goat.
and so does Non laudatur, quia melancholicum praebet alimentum.
Bruerinus, lib. 13. cap. 19. calling it a filthy beast, and rammish, and
therefore supposes it will breed rank and filthy substance: yet kid, and such as
are young, and tender, Isaac excepts, Bruerinus and Galen lib. 1, cap. 1. de
alimentorum facultatibus.

Heart, Heart.
and red Dear Male audit cervina (inquit) Frietagius crassissimum and
atribilarium suppeditat alimentu^.
has an evil name, it yeeldes gross nutriment; a strong great grained meat,
and next unto a horse. Which although some countries eat, as Tartars, and they
of China: yet Lib. de subtiliss dieta Equina caro and asin na, equinis danda
est hominibus and asinin^s.
Galen condemns. Young foales are as commonly eaten in Spain as red Dear, and
to furnish their Navies often used; but such meats ask long baking, or
seething, to qualify them, and yet all will not serve.

All Venison is melancholy, and begets bad blood, a meat in great esteem with
us, (for we have more Parkes in England, then there are in all Europe besides)
in all our solemn Feasts. It Is somewhat better, hunted then otherwise, and well
prepared by cookery, Venison, Fallow Dear.
but generally bad, and seldom to be used.

Hare.
Hare, a black meat, melancholy and hard of digestion, it breeds Incubus often
eaten, and causes fearful Dreams, and so does all Venison, and is condemned
by a Jury of Physicians. Mizaldus, and some others, say, that Hare is a merry
meat, and that it will make one fair, as Martials Epigram testifies to Gellia,
but this is because of the good sport it makes, and merry company, and good
Discourse that is commonly at the eating of it, and not otherwise to be
understood,

Parum absunt a natura lepo^u^. Bruerinus lib. 13 cap. 25. pullorum tenera and
optima.
Conies are of the nature of Hares. Conies.
Magninus compares them to Beef, Pig, and Goat. Reg. sanit. part. 3. cap. 17.
yet young Rabbits, by all men are approved to be good.

Generally, all such meats as are hard of Digestion, bree^e melancholy. Areteus
lib. 7. cap. 5. reckons up heads and feet, Illaudabilis succi nauseam
provocant.
bowels, brains, entrals, marrow, fat, blood, skins, and those inward parts,
as Heart, lungs, ljuer, spleen etc. They are rejected by Isaac lib. 2. and
part. 3. Magninus part. 3. cap. 17. Bruerinus lib. 12. Savanarola Rub. 32.
Tract. 2.

Milk, Milk.
and all that conies of milk, as Butter and Cheese, Curds, etc. increase
Melancholy (whay only excepted) which is most wholesome: Piso. Altomar.
some except Asses milk. The rest, to such as are sound, is nutritive and
good, especially for young children, but because soon turned to corruption,
Curio Frietagius. Magninus. part. 3. cap. 17. Mercurialis de affect. lib. 1.
cap. 10. excepts all milk meats in Hypocondriacall melancholy. Foul.
not good for such as have unclean stomachs, or be subject to headache, or
have green wounds, Stone, etc. Of all Cheeses, I take Banbury Cheese to be the
best, ex vetustis pessimus, the older, stronger, and harder, the worst, as
Langiuus discourses in his Epistle to Melanchthon, cited by Mizaldus. Isac.
part. 5. Galen. lib. 3. de cibis boni sacci. etc.

Amongst Foul, Wecker Syntax. Theor. p. 2. Isaac. Bruerinus. lib. 15. c. 30.
and 31.
Pecocks and Pigeons, all fenny Foul are forbidden, as Ducks, Geese, Swans,
Hearnes, Cranes, Coots, Didappers, Waterhens, and all those Teales, Curres,
Sheldrakes, and peckled Fowls, which come hither in winter, out of Scandia,
Muscovy, Greeneland, Freiseland, which half the year be covered all over with
snow, and frozen up. Though these be fair in feathers, pleasant in taste, and
have a good outside, like hypocrites white in plumes, and soft, their flesh is
hard, black, unwholesome, dangerous melancholy meat, grauant and putrefaciunt
stomachum, says Isaac. part. 5. de vol. their young ones are more tolerable,
but young Pigeons he quite disprooues.

Rhasis, Fishes.
and Cap. 18 par. 3.
Magninus discommend all Fish, and say they breed Viscosities, slymy nutriment,
little and humorous nutriment, Savanorola adds cold, moist, and phlegmatic,
Isaac and therefore unwholesome, for all cold and melancholy complections.
Others make a difference, rejecting only amongst freshwater fish, Eele, Tensh,
Lamprey, Crawfish, which Bright approues cap. 6. and such as are bred in muddy
and standing waters, and have a taste of mud, as Franscisus Bonsuetus poetically
defines. lib. de aquatilibus. Nam pisces omnes qui stagna lacusque frequentant,
Semper plus succi deterioris habent.
All fish that standing pooles and lakes frequent,
Do ever yield bad juice and nourishment.
Lampryes Paulus Iouius cap. 34. de piscibus fluvial. highly magnified, and
says none speak against them but inepti and scrupulosi, some scrupulous
persons, but Omni loco and omni tempore medici detastantur anguillas praesertim
circa solstitium. Damnantur tum sanis tum aegris.
Eeles cap. 33. he abhorres in all places, at all times, all Physicians detest
them, especially about the solstice. Gomesius lib. 1. cap. 22. de sale does
immoderately extol all Seafish, which others as much vilify, and above the
rest dried, sowced, indurate fish, as Ling, Fumados Red-herrings, Sprats,
Stockfish, Halberdine, poor John, all shelfish. Cap. 6. in his Tract of
Melancholy.
Tim. Bright excepts Lobstar and Crab. Messarius commendes Salmon, which
Bruerinus contradicts lib. 22. cap. 17. Magninus reiects Conger, Sturgeon,
Turbit, Maquarell, Scate. Carp, is a fish of which I know not well what to
determine: Franciscus Bonsuetus accounts it a muddy fish, Hippolitus Salvianus
in his book de Piscium natura and praparatione, which was printed at Rome in
fol. 1554. in most elegant pictures, esteems Carp no better then a slimy
watery meat. P. Iouius on the other side disallowing tench, approues of it. So
does Dubrauius in his books of Fishponds. Freitagius Optime nutrit omnium
Iudicio inter prime notae pisces gustu praestanti.
extols it for an excellent wholesome meat, and puts it amongst the Fishes of
the best rank: and so do most of our country Gentlemen, that store their
ponds almost with no other Fish. But this controversy is easily decided in my
judgment by Bruerinus lib. 22. cap. 13. The difference arises from the
difference and site and nature of pooles, Non est dubium quin pro vivariorum
situ, ac natura magnas alimentorum sortiantur differentias, alibi suauiores
alibi lutulentiores.
sometimes muddy, sometimes sweet, they are in taste as the place is from whence
they be taken. In like manner almost we may conclude of other fresh-fish. But
see more in Bellonius, Oribasius, lib. 7. cap. 22. Isaac. lib. 1. especially
Hoppolitus Salvianus, instar omnium solus, etc. Howsoever they may be wholesome
and approved, much use of them is not good; P. Forestus in his Medicinal
observations, Obseruat. 16. lib. 10.
relates that Carthusian Friars, whose living is most part Fish, are more
subject to Melancholy then any other order, and that he found by experience,
being sometimes their Physician ordinary at Delft in Holland. He exemplifies it
with an instance of one Buscodnese a Carthusian of a ruddy color, and well
likeing, that by solitary living and fish eating became so misaffected.

Amongst herbs to be eaten, I find Gourds, Cowcumbers, Coleworts, Millions
disallowed, Herbs.
but especially Cabbage. It causes troublesome dreams, and sendes up black
vapors to the brain. Galen. loc. affect. lib. 3. cap. 6. of all herbs
condemns Cabbage. And Isaac. lib. 2. cap. 1. animae gravitatem facit, it
brings heaviness to the soul. Some are of opinion, that all raw herbs and
sallets breed Melancholy blood, except Buglosse and Lettice, Crato consil. 21.
lib. 2. speaks against all herbs and worts, except Borrage, Buglosse,
Fennel, Parsley, Dill, Bawm; Succory. Magninus regim. sanitatis 3. part. cap.
13. omnes herbae simpliciter malae, via cibi. All herbs are simply evil to
feed on, as he thinks, and so did that scoffing Cook in Pseudolus. act. 3.
scen. 2.
Plautus: -- Non ego coenam condio vt alij coqui solent.
Qui mihi condita prata in patinis proferunt,
Boues qui conuiuas faciunt, herbasque aggerunt.
Like other Cooks I do not supper dress,
That put whole Meddowes in a platter,
And make no better of their guests then Beeues,
With herbs and grass to feed them fatter.
As our Italians and Spaniards do make a whole dinner of Herbs and Sallets,
by which means as he follows it. Plautus ibid.
Hic homines tam brevem vitam colunt, --
Qui herbas huiusmodi in aluum suum congerunt,
Formido lo sum dictu, non esu modo,
Quas herbas pecudes non edunt, homines edunt.
There lives that eat such herbs must needs be short,
And it is a fearful thing for to report,
That men should feed on such a kind of meat,
Which very iuments would refuse to eat.
Quare rectius valetudini sua quisque consulet qui lapsus priorum parentum
memor eos plane vel omiserit vel parce degustarit Kersteius cap. 4 de vero vsu
med.
They are windy, and not fit therefore to be eaten of all men raw, though
qualified with oil, but in brothes or otherwise. See more of these in every In
Mizaldo de Horto. P. Crescent. Herbastein etc.
Husbandman and Herbalist. Roots, Etsi quorundam gentium opes sint, says
Bruerinus, the wealth of some countries and sole food, are windy and bad, or
troublesome to the head; as Onions, Garlic, Scallions, Roots.
Turnips, Carrets, Radishes, Parsnips; Crato lib. 2. consil. 11. disallowes all
roots, though Cap. 13. part. 3 Bright in his Tract. of Mel.
some approve of Parsnipps, and Potatoes.b Magninus is of Crato's opinion,
InteV^ctum turbant producunt insaniam, audiui inquit Magninus quod si quis ex
ijs continue per annum comedat in insaniam caderet. cap. 13. Fruits. Improbi
succi sunt. Cap. 12.
they trouble the mind sending gross fumes to the brain, make men mad,
especially Garlike, Onions, if a man liberally feed of them a year together.
Guianerius. Trac. 15. cap. 2. complains of all manner of Roots, and so does
Bruarinus even Parsnipps themselves, which are the best, lib. 9. cap. 14.
pasticanarum vsus succos gignit improbos. Crato consil. 21. lib. 1. utterly
forbids all manner of Fruits; as Pears, Apples, Plums, Cherries, Strawberries,
Nuts, Medlers, Serves, etc. Sanguinem inficiunt, says Villanouanus, they
infect the blood and p^trifie it Magninus holds, and must not therefore be
taken, via cibi, aut quantitate magna. not to make a meal of, or in any great
quantity. De rerum varietat. In Fessa pleruque morbosi quod fructus comedat ter
in dic.
Cardan makes that a cause of their continual sickness at Fessa in Afric,
because they live so much on fruits, eating them thrice a day. Laurentius
approues of many fruits in his tract of Melancholy, which others disallow, and
amongst the rest Apples, which many likewise commend, as Sweetings,
Pairemaines, Pippins, as good against melancholy. But to him that is any way
inclined to, or touched with this malady, Cap. de Melancholia.
Nicholas Piso in his Practicks forbids all fruits, as windy, or to be
sparingly eaten at least, and not raw. Amongst other fruits Lib. 11. cap. 3.
Pulse.
Bruerinus forth of Galen, excepts Grapes and Figs, but I find them likewise
rejected. All Pulse are naught, Beans, Pease, Fitches, etc. They fill the
brain, says Isaac with gross fumes, breed black thick blood, and cause
troublesome dreams. And therefore that which Pythagoras said to his Scholars
of old, may be for ever applied to melancholy men* a fabis abstinete, Eat no
Pease nor Beans: yet to such as will needs eat them, I would give counsel to
prepare them according to those rules that Arnoldus, Villanouanus, Frietagius
prescribe, for eating and dressing Fruits, Herbs, Roots, Pulse, etc.

Spices cause hot and head melancholy, Spices.
and are for that cause forbidden by our Physicians, to such men as are
inclined to this malady, as Pepper, Ginger, Cinnamon. Cloves, Mace, Dates, etc.
Honey and Sugar. Bright cap 6. excepts honey.
Some except Honey, to those that are cold it may be more tolerable, but Hor.
apud Scoltzium consil. 186.
Dulcia se in bil vertunt, they are obstructiue. Crato therefore forbids all
spice in a consultation of his, for a melancholy Schoolmaster, Omnia
aromatica, and quicquid sanguinem adurit: so does Fernelius consil. 45.
Guianerius tract. 15. cap. 2. Mercurialis cons. 189. To these I may add all
sharp and sower things, or luscious and over sweet, or Fat, as Oil, Vinegar,
Veriuice, Mustard, Salt. As sweet things are obstructiue, so these are
corrosiue. Gomesius in his books de Sale lib. 1. cap. 21. highly commends
Salt; so does Codronchus in his Tract de sale Absynthij. Lemn. lib. 3. cap. 9.
de occult. not. mir. yet common experience finds Salt and salt meats to be
great causes of this disease. And for that cause belike those Egyptian Priests
abstained from salt, even so much as in their bread, vt sine perturbatione
anima esset, says my Author, that their souls might be free from
perturbations.

Bread that is made of baser grain; as Pease, Beans, Oats, Bread.
Ric, or Ne comedas crustam choleram quia gignit adustam. Schol. Sal.
over hard baked, and crusty black, is much spoke against, as causing
melancholy juice and wind. Ioh. Mayor in his first book of his history of
Scotland, contends much for the wholsomnesse of oaten bread; It was objected to
him the living at Paris in France, that his countrymen fed on Oats and base
grain, as a disgrace, but he does ingeniously confess that Scotland, Wales,
and a third part of England, did most part use that kind of bread, but that it
was as wholesome as any grain, and yielded as good nourishment. And yet Wecker
out of Galen calls it horse meat, and fitter for iuments then for men to feed
on. But read Galen himself lib. 1. de cibis boni and mal. succi. more largely,
discoursing of Corn and Bread.

All black Wines, over hot compound strong thick drinks, Wine, Beers.
as Muscadine, Malmesie, Allegant, Rumny, Brown bastard, Metheglen, and the
like, of which they have 30 several kinds in Muscovy, all such made drinks
are hurtful in this case, to such as are hot, or of a sanguine choleric
complexion, or young, or inclined to head melancholy. For many times the
drinking of wine alone causes it. Vinum turbidum.
Arculanus cap. 16 in 9. Rhasis puts in wine for a great cause, especially if
it be immoderately used. Guianerius Tract. 15. cap. 2. tells a story of two
Dutchmen, to whom he gave entertainment in his house, that in Ex vini
potentis bibitione duo Alemani in vno mense Melancholici facti sunt.
one months space were both melancholy by drinking of Wine, one did naught but
sing, the other sighe. Galen l. de causis morb. cap. 3. Mathiolus on
Dioscorides, and above all other Andreas Bachius lib. 3. c. 18.19.20. have
reckoned up those inconveniences that come by wine. Yet notwithstanding all
this to such as are cold, or sluggish melancholy, a cup of wine is good
physic, and so does Mercurialis grant, consil. 25. in such cases, if the
temperature be cold, as to most melancholy men it is, wine is much commended,
if it be moderately used. Cider and Perry are both cold and windy drinks,
Cider, Perry.
and for that cause to be neglected, and so are all those hot spiced strong
drinks.

Beer, Beer.
if it be over new or over stale, over strong, or not sod, smell of the caske,
sharp or sower is most unwholesome, it frets and gauls, etc. Henricus Ayrerus in
a Hildesheim spicel. fol. 273.
consultation of his, for one that labored of Hypocondriacall melancholy
discommends Bear. So does Crassam generat sanguinem.
Crato in that excellent counsel of his lib. 2. consil. 21. as too windy
because of the Hoppe. But he means belike that thick black Bohemian bear
used in some other parts of About Danzick in Spruce Hamburg.
Germany, -- Henricus Abrincensis.
nil spissius illa
Dum hibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur, vnde
Constat quod multas faeces in corpore linquat.
Nothing comes in so thick.
Nothing goes out so thin,
It must needs follow then
The dregs are left within.
As that old Henricus brincensis.
Poet scoffed, calling it Stygiae monstrum conform palud^, a monstrous drink
like the river Styx. But let the^ say as they lift to such as are accustomed
unto it, it is a most wholesome (as Potus tumsalubris tum Iucundus. lib. 1.
Polidor Virgil calls it) and a pleasant drink, it is more subtle and better
for the hop that rarifies it, and has an especial virtue against melancholy,
as our Herbalists confess. And Fuchsius approues. lib. 2. sect. 2. Instit.
cap. 11. and many others.

Standing Waters, thick and ill colored, Waters.
such as come forth of Pooles and Motes, where hemp has been steeped, or
slimy fishes live are most unwholesome, putrified and full of mites, ^reepers,
slimy, muddy, unclean, corrupt, impure by reason of the Sons heat: and still
standing they cause foul distemperatures in the body and mind of man, and are
unfit to make drink of, or to dress meat with, or to be Galen. l. 1. de san
tuend. cauendae sunt aquae que ex slagnis hauriuntur and quae turbidae and male
otentes, etc
used about men inwardly or outwardly. They are good for many domestical uses,
to steep Malt, water Cattle, etc. or in time of necessity, but not otherwise.
Some are of opinion that such fat standing waters make the best Beer, and that
seething does defecate it as Innoxia reddit and been olentem.
Cardan holds lib. 13. subtle. it mends the substance and savor of it, but it
is a paradoxe. It may be stronger such bear, but not so wholsomes as the
other, as Contendit haec vitia coctione uo^ emendari.
Iobertus truly justifies out of Galen, Paradox dec. 1. Paradox. 5. that the
seething of such impure waters does not purge or purify them. Pliny lib. 31.
cap. 3. is of the same Tenet. And P. Crescentius agricult. lib. 1. and lib. 4.
cap. 11. etc. 45. such waters are naught, not to be used, and by the testimony
of Lib. de bonitate aquae, hydropem auget, febres putridas, splene^, tusses,
nocet oculis malum habitum corporis and colorem.
Galen, Breed Agues, Dropsies, Pleurisyes, Spleneticke, and melancholy
passions, hurts the eyes, causes a bad temperature and disposition of the
whole body and bad color. And this Iobertus stiffly maintains Paradox. lib.
1. par. 5. that it causes bleare eyes, bad color, and many loathsome diseases
to such as use it. This which they say stands to good reason, for as
geographers relate of the water of Astracan, it breeds worms in such as drink
it. I. Aubanus Bohemius referres that Aquae ex niuibus conctae strumosos
faciunt.
Struma, or poke of the Bauarians and Styrians to the nature of their waters,
And Method. hist. cap. 5. halbutiunt Labdoni in Aquitania ob aquas atque hi
morbi ab aquis in corpora deriuantur
Bodine of some families in Aquitania that stutte, which he supposes to
proceed from the nature of their water, and that the filth is derived from the
water to their bodies, So that they that use filthy standing, ill colored,
muddy water, must needs have muddy, ill colored, impure, and infirm bodies.
And because the body works upon the mind, they must have grosser
understandings, dull, foggy, melancholy spirits, and be really subject to all
manner of infirmities.

To these noxious simples, we may reduce an infinite number of compound
artificial made dishes, of which our Cooks afford us as great variety, as
Taylers do fashions in our apparel. Such are Edulia ex sanguine and suffocato
parta. Hildesheim.
Puddings stuffed with blood, or otherwise composed, Baked meats, sowced,
indurate meats, fried and broyled, buttered meats, condite, powdered, and
ouerdryed, Cupedia vero placentae bellaria commentaque alia curiosa pistorum
and coquorum g^stui seruientium conciliant morbos tu^ corporitum animo
insanabiles. Philo Iudeus lib de victimis. P. Iov. vi^a eius
all cakes, Simnels, Bunnes, Cracknels made of butter, spice, etc. Fritters,
Pancakes, Pies, Salsages, and al those several sauces, sharp or over sweet,
of which Scientia popinae, as Seneca calls it, has served those As lettice
steepd in wine birds fed with fenell and sugar, as a popes concubin used in
Aninion Stephanus.
Apician tricks, and perfumed dishes, which Animae negotium illa facessit et de
templo dei immundu^ stabulum facit. Peletius. 10. cap.
Adrian the 6, Pope, so much admired in the accounts of his predecessor Leo
Decimus: And which riot and prodigality have invented, and these do generally
engender gross humors, fill the stomach with crudities, and all those inward
parts with oppilations. Montanus consil. 22. gives instance in a melancholy
Jew, that by eating such tart sauces, made dishes, and salt meats, with which
he was overmuch delighted, became melancholy, and was evil affected. Such
examples are familiar and common.

SVBSEC. 2. Quantity of Diet a cause.
THere is not so much harm proceeding from the substance it self of meat, and
quality of it in ill dressing and preparing of it, as there is from the
quantity, disorder of time and place, unseasonable use of it, Animae negotium
illa facessit et de templo dei immundu^ stabulum facit. Peletius. 10. cap.
intemperance, or overmuch or over little taking of it. A true saying it is,
Plures crapula quam gladius, this gluttony kills more then the sword. And that
of Lib. 11. cap. 52. Homini cibus v^ilissimus simplex; aceruatio ciborum
pestisera, and condimenta pernitiosa, multos morbos, multa fercula sera^t.
Pliny. Simple diet is the best, and heaping up of several meats is
pernicious, and sauces worse, many dishes bring many diseases. 3.1. doc. 2 cap
Nihil deterius quam si tempus iusto ongius comedendo protrabatur and varia
ciborum genera coniunga^tur, inde morboru^ scaturigo quae ex repugnantia
humorii oritur.
Avicen cries out, that nothing is worse then to feed on many dishes, or to
protract the time of meats longer then ordinary, from thence proceed our
infirmities, and it is the fountain of all diseases, which arise out of the
repugnancy of humors. Thence, says Path. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Fernelius, comes crudities, wind, oppilations, cachochymia, plethora, etc.
and what not.

As a lamp is choked with a multitude of oil, or a little fire with overmuch
wood quite extinguished: so is the natural heat with immoderate eating
strangled in the body. Pernitiosa sentina est abdomen insaturabile; one says,
an insatiable paunch is a pernicious sink, and the fountain of all diseases
both of body and mind. N^mia repletio ciborum facit melancholicum.
Mercurialis will have it a peculiar cause of this private disease. Solenander
consil. 5. sect. 3. illustrates this of Mercurialis, with an example of one so
melancholy, ab intempestiuis commessationibus, unseasonable feasting. Comestio
superstua cibi, and potus quantitas nimia.
Crato confirms as much, in that often cited council, 21. lib. 2. putting
superfluous eating for a maine cause. But what need I seek farther for
proofs? Hear Hippocrates himself lib. 2. Aphoris. 10. Impura corpora quanto
magis nutris tanto magis laedi^: putrefacit enim alimentum vitiosus humor.
Impure bodies the more they are nourished, the more they are hurt, for the
nourishment is putrified with vicious humors.

And yet for all this harm, which apparently follows surfeiting and
drunkenness, see how we luxuriate and rage in this kind, quam Vid. Goc'en.
de portentosis cenis etc.
portentosae caenae, prodigious suppers, what Fagos, Epicuros, Apitios our
times afford? Lucullus Ghost walks still, and every man desires to sup in
Apollo: Aesops costly dish is ordinarily served up, and if they be Ingeniosi
ad Gulam.
witty in any thing it is ad gulam. If they study any thing at all, it is to
please their pallat, and to satisfy their gut. Venture Deus, wearing their
brains in their bellies, and their guts in their heads. as Epist. 28. l. 7.
quorum in ventre ingenium in patinis etc.
Agrippa taxed some Parasites of his time, rushing on their own destruction,
as if a man should run upon the point of a sword, vsque dum rumpantur
comedunt., In lucem c^nat Sertorius.
all day all night, let the Physician say what he will, imminent danger, and
ferall diseases be now ready to seize upon them, they will eat till they burst
again, and, Seneca.
Strage animantium ventrem onerare, and rake over all the world, as so many
Mancipis gulae dapes non sapore sed sumptu aesiimantes. Seneca consil ad
Helvidium.
slaves and belly Gods, and totus orbis ventri nimis angustus, the whole world
cannot satisfy their appetite. And what immoderate drinking in every place? As
if they were fruges consumere nati borne to no other end but to eat and drink.
Quae fuerant vitia mores sunt: it is now the fashion of our times, an honor,
and a credit to have a strong brain and carry his liquor well; the sole
contention who can drink most and fox his fellow soonest. It Is the summum
bonum of our Tradesmen, their felicity, tanta dulcedine affectant, says Pliny,
lib. 14. cap, 22. Vt magna pars non aliud vitae praemium intelligat, they will
labor hard all day long to be drunk at night, strive to hurt themselves.
They invent new tricks, as Sausages, and Anchoues, Tobacco, Caueare, pickled
Herrings, etc. and salt meats to increase their appetite, and study how to hurt
themselves by taking Antidotes, Et quo plus capiant irritamenta excogitantur.
to make themselves carry their drink the better: For As portantur vt ad
conuiuium reportentur, repleri vt exhauriant and exhauriri vt bibant. Ambros.
And when naught else serves, they will go forth or be carried out to empty
their gorge that they may drink afresh: and make laws contra bibendi
fallacias, and Ingentia vasa velut ad ostentationem, etc.
brag of it when they have done, Gratiam conciliant potando.
inviting and encouraging others to do as they do, and love them dearly for
it: no glue like to that of goodfellowship, so did Alcibiades in Greece, Nero,
Bonosus, Heliogabalus in Rome, or Alegaebalus rather, as he was styled of old,
as Notis ad Caesares.
Ignatius proves out of some old coins. Our Dutch men invite all comers, with
a peale and a dish, making barrels of their bellies, incredibile dictu, as
Bohemus in Saxonia. adeo immoderate and immodeste ab ipsis bibitur vt in
compotationibus suis non cyatbis solum and cantharis sa^ infundere possint sed
repletu^ mulctrale apponant and scutella inieEta hortentur quemlibet ad libitum
potare.
one of their own countrymen complains: Dictu incredibile quantum huiusce
liquoru immodesta gens capiat plus potantem am ciss^^^^m habent and serto
coronant inimi^issimum e cotra qui non vult and caede and fustibus expiant.
Quantum liquoris immodestissima gens capiat, etc. How they love a man that
will be drunk, and crown him and honor him for it. Hate him that will not
pledge him, stab him, kill him, a most intolerable offense and not to be
forgiven. So in Poland, he is the best seruitor, and the honestest fellow,
says Alexander Gaguinus, Qui melius ^i^it pro salute domini melier habetur
minister.
that drinks most healths to the honor of this master, he shall be rewarded
as a good servant; and thus they many times wilfully pervert the good
temperature of their bodies, stifle their wits, strangle nature, and degenerate
into beasts.

Some again are in the other extreme and draw this mischief on their heads
by overmuch fasting. Pining a days, says Qui de die ieiunant and nocte
vigilant facile cadunt in melancholiam and quinaturae modum excedunt. cap 5.
lract. 15. cap. 2. longa fau^is tole^amia vt iis sape accidit qui tanto cum
seruore Deoseruire cupiunt per ieiunium quod maniaciefficiantur ipse vidilaepe.
Guatinerius, and waking a nights, as many Moors, and Turks in these our times
do. Anchorites Monks, and the rest of that superstitious rank (as the same
Guianerius witneseth) that he has often seen to have happened in his time:
that such men through immoderat fasting have been frequently mad. And of such
men belike Hyppocrates speaks, 1. Aphor. 5. when as he says, In tenui victu
egri delinquunt ex quo fit vt maiori afficiantur detrimento, maiorque fit errer
tenui quam ^le i re victu.
They more offend in two sparing diet and are more damnified, then they that
feed liberally and are ready to surfeit.

SVBSECT. 3. Custom of diet, Delight, Appetite, Necessity, how they cause or
hinder.
NO rule is so general which admits not some exception, to this therefore
which has been hitherto said, and all those inconveniences which proceed from
the substance of meats, or intemperate and unseasonable use of them, custom
somewhat detracts, and qualifies, according to that of Hyppocrates, 2. Aphoris.
50. Quae longo ^^pore consueta sunt etiam si deteriora minus i^ssuetis
molestare solent.
Such things as we have been long accustomed to, though they be evil in their
own nature; yet they are less offensive. Otherwise it might well be objected,
that it were a mere Qui medice vi^^t, misere vivit.
tyranny to live after those strict rules of Physic. For Consuetudo altera
natura.
custom does alter nature it self, and to such as are used to them it makes
bad meats wholesome, and unseasonable times to cause no disorder. Cider and
Perry are windy drinks, so are all fruits windy in themselves, and cold most
part, yet in some parts of Herefordshire, Glocestershire, Worcestershire.
England, Normandy in France, Guipuscoa in Spain, it is their common drink,
and they are no whit offended with it. In Spain, Italy, and Afric, they live
most on roots, on raw herbs, Leo Aser. l. 1. solo camelorum lacte contenti nil
praeterea delitiarum ambiunt.
Camels Milk, and it agrees well with them, which to a stranger would cause
much greuance. In Wales, lacticinijs vescu^tur, as Humfry Lluyd confesses, and
Cambro-Brittaine himself in his elegant Epistle to Abraham Ortelius, they live
most on whit-meats. In Holland Fish, Flandri vinu^, butiro, dilutum bib^nt
(nauseo referens) vbique butirum inter omnia fercula and bellaria locum
obtinet. Stephan praefat. Herod.
Roots, Butter. With us Maxima pars victus in carne consistit, we feed on flesh
most part, says Lib. 1. hist. Aug.
Polydor Virgil, as all northern countries do, and it would be very offensive
to us, to live after their diet, or they to live after ours. We drink bear,
they wine, they use oil, we butter: we in the North are P. Iovius descrip.
Britonum. they sit eat and drink all day at dinner, in Island, Moscovy, and
those northern parts
great eaters, they most sparing in those hotter countries: and yet they and we
following our own customs are well pleased. In China the common people live in
a manner altogether on roots and herbs, and to the wealthiest, horse, Ass,
Mule, Dogs, Cats flesh is as delightsome as the rest, as Expedit in Sinas
lib. 1. cap. 3. hortensium herbarum and olerum apud Sinas quam apud nos long
frequentior vsus, complures quippe de vulgo reperias nulla alia re
veltenuitatis vel religionis causa vescentes. Equus, mulus, asellus, etc. aeque
fere vescuntur ac pabula omnia, Mat Riccius. lib. 5. cap 12.
Mat. Riccius the Jesuit relates, that lived many years amongst them. The
Tartars eat raw meat, and most commonly Tartari mulis equis vescuntur and
crudis carnibus and fruges contemnunt dicentes hoc iumentorum pabulum and boum
non hominum.
horseflesh, drink milk and blood as the Nomades of old, Et lac concretum
cum sanguine potat equino, They scoff at our Europeans for eating bread which
they call tops of weeds, and horse meat, not fit for men. And yet Scalliger
accounts them a sound and witty nation, living an hundred years; even in the
ciuillest countries of them they do thus, as Benedict the Jesuit observed in
his travels from the great Mogors court by land to Paquin, which Riccius
contends to be the same with Cambalu in Cataia. In Scandia their bread is
usually dried fish, and so likewise in the Shetland Isles. And their other fare
as in Island, says Islandie descriptione: victus eorum butiro, lacte, caseo,
consistit: pisces loco panis habent, potus aqua aut serum sic vivunt sine
medicina multi ad annos 200.
Dithmarus Bliskenius Butter, Cheese, and Fish, their drink water, their
lodging on the ground. In America in many places their bread is roots, their
meat Palmitos, Pinas, potatos, etc. and such fruits. With some, Fish, Serpents,
Spiders; and in some places they Patagones.
eat man's flesh raw, and roasted, even the Emperor Benso. and Fer. Cortesius
lib. novus orbis inscripto
Metazuma himself. In some places again, Linschcoten cap 56. palmae instar
totius orbis arboribus long praestantior etc.
one tree yields them Coquernuts, meat and drink, fire, fuel, apparel, with
his leaves, oil, vinegar, cover for houses, etc. And yet these men going
naked, feeding course, live commonly 100. years, and are seldom or never
sick, all which diet our Physicians forbid. In Westphaling they feed most part
on fat meats and wourts, knuckle deep, and call it Lips. Epist.
cerebrum Iouis. In the Low countries with roots. In Italy Frogs and Snailes
are used. The Turks, says Busbequius, delight most in fried-meats. In Muscouy
Garlic and Onions, are ordinary meat and sauce, all which would be pernicious
to such as are unaccustomed unto them: delightsome to them, and all is Teneris
assuescere multum est
because they have been brought up unto it. Husbandmen and such as labor can
eat salt, fat bacon, gross meat, hard cheese, etc. course bread at all times,
and go to bed and labor upon a full stomach, which to some idle persons
would be present death, and is against all the rules of Physic; so that
custom is all in all. Our travelers find this by common experience when they
come into far countries, and use their diet, they are Repentinae mutationes
noxam pariunt. Hippoc. Aphoris. 21. Epid. 6. sect. 3.
suddenly offended, as our Hollanders and Englishmen when they touch upon the
coasts of Afric, and those Indian Islands, are commonly molested with
Calentures, Fluxes and much distempered by reason of their fruits.
Bruerinuslib. 1. cap. 23.
Peregrina, etsi suavia, solent vescentibus perturbationes insignes adferre,
strange meat though pleasant, cause notable alterations and distempers. On the
other side use and custom mitigates or makes all good again. Mithridates by
often use, which Pliny wonders at, was able to drink poison; and a maid, as
Curtius records, that was sent to Alexander from King Porus, was brought up
with poison from her infancy. The Turks, says Bellonius obseruat. lib. 3.
cap. 15. take Opium familiarly a dram at once, which we dare not take in
grains. Simpl. med. cap. 4. lib. 1.
Garcius ab Horto records of one, whom he saw at Goa in the East Indies, that
took ten drammes of Opium in three days; and yet Consulto loquebatur, spoke
understandingly, so much can custom do. Hernius lib. 3. cap. 19. prax. med.
Theophrastus speaks of a Shepherd that could eat Hellebor in substance. And
therefore Cardan concludes out of Galen, consuetudinem vtcunque ferendam nisi
valde malam. Custom is howsoever to be kept, except it be extreme bad, and he
advises all men to keep their old customs, and to In dubijs consuetudinem
sequatur adolescens and in caeptis perseueret.
continue as they began, be it diet, bath, exercise, etc. or whatsoever else.

Another exception is Delight, or Appetite, to such and such meats. Though they
be hard of digestion, melancholy: yet as Fuchsius excepts cap. 6. lib. 2.
Institut. sect. 2. Qui cum voluptate assumu^tur cibi ventriculus auidius
co^plectitur expeditiusque concoquit and quae displice^t aversatur.
The stomach does readily digest, and willingly entertain such meats as we
love most, and are pleasing to us, and abhorres on the other side such as we
distaste. Which Hippocrates confirms Aphorism. 6.38. Some cannot endure Cheese,
out of a secret Antipathy, or to see a roasted Ducke, which to others is a
Nothing against a good stomach, as the saying is.
delightsome meat.

The last exception is necessity, poverty, want, hunger, which drives men many
times to do that which otherwise they are loath, and cannot endure, and
thankfully to accept of it. As Beuerage in ships, and in seiges of great
Cities, to feed on Dogs, Catts, Rats, and Men themselves. Three outlawes in
Lib. 7. hist. Scot.
Hector Boethius being driven to their shifts, did eat raw fish, and flesh of
such foul as they could catch in one of the Hebrides for some few months.
These things do mitigate or disanull this which has been said of Melancholy
meats, and make it more tolerable, but to such as are wealthy live plentiously,
at ease, and may take their choice, and refrain if they will, such meats are
to be forborne, if they be inclined to, or suspect melancholy, as they tender
their healths: Otherwise if they be intemperate, or disordered in their diet,
at their peril be it. Qui monet amat, Aue and cave.

SVBSEC. 4. Retention and Evacuation a cause, and how.
OF Retention and Evacuation, there be diverse kinds, which are either
concomitant, assisting, or sole causes many times of melancholy. 3io artis.
Galen reduces defect and abundance to his head; others Quae excernu^tur aut
subsistunt.
all that is separated or remains. In the first rank of these I may well
reckon up Costiuenesse, and keeping in of our ordinary excrements, which as it
often causes other diseases, so this of Melancholy in particular. Ex ventre
suppresso, inflammationes capitis, dolores, caligines crescunt.
Celsus lib. 1. ca. 3. says, it produces inflammation of the head, dulnes,
cloudinesse, headache, heaviness, etc. Prosper Calenus lib. de atra bile. will
have it distemper, not the Organ only, Excrementa retenta, mentis agitationem
pareresolent.
but the mind it self by troubling of it. And sometimes it is a sole cause of
madness, as you may read in the first book of Cap. de Mel.
Skenkius medicinal observations. A young Merchant going to Nordeling Fair in
Germany, for ten days space never went to stool, at his return he was tam
delirus, vt vix se hominem agnosceret.
grievously melancholy, thinking that he was robbed, and would not be
persuaded but that all his money was gone. His friends thought he had some
Philtrum given him, but Cnelinus a Physician being sent for, found his aluus
astrictus causa.
costiuenesse alone to be the cause, and thereupon gave him a Clister, and he
was speedily recovered. Trincauellius consult. 35. lib. 1. says as much of a
melancholy Lawyer, to whom he administered Physic: Other Retentions and
Evacuations there are, not simply necessary but at sometimes, as Fernelius
accounts them, Path. lib. 1. cap. 15. as suppressions of Haemrods, monthly
issues in weomen, bleeding at nose, immoderate use or no use at all of Venus:
or any other ordinary Issues.

Sive pernares, sieve haemorroides.
Detention of haemrods, or monthly Issues, Villanouanus Breviar. lib. 1. cap.
18. Arculanus cap. 16. in 9, Rhasis, Vittorius Faventinus pract. mag. Tract. 2.
cap. 15. Bruel etc. put for ordinary causes. Euschius lib. 2. sec. 5. cap. 30.
goes farther, and says, that Multi intempestiue ab Haemorroid bus curati
melancholia correpti sunt. Incidit in Scyllam etc.
many men unseasonably cured of the haemrods, have been corrupted with
melancholy, seeking to avoid Scilla, they fall into Charibdis. Galen lib. de
hum. commen. 3. ad text. 26. illustrates this by an example of Lucius Martius,
whom he cured of madness, contracted by this means: And Lib. 1. de Manid.
Sckenkius has two other examples of two Melancholy and mad women so caused
from the suppression of their months. The same may be said of bleeding at nose
if it be suddenly stopped, and have been formerly used, as Breviat lib. 7. cap.
18.
Villanouanus urges. And Non sine magno incommodo eius cui sanguis a naribus
promanat noxij sanguinis vacuatio impediri potest.
Euschius, lib. 2. sect. 5. cap. 33. stiffly maintains, that without great
danger such an issue may not be stayed.

Venus omitted produces like effects. Mathiolus epist. 5. lib. penult. Noui
quosda^ prae pudore a coitu abstinent ^ torpidos pigrosque factos nonnullos
etiam melancholicos praeter modum m^stos timidosque
avouches of his knowledge some that either through bashfulnesse abstained
from Venery, and thereupon became very heavy and dull; and some others that
were very timorous, Melancholy, and beyond all measure sad. Orbasius med.
collect. lib. 6. cap. 37. speaks of some, Nonnulli nisi coeant assidue capitis
gravitate infestantur. dicit se nouisse quosdam trisles and melancholicos it a
factos intermissione Veneris.
that if they do not use carnal copulation, are continually troubled with
heaviness and headache; and some in the same case, by intermission of it. Not
use of it hurts many. Arculaus cap. 16, in 9. Rhasis and Magninus part. 3. c.
5. hold because it Vapores venenatos mittit sperma ad cor and cerebrum. Sperma
plus diureten^um transit in Venenum.
sends up poisoned vapors to the brain and heart, And so does Galen himself
hold, that if this natural seed be over long kept (in some parties) it turns
to poison. Hieronimus Mercurialis in his chapter of Mela^choly, cites this for
an especial cause of this malady, and of Graves producit corporis and animi
aegritudines.
Priapismus, Satyriasis, etc. Haliabbas. 5. Theor. cap. 36. reckons up this and
many other diseases. Villanouanus Breviar. lib. 1. c. 18. says he knew Ex
spermate supra modum retento monachos and viduas melancholicos saepe fieri vidi.
many monks, and widows grievously troubled with melancholy and that from
this sole cause. Aelianus Montaltus. cap. 27. de melanchol. confirms as much
out of Galen: so does Wierus, and Christopherus a Vega de art. med. lib. 3.
cap. 14. relate many such examples of men, Melancholia orta a vasis semina^ys
in vie^o.
women, that he had seen so melancholy. Foelix Platter in the first book of
his observations Nobilis senex Alsatus iunenem vxorem duxit at ille cholico
dolor and multis morbis correptus non potuit praestare officium mariti vix
inito matrimonio aegrotus. Illa in horrendum furorem incidit ob venerem
cohibitum vt omnium eam inuisentium congressum voce vultu gestuexpeteret and
quu^ no^ consentirent molossos Anglicanos expetijt magno clamore.
tells a story of an ancient Gentleman in Alsatia, that married a young wife and
was not able to pay his debts in that kind, for a long time together by reason
of his several infirmities, but she by reason of this inhibition of Venus fell
into a horrible fury, and desired every one that came to see her, by words,
looks, and gesture to have to do with her, etc. Bernardus Paternus a
Physician, says he knew a good honest godly Priest, that because he would
neither marry, nor make use of the Stews fell into grievous melancholy fits.
Hildesheim spicel. 2. has such another instance of an Italian melancholy
Priest in a consultation had Ao 1580. Vidi sacerdotem optimum and pium qui quod
nollet vti venere, in melancholica symptomota incidit.
Jason Pratensis gives instance in a married man, that after his wives death
abstaining Ob abstinentiam a concubitu incidit in melancholiam.
after marriage became exceeding melancholy. To these you may add if you
please, that conceited tale of a Jew, so visited in like sort, and so cured out
of Podgius Florentinus.

Intemperate Venus is all out as bad in the other extreme, Galen. lib. 6. de
morbis popular. sect. 5. tert. 26. reckons up Melancholy amongst those diseases
which are Quae a coitu exacerbantur.
exasperated by Venery, so does Avicenna 2.3. cap. 11. Oribasius loc. citat.
Ficinus lib. 2. de sanitate tuenda, Marsilius Cagnatus, Montaltus c. 27.
Guatinerius Tract. 15. cap. 2. Magninus c. 5. part. 3. Superfluum coitum ca^
some ponunt.
gives the reason because Exsiccat and infrigidat corpus, spiritus consumit
etc. caveant ab hoc sicci ve^ut inimico mortali.
it infrigidates and dries up the body consumes the spirits; and would
therefore have all such as are cold and dry, to take heed of it and avoid it as
a mortal enemy. Iacchinus in 9. Rasis cap. 15. gives the same cause, and
instance in a patient of his that married a young wife in a hot summer, Ita
exsi^catus vt ab melancholico statim fuerit i^sanus ab humectantibus curatus.
and so dried himself with chamber-worke that he became in short space from
melancholy mad, he cured him by moistning remedies. The l^ke example I find
in Lael us a Font Eugubinus consult. 1 29. of a Gentleman of Venice, that upon
the like occasion became from melancholy mad: Read the story at large in him.

Any other Evacuation stopped, will cause it, as well as these aboue-named, be
it bile, Ex cauterio and vlcere exsiccato.
ulcer, issue etc. Hercules de Saxonia lib. 1. cap. 16. and Gordonius verifies
this out of their experience. They saw one wounded in the head, who as long as
the sore was open, lucida habuit mentis intervalla, was well, but when it was
stopped, redijt melancholia, his melancholy fit seized on him again.

Artificial Evacuations are much like in effect, as hotehouses, bathes,
blood-letting, purging, unseasonably, and immoderatly used. Gord. cap. 10. lib.
1. discommends cold bathes as noxious.
Bathes Siccum reddu^t corpus.
dry too much, if used in excess, be they natural, or artificial, and offend
extremae hot, or cold; one dries, the other refrigerates in extremes.
Montanus consil. 237. says, they overheate the Liver. Ioh. Struthius Stigmat.
artis lib. 4. cap. 9. contends, Si quis longius moretur in ijs, aut nimis
frequenter, aut importune vtatur humores putrefacit.
that if one stay longer then ordinary at the Bathe, or go in too often, or at
unseasonable times, he putrifies the humors in his body. To this purpose writes
Magninus lib. 3. cap. 5. Guianerius Tract. 15. cap. 21. utterly disallowes all
hot Bathes in melancholy adust. Ego anno superiore quendam guttosum vidi
adustum, qui vt liberaretur de gutta, ad balnea accessit, and de gutta
liberatus, maniacus factus est.
I saw, says he, a man that labored of the gout, who to be freed of his
malady, came to the Bathe, and was instantly cured of his gout, but got another
which was worse, and that was Madness. But this judgment varies as the humor
does, in hot, or cold. Baths may be good for one melancholy man, bad for
another: that which may cure it in one party, may cause it in another.

Phlebotomy.
Phlebotomy many times neglected, may do much harm to the body, when there is
a manifest redundance of bad humors and melancholy blood; and when these humors
heat and boil, if this be not used in time, the parties affected so inflamed,
are in great danger to be mad: but if it be unadvisedly, importunely,
immoderately used, it does as much harm by refrigerating the body, dulling the
spirits, and consuming them: as Ioh. Curio in his 10. chap. well reprehends, it
does more harm then good, such kind of letting blood, On Schola Salernitana.
and the humors rage much more then they did before, Calefactio and ebullitio
per venae incisionem magis saepe incitatur and augetur maiore impetu humores
per corpus discurrunt.
and is so far from avoiding melancholy, that it increases it, and weakeneth
the sight. Lib. de flatulenta Melancholia. frequens sanguinis missio corpus
extenua^t.
Prosper Calenus observes, except they keep a very good diet after it. Yea,
and as In 9. Rhasis. atram bilem parat and visum debilitat.
Leonartus Iacchinus speaks out of his own experience, Multo nigrior
spectatur sanguis post dies quosdam, quam fuit ab initio.
the blood is much blacker to many men after their letting of blood, then it
was at first. And for this cause belike, Salust. Salvinianus lib. 2. cap. 1.
will admit or hear of no blood-letting at all in this Disease, except it be
manifest it proceed from blood, he was as it appears by his own words in
that place, master of an hospital of madmen, Non laudo eos qui in desipientia,
docent secandam esse venam frontis, quia spiritus debilitatur inde, and ego
longa experientia observaui in proprio Xenecdochio quod desipientes ex
phlebotomia magis laeduntur, and magis desipiunt, and melancholici saepe fiunt
inde peiores.
and found by long experience, that this kind of evacuation either in head, or
arm, or any other part, did more harm then good,

Purging upward and downward, in abundance of bad humors omitted, may be for
the worst, so likewise as in the precedent, if it be overmuch, or too frequent,
or violent, it Vires debilitat.
weakeneth their strength, says Fuschius lib. 2. sec. 2. cap. 17. or if they
be strong, or able to endure Physic, yet it brings it to an ill habit, they
make their bodies no better then an Apothecaries shop, and this, and such like
infirmities must needs follow.

SVBSEC. 5. Bad Air a cause of Melancholy.
Air is a cause of great moment, in producing this or any other Disease, being
that it is still taken into our bodies by respiration, and our more inner
parts. Impurus aer spiritus deijcit, infecto cord gignit morbos.
If it be impure and foggy, it deiects the spirits, and causes diseases by
infection of the heart, as Paulus has it lib. 1. cap. 49. Avicenna lib. 1.
Gal. de san. tuenda. Mercurialis, Montaltus etc. Sanguinem densat, and humores.
lib. 1. Path. 1. cap. 13.
Fernelius says, a thick air thickneth the blood and humors. Lib. 3. cap. 13.
Lemnius reckons up two maine things most profitable, and most pernicious to
our bodies, Air and Diet: and this peculiar Disease nothing sooner causes (
Lib. de quartana, ex acre ambiente contrabitur humor melancholicus.
Iobertus holds) then the Air wherein we breath and live. It offends commonly
if it be to Aelianus Montaltus cap. 11. calidus and siccus, frigidus and
siccus, paludinosus, crassus.
hot and dry, or too cold and dry, thick, fuligenous, cloudy, blustering, or a
tempestuous Air. Bodine in his 5. book de repub. cap. 1. and 5. cap. of his
method of history, proves that hot countries are most troubled with
melancholy, and that there are therefore in Spain, and Afric, and Asia
minor, great numbers of mad men, in so much that they are compelled in all
Cities of note, to build peculiar Hospitals for them. Leo Afer Multa hic in
Xenodochiis fanaticorum millia quae strictissime catenata seruantur.
lib. 3. de Fessa vrbe: and Zuinger confirms as much: and Gordonius will have
every man take notice of it. Note this, says he, that in hot Countries, it is
far more familiar then in cold. Lib. Med. part 2. cap. 19. Intellige quod in
calidis regionibus frequenter accidit mania, in frigidis autem tarde.
Although this be not always true: for as Lib. 2.
Acosta truly says, under the Equator it self, is a most temperate
habitation, and wholesome Air, a Paradise of pleasure: the leaves ever green,
cooling showers. But such as are intemperately hot, as Hodopericum. cap 7.
Johannes a Meggen, found in Cyprus, others of Malta, and the Holy land, where
at some seasons of the year, is nothing but sand, their rivers dried up, and
the Air scorching hot, and Earth: in so much, that many Pilgrims going
barefoot for Devotions sake, from Ioppa to Jerusalem upon the hot sands, often
run mad. Pantheo seu pract. Med. l-b. 1 cap. 16. Venetae mulieres quae diu sub
sole vivunt, aliquando melancholicae evadunt.
Hercules de Saxonia a Professor in Venice, gives this cause, why so many
Venetian women are melancholy, quod diu sub sole degant, they tarry too long
in the Sun. Montaenus consil. 21. amongst other causes, assigns this, why that
Jew his patient was mad, quod tam multum exposuit se calori and frigori, he
exposed himself so much to heat and cold. And for that reason in Venice, there
is little stirring in those brick-paved streets in Summer about noone, they are
most part then a-sleep: As they are likewise in the great Mogors Countries, and
all over the East Indies. At Aden in Arabia, as Navig. lib. 2. cap. 4.
commercia nocte, hori secunda ob nimios qui saeviunt interdiu aestus exercent.
Lodovicus Vertomannus relates in his travels; they keep their markets in the
night, to avoid extremity of heat: and in Ormus, like cattle in a Pasture,
people of all sorts lie up to the chinne in water all day long. At Burgos in
Porting all, Messina in Sicily, all over Spain and Italy, their streets are
most narrow, to avoid the Sun beams. The Turks wear great Tulipantes, ad
fugandos solis radios, to refract the Sun beams, and much inconvenience, that
hot Air of Bantam in Iaua yields to our men, that sojourne there for
traffic, where it is so hot, Morbo Gallico laborantes exponunt ad solemn, vt
morbos exsiccent.
that those that are sick of the pox, lie commonly bleaching in the Sun, to
dry up their sores. The hardiest men are offended with this heat, and stiffest
clownes cannot resist it, as Constantine affirms agricult. lib. 2. cap. 45.
Those that are naturally borne there, cannot Hippocrates 3. Aphorismorum idem
ait.
endure it, much less weakelings and strangers. Amatus Lusitanus, cent. 1.
curat, 45. records of a young maid, that was one Vincent a curriers Daughter,
some 30 years of age, that would wash her hair in the heat of the Day, in
July, and so let it dry in the Sun Quum ad solis radios in leone longam moram
traheret, vt capillos flavos redderet, in maniam incidit.
to make it yellow, but by that means tarrying too long in the heat, she
inflamed her head, and made herself mad.

Cold Air in the other extreme, is almost as bad as hot, and so does
Montaltus esteem of it cap. 11. if it be dry withal. In those Northern
Countries the people are therefore generally dull, heavy, and many witches,
which (as I have before quoted) Saxo Grammaticus, Olaus, Baptista Porta ascribe
to melancholy, But these colder Climes are more subject to natural melancholy,
not this artificial, cold and dry: For which cause, my countriman Mundus alter
and idem seu Terra Australis incognita.
Mercurius Britannicus belike, puts melancholy men to inhabit just under the
Pole. the worst of the three is a Crassus and turbidus aer tristem efficit
animam.
thick, cloudy, misty, foggy, air, or such as comes from sennes, moorish
grounds, lakes, muckels, draughts, sinkes, where any filthy carcasses or
carrion lies, or from whence any stinking fulsome smell comes; Galen, Avicenna,
Mercurialis, new and old, hold that such air is unwholesome, and ingenders
melancholy, plagues, and what not? Commonly called Scandarone in Asia minor.
Alexandreta, an haven town in the Mediterranean Sea, is much condemned for a
bad air. Littuania, Ditmarshe, Pomptina paludes in Italy, the territories
about Pisa, Ferrara, etc. Rumny marsh with us, the Hundreds in Essex, the
Fennes in Lincolneshire. Cardan de rerum varietate lib. 17. cap. 96. finds
fault with the site of most of those rich and populous cities in the Low
countries, as Bruges, Gant, Amsterdam, Leyden, Vtrect etc. the air is bad; and
so Stockholne in Sueden, Regium in Italy: our Salesburry and Linne. They may be
commodious for navigation; this new kind of fortification, and many other good
and necessary uses, but are they so wholesome? Old Rome has descended from the
hills to the valley, and it is the site of most of our new cities, and held best
to build in plains, to take the opportunity of rivers. Leander Albertus pleads
hard for the air and site of Venice, though the black moorish sands appear at
every low water; the Sea, Fire, and Smoke, as he thinks, qualifyes the air:
and Atlas Geographicus memoria valent Pisani quod crassiore fruantur acre.
some think, that a thick foggy air helps the Memory, as them of Pisa in
Italy; and our Camden out of Plato, commends the site of Cambridge, because it
is so near the Fennes. But let the site of such places be as it may, how can
they be excused that have a delicious seat, a pleasant air, and all that nature
can afford, and yet through their own nastinesse and sluttishnesse, and
immund sordid manner of life, suffer their air to putrify, and themselves to
be choked up. Many cities in Turkey do male audire in this kind:
Constantinople it self, where commonly carrion lies in the street. Some find
the same fault in Spain, even in Madrit the Kings seat, a most excellent air,
and pleasant site, but the inhabitants are slouens, and the streets uncleanly
kept.

A troublesome tempestuous Air is as bad, as impure, rough and foul weather,
impetuous winds, cloudy dark days, as it is commonly with us, coelum visu
foedum, Lib. 1. Hist. Lib. 2. cap. 41. aura densa accaliginosa tetrici homines
existunt and subtristes. and cap. 3 stante subsolano and Zephiro maxima in
mentibus hominum alacritas existit, mentisque erectio ubi caelum solis
splendore nitescit. Maxima deiectio maerorque si quando aura caliginosa est.
Polidore calls it a filthy sky, and in quo facile generantur rubes: as Tullyes
Brother Quintus, wrote to him in Rome, being then Quaestor in Britain. In a
thick and cloudy air, says Lemnius, men are tetricke, sad, and peev^sh: and
if the Western winds blow, and that there be a calm, or a fair sunshine
day, there is a kind of alacrity in men's minds, it cheares up men and beasts:
but if it be a turbulent, a rough, cloudy, stormy weather, men are sad,
lumpish, and much dejected, angry, waspish, dull and melancholy. This was Georg.
Virgils experiment of old: Verum vbi tempestas and coeli mobilis humor
Mutavere vices, and Jupiter humidus Austro
Vertuntur species animorum and pectore motus
Concipiunt alios --
But when the face of Heaven changed is,
To tempests, rain, from season fear:
Our minds are altered, and in our breasts,
Forthwith some new conceits appear.
and who is not wether-wise against such and such conjunctions of Planets,
moved in foul weather, dull and heavy in such tempestuous seasons? Hor.
gelidum contristat Aquarius annum: the time requires, and the Autumn breeds
it, winter is like unto it, ugly, foul, squalid: the air works on all men,
more or less, but especially on such as are melancholy, or inclined to it, as
Lemnius holds, Men's quibus vacillat abacre cito offenduxtur. and multi insani
apud Belgas ante tempestates saeviunt aliter quieti. Spiritus quoque aerii and
mali geniialiquando se tempestatibus ingerunt, and menti humanae se latentur
insinuant, eamque vexant, exegitant, and ut fluctus marini, sic humanum corpus
vemis agit^tur.
they are most moved with it, and those which are already mad, roue
downright, either in, or against a tempest. Besides, the devil many times
takes his opportunity of such storms, and when the humors by the air be
stirred, he gets in with the air, and exagitates our spirits, and vexes our
souls: and as the Sea waves, so are the spirits and humors in our bodies,
tossed with tempestuous winds and storms. To such as are melancholy
therefore, Montanus consil. 24. will have tempestuous and rough air to be
avoided: and consil. 27, all night air, and would not have them to walk
abroad, but in a pleasant d^y. Lemnius lib. 3. cap. 3. discommends the South
and Eastern winds, commends the North. Montanus consil. 31 Aer noctu densatur
and cogit moestitiam.
will not any windoes to be opened in the nigh. Consil. 229. and consil. 230.
he discommends especially the South wind, and nocturnall air. So does lib de
^si^e and Osucide.
Plutarch: The night and darkness makes men sad, and so do all subterranean
vaults, dark houses in caves and rocks, desert places cause melancholy in an
instant, especially such as have not been used to it, or otherwise accustomed.
Read more of air in Hippocrates, Aetius lib. 3. a capit. 171. ad 175. Orbasium
a cap. 1. ad 22. Avicen lib. 1. can. Fen. 2. doc. 2. Fen. 1. cap. 123. to the
12. etc.

SVBSECT. 6. Immoderate Exercise a cause, and how. Solitariness, Idleness.
NOthing so good, but it may be abused: nothing better then Exercise, if
oportunely used for the preservation of the body: nothing so bad, if it be
unseasonable or overmuch. Fernelius out of Galen, Path. lib. 1. cap. 16. says,
Multa defatigatio spiritus viriumque substantiam exhaurit, and corpus
refrigerat. Humores corruptos qui aliter a natura concoqui and domari possint,
and demum blande excludi irritat, and quasi in furorem agit, qui postea mota
camerina, tetro vapore corpus vary lacessunt, animu^que
that much exercise and weariness, consumes the spirits and substance, and
refrigerates the body, and such humors which nature would have otherwise
concocted and expelled, it stirs up, and makes them rage. Which being so
enraged, diversely affect, and trouble the body and mind: so does it if it be
unseasonably used, upon a full stomach, or when the body is full of crudities,
which Fuchsius so much inveighs against, lib. 2. instit. sec. 2. cap. 4. giving
that for a cause, why boys in Germany are so often scabbed, because they use
exercise presently after meats. In Venimecum. Liber sic inscripto.
Bayerus puts in a caveat against such exercise, because it Instit. ad vit.
Christ. cap. 44. cibos crudos in venas rapit, qui putrescentes illic, spiritus
animales insiciunt.
corrupts the meat in the stomach, and carries the same juice, raw, and as yet
undigested into the veins (says Lemnius) which there putrifies and confounds
the animal spirits. Crato consil. 21. lib. 2. Crudi hec humoris copia per
venas aggeritur, vnde morbi multiplices.
Exclaimes against all such Exercise after meat, as being the greatest enemy
to concoction that may be, and cause of corruption of humors, which produce
this and many other diseases. Not without good reason then, does Salust
Salvianus lib. 2. cap. 1, and Leonartus Iacchinus in 9. Rhasis, Mercurialis,
Arculanus, and many other, set down Immodicum exercitium.
immoderate exercise, as a most forcible cause of melancholy.

Opposite to Exercise is Idleness, or want of Exercise, the bane of body and
mind, the chief author of all mischief, ore of the seven deadly sins, and
a sole cause of this and many other maladies, the Devils cushion, as Hom. 31.
in 1. Cor. 6. nam quum men's hominis quiescere non possit, sed continuo circa
varias cogitationes discurrat, nisi honesto aliquo negotio occupetur, ad
Melancholiam sponte delabitur.
Gualter calls it, his pillow, and chief reposall. For the mind can never rest,
but still meditates on some thing or other, except it be occupied about some
honest business, of his own accord it rusheth into melancholy. Crato consil.
21. vt immodicae corporis exercitatio, nocet corporibus, ita vitae deses, and
otiosa otium animal pituosum reddit viscerum obstructiones and crebras
fluctiones and morbos concitat.
As too much and violent exercise offends on the one side, so does an idle life
on the other (says Crato) it fills the body full of fleam, gross humors, and
all manner of obstructions, rhumes, catarres etc. Rhasis cont. lib. 1. tract. 9.
accounts of it as the greatest cause of Melancholy: Et vidi quod vna de rebus
quque magis generat Melancholiam, est otiositas.
I have often seen (says he) that Idleness begets this humor more then any
thing else. Montaltus cap. 1. seconds him, Reponitur otium ab aliis causa, and
hoc a nobis observatum eos huic malo magis obnoxios qui plane otiosi sunt, quam
eos qui aliquo munere versantur exequendo.
out of his experience, that those that are idle, are far more subject to
melancholy, then such as are conversant or employed about any office or
business. De tranquil. animae: sunt quos ipsum otium in animi coniicit
aegritudinem.
Plutarch reckons up Idleness for a sole cause of the sickness of the Soul:
There are those (says he) troubled in mind, that have no other cause but this.
Homer. Iliad. 1. brings in Achilles eating of his own heart in his Idleness,
because he might not fight. Mercurialis consil, 86. for a melancholy young man
urges Nihil est quod aeque Melancholiam alat ac augeat, ac otium and
abstinentia a corporis and animi exercitationibus.
this as a chief cause, why was he Melancholy? because idle. Nothing begets it
sooner, increases and continues it ofter then Idleness. A Disease familiar
to all Idle persons, an inseparable companion to such as live at ease, a life
out of action, and have no calling or ordinary employment to busy themselves
about. Especially if they have bin formerly brought up to business, and upon a
sudden come to lead a sedentary life, it crucifies their Souls, and seaseth on
them in an instant: And is such a torture, that as wise Seneca well says, malo
mihi male quam molliter esse: I had rather be sick the^ idle. This Idleness is
either of body or mind. That of body is nothing but intermitting Exercise,
which if we may believe Path. lib. 1. ca. 17. exercitationis intermissio
inertem calorem languidos spiritus and ignavos, and ad omnes actiones segniores
reddit cruditates, obstructiones, and excrementorum prouentus facit.
Fernelius, causes crudities, obstructions, excrement all humors, Nihil magis
excaecat intellectum, quam otium. Gordonius de observat. vit. hum. lib. 1.
quenches the natural heat, dulls the spirits, and makes them unapt to do
any thing whatsoever.

Her. Ser. 1. Sat. 3.
Neglectis vrenda filix innascitur agris. As fern grows in vntill'd grounds,
and all manner of weeds, so do gross humors in an Idle body, Ignavum
corrumpunt otia corpus. A horse in a stable that never travailes, an hawke in a
mew that never flies, are both subject to Diseases, which left unto themselves
are most free from any such encumbrances. An idle dog will be maungye, and how
shall an idle person think to escape? Idleness of the mind is much worse
then this of the body. Seneca.
Aerugo animi, rubigo ingenij: the rust of the Soul, Moerorem animi, and
maciem Plutarch calls it.
a plague, a hell it self, maximum animi nocumentum, Galen calls it. Sicut in
stagno generantur vermes, sic and otioso malae cogitationes. Seneca.
As in a standing poole, worms and filthy creepers increase; so do evil and
corrupt thoughts in an idle person. In a commonwealth where there is no public
enemy, there is likely civil wars, and they rage upon themselves: and this
body of ours when it is idle, and knows not how to bestow it self, macerates
and vexes it self with cares and griefs, and false-feares, suspicions, it
tortures and preyes upon his own bowels, and is never at rest. This much I
dare boldly say, that he or she that is Idle, be they of what condition they
will, never so rich, well allied, fortunate, happy, let them have all things in
abundance, all felicity that heart can wish and desire, all contentment, and so
long as he or they are idle, they shall never be pleased. Well they may build
castles in the air for a time, and sooth up themselves with fantastical
humors, but in the end they will prove as bitter as gall, they shall be still
discontent, suspicious, Prove. 18. Pigrum deijciet timor. Heautontimorumenos.
fearful, jelous, sad, fretting, and vexing of themselves: so long as they be
idle, it is impossible to please them. Otio qui nescit vti, plus habet negotij,
quam qui negotium in negotio: as that Lib. 19. cap. 10
Agellius could observe. He that knows not how to spend his time, has more
business, care and grief, anguish of mind, then he that is most busy in the
midst of all his business: Otiosus animus nescit quid volet: An idle person
(as he follows it) knows not when he is well, or what he would have, or
whether he would go, quum illuc ventum est, illinc lubet, he is tired out with
every thing, displeased with all, aweary of his life: nec been domi, nec
militiae, neither at home, nor abroad, errat, and praeter vitam vivitur, he
wanders, and lives besides himself.

Cosen German to Idleness, and a concomitating cause, which goes hand in hand
with it, is Piso, Montaltus, Mercurialis. etc.
nimia solitudo, too much solitariness, by the testimony of all Physicians,
Cause and Symptom both: but as it is here put for a cause, it is either
coact, enforced, or else voluntary. Enforced Solitariness is commonly seen in
students, Monks, Friars, Anchorites, that by their order and course of life,
must abandon all company, and society of other men, and betake themselves to a
private life; Such as live in prison, or in some desert place, and cannot have
company, as many of our country Gentlemen do in solitary houses, they must
either be alone without company, or live beyond their means, and entertain al
comers, as so many hosts, or else converse with their servants and hindes,
such as are unequal, inferior to them, and of a contrary disposition; or else
as some do, to avoid solitariness, spend their time in alehouses, and addict
themselves to some unlawful disports, or dissolute courses. Some again are
cast upon this rock of solitariness for want of means, or out of a strong
apprehension of some infirmity, disgrace, or through bashfulnesse, rudeness,
simplicity, they cannot apply themselves to others company. This enforced
solitariness takes place, and produces this effect soonest in such as have
spent their time Iovially peradventure in all honest, recreations, in all good
company, and are upon a sudden confined, and restrained of their liberty, and
barred from their ordinary associates: solitariness is very irksome to such,
most tedious, and a sudden cause of great inconvenience.

Voluntary solitariness is that which is familiar with Melancholy, and gently
brings on as a Siren, a shooing-horne, or some Sphinx to this irrevocable
gulf, Aquibus malum, velut a primaria causa occasionem nact^est.
a primary cause Piso calls it, most pleasant it is at first to such as are
Melancholy given, to walk alone in some solitary grove, betwixt wood and
water, by some brook side, and to meditate upon some delightsome and pleasant
subject, which shall affect him most, amabilis insania, and mentis gratissimus
error. A most incomparable delight to build castles in the air, to go smiling
to themselves, acting an infinite variety of parts, which they suppose, and
strongly imagine they act, or that they see done. Blandae quidem ab initio,
says Lemnius, to conceive and meditate of such pleasant things sometimes,
Iucunda rerum praesentium, praeteritarum, and futurarum meditatio.
present, past, or to come, as Rhasis speaks. So delightsome these toys are
at first, they could spend whole days and nights without sleep, even whole
years in such contemplations, and fantastical meditations, which are like so
many dreams, and will hardly be drawn from them, winding and vnwinding
themselves as so many clocks, and still pleasing their humors, until at the
last the Scene turns upon a sudden, and they being now habitated to such
meditations and solitary places, can endure no company, can think of nothing
but harsh and distastefull subjects: Fear, sorrow, suspicion, substructicus
pudor, discontent, cares, and weariness of life, surprise them on a sudden,
and they can think of nothing else: continually suspecting, no sooner are their
eyes open, but this infernal plague of melancholy seaseth on them, and
terrifies their souls, representing some dismal object to their minds, which
now by no means, no labor, no persuasions they can avoid, haeret laters
lethalis arundo, they cannot be rid of it, Facilis descensus Averni: Sed
revocare gradum, superasque evadere ad auras Hic labor, hoc opus est. Virg.
they cannot resist. I may not deny but that there is some profitable
Meditation, Contemplation, and kind of Solitariness to be embraced, which the
Fathers so highly commend, Hieronymus dixit oppida and vrbes videri sibi tetros
carceres, solitudo Paradisus, solum scorpionibus infectum, saccho amictus, humi
cubans, aqua and herbis victitans, Romany praetulit delitijs.
Hierome, Chrysostom, Cyprian, Austin, in whole Tracts, which Petrarch,
Erasmus, Stella, and others so much magnify in their books, a Paradise, a
Heaven on earth, if it be used aright, good for the body and the Soul: As many
of those old Monks used it, to divine contemplations, as Similus a courtier in
Adrians time, Dioclesian the Emperor retired themselves etc. Or the bettering
of their knowledge, as Democritus, Cleanthes, and all those excellent
Philosophers have ever done, to sequester themselves from the tumultuous world,
or as Plinies villa Lauretana, Tullies Tusculane, Iovius study, that they might
better vacare studijs and Deo, serve God, and follow their studies. These men
are neither solitary, nor idle, as the Poet made answer to the husbandman in
Aesop, that objected Idleness to him: he was never so idle, as in his company:
or that Scipio Africanus in Offic. 3.
Tully, nunquam minus solus, quam quum solus; nunquam minus otiosus, quam quum
esset otiosus: never less solitary then when he was alone, never more busy
then when he seemed to be most idle. But it is far otherwise with these men,
they are devils alone, as the saying is, homo solus aut Deus, aut demon: a man
alone is either a Saint, or a devil, and Eccles. 4.
vae soli in this sense, woe be to him that is alone. These men degenerat from
men, and from sociable creatures, become beasts, monsters, inhumane, ugly to
behold, Misanthropi: they do even loathe themselves, and hate the company of
men, as so many Timons, Nebuchadnessars: by too much indulging to these
pleasing humors, and through their own default. So that which Mercurialis
consil. 11. sometimes expostulated with his Melancholy patient, may be justly
applied to every solitary and idle person in particular. Naturae de te videtur
conqueri posse, quod cum ab ea temperatissimum corpus adeptus sis, tam
praeclaerum a Deo ac vtile donum non contempsisti modo, verum corrupisti,
faedasti, prodidisti, optimam temperaeturam otio, crapula and aliis vitae
erroribus etc.
Natura de te videtur conqueri posse etc. Nature may justly complain of thee,
that whereas she gave thee a good wholesome temperature, a sound body, and God
has given thee so divine and excellent a soul, so many good parts, and
profitable gifts, thou have not only contemned and rejected them, but have
corrupted them, polluted them, overthrown thy temperature, and perverted those
gifts with riot, idleness, solitariness, and many other ways, thou art a
traitor to God and Nature, an enemy to thy self and to the world. Perditio tua
ex te: thou thy self art the efficient cause of thine own misery, by not
resisting such vain cogitations, but giving way unto them.

SVBSEC. 7. Sleeping and Waking causes.
WHat I have formerly said of Exercise, I may now repeat of Sleep. Nothing
better then moderate Sleep, nothing worse then it, if it be in extremes, or
unseasonably used. It is a received opinion, that a Melancholy man cannot sleep
overmuch, Somnus supra modum prodest, it is an only Antidote, and nothing
offends them more, or causes this malady sooner, then Waking: yet in some
cases Sleep may do more harm then good, in that slegmatick, swinish, and
sluggish Melancholy, that Melancthon speaks of, that thinks of waters, sighing
most part etc. Path. lib. 1. cap.: 7. Fernel. corpus infrigidat omnes sensus,
mentisque vires torpore debilitat.
It duls the Spirits if overmuch, and senses, and fills the head full of gross
humors, causes distillations, rhumes, and great store of excremen^s to the
brain, and all the other parts, as Lib. 2. sec. 2. cap. 4. Magnam
excrementorum vim cerebro and alij^ partibus conseruat.
Fuchsius speaks of them, that sleep like so many dormice. Or if it be used in
the day time, or upon a full stomach, the body ill composed to rest, or after
hard meats it increases fearful dreams, Incubus, night waking, crying out,
and much unquietness: such sleep prepares the body, as Io. Ratzius l. de rebus
6. nonnaturalibus. praeparat corpus talis Comnies ad multas periculosas
aegritudines.
one observes, to many perilous diseases. But as I have said, waking overmuch,
is both a symptom, and an ordinary cause. It causes dryness of the Brain,
frensye, dotage; and makes the body dry, lean, hard, and ugly to behold, as
Instit ad vitam optimam. cap. 26 cerebro siccitatem adfert, phrenesin and
delirium, corpus. aridum facit, squalidum, strigosam, humores adurit
temperamentum cerebri corripit, maciem inducit: exsiccat corpus, bilem
accendit, profunde: reddit oculos; calorem auget.
Lemnius has it. The temperature of the Brain is corrupted by it, the humors
adust, the eyes made to sink into the head, choler increased, and the whole
body inflamed: and as may be added out of Galen 3. de sanitate tuenda, Avicenna
3.1. Naturalem calorem dissipat, lesa concoctione cruditates facit. Attenuant
invonum vigilatae corpora noctes.
it overthrows the natural heat, it causes crudities, and hurts concoction,
and what not? Not without good cause Crato consil, 21. lib. 2. Hildisheim
spicel. 2. de delir. and Mania. Iacchinus, Arculanus on Rhasis, Guianerius, and
Mercurialis, reckon up this overmuch waking, as a principal cause.

MEMB. 3.
SVBSEC. 1. Passions and perturbations of the Mind, how they cause Melancholy.
AS that Gymnosophist in Vitae Alexand.
Plutarch, made answer to Alexander, demanding which spoke best, every one of
his fellows did speak better then the other: may I say of these causes, to
him that shall require which is the greatest, every one is more grievous then
other, and this of passion the greatest of all. A most frequent and ordinary
cause of Melancholy, Grad. 1 c. 24.
fulmen perturbationum, as Piccolomineus calls it, this thunder and lightning of
perturbation, which causes such violent and speedy alterations in this our
Microcosine, and many times subverts the good estate and temperature of it. For
as the Body works upon the Mind, by his bad humors, disturbing the Spirits,
sending gross fumes into the Brain; and so per consequens disturbing the
Soul, and all the faculties of it, with fear, sorrow etc. which are ordinary
symptoms of this Disease: so on the other side, the Mind most effectually
works upon the Body, producing by his pa^^^ons and perturbations, miraculous
alterations, as Melancholy, Despair, cruel diseases, and sometimes death it
self. In so much, that it is most true which Plato says in his Charmides:
omnia corporis mala, ab anima procedere, that all the Perturbationes claui
sunt, quibus corpori animus seu patibulo affigitur. Iamb. de mist.
mischiefs of the Body, proceed from the Soul; and as Democritus in Lib. de
sanitat. tuend.
Plutarch urges, damnatam tri animam a corpore, that if the Body should in
this behalf bring an action against the Soul, surely the Soul would be cast
and convicted, Prolog. de virtute Christi. Quae vtitur corpore, vt faber malleo.
that by her supine negligence, had caused such inconveniences, as having
authority over the Body, and using the Body as an instrument, as a Smith does
his hammer, says Cyprian, imputing all those vices and maladies to the Mind.
And so does Vit. Apollonii. lib. 1.
Philostratus, non coinquinatur corpus, nisi consensu animae, the Body is not
corrupted but by the Soul. Lib. de Anim. ab inconsiderantia and ignorantia
omnes animi motus.
Lod. Vives will have such turbulent commotions proceed from Ignorance, and
Indiscretion. All Philosophers impute the miseries of the Body to the Soul,
that should have governed it better, by command of Reason, and has not done
it. The Stoics are altogether of opinion, (as De Phisiol. Stoic.
Lipsius, and Grad. 1. c. 32.
Piccolomineus record) that a wise man should be (...), without all manner of
passions and perturbations whatsoever, as Epist. 104.
Seneca reports of Cato, the Aelianus.
Greeks of Socrates, and Lib. 1. cap. 6. si quis ense percusserit eos, tantum
recipient.
Io. Aubanus of a nation in Aphricke, so free from passion, or rather so
stupid, that if they be wounded with a sword, they will only look back.
Terror in sapiente esse non debet.
Lactantius 2. instit. will exclude all fear from a wise man: others except
some other pa^^^ons. But let them dispute how they will, set down in Thesi,
give precepts to the contrary; we find that of De occult. not. mir. l. 1. c.
16. nemo mortalium qui affectibus non ducatur, qui non movetur, aut saxum, aut
deus est.
Lemnius true by common experience: No mortal man is free from these
perturbations; or if he be so, sure he is either a god, or a block. They are
borne with us, and bred up with us, we have them from our parents by
inheritance, a parentibus habemus malum hunc assem, says Instit. lib. 2. de
humanorum affect. morborumque curat.
Pelezius, nascitur vna nobiscum, aliturque: it is propagated from Adam, Cain
was melancholy, Epist. 105.
as Austin has it, and who is not? Good discipline, education, Philosophy,
Divinity (I may not deny) may mitigate and restrain these passions, in some
few men at some times, but most part they domineere, and are so violent,
Granatensis.
that like a torrent, torrens velut aggere rupto, bears down all before, and
ouerflowes his banks, sternit agros, sternit sata, they ouer-whelme Reason,
Judgment, and pervert the temperature of the Body. Virg.
Fertur equis auriga, nec audit currus habenas. And such a man says Austin,
that is so led De civit. Dei l. 14. c. 9. qualis in oculis hominii^ qui
inversis pedibus ambulat, talis in oculis sapientum cui passiones dominantur.
in a wisemans eye, is no better then he that stands upon his head. It is
doubted by some, gravioresne morbi a perturbationibus, an ab humoribus, whether
humors, or perturbations, cause the more grievous maladies. But we find that
of our Savior Mat. 26.41. most true The Spirit is willing, the Flesh is weak,
we cannot resist: And And that of Lib. de decal. passiones maxim corpus
offendunt and anima^, and grauissimae and frequentissimae causae melancholiae,
dimoventes abingenio and sanitate pristina. lib. 3. de anim.
Philo Iudaeus, Perturbations most offend the body, and are most frequent
causes of melancholy, turning it out of the hinges of his health Vives compares
them to VVindes upon the sea, some only move as those great gales, but some
turbulent quite ouerturne the ship. Those which are light and easy, and more
seldom, to our thinking do us little harm, and are therefore contemned of
us: Yet if they be reiterated, Vt gutta lapidem, sic paulatim hae penetrant
animum.
(as the rain (says Austin) does a stone, so do these perturbations
penetrate the mind, V^^ valentes recte morbi animi vocantur.
and as one observes, produce an habit of Melancholy at the last, and having
got the mastery in our souls, may well be called Diseases.

How these passions produce this effect, Fraena and stimuli animi, uelut in
mari quaedam aurae leaves, quae and placidae, quaedam turbulentae: sic in
corpore quaedam affectiones excitant tantum, quaedam ita movent, vt de statu
Indicii depellant.
Imaginatio mouet corpus ad cuius motum excitantur humores and spiritus vitales
quibus alteratur.
Agrippa has handled at large, occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 63. Cardan. lib.
14. subtle. Lemnius lib. 1. cap. 12. de occult. not. mirac. and lib. 1. cap.
16. Suarez Met. disput. 18. sect. 1. art. 25. T. Bright cap. 12. of his
melancholy Treatise. Wright the Jesuit in his book of the passions of the
mind, etc. Thus in brief. To our imagination comes by the outward sense or
memory, some object to be known (residing in the former part of the Brain)
which he misconceauing or amplifying, presently communicates to the Heart, the
Seat of all affections. The purer spirits forthwith flock from the brain to
the Heart, by certain secret channels, and signify what good or bad object was
presented, Beeles. 13. 26. The Heart alters the countenance to good or evil,
and distractio^ of the mind causes diste^perature of the Body.
which immediately bends it self to prosecute, or avoid it; and withal draws
with it other humors to help it: so in pleasure concur great store of purer
spirits, in sadness much melancholy blood, in ire, choler. If the Imagination
be very apprehensiue, intent, and violent, it sends great store of spirits to
or from the Heart, and makes a deeper impression, and greater tumult, as the
humors in the body be likewise prepared, and the temperature it self ill or
well disposed, the passions are longer and stronger. So that the first step
and fountain of all our grieuances in this kind, is Spiritus and sanguis a
lesa Imaginatione contaminantur humores enim mutati actiones animi immutant.
Piso.
laesa Imagidatio, which misinforming the Heart, causes all these
distemperatures, alteration and confusion of spirits and humors. By means of
which so disturbed, concoction is hindered, and the principal parts are much
debilitated; as Montani consil. 22. Hae vero quomodo causent melancholiam
clarum, quod concoctionem impediant and membra principalia debilitent.
D. Navarra well declared, being consulted with Montanus about a melancholy
Jew. The spirits so confounded the nourishment must needs be abated, bad
humors increased and crudities, thick spirits engendered, and melancholy
blood. The other parts cannot perform their functions, having their spirits
drawn from them by vehement passion, but fail in sense and motion; so we
look upon a thing and see it not, hear and observe not, which otherwise would
much affect us, had we been free. I may therefore conclude with Breviar. lib.
1. cap. 18.
Arnoldus, Maxima vis est phantasiae, and huic vni fere, non autem corporis
intemperiei, omnis melancholiae causa est ascribenda: great is the force of
Imagination, and much more ought the cause of melancholy to be ascribed to this
alone, then to the distemperature of the body. Which Imagination because it
has so great a stroke in producing this malady, and is so powerful of it
self, it will not be impertinent to my present discourse, to make a brief
Digression, of the force of it, and how it causes this alteration.

SVBSEC. 2. Of the force of Imagination.
What Imagination is, I have sufficiently declared in my Digression of the
Anatomy of the Soul. I will only now point at the wonderful effects and power
of it; which as it is eminent in all, so most especially it rages in melancholy
persons in keeping the species of objects so long, mistaking, amplifying them
by continual and strong Ab Imaginatione oriuntur affectiones quibus anima
componitur aut turbata deturbatur. Io. Sarisburiens. Metalog. lib. 4. cap. 10.
meditation, until at the length it produces real effects, and causes this
and many other maladies. And although this Fantasy of ours be a subordinate
faculty to reason, and should be ruled by it, yet in many men, through inward
or outward distemperatures, defect of organs, which are unapt or hindered, or
otherwise contaminated, it is likewise unapt, hindered and hurt. This we see
verified in sleepers, which by reason of abundance of humors and concurse of
vapors troubling the Fantasy, imagine many times absurd and prodigious
things, and in such as are troubled with Incubus, or witch ridden, as we call
it, if they lie on their backs, they suppose an old woman rides them, and fits
so hard upon them, that they are almost stifled for want of breath; when there
is nothing but a concourse of bad humors, which trouble the Fantasy. This is
likewise evident in such as walk in the night in their sleep, and do strange
feats: Scalig. exercit.
these vapors move the Fantasy, the Fantasy the Appetite, which moving the
animal spirits, causes the body to walk up and down, as if they were awake.
Fracastorius lib. 3. de intellect. referres all Ecstasies to this force of
Imagination, such as lie whole days together in a Trance; as that Priest whom
Quiquotics volebat mortuo similis iacebat aufere^s se a sensibus and quum
pungeretur dolorem non sensit.
Celsus speaks of, that could separate himself from his senses when he lift,
and lie like a dead man void of life and sense. Verbis and vnctionibus se
consecrant daemoni pessimae mulieres, qui ijs ad opus suum vtitur and earum
phantasiam regit ducitque ad loca ab ipsis desiderata, corpora vero earum sine
sensu permanent quae vmbra cooperit diabolus vt nulli sint conspicua, and post
vmbra sublata proprijs corporibus eas restituit l. 3. c. 11. Wier.
Cardan bragges of himself that he could do as much, and that when he lift.
Many times such men when they come to themselves, tell strange things of Heaven
and Hell, what visions they have seen as that Sr Owen in Matthew Paris, that
went into St Patricks Purgatory, the Monk of Euesham in the same Author. Those
common apparitions in Bid and Gregory, and Sr Bridgets revelations. Wien. lib.
3. de Lamijs cap. 11. etc. 8. reduces, as I have formerly said, and all those
tales of Witches progresses, dancing, riding, transformations, operations, etc
to the force of Idem Nymannus orat. de Imaginat.
Imagination, and the Devils illusions. The like effects, almost are to be
seen in such as are awake: How many Chimaeras, Anticks, golden mountains, and
Castles in the air do they build unto themselves? I appeal to Painters,
Mechanicians, Mathematitians. Some ascribe all vices to a false and corrupt
Imagination, Anger, Revenge, Lust, Ambition, Covetousness, which preferres
false before that which is right and good, deluding the soul with false shows
and suppositions. Denario medico.
Bernardus Penottus, will have heresy and superstition to proceed from this
fountain, as he falsely imagines, so he believes, and as he conceaueth of
it, so it must be, and so it shall be, Contra gentes he will have it so. But
most especially in passions and affections, it shows strange and evident
effects: what will not a fearful man conceive in the dark; what strange
forms of Devils, Witches, Goblins? Lauater imputes the greatest cause of
spectrums, and the like apparitions to fear, which above all other passions,
begets the strongest Imaginations, says Solet timor prae omnibus affectibus
fortes Imaginationes gignere, post amor, etc. l. 3. c. 8.
Wierus, and so likewise love, and sorrow, joy, etc. Some dye suddenly, as
she that saw her son come from the battle at Canna, etc. Jacob the Patriarch
by force of Imagination made peckled lambs, laying peckled rods before them.
Persina, that Ethiopian Queen in Heliodorus, by seeing the picture of Perseus
and Andromeda, instead of a Blackemoore was brought to bed of a fair white
child. And if we may believe Bale, one of Pope Nicholas the thirds Concubines,
by seeing of a Ex viso vrso talem peperit.
Bear was brought to bed of a Monster. If a woman (says Lib. 1. cap. 4. de
occult. not. mir. si inter amplexus and suauia cogitet de vno, aut alio
absente, eius effigies solet in faetu elucere.
Lemnius) at the time of her conception, think of another man present or
absent, the child will be like him. Great bellied women when they long, yield
us prodigious examples in this kind, as Moles, Warts, Scarres, Hare-lips,
Monsters, especially caused in their children, by force of a depraved phantasy
in them. Ipsam speciem quam animo effigiat, faetui inducit: she imprints that
stamp upon her child which she Quid non faetui adhuc matri unito subita
spirituum vibratione, per neruos quibus matrix cerebro coniuncta est, imprimit
impregnatae Imaginatio; vt si imaginetur malum granatum, illius notas secum
proferet faetus, si leporem, infans editur supremo labello bifido and dissecto,
vehemens cogitatio mouet rerum species Wier. lib. 3. c. 8.
conceaues unto her self. And therefore, Lodovicus Vives lib. 2. de Christ
faem: gives a special caution to great bellied women, Ne dum vterum gestent
admittant absurdas cogitationes sed and visu audituque faeda and horrenda
deuitent.
That they do not admit of such absurd conceits and cogitations, but by all
means avoid such horrible objects, heard or seen, or filthy spectacles. Some
will laugh, weep, sigh, groan, blush, tremble, sweat, at such things as are
suggested unto them by their Imagination. Avicenna speaks of one that could
cast himself into a palsy when he list, and some can imitate the tunes of
Birds and Beasts, that they can hardly be discerned. Dagobertus and Sr Frances
scarres and wounds, like to those of Christ's, (if at the least any such were)
Occult. philos. lib. 1. cap. 64.
Agrippa supposes to have happened by force of Imagination: that some are
turned to Wolves, from Men to Women, and Women again to Men (which is
constantly believed) to the same Imagination; or from Men to Asses, Dogs, or
any other shapes. Lib 3 de lamijs cap. 10.
Wierus ascribes all those famous transformations to Imagination, that in
Hydrophobia they seem to see the picture of a Dog, still in their water,
Agrippa lib. 1. cap. 64.
that melancholy men, and sick men conceive so many fantastical visions,
apparitions to themselves, and have so many absurd suppositions, as that they
are Kings, Lords, Cocks, Bears, Apes, Owls, that they are heavy, light,
transparent, great and little, senseless and dead (as shall be showed more at
large in our Sect. 3. memb. 1. subsect. 3.
Sections of Symptoms) can be imputed to naught else but to a corrupt and
false Imagination. It works not in sick and melancholy men only, but even most
forcibly sometimes in such as are found, it makes them suddenly sick, and
Malleus malefic. fol. 77. corpus mutari potest in diversas aegritudines ex
forti apprehensione.
alters their temperature in an instant. And sometimes a strong apprehension,
as Fr. Vales. l. 5. cont. 6. nonnunquam etia^ morbi diuturni consequu^tur,
qua^doque curantur.
Valesius proves, will take away Diseases: in both kinds it will produce real
effects. Men if they see but another man tremble, giddy, or sick of some
fearful disease, their apprehension and fear is so strong in this kind,
that they will have the same disease. Or if by some Southsayer, wiseman,
fortuneteller, or Physician, they be told they shall have such a disease they
will so seriously apprehend it, that they will instantly labor of it. A thing
familiar in China, says Riccius the Jesuit, Expedit in Sinas l. 1. c. 9.
tantum porro multi praedictoribus hisce tribuunt, vt ipse metus fidem faciat,
nam si praedictum ijs fuerit ta^i die eos morbo corripiendos, ij vbi dies
advenerit, in morbum incidunt, and vi metus afflicti, cum aegritudine,
aliquando etiam cum morte colluctantur.
If it be told them they shall be sick on such a day, when that day comes they
will surely be sick, and will be so terribly afflicted, that sometimes they
dye upon it. D. Cotta in his discovery of ignorant practitioners of Physic
cap. 8. has two strange stories to this purpose, what fancy is able to do:
The one of a Parsons wife in Northamptonshiere, Ao 1607. that coming to a
Physician, and told by him that she was troubled with the Sciatica, as he
coniectured (a disease she was free from) the same night after her return,
upon his words fell into a grievous fit of the Sciatica. And such another
example he has of another goodwife, that was so troubled with the cramp, after
the same manner she came by it, because her Physician did but name it. Sometimes
death it self is caused by force of fantasy. I have heard of one that
coming by chance in company of him, that was thought to be sick of the Plague
(which was not so) fell down suddenly dead. Another was sick of the Plague
with conceit. One seeing another let blood, falls down in a sown. Another,
says Subtle. 18.
Cardan out of Aristotle, fell down dead (which is familiar to women at any
ghastly sight) seeing but a man hanged. A Jew in France, says Lib. 3. de anima
cap. de me-
Lodovicus Vives, came by chance over a dangerous passage, or plancke, that lay
over a Brook in the dark, without harm, the next day seeing what danger he
was in, fell down dead. Many will not believe such stories to be true, but
laugh commonly at them, when they hear of them; but let these men consider
with themselves, as Lib de Peste.
Peter Byarus illustrates it, if they were set to walk up on a plancke on
high, they would be giddy, upon which they dare secure walk upon the ground.
Many, says Agrippa, Lib. 1. cap. 63. Ex alto despicientes aliqui prae timore
contremiscunt, caligant, infirma^tur sic singultus, febres, morbi comitiales
quandoque sequu^tur, quandoque recedunt.
strong hearted men otherwise, tremble at such sights, dazell and are sick if
they look but down from an high place, and what moves them but conceit? As
some are so molested by Fantasy, so some again by Fancy alone, and a good
conceit, are as easily recovered. We see commonly the Toothache, Gout,
Falling Sickness, biting of a mad Dog, and many such maladies, cured by
Spells, Words, Characters, and Charms, and many green wounds magnetically
cured, which Goclenius in a book of late has defended. All the world knows
there is no virtue in such Charms, but a strong conceit and opinion alone, as
Lib de Incantatione. Imaginatio subitum humorum and spirituum motum infert,
vnde vario affectu rapitur sanguis, ac vna morbificas causas partibus affectis
eripit.
Pomponatius holds, which forces a motion of the humors, spirits, and blood,
which takes away the cause of the malady from the parts affected. The like we
say of all our magical effects, superstitious cures, and such as are done by
Mountebanks and Wisards. An Empiricke many times, and a silly Surgeon, does
more strange cures then a rational Physician. Nymannus gives a reason, because
the patient puts his confidence in him, Aegri persuasio and fiducia, omni arti
and co^silio, and medicinae praeferenda. Avicenna.
which Avicenna preferres before art, precepts, and all Remedies whatsoever.
It Is opinion alone, says Plures sanat in quem plures confidunt. lib. de
sapientia.
Cardan, that makes or marres Physicians, and he does the best cures according
to Hippocrates, in whom most trust. So diversely does this fantasy of ours
affect, turn and wind, so imperiously command our bodies, which as another
Proteus or a Camelion can take all shapes; and is of such force, as Ficinus
adds, that it can work upon others as well as our selves. How can otherwise
bleare eyes in one man cause the like affection in another? Why does one man's
Cur oscitantes oscitent. Wier.
yawning make another yawne? Marsilius Fici nus lib. 13. c. 18. de Theolog.
Platonica. Imaginatio est tanquam Proteus vel Chamelion corpus proprium and
alienum nonnunquam afficiens.
One man's pissing provoke a second many times to do the like? Why does
scraping of trenchers offend a third, or hacking of files, etc. Why does a
carcass bleed when the murderer is brought before it, some weeks after the
murder has been done? Why do Witches and old women fascinate and bewitch
children, but as Wierus, Paracelsus, Cardan, Mizaldus, Valleriola, and many
Philosophers think, the forcible Imagination of the one party, moves and
alters the spirits of the other. Read more of this subject, in Wierus lib. 3.
de lamijs cap. 8.9.10. Franciscus Valesius med. controvers. lib. 5. cont. 6.
Marcellus Donatus lib. 2. cap. 1. de hist. med. mirabil. Leuinus Lemnius de
occult. not. mir. lib. 1. cap. 12. Cardan. lib. 18. de rerum var. Corn. Agrippa
de occult. philos. cap. 64.65. Camerarius 1. cent. cap. 54. hornrum subcis.
Nymannus in orat. de Imag. Laurentius, and he that is instar omnium, Fienus a
famous Physician of Antwerpe, that writ three books de viribus Imaginationis.
I have thus far digressed because this Imagination is the medium deferens of
passions, by whose means they work and produce many times prodigious effects;
and as the fantasy is more or less intended or remitted, and their humors
disposed, so do perturbations move more or less, and take deeper impressions.

SVBSEC. 3. Division of Perturbations.
PErturbations and passions which trouble the fantasy, though they dwell
between the confines of sense and reason, yet they rather follow sense then
reason, because they are drowned in corporeal organs of sense. They are
commonly T.W. Jesuit.
reduced into two inclinations, Irascibile and Concupiscibile. The Thomists
subdiuide them into eleven, six in the Coveting, and five in the Invading.
Aristotle reduces all to pleasure and pain; Plato to love and hatred, 3. De
anima.
Vives to good and bad. If good it is present, and then we absolutely joy and
love, or to come, and then we desire, and hope for it. If evil we absolutely
hate it; if present it is Sorrow, if to come, Fear. These 4. passions Ser. 35.
Hae 4 passiones, sunt tanquam rotae in curtu, quibus vehimur hoc mundo.
Bernard compares to the wheels of a Chariot, by which we are carried in this
world. All other passions are subordinate unto these four, or six, as some
will? Love, Joy, Desire, Hatred, Sorrow, Fear: All the rest, as Anger, Envy,
Emulation, Pride, Jealousy, Anxiety, Mercy, Shame, Discontent, Despair,
Ambition, Avarice, etc. are reducible unto the first, and if they be
immoderate, they Horum quippe immoderatione ^tiritus marcescunt Fernelius lib.
1. path. cap. 18.
consume the spirits, and melancholy is especially caused by them. Some few
discreet men there are, that can govern themselves, and curb in these
inordinate affections, by religion, Philosophy, and such divine precepts, of
meekness, patience, and the like: but most part for want of government, out of
indiscreation, ignorance, they suffer themselves wholly to be led by sense, and
are so far from repressing rebellious inclinations, that they give all
encouragement unto them, leaving the raines, and using all provocations to
further them: bad by nature, worse by art, discipline, Mala consuetudine
deprauatur ingenium ne been faciat. prosper Calenus, lib. de atra bile. plura
faciunt homines e consuetudine quam e ratione. Teneris assuescere multum est.
Video meliora proboque deteriora sequor Ovid.
custom, education, and a perverse will of their own, they follow on,
wheresoever their unbridled affections will transport them, and do more out of
custom, self-will, then out of Reason. Contumax voluntas, as Melanchthon
calls it, malum facit, this stubborn will of ours, perverts our judgments,
which sees and knows what should and ought to be done, and yet will not do
it. Mancipi^ gulae. Slaves to their several lusts, and appetite, they
precipitate, and plunge Nemo laeditur nisi a seipso.
themselves into a labyrinth of cares, blinded with lust, blinded with
ambition, Multi se in inquietudine^ praecipitant ambitione and cupiditatibus
excaecati, non intelligunt se illud a dijs petere quod sibi ipsis si velint
praestare possint. Si a curis and perturbationibus quibus assidue se macerant
temperare vellent.
They seek for that at Gods hands, which they may give unto themselves, if
they could but refrain from those cares and perturbations, wherewith they
continually macerate themselves. But giving way to these violent passions of
fear, grief, shame, revenge, hatred, malice, etc. They are torn in pieces,
as Actaeon was with his own dogs, and Tanto studio miseriarum causas and
alimenta dolorum quaerimus vitamque secus f^^licissimam tristem et miserabilem
efficimus. Petrach praesat. de Remedijs etc.
crucify their own souls.

SVBSEC. 4. Sorrow, a cause of Melancholy.
IN this Catalogue of Passions, Sorrow. Insanus dolor.
which so much torments the Soul of man, and causes this malady (for I will
briefly speak of them all, and in their order) the first place in this
Irascible Appetite, may justly be challenged by Sorrow. An inseparable
companion, Timor and maestitia, si diu perseverent, causae and soboles atri
humoris sunt and in circulumse procreant Hippoc. Aphoris. 23 l 6. Idem
Montaltus cap. 19. Victorius Faventinus pract. mag.
The mother and daughter of Melancholy, her Epitome, Symptom, and chief
cause: as Hippocrates has it, They beget one another and tread in a ring^, for
Sorrow is both cause and Symptom of this Disease. How it is a Symptom shall
be showed in his place. That it is a cause all the world acknowledges, Dolor
nonnullis insaniae causa fuit, and aliorum morborum insanabilium, says
Plutarch to Apollinus; a cause of madness, a cause of many other diseases, a
sole cause of this mischief, Multi ex maerore and metu huc delapsi sunt.Lemn.
l 1. c. 16.
Lemnius calls it. And so does Rhasis cont. l. 1. Tract. 9. Gulanerius Tract.
15. cap. 5. And if it take root once it ends in despair, as Multa cura and
tristitia facivnt accedere melancholia^ (cap. 3. de mentis alie not.) si altos
radices agat in veram fixamque degenerat melancholiam and in desperationem
desinit.
Faelix Platter observes, and as in Ille luctus, eius vero soror desperatio
simul ponitur.
Cebes table may well be coupled with it. Animarum crudele tormentum, dolor
inexplicabilis, tinea non solum ossa, sed corda pertingens, perpetuus carnifex,
vires anime consumens, iugis nox and tenebrae profunde, tempestas and turbo,
and febris non apparens, omni igne validius incendens longier and pugna finem
non habens -- crucemcircumfert dolor faciemque omni tyranno crud^liore^ praese
fert.
Chrysostom in his seventeenth Epistle to Olimpia, describes it to be, a
cruel torture of the Soul, a most inexplicable grief, a poisoned worm,
consuming body and soul, and gnawing the very heart, a perpetual executioner,
continual night, profound darkness, a whirelewind, a tempest, an ague not
appearing, heating worse then any fire, and a battle that has no end: It
crucifies worse then any Tyrant, no torture, no strappado, no bodily punishment
is like unto it. It Is the Eagle without question which the Poets fained to
gnawe Not. Comes Mythall 4, c. 6.
Prometheus Heart. And no heaviness is like unto the heaviness of the heart.
Ecclus 25.15.16. It dries up the bones, says Solomon, cap. 17. Pro. makes them
hollow-eyed, pale, and lean, furrow-faces, dead looks, wrinkled brows,
riueled cheeks, dry bodies, Crato consil. 21. lib. 2. moestitia universum
infrigidat corpus, calorem innatum extinguit, appetitum destruit.
Cor refrigerat triflitia spiritus exsiccat innatumque calorem obruit, vigilias
inducit concoctionem labefactat, sanguinem incrassat, exaggeratque
melancholicum suscum.
It hinders concoction, refrigerates the heart, takes away stomach, color,
and sleep; thickens the blood. Fernelius lib. 1. cap. 18. de morb. causis.
Contaminates the spirits. Piso. Overthrowes the natural heat, and perverts the
good estate of body and mind, and makes them weary of their lives, cry out,
howl and roar for very anguish of their souls. David confessed as much,
Psalm. 38.8. I have roared for the very disquietnesse of mine heart. And Psalm.
119.4. part. 4. v. my soul melts away for very heaviness, verse. 83. I am
like a bottle in the smoke. I Marc. 6.1011.
Antiochus complained that he could not sleep, and that his heart fainted for
grief. Christ himself, Vir dolorum, out of an apprehension of grief, did
sweat blood, Mark. 14. His soul was heavy to the death, but no sorrow was like
unto his. Crato consil. 21. lib. 2. Spiritus and sanguis hoc contaminatur Piso.
gives instance in one that was so melancholy by reason of Maerore maceror
marcesco and consenesco miser, ossa atque pellis sum misera macretudine.
Plautus.
grief: and Montanus consil. 30. in a noble matron, Malum inceptum and auctum
a tristitia sola.
that had no other cause of this mischief. I.S, D.in Hildesheim fully cured a
patient of his, that was much troubled with melancholy, and for many years,
Hildesheim, spicel. 2. de melancholia. maerore animi postea ac^dente in priora
symptomata incidit.
but afterward by a little occasion of sorrow, he fell into his former fits,
and was tormented as before. Examples are common, how it causes melancholy,
desperation, and sometimes death it self. Ecclus. 38.15. Of heaviness comes
death. Worldly sorrow causes death, 2. Cor. 7.10. Psalm. 31.10. My life is
wasted with heaviness, and my years with mourning* Why was Hecuba said to be
turned to a Dog? Niobe into a stone? But for grief, she was senseless and
stupid. Seuerus the Emperor Herodian lib. 3, m^erore magis quam morbo
co^sumptus est.
died for grief; and how Bothwellius atribilarius abijt, Bizarrus Genuensis
hist etc.
many myriades besides. Tanta illi est feritas, tanta est insania luctus.

Melancthon gives a reason of it, In maestitia cor quasi percussum
constringitur, tremit and languescit cum acrisensu doloris. In tristitia cor
sugiens attrahit ex Spleen lentum humorem melancholicum. qui effu^us sub
costis, in sinistro latere hypochondriacos status facit quod sa^e accidit ijs
qui diuturna cura and mestitia conflictantur. Melancthon.
the gathering of much melancholy blood about the Heart; Vives 3. de anima c.
de maerore. Sabin in Ovid.
which collection extinguisheth the good spirits, or at least dulleth them,
sorrow strikes the heart makes it tremble and pine away, with great pain: And
the black blood drawn from the Spleen, and diffused under the ribbs, on the
left side, makes those perilous hypocondriacall convulsions, which happen to
them that are troubled with Sorrow.

SVBSEC. 5. Fear.
COsen german to Sorrow is Fear, or rather a sister; fidus Achates, and
continual companion, an assistant and a principal agent in procuring of this
mischief; a cause and symptom as the other. In a word as Lib. 3. Aen. 4.
Virgil said of the Harpies, I may justly say of them both, Tristius haud illis
monstrum, nec saeuior vlla
Pestis and ira Deum stygijs sese extulit vndis.
A sadder monster, or more cruel plague so fell
Or vengeance of the Gods, never came from Styx or Hell.


This foul fiend of Fear was worshipped heretofore for a God amongst the
Lacedaemonians, and most of those other torturing Et mentem ideo deam sacrarunt
and vt bona^mentem concederet Varro Lactantius, August
affections, and so was sorrow amongst the rest, under the name of Angerona
Dea, they stood in such awe of them. As Austin de Ciuit. Dei lib. 4. cap. 8.
notes out of Varro. Fear was commonly Lilius Girald. Syntag. 1. de dijs
miscellaneis.
adored and painted in their Temples with a Lions head; and as Macrobius
records 1. 10. Saturnaliu^ Calendis Ion. feriae sunt di^^^ Angeronae, cui
pontifices in sacello Volupiae sacra faciunt, quod angores and animi
sollicitudines propitiata propellat.
in the Calends of January Angerona had her holyday, to whom in the Temple of
Volupia, or Goddess of pleasure, their Augures and Bishops did yearly
sacrifice; that being propitious to them, she might expel all caeres, anguish,
and vexation of the mind for that year following. Many lamentable effects this
Fear causes in men, as to be red, pale, tremble, sweat, Timor inducit frigus
cordis pal pitationem vocis defectum atque pallorem. Agrippa. lib. 1. cap. 63.
Timidi semper spiritus habent frigidos. Mont.
it causes sudden cold and heat to come over all the body, palpitation of the
heart, Syncope, etc. It amaseth many men that are to speak, or show themselves
in public assemblies, or before some great personages, as Tully confesses of
himself that he trembled still at the beginning of his speech; and Demosthenes
that great Orator of Greece before Philippus; It confounds voice and memory, as
Lucian wittely brings in Jupiter Tragoedus, so much afraid of his auditory,
when he was to make a speech to the rest of the Gods, that he could not utter
a ready word, but was compelled to use Mercuries help in prompting. Many men
are so amassed and astonished with fear, they know not where they are, what
they say, Effusos cerne^s fugientes agmine turmas, quis mea nunc inflat cornua
Faunus ait. Alciat.
what they do, and that which is worst, it tortures them many days before with
continual fear and suspicion. It hinders many honorable attempts, and makes
their hearts ache, sad and heavy. They that are in fear are never free, Metus
non solum memoriam consternat sed and institutum animi omne and laudabilem
conatum impedit. Thucidides.
resolute, secure, never merry, but in continual pain, that as Vives truly
said, Nulla est miseria mayor quam metus, no greater misery, no rack, nor
torture like unto it, ever suspicious, anxious, sollicitous, they are
childishly drooping, without reason, without judgment, Lib. de fortitudine and
virtute Alexandri. vbi prope res adfuit terribilis.
especially if some terrible object be offered, as Plutarch has it. It causes
many times sudden madness, and almost all manner of diseases, as I have
sufficiently illustrated in my Sect. 2. Mem. 3. Subs. 2.
Digression of the force of Imagination, and shall do more at large in my
Section of Sect. 2. Mem. 4. Subs. 3.
Terrors. Fear makes our Imagination conceive what it list, it invit's the
Devil to come to us, as Subtle. 18. lib. timor altrahit ad se Daemones, timor
and error multum in hominibus possunt.
Agrippa and Cardan avouch, and tyrannizeth over our phantasy more then all
other affections, especially in the dark. We see this verified in most, as
Lib. de spectris cap. 3 fortes raro spectra vident quia minus timent.
Lavater says, Quae merunt fingunt, what they fear they conceive and faigne
unto themselves, they think they see Goblins, Hagges, Devils, and many times
become melancholy thereby. Cardan. subtle. lib. 1^. has an example of such a
one, so caused to be melancholy, by sight of a Goblin all his life after.
Augustus Caesar durst not sit in the dark, nisi aliquo assidente, says Vita
eius.
Suetonius, Nunquam tenebris evigilauit. And it is strange what women and
children will conceive unto themselves, if they go over a Churchyard in the
night, or lie, or be alone in a dark room, how they sweat and tremble on a
sudden. Many men are troubled with future events, foreknowledge of their
fortunes, destinies, as Severus the Emperor, Adrian and Domitian, Quod sciret
vltimum vitae diem, says Suetonius valde sollicitus, much troubled in mind
because he foreknewe his end; with many such, of which I shall speak more
opportunely in Sect. 2. Mem. 4. Subs. 7.
another place.

SVBSEC. 6. Shame and Disgrace, causes.
SHame and Disgrace cause most violent passions, and bitter panges, Ob pudorem
and dedecus publicum ob errorem co^missum saepe mouentur generosi animi, Faelix
Plater lib. 3. de alienat. mentis. Generous minds are often moved with shame,
to despair for some public disgrace. And he, says Philo lib. de provid. Dei.
Qui mentem subiecit timoris dominationi, cupiditatis, doloris, ambitionis,
pudoris, faelix non est, sed omnino miser, assiduis laboribus torquetur and
miseria.
That subjects himself to fear, desire, grief, ambition, shame, is not
happy, but altogether miserable, tortured with continual labor, care, and
misery. And it is as forcible a batterer as any of the rest: Multi contemnunt
mundi strepitum, reputant pro nihilo gloriam, sed timent insamiam, offensionem,
repulsam, Voluptatem severissime contemnunt, in dolor sunt molliores, gloriam
negligunt, franguntur infamid.
Many men contemn the tumults of the world, and care not for glory, and yet
they are afraid of infamy, repulse, disgrace, (Tul. offic, lib. 1.) they can
severely contemn pleasure, bear grief indifferently, but they are quite
battered and broken with reproach and obloquy. And are so dejected many times
for some public injury, disgrace, as a box on the ear by their inferior, to
be overcome of their adversary, foiled in the field, to be out in a speech, or
some foul fact, etc that they dare not come abroad all their lives after, but
melancholize in corners, and keep in holes. The most generous spirits are most
subject to it. Spiritus altos fra^git et generosos. Hieronimus. Aristotle
because he could not understand the motion of Euripus for grief and shame
drowned himself. Caelius Rhodiginus antiquar. lec. li. 29. cap. 8. Homerus
pudore consumptus, was swallowed up with this passion of shame, because he
could not unfold that fishermans riddle. Sophocles killed himself Ob
Tragediam explosam morte^ sibi gladio consciuit.
because a Tragedy of his was hissed of the stage. Valor. Max. lib. 9. cap.
12. Lucretia stabbed her self, and so did Cum vidit in triumphum se servari,
causa eius ignominiae vitandae, mortem sibi consciuit. Plut.
Cleopatra, when she saw that she was reserved for a triumph, to avoid the
infamy. Gravius contumeliam ferimus, quam detrimentum, ni abiecto nimis animo
sinius. Plutarch. in Timol.
Antonius the Roman, Bello victus, per tres dies sedet in prora navis,
abstinens ab omni consortio, etiam Cleopatrae, postea se interfecit.
after he was overcome of his enemy, for three days space sat solitary in the
forepart of the ship, abstaining from all company, even of Cleopatra her self,
and afterward for very shame, butchered himself, Plutarch vita eius.
Apollonius Rhodius Cum male recit asset Argonautica, ob pudorem se exulavit.
wilfully banished himself, forsaking his country, and all his dear friends,
because he was out in reciting his Poems, Plinius lib. 7. cap. 23. Quod
piscatoris aenigma soluere non posset.
In China it is an ordinary thing for such as are excluded in those famous
trials of theirs, or should take degrees, for shame and grief to loose their
wits. Qadam pro verecundia simul and dolor, in insaniam incidunt, eo quod a
literatorum gradu in examine excluduntur.
Mat. Riccius expedit. ad Sinas lib. 3. cap. 9. Hostratus the Friar, took that
book which Reuclin had writ against him, under the name of Epist. obscurorum
virorum, so to heart, that for shame and grief he made away himself.
Hostratus cucullatus adeo graviter ob Ruclini librum, qui inscribitur,
Epistolae obscurorum virorum, dolor simul and pudore sauciatus, vt seip sum
interfecerit.
Iovius in elogijs. A grave and learned Minister, and an ordinary Preacher at
Alcmar in Holland, was one day (as he was walking in the fields for his
recreation) suddenly taken with adaske or looseness, and thereupon compelled
to take the next ditch; but being surprised at unawares, by some Gentlewomen of
his Parish wandering that way; Propter ruborem confusus, statim cepit delirare.
ob suspitionem quod vili illum crimine accusarent.
was so abashed, that he did never after show his head in public, or come into
the pulpit, but pined away with melancholy. Pet. Forestus med. obseruat. lib.
10. obser. 12. so shame amongst other passions can play his prize.

I know there be many base, impudent, and brasen-faced roagues, that will Hor.
nulla pallescere culpa, be moved with nothing, take no infamy or disgrace to
heart, laugh at all: let them be proved, perjured, stigmatized, convict
roagues, thieves, traitors, loose their ears, be whipped, branded, carted,
pointed at, hissed, reviled, and derided, with Ps. Impudice. B. Ita est. Ps
sceleste. B. dicis vera. Ps. Verbero. B. quippini. Ps. furcifer, B. factu^
optime. Ps. socifraude. B. sunt mea istaec. Ps. paricida. B. perge tu. Ps.
sacrilege. B. fateor. Ps. periure B. vera dicis. Ps. pernicies adolescentum. B.
ac^^ri^^. Ps. fur. B. babe. Ps. fugitive. B. bombax. Ps. fraus populi. B.
pla^issime. Ps. Impure leno caenum. B. cantoraes probos. Pseudolus Act. 1.
Scen. 3.
Ballio the baud in Plautus, they rejoice at it, cantores probos: ba and Bombax
what care they: yet a modest man, one that has grace, a generous spirit, one
that is tender of his reputation, will be deeply wounded, and so grievously
affected with it, that he had rather give myriades of crown^s, loose his life,
then suffer the least diffamation of his honor, or blot in his good name. And
if so be that he cannot avoid it, as a Nightingale, quae cantando victa
moritur, says ^^m. 7. ^ Pli^i^.
Mizaldus, dies for shame if another bird sing better, he languisheth and
pineth away for shame and grief.

SVBSECT. 7. Envy, Malice causes.
ENvy and Malice are two linkes of this chain, and both as Guianerius Tract.
15. cap. 2. proves out of Galen, 3. Aphorism. com. 22. Multos vidimus propter
invidiam and odium in melancholiam incidisse: and illos potissimum quorum
corpora ad hanc apta sunt.
cause this malady by themselves, especially if their bodies be otherwise
disposed to Melancholy. It Is Valescus de Taranta, and Foelix Platerus
observation, Invidia affligit homines, adeo and corredit, vt by melancholici
penitus fiant.
that envy so gnawes many men's hearts, that they become altogether melancholy.
And therefore belike Solomon, Prove. 14.13, calls it, the rotting of the bone.
Cyprian, vulnus occultum. -- Hor.
Siculi non invenere tyranni
-- Maius tormentum --
the Sicilian tyrants never invented the like torment. It crucifies their
souls, and withers their bodies, makes them hollow-ey'd, His vultus minax,
torvus aspectus, pallor in facie, in labijs tremor, stridor in dentibus etc.
pale and lean, and ghastly to behold. Cyprian ser. 2. de zelo and liuore. Vt
tinea corrodit vestimentum, sic invidia eum qui ^^latur, consumit.
As a moth gnawes a garment, so says Chrysostom does envy consume a man: to
be a living Anatomy, a Skeleton, to be a lean and Pallor in ore sedet, macies
in corpore toto. Nusquam recta aciet liuent rubigine dentes.
pale carcass, quickened with a Diaboli expressa Imago, toxicum charitatis,
venenum amicitiae abissus mentis, non est eo monstruosius monstrum, damnosius
damnum, vrit, torret, discruciat, macie and squalore conficit. Austin Domini
primi Advent.
fiend. Hall in Charact. For so often as an envious man, sees another man
prosper, to be enriched, to thrive and be fortunate in the world, to get
honors, offices, or the like, he repines and grieves. -- Ovid.
intabescitque videndo
Successus hominum, -- suppliciumque suum est:
he tortures himself if his equal, friend, neighbor be preferred, commended,
do well. If he hear of it, it gauls him a-fresh, and no greater pain can
come to him, then to hear of another man's well-doing, it is a dagger at his
heart every such object. He looks at him, as they that fell down in Lucians
rock of honor with an envious eye, and will damage himself to do the other a
mischief: As he did in Aesope, loose one eye willingly, that his fellow might
loose both. His whole life is Sorrow, and every word he speaks a Satyr,
nothing fattes him but other men's ruins. For to speak in a word, Envy is
nothing else but Tristitia de bonis alienis, sorrow for other men's good, be it
present, past, or to come: and gaudium de adversis, and Statuis cereis Basilius
eos comparat, qui liquifiunt ad praesentiam Solis, quo alij gaudent and
orna^tur. Muscis alii quae vlceribus gaudent, amaena praetereunt, sistunt in
faetidis.
joy at their harms, opposite to mercy, Misericordia etiam quae tristitia
quaedam est, saepe miserantis corpus male afficit, Agrip. lib. 1. cap 63.
which grieves at other men's mischances, and misaffects the body in another
kind; so Damascen defines it, lib. 2. de orthod. fid. Thomas 22. quest. 36.
art. 1. Aristotle li 2.2. Ret. cap. 4. and 10. Plato Philebo, Tully 3. Tusc.
Greg. Nic. lib. de virt. animae cap. 12. Basil. de Invidia. Pindarus Od. 1.
Ser. 5. and we find it true. It Is a common disease, and almost natural to us,
as Insitu^ mortalibus a natura recentem aliorum faelicitatem aegris oculis
intueri. hist. lib. 2. Tacit.
Tacitus holds, to envy another man's prosperity: And it is in most men an
incurable disease. Legi Chaldaeos, Graecos, Hebraeos consului sapientes pro
remedio invidiae: hoc enim inveni, renunciare faelicitati and perpetuo miser
esse.
I have read, says Marcus Aurelius, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldie authors, I have
consulted with many wise men, for a remedy for envy, I could find none, but to
renounce all happiness, and to be a wretch and miserable for ever. It Is the
beginning of Hell in this life, and a passion not to be excused. omne peccatum
aut excusatione^ secum habe^t, aut voluptatem, sola invidia vtraque caret,
reliqua vitia finem habent, ira defervescit, gula satiatur, odium finem habet,
invidia nunquam quiescit.
Every other sin has some pleasure annexed to it, or will admit of an
excuse, envy alone wants both. Other sins last but for a while, the gut may
be satisfied, anger remittes, hatred has an end, envy never cease. Cardan
lib. 2. de sap. Divine and humane examples are very familiar, you may run and
read them, as that of Saul and David, Cain and Abel, angebat illum non proprium
peccatum, sed fratris prosperitas, says Theodoret, it was his brothers good
fortune gauled him. Rachel envied her sister being barren Genesis 30. Joseph's
brethren him Genesis 37. David had a touch of this vice, as he confesses Vrebat
me aemulatio propter stultos.
Psalm. 73. and Hier. 12.1.
Jeremy, and Hab. 1.
Habacucke, they repined at others good, but in the end they corrected
themselves. Psalm. 75. fret not thy self etc. Domitian envied Agricola for his
worth, Invidit privati nomen supra principis attolli.
that a private man should be so much glorified. Tacit. hist. lib. 2. part. 6.
Cecinna was envied of his fellow-citizens, because he was more richly adorned.
But of all others Periturae dolor and invidia. si quem viderint or^^iorem, se
in publicum prodijsse. Platina dial. amorum.
women are most weak, ob pulchritudinem inuidae sunt faeminae? Musaeus: aut
amat, aut odit nihil est tertium. Granatensis. They love or hate, no medium
amongst them. Ant. Guianerius lib. 2. cap. 8. vit. M. Aurelii. faemina vicinam
elegantius se vestitam videns leaenae instar in virum insurgit. etc.
Agrippina like a woman if she see her neighbor, more neat or elegant, richer
in tires, Jewels, or apparel, is enraged, and like a lioness sets upon her
husband, and rails at her, scoffs at her, and cannot abide her: so the Roman
Ladies in Tacitus did at Salonina Cecinnas wife, Quod insigni equo and aestro
veheretur, qua^qua^ nullius cum iniuria ornatum illum tanquam lesigravabantur.
because she had a better horse, and better furniture, as if she had hurt them
with it, they were much offended: And as our Gentlewomen do at all their
meetings, one repines or scoffs at another bravery and happiness. Myrsine an
Atticke wench, was murdered of her fellows, Quod pulchritudine omnes
excelleret puellae indignatae occiderunt.
because she did excel the rest in beauty. Constantine Agricult. lib. 11. cap,
7. every Village will yield such examples.

SVBSECT. 8. Aemulation, Hatred, Faction, Desire of revenge.
OVt of this root of envy, Late patet invidiae foecunda pernities, and livor
radix omnium malorum, fons cladium inde odium surgit, emulatio. cyprian, ser.
2do de Livore.
spring those ferall branches of faction, hatred, livor, emulation, which cause
the like grievances, and are, serrae animae, the sawes of the soul: or as
Cyprian describes it, Qualis est animi tinea, quae tabes pectoris zelare in
altero vel aliorum faelicitatem suam facere poenam and velut quosdu^ pectori
suo admouere carnifices, cogitationibus and sensibus suis adhibere tortores,
quise intestinis cruciatibus lacerent, non cibus talibus laetus, non potus
potest esse iucundus; suspiratur semper and gemitur, and doletur dies and
noctes, pectus sine intermissione laceratur.
a moth of the soul, a consumption, to make another man's happiness his
misery, to torture, crucify, and execute himself, to eat his own heart. Meat
and drink can do such men no good, they do always grieve, sigh and groan,
day and night, without all intermission, their breast is torn asunder: and a
little after. Quisquis est ille quem aemularis, cui invides, is te subterfugere
potest, at tu non te, vbicunque fugeris, adversarius tuus tecum est, hostis
tuus semper in pectore tuo est, pernitics intus iuclusa, ligatus es vinctus
zelo deminante captivus, nec solatia tibi ulla s^bveniunt: binc diabolus inter
initia statim mundi, and pf^^^t primus, and perdidit, Cyprian. ser. 2. de zelo
and livore.
Whosoever he is, whom thou do emulate and envy, he may avoid thee, but
thou can neither avoid him, nor thy self, wheresoever thou art, he is with
thee, thine enemy is ever in thy breast, thy destruction is within thee, thou
art a captive, bound hand and foot, as long as thou art malicious, and envious,
and can not be comforted. It was the devils overthrow: and whenever thou
art affected with this passion, it will be thine. And yet no passion so common.
Hesiodus op* dies.
(...),
(...).
A Potter emulates a Potter,
One Smith envies another:
A beggar emulates a beggar,
A Singing man his brother.
Every society, corporation, and private family is full of it, it takes hold
almost of all sorts of men, from the Prince, to the Plowman, even amongst
Gossips it is to be seen; scarce three in a company, but there is siding,
faction, emulation betwixt two of them, some simultas, jarre, private grudge,
hart-burning in the midst of them. Scarce two Gentlemen dwell together in the
country, but there is emulation betwixt them and their servants, some quarrel
or some grudge betwixt their wives, or children, friends, and followers, some
contention about wealth, gentry, precedence, etc. by means of which, like that
frog in Rana cupida aequadi bouem se distenbebat etc.
Aesope, that would swell till she was as big as an ox, but burst her self at
last: they will stretch beyond their fortunes, callings, and strive so long,
that they consume their substance in Law suits, or otherwise in hospitality,
feasting, to get a few bumbast titles etc. to outbraue one another they will
tire their bodies, macerate their souls, and beggar themselves.

Honest Aemulatio alit ingenia^: Paterculus poster. vol.
emulation in studies, in all callings is not to be disliked, it is ingeniorum
cos, as one calls it, the whetstone of wits: As Th^mistocles was roused up with
the glory of Miltiades, Achilles trophyes moved Alexander: but when it is
immoderate, it is a plague, and a miserable pain. What a deal of money did
Henry the ^, and Francis the first King of France, spend at that Anno 1519.
betwixt Ardes and Quine.
famous interview? and how many vain courtiers, seeking each to outbraue
other, spent themselves, and died beggars. Spartian.
Adrian the Emperor was so galled with it, that he killed all his equals: so
did Nero. This passion made Plutarch.
Dionysius the tyrant, banish Plato, and Philoxenus the Poet, because they did
excel, and eclipse his glory, as he thought. When Richard the first, and
Philip of France, were fellow soldiers together, at the siege of Achon in the
Holy land, and Richard had approved himself to be the more valiant man, and
al men's eyes were upon him, it so galled Philip, Francum vrebat Regis victoria,
says mine Johannes Heraldus lib. 2. cap. 12. de bello sacro.
Author, tam aegre far Richardi gloriam vt carpere dicta, calumniari facta:
that he cavelled at all his proceedings, and fell at length to open defiance,
he could contain no longer, but hasting home, Nulla dies tantum poterit lenire
furorem. Aeterna bella pace sublata gerunt. Jurat odium, nec ante invisum esse
desinit, quam esse desiit. Paterculus, vol. 1.
invaded his territories, and professed open war. Hatred stirs up
contention, Prove. 10.12. and they break out at last into immortal enmity,
virulency, and more then Vatinian hate and rage, to persecute one another,
their friends and followers, and all their posterity, with bitter taunts, and
hostile wars, scurrile invectiues, libels, calumnies, fire and sword, and the
like, and will not be reconciled. Witness that Guelfe and Gebelline faction in
Italy: that of the Adurni and Fregosi in Genoa: that of Cneus Papirius, and
Quintus Fabius in Rome: Caesar and Pompey: Orleans and Burgundy in France:
York and Lancaster in England. Yea this passion so Ita saeuit haec stigia
ministra, vt vrbes subvertat aliquando, deleat populos, provincias alioqui
florentes redigat in solitudines, mortales vero miseros in profunda miseriarum
valle miserabiliter immergat.
rages many times, that it subverts not men only and families, but even
populous cities, and flourishing kingdoms, are brought into a wilderness by
it. This hatred, malice, faction, and desire of revenge, invented first all
those racks and wheels, strappadoes, brazen bulls, several engines, prisons,
Inquisitions, severe laws to macerate and torment one another. How happy might
we be, and end our time with blessed days, and sweet content, if we could
contain our selves, and as we ought to do, put up injuries, learn humility,
meekness, patience, forget and forgive, as in Paul 3. Col.
Gods word we are enjoined; compose such small controversies amongst our
selves, moderate our passions in this kind, and think better of others, as
Romans 12.
Paul would have us, then of our selves: be of like affection one toward
another, and not avenge our selves, but have peace with all men. But being that
we are so peevish and perverse, so factious and seditious, so malicious,
envious: we do invicem angariare, maule and vex one another, and torture, and
disquiet our selves, precipitate our selves into that gulf of woes and cares,
and aggravate our misery, and melancholy, and heap upon us hell and eternal
damnation.

SVBSEC. 9. Anger a cause.
ANger, a perturbation^, which carries the spirits outward, and prepares the
body to melancholy, and madness it self: Ira furor brevis est: and as Grad.
1. c. 54.
Piccolomineus accounts it one of the three most violent passions. Ira and
moeror, and ingens animi consternatio, melancholicos facit. Arateus. Ira
immodica gignit insaniam.
Arateus sets it down for an especial cause, and so does Senecae ep. 18. lib.
1. of this malady. Reg. sanit. part 2 cap 8. in apertam insaniam mox ducitur
iratios.
Magninus gives the reason, ex frequenti ira supra modum calefiunt, it
ouer-heates their bodies, and if it be ouer-frequent, it breaks out into
manifest madness, says Ambrose. It Is a known saying, furor fit laesa saepius
patientia, the most patient spirit that is, if he be often provoked, will be
incensed to madness, it will make a devil of a Saint. And therefore Basil
belike in his Homily de Irae, calls it tenebras rationis, morbum animae, and
daemonem pessimi^m: the darkening of our understanding, and a bad angel.
Gilbert. Cognato interpret. Multis and praesertim senibus, ira impotens
insaniam fecit, and importuna calumnia, haec initio perturbat animum, paulatim
vergit ad insaniam Porro mulierum corpora multa infestant, and in hunc morbum
adducunt, praecipue si quem oderint aut invideant etc. hec paulatim in insaniam
tandem evadunt.
Lucian in Abdicato To. 1, will have this passion to work this effect of
madness, especially in old men and women, anger and calumny (says he) trouble
them at first, and after a while break out into open madness: many things
cause fury in women, especially if they love or hate overmuch, or envy, or be
much grieved, or angry, these things by little and little lead them on to this
malady. From a disposition, to an habit, for there is no difference betwixt a
mad man, and an angry man, in the time of his fit: Anger, as Lactantius
describes it lib. de Ira Dei ad Donatum, cap. 5. is Saeva animi tempestas
tantos excitans fluctus, ut statim ardescant oculi, os tremat, lingua titubet,
dentes concrepan^ etc.
saeua animi tempestas etc. making his eyes spark fire, and stare, his teeth
gnash in his head, his tongue stutter, his face pale, or red, and what more
filthy imitation can be in a mad man. They are void of reason, inexorable,
blind, and like ora tument ira, servescunt sagui ne venae, lumina Gorgonio
saevius angue micant. Ovid.
beasts and monsters for the time, say and do they know not what, curse,
swear, rail, fight, and what not? what can a mad man do more? as he said in
the comedy, Terence.
Iracundia non sum apud me. If these fits be immoderate, or continue long, or
frequent, without doubt they provoke madness. Montanus consil. 21. had a
melancholy Jew to his patient, he ascribes this for a principal cause,
Irascebatur leuibus de causis, he was easily moved to anger. Ajax had no other
cause of his madness; and Charles the 6. that Lunaticke French King, fell into
this misery, out of the extremity of this passion, and desire of revenge and
malice, Infensus Britannie Duci, and in vltionem versus, nec cibum cepit, nec
quietem, ad Calendas Iulias 1392. comites occidit etc.
incensed against the Duke of Britain, he could neither eat, drink, nor
sleep for some days together, and in the end about the Calends of July 1392.
he ran mad upon his horse back, drawing his sword, and striking all came
near him promiscuously, and so continued all his life. Aemil. lib. 10. gall.
hist. Aegesippus de excid. vrbis Hieros. lib. 1. cap. 37. has such a story of
Herod, that out of an angry fit, became mad, and Indignatione nimia furens,
animique impotens, exiliit de lecto furentem non capiebat aula etc.
leaping out of his bed, killed Iosippus, and played many such Bedlam prankes,
all the court could not rule him, for a long time after: sometimes he was sorry
and repented, much grieved for that he had done, by and by mad again. In hot
choleric bodies, nothing so soon causes madness, as this passion of Anger,
besides many other diseases, as Pelesius observes cap. 21. lib. 1. de hum.
affect. causis. Sanguinem imminuit, fell auget: and as An ira possit hominem
interimere.
Valesiu controverts. med. controvers. lib. 5. contr^. 8, many times kills them
quite out. If this were the worst of this passion, it were more tolerable,
Abernethy.
but it ruins and subverts whole towns, As Troy, sae^e memorem Iunonis obiram.
cities, families, and kingdoms; Nulla pestis humano generi pluris stetit,
Seneca de Ira lib. 1. no plague has done mankind so much harm. Look in all
our histories, and you shall almost meet with no other subject, but what a
Stultorum regum and populorum continet astus.
company of hairebraines have done in their rage. We may do well therefore, to
put this in our precession amongs the rest: from all blindness of heart, from
pride, vainglory, and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred and malice, anger, and
all such pestiferous perturbations, good Lord deliver us.

SVBSEC. 10. Discontents, Cares, Miseries, etc. causes.
DIscontents, cares, crosses, miseries, or whatsoever it is, that shall cause
any molestation of spirits, grief, anguish and perplexity, may well be reduced
to this head, (preposterously placed here in some men's Judgments they may
seem) yet in that Aristotle in his Lib. 2. Invidia est dolor and ambitio est
dolor etc.
Rhetoric defines these cares, as he does envy, emulation etc. still by
grief, I think I may well rank them in this Irascible row; being that they
are as the rest, both causes and symptoms of this Disease; and cause the like
inconveniences, and are still accompanied with anguish and grief. Dementes
curae, insomnes curae, damnosae cura, tristes, mordaces, carnifices etc.
biting, eating, gnawing, cruel, bitter, sick, sad, unquiet, pale, tetricke,
miserable, intolerable cares, as the Insomnes, Claudianus. Tristes Virg.
Mordaces Luca. Edaces Hor, maestae. Amarae Ovid. damnosae. Inquietae Mart.
Vrentes Rodentes Mant. etc.
Poets call them, worldly cares, and are as many in number as the Sea sands.
Galen lib. 3. c. 7. de locis affectis. homines sunt maxim melancholici, quando
vigiliis multis and sollicitudinibus and laboribus and curis fuerint
circumventi.
Galen, Fernelius, Faelix, Platter, Valescus de Taranta etc. reckon
afflictions, miseries, and all these contentions and vexations of the mind, as
principal causes, in that they take away sleep, hinder concoction, dry up
the body, and consume the substance of it. They are not so many in number, but
their causes be as diverse, and not one of a thousand free from them, or that
can vindicate himself, whom that Ate dea, Homers goddess Ate, has not
involued into this discontented rank, or plagued with some misery or other. A
general cause, a continuate cause, an inseparable accident to all men, is
discontent, care, misery; were there no other particular affliction (which who
is free from?) to molest a man in this life, the very cogitation of that Omnia
imperfecta confusa, and pertubatione plena. Cardan.
common misery, were enough to macerate him, and make him aweary of his life:
to think that he can never be secure, but still in danger, sorrow, grief, and
persecution. For to begin at the first hour of his birth, as Lib. 7. not.
hist. cap. 1 hominem nudum and ad vagitum edit natura. Flens ab initio
devinctus iacet etc.
Pliny does elegantly describe it, he is borne naked, and falls a (...).
Lachrymans natus sum, and lachrymans morior. etc.
whining at the very first, he is swadled and bound up like a prisoner, and
cannot help himself, and so he continues to his lives end. No estate, age,
sex, can secure himself from this common misery. A man that is borne of a
woman, is of short continuance, and full of trouble, Job 14.1. and verse. 22.
and while his flesh is upon him, he shall be sorrowful, and while his soul is
in him, it shall mourn.

All his days are sorrow, and his travels griefs, his heart also takes not
rest in the night Eccles 2.23. And cap. 2.11. all that is in it is sorrow and
vexation of spirit Initium caecitas, progressum, labor, exitum, dolor, error
omnia: quem tranquillum quaso, quem non laboriosum aut anxium diemegimus?
Petrarch.
Ingresse, progress, regresse, egresse, all alike, blindness seaseth on us in
the beginning labor in the middle, grief in the end, error in all. What day
arises to us without some grief or care, or what so secure, and pleasing a
morning have we seen, that has not bin ouercast before the evening? One is
miserable, another man is ridiculous, a third odious. One complains of this
grievance, another of that, and Vb^que periculum, vbique dolor, vbique
naufragium, in hoc ambitu quocunque me vertam. Lipsius.
everywhere danger, contention, anxiety in all places, go where thou will,
and thou shall find discontents, cares, woes, complaints, encumbrances,
exclamations; as he said of old, Homer.
Nil homine in terra spirat miserum magis alma: no creature so miserable as
man, so generally molested, Multis repletur homo miserijs, corporis miserijs,
animi miserijs, dum dormit, dum vigilat, quocunque se vertit. Lususque rerum
temporumque nascimur.
in miseries of body, in miseries of mind, miseries of heart, in miseries
asleep, in miseries awake, in miseries wheresoever he turns. Bernard. Nunquid
tentatio est vita humana super terram? a mere temptation is our life. Austin
confess. lib. 10. cap. 28. potest molestias and difficultates pati? who can
endure the miseries of it? Prosperai in adversis desidero, and adversa
prosperis timeo, quis inter haec medius locus, vbi non fit humanae vitae
tentatio.
In adversity I wish for prosperity, and in prosperity I am afraid of
adversity, what medium may be found? where is no temptation? what condition of
life is free? Cardan consol. sapientiae labor annexus, glory invidia, divitiis
curae, soboli solicit udo, voluptati morbi, quietipaupertas, vt quasi luendorum
scelerum causa nasci, hominem possis cum Platonistis agnoscere.
Wisdom has labor annexed to it, glory envy, riches cares, children and
encumbrances, pleasure and diseases, rest and beggary go together, as if a man
were therefore borne, as the Platonists hold, to be punished in this life for
some precedent sins. Or that as Lib. 7. cap. 1. Non satis estimare an melior
parens natura homini, an tristior noverca fuerit, nulli fragilior vita pavor,
confusio, rabies mayor, vni animantium ambitio datus, luctus, avaritia, vnis
^spitio.

De consol lib. 2 Nemo facile cum condition sia concordat, iuest singulis quod
imperiti petant, experti horreant.


Pliny complains, Nature may be rather accounted a stepmother, then a mother
unto us, all things considered: no creatures life so brittle, so full of fear,
so mad, so furious, only man is plagued with envy, discontent, grief,
covetousness, ambition and superstition. Our whole life is like an Irish Sea,
wherein there is naught to be expected but tempestuous storms, and troublesome
waves, no Halcyonian times, wherein no man can hold himself secure, or agree
with his present estate; but as Boethius inferres p there is something in every
of us, which before trial we seek, and having tried, abhor: Esse in honor
iuvat mox displicet
We earnestly wish, and eagerly covet, and are est soones aweary of it: and
thus, Hor.
Inter spemque, metumque, timores inter and iras, betwixt hope and fear,
suspicions, angers, betwixt fallings in, fallings out etc. we lead a
contentious, a discontent, a tumultuous, a melancholy, miserable life. Some few
amongst the rest, or some one of a thousand, may be Pullus Iovis in the worlds
esteem, or Gallinae filius albae, an happy and fortunate man, because rich,
fair, well allied, in honor and office: yet peradventure ask himself, and
he will say, that of all others, Hor.
he is most miserable, unhappy. A fair shoe, hic soccus novus elegans, as Cn.
Graeccinus.
he said, sed nescis vbi vrat, but thou know not where it pincheth. It is not
another man's opinion can make me happy, but as Ep. 9. lib. 7. Miser est qui se
beatissimum no^ indicat, licet imperet mundo non est beatus, quise non putat,
quid enim refert qualis status tuus sit, si tibi videturmalus.
Seneca well has it, He is a miserable wretch, that does not account himself
happy, though he be Sovereign lord of a world, he is not happy, Sua cuique
calamitas praecipuae
if he think himself not to be so: for what avails it what thine estate is,
or seem to others, if thou thy self dislike it. It is a common humor of all
men to think well of other men's estates, and to dislike their own: Hor.
epist. l. 1. 4
cui placet alterius, sua nimirum est odio sors: and Hor. ser. 1. Sat. 1.
qui fit Mecaenas etc. Many men are of such a nature, that they are pleased
with nothing says Lib. de curat. graec. affect. cap. 6. de provident. Mu^us
nihil placet, atque adeo and divitias damnant, and paupertatem: de morbis
expostulant, been valen es grauiter ferunt, atque vt semel dicam, nihil eos
delectat, etc.
Thevdoret, neither riches nor poverty, they complain when they are well, and
when they are sick, grumble at all fortunes, prosperity and adversity; they
are troubled in a cheap year, in a barren, plenty or not plenty, nothing
pleases them, war nor peace, with children, nor without. This for the most
part is the humor of us all, to be discontent, miserable, and most unhappy, as
we think at least, and show me him that is not so, or that ever was otherwise?
Quintus Metellus his fortune and happiness is much admired amongst the Romans,
in so much, that as Vix vllius gentis, aetais, ordinis, hominem invenias, cuius
faelicitatem fortunae Metelli co^pares. Vol. 1.
Paterculus mentions of him, you can scarce find of any nation, order, age,
sex, one for happiness to be compared unto him, he had in a word bona animi,
corporis, and fortunae, goods of mind, body and fortune: so had P. Mutianus
Crassus, Lampsaca that Lacedaemonian Lady, was such another in Lib. 7 Regis
filia, regis vxor, regis matter.
Plinies conceit, a Kings daughter, a Kings Wife, a Kings mother: P. Crassus
Mutianus quinque habuisse dicitur rerum bonarum maxima quod esset ditissimus,
quod esset nobitissimus, eloquentissimus, Iurisconsu^tissimus, Pontifex maximus.
and all the world esteems as much of Polycrates of Samos. The Greeks brag
of their Socrates, Phecyan, Aristides, the Romans of their Q^i nihil vnquam
mali aut dixit, aut fecit, aut sensit, qui been semper fecit, quod aliter
fa^^^t non potuit. Solomon Eccles. 1.14.
Catoes, Curioes, Fabricioes for their composed fortunes, and retired estates
government of passions, and contempt of the world: Yet none of all these was
happy, or free from discontent, neither M^tellus, Crassus, nor Polycrates, for
he died a violent death, and so did Cato. And how much evil does Lactantius
and Theodoret speak of Socrates, a weak man, and so of the rest. There is no
content in this life, but as e he said, all is vanity and vexation of spirits
even in the midst of all our mirth, jollity and laughter, is sorrow and
grief: or if there be true happiness amongst them, it is but for a time, Hor
art. Toet.
Desinit in piscem mulier formosa superne: a fair morning turns to a lowering
afternoon. One is borne rich, dies a beggar: sound to day, sick tomorrow: so
many casualties there are, that as Seneca said of a city consumed with fire,
Vna dies interest inter maximam civitatem and nullam, one day betwixt a great
city, and none: so many grievances from outward accidents, and from our
selves, our own indiscretion, inordinate appetite, one day betwixt a man, and
no man. And which is worse, as if discontents and miseries would not come
otherwise fast enough upon us; homo homini demon, we maul, persecute, and
study how to sting, gaul and vex one another, with mutual hatred, preying
upon, and devouring one another, as so many Omnes hic aut captantur, aut
captant, aut cadauera qu^ lacerantur, aut corui qui lacerant. Petron.
ravenous birds, and as juglers, panders, bawdes, cosening one another, as so
many Homo omne monstrum est ille nam superat feras, luposque and vrsos pectore
obscuro ^egit. Hens.
wolves, tigers, devils: men are evil, wicked, malicious, treacherous, and
Quod Pa^erculus de populo Romano, durante bellopunico per anno^ 115 aut bellum
inter cos, aut bell^ p^aeparatio, aut ins^da pax: idem ego de mundi ^^^olis.
naught, not loving one another, or loving themselves, not hospital,
charitable and sociable as they ought to be, but counterfeit dissemblers,
ambodexters, all for their own ends, hard-hearted, merciless, pitiless, and
to benefit themselves, they care not what mischief they procure others. As
Theocritus Edill. 15.
Praxinoe and Gorgo in the Poet, when they had got in to see those costly
fights they cried, been est, and would thrust out all others: when they are
rich themselves, in honor, preferred, and have even what they would, they
debar others of those pleasures which youth requires, and they formerly have
inioyed. They tire out others bodies with continual labor, they themselves
living at ease, caring for no body else, sibi nati, and are so far many times
from putting to their helping hand, that they seek all means to depresse, even
those whom they are by the Laws of nature bound to relieve and help as much
as in them lies, they will let them caterwaule, sterue, beg and hang before
they will any ways (though it be in their power) assist or ease them: Qu^ndo
in adolescemia sa^ ipsi vixerint, laut^^^ and liberius voluptates suas
expleverint. Illi gnatis imponunt duriores continentie leges.
so unnatural are they many times, so hard, so churlish, so dogged, of so bad
a disposition. And being so brutish, so divelishly bent one toward another,
how is it possible but that we should be discontent of all sides, full of
cares, woes and miseries.

If this be not a sufficient proof of our discontent, examine every condition
and calling apart. Kings, Princes and Monarchs seem to be most happy, but look
into their estate, you shall find Lugubris Ate luctuque fero regu^ tumidas
obsidet arces. Res est inquieta faelicitas.
them to be most encumbered with cares, in perpetual fear, agony, suspicion,
jelousie, that as Plus aloes quam mellis habet Non humi iacentem tolleres
Valor. lib. 7, cap. 3.
he said of a Crown, if they knew but the discontents that accompany it, they
would not stoop to take it up. Rich men are in the same predicament, as I
shall prove elsewhere, and their wealth is brittle, and like childrens rattles:
they come and go, there is no certainty in them; those whom they elevate, they
do as suddenly depresse, and overthrow them in a vale of misery. The middle
sort of men are as so many asses to bear burdens; or if they be free, and live
at ease, they spend themselves and consume their bodies and fortunes with
luxury and riot, contention, emulation etc. The poor I refer for another
Sec. 2. memb. 4 subject. 6.
place, and their discontents. The like you may say of all ages: children live
in a perpetual slavery, still under that tyrannical government of masters,
young men, and of riper years, subject to labor, and a thousand cares of this
world; Rarus faelix idemque senex. Sexeca in ^^ er. ateo.
old are full of aches of their bones, crampes and convulsions, a burden to
themselves and others, after 70 years all is sorrow, as David speaks, they
do not live, but linger. If they be found, they fear diseases, if sick, a
weary of their lives: non est vivere sed valere vita. One complains of want,
another of servitude, Omitto a^^os exules captiuos mendicos, quos nemo audet
faelices dicere. Cardan lib. 8 cap. 46 derer. var.
another of a secret or incurable disease, of some deformity of body, of some
loss, danger, death of friends, shipwreck, persecution, imprisonment,
disgrace, repulse, Spretaeque iniuria form.
co^tumely, calumny, unkindness, scoffs, floutes, unfortunate marriage,
single life, too many children, false servants, unhappy children, barrenness,
banishment, oppress on, frustrate hopes, and ill success etc. Hor.
Talia de genere hoc adeo sunt multa, loquace vt delassare valent Fabium.
Fabius cannot tell half of them; they are the subject of whole volumes, and
shall some of them be more opportunely dilated elsewhere. In the mean time this
much I may say of them, that generally they crucify the soul of man,
Attenuant vigiles corpus miserabile curae. Plautus.
attenuate our bodies, dry them, wither them, rivell them up as so many rotten
apples, make the^ skin and bone as so many anatomies (as he said, ossa atque
pellis est totus, it a curis macet) they make tempus faedum and squalidum,
cumbersome days, ingrataque tempora, slow dull and heavy days, make us howl
and roar, and tear our hairs, as sorrow did in Haec quae crines evellit,
aerumna est.
Cebes table, and groan for the very anguish of our souls. Our hearts fail
us, as it did David Psalm. 40. 12. for innumerable troubles that compassed him;
and to confess with Hezekiah, Isay 58.17. behold for felicity I had bitter
grief: to weep with Heraclitus, to curse the day of our birth: with Jeremy 20,
14. and our stars with Job: and hold that axiom of Silenus. Optimum non nasci,
aut cito mori. Plinius.
better never to have been borne, and the best next of all to die quickly: or
if we must live, to abandon the world, as Timon did, creep into caves and holes
as our Anachorites, cast all into the Sea, as Crates Thebanus, or as
Theombrotus, Ambrociato's 400 auditors, precipitate our selves to be rid of
these miseries.

SVBSEC. 11. Concupiscible appetite, as Desires, Ambition.
THese Concupiscible and Irascible Appetites, are as the two twists of a rope,
mutually mixed one with the other, and both involving and twining about the
Heart: both good, as Austin holds lib. 14. cap. 9. de civit. Dei: Bonae si
rectam rationem sequuntur, malae si exorbitant.
if they be moderate, both pernicious if they be exorbitant. And this
concupiscible Appetite, howsoever it may seem to carry with it a show of
pleasure and delight, and our concupiscences most part affect us with content,
and a pleasing object, yet if they be in extremes, they rack and wring us on
the other side. A true saying it is, Desire has no rest, and is infinite in it
self, endless, and as The Buouie. Prob. 81.
one calls it, a perpetual rack, Molam as^nariam.
or horse mill, according to Austin still going round as in a ring. And they
are not so continual as diverse, facilius atomos denumerare possem, says
Tract. de Inter. de. cap. 62.
Bernard, quam motus cordis, nunc haec, nunc illa cogito: you may as well
reckon up the motes in the Sun, as the^ Circa quamlibet rem mundi haec passio
fieri potest, q^ae superflue diligatur. Tract. 15 cap. 17
It extends it self to every thing, as Guianerius will have it, that is
superfluously sought after: or to any Feruentius de siderium.
fervent desire, as Fernelius interprets it; be it in what kind soever, it
tortures if immoderat, and is, according to Imprimis vero Appetitus etc. 3. de
alie^. meant.
Plater and others, an especial cause of melancholy. Multuosis concupiscentijs
dilaniantur cogitationes meae, Cons. l. 11. c. 29
Austin confessed, that he was torn apieces with his manifold desires: and so
does Per diversa loca vagor nullo lo temporis momento quiesco, talis and talis
esse cupio, illud atque illud habere desidero.
Bernard complain, that he could not rest for them a minute of an hour: this
I would have, and that, and then I desire to be such and such. It Is a hard
matter therefore to confine them, being they are so various and many, and
impossible to apprehend all. I will only insist upon some few of the chief, and
most noxious in their kind, as that exorbitant Appetite and Desire of Honor,
which we commonly call Ambition; Love of money, which is Covetousness, and
that greedy desire of gain, Selfcloue, and inordinat desire of Vainglory, or
Applause, Love of Study in excess, Love of Women, (which will require a just
volume of it self) of the other I will briefly speak, and in their order.

Ambition, Ambition.
a proud covetousness, or dry thirst of Honor, a great torture of the mind,
composed of envy, pride, and covetousnes, a gallant madness, one Hall.
defines it, Ambros. lib. 3. super Lucam. aerug^ animae.
Ambrose, a canker of the soul, an hidden plague: Nihil animum cruciat, nibil
molestius inquietat, secretum virus, pestis occulta etc. ep. 126.
Bernard, a secret poison, the father of liuor, and mother of hypocrisy, the
moth of holiness, and cause of madness, crucifying and disquieting all that it
takes hold of. ep. 88.
Seneca calls it, rem sollicitam, timidam, vanam, ventosam, a windy thing, a
vain, sollicitous and fearful thing. For commonly they that like Sysiphus role
this restless stone of Ambition, are in a perpetual Nihil infaeliciut his
quantus ijs timor, quantae dubitatio, qu. vetus cenatus, quanta sollicitudo,
nulla illis a molestiae vacua hora.
agony, still Semperia^^onitus, semper pouidus, quid dicat faciatve, ne
displicent humilitatem simulat, honestatem mentitur.
perplexed, semper taciti tristesque recedunt, Lucret. doubtful, timorous,
suspicious, loath loath to offend in word or deed, still cogging and colloging,
embracing, capping, cringing, applauding, flattering, fleering waiting,
visiting at men's doors with all affability, counterfeit honesty and humility.
And if that will not serve, if once this humor, as Cypr. prolog. ad ser. To. 2.
cunctos honorat, vniversis inclinat, subsequitur, obsequitur, frequentat
curias, visitat optimates, amplexatur, applaudit, adulatur: per fas and nefas e
lat ebris in omne gradum vbi ad^tus patet, se ingerit, discurrit.
Cyprian describes it, possess his thirsty soul, ambitionis salsugo vbi
bibulam animam possidet, by hook and by crook he will obtain it, and from his
hole he will clime to all honors and offices, if it be possible for him to get
up, flattering one, bribing another, he will leave no means vnassaid to win
all, It is a wonder to see how slauishly these kind of men will subject
themselves, when they are about a canvas to every inferior person, what pains
they will take, run, ride, cast, plot and countermine, protest and swear,
vow, promise, what labors undergo, early up, down late, how obsequious and
affable they are, how popular and courteous, Turbae cogit ambitio regem
inservire vt Homerios Agamemnonem querentem inducit.
how they grinne and fliere upon every man they meet, what feasting and
inviting, how they spend themselves and their fortunes, in seeking that many
times, which they had much better be without, as Plutarchus. quin convivemar,
and in otio nos oblect. mus, quoniam in pro^plu id nobis fit etc-
Cyneas the Orator told Pyrrhus, with what waking nights, painful hours,
anxious thoughts, and bitterness of mind, inter spemque metumque, distracted
and tired, they spend the interim of their time. There can be no greater plague
for the present. If they do obtain their suit, which with such cost and
solicitude they have sought, they are not so freed, their anxiety is anew to
begin, for they are never satisfied, Vt b^dera arbori adhaeret, sic ambitio etc.
but as a dog in a wheel, a bird in a cage, or a squirell in a chain, so g
Budaeus compares them, they clime and clime still, with much labor, but never
make an end, Lib. 3. de contemptu rerum for tuitarum. Magno conatu and
impetumo^e^tur, super eodem centro rotati, non proficiunt, n. c ad finem
perveniunt.
never at the top. A Knight would be a Baronet, and then a Lord, and then an
Earl, etc. a Doctor, a Deane, and then a Bishop: from Tribune to Praetor, from
Bailiffe to Mayor; first this office, and then that, as Pyrrhus in ^ Plutarch,
they will first have Greece, and then Afric, and then Asia, and swell with
Aesops frog so long, till in the end they burst, or come down with Seianus and
Gemonias scalas, and break their own necks: as Euangelus the piper in Lucian,
Vita Pyrrbi.
that blew his pipe so long, till he fell down dead. If he chance to miss, and
have a canvas, he is in a hell on the other side, so dejected, that he is ready
to hang himself, turn Heretic, Turk, or Traitor in an instant. Enraged
against his enemies, he Ambitio in insaniam facile delabitur si excedat.
Patricius l 4 tit. 20. de regis instit.
railes, fights, slanders, detracts, envies, murders: and for his own part, si
appetitum explere non potest, furore corripitur, if he cannot satisfy his
desire, as Lib. 5. de rep. cap. 1.
Bodine observed, he runs mad. So that both ways, hit or miss, he is
distracted so long as his Ambition lasts, he can look for no other but anxiety
and care, discontent and grief in the mean time, and Imprimis vero appetitus
seu concupiscentis nimia rei alicuius honestae velinhonestae, phantasini^
laedunt, vnde multi ambitiosi, Philauti, irati, nuari etc. insani. Faelix
Plate. l. 3. de mentis alien.
madness it self, or violent death in the end. The event of this is commonly
to be seen in populous Cities, or in Princes Courts: for a courteour's life,
as Budaeus describes it, is Aulica vita colluvies ambitionis, cupiditatis,
simulationis, imposture, fraudis, ix^idi^, su^^b^^ Titanice, diversorium aula,
and commune conventiculum assentandi-artisicum etc. Budaeus de ass^. lib. 5.
a gallimaufry of ambition, lust, fraud, imposture, dissimulation, detraction,
envy pride, the Court a common conventicle of flatterers, time-seruers,
politicians etc. If you will see such discontented persons, there you shall
likely find them.

SVBSECT. 12. (...). Covetousness a cause.
PLutarch, in his To^. 2. stexamines, omnes miseriae causas, vel a coxtumaci
ira, vel a furioso contendendi studio, vel ab iniusta cupiditate originem
traxisse scies. Idem sere Chrysostomus com. in cap. 6. ad Roman. ser. 11.
book whether the diseases of the body, be more grievous then those of the
soul; is of opinion, that if you will examine all the causes of our miseries
in this life, you shall find them most part, to have had their beginning from
stubborn anger, or that furious desire of contention, or some iniust or
immoderate affection, as Covetousness in this place. Hippocrates therefore in
his Epistle to Cratena an Herbalist, gives him this good counsel, that if it
were possible, Si vero Crateua inter caeteras herbarum radices, avaritia
radicem secare posses amaram, vt nullae reliquiae essent, probe scito etc.
amongst other herbs, he should cut up that weed of covetousness by the
roots, that there be no remainder left, and then know this for a certainty
that together with their bodies, thou may quickly cure all the diseases of
their minds. For it is indeed the pattern, Image, Epitome of all Melancholy,
the fountain of many miseries, and much discontent, care and woe; this
inordinate desire of gain, to get or keep money, as Cap. 6. Dietae salutis;
avaritia est amor immoderatus pecuniae vel acquirende vel retinendae.
Bonaventure defines it: or as Austin describes it, a madness of the Soul;
Gregory a torture, Chrysostom, an insatiable drunkenness; Cyprian, blindness,
a plague subverting kingdoms, families, an Malus est mor bus maleque afficit
avaritia, siquide^ censeo etc. avaritia difficilius curatur quam insania
quoniam hac omnes fere medici laborant. Hippocr. ep. Abderit.
in curable disease; Budeus, an ill habit, yielding to no remedies; neither
Aesculapius nor Plutus can cure them: a continual plague, Ferum profecto
dirumque vlcus animi, remedijs non cedens, medendo exasperatur.
says Solomon, and vexation of spirit, another Hell. I know there be some men
that are of opinion that covetous men are happy, and worldly wise, only wise,
and that there is more pleasure in getting of wealth then in spending, and that
there is no pleasure in the world like unto it. What is it trow you that makes
a poor man labor all his life time, carry such great burdens, fare so hardly,
macerate himself, and endure so much misery, undergo such base offices with
so great patience, to rise up early and ly down late, if there were not an
extraordinary delight in getting and keeping of this money? What makes a
Merchant that has no need, satis superque domi, to range all over the Extremos
currit mercator ad Indos. Hor.
world, through all those intemperate Zones of heat and cold; voluntarily to
venture his life, and be content with such miserable famine, nasty usage, in a
stinking ship, if there were not a pleasure and hope to get money, which does
season the rest, and mitigate his pains? What makes them go into the bowels
of the earth, an hundredth fadome deep, endangering their dearest lives,
enduring damps and filthy smells, when they have enough already if they could be
content, and no such cause to labor, but an extraordinary delight they take in
riches? This may seem plausible at first show, and a popular and strong
argument: but let him that so thinks consider better of it, and he shall soon
perceive that it is far otherwise then he supposes: it may be happily
peasing at the first, as most part all melancholy is, or such men may have some
lucida intervalla, pleasant symptoms intermixed, but generally they are all
fools, disards, madmen, miserable wretches, Divitiae vt spinae animum hominis
timoribus, sollicitudinibus, angoribus mirifice pungunt, vexant, cruciant. Greg
in hom
living besides themselves in perpetual slavery, fear, suspicion, sorrow, and
discontent. plus aloes quam mellis habent. Damasippus the Stoicke in Horace,
proves that all mortal men dote by fits, some one way, some another, but that
covetous men are Danda est Hellebori multo pars maxima avaris.
madder then the rest: and he that shall truly look into their estates, and
examine their symptoms, shall find no better of them, but that they are all Luke
12.20, Stulte hac nocte eripiam animam tuam.
fools, as Nabal was, Re and nomine, 1. Reg. 15. For what greater folly can
there be or Opes quidem mortalibus sunt dementia Theo^
madness, then to macerate himself when he need not; and when as Cyprian
notes, ep. 2. lib. 2. exonerare cum se possit and relevare ponderibus, pergit
magis fortunis augentibus pertinaciter incubare.
he may be freed from his burden and eased of his pains, will go on still,
his wealth increasing, when he has enough to get more, to live besides
himself, to Miser abstinct and timet vti Her.
starve his Genius, keep back from his Non amicis non liberis non ipsi sibi
quidqud impertit. possidet ad hoc tantum, ne possidere altero liceat etc.
Hieron ad Paulin. tam deest quod habet quam quod non habet.
wife and children, neither letting them nor other friends use or enjoy that
which is theirs, by right, and which they much need perhaps, like a hog, or dog
in the manger, he does only keep it because it shall do no body else good,
hurting himself and others; and for a little momentary good, damn his own
soul. They are commonly sad and tetricke by nature, as Achabs spirit was
because he could not get Nabals vineyard, 1. Reg. 22. and if he part with his
money at any time, though it be to necessary uses to his own children, he
brawls and scolds his heart is heavy, much disquieted he is, and loath to part
from it. He is of a wearish, dry, pale constitution, and cannot sleep for cares
and worldly businesses, his riches, says Solomon, will not let him sleep, and
unnecessary business which he heapeth on himself; or if he do sleep, it is a
very unquiet, interrupt, unpleasing sleep: And though he be at a banquet, or
at some merry feast, he sighs for grief of heart (as Ep 2. lib. 2. suspirat
in convivio, bibat licet gemmis and toro molliore marcidum corpus condiderit,
vigilat in pluma.
Cyprian has it) and cannot sleep though it be upon a down bed; his wearish
body takes no rest, Angustatur ex abundantia contristatur ex apulentia infaelix
prasentibus bonis infaelitior infuturis.
troubled in his abundance, and sorrowful in plenty, unhappy for the present,
and more unhappy in the life to come. Basil. He is a perpetual drudge, Illerum
cogitatio nunquam cessat qui pecunias supplere diligunt. Guianer. tract. 15
cap. 17.
restless in his thoughts and never satisfied, a slave, a wretch, a dust worm,
semper quod idolo suo immolet sedulus observat Cypr. prolog. ad sermon. st^ll
seeking what sacrifice he may offer to his golden God, per fas and nefas, he
cares not how, his trouble is endless, Hor. 3. Od. 24 Quo plus funt potae plus
suiuntur aquae.
crescunt divitiae tamen, curtae nescio quid semper abest rei: his wealth
increases, and the more he has, the more Hor. l. 2. Sat. 6. O si angulus
ille proximus accedat qui nu^c deformat agellu^.
he wants. Lib. 3 de lib. arbit. Immoritur studys and amore senescit babendi.
Austin therefore defines covetousness, quarumlibet rerum inhonestam and
insatiabilem cupiditatem, an dishonest and insatiable desire of gain, and in
one of his Epistles compares it to Hell, Avarus vir inferno est similis. etc.
modum non habet hoc egentior quo plurae habet.
which devoures all, and yet never has enough, a bottomless pit, an endless
misery. And that which is their greatest corsiue, they are in continual
suspicion, fear, and distrust. He thinks his own wife and children are so
many thieves, and go about to cosen him, his servants are all false: Timidus
Plutus, an old proverb, as fearful as Plutus, so does Aristophanes and Lucian
bring him in fearful still, pale, anxious, and suspicious, trusting no man.
Erasm. Adag. chit. 3. cent. 7. pro. 72. Nulli fidentes omnium formidant open
ideo pauid^ malum vocat Euripides metuunt tempestates ob frumentum, amicos ne
rogent, inimicos ne ledant, fures ne rapiant, bellum timent, pacem timent,
summos medios, insimos.
They are afraid of tempests for their corn, they are afraid of their friends
least they should ask something of them, beg, or borrow, they are afraid of
their enemies least they hurt them, thieves least they rob them, they are
afraid of war and afraid of peace, afraid of rich, afraid of poor, afraid of
all. Last of all they are afraid of want that they shall die beggars, which
makes them lay up still, and dare not use what they have, what if a dear year
come, or dearth, or some loss? and were it not that they are loath to Hall
char.
lay out money on a rope they would hang themselves, and sometimes die to save
charges, and make away themselves, if their corn or cattle miscarry; though
they have abundance left, as Agellius lib. 3. cap. 1. interd^^ ^^ sceleris
perueniunt ob lucrum vt vitam propriam commutent.
Agellius notes. Lib. 7. cap. 6.
Valerius makes mention of one that in a famine sold a mouse for 200 pence, and
famished himself: Such are their cares, Omnes perpetuo morbo agitantur,
suspicatur omnes timidus sibique ob auru^ insidiari putat nunquam quiescens.
Plin. proem lib. 14.
griefs, and perpetual fears. These symptoms are elegantly expressed by
Theophrastus in his Character of a covetous man, Cap. 18. In lecto iacens
interrogat vxorem an arcam probe clausit, an capsula etc. Electo surgens nudus
and absque calceis accensa lucerna omnia obiens and lustrans, and vix somno
indulgens.
lying in bed, he asks his wife whether she shut the trunks, and chests fast,
capcase sealed, and whether the Hall door be bolted, and though she say all is
well, he rises out of his bed in his shirt barefoot and bare-legged to see
whether it be so with a dark lantern searching every corner, scarce sleeping
a wink all night. Lucian in that pleasant and witty dialogue called Gallus,
brings in Mycillus the Cobbler disputing with his Cock, sometimes Pythagoras:
where after much speech Pro and Con, to prove the happiness of a mean estate,
and discontents of a rich man, Pythagoras his Cock in the end to illustrate
by examples that which he had said, brings him to Gnyphon the Usurers house at
midnight, and after that to Eucrates: whom they found both awake, casting up
of their accounts, and telling of their money, Curis extenuatus vigilans and
secum supputa^s.
lean, dry, pale, and anxious, still suspecting least some body should make a
hole through the wall, and so get in, or if a Rat or Mouse did but stir,
starting up on a sudden, and running to the door to see whether all were
fast. Plautus in his Aulularia, makes old Euclio Cave quenqua^ alienum in aedes
intromiseris, Ignem extinguivolo, ne causae quidquam sit quod te quisqua^
queritet. Si bona fortuna veniat ne intromiseris. Occlude sis fores ambobus
pessulis. Discrucior animi quia domo abeundum est mihi. Nimis hercule inuitus
abeo, nec quid agam scio.
commanding Staphyla his wife to shut the doors fast, and the fire to be put
out, least any body should make that an errant to come to his house; and as he
went from home, seeing a Crow scrat upon the muck-hill returned in all have,
taking it for malum omen, an ill sign his money was dug up, with many such.
He that will but observe their actions, shall find these and many such passages
not feigned for sport, but really performed, and verified indeed by such
covetous and miserable wretches.

SVBSECT. 13. Love of gaming, etc, and pleasures immoderate.
IT is a wonder to see how many poor distressed miserable wretches, one shall
meet almost in every path and street, begging for an alms, that have been
well descended, and sometimes in flourishing estate, now ragged, tottered, and
ready to be starued, lingering out a painful life, in discontent and grief
of body and mind; and all through immoderate lust, gaming, pleasure, riot. And
it is the common end of all sensual Epicures and brutish prodigals, that are
stupefied and carried away headlong with their several pleasures and lusts.
Lucian in his Tr. de Mercede conductis has excellent well deciphered such men's
proceedings in his Such another picture you shall have in S. Ambrose second
book of Abel and Cain.
picture of Opulentia, whom he faines to dwell on the top of an high mount,
much sought after by many suitors, At their first coming they are generally
entertained by Pleasure and Dalliance, and have all the content that possibly
may be given, so long as their money lasts: but when their means fail, they
are contemptibly thrust out at a back door headlong, and there left to Shame,
Reproach, Despair. And he at first that had so many attendants, parasites and
followers, young and lusty, richly arrayed, and all the dainty fare that might
be had, with all kind of welcome and good respect, is now upon a sudden stripped
of all, Ventricosus, nudus, pallidus, Leua pudorens occultans, dextrae seipsum
strangula^s. occurrit autem exeunti paenitentia bis miserum conficiens etc.
pale, naked, old, diseased and forsaken, cursing his stars, and ready to
strangle himself; having no other company but Repentance, Sorrow, and Grief,
Derision, Beggary, and Contempt, which are his daily attendants to his life's
end. As the Luke 15.
prodigal son had music, merry company, dainty fare at first, but a
sorrowful reckning in the end: so have al such vain delights and their
followers. Boethius.
Tristes voluptatum exitus and quisquis voluptatum suarum reminisci volet,
intelliget, as bitter as gaull and wormwood is their last, grief of mind,
madness. The ordinary rocks upon which such men do impinge and precipitate
themselves, are Cards, and Dice, Hawks, and Hounds, Insanum venandi studium
one calls it, insanae substructiones, their mad structures, disports, plays,
etc. when they are vnsociably used, imprudently handled, and beyond their
fortunes. Some men are consumed by mad fantastical buildings, by making
Walks, Orchards, Gardens, Bowers, and such places of pleasure, Inutiles domos,
In Oecon^m. quid si nunc ostendam eos qui magna^i argenti domus inutiles
aedificant inquit Socrates.
Xenophon calls them, which howsoever they be delightsome things in themselves,
and acceptable to all beholders, an ornament, and befitting some great men, yet
unprofitable to others, and the sole overthrowe of their estates. Forestus in
his observations has an example of such a one that became melancholy upon such
an occasion, having consumed his substance on such an vnp^ofitable building,
which would afterward ye^ld him no advantage. Others are Sarisburiensis
Polycrat. lib. 1. cap. 4. venatores omnes adhuc institutione^ redolent
Centaurorum. Raro invenitur quisquam eorum modestus and grauis, raro continens
and vt credo sobrius u^quam.
overthrown by those mad disports of Hauking and Hunting; honest recreations
and fit disports for some great men, but not for every base inferior person;
whilst they will maintain their Faukoners, and Dogs, and hunting Nagges,
their wealth, says Salmutze, runs, away with Dogs, and their fortunes fly
away with Hawks. They hunt and persecute beasts so long, till in the end they
themselves degenerate into beasts, Panc^^ol. Tit. 23. avolant op^s cum
accipitre.
as Insignis venatorum stultitia and supervacanea cura eorum qui dum ni ni^i
venationi insistunt ipsi ab^e^ta omni hum^nitate inferas d^generant, vt Act^on,
etc.
Agrippa taxes them. Sabin in Ovid Metamor.
Ac^aeon like, as he was eaten to death by his own Dogs, so do they devour
themselves and their patrimonies, in such idle and unnecessary disports,
neglecting in the mean time their more necessary business, and to follow
their vocations. Over mad too sometimes are our great men in following of it,
doting too much on it, Agrippa de vanit s^^^nt. Insan^m venandi studum, d^m a
novalibus arcentur agrico^e, sabtraliumini p^aedia rus^^cis, aeri colonis
praecluduntur, s^lue and pra^a pa^^oribus. vt augeantur pascua f^ris. --
Maiestatis reus agricola si gustarit.
When they drive poor husbandmen from their tillage, as Sariburiensis objects*
polycrat. lib. 1. cap. 4. and f^^ng down country farms, and whole towns to
make Parkes, end Forests, staruing men A novilib^^ sui^ arcentur agricolae dum
ferae habeant vagandi libertatem is^is, ^^ pa^^u^ ^^geantur, p^edi^
s^b^rahuntu^ etc. Sariburiensis
to feed beasts, and Feris quam ho minibus aquiores Cambd. d^ Guil. Conq. qui
36. Ecclesias matrices depopulatus est ad Forestam novam. Mat. Paris.
punishing in the mean time such a man that shall molest their game, more
severely then him that is otherwise a common hacker, or a notorious theafe. But
great men are some ways to be excused, the meaner sort have no evasio^ why
they should not be counted mad. Podgius the Florentine tells a merry story to
this purpose, condemning the folly and impertinent business of such kind of
men. A Physician of Millan, says he, that cured mad men had a pit of water in
his house, in which he kept his patients some up to the knees, some to the
girdle, some to the chinne, pro modo in saniae, as they were more or less
affected. One of them by chance that was well recovered, stood in the door,
and seeing a gallant ride by with an Hawk on his fist, well mounted, and his
Spaniels after him, would needs know of him to what use all this preparation
served; he made answer to kill certain foul: the patient demanded again
what his foul might be worth which he killed in a year, he replied 3 or 4
Crowns; and when he urged him farther, what his Dogs, Horse and Hawks stood
him in, he told him 100 Crowns: with that the patient bad him be gone as he
loved his life and welfare, for if our master come and find thee here, he will
put thee in the pit amongst madmen up to the chin: Taxing the madness and
folly of such vain men that spend themselves in such idle sports, neglecting
their business and necessary affairs. Leo Decimus that hunting Pope is much
discommended by Tom 2. de vitis illustrium. l. 4 de vit. Leon. 10 ^^.
Ionius in his life, for his immoderate desire of hauking and hunting, in so
much, that as he says he would sometimes, live about Ostia weeks and months
together, and leave suitors Venationibus adeo perdite studebat and aucupijs.
unrespected, Bulls and Pardons vnsigned, to his own prejudice, and many
private men's loss. Aut infaeliciter venatus tam impatiens inde vt summos saepe
vires acerbissimis contumelijs oneraret and incredible est quali vultus
animique, habitu dolorem ^racundiamque praeferret etc.
And if he had been by chance crossed in his sport, or his game not so good,
he would be so impatient, that he would revile and miscall many times men of
great worth with most bitter taunts, and look so sour, and be so angry and
wispesh, so grieved and molested that it is incredible to relate it. But if he
had good sport, and had been well pleased on the other side, incredibili
munificentia, with unspeakable bounty he would reward all his fellow hunters,
and deny nothing to any suter when he was in that mood. To say truth, it is the
common humor of all gamesters, as Galateus observes, if they win no men
living are so Iouiall and merry, Vnicuique aute hoc a natura insitum est vt
doleat sicubi erraverit aut deceptus sit.
but if they loose, though it be but a trifle, two or three games at tables, or
a dealing at Cards for 2d a game, they are so choleric and tetty that no man
may speak with them, and break many times into violent passions, oaths,
imprecations, and unbeseeming speeches, little differing from mad men for the
time. Generally of all Gamsters and gaming, if it be excessive, thus much we
may conclude, that whether they win or loose for the present, the common
Catastrophe is Iuven. Sat. 8 Necenim loculis comitantibus itur ad casum tabule,
posita sed luditur arca. Lemnius instit. cap 44. mendaciorum quidem and
periurio^um and paupertatis matter est alea, nullum habens
patrimoniireverentiam, quum illud effuderit, sensim in furta delabitur and
rapinas. Saris. policrat. lib. 1. c. 5.
beggary, for a little pleasure they take, and some small gains and gettings
now and then, their wives and children are wringed in the mean time, and they
themselves rue it in the end. I will say nothing of those prodigious prodigals,
and Platus in Aristeph. calls all such gamsters mad men. Si in insanum hominem
contigero. Spontaneum ad se trahunt furorem, and os and nares and oculos rivos
faciunt furoris and diversoria chrysostom hom. 71.
mad Sybaritical spendthrifts, quique vna comedunt patrimonia mensa; that eat
up all at a breakfast, or at a supper, and amongst Bauds, Parasites and
Players, consume themselves in an instant, Seneca.
Irati pecunijs, as he says, angry with their money: Hall.
What with a wanton eye, aliquorish tongue, a gamesome hand, when they have
indiscreetly impoverished themselves, and intombed their ancestors in their bow
else, they may lead the rest of their days in prison, as many times they do,
and there repent at leisure; and when all is gone begin to be thrifty In Sat.
11. Sed deficiente crumena, and crescente gula quis te manet exitus. -- rebus
in ventrem mersis.
but Sera est in fundo parsimonia, it is then too late to look about; their end
is misery, sorrow, shame, and discontent. I may not here omit those two maine
plagues and common dotages of humane kind, Wine and Women, which have
infatuated and besotted Myriades of people. To whom is sorrow says Solomon,
Pro. 23.29. to whom is woe, but to such a one that loves drink? it causes
sorrow and bitterness of mind, Sirac. 31.21. Vinum furoris, Jeremy calls it,
25. cap. as well he may, for insanire facit sanos, it makes sound men sick and
sad, and wise men Poculum quasi sinus in quo saepe naufragium faciunt iactura
tum pecunia tu^mentis, Erasm. in Proverb. calicum remiges. chil 4. cent. 7.
Prove. 41.
mad. A true saying it was of him, Vino dari laetitiam and dolorem, drink
causes mirth, and drink causes sorrow, drink causes poverty and want,
(Prove. 21) shame and disgrace. Multi ignobiles evasere ob vini potum, etc.
(Austin) amissis honoribus profugi aberrarunt: Many men have made shipwreck of
their fortunes, and go like rogues and beggars, that otherwise might have
lived in good worship and happy estate, and for a few hours pleasure, or
Liberae vnius horae insaniam aeterno temporis taedio pensant.
free madness, as Seneca terms it, purchase unto themselves eternal
tediousness and trouble. That other madness is women, Apostare facit cor:
says the wiseman, pleasant at first, but as the rest bitter as wormwood in
the end, Prove. 5, 4. and sharp as a two-edged sword. And (7.21) her house is
the way to hell, and goes down to the chambers of death. What more sorrowfully
can be said; they are miserable in this life, mad, beasts, lead like e Oxen to
the slaughter: and that which is worse, whoremasters and drunkards shall be
judged: amittunt gratiam, says Austin, perdunt gloriam, incurrunt damnationem
aeternam. They loose grace and glory, and gain hell and eternal damnation.

SVBSECT. 14. Philautia, or Self-love, Vaineglory, Praise, Honor, Immoderate
applause, Pride, overmuch joy, etc
Self-love, Pride, and Vainglory, which Chrysostom calls one of the Devils
three great nets, Sagitta quae animam interficit leuiter penetrat sed non leve
infligit vulnus sup. cant.
Bernard, an arrowe which pearceth the Soul through, and slayes it, a slye
insensible enemy not perceived. Where neither anger, lust, covetousnes, fear,
sorrow, etc. nor any other perturbation can lay hold on us, this will slily and
insensibly pervert us, Quem non gula vicit Philautia superauit, says Cyprian,
whom surfeting could not overtake, Self-love has overcome. Qui omnem
pecuniarum contemptum habent and nulli Imaginationi totius ^nuidise
immiscuerint, and tyrannicas corporis concupiscentias sustinuerint hi multoties
capti a vana gloria omnia perdiderunt.
He that has scorned al money, bribes, gifts, upright otherwise and sincere,
has inserted himself to no fond Imagination, and sustained all those
tyrannical concupiscences of the body, has lost all his honor, captivated by
Vainglory, Chrysoft. sup. Ioh. A great assault, and cause of our present
malady, although we do most part neglect it, take no notice of it, yet this is
a most violent batterer of our Souls, and causes Melancholy and Dotage. This
pleasing humor, this soft and whispering popular air, Amabilis insania, this
delectable frensy, most irrefragable passion, Mentis gratissimus error, this
most acceptable disease, which so sweetly sets upon us, ravisheth our senses,
lulls our souls asleep, puffes up our hearts as so many bladders, and that
without all feeling, Hac correpti non cogitant de medela
that those that are misaffected with it, never so much as once perceive it, or
think of any cure. We commonly love him best in this Dij talem terris
avertite pestem.
malady that does us most harm, and are most willing to be hurt; adulationibus
nostris libenter fauemus, says Ep. ad Eustochium de custed. virgin.
Hierome, we love him, we love him for it: Lips. Epist. ad Bonciarum.
O Bonciari suaue suaue fuit a te tali haec tribui, it was sweet to hear it.
Though we seem many times to be angry Hieron: Et licet nos indignos dicimus
and calidus rubor ora perfundat, attame ad laudem suam intrinsecus
animalaetatur.
and blush at our own praises, yet our soul inwardly rejoices, it puffes us
up and makes us swell beyond our bounds, and forget ourselves. Her two
daughters are lightness of mind and immoderate joy and pride. Now the common
cause of this mischief arises from our selves or others, Nec enim mihi cornea
fibra est. Per.
we are active and passive. It proceeds inwardly from our selves, as we are
active causes, from an overweening conceit we have of our good parts, own
worth (which indeed is no worth) our bou^ty, favor, grace, valor, strength,
wealth, patience, meekness, hospitality, beauty, temperance, gentry,
knowledge, wit, science, art, learning, Emanibus il lis nascentur viola. Per.
1. Sat.
our excellent gifts and fortunes, for which Narcissus like we admire, flatter,
and applaud our selves, and think all the world esteems so of us. We brag
and venditate our Omnia enim nostra supra modum placent. Fab. l. 10 cap. 3.
own works, and scorn all others in respect of us, Instati scientia, Paul
terms us, our wisdom, Ridentur mala qui componunt carmina. verum gaudent
scribentes and sevenerantur. and vlira si taceas laudant quicquid scripsere
beati. Hor. ep. 2. l. 2.
our learning, all our geese are swannes, and as basely esteem and vilify
other men's, as we do, over-highlye prise our own. We will not suffer them to
be in secundis, no not in tertijs, what? Mecum confertur Ulysses? Though
indeed they be far before us. Only wise, only rich, fortunate, valorous, and
fair, as that proud Luke 18.10.
Pharisie, they are not (as they suppose) De meliore luto finxit praecordia
Titan.
like other men, of a purer precious mettle. Novi quendam, says Chil. 3. Cent.
10. pro 97. qui se crederet neminem vlla in re praestantine^.
Erasmus, I knew one that thought himself inferior to no man living. And such
for the most part are your Princes, Potentates, great Philosophers, Poets,
Historiographers, Authors of Sects or Heresies, and all our great Scholars. As
Consul. ad Pammachium, mundi Philosophus gloriae animal, and popularis aura and
rumorum venale mancipium.
Hierom defines, A natural Philosopher, glories creature, and a very slave of
rumor, fame, and popular opinion. Vobis and famae me semper dedi, says
Trebellius Pollio, I have wholly consecrated my self to you and Fame; and that
vaineglorious Tullius.
Orator, is not ashamed to confess in an Epistle of his to Marcus Lecceius: Vt
nomen meum scriptis tuis illustretur.
Ardeo incredibili cupididate, etc. I burn with an incredible desire to have
my Inquies animus studio aeternitatis noctes and dies angebatur. Hensius orat.
funeb. de Scal.
name registered in thy book. Out of this fountain proceed all those cracks and
bragges, -- Hor. art. Poet.
speramus carmina fingi posse linenda cedro, and leni seruanda cupresso. -- Od.
vlt. lib. 2.
Non vsitata nec tenuiferar penna. -- nec in terra morabor longius. Od. 25.
lib. 2.
nil parvum aut humilimodo nil mortale loquor. Od. vlt. lib. 3. Ovid. Iamque
opus exegi. Vade liber faelix Paligen.
Dicar qua violence obstrepit Aufidus. -- Exegi monumentum are perennius. I
amque opus exegi, etc. etc many such common with writers. Not so much as
Democharis on the In lib. 8.
Topics, but he will be immortal, and every common Poet will be renowned.
This puffing humor is it has produced so many great Tomes, that has built so
many famous monuments, Castles and Mausolean Tombs, to have their names
aeternised, Digito monstrari, and dicier hic est, to have their names inscribed
as Phryne on the walls of Thebes, Phryne fecit; This causes so many battles, Et
noctes cogit vigilare serenas. Long ^ournies, Magnum iter intendo sed dat mihi
gloria vires, a little applause, Pride, Selfeloue, Vaineglory. This is it which
makes them take such pain, and break out into such ridiculous strains, this
high conceit of themselves, De ponte deijcere.
to scorn al others; and brings them to that height of insolency, that they
cannot endure to be contradicted, Nihil libenter audiunt nisi lauds suas.
or hear of any thing but their own commendations, as Hierom notes of such
kind of men. When as indeed, in all wisemens judgments they are Quae mayor
dementia aut dici aut excogitari potest quam sic ob gloriam cruciari. Insaniam
istam domine long fac a me Austin cons. lib. 10 cap. 37.
mad, beside themselves, derided and a common obloquy, insensati and come far
short of that which they suppose or expect. Hor. Sat. 1. l. 2.
O puer vt sis vitalis metuo. Nos demiramur, sed non cum deside vulgo
Se velut Harpyas, Gorgonas, and Furias.
We marvail too, not as the vulgar we,
But as we Gorgons, Harpy or Furies see.
Another kind of mad men there is opposite to these that are insensibly mad,
and know not of it, such as contemn all praise and glory, and think
themselves most free; when as indeed they are most mad: calcant sed alio fastu:
a company of Cynicks, such as are Monks, Hermites, Anachorites, that contemn
the world, contemn themselves, contemn all titles, honors, offices: and yet
in that contempt, are more proud then any man living whatsoever. They are proud
of humility proud in that they are not proud, saepe homo de vanae gloriae
contemptu, vanius gloriatur, as Austin has it, confess. lib. 10. cap. 38. as
Diogenes, intus gloriantur, they brag inwardly, and feed themselves fat with
a self conceit of sanctity, which is no better then Hypocrisy: they go in
sheeps russet many great men, that might maintain themselves in cloth of gold
and seem to be dejected, humble by their ordinary gesture and apparel, much
mortified in their outward carriage, when as inwardly they are swollen full of
pride, arrogance, and selfeconceipt. And therefore Seneca advises his friend
Lucilius, Epist. 13. Illud te admoneo, ne eorum more fatias, qui no^ proficere
sed conspici cupiunt, quae in habitu tuo aut genere vitae notabilia sunt
Asperum cult^ and vitiosum caput, negligentiorem barbam, indictum argento
odium, cubile humi positum, and quicquid ad laudem perversa via sequitur, evita.
in his attire and gesture, outward actions, especially to avoid all such
things as are more notable in themselves: as a rugged attire, hirsute head,
horrid beard, contempt of money, course lodging and whatsoever leads to Fame
that opposite way.

All this madness yet proceeds from our selves, the maine engine which batters
us is from others, we are merely passi^e in this business: a company of
parasites and flatterers, that with immoderate praise and bumbast Epithites,
glosing titles, false elogiums, so bedaub and applaud, gild over many silly and
undeserving man, that they clap him quite out of his wit. Res imprimis violenta
est, as Hierome notes, this common applause is a most violent thing, that
fattens men, erects and deiects them in an instant. Per.
Palma negata macrum, donata reducit opimum. It makes them fat and lean as
frost does Conies. Quis eorum tam been modulo suo metirise nouit, vt eum
assiduae and immodicae laudationes no^ ^ouea^t. Hen. Steph.
And who is that mortal man that can so contain himself, that if he be
immoderatly commended and applauded, will not be moved. Let him be what he
will, those Parasites will overturne him. If he be a soldier then
Themistocles, Epaminondas, Hector, Achilles, and the valor of both Scipioes is
to little for him, he is invictissimus, serenissimus, multis tropheis
ornatissimus, although he never durst look his enemy in the face, If he be a
big man, then is he a Sampson, another Hercules: If he make a speech, another
Tully or Demosthenes: as of Herod in the Acts, the voice of God and not of man:
If he can make a verse, Homer, Virgil. And then my silly weak Pathicke takes
all these elogiums to himself, if he be a Scholar so commended for his much
reading, excellent style, method, etc. he will eviscerate himself like a
spider, study himself to death, Laudatas extendit ales Iunonia pennas,
Peacocke like he will display all his feathers. If he be a soldier and so
applauded, as another Livius Gloria tantum elatus non ira iu medios
hostesirruere, quod completis muris conspici se pugna^tem a muro spectanibus
egregiu^ dicebat
Philip, he will ride into the thickest of his enemies. Commend his
housekeeping, and he will beggar himself, commend his temperance he will
starve himself. -- laudataque virtus Crescit, and immensum gloria calcar
habet, he is madd, madd, madd, no who with him he will over the I demens and
seuas curre per Alps. Aude aliquid etc. vt pueris placeas and vt declamatio
fias. Iuv. Sat. 10
Alps to be talked of, or to maintain his credit. Commend an ambitious man,
or some proud Prince or Potentate, Si plu^ aequo laudetur, says In moriae
E^com.
Erasmus, cristas erigit, exuit homine^, deum se putat: he sets up his crest
and will be no longer a man, but a God. How did this work with Alexander, that
would needs be Jupiters son, and go like Hercules in a Lions skin. Commodus
the Emperor was so gulled by his flattering Parasites, that he would be called
Hercules. Antonius ab assentatoribus evectus Liberu^ se patrem appellari iussit
and pro deo se venditans redimitus hedera and corona velatus aurea, and thyrsum
tenens cothurnisque succinctus, curru velut Lib. pater vectus est Alexandrie.
Pater. vol. post.
Antonius the Roman would be crowned with Ivy, and carried in a Chariot, and
adored for Bacchu^. Cotys king of Thrace would be married to Mineruae nuptias
ambit, tanto furore percitus, vt satellites mitteret ad videndu^num Dea in
thalamum venisset, etc.
Minerva, and sent three several messengers one after another, to see if she
were come to his bedchamber. Such a one was Aelian. lib. 12.
Jupiter Menecrates, Maximinus Iovianus, Dioclesianus Herculeus, Sapor the
Persian king, brother of the Sun and Moon, and our kings of China and
Tartaria in this present age. Such a one was Xerxes that would whip the Sea,
and send a challenge to mount Athos, and such are many foolish Princes, brought
into a fools Paradise by their Parasites. And it is a common humor incident to
all men, when they are in great place, have done well, or deserved well, to
applaud and flatter themselves. Sequiturque superbia formam. livius lib. 11,
Oraculum ost vivida saepe ingenia luxuriare hac and evanescere multosque se^
sum penitus amisisse. Homines intuentur at siipsi non esset homines.
They have good parts and they know it, you need not tell them of it, out of a
conceit of their worth they go smiling to themselves, and perpetual
meditation of their trophies and plaudits, they run at the last quite mad, and
loose their wits. Petrarch. lib. 1. de contemptu mundi, confessed as much of
himself, and Cardan in his 5 book of wisdom gives an instance of a Smith of
Millan, a fellow citizen of his Galeus de Rubeis civis noster faber ferrarius
ob inventionem instrumenti Cocleae olim Archimedis dicti prae laetitia
insaniuit.
one Galeus de Rubeis, that being commended for the refinding of an Instrument
of Archimedes, for joy rann mad. Plutarch in the life of Artaxerxes has such
a like story of one Chamus a soldier, that wounded king Cyrus in battle and
grew thereupon so Insania postmodum correptus ob nimiam inde arrogantiam.
arrogant that in a short space after he lost his wits. So many men, if any
new honor, office, preferment, possession, or patrimony, ex insperato fall unto
them, for immoderate joy and continual meditation of it, cannot sleep, Been
far magnam disce fortunam. Hor. Fortunam reverenter habe, quicunque repent
Dives ab exili progredier^ loco. Ausonius.
or tell what they say or do, they are so ravished on a sudden. Epaminondas
therefore the next day after his Leuctrian victory, Processit squalidus and
submissus vt hesterni diei gaudium intemperans hodie, castigaret, Vxor Hemici 8.
came abroad all squallid and submisse, and gave no other reason to his friends
of his so doing, then that he perceived himself the day before, by reason of
his good fortune to be too insolent, overmuch ioyed. And that wise and virtuous
Lady, a Queen Catherine Dowager of England, in private talk said that Nutrius
se fortunae extremum libenter experturum dixit, sed sinecessitas alterius
subinde imponeretur, optare se difficilem and adversam: quod in hac nulli
vnquam defuit solatium, in altera multis consilium etc. Lod. Vives.
she would not willingly endure the extremity of either Fortune, but if it were
so that of necessity she must undergo the one she would be in adversity,
because comfort was never wanting in it, but still counsel moderation and
government, were defective in the other. They would not moderate themselves.

SVBSEC. 15. Love of Learning, or overmuch study. With a Digression of the
misery of Scholars, and why the Muses are Melancholy.
LEonartus Fuchsius Institut. lib. 3. sect. 1. cap. 1. Faelix Platter l.3. de
mentis alienat: Peculiaris furor qui ex literis fit.
speaks of a peculiar Fury which comes by overmuch Study. Fernelius lib. 1.
cap. 18. Nihil magis auget, ac assidua studia, and profundae cogitationes.
puts study, contemplation, and continual meditation, an especial cause of
madness: and in his 86. counsel. cites the same words. Io. Arculanus in lib.
9. Rhasis ad Almansorem cap. 16. amongst other causes reckons up studium
vehemens, so does Levinus Lemnius, lib. de occult. not. mirac. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Non desunt qui ex Iugi studio and intempestiua lucubratione huc divenerunt, hi
prae caeteris enim plerumque melancholia solent infestavi.
Many men (says he) come to this malady by continual Study is a continual
and earnest meditation applied to something with great desire. Tully.
study, and night waking, and of all other men Scholars are most subject to
it: and such Rhasis adds, Et illi qui sunt subtilis ingenii and multae
praemeditationis de facili incidunt in melancholiam.
that have commonly the finest wits. Cont. lib. 1 tract. 9. Marsilius Ficinus
de sanit. tuenda. lib. 1. cap. 7. puts Melancholy amongst one of those 5
principal plagues of Students, it is a common maul unto them all, and almost in
some measure an inseparable companion. Varro belike for that cause calls
Tristes Philosophos and severos, severe, sad, dry tetricke, are common
Epithites to Scholars. And Ob studiorum sollicitudinem, lib. 5. Tit. 5.
Patritius therefore in the institution of princes, would not have the^ to be
great students. For as Machiauel holds study weakens their bodies, dulls their
spirits, abates their strength and courage, and good Scholars are never good
soldiers: which a certain Gothe well perceived, when his country men came
into Greece and would have burned all their books, he cried out against it by
all means they should not do it, Gaspar Ens. Thesaur polit. Aposteles. 31.
Graecis hanc pestem relinquite quae dubium no^ est quin brevi omne ijs vigore
ereptura Martiosque spiritus exhaustura sit Vt ad arma tractada plane inhabiles
futuri sint.
leave them that plague, which in time will consume all their vigor, and
martial spirits. The Knoles Turk. hist.
Turks abdicated Cornutus the next heir from the Empire, because he was so
much given to his book, and it is the common Tenet of the world, that learning
dulls and diminishes the spirits, and so per consiquens produces Melancholy.

Two main reasons may be given of it, why stude^ts should be more subject to
this malady then others. The one is they live a sedentary, solitary life, sibi
and musis, free from bodily exercise, and those ordinary disports which other
men use: and many times if discontent and Idleness concur with it, they are
precipitated into this gulf on a sudden: but the common cause is overmuch
study, too much learning, as Acts 26.24.
Fesius told Paul, has made thee mad; it is that other extreme which effects
it. So did Trincavellius lib. 1. consil. 12. and 13. find by his experience in
two of his patients, a young Baron, and another, that contracted this malady by
too vehement study. So Forestus obseruat. lib. 10. observe. 13. in a young divine
in Lovain, that was mad, and said Nimijs studijs melancholicus evasit, dicens
se Bibliam in capite habere.
he had a Bible in his head. Marcilius Ficinus de sanit. tuenda. lib. 1. cap.
1.3.4. and lib, 2. cap, 16. gives many reasons, Cur Melancholia assidua,
crebrisque deliramentis vexentur little animi, vt desipere cogantur.
why students dote more often then others: The first is their negligence:
Solers quilibet artisex instrumenta sua diligentissime curat, pencillos pictor,
malleos iucundesque faber ferrarius, miles equos, arma^venator auceps, aues and
canes, Cytheram cytharedus etc. soli musarum myste tam negligentes sunt, vt
instrumentum illud quo mundum vniversum metiri solent, spiritum scilicet
penitus negligere videantur.
other workmen look to their tools, a Painter will wash his pencils, a Smith
will look to his hammer, anvil, forge: an husbandman will mend his plow-irons,
and grind his hatchet if it be dull, a faukoner or huntsman will have an
especial care of his hawks, hounds, horses, dogs etc. a musician will
string and vnstring his lute etc. only Scholars neglect that instrument,
their brain and spirits I mean, which they daily use, and by which they range
over all the world, which by much study is consumed. Vide says Lucia^, ne
funiculum nimis intendendo, aliquando abrumpas: thou twist not the rope so
hard, till at length it Arcus and arma tui non sint tractanda Diana. Si nunquam
cesses tendere mollis erit. Ovid.
break. Ficinus in his 4. c. gives some other reasons, Saturn and Mercury the
Patrons of Learning, are both dry Planets: and Ephaenter.
Origanus gives that same cause, why Mercurialists are so poor, and most part
beggars because their praesident Mercury had no better fortune himself, he can
help them to knowledge, but not to money. The second is contemplation,
Contemplatio cerebrum exsiccat, and extinguit calorem naturale^ vnde cerebrum
frigidum and siccum evadit quod est melancbolicum. Accedit ad hoc, quod natura
in contemplatione cerebro prorsus cordique intenta, stomachum, heparque
destituit, vnde ex alimentis male coctis, sanguis crassus and niger efficitur,
dum nimio otio membrorum superflui vapores non exhalant.
which dries the brain, and extinguisheth natural heat; for whilst the
spirits are intent to meditation about in the head, the stomach and litter are
left destitute, and thence comes black blood, and crudities, for want of
concoction, and for want of exercise, the superfluous vapors cannot exhale etc.
The same reasons are repeated by Gomesius lib. 4. cap. 1. de sale. Cerebrum
exsiccatur, corpora sensim gracilescunt.
Nymanus orat. de Imag. Io. Voschius lib. 2. cap. 5. de peste: and something
more they add, that hard students are commonly troubled with goutes, catarres,
rhumes, cacexia, bad eyes, stone and colicke, Studiosi sunt Cacectici, and
nunquam been colorati, propter debilitate^ digestiuae facultatis,
multiplicantur in ijs superfluitates, Io. Voschius part 2. cap. 5. de peste.
crudities, opilations, vertigo, winds, crampes, consumptions, and all such
diseases as come by overmuch sitting; they are commonly lean, dry, ill
colored, spend their fortunes, loose their wits, and many times their lives,
and all through immoderate pains, and extraordinary studies. If you will not
believe the truth of this, look upon great Tostatus, and Thomas Aquinas
works, and tell me whether those men took pains? peruse Austin, Jerome etc.
and many thousands besides. Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam,
Multa tulit, fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit.
He that desires this wished goal to gain,
Must sweat and freeze, before he can attain.
and labor hard for it: so did Seneca, by his own confession, epist. 8.
Nullus mihi per otium dies exit, partem noctis studijs dedico, non vero somno,
sed oculos vigilia fatigatos, cadentesque in operam detined.
not a day that I spend idle, and part of the night, and keep mine eyes tired
with waking, and now slumbering to their continual task. Hear Tully pro
Archia poeta. whilst other loytered, and took their pleasures, he was
continually at his book: and so they do that will be Scholars, and that to
the hazard I say, of their health, fortunes, wits, and lives. How much did
Aristotle and Ptolomy spend? how many crowns per annum, to perfect Arts, the
one about his history of creatures, the other about his Almagest? how many
poor Scholars have lost their wits, or become dizardes, neglecting all
worldly affairs, and their own health, wealth, esse, and been esse to gain
knowledge? for which after all their pains, in the worlds esteem they are
accounted ridiculous, and silly fools, Idiots, Asses and (as often they are)
rejected, contemned, and derided, doting, mad. Look for examples in Hildisheim
spicel. 2. de Mania and delirio, read Trincavelius lib. 3. consil. 36. and
consil. 17. Montanus consil. 233. Johannes Hanuschius Bohemus, natus 1516
eruditus vir ex nimijs studijs in Phraenesin incidit.

Montanus in: stances in a Frenchman of Tolosa.


Garceus de Indic, genit. cap, 33. Mercurialis consil. 86. consil. 25. Prosper
Cardinalis Caecius ob laborem, vigiliam and diuturna studia factus
melancholicus.
Calenus his book de atra bile. Go to Bedlam and ask. Or if they keep their
wits, yet they are accounted fools by reason of their carriage, because they
cannot ride a horse, which every clown can do, salute and court a
Gentlewoman, carue at table, cringe and make congies, which every common
swasher can do, Pers. Sa. 3.
hos populus ridet etc. they are laughed to scotne, and They cannot fiddle, but
as Themistocles said, he could make a small town become a great city.
accounted silly fellows by our gallants. And many times such is their misery,
they deserve it: Pers. Sat. 3.
a mere Scholar, a mere Ass. Ing nium sibi quod vanas desumpsit Athenas,
and sept^^ studijs a nos dedit insenuitque libris and curis statua taciturnius
exit, plerumque and risu populum quatit. Hor. ep. 2. lib. 2.
Obstipo capite, and figentes lumine terram,
Murmura cum secum and rabiosa silentia rodunt,
Atque experrecto trutinantur verba labello
Aegroti veteris meditantes somnia, gigni
De nihilo nihilum, in nihilum nil posse reverti.
-- who do lean awry
Translated by Mr B. Holiday.
Their heads, piercing the earth with a fixed eye:
When by themselves they gnaw their murmuring
And furious silence, as 'twere ballancing,
Each word upon their out-stretch'd lip, and when
They meditate the dreams of old sick men,
As, Out of nothing, nothing can be brought,
And that which is, can never be turned to naught.
Thus they go commonly meditating unto themselves, thus they sit, such is
their action and gesture. Fulgosus lib. 8. cap. 7. makes mention, how Th.
Aquinas supping with King Jews of France* upon a sudden knocked his fist on
the table, and cried, conclusum est contra Manichaeos, his wits were a
wool-gathering, as they say, and his head busied about other matters; Lib. 2.
cap. 18.
when he perceived his error, he was much Thomas rubore confusus dixit de
argumeto cogitasse.
abashed. Such a story there is of Archimedes in Vitruvius, that having found
out the means to know how much gold was mingled with the silver in King
Hierons crown, ran naked forth of the bathe, and cried (...), I have found:
Plutarch. vita Marcelli nec sensit vrbem captam, nec milites in domum
irruentes, adeo intentus studijs etc.
and was commonly so intent to his studies, that he never perceived what was
done about him, when the city was taken, and the soldiers now ready to rifle
his house, he took no notice of it. Sr Bernard rode all day long by the Leman
lake, and asked at last where he was. Marullus lib. 2. cap. 4. It was
Democritus carriage alone that made the Abderites suppose him to be mad, and
send for Hippocrates to cure him: if he had been in any solemn company, he
would upon all occasions fall a-laughing. Theophrastus says as much of
Heraclitus, because he continually wept, and Laertius of Menedemus Lampsacus,
because he ran about like a mad man. Sub Furiae larva circumiuit vrbem,
dictitans se exploratorem ab inferis venisse delaturum daemonibus mortalium
peccata.
saying he came from hell as a spy, to tell the devils what mortal men did.
Your great students are commonly no better, silly fellows in their ^utward
behavior, ridiculous to others, and no whit experienced in worldly businesses.
Novi meis diebus, plerosque studiis literarum deditos, qui disciplinis admodum
abundabant, sed hi nihil civilitatis habebant, ne^ rempubl. nec domesticam
regere norant. Stupuit Paglarensis and furti villicum accusavit, qui suem
faetam vndecem porcellos, asinam vnum duntaxat pullum enixam retulerat.
I knew in my time many Scholars, says Aenaeas Sylvius, (in an Epistle of his
to Gaspar Sciticke, Chancellor to the Emperor) excellent well learned, but so
rude, so silly, that they had no common civility, nor knew not how to manage
their domesticke or public affairs. Paglarensis was amassed, and said his
farmer had surely cosened him, when he heard him tell that his sow had eleven
pigs, and his Ass but one foul.

And for this reason, because they are commonly subject to such hazards and
inconveniences, as dotage, madness, simplicity etc. Io. Voschius would have
good Scholars to be highly rewarded, and had in some extraordinary respect
above other men, and to have greater Inre privile giandi qui ob commune bonum
abbreviant sibi vitam.
privileges then the rest, that adventure themselves, and abbreviate their
lives for the public good. But our patrons of learning are so far
now-a-dayes, from respecting the Muses, and giving that honor to Scholars,
and reward which they deserve, and are allowed by these indulgent privileges
of many noble Princes, that after all their pains taken in the Universities,
cost and charge, expenses, irksome hours, laborious taskes, and wearisome
days,, dangers, hazards, barred interim from all pleasures, which other men
have, mewed up like hawks all their lives, if they chance to wade through
them, they shall in the end be rejected and contemned, and which is their
greatest misery, driven to their shifts, exposed to want, poverty and beggary.

If there were nothing else to trouble them, the conceit of this alone we^e
enough to make them all melancholy. All other trades and professions after some
seven years prenticeship, are enabled by their trade to live of themselves. A
merchant adventures his goods at Sea, and though his hazard be great, yet if
one ship return of four, he makes a saving voyage. An husband-mans gains are
certain, only Scholars me thinks are uncertain, unrespected, subject to
all casualties, and haz^rds. For first not one of a many proves to be a
Scholar, all are not capable and docile, Quotannis fiunt consules and
proconsules. Rex and Poeta quotannis non nascitur. Sigismund the Emperor could
make a knight as he said, but neither he nor all the Emperors in the world can
make a good Scholar.
ex omni ligno non fit Mercurius: howsoever they may be willing to take pains,
and to that end sufficiently informed, and liberally maintained by their
Parents: or if they be, yet all men's wills are not answerable to their wits,
they can apprehend, but will not take pains; they are either seduced by bad
companions, vel in puellam impingunt, vel in poculum, and so spend their times
to their friends grief, and their own vndoings. Or put case they be studious,
industrious, of ripe wits, and happily good capacities, then how many diseases
of body and mind must they endure? no labor in the world like unto study. It
may be, their temperature will not endure it, but in striving to be excellent,
to know all, they loose health, wealth, wit, life and all. Let him yet happily
escape all these hazards, and is now consummate and ripe, he has profited in
his studies, and proceeded with all applause, after many expenses, he is now
fit for preferment, where shall he have it? he is as far to seek as he was
(after twenty years standing) at the first day of his coming to the
University. For what course shall he take, being now capable and ready? The
most parable and easy, and about which most are employed, is to teach a
school, turn Lecturer or Curat, and for that he shall have falconers wages,
10 per annum, and his diet, or some small stipend, so long as he can please his
Patron or the Parish; if they like him not, as usually they do not above a
year or two, serving-man like, he must go look a new Master: if they do,
what is his reward? Her. ep. 10. l. ^.
Hoc quoque te manet vt pueros elementa docentem
Occupet extremis in vicis alba senectus.
his labor for his pains, to keep him alive till he be old, and that is all.
If he be a trencher Chaplin in a Gentleman's house, as it befell Satyricon.
Euphormio, after some years service, he may perchance have a living to the
halfes, or some small Rectory with a cracked chamber-maide, to have and to hold
during the time of his life. If he bend his forces to some other studies, with
an intent to be a secretis to some nobleman, or in such a place under an
Ambassador, he shall find that such men rise like Prentices one under another,
as so many trades; when the Master is dead, the forman of the shop commonly
steps in his place. Now for Poets, Rhetoritians, Historians, Philosophers, As
colit astra.
Mathematitians, Sophisters etc. they are like grasshoppers, sing they must in
Summer, and pine in the Winter, for there is no preferme^t for them. And so
they were at first, if you will believe that pleasant tale of Socrates, which
he told fair Phaedrus under a Plane-tree, at the banks of Imenus; about noon
when it was hot, and the grasshoppers made a noise, he took that sweet
occasion to tell him a tale, how grasshoppers were once Scholars, Musicians,
Poets etc. before the Muses were borne, and lived without meat and drink, and
for that cause were turned by Jupiter into grasshoppers. And may be turned
again, for any reward I see they are like to have; or else in the mean time, I
would they could live like them without meat and drink, like so many
Aldouerandus de Avibus l. 12. Gesner. etc.
Manucodiatae those Indian birds, I mean that live with the air and dew of
heaven, and need no other food: for being as they are, many of them for want of
means are driven to hard shifts, from grasshoppers they turn humblebees and
wasps, ad filthily and basely prostitute themselves, and the Muses, to satisfy
their hunger-starued panches, and get a meals meat. And it is the common
fortune of most Scholars, to be servile and poor, and as so many fiddlers, to
serve great men's turns for a small reward, they are Or as horses know not
their strength, they consider not their own worth.
like Indians, they have store of gold, but know not the worth of it, they
undervalue themselves, and so by those great men are kept down. Let them have
all that Encyclopaedian, all the learning in the world, they must keep it to
themselves, Inter inertes and Plebeios fere iacet vltimum locum habens, nisi
tot artis, virtutisque insignia, turpiter, obnoxie supparisitando fascibus
subiecerit proteruae insolentisque potentiae. Lib. 1. de contempt. rerum
fortuitarum.
and live in base esteem, and starve, except they will submit, as Budaeus well
has it, so many good parts,, so many ensigns of Arts, virtues, and be
slauishly obnoxious to some illiterat potentate, and live under his insolent
worship, or his honor, like a parasite. For to say truth, arts hae non sunt
Lucratiua, as Guido Bonat that Astrologer could foresee, they be not gainful
Arts. Dat Galenus opes, dat Iustinianus honores,
Sed genus and species cogitur ire pedes.
The rich Physician, honored Lawyers ride,
Whilst the poor Scholar foots it by their side.
Poverty is the Muses Patrimony, and as that Poetical divinity teaches us,
when Jupiters daughters were all married to Gods, the Muses alone were left
solitary, Helicon forsaken of all suitors, and I believe it was, because they
had no portion, and ever since, all their followers are poor, and left unto
themselves. In so much, that as In Satyricon. Intrat senex, sed cultu non ita
speciosus, vt facile appareret eum hac nota literatu^ esse, quos divites odisse
solent. Ego inquit, Poetasum, Quare ergo tam male vastitus es? Propter hoc
ipsu^, amor ingenii neminem vnquam divitem fecit.
Petronius argues, you shall likely know them by their clothes: There came
says he, by chance into my company, a fellow not very spruce to look on, that
I could perceive by that note alone he was a Scholar, whom commonly rich men
hate, I asked him what he was, he answered, a Poet; I demanded again why he
was so ragged, and he told me this kind of learning never made any man rich.
Petronius Arbiter.
Qui Pelago credit magno se faenore tollit,
Qui pugnas and rostra petit, praecingitur auro:
Vilis adulator picto iacet ebrius aestro,
Sola pruinosis horret facundia pannis.
A Merchants gain is great that goes to Sea,
A Soldier embossed all in gold:
A Flatterer lies fox'd in brave array,
A Scholar only ragged to behold.
All which our ordinary students, right well perceiving in our Universities,
how unprofitable these Poetical, Mathematical, and Philosophical studies
are, how little respected, how few patrons, apply themselves in all haste to
those three commodious professions, of Law, Physic, and Divinity, Oppressus
paupertate animus nihil eximium aut sublime cogitare potest, amoenitates
literaru^, aut elegantias, quoniam nihil praesidii in his ad vitae commodum
videt primo negligere, mox od sse incipit. Hens.
rejecting the Arts in the mean time, or lightly passing of them over, as
pleasant toys, fitting only table-talke, and to furnish them with discourse.
And this was the common practice of Poland, as Cromerus observed not long
since, in the first book of his History, their Universities were generally
base, not a Philosopher, a Mathematitian, an Antiquary etc. to be found of any
note amongst them, because they had no set reward or stipend, but every man
betook himself to Divinity, hoc solum in votis habens opimum sacerdotium, a
good Personage was their aim. Even so is it with us, to get an office in some
Bishops court, to practice in some good Town, or a Benefice is the mark we
shoot at, as being only advantageous, the highway to preferment.

Although many times, for ought I can see, these men fail as often as the rest
in their proiects, and are as usually frustrated of their hopes. For let him be
a Doctor of the Law, an excellent Civilian of good worth, where shall he
practice and expatiate? their fields are so scant, and the Civil Law with us
so contracted with prohibitions, so few causes, by reason of those
all-devouring municipall Laws, quibus nihil illiteratius, says Epist.
Erasmus, an illiterate and a barbarous study, (for though they be never so
well learned in it, I can hardly vouchsafe them the name of Scholars, except
they be otherwise qualified) and so few courts are left to that profession, so
few offices, and those commonly to be compassed at such rates, that I know not
how an ingenious man shall thrive amongst them. Now for Physicians, there are
in every Village so many Mountibanks, Empiricks, Quacsalvers, Paracelsians as
they call themselves, Wisards, Alcumists, poor Vicars, cast Apothecaries and
Physicians men, Barbers, and Goodwiues that profess great skill, that I know
not how they shall maintain themselves, or who shall be their Patients.
Besides, there are so many of both sorts, and some of them such Harpies, and so
covetous, so clamorous, and so impudent; as Io. D^usa Epiden lib. 2. car. 2.
he said, litigious Idiots. Quibus loquacis affatim arrogantiae est,
Peritiae parum aut nihil,
Nec vlla mica literarij salis,
Crumeni-mulga natio:
Loquutelia turba, litium strophae.
Maligna litigantium cohors, togati vultures
Lavernae alumni. Agyrtae etc.
Which have no skill, but prating arrogance,
No learning, such a purse-milking nation:
Gown'd vultures, thieves, and a litigious rout
Of coseners, that haunt this occupation.
that they cannot well tell how to live by one another, but as he said of
clocks, they were so many, Plantia.
mayor pars populi arida reptant fame: they are almst starued many of them, and
ready to devour one another, so many Pettifoggers and Empericks; such
imposters, that an honest man cannot well tell how to compose and carry himself
in such a society, to live with credit amongst them.

Last of all to come to our Divines, the most worthy profession, and worthy of
double honor, but of all others most distressed and miserable. If you will not
believe me hear a brief of it, as it was not many years since, publicly
preached at Paul's cross, Io. Howson 4o Novembris 1597. the sermon was printed
by Arnold Hartfield.
by a grave Minister then, and now reverend Bishop of this land. We that are
bred up in Learning, and destinated by our Parents to this end, we suffer our
childhood in the Grammar school, which Austin calls magnam tyrannidem, and
grave malum, and compares it to the torments of martyrdom, when we come to the
University, if we live of the College allowance, as Phalaris objected to the
Leontines, (...), needy of all things but hunger and fear; or if we be
maintained but partly by our Parents cost, do expend in unnecessary
maintenance, books and degrees, before we come to any perfection, five hundredth
pounds, or a thousand marks. If by this price of the expense of our time, our
bodies and spirits, our substance and patrimonies, we cannot purchase those
small rewards, which are ours by Law, and the right of inheritance, a poor
Personage, or a Vicarage of 50 per annum, but we must pay to the Patron for the
lease of a life (a spent and outworne life) either in annual pension, or above
the rate of a copy hold, and that with the hazard and loss of our souls, by
Simony and perjury, and the forfeiture of all our spiritual preferments, in
esse and posse, both present and to come, what father after a while will be so
improvident, to bring up his son to his great charge, to this necessary
beggary? What Christian will be so irreligious, to bring up his son in that
course of life, which by all probability and necessity, cogit ad turpia,
enforcing to sin, will entangle him in simony and perjury! when as the Poet
says, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de ponte negabit: a beggars brat taken from
the bridge where he sits a-begging, if he knew the inconvenience, had cause to
refuse it. This being thus, have not we fished fair all this while, that are
initiated divines, to find no better fruits of our labors, Per. Sat. 3.
hoc est cur palles, cur quis non prandeat hoc est? do we macerate our selves
for this? If this be all the respect, reward, and honor we shall have, Mart.
frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos: let us give over our books,
and betake our selves to some other course of life? to what end should we
study? Mart.
quid me literulas stulti docuere parents: what did our parents mean to make
us Scholars, to be as far to seek for preferment after twenty years study, as
we were at first: why do we take such pains? quid tantum insanis invat
impallescere chartis? if there be no more hope of reward, no better
encouragement. I say again, Frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos;
let us turn soldiers, tear our books, or turn them into gunnes and pikes,
leave all, and betake our selves to any other course of life, then to continue
longer in this misery.

Yea but me thinks I hear some man except at this which I have said, that
though this be true which is said of the estate of Scholars, and especially of
divines, that it is miserable and distressed at this time, and that the Church
suffers shipwreck of her goods, and that they have just cause to complain;
there is a fault, but whence ptoceeds it? if the cause were justly examined, it
would be retorted upon our selves, if we were cited at that Tribunal of
Truth, we should be found guilty, and not able to excuse it. That there is a
fault amongst us, I confess, and were there not a buyer, there would not be a
seller, but to him that will consider better of it, it will more then
manifestly appear, Lib. 3. de cons.
that the fountain of these miseries proceeds from these griping Patrons. In
accusing them, I do not altogether excuse us, both are faulty, they and we:
yet in my judgment, theirs is the greater fault, more apparent causes, and more
to be condemned. For my part, if it be not with me as I would, or as it should,
I do ascribe the cause as Cardan did in the like case, meo infortunio potius
quam illorum sceleri, to I had no money, I wanted impudence, I could not
scamble, temporise, dissemble: non pranderet olus etc.
mine own infelicity, rather then their naughtiness: Although I have bin
bafled in my time by some of them, and have as just cause to complain as
another. For the rest it is on both sides, facinus detestandum, to buy and sell
livings, to detain from the Church that which Gods and men's Laws have
bestowed on it, but in them most, and that from the covetousness and ignorance
of such as are interrested in this business, I name covetousness in the first
place, as the root of all these mischiefs, which Achan-like compels them to
commit sacrilege, and to make Simoniacal compacts, and what not to their own
ends, Deum habent iratum, sibique mortem aeterna^ acquirunt, alijs miserabilem
ruinam. Serrarius in Josua 7.
and that kindles Gods wrath, brings a plague, vengeance, and an heavy
visitation upon themselves, and others. Some out of that insatiable desire of
filthy lucre, to enrich themselves, care not how they come by it, per fas and
nefas, hook or crook, so they have it. And some when they have with riot and
prodigality, embezelled their estates to recover themselves, make a prey of the
Church, robbing it, Nicephorus l. 10. cap. 5.
as Julian the Apostate did, spoil Persons of their revenewes (in keeping
half back ( Lord Cook in his Reports second part. fol. 44.
as a great man amongst us observes:) and that maintenance on which they should
live: by means of which Barbarism is increased, and a great decay of
Christian professors; for who will apply himself to these divine studies, or
his son or friend, when after great pains taken, they shall have nothing
whereupon to live? But with what event do they these things? they are commonly
unfortunate families that use it, accursed in their progeny, and as common
experieuce evinceth, accursed themselves in all their proceedings. With what
face as Sr Henry Spelman. de non temerandis Ecclesus.
he quotes out of Austin, can they expect a blessing or an inheritance from
Christ in Heaven, that defraud Christ of his inheritance here on earth. I would
all our Symoniacal Patrons, and such as detain Tithes, would read that
judicious Tract of Sr Henry Spelman and Sr James Sempill Knights, which they
have written of that subject. But though they should read, it would be to small
purpose, clames licet and mare coelo confundas, thunder and preach hell and
damnation, tell them it is a sin, they will not believe it, denounce and terrify
them, they have 1 Timothy 4.^.
cauterised consciences, they do not attend, as the enchanted adder, they stop
their ears. Call them base, irreligious, profane, barbarous, and Pagans,
Atheists, Epicures, as some of them surely are, with that baud in Plautus,
Euge, they cry and applaud themselves, with that Miser, simulac nummos
contemplor in arca: say what you will, quocunque modo rem. Take you Heaven, let
them take money. Hor.
A base, profane, Epicurean, hypocritical rowt; for my part, let them pretend
what zeal they will, counterfeit Religion, and bleare the worlds eyes, bumbast
themselves, and stuff out their greatness with Church spoils, shine like so
many Peacocks, so cold is my charity, so defective in this behalf, that I
shall never think berter of them, then that they are rotten at core, their
bones are full of Epicurean hypocrisy, and Atheistical marrow, that they are
worse rhen Heathens. For as Dionysius Halicarnasseus observes antiq. Tom. 1. de
steril. trium annoru^ sub Elia sermon.
Romans lib. 7. Primum locum apud omnes gentes habet patritius deorum cultus, and
geniorum, nam hunc diutissime custodiunt, tam Graeci, quam Barbari etc.
primum locum etc. Greeks and Barbarians observe all religious rites, and dare
not break them for fear of offending their gods; but our Simoniacal
contracters, our senceles Achans, our stupefied Patrons, fear neither God nor
devil, they have evasions for it, it is no sin, or not due iure divino, or if
a sin, no such great sin etc. And though they be daily punished for it, yet as
Chrysostom follows it, nulla ex poena fit correctio, and quasi adversis
malitia hominum provocetur, crescit quotidie quod puniatur: they are rather
worse then better, and the more they are corrected, the more they offend: but
let them take their course, Ovid. Fast.
Rode caper vites, go on still as they begin, it is no sin, let them rejoice
secure, Gods vengeance will overtake them in the end, and these ill-gotten
goods, as an Eagles feathers, De male quaesit^s vix gaudet tertius haeres.
will consume the rest of their substance. It is Strabo lib 4. Geog.
aurum Tholosanum, and will produce no better effects. Nihil facilius opes
evertit, qua^ avaritia and fraud parta. Etsi enim seram addas tali arcae and
exteriore ianua, and vecte eam communias, intus tamen fraudem and avaritiam.
etc. In 5. Corinth.
Let them lay it up safe, and make their conveyances never so close, lock and
shut door says Chrysostom, yet fraud and covetousnes, two most violent
thieves, are still included, and a little gain evil gotten, will subvert the
rest of their goods. The Eagle in Aesope, seeing a piece of flesh now ready to
be sacrificed, swept it away with her claws, and carried it to her nest, but
there was a burning coal stuck to it by chance, which unawares consumed her,
young ones, nest and all together. Let our Simoniacall church-chopping Patrons,
and sacrilegious Harpyes, look for no better success.

A second cause is Ignorance, and from thence contempt, successit odium in
literas ab ignorantia vulgi, which Acad. cap. 7.
Iunius well perceived; this hatred and contempt of Learning proceeds out of
Ars neminem habet inimicum praeter ignorantem.
Ignorance, as they are themselves barbarous, idiots, and dull, illiterate and
proud, so they esteem of others: Sint Mecoenates, non deerunt Flaece Marones;
let there be bountiful Patrons, and there will be painful Scholars in all
Sciences. But when they contemn Learning, and think themselves sufficiently
qualified, if they can write and read, or scamble at a piece of Evidence, or
have so much Latin as that Emperor had, He that cannot dissemble, cannot live.
qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere, they are unfit to do their country
service, or to perform or undertake any action or employment, which may tend
to the good of a Commonwealth, except it be to fight, or to do country
Justice, with common sense, which every thresher can likewise do. And so they
bring up their children, rude as they are themselves, untaught, uncivil most
part. Shall these men Judge of a Scholars worth; that have no worth
themselves, that know not what belongs to a Students labors, that cannot
distinguish betwixt a true Scholar, and a drone? or him that by reason of a
voluble tongue, and some triuantly helps, steals and gleanes a few notes from
other men's haruests, and so makes a fair show, and him that is truly learned
indeed: that thinks it no more to preach, then to speak, and no more Dr King,
in his last Lecture on Jonas, now the right Reverend L. Bishop of London.
then to run away with an empty cart, as one said, and thereupon vilify us, and
our pains, and scorn us, and al Learning. Quibus opes and otium, hibarbaro
fastu literas contem^unt.
Because they are rich, and have other means to live, they think it concerns
them not to know; or to trouble themselves with it, a fitter task for younger
brothers, and poor men's sons, and no whit beseeming the calling of a
Gentleman. In former times kings Princes, and Emperors were the only
Scholars, excellent in all faculties: Julius Caesar mended the year, and writ
his own comme^taries, Spartian. solliciti de rebus aimis.
Antoninus, Adrian, Nero, Severus, Julian etc. Nicet. 1. Anal. fumis
lucubrationum sordeba^t.
Michael the Emperor, and Isacius, were so much given to their studies, that
no base fellow would take so much pains. Orion, Perseus, Alphonsus, Ptolomeus,
famous Astronomers: Sabor, Mithridates, Lysimachus admired Physicians: Plato'es
kings all. Euax that Arabian Prince, a most expert Iueller, and an exquisit
Philosopher: The Kings of Egypt were Priests of old, and chosen from thence,
Idem rex hominum, Phoebique sacerdos: but those heroical times are past, the
Muses are now banished in this bastard age, ad fordid^ tuguriola, to meaner
persons, confined alone to Universities. In those days, Scholars were highly
beloved, Grammaticis olim and Dialecticis, Iurisque Professoribus, qui specimen
eruditionis dedissent, eadem dignitatis insignia decreverunt imperatores,
quibus ornabant heroes. Erasm ep. 10. ^abio ^epsic. Vien. Hiensius praefat.
poematum.
honored, esteemed, as Virgil by Augustus, Horace by Mecoenas, Princes
companions, and highly rewarded. And it was fit it should be so, d quoniam illis
nihil deest, and minime egere solent, and disciplinas quas profitentur, soli a
contemptu vindicare possunt, they needed not to beg so basely, as they compel
Servile nomen Scholaris iam.
Scholars in our times to complain of poverty, or crouch to a base chuffe for
a meals meat, but could vindicat themselves, and those Arts which they
professed. Now they would, and cannot; Hand facile emergunt etc.
some want means, others will, all want Media quod noctis ab hora sedisti, qua
nemo faber, qua nemo sedebat, qui docet obliquo lan^ deducere ferro. rara tamen
merces Iuven. Sat. 7.
encouragement, as being forsaken almost and generally contemned. How dear of
old, and how much respected was Plato of Dionysius? how dear to Alexander was
Aristotle? Plutarch to Traian? Seneca to Nero? Simonides to Hieron how much
respected? Catullus. Iuven.
Sed haec prius fuere, nunc recondita senent quiet, those times are gone. Et
spes and ratio studiorum in Caesare tantum: as he said of old, we may truly say
now, he is our Amulet, our Nemo est quem non Phoebus hic noster, solo intuitu
lubentiorem reddat.
Sun, our sole comfort and refuge, our Ptolomy, our common Mecoenas, Iacobus
munificus, Iacobus pacificus, mysta Musarum, Rex Platonicus: Grande decus
columenque nostrum: A famous Scholar himself, and the sole Patron, Pillar,
and sustainer of Learning. Let me not be malicious and lie against my Genius,
I may not deny but that we have a sprinkling of our Gentry, here and there
one, excellently well learned, Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto: but they
are but few in respect of the multitude, the major part (and some again
excepted, that are indifferent) are wholly bent for hawks and hounds, and
carried away many times with intemperat lust, gaming, and drinking. If they
read on a book at any time, it is an English Chronicle, Sr Huon of Bordeaux,
Amadis de Gaul etc. a play-book, or some pamphlet of News, and that at such
times only, when they cannot stir abroad, to drive away time, Rarus enim ferme
sensus communis in illa Fortuna Iuven. Sat 8.

Quis enim generosum dixerit hunc qui, Indignus genere and praeclaro nomine
tantum Insignis. Iuv. Sat. 8.


their sole discourse is dogs, hawks and horses, and what news? If some one
have bin a travailer in Italy, or as far as the Emperors Court, wintered in
Orleance, and can court his Mistress in broken French, he is complete, and to be
admired. l Otherwise he and they are much at one, no difference betwixt the
Master and the man, but worshipful titles: wink and choose betwixt him that
sits down, (clothes excepted) and him that holds the Trencher behind him: yet
these men must be our Patrons, and wise by inheritance. Mistake me not Vos o
patritius sanguis, you that are worthy Gentlemen, I honor your names and
Persons, and with all submissenes prostrate my self to your censure and service.

There are amongst you I do ingeniously confess, many well deserving Patrons,
and true patriots of my knowledge, besides many hundreths which I never saw, no
doubt, or heard of, Pillars of our commonwealth, I have often met with myself,
and conferred with diverse worthy Gentlemen in the Country, no whit inferior,
if not to be preferred for diverse kind of learning to many of our Academicks.
whose worth, bounty, learning, forwardnes, and true zeal in religion, and
good esteem of all Scholars, ought to be consecrated to all posterity: but of
your rank there are a deboshed, corrupt, covetous, illiterat crew again, a
profane pernicious company, irreligious, impudent and stupid, I know not what
Epithets to give them, enemies to Learning, confou^ders of the Church, and the
ruin of a Commonwealth. Patrons they are by right of inheritance, and put in
trust to dispose such livings to the Churches good; but they commonly respect
their own ends, commodity is the steer of all their actions, and him they
present in conclusion, that will give most; no penny, Ipse licet Musisvenias
comitatus Homere, Nil tamen attuleris Ibis Homeref^ras.
no pater noster, as the saying is. A Clark may offer himself, and prove his Et
legate historicos, authors noverit omnes tanquam vngues digitosque suos. Juv.
Sat. 7.
worth, learning, honesty, religion, zeal, and they will commend him for it;
and if he be a man of extraordinary parts, they will flock afar off, to hear
him as they did in Apuleius; to see Psyche: multi mortales confluebant ad
videndum saeculi decus, speculum gloriosum: laudatur ab omnibus, spectatur ab
omnibus, nec quisquam non rex non regius, cupidus eius nuptiarum petitor
accedit, mirantur quidem divinam formam omnes, sed vt simulachrum fabre politum
mirantur; many mortal men came to see fair Psyche the glory of her age, they
did admire her, commend, and desire her for her divine beauty, and gaze upon
her; but as on a picture, none would marry her, quod indotata, fair Psyche had
no money. Tu vero licet Orpheus sis saxa sono testudinis emolliens, nisi
plumbea eorum corda, auri vel argenti malleo emollias etc. Salisburiensis
Policrat. lib. 5. ca. 10.
So they do by learning. -- didicit iam dives avarus
Juvenal. Sat. 7.
Tantum admirari tantum laudare disertos
Vt pueri Iunonis avem. --
Your rich men have now learned of later days
T'admire, commend, and come together
To hear and see a worthy Scholar speak
As children do a Peacocks feather.
He shall have all the good words that may be given, Euge been: no need. Dousa.
epod. lib. 2. -- dosipsae scientia, sibique congiarum est.
a proper man and it is pity he has no preferment, all good wishes, but he
will not prefer him though it be in his power, because he is indotatus, he
has no money. Or if he do give him entertainment, let him be never so well
qualified, or plead affinity, consanguinity, sufficiency, he shall serve 7
years as Jacob did for Rachel before he shall have it. Quatuor ad portas
Ecclesias itur ad omnes sanguinis aut Simonis, praesulis atque Dei. Holcot.
If he will enter at first, he must come in at that Simoniacall gate, come off
soundly, and put in good security to perform all covenants, or else he will
not deal with him or admit him. But if some poor scholar, or some person
chafe will come and offer himself, or some trencher Chaplain, that will take
it to the halfes, thirds, or accept of what he will give him, he is welcome,
and be conformable, and preach as he will have him, he likes him: and then as
Hierome said to Cromatius, patella dignum operculum, such a Patron, such a
Clearke, the cure is supplied, and all parties pleased. And so that is still
verified in our age which Lib. contra Gentiles de Babila martyr.
Chrysostom complained of in his time, Qui epulentiores sunt in ordinem
parasitorum cogunt eos, and ipsos ta^quam canes ad mensas suas enutriunt,
eorumque impudentes Ventres iniquarum canarum reliquijs differtiunt, ijsdem pro
arbitrio abutentes. Rich men keep these Lecturers and fawning Parasites like
so many Dogs at their tables, and filling their hungry guts with the offauls
of their meat, they abuse them at their pleasure, and make them say what they
please. Praescribunt imperant in ordinem cogunt ingenium nostrum prout ipsis
videbitur astriugunt and relaxant vt papilionem pueri aut bruchum filo
demittunt, aut attrahunt, nos a libidine sua pendere aquum ce^sentes. Heinsius.
As children do by a bird or butterfly in a string, pull him and let him out
as they lift: do they by their trencher Chaplins, prescribe, command their
wits, and let in and out, as to them it seems best. If the Patron be precise,
so must his Chaplain be, or if he be Papisticall, he must be so too, or else
be turned out. And these are those Clearkes which serve the turn, and whom
they commonly entertain, and present to Church livings, whilst in the mean
time we that are University men, like so many hide-bound Calves in a pasture,
tarry out our time, and wither away as a flower ungathered in a garden, and
never used: or as so many candles illuminate our selves alone, obscuring one
another light, and are not discerned here at all, the least of which
translated to some dark room, or to some country benefice, where it might
shine apart, would give a fair light, and be seen over all. whilst we lie
waiting here as they did at the poole of Siloa, till the Angel stirred the
water, expecting a good hour, they step between and beguile us of our
preferment. I have not yet said. If after long expectation and much and earnest
fuit of our selves and friends, we obtain a small benefice at last: our misery
begins a fresh, we light upon a cracked title, or stand in fear of some
precedent Lapse, or some litigious people, that will not pay their dues without
much repining, or compelled by long suit; all they think well gotten that is
had from the Church, and by such uncivil, harsh dealings, they make their
poor Minister a weary of his place, if not of his life: and put case they be
quiet honest men, make the best of it, as often it falls out, he must turn
rusticke, and daily converse with a company of Idiots and Clownes.

Nos interim quod attinet (nec enim immunes ab hac noxa sumus) idem reatus
manet, idem nobis and si non multo gravius crimen objici potest: nostra enim
culpa fit, nostra incuria, nostra avaritia, quod tam frequentes foedaeque fiant
in Ecclesia nundinationes, tot sordes invehantur, tanta grassetur impietas,
tanta nequitia, tam insanus miseriarum Euripus, and turbarum aestuarium, nost^o
inquam omnium (Academicorum imprimis) vitio fit. Quod tot Respub. malis
afficiatur, a nobis seminarium, vltro malum hoc accersimus, and quavis
contumelia, quavis interim miseria digni, qui pro virili non occurrimus. Quid
enim fieri posse speremus, quum tot indies sine delectu pauperes alumni, terrae
filij, and cujuscunque ordinis homunciones, ad gradus certatim admittantur? qui
si definitionem distinctionemque vnam aut alteram memoriter edidiscerint, and
pro more tot annos in dialectica posuerint, non refert quo profectu, quales
demum sint, Idiotae, nugatores, otiatores, aleatores, compotores, indigni,
libidinis voluptatumq: administri, Sponsi Penelopes, nebulones, Alcinoique,
modo tot annos in Academia insumpserint, and se pro togatis vendicarint; lucri
causa, and amicorum intercessu praesentantur: Addo etiam and magnificis
nonnunquam elogijs morum and scientiae, and jam valedicturi testimonialibus
bisce literis, amplissime conscriptis in little gratiam honorantur, ab ijs, qui
fidei suae and existimationis jacturam proculdubio faciunt. Doctores enim and
Professores (quod ait Iun. Acad. c. 6
ille) id vnum curant, vt ex professionibus frequentibus, and tumultuarijs
potius quam legitimis, commoda sua promoueant, and ex dispendio publico suum
faciant incrementum. Id solum in votis habent annui plerumque magistratus, vt
ab incipientium numero Accipiamus pecuniam demittamus asinum vt apud Patavinos
Italos.
pecunias emungant, nec multum interest qui sint, literatores an literati, modo
pingues, nitidi, ad aspectum speciosi, and quod verbo dicam, pecuniosi sint.
Hos non ita pridem perstrinxim is in Philosophastro Comedia latina, in Aede
Christi Oxon. public habita Anne 1617. Feb. 16^0.
Philosophastri licentiantur in artibus artem qui non habent. Theologastri
(soluant modo) satis superque docti, per omnes honorum gradus evehuntur and
ascendunt. Atque hinc fit quod tam viles scurrae, tot passim Idiotae, larvae
pastorum, circumforanei, vagi, bardi, fungi, crassi, asini, merum pecus in
sacrosanctos Theologiae aditus illotis pedibus irrumpant, praeter inuerecundum
frontem adferentes nihil, vulgares quasdam quisquilias, and scholarium quaedam
nugamenta, indigna quae vel recipiantur in trivijs. Hoc illad indignum genus
hominum and famelicum, indigum, vagum, ventris mancipium, quod divinas hasce
literas turpiter prostituit, hi sunt qui pulpita complent, and in aedes
nobilium irrepunt, and quum reliquis vitae destituantur subsidijs ob corporis
and animi egestatem, aliarum in repub: partium minime capaces sint, ad sacram
hanc anchoram confugiunt, sacerdotium quovisinodo captantes, non ex sinceritate
quod 2. Cor. 7.17.
Paulus alt sed cauponantes verbum Dei. Ne quis interim vitis bonis detractum
quid putet, quos habet Ecclesia Anglicana quamplurimos, egregie doctos,
illustres, intactae famae vi^os, and plures forsan quam quaevis Europae
provincia; ne quis a florentissimis Academijs, quae viros vndiquaque
doctissimos, omni virtutum genere suspiciendos abunde producit. Et multo plures
vtraque habitura, multo splendidior futura, si non hae sordes splendidum lumen
ejus obfuscarent, obstaret corruption, and cauponantes quaedam Harpyae,
proletarijque bonum hoc nobis non inviderent. Nemo enim tam caeca mente qui non
hoc ipsum videat, nemo tam solido ingenio qui non i^telligat, tam pertinaci
iudicio qui non agnoscat, ab his Idiotis, circumforaneis, sacram pollui
Theologiam, ac caelestes musas quasi prophanum quiddam prostitui. Viles animae
and effrontes (sic enim Lutherus Comment. in Gal.
alicubi vocat) lucelli causa vt musca ad mulctra, ad nobilium and heroum
mensas advolint, in spem sacerdotij, cuiuslibet honoris, officij, in quamvis
aulam, vrbem se ingerunt, ad quodvis se ministerium componunt. -- vt nervis
alienis mobile lignum -- ducitur -- Hensius.
offam sequentes psittacorum more, in praeda spem quidvis effutiunt;
obsecundantes Parasitae ( Ecclesiast.
Erasmus ait) quidvis docent, dicunt, scribunt, suadent, and contra
conscientiam probant, non vt salutarem reddant gregem, sed vt magnificam sibi
parent fortunam. Opiniones quasvis and docreta contra verbum De^ astruunt, ne
non offendant patronum, sed vt retineant fauorem procerum, and populi plausum,
sibique ipsis opes accumulent. Eo etenim plerumque animo ad Theologiam
accedunt, non vt rem divinam, sed vt suam faciant, non ad Ecclesiae bonum
promovendum, sed expilandum, quaerentes quod Paulus ait, Non quae Jesus Christi
sed quae sua, non domini thesaurum, sed vt sibi suisque thesaurisent. Nec
tantum ijs qui vilioris fortunae and abiectae sortis sunt, hoc in vsu est: sed
and medios, su^mos, elatos, ne dicam episcopos hoc malum invasit. Pers. Sat. 2.
Dicite pontifices in sacris quid facit aurum? Salust. ^^
summos saepe viros transversos agit avaritia, and qui reliquis morum probitate
praelucerent, hi facem praeserunt ad simoniam, and in corruptionis hunc
scopulum impingentes, non todent pecus sed deglubunt, and quocunque se
conserunt, expilant, exhauriunt, abradunt, magnum famae suae, si non animae
naufragium facientes: vt non ab infimis ad summos, sed a summis ad infimos
malum promanasse videatur, and illud verum sit quod ille olim lusit, Emerat
ille prius, vendere iure potest. Simoniacus enim (quod cum Leone dicam) gratiam
non accipit, si non accipit, non habet, and si non habet, nec gratus potest
esse, nec gratis dare. Vtcunque vel vndecunque malum hoc originem ducat, non
vltro quaeram, ex his primordijs caepit vitiorum colluuies, omnis calamitas,
omne miseriarum agmen in Ecclesiam invehitur. Hinc tam frequens simonia, hinc
ortae querelae, frauds, imposturae, ab hoc font se derivarunt omnes
nequitiae. Ne quid obiter dicam de ambitione, Adulatione plusquam aulica, etc.
Hinc ille squalor Academicus, tristes hac tempestate Camenae, quum quivis
homunculus artium ignarus, his artibus assurgat, hunc in modum promoveatur and
diteseat, ambitiosis appellationibus insignis, and multis dignitatibus augustus
vulgi oculos perstringat, been se habeat, and grandia gradiens maiestatem
quandam ac amplitudinem prae se serens, miramque sollicitudinem, barba
reverendus, toga nitidus purpura coruscus, and famulorum numero maxim
conspicuus. Quales statuae (quod ait Budeus de Ass lib. 5.
ille) quae sacris in aedibus co-^lumnis imponuntur, velut oneri cedentes
videntur, acsi insudarent, quum revera sensu sint carentes, and nihil saxeam
adiuvent firmitatem: Atlantes h videri volunt, quum sint statuae lapideae,
fungi forsan and bardi, nihil a saxo differentes. Quum interim docti viri and
vitae sanctioris ornamentis praediti, his iniqua sort serviant, puris
nominibus nuncupati, humiles, obscuri, multoque digniores licet, egentes,
inhonorati vitam privam privatam agant, tenuique sepulti sacerdotio, vel in
collegiis suis in aeternum incarcerati, inglorie delitescant. Sed nolo diutius
hanc movere sentinam, hinc illae lachrymae, lugubris musarum habitus, abjectum
(atque haec vbi siunt, ausum dicere, and putidum Campian.
putidi dicterium de clero vsurpate) Patidum vulgus, inops, rude, sordidum,
melancholicum, miserum, despicabile, contemnendum.

MEMB. 4.
SVBSEC. 1. Non-necessary, remote, outward, adventitious or accidental causes:
as first from the Nurse.
OF those remote, outward, ambient, Necessary causes I have sufficiently
discoursed in the precedent member the Non-necessary follow, of which, says
Proem. lib. 2. nulla ars constitui potest.
Fuchsius, no art can be made, by reason of their uncertainty, casualty, and
multitude; so called not necessary, because according to Lib. 1. cap. 19 de
morborum causis. Quas declinare licet aut nulla necessitate vtimur.
Fernelius they may be avoided, and used without necessity. Many of these
Accidental causes, which I shall entreat of here, might have well been
reduced to the former, because they cannot be avoided, but fatally happen to us
though accidentally, and at unawares, at some time or other: the rest are
contingent and inevitable, and more properly inserted in this rank of causes.
To reckon up all is a thing impossible, of some therefore of the most
remarkable, of these contingent causes which produce Melancholy, I will briefly
speak and in their order.

From a child's Nativity, the first ill accident that can likely befall him in
this kind is a bad Nurse, by whose means alone, he may be tainted with this
Quo semel est imbusa recens servah^t odo^em Tesia diu. Hor.
malady from his cradle. Aulus Gellius lib, 12. cap. 1. brings in Phauorinus
that eloquent Philosopher, proving this at large, Sicut valet ad fingendas
corporis atque animi similitudines vis and natura seminis, sic quoque lactis
proprietas. Neque id in hominibus solum, sed in pecudibus animadversum Nam si
ovium lacte haedi aut caprarum agni alerentur constat fieri in his lanam
duriorem in illis capillum gigni severiorem
that there is the same virtue and property in the milk as in the seed, and
not in men alone but in all other creatures: he gives instance in a Kid and
Lamb, if either of them suck of the others milk, the Lamb of the Goats, or
the Kid of the Ewes, the wool of the one will be hard, the hair of the other
soft. Giraldus Cambrensis Itinerar. Cambriae. lib. 1. cap. 2. confirms this by
a notable example which happened in his time. A sow pigge by chance sucked a
Brach, and when she was grown, Adulta in ferarum persequutione ad miraculum
vsque sagax.
would miraculously hunt all manner of Dear, and that as well or rather better
then any ordinary hound. His conclusion is, Tam animal quodlibet quam homo ab
illa cuius lacte nutritur naturam co^trabit.
that Men and Beast ^ participate of her nature and conditions, by whose milk
they are fed. Phauorinus urges it farther and demonstrats it more evedently,
that if a Nurse be Improba informis impudica tem de it^ nutiix etc. quoniamin
morib us essormandis magnun sepe partem agenium altricis and natura lactis
tenet.
misshapen, unchaste, dishonest impudent, drunk, Hircanaeque admorunt vbera
Tigres. Virg.
cruel, or the like, the child that sucks upon her breast will be so too; and
all other affections of the mind and diseases almost are ingraffed, as it were,
and imprinted into the temperature of the Infant, by the Nurses milk; as Pox,
Leprosy, Melancholy, etc. Cato for that reason would make his servants
children suck upon his wives breast, because by that means they would love
him and his the better, and in all likelihood agree with them. A more evident
example that the minds are altered by milk, cannot be given then that of Dion
which Lib. 2. le Caesaribus.
he relates of Caligulas cruelty, it could neither be imputed to father or
mother, but to his Nurse alone, that anointed her paps with blood still, which
made him such a murderer, and to express her to a hair. And that of Tiberius
who was a common drunkard, because his Nurse was such a one. Et si delira
fuerit ( Beda cap. 27. lib. 1. Eccles. hist.
one observes) infantulum deliru^ faciet, if she be a fool or dolt, her child
she nurseth will take after her, or otherwise be misaffected; Which Franciscus
Barbarus lib. 2. cap. vlt. de re vxoria, proves at full; and Ant. Guiuarra lib.
2. de Marco Aurelio. The child will surely participate. For bodily sickness
there is no doubt to be made. Titus, Vespatianus son was therefore sickly
because his Nurse was so, Lampridius. And if we may believe Physicians, many
times children catch the pox from a good Nurse. Botaldus c. 61. de lue vener.
Ne insitivo lactis alimento degeneret corpus and animus corrumpatur.
for these causes Phauorinus, and Marcus Aurelius would not have a child put to
nurse at al, but every mother to bring up her own, of what condition soever she
be. Which some women most curiously observe, and amongst the rest, Stephanus.
that Queen of France a Spaniard by birth, that was so precise and zealous in
this behalf, that when in her absence a strange Nurse by chance had suckled
her child, she was never quiet till she had made the infant vomit it up again.
But she was too jealous, if it be so, as many times it is, they must be put
forth, I would then advise such mothers as To 2. Nutrices non quasvis, sed
maxim probas deligamus.
Plutarch does in his book de liberis educandis, and Nutrix non fit lasciva
aut temulenta. Hier.
S. Hierome lib. 2. epist. 27. Laetae, de institut. fill. Magninus part. 2. Reg.
sanit. cap. 7. that they make choice of a sound woman, of a good complexion,
honest, and free from diseases, if it be possible, and all passions and
perturbations of the mind, as sorrow, fear, grief, Prohibendum ne stolida
lactet.
folly, melancholy. For such passions corrupt the milk and alter the
temperature of the child, which now being Pers.
Vdum and molle lutum, is easily seasoned and perverted. And if such a Nurse
may be found out, let Phauorinus and M. Aurelius plead how they can against it,
I had rather accept of her then the mother her self. For why may not the
mother be a whore, a peevish drunken flurt, a waspish choleric slut, a crased
piece, a fool (as many mothers are) as soon as the Nurse? There is more
choice of Nurses then Mothers; and therefore except the mother be most
virtuous, staid, and a woman of excellent good parts, and of a sound
co^plection, I would have all children in such cases committed to strangers.
And it is the only way; as by marriages they are engrafted to other families to
alter the breed, or if any thing be amiss in the mother as Lodovicus Mercatus
contends, Tom. 2 lib. de morb. haered. to prevent diseases and future maladies,
to correct and qualify the child's ill disposed temperature, which he had from
his parents. This is an excellent remedy, if good choice be made of such a
Nurse.

SVBSEC. 2. Education a cause of Melancholy.
EDucation of these accidental causes of melancholy, may justly challenge the
next place: for if a man escape a bad Nurse, he may be undone by evil bringing
up. Lib. de morbis capitis cap. de mania. haud postrema causa supputatur
educatio inter has mentis abalienationis causas. Injusta noverca.
Jason Pratensis, puts this of Education for a principal cause, bad parents,
step-mothers, Tutors, Masters, Teachers, too rigorous and too severe, or too
remiss or indulgent on the other side, are often fountains and furtherers of
this disease. Parents and such as have the tuition and oversight of children,
offend many times in that they are too stern, always threatening, chiding,
brawling, whipping, or striking; by means of which their poor children are so
disheartened and cowed that they never after have any courage, or a merry hour
in their lives, or take pleasure in any thing. There is a great moderation to
be had in such things, as matters of so great moment, to the making or marring
of a child. Some fright their children with beggars, bugbeares, and hobgoblins
if they cry, or be otherwise unruly, but they are much too blame in it, many
times says Lavater de spectris, part. 1. cap. 5. ex metu in morbos graves
incidunt, and noctu dormientes clamant, for fear they fall into many diseases,
and cry out in their sleep, and are much the worse for it all their lives:
these things ought not at all, or to be sparingly done, and upon just occasion.
Tyrannical, impatient, harebraine Schoolemasters, are in this kind as bad as
hangmen and executioners, they make many children endure a martyrdom all the
while they are at School, with bad diet, if they board in their houses, and
too much severity and ill usage, they quite pervert their temperature of body
and mind: still chiding, railing, frowning, lashing, tasking, keeping, that
they are fracti animis moped many times, and aweary of their lives, and think
no slavery in the world (as once I did my self) like to that of a grammar
Scholar. S. Austin in his first book of his confess. and 4. c. calls this
schooling meticulosam necessitatem, And elsewhere a martyrdom, and confesses
of himself, how cruelly he was tortured in mind for learning Greek, nulla
verba noveram, and saevis terroribus and paenis, vt nossem instabatur mihi
vehementer, I knew nothing and with cruel terrors and punishments I was daily
compeld. Praefat. ad Testam.
Beza complains in like case of a rigorous Schoolmaster in Paris, that made
him by his continual thundering and threats, once in a mind to drown
himself, had he not met by the way with an uncle of his that vindicated him
from that misery for the time, by taking of him to his house. Trincavellius
Lib. 1. consil. 16. had a patient 19 years of age extremely melancholy, ob
nimium studium Tarvitij and praeceptoris minas, by reason of overmuch study,
and his Tutors threats. Many masters a^e hard hearted and bitter to their
servants, and by that means do so much deiect them, and with terrible
speeches and hard usage so crucify them, that they become desperate, and can
never be recalled.

Others again in that other extreme do as much harm by their too much
remissness, their servants, children, scholars, are carried away with that
stream of drunkenness, Idleness, gaming, and many such irregular courses, that
in the end they rue it, curse their parents, and mischief themselves. Too much
indulgence causes the like, many fond mothers especially, dote so much upon
their children like Aesops ape, till in the end they crush them to death.
Corporum nutrices animarum novercae, pampering up their bodies to the undoing
of their souls: they will not let them be Prove. 13.24. He that spares the
rod hates his son.
correct ed or controled, but still soothed up in every thing they do, that in
conclusion, they become headstrong, i^corrigible and graceless; They love them
so foolishly, says Lib. 2. de consol. Tam stulte pueros diligimus vt odi^se
potius videamur, illos non ad virtutem sed ad iniuriam non ad eruditionem sed
ad luxum, non ad vitam sed voluptatem educates
Cardan, that they rather seem to hate them, bringing them up not to virtue
but injury, not to learning but riot, not to sober life and conversation, but
to all pleasure and licentious behavior. Who is he ^f so little experience
that knows not that of Fabius to be true, that Lib. 1. cap. 3 educatio altera
natura alterat animos and voluntatem atque utinam inquit liberorum nostrorum
mores non ipsi perderemus, quum infantiam statim delitijs solvimus, mollior
^sta educatio, quam indulgentiam vocamus nervos omnes, and mentis and corporis
frangit, fit ex his consuetudo, inde natura.
Education is another nature altering the mind and will, and I would to God
(says he) we our selves did not spo^le our childrens manners, by our overmuch
cockering and nice education, and weaken the strength of their bodies and
minds; that causes custom, custom nature, etc. And for these causes
Plutarch in his book de lib. educ. and Hierom epist. lib. 2 epist. 17. to
Laeta de institut. filiae, gives a most especial charge to al parents, and
many good cautions about the bringing up of children, that they be not
committed to indiscreet, passionate, bedla^ tutors, light, giddy headed, or
covetous persons, and spare for no cost, that they may be well nurtured and
taught, it being a matter of so great consequence. For such parents as do
otherwise, Plutarch esteems like them that are more careful of their shoes
then of their feet, that rate their wealth above their children. And he, says
Cardan, that leaves his son to a covetous Schoolmaster to be informed, or to a
close Abbey to fast and learn wisdom together, Perinde agit ac siqui^ de
calceo sit so licitus, pedem nihil curet. Iuven, Nil patri minus est quam
filius.
does no other, the^^ that he be a learned fool, Lib 3. desapient, qui avaris
paedagogis pueros alendos dant, vel clausos in caenobus ieiunare simul and
sapere, ni^il aliudagunt, nisi vt sint vel non sine stulissia eruditi, vel
integra vita sapientes.
or a sickly wise man.

SVBSECT. 3. Terrors and affrights causes of melancholy.
TVlly in the 4. of his Tusculanes, distinguishes these terrors which arise
from the apprehension of some terrible object heard or seen, from all other
fears, and so does Patritius lib. 5. Tit. 4. de regis institut.: and of all
fears they are most pernicious and violent, and so suddenly alter the whole
temperature of the body, move the soul and spirits, and strike such a deep
impression, that the parties can never be recovered, causing a more grievous
and fiercer melancholy, as Faelix Plater, cap. 3. de mentis alienat. Terror and
metus maxim ex improviso accidents. ita animum commovet, vt spiritus nunquam
recuperet, gravioremque melancholiam terror facit, quam quae ab internae causa
fit. Impressio tam fortis in spiritibus humoribusque cerebri, vt extracta tota
sanguinea massa, egre exp^imatur. Et haec horrenda species melancholy
frequenter oblata mihi omnes exercens viros, iuvenes, senes.
speaks out of his experience, then any inward cause whatsoever: and imprints
it self so forcibly in the spirits, brain, humors, that if all the mass of
blood were let out of the body, it could hardly be extracted. This horrible
kind of melancholy (for he so terms it) had bin often brought before him, and
troubles and affrights commonly men and women, young and old, of all sorts. This
Terror is most usually caused, Lib. de fort. and virt-Alex. praesertim ineunte
periculo vbires quippe adsunt terribiles.
as Plutarch will have, from some imminent danger, when some terrible object is
at hand, heard, or seen, or conceived, Fit a visione horrenda, revera
apparente, vel per insomnia. Platerus.
truly appearing, or in a A Painters wife in Basil 1600. Somniavit filium bello
mortuum, inde melancholica consolari noluit.
dream: and many times the more sudden the Accident, it is the more violent.
Arthemedorus the Grammarian lost his wits by the sudden sight of a Crocodile,
Laurentius cap. 7. de melan. The Quarta pars comment de Statu religionis in
Gallia sub Carolo 9^ 1572.
Massacre at Lions 1572. in the reign of Charles 9. was so terrible and
fearful, that many ran mad, some died, great-bellied women were brought to
bed before their time, and generally all affrighted and aghast. Many lose their
wits Ex occursu daemonum aliqui furore corripiuntur, and experientia notum est.
by the sudden sight of some spectrum or devil, a thing very common in all
ages. Lavater. part. 1. cap, 9. or if they be but affrighted by some
counterfeit devils in jest, they are the worse for it all their lives: Some by
sudden fires, earthquakes, inundations, or any such dis^all objects. Themison
the Physician fell into an Hydrophobia, by seeing one sick of that disease,
Dioscorides lib. 6. cap. 33. or by the sight of a m^nster, a carcass, they are
disquieted many months after, and cannot endure that room where a coarse has
bin, or for a world would not be alone with a dead man, or lie in that bed many
months after, where a man had died. At Puellae extra urbem in prata
excurrentes etc. mesta and melancholica domum redijt per dies aliquot vexata,
dum mortua est. Plater.
Basil a many of little children in the Springtime, went to gather flowers in
a meddow, and at the towns end, where a malefactor hung in gibbets, all gazing
at it, one by chance flung a stone, and made it stir, by which accident, all
the children affrighted, ran away; one slower then the rest, looking back, and
seeing the stirred carcass wag toward her, cried out it came after her, and
was so terribly affrigted, that for many days she could not be pacified, but
melancholy, died Altera trans-Rhenana ingressa sepulchrum recens apertum, vidit
cadaver, and domum subito reversa, putavit eam vocare, post paucos dies obijt,
proximo sepulchrocollocata. Altera patibulu^ sero praeteriens, metuebat ne vrhe
exclusa illic pernoctaret vnde melancholica facta per multos annos laboravit.
Platerus.
In the same town another child beyond the Rhine, saw a grave opened, and upon
the sight of the carcass, was so troubled in mind, that she could not be
comforted, but a little after died, and was buried by i^ Platerus observat.
lib. 1. A Gentlewoman of the same City saw a fat hog cut up, and when the
intrals were opened, and a noisome savor offended her nose, she much misliked,
and would no longer abide: a Physician in presence, told her, that as that hog
was, so was she, full of filthy excrements, and aggravated the matter by some
other loathsome instances, in so much, that this nice Gentlewoman apprehended it
so deeply, that she fell instantly a-vomiting, and was much distempered in mind
and body, that with all his Art and persuasions, for some months after, he
could not restore her to her self, she could not forget it, or remove the
object out of her sight, Idem. Many cannot endure to see a wound opened, but
they are sick, or a man executed, or sick of any fearful disease, as
possession, Apoplexies, bewitched: Subitus occursus inopinata lectio.
or if they read by chance of some terrible thing, they are as much disquieted,
as if they had seen it. Hecates sibi videntur somniare, they dream of it, and
continually think of it. As lamentable effects are caused by such terrible
objects heard, as seen, auditus maximos motus in corpore facit, and animo, and
nullus sensus tot alienationes facit, as Lib de auditione.
Plutarch holds, no sense makes greater alteration of body and mind: let the^
bear witness that have heard those Tragical allarums, outcries, hideous noises,
which are many times suddenly heard in the dead of the night by irruption of
enemies, accidental fires etc. those Effuso cernens fugientes agmine turmas,
quis mea nunc instat cornua Faunus ait. Alciat. embl. 122
panick fears, which often drive men out of their wits, bereave them of sense,
understanding and all, some for a time, some for all their lives, they never
recover it. The Judge. 6.19.
Midianites were so affrighted by Gideons soldiers, they breaking but every
one a pitcher; and Plutarchus vita e^us.
Hannibals army by such a panick fear, discomfited at the walls of Rome.
Augusta Livia hearing a few Tragical verses recited out of Virgil, Tu
Marcellus eris etc. fell down dead in a sown. Edinus King of Denmark, by a
sudden sound which he heard, In furorem cum socijs versus.
was turned into fury with all his men. Cranzius lib. 5. dan. hist. and
Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 3. cap. 5. Amatus Lusitanus had a patient, that by
reason of bad tidings became, Epilepticus cent. 2. cura 90. and Cardan subtle.
lib. 18. saw one that lost his wits by mistaking of an Echo. If one sense
alone can cause such violent commotions of the mind, what may we think when
hearing, sight, and those other senses are all troubled at once? as by some
earthquakes, thunder, lightning, tempests etc. At Historica relatio de rebus
Iaponicu Tract. 2. de legate. regis Chinensis a Lodovico Frois Iesuita, Ao 1596.
Fuscini derepente tanta aeris caligo, and terraemotus, vt multi capite dolerent
plurimus cor maerore and melancholia obrueretur. tantum fremitum edebat, vt
tonitru fragorem imitari videretur, tantamque etc. In vrbe Secai tam horrificus
fuit, vt homines vix sui compotes essent, a sensibus abalienati, maerore
oppressi tam horrendo spectaculo. etc.
Fuscinum in Iapona there was such an earthquake, and darkness of a sudden, that
many men were offended with headache; many overwhelmed with sorrow and
melancholy. At Meacum whole streets and goodly palaces were ouerturned at the
same time, and there was such an hideous noise withal like thunder, and a
filthy smell, that their hair stared for fear, and their hearts quaked, men
and beasts were incredibly terrified. In Sacai another city, the same
earthquake was so terrible unto them, that many were bereft of their senses;
and others by that horrible spectacle so much amassed, that they knew not what
they did. Blasius a Christian, the Reporter of the news, was so affrighted for
his part, that though it were two months after, he was scarce his own man,
neither could he drive the remembrance of it out of his mind. And many times
even some years after, they will tremble afresh at the Quum subit illius
tristissima noctis Imago.
remembrance or conceit of such a terrible object, even all their lives long,
if mention be made of it. Cornelius Agrippa relates out of Gulielmus
Parisiensis, a story of one, that after a distantfull purge which a Physician
had prescribed to him, was so much moved, Qui solo aspectu medicinae movebatur
ad purgandum.
that at the very sight of Physic he would be distempered, as much at the
pres^^^, though he never so much as smelled to it, the very sight of Physic
long after, would give him a purge; nay the very remembrance of it would effect
it: Sicut viatores si ad saxum impegerint, aut nautae memores sui casus non
ista modo quae offendunt, sed and similia horrent perpetuo and tremunt.
like travelers and Seamen, says Plutarch, that when they have bin sanded or
dashed on a rock, for ever after fear not that mischance only, but all such
dangers whatsoever.

SVBSECT. 4. Scoffs, Calumnies, bitter Jests, how they cause Melancholy.
IT is an old saying, Leviter volant, graviter vulnerant Bernarde.
A blow with a word, strikes deeper then a blow with a sword: and many men are
as much gauled with a calumny, Ensis sauciat corpus, mentem sermo.
scurrile and bitter jest, a libel, a pasquill, or the like, as with any
misfortune whatsoever. Princes and Potentates, that are otherwise happy, and
have all at command, are grievously vexed with these pasquilling libels, and
Satyrs: the Caesar's themselves in Rome, were commonly taunted. Adrian the sixth
Pope, Iovius in vita eius, gravissime tulebat famosis libellis nomen suum ad
Pasquilli statuam fuisse laceratum, decrevitque ideo statuam demoliri etc.
was so highly offended, and grievously vexed with Pasquillers at Rome, that he
gave command that statue should be demolished and burned, and the ashes flung
into the river of Tyber, and had done it forthwith, had not Lodovicus Suessanus
a facete companion, dissuaded him to the contrary, by telling him, that
Pasquils ashes would turn to frogs in the bottom of the river, and croake
worse and louder then before. The Prophet David replies, Psalm. 123.4. that his
soul was full of the mocking of the wealthy, and of the despitefulnesse of the
proud, and Psalm. 55.4. for the voice of the wicked etc. and their hate, his
heart trembled within him, and the terrors of death came upon him. Fear and
horrible fear etc. and Psalm. 69.20. Rebuke has broken mine heart, and I am
full of heaviness. Who has not like cause to complain, and is not so
troubled, that shall fall into the mouths of such men? for many are of so
Petulanti spleen cachinno.
petulant a spleen, and have that figure Sarcasmus so often in their mouths,
so bitter, so foolish, as Curial. lib. 2. Ea quorundam est inscitia, vt quoties
loqui toties mordere licere sibi putent.
Baltasar Castilio notes of them, that they cannot speak, but they must bite,
they had rather lose a friend then a jest, and what company soever they come
in, they will be scoffing, humoring, misusing or putting gulleries of some or
other, till they have made by their humoring and gulling, Ter. enuch.
ex stulto insanum: and all to make themselves merry. To make a fool a madman
is all their sport, and they have no other felicity then to scoff and deride
others; they must sacrifize to the god of laughter, with them in Lib. 2.
Apuleius once aday, or else they shall be melancholy themselves, they care not
how they grind and misuse others, so they may exhilerate themselves. Leo
Decimus that scoffing Pope, as Iovius has registered in the 4. book of his
life, took an extraordinary delight in humoring of silly fellows, and to put
gulleries upon them, Laudando and mira ijs persuadendo.
by commending some, persuading others to this or that; he made ex stolidis
stultissimos, and maxim ridiculos, ex stultis insanos: he made soft fellows
stark noddies, and such as were foolish, quite mad before he left them. One
memorable example he recites there of Tarascomus of Parma a Musician, that was
so humoured by Leo Decimus, and Bibiena his second in that business, that he
thought himself to be a man of most excellent skill, (who was indeed a ninny)
they a made him set foolish songs, and invent new ridiculous precepts, which
they did highly commend, as to tie his arm that played on the lute, to make him
strike a sweeter stroke, Et vana instatus opinione, incredibilia ac ridenda
quaedam Musices praecepta commentaretur etc.
and to pull down the Arras hangings, because the voice would be clearer, by
reason of the reverberation of the wall. In like manner they persuaded one
Baraballius of Caieta, that he was as good a Poet as Petrarch, and would have
him to be made a Laureat Poet, Vt voces nudis parietibus illisae suavius ac
acutius resilirent.
and invite all his friends to his installment, and had so possessed the poor
man with a conceit of his excellent poetry, that when some of his more
discreet friends told him of his folly, he was very angry with them, and told
them, Immortalitati and gloriae suae prorsus invidentes.
they envied his honor and prosperity. It was strange, says Iovius, to see an
old man of 60 years, a venerable and grave old man, so gulled. But what cannot
such scoffers do, especially if they find a soft creature on whom they may
work: nay to say truth, who is so wise, or so discreet, that may not be
humoured in this kind, especially if some excellent wits shall set upon him; he
that maddes others, if he were so humoured, would be as mad himself, as much
grieved and tormented. For all is in these things as they are taken, if he be a
silly soul, and do not perceive it, it is well, he may hapily make others
sport, and be no whit trobled himself; but if he be apprehensiue of his folly,
and take it to heart, the^ it torments him worse the^ any lash: a bitter jest, a
slander, a calumny pierces deeper then any loss, danger, bodily pain, or
injury whatsoever. Especially if it shall proceed from a virulent tongue, it
cuts, says David, like a two edged sword. And they smote with their tongues,
Ier. 18.18. and that so hard, that they leave an incurable wound behind them.
Many men are undone by this means, moped, and so dejected, that they are never
to be recovered; and of all other men living, those which are actually
melancholy, or inclined to it, are most sensible (as being suspicious,
choleric, and apt to mistake) and impatient of an injury in that kind, they
aggravate it, and so meditate continually of it, that it is a perpetual
corsiue, not to be recovered, till time wear it out. And although they
peradventure that so scoff, do it alone in mirth and merriment, and hold it,
optimum aliena frui insania, an excellent thing to enjoy another man's madness;
yet they must know, that it is a mortal sin, as 2.2. d ae quaest. 75. Irrisio
mortale peccatum.
Thomas holds, and as the Prophet Psalm. 15.3.
David denounces, they that use it, shall never dwell in Gods Tabernacle. Such
scurrile jests, flouts, and Sarcasmes, therefore ought not at all to be used;
especially to such as are in misery, or any way distressed: for to such
arumnarum incrementa sunt, as Balthazar Castilio lib. 2. de aulico.
he perceived. In multis pudor, in multis iracundia etc. many are ashamed, many
vexed, and angered, and there is no greater cause or furtherer of melancholy.
For that cause, al those that otherwise approve of jests in some cases, will by
no means admit them in their companies, that are any way inclined to this
malady, non iocandum cum ijs qui miseri sunt and aerumnosi, no jesting with a
discontented person. It Is Castilio's caveat, and De sermon lib. 4. cap. 3.
Io. Pontanus, and Fol. 55. Galateus.
Galateus, and every good man's. Play with me, but hurt me not:
Jest with me, but shame me not.
If a man be liable to such a jest, or obloquy, or have bin overseen, or
committed an offense: yet it is no good manners or humanity, to vpbraid or hit
him in the teeth with his offense, or to scoff at such a man, such jests as he
Tales ioci ab iniurijs non possint descerni. Galateus fol. 55.
says, are no better then injuries, biting jests, mordentes and aculeati, they
are poisoned jests, and leave a sting behind them, and ought not to be used.
Pibrancke in his Quadrains 37.
Set not thy foot to make the blind to fall,
Nor wilfully offend thy weaker brother:
Nor wound the dead with thy tongues bitter gall,
Neither rejoice thou in the fall of other.
And if these rules could be kept, we should have much more ease and quietness,
then we have, and less melancholy: whereas on the contrary, we study to misuse
each other, how to sting and gaul, like two bores, bending all our force and
wit, friends means, to crucify one another souls; by means of which, there
is little content and charity, much virulency, hatred, malice, and disquietnes
amongst us.

SVBSECT. 5. Loss of liberty, servitude, imprisonment, how they cause
melancholy.
TO this Catalogue of causes, I may well annexe loss of liberty, servitude, or
imprisonment, which to some persons is as great a torture as any of the rest.
Though they have all things convenient, sumptuous houses to their use, fair
walks and gardens, delicious boures, galleries, good fare and diet, and all
things correspondent: yet they are not content, because they are confined, and
may not come and go at their pleasure, and have, and do what they will, but
live Miserum est aliena vivere quadra. Iuv.
aliena quadra, at another man's command. As it is Crambe bis cocta.
in meats, so is it in all other things, places, societies, sports, let them
be never so pleasant, commodious, wholesome, so good, yet omnium rerum est
satiestas. The children of Israel were tired with Manna, it is irksome to them
so to live, as to a bird in a cage, or dog in his kennell, they are awoary of
it. They are happy it is true, and have all things to another man's judgment,
that heart can wish, or that they themselves can desire, bona si sua norint:
yet they loath it, and are tired with the present: Est natura hominu^ novitatis
avida, man's nature is still desirous of news, variety, delights, and our
wandering affections are so irregular in this kind, that they must change,
though it be to the worst. Bachelors must be married, and married men would be
Bachelors; they do not love their own wives, though otherwise fair, wise,
virtuous and well qualified, because they are theirs: our present estate is
still the worst, we cannot endure one course of life long, and quod modo
vouerat odit, one calling long, esse in honor iuvat, mox displicet, one place
long; Hor.
Romae Tybur amo ventosus, Tybure Romam, that which we earnestly sought, we now
contemn. Hoc quosdam agit ad mortem (says De Tranquil. animae.
Seneca) quod proposita saepe mutando in eadem revoluntur, and non relinquunt
novitati locum, Fast idio caepit esse vita, and ipsus mundus, and subit illud
rapidissimarum deliciarum, Quousque eadem? This alone kills many a man, that
they are tied to the same still, as a horse in a mill, a dog in a wheel, they
run round without alteration or news, their life grows odious, and the world
loathsome, and that which crosses their furious delights, What? still the
same? Marcus Aurelius and Solomon, that had experience of all worldly delights
and pleasures, confessed as much of themselves, that what they most desired,
was loathsome at the last, and that their lust could never be satisfied, all was
vanity and affliction of mind.

Now if it be death it self, another Hell, to be glutted with one kind of
sport, dieted with one dish, tied to one place, though they have all things
otherwise as they can desire, and are in heaven to another man's opinion, what
misery and discontent shall they have that live in slavery or in prison it self
Quod tristius morte, in servitute vivendum, as Hermolaus, told Alexander in
Lib. 8.
Curtius worse then death is bondage. Boterus lib. 1. polit. cap. 4.
Equidem ego is sum qui servitutem extremum omnium malorum esse arbitror: I am
he says Boterus. lib. 1. polit. cap. 4.
Boterus that account servitude the extremity of misery. And what misery do
they endure that live under those hard taskmasters, in gold-mines, tin-mines,
lead-mines, stone-quarries, cole-pits, like so many mouldewarpes under ground,
condemned to the galleys, to perpetual drudgery, hunger, thirst, and stripes,
without all hope of delivery? How are these women in Turkey affected, that most
part of the year come not abroad, and those Italian and Spanish dames that are
mewed up like hawks, and locked up by their jelous husbands? how tedious is it
to them that live in stoues and caves half a year together; as in Island,
Muscovy, or under the If there be any inhabitants
Pole it self, where they have six months perpetual night. Nay, what misery
and discontent do they endure, that are in prison, they want all those six
non-naturall things at once, good air, good diet, exercise, company, sleep,
rest, ease, etc. that are bound in chains all day long, suffer hunger, and as
In Toxari. Interdiu quidem collum vinctum est, and manus constricta, noctuvero
totum corpus vincitur, ad has miserias accedit corporis faetor, strepitus
eiulantium, somni brevitas, haec omnia plane molesta and intolerabilia.
Lucian describes it, must abide that filthy stink and rattling of chains,
howlings, pitiful outcries that prisoners usually make; these things are not
only troublesome, but intolerable. They lie nastily amongst todes and frogs in
a dark dungeon, in their own dung, in pain of body, in pain of soul: as
Joseph did. Psalm. 105.18. they hurt his feet in the stocks, the iron entered his
soul. They live solitary alone, sequestered from all company, but heart-eating
melancholy, and for want of meat, must prey upon themselves. Well might In 9.
Rhasis.
Arculanus put long imprisonment for a cause, especially to such that have
lived Iovially, in all sensuality and lust, and upon a sudden are estranged and
debarred from all manner of pleasures: As Huniades and Richard the second,
Valerian the Emperor, Bajazet the Turk. If it be irksome to miss our ordinary
co^panio^s and repast for once or an hour, what shall it be to lose them for
ever? If it be so great a delight to live at liberty, and to enjoy that variety
of objects the world affords, what misery and discontent must it needs bring to
him that shall now be cast headlong into that Spanish inquisition, to fall from
Heaven to hell, to be cubbed up upon a sudden, how shall he be perplexed? what
shall become of him? William the Conquerors eldest son.
Robert, Duke of Normandy, being imprisoned by his elder brother Henry the
first, ab illo die inconsolabili dolor in carcere contabuit, says Matthew
Paris: From that day forward pined away with grief. Camden in Wiltsh. miserum
senem ita fame and calamitatibus in carcere fregit inter mortis metum, and
vitae tormenta etc.
Roger, Bishop of Salisbury, the second man from king Stephen, he that built
that famous castle of Devises in Wiltshire, was so tortured in prison with
hunger, and all those calamities accompanying such men, Seneca.
vt vivere noluerit, mori nescierit, he would not live, and could not dye,
betwixt fear of death, and torments of life. Francis King of France, Vies
hodie.
was taken prisoner by Charles the 5th, ad mortem fere melancholicus, says
Guicciardine, melancholy almost to death, and that in an instant. But this is
as clear as the Sun, and needs no farther illustration.

SVBSEC. 6. Poverty and Want causes of Melancholy.
POverty and Want are so violent oppugners, so unwelcome guests, so much
abhorred of all men, that I may not omit to speak of the^ apart. Poverty
although (if it be considered aright to a wise, understanding, truly regenerate
and contented man) it be donum Dei, a blessed estate, the way to Heaven, as
Com. ad Hebraeos.
Chrysostom calls it, Gods gift, the mother of modesty, and much to be
preferred before riches (as shall be showed in his Part. 2. Sec. 3. Memb. 3.
place) yet as it is esteemed in the worlds censure, it is a most odious
calling, vile and base, a severe torture, and most intolerable burden, we Quem
vt difficilem morbum pueris traedere formidamus. Plutar.
shun it all cane petus and angue, as being the fountain of all other
miseries, cares, woes, labors, and grievances whatsoever. To avoid which, we
will take any pains, extremos currit mercator ad Indos. We will leave no haven,
no coast, no creek of the world unsearched, though it be to the hazard of our
lives, we will diue to the bottom of the Sea, to the bowels of the earth 100
fathom deep, and through all five Zones, and both extremes of heat and cold:
we will turn parasites and slaves, prostitute our selves, swear and lie,
damn our bodies and souls, forsake God, abjure Religion, steal, rob, murder,
rather then endure this insufferable yoke of poverty, which does so tyrannize,
crucify, and generally depresse us.

For look into the world, and you shall see men generally esteemed according to
their means, and happy as they are rich; In the vulgar opinion, if a man be
wealthy, no matter how he gets it, of what parentage, how qualified, how
virtuously endowed, or villainously inclined; let him be a bawd, a gripe, an
usurer, a villain, a Pagan, a Barbarian, a wretch, so that he be rich (and
liberal withal) he shall be honored, admired, adored, reverenced, and highly
Omnis enim res, virtus, fama, decus, divina humanaque pulchris divitijs parent.
Hor. Ser. l. 2. Sat, 3. Clarus erit fortis iustus, sapiens etiam rex. Et
quicquid volet Hor.
magnified. The rich is had in reputation because of his goods, Eccl. 10.31. He
shall be befriended; for riches gather many friends, Prove, 19.4. multos
numerabit amicos, all Et genus and formam regina pecunia donat: Money adds
spirits courage, etc.
happiness ebbes and flows with his money, he shall be accounted a gracious
Lord, a Mecoenas, a benefactor, a wise, discreet, a proper, a valiant man, a
fortunate man, of a generous spirit. Pullus Iovis and gallinae filius albae: a
hopeful, a good man, a virtuous, honest man. Quando ego ie Iunonium puerum,
and matris partum vere aureum, as Epist. vlt. ad Atticum.
Tully said of Octavianus Augustus, while he was adopted Caesar, and an Our
young master, a fine towardly gentleman, God bless him, and hopeful, why? he
is heir apparent to the worshipful, honorable etc.
heir apparent of so great a Monarchy. All O nummi nummi vobis hunc praestat
honorem.
honor, offices, applause, grand titles, and turgent Epithets are put upon
him, omnes omnia bona dicere, all men's eyes are upon him, God bless his good
worship, his honor; Exinde sapere eum omnes dicimus, ac quisque fortunam habet.
Plautus Pseud.
Every man speaks well of him, every man presents him, seeks and sues to him
for his love, favor, and protection, to serve him, belong unto him, every man
rises to him, as to Themistocles in the Olympicks; if he speak as of Herod,
Vox Dei, non hominis, the voice of God, and not of man: All the graces,
Veneres, pleasures, elegances attend him, Aurea fortuna principum cubiculis
reponi solita. Julius Capitolinus vita Antonini.
golden Fortune accompanies him, and lodges with him, and as to those Roman
Emperors is placed in his chamber. -- Secura naviget aura, fortunamque suo
temperet arbitrio, he may sail as he will himself, and temper his estate at
his pleasure, Ioviall days, sple^dor and magnificence, Petronius.
sweet Music, dainty fare, the good things, and fat of the land, fine clothes,
and rich attires, soft beds, and fine pillowes a^e at his command, all the
World labors for him, thousands of Artificers are his slaves, to drudge for
him, work, and run and poast for him. Every man seeks his Multi illum invenes,
multae petiere puellae.
acquaintance, his kindred, to match with him, vxorem ducat Danaen, when, and
whom he will, hunc optant generum Rex and Regina, he is an excellent Dummodo
sit dives barbarus ille placet.
match for my son my daughter, my niece etc, Quicquid calcaverit hic, Rosa
fiet, let him go whether he will, all happiness attends him, every man is
willing to entertain him, he sups in Plut in Lucullo. A rich chamber so called.
Apollo wheresoever he comes; what preparation is made for his Panis pane
melior.
entertainment? fish and foul, spices and perfumes, all that sea and land
affords. What cookery, masking, mirth to exhilerate his person? Iuvenal. Sat. 5.
Da Trebio, pone ad Trebium, vis frater ab illis Illibus? What dish will your
good worship eat of? what sport will your honor have? hawking, hunting,
fishing, fowling, bulls, bears, cards, dice, cocks, players, tumblers fiddlers,
jesters etc. they are at your good worships command. Fair houses, gardens,
orchyards, Bohemus de Turcis and Bredenbach.
galleries, pleasant walks, delightsome places, they are at hand, in aureis
lac, vinum in argenteis, adolescentulae ad nutum speciosae, a Turkey Paradise,
Heaven upon earth. And though he be a filly soft fellow, and scarce have common
sense, yet if he be borne to fortunes, as I have said, Euphormio.
iure haereditario sapere iubetur, he must be wise, Qui pecuniam habent ela^
sunt animi: lofty spirits, brave men at arms, all rich men are generous,
courageous. etc.
valiant and discreet by inheritance, he must have honor and office in his
course. Nemo nisi dives honor dignus. Ambr^s. 2. offic. 21. none so worthy as
himself: He shall have it, atque esto quicquid Servius aut Labeo. It is not
with us, as amongst those Athenian Senators of Licurgus in Plutarch, he
preferred that deserved best, and was most virtuous and worthy of the place,
Non fuit apud mortales vllum excellentius certamen, non inter celeres
celerrimo, non inter robustos robustissimo etc.
not swiftness, or strength, or wealth, or friends carried it in those days;
but inter optimos optimus, inter temperantes temperantissimus, the most
temperate and best. We have no Aristocraesie but in contemplation, all
Oligarches, wherein a few rich men domineere, and do what them list, and are
privileged by their greatness. Quicquid libet licet.
They may freely trespass, and do what they please, no man dare accuse them,
no not so much as mutter against them, there is no notice taken of it, they may
securely do it, and live after their own Laws, and for their money, get
pardons, indulgences, redeem their souls from Purgatory and Hell, clausum
possidet arca Iovem. Let them be Epicures, or Atheists, Libertines,
Machiavilians (as often they are) if they will themselves, they may be canonized
for Saints, they shall be Cum moritur dives concurrunt vndique cives: Pauperis
ad funus vix est ex millibus vnus.
honorably interred in Mausolean tombs, commended by Poets, registered in
Histories, have temples, and statues erected to their names, e manibus illis
nascentur viola. If he be bountiful in his life, and liberal at his death, he
shall have one to swear, as he did by Claudius the Emperor in Tacitus, he saw
his soul go to Heaven, and be miserably lamented at his death. Ambubaiarum
collegia etc. Trimalcionis Topanta in Petronius recta in coelum aebijt, went
right to Heaven: a base queen, Et modo quid fuit ignoscat mihi Genius tuus,
noluisses de manu e^es nummos accipere.
thou would have scorned in thy misery to have a penny from her, and why?
modio nummos metijt, she measured her money by the bushel. These prerogatives
do not usually belong to rich men, but to such as are most part seeming rich,
let him have but a good He that wears silk, satin, velvet, and gold lace,
must needs be a Gentleman.
outside, he carries it, most men are esteemed according to their clo^hes. In
our gullish times, him, whom you peradventure in modesty would give place to,
as being deceived by his habit, and presuming him some great worshipful man,
believe it, if you shall examine his estate, he will likely be proved a
serving-man of no great note, my Ladies tailor, or his Lordships barber, or
some such gull, a Fastidius Brisk, a Sr Petronell Flashe, a mere outside.
Only this respect is given him, and wheresoever he comes, he may call for what
he will, and take place, by reason of his outward habit.

But on the contrary if he be poor Pro. 15.15. all his day: are miserable, he
is under hatches, dejected, rejected and forsaken, poor in purse, poor in
spirit. Though he be honest, wise, learned, wel-deserving, noble by birth, and
of excellent good parts: yet in that he is poor, he is contemned, neglected,
In tenui rara est facundia panno. Inven.
If he speak what babbler is this? Nullum tam barbarum, tam vile munus est,
quod non lubentissime obire vetint gens vilissima
Ecclus. his nobility without wealth, is Hor.
proiecta vitior alga, and he not esteemed: nos viles pulli nati infelicibus
ouis, if once poor, we are metamorphosed in an instant, base slaves, and vile
drudges, borne to labor, to misery, to carry burdens, like juments, pistum
stercum comedere with Ulysses companions, and as Chremilus objected in
Aristophanes, Plutus act. 4.
salem lingere, lick salt, to empty jakes, fay channels, carry out dirt and
dunghils, sweep chimnies, rub horse heels etc. Leo Afer cap. vlt. lib. 1.
edunt non vt been vivant, sed vt fortiter laborent. Hemsius.
Others eat to live, but they live to drudge, footstooles for rich-men, to
tread on, blocks for them to get on horseback on, Pauper paries factus, quem
caniculae commingant.
walls for them to piss on, or as new grauel for dogs to scumer on. They are
commonly such people, rude, silly, superstitious Idiots, nasty, unclean,
lowsy, poor, dejected, slauishly humble: and as Lib. 1. cap. vlt.
Leo Afer observes of the commonalty of Afric, natura viliores sunt, nec apud
suos duces maiore in precio-quam si canes essent: Deos omnes illis infensos
diceres tam pannosi fame fracti, tot assidue malis afficiuntur.
base by nature, and no more esteemed then dogs, miseram, laboriosam,
calamitosam vitam agunt, and inopem, infaelicem rudiores asinis, vt brutis
plane natos dicas: no learning, no knowledge, no civility, scarce common sense,
naught but barbarism amongst them, belluino more vivunt, neque calceos gestant
neque vestes, like roagues and vagabonds they go barefoot and barelegged,
Nihil omnino meliorem vitam decunt, quam ferae in siluis iumenta in terris. Leo
Afer.
leading a laborious, miserable, wretched, unhappy life, like beasts and
iuments, if not worse: their discourse is scurrility, their summum bonum, a pot
of Ale. There is not any slavery which they will not undergo, Inter illos
plerique latrinas evacuant, alij culinariam curant, alij^st abularios agunt,
and id gerus similia exercent etc. like those people that dwell in the Ortelius
in Helvetia. Qui habitant in Caesia valle vt plurimum latomi, in Oscella valle
cultorum fabri, sumarij in Vigetia, sordidum genu, hominum, quod repurgandis
caminis victum parat.
Alps, chimny-sweepers, Iakes-fermers, durt-daubers, vagrant rogues, they
labor hard, and yet cannot get clothes to put on, or bread to eat. But what
can poverty give else, but I write not this any ways to vpbraide or scosse at,
or misuse poor men, but rather to condole and pity them by expressing etc.
beggary, fulsome nastinesse, squalor, contempt, drudgery, labor, ugliness;
pediculorum and pulicum numerum? as Chremulus Act 4. Plaut.
he well followed it in Aristophanes, fleas and lice, pro pallio vestem laceram,
and pro pulvari lapidem been magnum ad caput, rags for his raiment, and a stone
for his pillow, pro cathedra ruptae caput vrnae, he sits in a broken pitcher,
or a block for a chair, and malvae ramos pro panibus comedit, he drinks water,
and liue's of wort leaves, pulse, like a hog, or scraps like a dog, vt nunc
nobis vita afficitur, quis non putabit insaniam esse, infaelicitatemque as
Cremulus concludes his speech, as we poor men live now a-dayes, who will not
take our life to be Paupertas durum onus miseris mortalibus.
infelicity, misery, Vexat censura columbas.
and madness. If they be of little better condition then those hunger-starued
beggars, wandering roagues, those ordinary slaves, and day-labouring drudges;
yet they are commonly so preyed upon by poling officers for breaking Laws, by
their tyrannising landlords, so flead and fleeced by perpetual Deux ace non
possunt and six cinque soluer e nolunt: Omnibus est notum quater tree solu^re
totum.
exactions, that though they do drudge and fare hard, and starve their Genius,
they cannot live in some Sca^dia, Africa, Lituana, Turciea etc.
countries; but what they have is instantly taken from them, the very care they
take to live to be drudges, to maintain their poor families, their trouble and
anxiety takes away their sleep, Eccle. 3.11. Sir. 31.1. makes them aweary of
their lives: when they have taken all pains, and do their utmost and honest
endeavors, if they be cast behind by sickness, or overtaken with years, no man
pitties them, hard-hearted and mercilessef uncharitable as they are, they leave
them so distressed, to beg, steal, murmr and Montaigne in his Essaies
speaks of certain Indians in France, that being asked how they liked the
country, wondered how a few rich men could keep so many poor men in subjection,
that they did not cut their throats.
rebel. The fear of this misery compelled those old Romans, whom Menenius
Agrippa pacified, to resist their governors: outlawes and rebels in most
places, to take up seditious arms, and in all ages has caused vproares,
murmuring, seditions, rebellions, thefts, murders, mutinies, jarres and
contentions in every commonwealth, grudging, repining, complaining, discontent
in every private family, because they want means, to live according to their
callings, to bring up their children, it breaks their hearts, they cannot do
as they would do. No greater misery the^ for a Lord to have a Knights living,
a Gentleman a Yeoma^s, not to be able to live according to his birth and place.
Poverty and want are generally corsiues to all kind of men, especially to such
as have bin in good and flourishing estate, and are suddenly distressed,
Augustas animas animoso in pectore versant. The rest as they have base fortune,
so have they base minds withal, and they are not touched with it.
nobly borne, liberally brought up, and by some disaster and casualty,
miserably dejected. And that which torments them more, if once they come to be
poor, they are forsaken of their friends, most part neglected, and left unto
themselves. Tempora si fuerint nubila solus eris, left cold and comfortless,
nullus ad amissas ibit amicus opes, all fly from him as from a rotten wall,
now ready to fall on their heads. Pro 19.4. Poverty separates them from their
Prove. 19.7. though he be instant, yet they will not.
neighbors. And that which is worse yet, if he be poor Non est qui doleat
vicem, vt Petrus Christum, iurant se hominem non novisse.
every man contemnes him, insults over him, oppresses him, aggravates his
misery. Ovid. in Trist.
Quum caepit quassata domus subsidere, parts
In proclinatas omne recumbit onus.
When once the tottering house begins to shrink,
Thither comes all the weight by an instinct.
nay they are odious to their own brethren, and dearest friends. Prove. 19.7.
his brethren hate him if he be poor. Hor.
omnes vicini oderunt, his neighbors hate him, Prove. 14.20. Ter. Eunuchus act
2. sc. 2.
omnes me noti ac ignoti deserunt, as he complained in the comedy, friends and
strangers all forsake me. And that which is most grievous, poverty makes men
ridiculous, nil habet infaelix paupertas durius in se, quam quod ridicvlos
homines facit, they must endure Quid quod materiam praebet, causamque iocaendi.
Si toga sordida sit. Iuven. Sat. 3.
jests, taunts, flowts, blows of their betters, and take all in good part to
get a meals meat: Hor.
magnum pauperies opprobrium iubet quidvis and facere and pati, he must turn
parasite, j^ster, fool, slave, and drudge to get a poor living, and be
buffeted when he has all done, as Ulysses was by Melanthius Odiss. 17.
in Homer, and reviled, and must not so much as mutter against it. He must
turn rogue, villain; for as the saying is, Necessitas cogit ad turpia,
poverty alone makes men thieves, roagues, rebels, murderers, traitors,
assasinats, because of poverty we have sinned, Eccles. 27.1. swear and
forswear, bear false witness, lie, dissemble, any thing, as I say, to
advantage our selves, and to relieve our necessity. Mantuan.
Culpae scelerisque magistra est, when a man is driven to his shifts, what will
he not do? betray his father, Prince, and country, turn Turk, forsake
Religion, abjure God and all. nulla tam horrenda proditio, quam illi lucri
causa perpetrare non ausint. De Africa lib. 1. cap. vlt.
Leo Afer. It makes many an upright man otherwise, had he not bin in want, to
take bribes, to be corrupt, to do against his conscience, to sell his tongue,
heart, hand etc. and use indirect means to help his present estate. A great
temptation to all mischief, it compels some miserable wretches to counterfeit
several diseases, to dismember, make themselves blind, lame, to have a more
plausible cause to beg, and loose their limbs to recover their present wants^
and that which is worst, it makes them through anguish and wearisomnesse of
their lives, to make away themselves. They had rather be hanged, drowned etc.
then to live without means Theognis.
In mare cetiferum ne te premat aspera egestas
Desili and a celsis corrue Cerne iugis.
Much better it is to break thy neck, or drown thy self in the Sea
Then suffer irksome poverty. go make thy self away.


Gaspar vilela Jesuita epist. Iapon. lib.
In Iaponia it is a common thing to stifle their children if they be poor, or
to make an abort, which Aristotle commends. In that civil commonwealth of Mat.
Riccius expedit. in Sinas lib. 1. cap. 3.
China, the mother strangles her child, if she be not able to bring it up, and
had rather lose it, then sell it, or have it endure such misery as poor men
do; Vel bonorum desperatione, vel maloru^ perpessione fracti and fatigati
plures violentas manus sibi inferunt.
many make away themselves. Apitius the Roman, when he cast up his accounts,
and found but 100000 Crowns left, murdered himself for fear he should be
famished to death. P. Forestus in his medicinal observations, has two
memorable examples, of two brothers of Louain, that being destitute of means,
became both melancholy, and in a disco^tented humor massacred themselves.
Another of a merchant, learned, wise otherwise and discreet, that out of a deep
apprehension he had of a loss at Seas, would not be persuaded but as Hor.
Ventidius in the Poet, he should die a beggar. In a word this much I may
conclude of poor men, that though they have good Ingenio poteram superas
velitaire per arces, ut me plura leuat sic grave mergit onus. Alciat.
parts, they cannot show the^, or make use of them: haud facile emergunt,
quorum virtutibus obstat res angusta domi: the wisdom of the poor is
despised, and his words are not heard. Eccles 9.16. Ter.
amittunt consilium in re, as Gnatho said. Hor. Sat. 3. lib. 1.
Sapiens crepidas sibi nunquam nec soleas fecit, a wise man never cobled
shoes, as he said of old, but how does he prove it? I am sure we find it
otherwise in our days, Petronius.
pruinosis horret facundia pannis. Herodotus vitae eius Scaliger in Poet.
potentiorum aedes ostiatim adiens aliquid accipiebat cane^s carmina sua
concomitante eum puerorum choro.
Homer himself must beg if he want means, and as by report he sometimes did
go from door to door, and sing ballads, with a company of boys about him.
This common misery of theirs must needs distract them, make them discontent and
melancholy, as commonly they are, wayward, still murmuring and repining, ob
inopiam morosi sunt, quibus est male, as Plutarch quotes out of Euripides, and
that comicall Poet well seconds. Ter. Act. 4. Scen. 3. Adelph. Hegio.
Omnes quibus res sint miniss secundae nescio quomodo
Suspitiosi, ad contumeliam omnia accipiunt magis,
Propter suam impotentiam se credunt negligi.
if they be in adversity, they are more suspicious and apt to mistake, they
think themselves scorned by reason of their misery: And therefore many
generous spirits in such cases, withdraw themselves from all company. And it is
not without cause, for we see men commonly respected to their means, and
vilified if they be in bad clothes. Plutarch vita cius.
Philopoemenus the orator was set to cut wood, because he was so homely
attired. Vita Ter.
Terentius was set at lower end of Cecilius table, because of his homely
outside. And Gomesius lib. 3 cap. 21. de sale.
Dantes that famous Italian Poet, because his clothes were but mean, could not
be admitted to sit down at a Feast. Gnatho scorned his old familiar friend,
because of his apparel. Ter. Enuch. Act. 2. Scen. 2.
Hominem video pannis, annisque obsitum, hic ego illum contempsipraeme; He that
has ^^ per annum coming in more then others, scorns him that has less, and
is a better man. Pro. 30.8. sc. 1.
and it is the common fashion of the world. That such men as are poor, may
justly be discontent, melancholy, and complain of their present misery, and all
may pray with Prove. 30.8.
Solomon, Give me O Lord neither riches nor poverty, feed me with food
convenient for me.

SVBSECT. 7. An heap of other Accidents causing melancholy. Death of friends,
losses etc.
IN this Labyrinth of Accidental causes, the farther I wander, the more
intricate I find the passage, multae ambages, and new causes, as so many
bypath, offer themselves to be discussed. To search out all, were an
Herculean work, and fitter for Theseus. I will follow mine intended thread, and
point at only some few of the chiefest. Amongst which, loss and death of
friends may challenge a first place, multi tristantur, Death of friends.
as 3. de Anima cap. de maerore.
Vives well observes, post delicias, convivia, dies festos, many are melancholy
after some feast, holiday, merry meeting, or some pleasing sport, some at the
departure of friends only, whom they shall shortly see again, weep and howl,
and look after them as a cow lowes after her calfe, or a child takes on that
goes to school after holidayes. Montanus consil. 232. make mention of a
country woman, that parting with her friends and native place, became
grievously melancholy for many years; and Trallianus of another so caused for
the absence of her husband. If parting of friends alone can work such violent
effects, what shall death do, when they must eternally be separated, never
here to meet again? This is so grievous a torment for the time, that it takes
away all appetite, desire of life, and extinguisheth all delights, it causes
deep sighs and groans, tears, exclamations, howling, roaring, and many
bitter pangs, and by frequent meditation extends so far sometimes, Patres
mortu^os coram astantes and filios etc. Marcellus Donatus.
that they think they see their dead friends continually in their eyes,
obuersantes imagines, as Conciliator confessed he saw his mothers ghost
presenting her self still before him. They that are most stayed and patient,
are so furiously carried headlong by this passion of sorrow in this case, that
brave discreet men many times forget them selves, and weep like children, many
months together, as Rachel did, and will not be comforted. How does Praefat.
lib. 6.
Quintilian complain for the loss of his son, to despair almost: and Cardan
lament his only child, in his book de libris proprijs, and elsewhere in many
other of his tracts. Alexander, a man of a most invincible courage, after
Ephestions death, as Curtius relates, triduum iacuit ad moriendum obstinatus,
lay three days together upon the ground, obstinate to dye with him, and would
neither eat nor drink, nor sleep: so did Adrian the Emperor bewail his
Antinous, Hercules Hylas, Orpheus Euridice, David Absolon, Austin his mother
Monica, Niobe her children, in so much, that the Ovid. Met.
Poets fained her to be turned into a stone, as being stupefied through the
extremity of grief. Plut. vita eius.
Aegeus signo lugubri filij consternatus, in mare se praecipite^ dedit,
impatient of sorrow for his sons death, drowned himself. Our late Physicians
are full of such examples. Montanus consil. 242. Nobilis matrona melancholica
ob mortem mariti.
had a patient troubled with this infirmity by reason of her husbands death
many years together, and Trincaevelius lib. 1. cap. 14. had such another,
almost in despair after his mothers departure, vt se ferme praecipitem daret;
and ready through distraction to make away himself: and in his 15 counsel,
tells a story of one, that was 50 years of age, that grew desperate upon his
mothers death, and cured by Falopius, Ex matris obitu in desperationem incidit.
fell many years after into a relapse, by the sudden death of a daughter which
he had, and could never after be recovered. The fury of this passion is so
violent sometimes, that it daunts whole kingdoms and cities. Vespasians death
was pitifully lamented all over the Roman Empire, totus orbis lugebat, says
Aurelius Victor. Alexander commanded the battlements of houses to be pulled
down, mules and horses to have their manes shorn off, and many common
soldiers to be slain, to accompany his dear Ephestions death, which is now
practiced amongst the Tartars, that when Mathias a Michou. Bolerus Amphitbeat.
a great Cham dies, 10 or 12 thousand must be slain, and amongst those Lo.
Vertomanus. M. ^olus Venetus.
pagan Indians their wives and servants voluntary die with them. Leo Decimus was
so much bewailed in Rome, after his departure that as Ionius gives out, Vita
eius.
publica hilaritas and all good fellowshipe, and peace, and mirth, and plenty
died with him when Augustus Caesar died, says Paterculus orbis ruina^
timueramus we were all afraid, as if heaven had fallen upon our heads. Lib. 5.
de ass.
Budaeus records, how that at Jews the 12. death ta^ subita mutatio, vt qui
prius digito coelu^ attingere videbantur, nunc humi derepente serpere,
sideratos esse diceres: they that were erst in heaven, upon a sudden, as if
they had bin planet stricken, lay groueling on the ground. How were we affected
here in England for our Titus, delitiae humani generis, Prince Henry's immature
death, as if all our lives had exhaled with his? In a word as he Mat. Paris.
says of Edward the first, at the news of Edward of Caernarvan his sons
birth, immortaliter gavisus, he was immortally glad; may we say on the contrary
of friends deaths, immortaliter gementes, we are many of us as so many turtles,
eternally dejected with it.

There is another sorrow which arises from the loss of Temporal goods and
fortunes, which equally afflicts, Lo^^e of goods
and may go hand in hand with the precedent: loss of time, loss of honor,
office, of good name, of labor, frustrate hopes, may much torment, but in my
Judgment there is no torture like unto this, or that sooner procures this
malady and mischief. Invenalis.
Ploratur lachrymis amissa pecunia veris: it wrings true tears from our eyes,
and many sighs and sorrow from our hearts, and often causes habitual
melancholy it self. Guianerius tract. 15.5, repeats this for an especial
cause: Multi qui res amatas perdiderant, vt filios opes non ^erantes recuperare
propter assidua^ talium considerationem melancholici fiunt vt ipse vidi.
Loss of friends, and loss of goods, makes many men melancholy, as I have
often seen by continual meditation of such things. The same causes Arnoldus
Villanovanus inculcates Breviar. lib. 1. cap. 18. ex r^rum amissione, damno,
amicorum morte etc. many men are affected like Staniburfius Hib. Hist.
Irishme^in this behalf, that if they have a good skimiter, had rather have a
blow on their arm, then their weapon hurt, they had rather loose their lives,
then their goods: and the grief that comes hence continues long, says Cap
3 melancholia frequenter venit ob iacturam pesuniae victoriae repulfa^ morte
liberorum, quibus longo post tempore animus torquetur, and a dispositione fit
habitus.
Plater, and out of many dispositions, procures an habit. Consil. 26.
Montanus and Frisemelica cured a young man of 22 years of age, that so became
melancholy ob amissam pecuniam, for a sum of money which he had unhappily
lost. Scenkius has such another story, of one that became melancholy because
he had ouershot himself, and spent his stock in unnecessary buildings.
Nubrigenfis.
Roger that rich Bishop of Salisbury, exutus opibus and castris a rege
Stephano, spoiled of his goods and Manors by King Stephen; vi doloris
absorptus, atque in amentiam versus, indecentia fecit, through grief ran mad,
and spoke and did he knew not what. Terence the Poet drowned himself for the
loss of some of his Comedies which suffered shipwreck. When a poor man has
made many hungry meals, got together a small sum which he loses in an
instant; a Scholar spent many an hours study to no purpose, and his labors
lost etc. how should it otherwise be? I may conclude with Gregory, temporalium
amor quantum afficit, cum haret possessio, tantum quum subtrahitur, vrit dolor;
riches do not so much exhilerate us with their possession, as they torment us
with their loss.

Next to Sorrow still I may annexe such accidents as procure Fear, as besides
those Terrors which I have Sec 2. Mem. 4. Subsec. 3. Fears from ominous
accidents, destinies foretold.
before touched, and many other fears (for they are infinite) there is a Fear
which is commonly caused by prodigies and dismal accidents, which much trouble
many of us. As if a Hare cross the way at our going forth, or a Mouse gnaw our
clothes: If they bleed three drops at nose, the Salt fall toward them, a black
spot appear in their nails etc. with many such, which Delrio To, 2 lib. 3.
sec. 4. Austin Niphus in his book de Augurijs. Polidore Virg. lib. 3. de
Prodigijs. Sarisburiensis Policrat. lib. 1. cap. 13. discuss at large, they
are so much affected, that with very strength of Imagination and Fear, and the
devils craft, they pull those Accersunt sibi (...).
misfortunes they suspect upon their own heads, and that which they fear
shall come upon them, as Solomon foretells, Pro. 10.24. and Isay denounces
66.4. which if they could neglect and contemn, would not come to pass. Eorum
vires nostra resident opinione, Si non observemus, nihil valent. Polidor.
vt morbi gravitas aegrota^tiu^ cogitatione, they are intended and remitted as
our opinion is fixed more or less. N.N. dat poenas says Consil. 26 lib. 2
Crato of such a one, vtina^ non attraheret: he is punished, and is the cause
of it Harm watch harm catch.
himself. As much we may say of the^ that are trobled with their fortunes or
ill destinies foretold, multos angit praescientia malorum. The foreknowledge
of what shall come to pass crucifies many men, foretold by Astrologers or
Wisards, be it ill accident or death it self. Severus, Adrian, Domitian, can
testify as much, of whose fear and suspicion Sueton, Herodian, and the rest
of those writers tell strange stories in this behalf. Invenis sollicitus de
futuris frustra, factus melancholicus.
Montanus Consil. 31. has one example of a young man exceeding melancholy upon
this occasion. Metus futurorum maxim torquet Sinas, as Expedit in Sinas lib.
1. cap. 3.
Matthew Riccius the Jesuit informs us in his Commentaries of those
countries, of all nations they are most superstitious, and much tormented in
this kind; and attribute so much to their divinators, vt ipse metus fidem
faciat, that fear it self and conceit cause it to Timendo praeoccupat quod
vitat vltro, provocatque quod fugit, gaudetque maeren^ and lubens miser fuit.
Heinsius Austriaco. Unfortunate marriage.
fall out: If he foretell such a day that very time they will be sick,
vimetus afflicti in aegritudinem cadunt, and many times dye as it is foretold.
A true saying, Timor mortis morte peior, the fear of death is worse then death
it self, and the memory of it to some rich men is a bitter as gaul, Ecclus.
41.1 a worser plague cannot happen to a man, then to be so troubled in his
mind. Amongst these irksome Accidents unfortunate marriages may be ranked, a
condition of life appointed by God himself in Paradise, an honorable and
happy estate, and as great a felicity as can befall a man in this world, A
virtuous woman is the crown of her husband. Pro. 12.4 but she etc.
if the parties can agree as they ought, and live as Lib. 17. epist. 105.
Seneca lived with his Paulina: but if they be unequally matched or cannot
agree, a greater misery cannot be expected, to have a scold, a slut, a harlot,
a fool, a ^ury, or a fiend, there can be no greater plague Eccl. 26.14. He that
has her is as if he held a Scorpion. and 26.25. a wicked wife makes a sorry
countenance, an heavy heart, and he had rather dwell with a lion then keep
house with such a wife Her Titionatur, candelabratur, etc.
properties Iovianus Pontanus has described at large, Ant. dial. Tom. 2. under
the name of Euphorbia. Or if they be not equal in years. Cicilius in Agellius
lib. 7. cap. 23. co^plaines much of an old wife, dum eius mortem inhio, egomet
mortuus viuo inter viuos, whilst I gape after her death, I live a dead man
amongst the living. The same inconvenience befalls women. Hiegans virgo inuita
cuidam e nostratibus nupsit etc.
A young Gentlewoman in Basil was married, says Faelix Plater observat. lib. 1.
to an ancient man against her will, whom she could not affect, she was
continually melancholy, and pined away for grief, and though her husband did
all he could possibly to give her content, in a disco^tented humor at length
she hanged her self. Many other stories he relates in this kind. Duxi vxorem
quam ibi miseri^ non vidinati filij alia curae. Ter. Act. 5. Scen. 4. Demea
Adelp.
Thus men are plagued with women, they again with men, when they are of
diverse humors and conditions, he a spendthrift, and she sparing, one honest,
the other dishonest, etc. Parents many times disquiet their children, and they
their parents. Pro.
A foolish son is an heaviness to his mother. Iniusta novercae: A
stepmother often vexes a whole family, which made Cato's son expostulate
with his father, why he should offer to marry his client Solinius daughter, a
young wench. Cuius causa novercam induceret, what offense had he done that he
should marry again? Unkind, unnatural friends, Evil neighbors, bad
servants, debts and debets, suretiship the bane of many families, Sponde
praesto noxa est, he shall be sore vexed that is surety for a stranger. Pro.
11, 15. and he that hates suretiship is sure. Contention, brawling, law-sutes,
falling out of neighbors and friends, discordia demens, Virg. Aen. 6. are
equal to the first, grieve many a man and vex his soul. Nihil sane
miserabilius eorum mentibus, as De increm. vib. lib. 3. cap. 3. tanquam diro
mucrone confossi his nulla requies nulla delectatio, sollicitudo, gemit^s,
furor, desperatio, timor tanquam ad perpetuam aerumnaus infaeliciter rapti.
Boter holds, nothing so miserable as such men, full of cares, griefs,
anxieties, as if they were stabbed with a sharp sword, fear, suspicion,
desperation, sorrow, care grief, are the ordinary companions of such men. Our
Welchmen are noted by some of their Humfredus Lluid epist ad Abrahamum
Ortelium. Litibus and controversiis vsque ad omnium bonoru^ consumptionem
contendunt.
own country men to consume one another in this kind, but whosoever they are
that use it, these are their ordinary sympto^es, especially if they be convict
or overcome, Spretaeque iniuria formae.
cast in a suit. Aerius put by a Bishopric by Eustachius turned heretic,
and lived after discontented all his life. Quaeque repulsa gravis
Every Repulse, heu quanta de spe decidi. Disgrace, Infamy, will almost effect
as much, and that a long time after. Hipponax a Satyricall Poet, so vilified
and lashed two Painters in his Iambicks, vt ambo laqueo se suffocarent, Lib.
36. cap. 5.
Pliny says, both hanged themselves. All oppositions, dangers, perplexities,
discontents, Nihil aeque amarum, quam diu pendere: quid^ aequiore animo serunt
praecidi spem suam quam trahi. Seneca cap. 3. lib. 2. de Den. Virg. Plater
observat. lib. 1.
to live in any suspense are of the same nature, potes hoc sub casu ducere
somnos? Who can be secure in such cases? Unkind speeches trouble many. A
Glasse-mans wife in Basil became melancholy because her husband said he would
marry again if she died. No cut to unkindness, as the saying is, a frown, or a
hard speech or bad look, especially to courtiers, or such as attend upon great
persons is present death, Ingeniu^ vultu statque caditque tuo, they ebb and
flow with their masters favors. Some persons are at their wits ends, if by
chance they overshoot themselves in their ordinary speeches, or actions, which
may after turn to their disgrace, or have any secret disclosed. Ronseus epist.
miscel. 3. reports of a gentlewoman 25 years old, that falling foul with one
of her Gossips, was vpbraided with a secret infirmity (no matter what) in
public, and so much grieved with it, that she did thereupon solitudines
quaerere, omnes ab se ablegare, ac tandem in gravissimam incidens melancholiam
contabescere, forsake al company and in a melancholy humor pine away. Others
are as much tortured to see themselves rejected contemned, scorned, disabled,
or Turpe relinqu^ est. Hor.
left behind their fellows. Lucian brings in a Philosopher in his Lapith.
conniuio, much discontented that he was not invited amongst the rest.
Praetextatus a robed Gentleman in Plutarch would not sit down at a feast
because he might not sit highest, but went his ways all in a chase. We see the
common quarrellings that are ordinary amongst us for taking of the wall,
precedence and the like, which though they be toys in themselves, and things
of no moment, yet they cause much hartburning amongst us. Nothing perceth
deeper then a contempt or disgrace, Scimus enim generosas naturas nulla re
citius moveri aut gravius affici, quam contemptu ac despicientia.
especially if they be generous spirits, scarce any thing affects the^ more,
then to be despised or vilified, Crato consil. 16. lib. 2. exemplifies it, and
common experience confirms it. Of the same nature is oppression, Eccles. 7.7.
surely oppression makes a man mad. Banishment a great misery as Tyrteus
describes it, in an Epigram of his. Nam miserum est patria amissa laribusque
vagari,
Mendicum and timida voce rogare cibos,
Omnibus invisus, quocunque accesserit exul
Semper crit, semper spretus egensque iacet. etc.
A miserable thing it is so to wander,
And like a beggar for to whine at door,
Contem'd of all the world an exile is,
Hated, rejected, needy still, and poor.
Polynices in his conference with Iocasta in In Phaeniss.
Euripides reckons up five miseries of a banished man, the least of which alone
were enough to deject some pusillanimous creatures. Oftentimes a too great
feeling of our own infirmities or imperfections of body or mind, will rivell us
up, as if we be visited with some loathsome disease, offensive to others, or
troblesome to our selves, as a stinking breath, deformity of our lims,
crookednes, loss of an eye, leg, hand, palenesse, leanesse, redness,
baldness, loss of hair, or want etc. hic vbi fluere caepit, diros ictus
cordi infert, says In laudem calvit.
Sinesius, he himself troubled not a little ob comae defectum, the loss of
hair alone, strikes a cruel stroke to the heart. Acco an old woman, seeing by
chance her face in a true glass: (for she vsedfalse flattering glasses belike
at other times, as most gentlewomen do) animi dolor in insaniam delapsa est,
Caelius Rhodiginus lib. 17. cap. 2. Ovid.
Brotheus the son of Vulcan, because he was ridiculous for his imperfections,
flung himself into the fire. Some are fair, but barren, and that gauls them.
Hanna wept and did not eat, and was troubled in spirit, and all for her
barrenness. 1. Sam. 1. and Genesis 30, Rachel said, in the anguish of her soul,
give me a child, or I shall die; another has too many, one was never married,
and that is his hell, another is, and that is his plague. Some are troubled in
that they are obscure, other by being traduced, slandred: no tidings troubles
one, ill reports and rumors, and bad tidings or news, hard hap, ill success,
va^n hopes another: one is too eminent, another is too base borne, and that
alone tortures him as much as the rest: one is out of action, employment,
another overcome and tormented with worldly cares, and onerous business. But
what Non mihi si centum lingue sint or^que centum Omnia causar^m percurrere
nomina possem.
tongue can suffice to speak of all.

Many men catch this malady by eating certain meats at unawares, as henbane,
nightshade, cicuta, mandrakes etc. by philters, wandering in the Sun, biting of
a mad dog, a blow on the head, stinging with that kind of spider called
Tarantula; an ordinary thing, if we believe Sckenkius lib. 7. de venenis, In
Calabria and Apulia in Italy. Cardan subtle. lib. 9. Scaliger exercitat. 185.
Their symptoms are merrily described by Iovianus Pontanus. Ant. dial. how they
dance altogether, Quae gestatae infaelicem and tristem reddunt, curas augent,
corpus siccant, somnii minuu^t.
and are cured by Music. Lib de gemmis
Cardan speaks of certain stones, if they be carried about one, which will
cause melancholy and madness, he calls them unhappy, as an Adamant, Selenites
etc. which dry up the body, increase cares, diminish sleep. Cresias in
Persicis makes mention of a Well in those parts, of which if any man drink, Ad
vnum diem mente alienatus.
he is mad for 24. hours: but these relations are common in all writers.
Invenal Sat. 3
His alias poteram and plures subnectere causas,
Sed iumenta vocant, and Sol inclinat, eundum est.
Many such causes, much more could I say,
But that for provender my cattle stay:
The Sun declines, and I must needs away.
These causes if they be considered and come alone, I do easily yield, can do
little of themselves, or seldom, or apart, though many times they are all
sufficient every one, yet if they do concur, as oftentimes they do, vis
vnita fortior: Et quae non obsunt singula, multa nocent^punc; they may batter a
strong constitution; and as Intus besti^ minutae m^ltae necant. num^uid
minuti^sima sunt grana a^enae? s^d si arena ^^plius in navom m^tatur, mergit
illa^: quam minu^^ gullae (...) namen (...) st^man^, domus eijciua^ timendae
(...) m^il^^^d^^s, si non mag^itudinis.
Austin said, many grains and small sands sink a ship, many small drops make a
flood etc. often reiterated, many dispositions produce an habit.

MEMB. 5.
SVBSEC. 1. Continent, inward, antecedent, next causes, and how the body works
on the mind.
AS a purly hunter, I have hitherto beaten about the circuit of the forest of
this Microcosme, and have followed only those outward adventitious causes; I
will now break into the inner rooms, and rip up the antecedent immediate
causes which are there to be found. For as the distraction of the mind, amongst
other outward causes and perturbations, alters the temperature of the Body, so
the distraction and distemperature of the Body, will cause a distemperature of
the Soul, and it is hard to decide which of these two do more harm to the
other. Plato, Cyprian, and some others, as I have formerly said, lay the
greatest fault on the Soul, excusing the Body, others again accusing the Body,
excuse the Soul, as a principal Agent. Their reasons are, because Mores
sequu^tur temperatura^ corporis.
the manners do follow the Temperature of the Body, as Galen proves in his
book of that subject, Prosper Calenius de Atra bile, Jason Pratensis cap. de
Mania, Lemnius lib. 4. cap. 16. and many others. And that which Gualter has
commented hom. 10. in epist. Iohannis is most true, concupiscence and original
sin, inclinations, and bad humors are Scintillae latent in corpore.
radical in every one of us, and cause these perturbations, affections, and
several distempers, offering many times violence unto the Soul. Every man is
tempted by his own concupiscence, James 1.14. and the spirit is willing, but
the flesh is weak, and rebelleth against the spirit, as our Gal. 5.
Apostle teaches us: that me thinks the Soul has the better plea against the
body, which so forcibly inclines us, that we cannot resist, Nec nos obniti
contra, nec tendere tantu^ Sufficimus. How the Body being material, works
upon the immateriall Soul, by mediation of humors and spirits, which
participate of both, ill disposed organs, Cornelius Agrippa has discoursed
lib. 1. de occult. Philos. cap. 63.64.65. Levinus Lemnius lib. 1. de occult.
not. mir. cap. 12. and 16. and 21. institut. ad opt. vit. Perkins lib. 1. Cases
of Con. cap. 12. T. Bright cap. 10 11, 12, in his Treatise of Melancholy. For
as Sicut ex animi affectionibus corpus languescit, sic ex corporis vitijs, and
morborum plerisque ^ruciatibus, anima^ videmus hebetari. Galenus.
anger, fear, sorrow, obtrectation, emulation etc. si mentis intimos recessus
occuparint, says Lib. 1. cap. 16.
Lemnius, corpori quoque infesta sunt, and ille teterrimos morbos inferunt,
cause grievous diseases in the Body, so bodily diseases affect the Soul by
consent. Now the chiefest causes proceed from the Corporis it^dem morbi animam
per consensum a lege consortii afficiunt, and quanquam obiecta multos motus
turbulentos in homine concitent, praecipua tamen causae in cord and humoribus,
spiritibusque consistit etc.
Heart, humors, spirits: as they are purer, or impurer, so is the Mind, and
equally suffers, as a lute out of rune, if one string, or one organ be
distempered, all the rest miscary, corpus onustum externis vitijs, animum
quoque praegravat vna: The Body is domicilium animae, her house, abode and
stay, and as a torch, gives a better light, and a sweeter smell, according to
the matter he is made of, so does our Soul perform al her actions, better or
worse, as her organs are disposed; or as wine savours of the caske where it is
kept, the Soul receives a Tincture from the Body, through which it works. We
see this in old men, children, Europeans, Asians, hot and cold Climes;
Sanguine are merry, Melancholy sad, Phlegmatic dull, by reason of abundance of
such humors, and they cannot resist such passions as are infflicted by them.
For in this infirmity of humane nature, as Melancthon declares, Hor.
the Understanding is so tied to, and captivated by his inferior senses, that
without their help he cannot exercise his functions, and the Will being
weakened, has but a small power to restrain those outward parts, but suffers
her self to be overruled by them; that I must needs conclude with Lemnius,
spiritus and humores maximum nocumentum obtinent, spirits and humors do most
harm in Humores pr^vi mentem obnubilant.
troubling the Soul. How should a man choose but be choleric and angry, that
has his body so clogged with abundance of gross humors? or melancholy, that
is so inwardly disposed? Thence comes then this malady, Madness, Apoplexyes,
Lethargies etc. it may not be denied.

Now this Body of ours is most part distempered by some precedent diseases,
which molest his inward organs and instruments, and so per consequens causes
Melancholy, according to the consent of the most approved Physicians. Hic humor
vel a partis intemperie generatur, vel relinquitur post infla^matisnes, vel
crassior invenis co^clusus, vel torpidus malignam qualitate contrabit.
This humor (as Avicenna lib. 3. Fen. 1. Tract. 4. cap. 18. Arnoldus breviar
lib. 1. cap. 18. Iacchinus comment. in 9. Rhasis cap. 15. Montaltus cap. 10.
Nicholas Piso cap. de Melan. etc. suppose) is begotten by the distemperature of
some inward part, innate, or left after some inflammations, or else included in
the blood after an Saepe constat in febre homine^ melancholicu^, vel post
febrem reddi aut alium morbum. Calida intemperies innata, vel a febre contracta.
ague, or some other malignant disease. This opinion of theirs concurres with
that of Galen lib. 3. cap. 6. de locis affect. Guianerius gives an instance in
one so caused by a quartan ague, and Montanus consil. 32. in a young man of 28
years of age, so distempered after a quartan, which had molested him 5 years
together. Hildisheim spicel. 2. de Mania, relates of a Dutch Baron, grievously
tormented with melancholy after a long Raro quis diuturno morbo laborat qui non
sit melancholicus. Mercurialis de affect. capitis lib. 1. cap. 10 de mel.
ague, Galen lib. de atra bile cap. 4. puts the plague a cause. Botaldus in his
book de lue vener. cap. 2. the French pox for a cause: others Phrensy,
Epilepsy, Apoplexy, because those diseases do often degenerate into this. Of
suppression of haemrods, haemorrogia, or bleeding at nose, menstruous
retentio^s, or any other evacuation stopped, I have already spoken. Only this I
will add, that such melancholy as shall be caused by such infirmities,
deserves to be pitied of all men, and to be respected with a more tender
compassion, according to Laurentius, as coming from a more inevitable cause.

SVBSECT. 2. Distemperature of particular parts.
THere is almost no part of the Body, which being distempered, does not cause
this Malady, as the Brain and his parts, Heart, Liver, Spleen, Stomach, Matrix
or Womb, Pylorus, Mirache, Mesentery, Hypocondries, Meseriack veins, and in a
word, says Ad nonum lib. Rhasis ad Almansor cap. 16. Vniversalites a quacunque
part potest fieri melancholicus. Vel quia aduritur, vel quia non expellit
superfluitatem excrementi.
Arculanus, there is no part which causes not melancholy, either because it is
adust, or does not expel the superfluity of the nutriment, Savanarola Pract.
mayor. rubric. 11. Tract. 6. cap. 1. is of the same opinion, that melancholy is
engendered in each particular part, and A Liene, iccinore, vtero, and alijs
partibus oritur.
Crato in consil. 17. lib. 2. Gordonius, who is instar omnium, lib. med partic.
2. cap. 19. confirms as much, putting the Materia melanchol ae aliquando in
cerebro, aliquar do ^s cord, in s^omacho, hepate, ab bypocondrijs, myrache,
spleen, cum ibi remanet, humor melancholicus.
matter of melancholy, sometimes in the Stomach, Liver, Heart, Brain, Spleen,
Mirach, Hypocondries, when as the melancholy humor resides there, or the Liver
is not well cleansed from Melancholy blood.

The Brain is a familiar and frequent cause, too hot, or to cold, Ex sanguine
adus^o, intra vel extra caput.
through adust blood so caused, as Mercurialis will have it, within or without
the head, the brain it self being distempered. Those are most apt to this
disease, Qui calidum cor habent, cerebrum bumidum, facile melancholici.
that have a hot Heart, and moist Brain, which Montaltus cap. 11. de Mel.
approues out of Haliabbas, Rhasis, and Avicenna. Mercurialis consil. 11.
assigns the coldness of the Brain a cause, and Salustius Salvianus med. lect.
lib. 2. cap, 1. will have it Sequitur melancholia malam intemperiem. frigidam
and siccam ipsius cerebri.
arise from a cold and dry distemperature of the Brain. Piso, Benedictus,
Victorius Faventinus, will have it proceed from a Saepe fit ex callidiore
cerebro, aut corpore colligente melancholiam. Piso.
hot distemperature of the Brain; and Vel per propriam affectione, vel per
consensum, cum vapores exhalant in cerebrum. Montaltus cap. 14.
Montaltus cap. 10. from the Brains heat, scorching the blood. The Brain is
still distempered by himself, or by consent: by himself or his proper
affection, as Faventinus calls it, Aut ibigignitur melancholicus fumus, aut
ali^^de vebitur, alterando animales facultates.
or by vapors which arise from the other parts, and fume up into the head,
altering the animal faculties.

Hildesheim spicel. ^. de Mania, will have it caused from a Ab intemperie
cordis, modo calidiore, modo f^r^idiore.
distemperature of the heart, sometimes hot, sometimes cold. A hot Liver, and
a cold Stomach, are put for usual causes of melancholy, or overmoist Stomach,
and a cold belly. Mercurialis consil. 11. and consil. 6. consil. 86 assigns a
hot Liver, and cold Stomach for ordinary causes. Epist. 209. Scoltzij.
Monavius in an epistle of his to Crato in Scoltzius, is of opinion, that
Hypocondriacall Melancholy may proceed from a cold Liver, the question is there
discussed. Most agree that a hot Liver is in fault, Officina humorum hepar
concurrit etc.
the Liver is the shop of humors, and especially causes melancholy by his hot
and dry distemperature. Ventriculus and venae meseriacae concurrunt, quod hae
parts obstructae sunt, etc.
The Stomach, and Meseriacke veins do often concur, by reason of their
obstructions, and thence their heat cannot be avoided, and many times the
matter is so adust, and inflamed in these parts, that it degenerates into
Hypocondriacall melancholy. Guianerius cap. 2. Tract. 15. will have the
Meseriacke veins a sufficient Perse sanguinem adurentes.
cause alone. The Spleen concurres to this malady, by all their consents, and
suppression of Haemrods, dum non expurgat altera causa lien, says Montaltus,
if it be Lien frigidus and siccus cap. 13.
too cold and dry, and do not purge the other parts as he ought. Consil. 23.
Montanus puts the Splen obstructus.
spleen stopped for a great cause. De art med. lib. 3, cap. 24.
Christophorus a Vega reports of his knowledge, that he has known melancholy
caused from putrified blood in those Seed veins and womb. A sanguiuis
putredine in vasis seminarijs and vtero, and quandoque a spermate d^u reten^o,
vel sanguine menstruo in melancholiam verso per pu^^efactionem, vel adust^onem.
Arculanus from that menstruous blood turned into melancholy, and seed too long
detained, (as I have already declared) by putrefaction or adustion.

The Misenteriu^, or Midriffe, Diaphragma is a cause, which the Magirus.
Greeks called (...): because by his inflammation, the mind is much troubled
with convulsions and dotage. All these most part offend by inflammation,
corrupting humors and spirits, in this non-naturall melancholy: for from these
are engendered fuliginous and black spirits. And for that reason E^go efficiens
^^^sa melancholy est calida and sicca intemperies, non frigida and sicca quod
multi opinati sunt ^oritur enim a calore cerebri (...) sanguine etc. ^um quod
aroma^a sanguinem incendant, solitude vigiliae febris precedens meditalio
studium, and h^^ omnia calefaciunt ergo ratum sit etc.
Montaltus cap. 10. de causis melan. will have the efficient cause of
melancholy to be hot and dry, not a cold and dry distemperature, as some hold,
from the heat of the Brain, rosting the blood, and immoderate heat of the
liver and bowels, and inflammation of the Pylorus. And so much the rather,
because that as Galen holds all spices inflame the blood, solitariness,
waking, agues, study, meditation, all which heat; and therefore he concludes
that this distemperature causing melancholy, is not cold and dry, but hot and
dry. But of this I have sufficiently treated in the matter of Melancholy, and
hold that this may be true in non-naturall Melancholy, which produces madness,
but not in that natural, which is more cold, and being immoderate, produces a
more gentle dotage. Cap. 13. de melanch.
Which opinion Geraldus de Solo maintains in his Comment upon Rhasis.

SVBSEC. 3. Causes of head Melancholy.
AFter a tedious discourse of the general causes of Melancholy, I am now
returned at last to treat in brief of the three particular Species, and such
causes as properly appertain unto them. And although these causes promiscuously
concur to each and every particular kind, and commonly produce their effects
in that part which is most weak, ill disposed, and least able to resist, and
so cause all three species; yet many of them are proper to some one kind, and
seldom found in the rest. As for example, Head melancholy is commonly caused
by a cold or hot distemperature of the Brain, Laurentius cap. 5. de melan.
Salust. Salvianus before mentioned lib. 2. cap. 1. de re med. will have it
proceed from cold: but that I take of natural melancholy, and such as are
fools and dote; for as Galen writes lib. 4. de pulls. 8. and Avicenna, A
fatuitate inseparabilis cerebri frigiditas.
a cold and moist Brain is an inseperable companion of folly. But this
adventitious melancholy which is here meant, is caused of an hot and dry
distemperature, as Ab interno calore assatur.
Damascen the Arabian, lib. 3. cap. 22. thinks, and most writers. Altomarus
and Piso call it Intemperies innata exurens, slavam bilem ac sanguinem in
melancholiam convertens.
an innate burning vntemperatnesse, turning blood and choler into melancholy.
Both these opinions may stand good, as Bruel maintains, and Capivaccius, si
cerebrum sit calidius, Si cerebrum sit calidius, fiet spiritus animalis
calidior, and delirium maniacum si frigidior fire fatuitas.
if the Brain be hot, the animal spirits will be hot, and thence comes
madness: if cold, folly. David Crusius Theatro morb. Hermet. lib. 2. cap. 6.
de atra bile, grants melancholy to be a disease of an inflamed Brain, but cold,
notwithstanding of it self: calida per accidens, frigida per se, hot by
accident only. I am of Capivaccius mind for my part. Now this humor according
to Salvianus, is sometime in the substance of the Brain, sometimes contained
in the Membranes and tunicles that cover the Brain, sometimes in the passages
of the Ventricles of the Brain, or veins of those Ventricles. It follows
many times Melancholia capitis accedit post phrenesim aut longam moram sub
sole, aut percussionem in capite. cap. 23. lib. 1.
Frenzy, long diseases, agues, long abode in hot places, or under the Sun, a
blow on the head, as Rhasis informs us: Piso adds solitariness, waking,
inflammations of the head, proceeding most part Qui bibit vina potentia, and
saepe sunt sub sole.
from much use of spices, hot wines, hot meats; all which Montanus reckons up
consil. 22. for a Melancholy Jew; and Hernius repeates cap. 12. de Mania, hot
bathes, garlic, onions, says Guianerius, bad air, corrupt, much Curae
validae largioris vini and aromatum vsus.
waking etc. retention of seed, or abundance, stopping of haemorrogia, the
Midriffe misaffected; and according to Trallianus l. 1.16. immoderate cares,
troubles, griefs, discontent, study, meditation, and in a word, the abuse of
all those 6. non-naturall things. Hercules de Saxonia cap. 16. lib, 1. will
have it caused from a A Cauterio and vlcere exsiccato.
cautery, or boil d^yed up, or any issue. Amatus Lusitanus cent. 2. cura 67.
gives instance in a fellow that had a boil in his arm, and Ab vlcere curato
incidit in insaniam, aperto vulnese curatur.
after that was cured, ran mad, and when the wound was open, he was cured
again. Trincavelius consil. 13. lib. 1. has an example of a melancholy man so
caused by overmuch continuance in the sun, frequent use of Venery, and
immoderate exercise. And in his consil. 49. lib. 3. from an Agalea nimis
ca^^fa^^a.
headpeece overheated, which caused head melancholy. Prosper Calenius brings in
Cardinal Caesius for a pattern of such as are so melancholy by long study: but
examples are infinite.

SVBSECT. 4. Causes of Hypocondriacall or windy Melancholy.
IN repeating of these causes, I must cramb bis coctam opponere, say that
again which I have formerly said, in applying them to their proper Species: of
Hypocondriacall or flatuous melancholy, which the Arabians call Myrachiall, and
is in my judgment the most grievous and frequent, though Bruel and Laurentius
make it least dangerous, and not so hard to be known. His causes are inward
or outward. Inward from diverse parts or organes, as midriffe, spleen,
stomach, liver, pylorus, womb, diaphragma, meseriacke veins, stopping of
Issues, etc. Montaltus, cap. 15. forth of Galen recites Exuritur sanguis and
venae obstruuntur quibus obstructis prohibetur transitus Chyliad iecur,
corrumpitur and in rugitus and flatus vertitur.
heat and obstruction of those meseriack veins, as an immediate cause, by
which means the passage of the Chylus to the liver is detained, stopped or
corrupted, and turned into rumbling and wind. Montanus consil. 233. has an
evident demonstration Trincavellius, lib. 1. cap. 12. and Plater obseruat, lib.
1. for a Doctor of the Law visited with this infirmity, from the said
obstruction and heat of these Meseriacke veins, and bowels: quoniam inter
ventriculu^ and iecur venae effervescu^t. The veins are inflamed about the
liver and stomach. Sometimes those other parts are together misaffected, and
concur to the production of this malady. A hot liver and cold stomach or
cold belly: look for instances in Hollerius, Victor Trincavelius, consil. 35.
lib. 3. Hildesheim Spicel. 2. fol. 132. Solenander consil. 9. pro cive
Lugdunensi, Montanus consil. 229. for the earl of Monfort in Germany. 1549.
and Frisimelica in the 233. consultation of the said Montanus. I. Caesar
Claudinus gives instance of a cold stomach and overhote liver, almost in every
consultation, consult. 89. for a certain Count, and consult. 106. for a
Polonian Baron, by reason of heat the blood is inflamed, and gross vapors
sent to the Heart and brain. Mercurialis subscribes to them, consil. 86.
Stomacho ^aeso robur corporis imminuitur and reliqua membra alimento orbata etc.
the stomach being misaffected, etc. which he calls king of the belly, because
if he be distempered, all the rest suffer with him, as being deprived of their
nutriment, or fed with bad nourishment, by means of which, come crudities,
obstructions, wind, rumbling, griping, etc. Hercules de Saxonia besides heat,
will have the weakness of the liver and his obstruction a cause, facultatem
debilem iecinoris, which he Cap. 12.
calls the mineral of melancholy. Laurentius assigns this reason, because the
liver overhote draws the meat undigested out of the stomach, and burns the
humors. Montanus col. 244. proves that sometimes a cold liver may be a cause.
Laurentius, cap. 12. and Trincavelius, lib. 12. consil. and Gualter Bruel
seems to lay the greatest fault upon the Spleen, that does not his duty in
purging the liver as he ought, being to great or to little, in drawing too much
blood sometimes to it, and not expelling it, as P. Cnemiandrus in a Hildesheim.
consultation of his noted, tumorem lienis he names it, and the fountain of
melancholy. Diocles supposed the ground of this kind of melancholy, to
proceed from the inflammation of the pylorus, which is the nether mouth of the
Ventricle. Others assign the Mesenterium or midriffe distempered by heat, the
womb misaffected, stopping of of hemrods, with many others. All which
Laurentius, cap. 12. reduces to three, Mesentery, liver and Spleen, from
whence he denominates Hepaticke, Spleniticke, and Meseriacke Melancholy.

Outward causes, are bad diet, care, griefs, discontents, and in a word al
those 6. non-natural things, as Montanus found by his experience, consil. 244.
Solenander consil, 9. for a citizen of Lions in France gives his reader to
understand, that he knew this mischief procured by a medicine of
Cantharides, which an unskillful Physician gave unto his patient to drink ad
venerem excitandam. But most commonly fear, grief, and some sudden commotion,
or perturbation of the mind begins it, in such bodies especially as are ill
disposed. Melancthon. tract. 14. cap. 2. de anima, will have it as common to
men, as the mother to women, upon some grievous trouble dislike, or discontent,
Montanus consil. 22. pro delirante Iudaeo confirms it, Habuit saena animi
symptomata quae impediunt concoctionem, etc.
grievous symptoms of mind brought him to it. Randoletius relates of
himself, that being one day very intent to write out a Physicians notes,
molested by an odd occasion, he fell into an hypocondriacall fit, to avoid
which he drank the decoction of wormwood, and was freed. Vsitatissimus morbus
cum sit, vtile est huius visceris accidentia considerare nec l^ve periculu^
huius causas morbi ignorantibus.
Melancthon, (being the disease is so troublesome and frequent) holds it a
most necessary and profitable study, for every man to know the accidents of it,
and a dangerous thing to be ignorant, and would therefore have most men, in
some sort to understand the causes, symptoms and cures of it.

SVBSEC. 5. Causes of melancholy from the whole Body.
AS before, the cause of this kind of melancholy is inward or outward. Inward,
Iecur aptum ad generandu^ ca lem humorem, splen natura imbecillior Piso.
Altomarus. Guianerius.
when the liver is apt to engender such an humor, or the Spleen weak by
nature and not able to discharge his office. A melancholy temperature,
retention of haemrods, monthly issues, bleeding at nose, long diseases, agues,
and all those six non-naturall things. But especially Melancholiam quae sit a
redundantia humoris in toto corpore victus imprimis generat qui cum humorem
parit.
bad diet as Piso thinks, as pulse, salt meat, shellfish, cheese black wine
etc. Mercurialis out of Averroes and Avicenna condemns all herbs. Galen. lib.
3. de loc. affec. cap. 7. especially cabbage. So likewise fear, sorrow,
discontents, etc: but of these before.

You have had at last the general and particular causes of melancholy: now go
and brag of thy present happiness whosoever thou art, brag of thy
temperature, and of thy good parts, insult, triumph, and boast? thou see in
what a brittle state thou art, how soon thou mai'st be dejected, how many
several ways, by bad diet, bad air, a small loss, a little sorrow, or
discontent, an ague, etc: how many sudden accidents may procure thy ruin, what
a small tenure of happynes thou have in this life, how weak and silly a
creature thou art. Humble thy self therefore under the mighty hand of God. 1.
Pet. 5.6. know thyselfe, acknowledge thy present misery, and make right use of
it, qui stat videat ne cadat. Thou do now flourish and have bona animi,
corporis, and fortunae, goods of body, mind, and fortune, nescis quid serus
secum vesper ferat, thou know notwhat storms and tempests the late evening
may bring with it. Be not secure, be sober and watch, Ausenius
fortunam reverenter habe, if fortunate and rich: if sick and poor, moderate
thy self, I have said.

SECT. 3.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Symptoms or signs of melancholy in the body.
Symptoms are either Quaedam vniversalia particularia quaedam manifesta
quaedam in corpore quaedam incogitatione and animo quaedam a stellis quaedam ab
humoribus quae vt vinum corpus vary dispoxit, etc. Diversa phantasmata pro
varietate causae externae internae
Universal or particular, says Gordonius, lib. med. cap. 19, part. 2. to
persons, to species, some signs are secret, some manifest, some in the Body,
some in the mind, and diversely vary, according to the inward or outward
causes, Capivaccius. or from stars according to Iovianus Pontanus, de reb.
coelest. lib. 10. cap. 13. and celestial influences or are from the humors
diversely mixed, Ficinus, lib. 1. cap. 4. de san. tue^da: as it is hot, cold,
natural, unnatural, intended or remitted, so will Aetius have melancholica
deliria multiformia, diversity of melancholy signs. Laurentius ascribes the^
to their several temperatures, delights, natures, inclinations, continuance of
time, as they are simple or mixed with other Diseases, as the causes are diverse,
so must the signs be and almost infinite, Altomarus, cap. 7. art. med. And as
wine producet diverse effects, or that herb Tortocolla in Lib. 1. de risu Fol.
17. Ad eius esum alij sudant alij vomu^t, flent, bibunt, saltant, alij rident,
tremunt, dormiunt, etc.
Laurentius, which makes some laugh, some weep, some sleep, some dance, some
sing, some howl, some drink, etc. So does this our melancholy humor, work
several signs in several parties.

But to confine them, these general symptoms may be reduced to those of the
Body or of the Mind. Those usual signs appearing in the Bodies of such as
are melancholy be these, cold and dry, or they are hot and dry, as the
humor is more or less adust. And from T. Bright c. 20
these first qualities arise many other second, as that of Nigres^it hic humor
aliquando supercalefactus, aliquando superfrigefactus. Melanel. e Gal.
color, black, swarty, pale, ruddy, etc. some are impense rubri, as Montaltus
cap. 16. observes out of Galen. lib. 3. de locis affectis, very read and high
colored. Hippocrates in his book de Interpret F. Calvo.
Insania and Melan. reckons up these signs, that they are Oculihis excauantur
venti gignuntur circum praecordia and acidiructus sicci fere ventres. Vertigo,
tinnitus aurium, somni p^s^lli somnia terribilia and interrupta.
lean, withered, hollow-eyed, look old, wrinkled, harsh, much troubled with
wind, and a griping in their bellies, or belly-ake, bealch often, dry bellies
and hard, dejected looks, flaggy beards, singing of the cares, vertigo,
lightheaded, little or no sleep, and that interrupt, terrible and fearful
dreams. The same symptoms are repeated by Melanclius in his book of
Melancholy collected out of Galen, Ruffus, Aetius, by Rhasis, Gordonius, and
all the Iuniors, Assiduae eaeque acidae ructationes quae cibum virulentum
pisculentumque nidorem etsi nil tale ingestum sit referant ob cruditatem.
Ventres hisce aridi somnus plerumque parcus and interruptus somnia absurdissima
turbulenta. corporis tremor, capitis grauedo, strepitus circa aures, and
visiones ante oculos, ad venerea prod^gi.
continual sharp and stinking belchings, as if their meat in their stomach
were putrified, or that they had eaten fish, dry bellies, absurd and interrupt
dreams, and many fantastical visions about their eyes, vertiginous, apt to
tremble, and prone to Venery, Altomarus Bruell. Piso. Montaltus.
Some add palpitation of the heart, Some add short wind, heart-ake, or
heaviness of heart.
cold sweat, as usual symptoms, and a kind of leaping in many parts of the
body, saltum in multis corporis partibus, and a kind of itching says
Laurentius on the superficies of the skin, like a flea-biting sometimes.
Frequentes habent oculorum nictationes. Aliqui tamen fixis oculis plerumque
sunt.
Montaltus cap. 21. puts fixed eyes and much twinkling of their eyes for a
sign, and so does Avicenna, oculos habentes palpantes, trauli vehementer
rubricundi, etc. l. 3 Fen. 1. Tract. 4. cap. 18. that they stutte most part,
which he took out of Hippocrates Aphorisms. Cont. lib. 1. Tract. 9. Signa
buius morbi sunt plurimus soltus, sonitus aurium, capitis gravedo, lingua
titubat, oculi excavantur, etc.
Rhasis makes headache, and a binding heaviness for a principal token, as much
leaping of wind about the skin as well as stutting, or tripping in speech,
etc. hollow eyes, gross veins, and broad lips. And although they be
commonly lean, hirsute, vncheareful in countenance, withered, and not so
pleasant to behold, by reason of those continual fears, griefs, and
vexations; yet their memories are most part good, they have happy wits, and
excellent apprehensions. Their hot and dry brains make them they cannot
sleep, Ingentes habent and erebras vigilias, Areteus. Mighty and often
watchings, sometimes waking for a month, a year together. In Pantheon cap. de
Melancholia.
Hercules de Saxonia faithfully averreth, that he has heard his mother swear,
she slept not for seven months together: Trincauellius Tom. 2. consil. 10.
speaks of one that waked 50 days, and Skenkius has examples of two years.
In natural actions their appetite is greater then their concoction, multa
appetunt pauca digerunt, as Rhasis has it, they covet to eat, but cannot
digest. And although they Alvus arida nihil deiiciens, cibi capaces nihilominus
tamen extenuati sunt.
do eat much, yet they are lean, ill liking, says Areteus, withered and
hard, much troubled with costiuenesse, crudities, oppilations, spitting,
belching, etc. Their pulse rare and slow, except it be of the Nic. Piso.
Inflatio carotidum etc.
Carotides which is very strong; but that varies according to their intended
passions or perturbations, as Struthius has proved at large, Spigmatica artis
lib. 4. cap. 13. To say truth in such Chronicke diseases the pulse is not much
to be respected, there being so much superstition in it, as Andreas Dudeth
Rahamo. epist lib 3. Crat. epist. multa in pulsibus superstitio ausum etiam
dicere tot differentias quae describuntur a Galeno neque intelligi a quoqua^
nec observari posse.
Crato notes, and so many differences in Galen, that he dares say they may not
be observed, or understood of any man.

Their urine is most part pale, and low colored, Vrina pauca, acris, biliosa,
Areteus, Not much in quantity, but this in my judgment, is all out as
uncertain as the other, varying so often according to several persons,
habits, and other occasions, not to be respected in Cronick diseases. T.
Bright. c. 20
Their melancholy excrements in some very much, in others little, as the
Spleen plays his part, and thence proceeds wind, palpitation of the Heart,
short breath, plenty of humidity in the stomach heaviness of heart and
heart-ake, an intolerable stupidity and dullness of spirits. Their excrements
or stool hard, black to some, and little. If thy heart, brain, liver, spleen
be misaffected, as usually they are, many inconveniences proceed from them,
many diseases accompany, as Incubus, Post. 40. aetat. ^^num, says Iacchinus in
15.9. Rhasis. Idem Mercurialis co^sil 86. Trincavelius Tom. 2. consil. 17.
Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Vertigo, those frequent wakings and terrible dreams,
intempestiue laughing, weeping, sighing, sobbing, blushing, trembling,
sweating, swouning, etc. Fernelius consil. 43. and 45. Montanus consil. 230.
Galen. de locis affectis lib. 3. cap. 6.
All their senses are trobled, they think they see, hear, smell, and touch,
that which they do not, as shall be proved in the following discourse.
Gordonius modo rident modo slent, silent, etc.


SVBSECT. 2. Symptoms or signs in the Mind. Fear.

ARculanus in 9. Rhasis ad Almansor. cap. 16. will have these symptoms to be
infinite, as indeed they are, varying according to the parties, for scarce is
there one of a thousand that dotes alike, Laurentius cap. 16. Some few of
greater note I will point at; and amongst the rest, Fear and Sorrow, which as
they are causes, so if they persevere long, according to Aphorism and lib. de
melan.
Hippocrates, Lib 3. cap. 6. de locis affect. timor and maestitia si diutius
perseuerent etc.
Galen etc. they are most assured signs, inseparable companions, and
characters of melancholy; Of present melancholy, and habituated, says
Montaltus cap. 21. and common to them all; Avicenna: and that Omnes exercent
metus and tristitia, and sine causa.
without a cause, tunent de non timendis, Gordonius: quaeque momenti non sunt,
although not all alike, says Altomarus, Omnes timent licet non omnibus idem
time^di modus. Aetius. Tetrab, lib. 2. sec. 2 cap 9.
yet all fear, Ingenti pavore trepidant.
some with an extraordinary and a mighty fear, Areteus. Multi mortem timent,
and tamen sibi ipsis mortem consciscunt, alij caeli ruinam timent.
Many fear death, and yet in a contrary humor make away themselves, Galen lib.
3. de loc. affec. cap. 7. Some are afraid that Heaven will fall on their heads:
some they are damned, or shall be. Fear of imminent danger, loss, disgrace
still torments them etc. that they are all glass, and therefore will suffer no
man to come near them, that they are all cork, as light as feathers, others
as heavy as Lead, some are afraid their heads will fall off their shoulders,
that they have frogs in their bellies etc. Non ausus egredi domo ne deficeret.
Montanus consil. 23. speaks of one that d^rst not walk alone from home for
fear he should sown, or die. A second Multi daemones timent, latrones,
insidias. Avicenna.
fears every man he meets will rob him, quarrel with him, or kill him, a
third dare not venture to walk alone for fear he should meet the devil, a
thief, be sick, fears all old women as witches, and every dog or cat he sees,
he suspecteth to be a devil, another dare not go over a bridge etc. or come
hear a poole; some are Alij. comburi, alij de rege. Rasis.
afraid to be burned, or that the Ne terra absorbeantur, Forestus.
ground will sink under them, or ne terra dehiscat. Gordonius.
swallow the^ quick, or that the King will call them in question for some fact
they never did Rhasis cont. and that they shall surely be executed. The terror
of such a death troubles them, and they fear as much, and are equally
tormented in mind, Alij timore mortis tenentur, and mala gratia principum
puta^t se aliquid commisisse, and ad supplicium requiri.
as they that have committed a murder, and are as pensive without a cause, as
if they were now presently to be put to death. Plater cap. 3. de mentis
alienat. they are afraid of some loss, danger, that they shall surely lose
lives, goods, and al they have, but why they know not. Trincavelius consil. 13.
lib. 1. had a patient that would needs make away himself, for fear of being
hanged, and would not be persuaded for three years together, but that he had
killed a man. Plater. observe. lib. 1. has two other examples, of such as
feared to be executed without a cause. If they come in a place where a robbery
or any offense has bin done, Ille charissimos, hic omnes homines citra
discrimen timet.
they presently fear they are suspected, and many times betray themselves
without a cause. Jews the 12 French king suspected every man a traitor that
came about him, durst trust no man, Alij timent Insidias. Aurelianus lib. 1. de
mor. Cron. cap. 6.
Alij formidolo suomnium, alij quorundam. Fracastorius lib. 2. de Intellec.
Alius domesticos timet, alius omnes. Aetius.
some fear all alike, some certain men, and cannot endure their companies,
are sick in them, or if they be from home. Some suspect treason still, others
are afraid of their dearest and nearest friends, Melanenilius e Galeno, Ruffo,
Aetio, and dare not be alone in the dark, for fear of hobgoblins and devils:
he suspects every thing he hears or sees a devil, and imagines to himself
a thousand Chimeras and visions; another dates not be seen abroad, Hic in lucem
prodire timet; tenebrasque quaerit, contra ille caliginosa fugit.
loves darkness as life, and cannot endure the light, or to sit in lightsome
places, his hat still in his eyes, he will neither see, nor be seen by his good
will. Hipocrates lib. de Insania and Melancholia. He dare not come in company
for fear he should be misused or disgraced, or ouershoot himself in gesture
or speeches, or be sick, he thinks every man observes him, or aims at him,
derides him, owes him malice. Most part Quidam larvas and malos spiritus, ab
inimicis veneficiis and incantationibus sibi putant obiectari (Hipocrates)
potionem se ve^eficam sumpsisse putat; and de hac ructare sibi crebr^ videtur.
Idem Montaltus cap 21. Aetius lib. 2. and ^lij. Trallianus lib. 1. cap. 16.
they are afraid, they are bewitched, possessed, or poisoned by their enemies;
and sometimes they suspect their nearest friends: he thinks something, speaks
or talks within him, or to him, and he belcheth of the poison. Christophorus a
Vega lib. 2. cap. 1. had a patient so troubled, that by no persuasion or
Physic could be reclaimed. Some are afraid that they shall have every
fearful disease they see others have, hear of, or read. If they see one
possessed, bewitch't, or an Epileptick Paroxisme, a man shaking with the palsy,
or giddy-headed, reeling, or standing in a dangerous place etc. for many days
after it runs in their minds, they are afraid they shall be so too, they are in
the like danger, as Perkins cap. 12. sec. 2. well observes in his Cases of
conscience. And many times by Imagination they produce it. They cannot endure
to see any terrible object, as a Monster, a man executed, a carcass, or hear
the devil named, or any Tragical relation, but they quake for fear, hecates
somniare sibi videntur, Lucian. they dream of hobgoblins, and cannot get it
out of their minds a long time after: they apply all they see, hear, read,
to themselves; as Observat. lib. 1 quando ijs nil nocet nisi quod mulieribus
melancholicis.
Faelix Plater notes of some young Physicians, that studying to cure diseases,
catch them themselves, and will be sick, and apply all symptoms they find
related of others, to their own persons. Generally of them all de inanibus
semper conqueruntur and timent, says Areteus, they complain of toys and
fear -- timeo tamen metusque causae nescius causa est metus. Hensius Austriaco.
without a cause. As really tormented and perplexed for toys and trifles,
(such things as they will after laugh at themselves) as if they were most
material and essential matters indeed worthy to be feared, and will not be
satisfied. Pacify them with one, they are instantly troubled with some other
fear, they are always afraid of something or other, which they foolishly
imagine or conceive to themselves, troubled in mind upon every small occasion,
still complaining, grieuing, vexing, suspecting, discontent, and cannot be
freed so long as melancholy endures: yet for all this as Cap. 15. in 9.
Rhasis, in multis vidi praeter rationem semper aliquid timent, in caeteris
tamen optime se gerunt, neque aliquid praeter dignitatem committunt.
Iacchinus notes, in all other things they are wise, stayed and discreet, and
do nothing unbeseeming their dignity, person or place, this foolish,
ridiculous and childish fear excepted, which so much, and so continually
tortures and crucifies their souls, and so long as melancholy lasts, cannot
be avoided.

Sorrow is that other Character and inseparable companion, fidus Achates, as
all writers witness, a common symptom, a continual, and still without any
evident cause of grief, Altomarus cap. 7. Areteus tristes sunt.
maerent omnes, and siroges eos reddere causam non possunt, they look as if
they had newly come forth of Trophonius den. And though they laugh many times,
and seem to be extraordinary merry, as they will by fits, yet extreme lumpish
again in an instant, dull and heavy semel and simul, merry and sad, but most
part sad, Mant. Egl. 1.
Si qua placent abeunt inimica tenacius haerent, sorrow sticks by them still,
continually gnawing as the vulture did Ovid. Met. 4.
Titius bowels, and they cannot avoid it. No sooner are their eyes open, but
after terrible and troublesome dreams, their heavy hearts begin to sigh: they
are still fretting, chasing, Heautontimorumenoi, vexing themselves, Inquies
animus.
disquieted in mind, with restles unquiet thoughts, discontent. Lugubris Ate
frowns upon them, in so much that Areteus well calls it, angorem animi, a
vexation of the mind. They can hardly be pleased or eased, though in other men's
opinion most happy, go, tarry, run, ride, -- Hor. lib. 3. ode 1.
post equitem sedet atra cura: they cannot avoid this ferall plague, let them
come in what company they will, Virgil.
haeret lateri laethalis aruudo, as a Dear that is struck, the grief
remains, and they cannot be relieved. As Mened Hoautont. Act. 1. sc. 1.
he complained in the Poet. Demum revertor maestus, atque animo fere
Perturbato, atque incerto prae aegritudine,
Adsido, occurrunt servi soccos detrahunt:
Vidco alios festinare, lectos sternere,
Coenam apparare, pro se quisque sedulo
Faciebant; quo illam mihi lenirent miseriam.
He came home sorrowful, and troubled in his mind, his servants did all they
possibly could to please him; one pulled of his socks, another made ready his
bed, another his supper, and did their utmost endeavors to ease his grief, and
to exhilerate him, but he was profoundly melancholy he had lost his son, illud
angebat, and his pain could not be removed. And thence it proceeds many times,
that they are a weary of their lives, taedium vitae is a common symptom, tarda
fluunt ingrataque tempora, they are soon tired with all things, Taedium vitae.
dislike all, a weary of all, sequitur nunc vivendi, nunc moriendi cupido,
says Aurelianus lib. 1. cap. 6. but most part Altomarus.
vitam damnant, discontent, disquieted, perplexed upon every light or no
occasion, object, often tempted to make away themselves, Seneca.
vivere nolunt, mori nesciunt, they cannot dye, they will not live; they
complain, weep and lament, and think they lead a most miserable life,
especially if they be alone, idle, and parted from their ordinary company, or
molested, displeased, provoked: grief, fear and discontent, or some passion,
forcibly seaseth on them Yet by and by when they come in company again which
they like, or be pleased, suam sententiam rursus damnant, and vitae solatio
delectantur, Luget and semper tristatur, solitudinem amat, mortem sibi
precatur, vitam propriam odio habet.
as Octavius Horatianus observes lib. 2. cap. 5. they condemn their former
dislike, and are well pleased to live. And so they continue, till with some
fresh discontent they be molested again, and then they are aweary of their
lives, and show rather a necessity to live, then a desire. Iul. Caesar,
Claudinus consil. 84. had a Polonian to his patient so affected, Suspicion.
Jealousy.
that through fear and sorrow, with which he was still disquieted, hated his
own life, and still wished for death, and to be freed.

Suspicion and Jealousy, are general symptoms, they are commonly
distrustful, apt to mistake, facile Irascibiles, Facile in iram incidunt.
Areteus
testy, pettish, peevish, and ready to snarle upon every Ira sine causa,
velocitas irae. Savanarola pract. mayor. Velocitas irae signum Avicenna lib. 3.
Fen. 1. Tract. 4. ca. 18 Anger sine causa.
small occasion, cum amicissimis, and without a cause. If two talk together and
whisper, or jest, or tell a tale in general, he thinks presently they mean
him, applies all to himself, de se putat omnia dici. Or if they talk with
him, he is ready to misconster every word they speak, and interpret it to the
worst he cannot endure any man to look steedily on him, speak to him almost,
or laugh, jest, or be familiar, or hem, or point, or cough, spit, or make a
noise sometimes, etc. Suspitio, dissidentia symptomata. Crato epist Iulio
Alexandrino consil. 185. Scoltzii.
He thinks they laugh or point at him, or do it in disgrace of him, circumvent
him, contemn him, he is pale, red, and sweats for fear and anger least some
body should observe him. He works upon it, and long after this false conceit
of an abuse troubles him. Montanus consil. 22. gives instance in a melancholy
Jew that was so waspish and suspicious, tam facile iratus, that no man could
tell how to carry himself in his company.

Inconstancy.
Inconstant they are in all their actions, unapt to resolve of any business,
they will and will not, persuaded to and fro upon every small occasion, or word
spoken: and yet if once they be resolved, obstinate, hard to be reconciled. If
they abhor, dislike, or distaste, by no counsel or perswation to be
removed. Yet in most things wavering, unable to deliberat through fear,
faciunt and mox facti poenitet, Areteus. avari and paulo post prodigi. Now
prodigal, and then covetous, they do, and by and by repent them of that which
they have done, soon weary, and still seeking change, erected and dejected in
an instant, animated to undertake, and upon a word spoken again discouraged.

Passionate.
Extreme passionate, quicquid volunt, valde volunt, and what they desire, they
do most furiously seek: envious, malicious, and covetous, muttering,
repining, discontent, peevish, iniuriarum tenuces, prone to revenge, and most
violent in all their Imaginations: and yet of a deeper reach, excellent
apprehension, judicious, wise and witty, of profound judgment in somethings,
although in others, non recte iudicant inquieti, says Fracastorius, lib. 2. de
intell. And as Arculanus, cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis, terms it Iudicium plerumque
perversum, corrupticum iudicant honesta inhonesta, and amicitiam habent pro
inimicitia: They count honesty dishonesty, friends as enemies, they will abuse
their best friends, and dare not offend their enemies. Cowards most part, and
ad inferenda^ iniuria^ timidissimi, says Cardan lib. 8. cap. 40. de rerum
varietate. Loath to offend, and if they chance to overshoot themselves in word
or deed, they are miserably tormented and frame a thousand dangers and
inconveniences to themselves, ex musca elephantum, if once they conceit it.
Amorous.
And yet again many of them desperate, harebraines, rash, careless, and none
so fit to be Assassinates. They are prone to love, and Facile amant Altom.
easy to be taken. Propensi ad amorem and excandescentiam, Montaltus cap. 21.
quickly inamored and dote upon all, love one dearly till they see another, and
then they dote on her. Et hanc and hanc and illam and omnes. Yet some again
cannot endure the sight of a woman abhor the sex, as that same melancholy.
Bodine.
Duke of Muscovy, that was instantly sick if he came but in sight of them, and
that Io. Mayor vitis Patrum, fol. 202. Paulus Abbas eremitae tanta solitudine
perseverat vt nec vestem nec vultum mulieris far possit etc.
Anchorite, that fell into a cold palsy when a woman was brought before him.

Humorous they are beyond all measure, one supposes himself to be a Dog,
Cock, Bear, Horse, Glass, Butter, Humorous.
etc. He is a Giant, a Dwarf, as strong as an hundred men, a Lord, Duke,
Prince, etc. And if he be told he has a stinking breath, a great nose, or is
sick, or inclined to such or such a disease he believes it eftsoons, and by
force of Imagination will work it out. Many of them are immouable and fixed in
their conceits, and others vary upon every object heard or seen. As, if they
see a stage play, they run upon that a week after, if they hear music and
see dancing, they have naught but Bagpipes in their brains, if they see a
cumbate they are also for arms. Generally as they are pleased or displeased so
are their continual cogitations pleasing or displeasing.
If abused an abuse troubles them long after, if crossed that cross, etc.
Restles in their thoughts, and continualy meditating, Velut aegri somnia, vanae
finguntur species. More liker dreams then men awake, cogitationes somnia^tibus
similes, id vigilant quod alij somniant cogitabundi. Still, says Avicenna,
they wake as others dream, and such for the most part are their Imaginations
and conceits, Omnes exercent vanae intensaeque animi cogitationes. (Nic. Piso.
Bruel) and assiduae.
absurd, vain, foolish toys, yet they are Curiosi de rebus minimis. Areteus.
most curious and sollicitous continually, and supra modum Rhasis. cont. lib.
1. ca. 9. praemeditantur de aliqua re. As serious in toys as if it were a most
necessary business and of great moment, and still thinking of it. Though they
do talk with you, and seem to be otherwise employed, and to your thinking
very intent and busy, still that toy runs in their mind, that fear, that
suspicion, that castle in the air, that waking dream whatsoever it is. Nec
interrogant, says Lib. 2. de intell.
Fracastorius, nec interrogatis recte respondent. They do not much heed what
you say, their mind is of another matter, ask what you will, they do not
attend. It Is proper to all melancholy men, says Hoc melancholicis omnibus
proprium vt quas semel Imaginationes valde receperint non facile reijciant sed
hae etiam vel invitis semper occurrant.
Mercurialis consil 11. What conceit they have once entertained, to be most
intent, violent, and continually about it. Invitis occurrit, do what they will
they cannot be rid of it, against their wills they must think of it. Perpetuo
molestantur, nec oblivisci possunt, they are continually troubled in company,
out of company, at meat, at exercise, at all times and places, they cannot
forget it.

Consil. 43.
Crato, Cap. 5. Bashfulnesse.
Laurentius, and Fernelius, put bashfulnesse for an ordinary symptom,
subrusticus pudor, or vitiosus pudor, is a thing which much hants and torments
them, though some on the other side according to Lib. 2. de Intell.
Fracastorius be inverecundi and pertinaces, impudent and peevish. Most part
they are very shamefast; and that makes them with Pet. Blesensis to refuse
honors, offices and preferments, which sometimes fall into their mouths, they
cannot speak or put forth themselves as others can, timor hos, pudor impedit
illos, timorousness and bashfulnesse hinder their proceedings. For that cause
they seldom visit their friends, except some familiars of small or no
complement, they are hard to be acquainted with, especially of strangers, they
had rather write their minds then speak and above all things love
Solitariness. Solitariness.
Ob voluptatem an ob timorem soli sunt, I rather think for fear, sorrow, etc.
Virg. Aen. 6.
Hinc metuunt cupiuntque dolent, fugiuntque nec auras
Recipient clausi tenebris and carcere caeco.
Hence it is they grieve and fear, avoiding light,
And shut themselves in prison dark from sight.
As Bellerophon in Il. 3.
Homer. Qui miser in silvis moerens errabat opacis
Ipse suum cor edens, hominum vestigia vitans.
That wandered in the woods sad all alone,
Forsaking men's society, making great moan.
They delight in woods and waters, desert places, Orchards, Gardens, private
walks, back-lanes, averse Simalum exasperatur homines odent and solitaria
petunt.
from company, as Diogenes in his tub, or Timon misanthropus, they abhor all
company at last, even their nearest acquaintance, and most familiar friends,
confining themselves wholly to their Chambers, f^g^^nt homines sine causa, says
Rhasis, and odio habent. cont. lib. 1. cap. 9. It was one of the chiefest
reasons why the Citizens of Abdera suspected Democritus to be melancholy and
mad; because that as Hippocrates related in his Epistle to Philopoemenes,
Democritus solet noctes and dies apud se degere, plerumque autem in speluncis
sub a maenis arborum vmb^is vel in tenebris and mollibus herbis, vel ad aquarum
crebra and quieta fluenta, etc.
he forsook the City and lived in groves and hollow trees, or upon a green
bancke by a brook side, or confluence of waters all day long and all night.
Quae quidem (says he) plurimum atra bile vexatis, and melancholicis eveniunt,
deserta frequentant, hominumque congressum aversantur. Gaudet tenebris
aliturque dolor. Ps. 62. Vigilaui and factus sum velut nycticorax in domicilio
passer solitarius in templo.
. Which is an ordinary thing with melancholy men. The Aegiptians therefore in
their Hieroglyphics, expressed a melancholy man by a Hare sitting in her
form, as being a most timorous and solitary creature, Pirerius Hieroglip. lib.
12. But this and all precedent symptoms are more or less apparent, as the
humor is intended or remitted, hardly perceived in some or not at all, most
manifest in others. Besides these, to speak in a word, there is nothing so
vain, absurd, ridiculous, extravagant, impossible, incredible, so monstrous a
Chymera, so prodigious and strange, Et quae vix audet fabula monstra parit.
such as Painters and Poets durst not attempt, which they will not really
fear, feign, suspect and Imagine unto themselves. All extremes,
contrarieties, and contradictions, and that in infinite varieties, Melancholici
plane incredibilia sibi persuadent, vt vix omnibus saeculis duo reperti sunt,
qui idem Imaginati sunt, Erastus de Lamijs. Scarce two of two thousand that
concur in the same symptoms. I will adventure yet in such a vast confusion
and generality, to bring them into some order, and so descend to particulars.

SVBSEC. 3. Particular Symptoms from the influence of Stars. Parts of the
Body and Humors.
SOme men have peculiar Symptoms, according to their temperament and Crisis,
which they have from the Stars and those celestial influences, variety of wits
and dispositions, as Anthony Zara contends, Anat. ingen. sect. 1. memb.
11.12.13.14. plurimum irritant influentiae caelestes, vnde cientur animi
aegritudines and morbi corporum. Velc. l. 4. c. 5.
One says, diverse diseases of the body and mind proceed from their
influences, Sect. 2 memb. 1. subs. 4.
as I have already proved out of Ptolomy, Pontanus, Lemnius, Cardan, and
others, as they are principal significators of manners, diseases, mutually
irradiated, or Lords of the geniture, etc. Ptolomeus in his centiloquy, or
Hermes, or whosoever else the author of that Tract, attributes all these
symptoms which are in melancholy men to celestial influences: which opinion
Mercurialis de affect. lib, 1. cap. 10. reiects; but as I say, De reb. coelest.
lib. 10. cap. 13.
Iovianus Pontanus, and others stiffely defend. That some are solitary, dull;
heavy, churlish, some again blithe, buxome, light, and merry, they ascribe
wholly to the stars. As if Saturn be predominate in his nativity, and cause
Melancholy in his temperature, then J. de Indagine Goclenius.
he shall be very austere, sullen, churlish, black of color, profound in his
cogitations, full of cares, miseries, and discontents, sad and fearful
always silent, solitary, still delighting in husbandry, in Woods, Orchards,
Gardens, Rivers, Ponds, Pooles, dark walks and close: Cogitationes sunt velle
aedificare, velle arbores plantare, agros colere, etc. Catch Birds, Fishes,
etc. and still contriuing and meditating of such matters. If Jupiter domineirs,
they are more ambitious, still meditating of kingdoms, magistracies, offices,
honors, or that they are Princes, Potentates, and how they would carry
themselves, etc. If Mars they are all for wars, brave combats, Monomachies,
testy, choleric, harebraine, rash, furious, and violent in their actions.
They will feign themselves Victors, Commanders, are passionate and satyricall in
their speeches, great braggers, ruddy of color. If the Sun they will be
Lords, Emperors, in conceit at least, and Monarchs, give Offices, Honors,
etc. If Venus, they are still courting of their mistresses and most apt to
love, amorously given, they seem to hear music, plays, see fine pictures,
dancers, merriments, and the like. Ever in love, and dote on all they see.
Mercurialists are solitary, much in contemplation, subtle, Poets,
Philosophers, and musing most part about such matters. If the Moon have a hand
they are all for perigrinatio^s, sea voiages, much affected with travels, to
discourse, read, meditate of such things; wandering in their thoughts, diverse,
much delighted in waters, to fish, foul. etc.

But the most immediate Symptoms proceed from the Temperature it self, and
the Organicall parts, as Head, Liver, Spleen, Mes^riacke Veins, Heart, Womb,
Stomach, etc. and most especially from the four humors in those seats
whether they be hot or cold, natural unnatural, intended remitted, simple or
mixed, and their diverse mixtures, and several adustions, combinations, which
may be as diversely varied, as those Humidum calidum frigidu^ siccum.
four first qualities in Com. in 1 cap. Iohannis de Sacrobosco.
Clavius, and produce as many several Symptoms and monstrous fictions as wine
does effects, which as Andreas Bachius observes lib. 3. de vino cap. 20. are
infinite. Those of greater note be these.

If it be natural Melancholy, as T. Bright. cap. 16. has largely described,
either of the Spleen, or of the veins falty by excess of quantity, or
thickness of substance, it is a cold and dry humor, as Montanus affirms
consil. 26. and the parties are sad, timorous, and fearful. Prosper Calenus
in his book de atra bile will have them to be more stupid then ordinary, cold,
heavy, dull, solitary, sluggish, Simultam atram bilem and frigidam habent.
Hercules de Saxonia cap. 16. lib. 7. Si residet melancholia naturalis tales plu
^bei coloris aut nigri stupidi solitary.
will have these that are naturally melancholy, to be of a leaden color or
black, and so will Guianerius cap. 3. tract. 15. and such as think themselves
dead many times if it be in excess. These Symptoms vary according to the
mixture of the other humors not adust, or the mixture of those four humors
adust, which is unnatural Melancholy. For as Trallianus has written cap. 16.
lib. 7. Non vna melancholiae causae est nec vnus humor vitij parens sed plures
and alius aliter mutatus vnde non omnes eade^ sentiunt symptomata.
There is not one cause of this melancholy, nor one humor which begets it, but
diverse diversely intermixed, from whence proceeds this variety of Symptoms. And
those varying again as they are hot or cold. Humor frigidus delirij causa,
humor calidus furoris.
Cold melancholy (says Benedic. Vittorius Faventinus pract. mag.) is a cause
of dotage, and more mild symptoms, if hot or more adust, of more violent
passions, and furies. Fracastorius lib. 2. de Intellect, will have us to
consider well of it, Multum refert quam vsque melancholia teneatur hunc fervens
and a ccensa agitat, illum tristis and friges occupat, hi timidi ill* inuerecun
di intrepidi, etc.
with what kind of Melancholy every one is troubled, for it much availes to
know it, one is enraged by fervent heat, another is possessed by sad and cold,
one is fearful, shamefast; the other impudent and bold. As Ajax, Arma rapit
superosque furens in praelia poscit: quite mad or tending to madness: nunc hos
nunc ^mpetit illos. Bellerophon on the other side, solis errat male sanus in
agris, wanders alone in the woods, one despaires, weeps, and is weary of his
life, another laughes, etc. All which variety proceeds from the several
degrees of heat and cold, or diverse adustio^ of the four humors, which in
this unnatural Melancholy, by corruption of blood, adust choler, or melancholy
natural, T. Bright cap, 16, Treat. Met.
by excessive distemper of heat, turned in comparison of the natural, into a
sharp lie by force of adustion, cause according to the diversity of their
matter, diverse and strange Symptoms, which he reckons up in his following
chapter. So does Cap. 16, in 9. Rasis.
Arculanus, according to the four principal humors adust, and many others.

As for example, if it proceed from sleame, which is seldom and not so
frequent as the rest, Bright. c. 16.
it stirs up dull symptoms, and a kind of stupidity, or impassionate hurt:
they are sleepy, says Pract. mayor. Somnians piger frigidus.
Savanorolae, dull, slow, cold, blockish, asselike, Asininam melancholiam, De
anima. cap de humor si a phlegmate se^per in aquis fere sunt and circa fluvios,
plorant multum, etc.
Melancthon calls it, they are much given to weeping, and delight in waters,
ponds, pooles, rivers, fishing, fowling, etc. Arnoldus breviar. 1. cap. 18.
They are Pigra nascitur ex color pallido and albo. Hercules de Saxonia.
pale of color, slow and apt to sleep, heavy, Savanorola.
much troubled with headache, continual meditation, and muttering to
themselves, they dream of waters, Muros cadere in se aut submergitiment cum
torpore and segnitie and fluvios amant talet Alexander, cap. 16. lib. 1.
that they are in danger of drowning, and fear such things, Rhasis. They are
fatter then others that are melancholy, paler, of a muddy complexion apter to
spit, Semper sere dormit somnolentia. cap. 16. lib. 7.
sleep more troubled with rheum then the rest, and have their eyes still fixed
on the ground. Such a patient had Hercules de Saxonia, a widdowe in Venice,
that was fat and very sleepy still, and Christophorus a Vega another affected
in the same sort. If it be inveterate or violent the symptoms are more
evident, they plainly dote and are ridiculous to others, in all their
gestures, actions, speeches. Imagining impossibilities, as he in Christophorus
a Vega: that thought he was a tun of wine, Laurentius.
and that Siennois that resolved with himself not to piss, for fear he
should drown all the town.

If it proceed from blood adust, or that there be a mixture of blood in it,
Cap. 6. de met. Si a sanguine venit rubedo oculorum and faciei plurimus risus.
such are commonly ruddy of complexion, and high colored, according to
Salust. Salvianus, and Hercules de Saxonia. And as Savanorola, Vittorius
Faventinus Emper. farther add, Venae oculoru^ sunt rubrae inde an precesserit
vini and aromatum vsus and frequens balneum. Trallianus lib. 1.16. an
praecesserit mora sub sole.
the veins of their eyes be red, as well as their faces. They are much
inclined to laughter, witty and merry, conceipted in discourse, pleasant, if
they be not far gone, much given to music, dancing, and to be in women's
company. They meditate wholly of such things, and think Ridet patiens si a
sanguine putat se videre choreas musicam audire ludos etc
they see or hear plays, dancing, and such like sports. If they be more
strongly possessed with this kind of melancholy, Arnoldus Breviar. lib. 1. cap.
18. As he of Argus in the Hor. epist. lib. 2. quidam haud ignobilis Argis, etc.
Poet that sat laughing all day long, as if he had been at a Theater. Such
another is mentioned by Lib. de reb. mir.
Aristotle, living at Abidos a town of Asia minor, that would sit after the
same fashion as if he had been upon a stage, and sometimes act himself,
sometimes clap his hands, and laugh as if he had been well pleased with the
sight. Wolfius relates of a country fellow called Brunsellius, subject to this
humor, Cum inter co^cionandum mulier dormiens e subsellio caderet and omnes
reliqui qui id viderent riderent tribus post diebus, etc.
that being by chance at a sermon, saw a woman fall of from a form half a
sleep, at which object most of the company laughed, but he for his part, was
so much moved, that for three whole days after he did nothing but laugh, by
which means he was much weakened, and worse a long time after. Such a one was
old Sophocles, and Democritus himself had hilare delirium, much in this vain.
Laurentius cap. 3. de melan. thinks this kind of melancholy, Insania laeta.
which is a little adust with some mixture of blood to be that which Aristotle
meant, when he said melancholy men of all others are most witty, which causes
many times a divine ravishment, and a kind of Enthusiasmus, which stirs them
up to be excellent Philosophers, Poets, Prophets, etc. Mercurialis consil. 110.
gives instance in a young man his patient, sanguine melancholy; Inuenis ingenij
and non vulgaris erudi ionis.
of a great wit, and excellently learned.

If it arise from choler adust, they are bold and impudent, and of a more
hairebraine disposition, Si a cho^era furibundi interficiunt se and alios,
putant se videre pugnas.
apt to quarrel, and think of such things, battles, combats, of their manhood,
furious, impatient in discourse, stiff, irrefragable and prodigious in their
tene^ts, and if they be moved, most violent, outrageous, and ready to disgrace,
Vrina subtilis and ignea, parum dormiunt.
provoke any, to kill themselves and others, Arnoldus, stark mad by fits, they
sleep little, their urine is subtle and fiery. Guianerius. In their fits you
shall hear them speak all manner of languages, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, that
never were taught or knew them before. Apponensis in com. in 1. Prob. sec. 30.
speaks of a mad woman that spoke excellent good Latin; and Rhasis knew
another, that could prophecy in her fit, and foretell things truly to come.
Tract. 15. c. 4.
Guianerius had a patient could make Latin verses when the Moon was combust,
otherwise illiterate. Avicenna and some of his adherents will have these
symptoms, when they happen, to proceed from the devil, and that they are
rather daemoniaci, possessed, then mad or melancholy, or both together, as
Jason Pratensis thinks; Immiscent se mali genij etc. but most ascribe it to the
humor, which opinion Montaltus cap. 21. stiffly maintains, confuting Avicenna
and the rest, referring it wholly to the quality and disposition of the humor
and subject. Cardan de rerum var. lib. 8. cap. 10. holds these men of all other
fit to be Assacinats, bold, hardy, fierce and adventerous, to undertake any
thing by reason of this choler adust. Ad haec perpetranda furore rapti
ducuntur, cruciatus quosvis tolerant, and mortem and furore exacerbato audent
ad suppli^ia plus irritantur, mirum est, quantam habeant in tormentis
patientiam.
This humor says he, prepares them to endure death it self, and all manner of
torments with invincible courage, and it is a wonder to see with what alacrity
they will undergo such tortures, vt supra naturam res videatur: he ascribes
this generosity, fury, or rather stupidity, to this adustion of choler and
melancholy: but I take these rather to be mad or desperate, the^ properly
melancholy: for commonly this humor so adust and hot, degenerates into
madness.

If it come from melancholy it self adust, those men, says Avicenna, Tales
plus caeteris timent, and continue tristantur, valde suspitiosi, solitudinem
diligunt corruptissimas babent imaginationes, etc.
are commonly sad and solitary, and that continually, and in excess, more then
ordinary suspicious, more fearful, and have long, sore, and most corrupt
Imaginations; cold and black, bashful and so solitary, that as Si a
melancholia adusta tristes, de sepulchris somniant, timent ne fasci netur,
puta^t se mortuos, aspici nolunt.
Arnoldus writes, they will endure no company, they dream of graves still, and
dead men, and think themselves bewitched or dead: if it be extreme they think
they hear hideous noyses, see and talk Videntur sibi videre monachos nigros
and daemones, and suspensos and mortuos.
with black men, and converse familiarly with devils, and such strange
Chimeras and visions, Gordonius. or that they are possessed by them, that some
body talks to them, or within them. Tales melancholici plerumque daemoniaci.
Montaltus consil. 26. ex Avicenna. Valescus de Taranta had such a woman in
cure, Quav^is nocte se cum daemone coire putavit.
that thought every night she had to do with the Devil: and Gentilis Fulgosus
quaest. 55. writes, that he had a melancholy friend, that Semper fere vidisse
militem nigrum praesente^.
had a black man in the likeness of a soldier, still following him
wheresoever he was, Laurentius cap. 7. has many stories of such as have
thought themselves bewitched by their enemies; and some that would eat no meat
as being dead. Anthony de Verdeur.
Anno 1550. an Advocate of Paris fell into such a melancholy fit, that he
believed verily he was dead, he could not be persuaded otherwise, or to eat or
drink, till a kinsman of his, a scholar of Bourges did eat before him, dressed
like a corse. This story says Serres, was acted in a comedy before Charles the
ninth. Some think they are beasts, wolves, hogs, and cry like dogs, foxes,
bray like asses, and low like kine, as King Praetus daughters. Quidam mugitus
boum aemulantur, and pecora se putant, vt Praeti filiae.
Hildisheim spicel. 2. de Mania, has an example of a Dutch Baron so affected,
and Trincavelius lib. 1. consil. 11. another of an other nobleman in his
country, Baro quidam mugitus boum, and rugitus asinorum and alior^ animalium
voce^ effingit.
that thought he was certainly a beast, and would imitate most of their voices,
with many such symptoms, which may properly be reduced to this kind.

If it proceed from the several combinations of these 4 humors, the symptoms
are likewise mixed. One thinks himself a giant, another a dwarf; one is heavy
as lead, another is light as a fether. Marcellus Donatus lib. 2. cap. 41. makes
mention out of Seneca, of one Seneccio a rich man, Omnia magna putabat, vxo^em
magnam, grandes equos, abhorruit omnia parva, magna pocula, and calceamenta
pedibus maiora.
that thought himself and every thing else he had, great: a great wise, great
horses, could not abide little things, but would have great pots to drink in,
and great hose, and great shoes bigger then his feet. Like her in Lib. 1. cap.
16. putavit se vno digito posse totu^ mundum contevere.
Trallianus, that thought she could shake all the world with a finger, and was
afraid to crush her hand together, lest she should crush the world like an
apple in pieces: or him in Galen, that thought he was Sustinet humeris caelum
cu^ Atlante. Alij caeli ruinam timent.
Atlas, and sustained heaven with his shoulders. Another thinks himself so
little, that he can creep into a mousehole: one fears heaven will fall on his
head, one is a cock, and such a one Cap. 1. Tract. 15. alius se gallu^ putat,
alius lusciniam.
Guianerius says, he saw at Padua, that would clap his hands together, and
crow. Trallianus.
Another thinks he is a nightingale, and therefore sings all night long:
another he is all glass, a pitcher, and will therefore let no body come near
him, and such a one Cap. 7. de mel.
Laurentius gives out upon his credit, that he knew in France. Christophorus a
Vega lib. 3. cap. 14. Sckenkius and Marcellus Donatus lib. 2. cap. 1. have many
such examples, and one amongst the rest of a Baker in Farara, that thought he
was composed of butter, and durst not sit in the sun, or come near a fire, for
fear of being melted: of another that thought he was a case of lether, stuffed
with wind. Some laugh, some weep etc. Some have a corrupt ear, eyes, some
smelling. Anthony Verduer.
Jews the eleventh had a conceit every thing did stink about him, all the
odoriferous perfumes they could get, would not ease him, but still he smelled a
filthy stink. A melancholy French Poet in Cap. 7. de mel.
Laurentius, being sick of a fever, and trobled with waking, by his Physicians
was appointed to use vuguentum populenum to anoint his temples; but he so
distasted the smell of it, that for many years after, all that came near him
he imagined to smell of it, and would let no man talk with him but aloof off,
or wear any new clothes, because he thought still they smelled of it; in all
other things, wise and discreet, and would talk sensibly, save only in this. A
gentleman in Limosingen, says Anthony Verdeur, was persuaded he had but one
leg, affrighted by a wild boar, that by chance struck him on the leg: he
could not be persuaded his leg was sound (in all other things well) until two
Franciscans by chance coming that way, fully removed him from that conceit.
Sed abunde fabularum audivimus.

SVBSECT. 4. Education, custom, continuance of time, condition mixed with other
diseases, by fits, inclination etc.
ANother great occasion of the variety of these symptoms, proceeds from
custom, discipline, education, and several inclination. Laurentius cap. 6.
This humor will imprint in melancholy men the objects most answerable to their
condition of life, and ordinary actions, and dispose men according to their
several studies and callings. If an ambitious man become melancholy, he
forthwith thinks he is a King, an Emperor, a Monarch, and walks alone,
pleasing himself with a vain hope of some future preferments, or present as he
supposes, and withal acts a Lords part, and takes it upon him, some statesman
or magnifico, and makes congies, gives intertainment, looks big, etc.
Francisco Sansovino records of a melancholy man in Cremona, that would not be
induced to believe, but that he was Pope, gave pardons, made Cardinals etc.
Lib. 3. cap. 14, qui se regem putavit regno expulsum.
Christophorus a Vega makes mention of another of his acquaintance, that
thought he was a King, driven from his kingdom, and was very anxious to
recover his estate. A covetous person is still conversant about purchasing of
lands and tenements, and plotting in his mind how to compass such and such
Manors, as if he were already Lord of it, and able to go through with it all
he sees is his, re or spe, he has deuuored it in hope, or else in conceit
esteems it his own; like him in Dipnosophist. lib. Thrasilaus putavit omnes
maues in Piraeum portum appellantes suas esse.
Athenaeus, that thought all the ships in the haven to be his own. A lascivious
inamorato, plots all the day long to please his mistress, acts and struttes, and
carries himself as if she were in presence, still dreaming of her, as
Pamphilus of his Glycerium, as some do in their morning sleep. de hist. med.
mirab. lib. 2. c. 1.
Marcellus Donatus knew such a Gentlewoman in Mantua, called Eleonera
Meliorina, that constantly believed she was married to a King, and Genibus
flexis loqui cum illo voluit, and adstare iam tum putauit etc.
would kneel down, and talk with him, as if he had bin there present with
his associats, and if she had found by chance a piece of glass in a muck-hill,
or in the street, she would say that it was a Jewel sent from her Lord and
husband. If devout and religious, he is all for fasting, prayer, ceremonies,
alms, interpretatio^s, visions, prophecies, revelations, Gordonius. quod sit
Propheta, and inflatus a spiritu sancto.
he is inspired by the Holy Ghost, full of the Spirit: one while he is saved,
another while damned, or still troubled in mind for his sins etc. more of these
in the third Partition, of Love Melancholy. Qui forensibus causis insudat nil
nis^ arresta cogitat, and supplices libellos alius non nisi versus facit. P.
Forestus.
A Scholars mind is busied about his studies, he applaudes himself for that
he has done, or hopes to do, one while fearing to be out in his next
exercise, another while contemning all censures, envies one, emulates another,
or else with indefatigable pains and meditation, consumes himself. So of the
rest, all which vary according to the more remiss, and violent impression of
the object, or as the humor it self is intended or remitted. For some are so
gently melancholy, that in all their carriage, and to the outward apprehension
of others, it can hardly, be discerned, and yet to them an intolerable burden,
and not to be endured. Gordonius.
Quaedam occulta quaedam manifesta, some signs are manifest and obvious to all
at all times, some to few, or seldom, or hardly perceived, let them keep their
own counsel, none will suspect them. Some dote in one thing, and are most
childish, ridiculous, and to be wondered at in that, and yet for all other
matters, most discreet and wise. To some it is in disposition, to another in
habit; and as they of heat and cold, we may say of this humor, one is
melancholicus ad octo, a second two degrees less, a third half way. It Is
superparticular, sesquialtera, sesquitertia, and superbipartiens tertias
quintas Melancholiae etc. all those Geometrical proportions are too little to
express it. Trallianus lib. 1.16. alij intervalla quaeda^ habent, vt etiam con
sueta administrent, alij in continuo delirio sunt etc.
It comes to some by fits, comes and goes, to others it is continuate, many
says Prag. mag. Vere tantum and autumno.
Faventinus in spring and fall only are molested, some once a year, as that
Roman, Lib. de humoribus.
Galen speaks of: Guianerius.
one at the conjunction of the Moon alone, or some unfortunate aspects, a
second once peradventure in his life, has a most grievous fit, even to the
extremity of madness or dotage, and that upon some ferall accident or
perturbation, terrible object, and that for a time, never so before, never
after. A third is moved upon all such troublesome objects, cross fortune,
disaster and violent passions, otherwise free, once troubled in three or four
years. A fourth, if things be to his mind, or be in action, is most jocund,
and of a good complexion: if idle, carried away wholly with pleasant dreams and
fantasies, but if once crossed and displeased, his countenance is altered on a
sudden, and his heart, heavy, irksome thoughts crucify his soul, and in an
instant he is aweary of his life. A fifth complains in his youth, a sixth in his
middle age, the last in his old age.

Generally thus much we may conclude of all melancholy almost. That it is
Levinus Lemnius, Jason Pratensis. blanda ab initio.
most pleasant at first, I say me^tis gratissimus error, a most delightsome
humor, to walk alone and meditate, and frame a thousand pha^tastical
Imaginatio^s unto themselves. They are never better pleased the^ when they are
so doing, they are in Paradise for the time, and cannot well endure to be
interrupt: with him in the Poet, Hor.
Pol me occidistis amici, non servastis ait! you have undone him, he complains,
tell him what inconvenience will follow, what will be the event, all is one,
canis ad vomitum, Facilis discensus Averni.
it is so pleasant, he cannot refrain. He may thus continue peradventure many
years, by reason of a strong temperature, or some mixture of business, which
may divert his cogitations: but at the last laesa Imaginatio, his phantasy is
crased, and now habituated to such toys, cannot but work still like a fat, the
Scene alters upon a sudden, and Fear and Sorrow supplant those pleasing
thoughts, suspicion and discontent, and perpetual anxiety succeed in their
places, so by little and little that shooing-horne of Idleness, and voluntary
solitarines, melancholy that ferall fiend is drawn on, and quantum vertice ad
auras aethereas, tantum radice Virg.
in Tartaratendit, she was not so delitious at first, as now she is bitter and
harsh. A cankered soul macerated with cares and discontents, taedium vitae,
impatience precipitates them into unspeakable miseries. They cannot endure
company, light, unfit for action, and the like. Corpus cad^verosum. Psalm. 67.
cariosa est facies mea prae agritudine animae.
Their bodies are lean and dried up, withered, ugly, look harsh, very dull,
and their souls tormented, as they are more or less entangled, as the humor
has bin intended, or according to the continuance of time they have bin
troubled.

To discern all which symptoms the better, Lib. 9. ad Almansorem.
Rhasis the Arabian makes three degrees of them. The first is, falsa cogitatio,
false conceits, and idle thoughts; the second is, falso cogitata loqui, to
talk to themselves, and utter their minds and conceits of their hearts by
their words; Practica maiore.
the third is to put in practice that which they think or speak. Sauanarola
Rub. 11. tract. 8. cap. 1 de aegritud. cap. confirms as much, Quum ore
loquitur quae cord concepit, quu^ subito de vna re ad aliud transit, neque
rationem de aliquo reddit, tunc est in medio at quum incipit operari qu lo
quitur in summo gradu est.
when he begins to express that in words, which he conceiue's in his heart,
or talks idly, or goes from one thing to another, which Cap. 19. Partic 2.
Loquitur secum and ad alios, ac si vere praescentes. A^g cap 11 lib. de cura
pro mortuis gerend^ Rasi^.
Gordonius calls, nec caput habentia, nec caudam, he is in the middle way: Quum
res ad hoc deuenit, vt ea quae cogitare coeperit, ore promat, atque actus
permisceat, tum perfecta melancholia est.
but when he begins to act it likewise, and to put his fopperies in execution,
he is then in the extent of melancholy, or madness it self. This progress of
Melancholy you shall easily observe in them that have bin so affected, they go
smiling to themselves at first, at length they laugh out; at first solitary, at
last they can endure no company: or if they do, they are now dizards, past
sense and shame, quite moped, they care not what they say or do, their whole
actions, words, gestures, are furious or ridiculous. At first his mind is
troubled, he does not attend what is said, if you tell him a tale, he cries at
last, what said you? but in the end he mutters to himself, as old women do
many times, or old men when they sit alone, upon a sudden they whoop and
hollow, or run away, and swear they see or hear players, Melancholicus se
videre and audire putat daemones. lavater de spectris part 3. cap. 2.
devils, hobgoblins, ghosts, or strike, or strut, etc. grow humorous in the
end: Like him in the Poet, saepe ducentos, saepe december seruos, he will dress
himself, and undress, careless at last, and grows insensible, stupid or
mad. Wierus lib. 3. cap. 31.
He howles like a wolf, barks like a dog, or raues like Ajax and Orestes,
hears Music or outcries, which no man else hears. As Michael a musician.
he did whom Amatus Lusitanus mentions cent. 3. cura. 55. or that woman in
Malleo malef.
Springer, that spoke many languages, and said she was possessed. That Farmer
in Lib. de atra bile.
Prosper Calenius, that disputed and discoursed learnedly in Philosophy and
Astronomy, with Alexander Achilles his master, at Bologne in Italy. But of
these I have already spoken.

Who can sufficiently speak of these symptoms? or prescribe rules to
comprehend them, they are so irregular in themselves, Proteus himself is not
so diverse, I may as well make the Moon a new coat, as a true Character of a
melancholy man, as soon find the motion of a bird in the air as the heart of
man, of a melancholy man. They are so confused, diverse, intermixed with other
diseases; as the species are confounded (as Part. 1. subsec. 2. memb. 2.
I have showed) so are the symptoms. Sometimes with headache, Cacexia, dropsy,
stone; as you may perceive by those several examples and illustrations,
collected by De delirio melancholia and mania.
Hildisheim spicel. 2. Mercurialis consil. 110. cap. 6. and 11. with headache,
Epilepsie, Priapismus, Trincavelius consil. 12. lib. 1. lib. 3. consil. 49.
with gout, caninus appetitus. Montanus consil. 26. and 23.234.249. with
Falling Sickness, Headache, Vertigo, Lycanthropea etc. I. Caesar Claudinus
consult. 4. consult. 89. and 116. with gout, agues, Haemrods, stone, etc. who
can distinguish these melancholy symptoms so intermix't with others, or apply
them to their several species, confine them into method? It Is hard I confess,
yet I have disposed of them as I could, and will descend to particularize them
according to their species. For hitherto I have expatiated in more general
lists or terms, speaking promiscuously of all such ordinary signs, which
occur amongst writers, not that they are all to be found in one man, for that
were to paint a Monster, a Chimera, not a man, but some in one, some in
another, and that successively, or at several times.

Which I have bin the more curious to express and report; not to vpbraid any
miserable man, or by way of derision, I rather pity the^, but the better to
discern the^, to apply remedies unto them, and to show that the best and
soundest of us all is in danger, how much we ought to fear our own fickle
estates, and remember our miseries and vanities, examine and humiliate our
selves, and seek to God, and call to him for mercy, that needs not seek for
any rods to scourge our souls, since we carry them in our bowels, and that our
souls are in a miserable captivity, if the light of grace and heavenly truth,
does not shine continually upon us: and by our discretion to moderate our
selves, to be more circumspect and wary in the midst of these dangers.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSEC. 1 Symptoms of head Melancholy.
Nicholas Piso. si signa circa ve^triculum non apparent, nec sanguis male
affectus, and adsunt timor and maestitia, cerebrum ipsum existimandii est etc.
IF no symptoms appear about the Stomach, nor the blood be misaffected, and
fear and sorrow continue, it is to be thought the Brain it self is troubled,
by reason of a melancholy juice bred in it, or other ways conveyed into it,
and that evil juice is from the distemperature of the part, or left after some
inflammation. Thus far Piso. But this is not always true: for blood and
hypocondries both are often affected, even in head melancholy. The common
signs if it be by essence in the head, are ruddinesse of face, high sanguine
complexion, most part rubore saturato, Facie sunt rubente and liuescente,
quibus etiam aliquando adsunt pustulae.
one calls it, a bluish, and sometimes full of pumpels, with red eyes. Avicenna
lib. 3. Fen. 2. Tract. 4. cap. 18. Duretus in his notes upon Hollerius, makes
this a principal sign of head melancholy, if they be facie admodum ruhente:
so does Montaltus and others, forth of Galen de loc. affec. lib. 3. cap. 6. Io.
Pantheon cap. de Mel. si cerebrum primario afficiatur, adsunt capitis gravitas,
fixioculi etc.
Hercules de Saxonia to this of rednes of face, adds heaviness of the head,
fixed and hollow eyes. Laur ent ca. 5. si a cerebro ex siccitate tum capitis
erit leuitas, sit is, vigilia, paucitas super fluitatum in oculi^ and naribus.
If it proceed from dryness of the Brain, then their heads will be light,
vertiginous, and they most apt to wake, and to continue whole months together
without sleep. Few excrements in their eyes and nostrils, and often bauld by
reason of excess of dryness. Montaltus cap. 17. If it proceed from moisture,
dulnes, drowsines, headache follows; and as Salust. Salvianus cap. 1. lib. 2.
out of his own experience found, Epilepticall, with a multitude of humors in
the head. They are very bashful, if ruddy, and apt to blush, and to be red
upon all occasions, praesertim si metus accesserit. But the chiefest symptom
to discern this species, as I have said, is this, that there be no notable
signs in the Stomach, or elsewhere, digna as Si nulla digna laesio ventriculo,
quoniam in hac melancholia capitis exigua nonnunqua^ ventriculi pathemata
coeunt, duo enim haec membra sibi invicem affectionem transmitt unt.
Montaltus terms them, or of greater note, because oftentimes the passions of
the stomach concur with them. Wind is common to all three species, and is not
excluded, only that of the Hypocondries is Postrema magis flatuosa.
more windy then the rest, says Hollerius Aetius tetrabib. lib. 2, sec. 2.
cap. 9. and 10. maintains the same, si minus molestia circa ventriculum aut
ventrem, in ijs cerebrum primari^ afficitur, and cura^e op^rtet hunc affectum
per cibos flatus exortes, and bonae co^coctionis. etc. ^^^cer^brum afficitur
sine ventriculo.
if there be more signs, and more evident in the head then elsewhere, the Brain
is primarily affected, and prescribes head melancholy to be cured by meats
amongst the rest void of wind, and good juice, not excluding wind, or corrupt
blood even in head melancholy it self: but these species are often confounded,
and so are these symptoms, as I have already proved, and therefore by these
signs not so easy to be discerned. The symptoms of the mind are superfluous,
and continual cogitations: Sanguinem adurit caput calidius, and inde fu^^^
melancholisi adusti, ^ni^um exagitant.
for when the head is heated, it scorcheth the blood, and from thence proceed
melancholy fumes which trouble the mind. Avicenna. They are very choleric, and
soon hot, solitary, sad, watchful, discontent. Montaltus cap. 24. If any
thing trouble the^ they cannot sleep, but fret themselves still, till another
object mitigate it, or time wear it out. They have grievous passions, and
immoderate perturbations of the mind, fear, sorrow etc. yet not so continuate,
but that they are sometimes merry, and that which is more to be wondered at, and
that by the authority of Lib. 3. de loc. affect. cap. 6.
Galen himself, by reason of a mixture of blood, praerubri iocosis delectantur,
and irrisores plerumque sunt, if they be ruddy, they are delighted in jests,
and oftentimes scoffers themselves, conceipted, and as Rhodericus a Vega
comments on that place of Galen, merry and witty, and of a pleasant
disposition, and yet grievously melancholy anon after: omnia discunt sine
doctore, says Areteus, they learn without a teacher; and as Cap. 6.
Laurentius supposes, those feral passions and symptoms of such as think
themselves glass, pitchers, feathers etc. speak strange languages, proceed a
calore cerebri (if it be in excess) from the Brains distempered heat.

SVBSECT. 2. Symptoms of windy or Hypocondriacall Melancholy.
IN this Hypocondriacall or flatuous melancholy, the symptoms are so ambiguous,
says Hildesh. spicel. 2. de melan. In Hypocondriaca melancholia adeo ambigua
sunt ^ymptomata vt etiam exercitatissimi medici de loco affecto statuere non
possint.
Crato in a counsel of his for a noblewoman, that the most exquisite
Physicians cannot determine of the part affected. Matthew Flacius consulted
about a noble matron confessed as much, that in this malady he wi^h Hollerius,
Fracastorius, Falopius, and others, being to give their sentence of a party
laboring of Hypocondriacall melancholy, could not find out by the symptoms,
which part was most especially affected; some said the womb, some heart, some
stomach etc and therefore Crato consil. 24. lib. 1. boldly averres, that in
this diversity of symptoms, which commonly accompany this disease, Medici de
loco affecto nequeunt statuere.
no Physician can truly say what part is affected. Galen lib. 3. de loc. affec.
reckons up these ordinary symptoms, which all the Neotericks repeat out of
Diocles: only this fault he finds with him, that he puts not Fear and Sorrow
amongst the other signs. Trincavelius excuses Diocles lib. 3. consil. 35.
because that oftentimes in a strong head and constitution, a generous spirit,
and a valiant, these symptoms appear not, by reason of his valor and courage.
The rest are these, beside Fear and Sorrow, Acidi ructus, cruditates, astus in
praecordijs, flatus, interdum ventriculi dolores vehemen^es: sumptoque cibo
co^coctu d^fficili, sputum humidu^, idque multum sequitur etc. Hip. lib. de
mel. Galenus, Melanelius e Ruffo and Aetio. Altomarus, Piso, Montaltus, Bruel
Wecker etc.
sharp belchings, and fulsome crudities, heat in the bowels, wind, and
rumbling in the guts, vehement gripings, and pain in the belly and stomach at
some times, and after meat that is hard of concoction, much watering of the
stomach, and moist spittle, cold sweat, importunus sudor, unseasonable sweat
all over the Body, as Octavius Horatianus lib. 2. cap. 5. calls it, cold joints,
indigestion, Circa praecordia de assidua inflatione queruntur, and cum sudore
totius corporis importuno, frigidos articulos saepe patiuntur indigestione
laborant, ructus suos insuaves perhorrescunt, viscerum dolores habent.
they cannot endure their own fulsome belchings, continual wind about their
Hypocondries, griping in their bowels, praecordia sursum convelluntur, midriffe
and bowels are pulled up, the veins about their eyes look red, and swell from
vapors and wind. Their ears sing now and then, Vertigo and giddiness come by
fits, turbulent dreams, dryness, leanesse, apt they are to sweat upon all
occasions, of all colors and complexions. Many of them are high colored,
especially after meals, which was a symptom Cardinal Caecius was much
trobled with, and of which he complained to Prosper Calenus his Physician, he
could not eat, or drink a cup of wine, but he was as red in the face as if he
had bin at a Majors feast. That symptom alone vexes many. Montaltus ca. 13.
Wecker. Fuschius cap. 33. Altomarus ca. 7. Laurentius c. 73 Bruel. Gordon.
Some again are black, pale, ruddy, sometimes their shoulders and shoulder blade
aches, there is a leaping all over their bodies, palpitation of the heart, and
that cardiaca passio, grief in the mouth of the stomach, which makes the
patient think his heart it self aketh, and sometimes sowning. Montanus consil.
55. Trincavelius lib. 3. consil. 36. and 37. Fernelius consil. 43. and 43.
Hildesheim, Claudinus etc. give instance of every particular. The peculiar
symptoms which properly belong to every part, be these. If from the stomach,
says Pract mayor dolor in co and ventositas, nausea.
Savanarola, it is full of pain, wind. Guianerius ads, vertigo, nausea, much
spitting etc. If from the myrache, a swelling and wind in the Hypocondries, a
lothing, and appetite to vomit, pulling upward.p If from the heart, aching and
trembling of it, much heavines. If from the liver, there is usually a pain in
the right Hypocondry. If from the Spleen, hardness and grief in the left
Hypocondry, a rumbling, much appetite and small digestion, Avicenna. If from
the Meseriack veins and liver on the other side, little or no appetite. Herc.
de Sax. If from the Hypocondries a rumbling, inflation, concoction is hindered,
often belching etc. and from these crudities, windy vapors ascend up to the
Brain, which trouble the Imagination, and cause fear, sorrow, dulnes,
heavines, and many terrible conceits and Chimeras, as Lemnius well observes
lib. 1. cap. 16. as Vt atra den saque nubes soli offusa radios and lumen eius
intercipit and offuscat sic etc.
a black and a thick cloud couers the Sun, and intercepts his beams and
light, so does this melancholy vapor obnubilate the mind, and enforce it to
many absurd thoughts and Imaginations, and compel good, wise, honest, discreet
men otherwise (arising to the Brain Vt fumus e tamin^.
from the lower parts as smoke out of a chimny) to dote, speak and do that
which becomes them not, their persons, callings, wisdoms. One by reason of
those ascending vapors and gripings, rumbling beneath, will not be persuaded
but that he has a serpent in his guts, a viper, another frogs. Trallianus
relates a story of a woman that imagined she had swallowed an Eele or a
serpent; and Faelix Platerus observat. lib. 1. has a most memorable example of
a country man of his, that in the Springtime by chance falling into a pit
where frogs and frogs-spawn was, and a little of that water swallowed, began to
suspect that he had likewise swallowed frog-spawn, and with that conceit and
fear, his phantasy wrought so far, that he verily thought he had young live
frogs in his belly, qui vivebant ex alimento suo, that lived by his
nourishment, and was so certainly persuaded of it, that for many years
together, he could not be rectified in his conceit. He studied Physic seven
years together to cure himself, and traveled into Italy, France, and Germany,
to confer with the best Physicians about it, and Ao 1609, asked his counsel
amongst the rest, he told him it was wind, his conceit etc. but mordicus
contradicere and ore and scriptis probare nitebatur: no saying would serve, it
was no wind, but real frogs: and do you not hear them croake? Platerus would
have deceived him, by putting live frogs into his excrements: but he being a
Physician himself, would not be deceived, vir prudens, alias and doctus, a wise
and a learned man otherwise, a Doctor of Physic, and after seven years dotage
in this kind, ^ Phantasia liberatus est, he was cured. Laurentius and Goulart
have many such examples, if you be desirous to read the^. One commodity above
the rest which are melancholy, these windy flatuous have, lucida intervalla,
their symptoms and pains are not usually so continuate as the rest, but come
by fits, fear and sorrow, and the rest: yet in another they exceed all others,
and that is, Hypocondriaci maxim affectaet coire, and multiplicatur coitus in
ipsis, eo quod ventositates multiplicantur in hypocondriis, and coitus saepe
allevat bas ventositates.
they are luxurious, incontinent, and prone to Venery, by reason of wind, and
facile amant, and quamlibet fere amant. Jason Pratensis. and Cont. lib. 1.
tract 9.
Rhasis is of opinion that Venus does many of them much good, the other
symptoms of the mind be common with the rest.

SVBSEC. 3. Symptoms of melancholy abounding in the whole Body.
THeir Bodies that are affected with this universal melancholy, are most part
black, Wecker* melancholicus succus toto corpore redundans.
the melancholy juice is redundant all over, hirsute they are, and lean, they
have broad veins, their blood is gross and thick. Splen natura imbecillior.
Montaltus cap. 22.
Their Spleen is weak, and a Liver apt to engender the humor; they have kept
bad diet, or have had some evacuation stopped, as haemrods, or months in
women, which Lib. 1. cap. 16. Interrogare convenit an aliqua evacuationis
retentio obuenerit, viri in haemor: mulierum menstruis, and vide faciem
similiter an sit rubicunda.
T rallianus in the cure, would have carefully to be inquired, and withal to
observe of what complexion the party is of, black or red. For as Forrestus and
Hollerius contend, if Naturales ^igri acquisiti a toto corpore saepe rubicundi.
the y be black, it proceeds from abundance of natural melancholy, if it
proceed from cares, disco^tents, diet, exercise etc. they may be as well of any
other color, red, yellow, pale, as black, and yet their whole blood corrupt:
praerubri color saepe sunt tales, saepe flavi, says Montaltus cap. 22. ^he
best way to discern this species is to let them blood, if the blood be
corrupt, thick and black, and they withal free from those Hypocondriacall
symptoms, Montaltus cap. 22. Piso. ex color sanguinis si minuas ve nam si
fluat niger etc.
or not so grievously troubled with them, and those of the head, it argues they
are melancholy a toto corpore. The fumes which arise from this corrupt blood,
disturbs the mind, and makes them fearful and sorrowful, heavy hearted, as
the rest, dejected, discontented, solitary, aweary of their lives, dull and
heavy, and if far gone, that which Apuleius wished to his enemy by way of
imprecation is true in them. Apul lib. 1. semper obviae species mortuorum
quicquid vmbrarum est vspiam quicquid lemurum and larvaru^ oculis suis
aggerunt, sibi fingunt, omnia noctium occursacula, omnia bustorum for midamina,
omnia sepulchrorum terriculamenta.
Dead men's bones, hobgoblins, ghosts are ever in their minds, and meet them
still in every turn, all the bugbeares of the night, and terrors and
fairybabes of tombs and graves are before their eyes, and in their thoughts,
as to women and children if they be in the dark alone. If they hear, or
read, or see any tragical object, it sticks by them, they are afraid of death,
and yet aweary of their lives. etc.

MEMB. 3.
SVBSECT. 1. Immediate cause of these precedent Symptoms.
TO give some satisfaction to melancholy men, that are troubled with these
symptoms, a better means in my Judgment cannot be taken, then to show them the
true causes whence they proceed, not from devils, as they suppose, or that they
are bewitched, or forsaken of God, hear or see etc. as many of them think, but
from natural and inward causes, that so knowing them, they may better avoid
the effects, or at least endure them with more patience. The most grievous and
common symptoms are Fear and Sorrow, and that without a cause, to the wisest
and discreetest men in this malady not to be avoided. The reason why they are
so, Aetius discusseth at large, Tetrab. 2.2. his first problem out of Galen
lib. 2 de causis, sympt. 1. For Galen imputes all to the cold that is black,
and thinks that the spirits being darkened, and the substance as the Brain
cloudy and dark, all the objects thereof appear terrible, and the Vapores
crassi and nigri a ventriculo in cerebrum exhalant. Ber. Platerus.
mind it self by those dark, obscure, gross fumes ascending from black
humors, is in continual darkness, fear and sorrow, and diverse terrible
monstrous fictions in a thousand shapes and apparitions, and violent passions,
by which the Brain and phantasy are troubled and eclipsed. Calidi hilares,
frigidi indispositi ad laetitiam, and ideo solitarij, taciturni, non ob
tenebras internas vt medici volunt sed ob frigus. multi melancholici nocte
ambulant intrepidi.
Fracastorius lib. 2. de Intellect. will have cold to be the cause of Fear and
Sorrow, for such as are cold, are ill disposed to mirth, dull and heavy, by
nature solitary, silent, and not for any inward darkness, as Physicians think;
for many melancholy men dare boldly be and continue, and walk in the dark,
and delight in it: solum frigidi timidi, if they be hot they are merry, and
the more hot, the more furious, and void of fear, as we see in madmen: but
this reason holds not, for then no melancholy proceeding from choler adust,
should fear. Averroes scoffs at Galen for his reasons, and brings fine
arguments to refell them, which are copiously censured and confuted by Aelianus
Montaltus cap. 5. and 6. Altomarus cap. 7. de mel. Guianerius tract. 15. cap.
1. Bright cap. 17. Laurentius cap. 5. Valesius med. contr. lib. 5. cont. 1.
Intemperies facit succum nigrum, nigrities obscurat spiritu^, obscuratio
spiritus facit metum and tristitia^.
Distemperature they conclude, makes black juice, blackness obscures the
spirits, the spirits obscured, cause fear and sorrow. Laurentius cap. 13.
thinks these black fumes offend especially the Diaphragma or Midriffe, and so
perconsequens the mind, which is obscured as Vt nubeculae Solemn offuscat.
Constantinus lib. de Melan.
a cloud by the Sun. To this opinion of Galen, almost all the Greeks and
Arabians subscribe, and Latins new and old, internae tenebrae offuscant
animum, vt externae nocent pueris, as children are affrighted in the dark, so
are melancholy men at all times, Altomarus cap. 7. causam timoris circumfert
ater humor passionis materia, and atri spiritus perpetua^ animae domicilio
offundunt noctem.
as having the inward cause with them, and still carrying it about. Which black
vapors whether they proceed from the black blood about the heart, as T.W. Ies.
thinks in his Treatise of the passions of the mind, or stomach, spleen,
midriffe, or all the misaffected parts together, it boots not, they keep the
mind in a perpetual dungeon, and oppress it with continual fears,
anxieties, sorrows etc. It is an ordinary thing for such as are sound, to
laugh at this dejected pusillanimity, and those other symptoms of melancholy,
to make themselves merry with the^, and to wonder at such, as toys and
trifles, which may be resisted and withstood, if they will themselves: but let
him that so wonders, consider with himself, that if a man should tell him of a
sudden, that some of his especial friends were dead, could he choose but
grieve, or set him upon a steep rock, where he should be in danger to be
precipitated, could he be secure? his heart would tremble for fear, and his
head would be giddy. P. Byarus Tract. de pest. gives instance, as I have said,
Pone exemplu^ quod quis potest ambulare super trabem quae est in via, sed sisit
super aquam profundam loco pontis non ambulabit super eam, eo quod imaginetur
in animo and timet vehementer, formae cadendi impressa, cui obediunt membra
omnia, and facultates reliquae.
and put case (says he) in one that walks upon a planke, if it lie on the
ground, he can safely do it, but if the same planke be laid over some deep
water, instead of a bridge, he is vehemently moved, and it is nothing but his
imagination, forma cadendi impressa, to which his other members and faculties
obey. Yea, but you infer that such men have a just cause to fear, a true
object of fear, so have melancholy men an inward cause, a perpetual fume and
darkness, causing fear, grief, suspicion, which they carry with the^, an object
which cannot be removed, remove heat of the Liver, a cold stomach, weak spleen,
remove those adust humors and vapors arising from them, black blood from the
heart, take away the cause, and then bid them not grieve, nor fear, or be
heavy, dull, lumpish, otherwise counsel can do little good; you may as well
bid him that is sick of an ague, not to be adry, or him that is wounded, not to
feel pain.

Suspicion follows Fear and Sorrow at heels, arising out of the same
fountain, so thinks Lib. 2. de Intellectione suspitiosi ob timorem and
obliquum discursum and semper inde putant sibi sieri insidias.

Laurentius c. 5.


Fracastorius, that fear is the cause of suspicion and still they suspect some
treachery, or some secret machination to be framed against them, still they
distrust. Restlinesse proceeds from the same spring, variety of fumes makes
them like and dislike. Solitariness, avoiding of light, that they are weary of
their lives, hate the world, arise from the same causes, because their spirits
and humors are opposite to light, fear makes them avoid company, and absent
themselves, least they should be misused, hissed at, or overshoot themselves,
which still they suspect. They are prone to venery by reason of wind. Angry,
waspish, and fretting still, out of abundance of choler, which causes
fearful dreams, and violent perturbations to them, both sleeping and waking.
That they suppose they have no heads, fly, sink, they are pots, glasses, etc.
is wind in their heads. Illud inquisitione dignum cur tam falsa recipiant,
habere se cornua esse mortuos nasatos esse aves, etc.
Fracastorius accounts it a thing worthy of inquisition, why they should
entertain such false conceits, as that they have horns, great noses, that they
are Birds, Beasts, etc. And why they should think themselves Kings, Lords,
Cardinals. For the first 1. Dispositio corporis. 2. Occasio Imaginationis.
Fracastorius gives two reasons: One is the disposition of the body; the other
the occasion of the fantasy; as if their eyes be purblind, their ears sing,
etc. To the second Laurentius answers, the Imagination inwardly or outwardly
moved, represents to the understanding, not intisements only to favor the
passion or dislike, but a very intensiue pleasure follows the passion, or
displeasure, and the will and reason are captivated by delighting in it.

Why Students and Lovers are so often Melancholy and mad, the Philosophers of
In prob lib. de coelo. vehemens and assidua cogitatio rei erga quam afficitur
spiritus in cerebrum evocat.
Conimbra gives this reason, because by a vehement and continual meditation of
that, wherewith they are affected, they fetch up the spirits into the brain,
and with the heat brought with them, they incend the brain beyond measure, and
the cells of the inner senses, dissoluing their temperature, which being
dissolved they cannot perform their offices as they ought.

Why melancholy men are witty, which Aristotle has long since maintained in
his Problems; and that Melancholici Ingeniosi omnes su^mi viri in artibus and
disciplinis sieve circum imperatoriam aut reipub. disciplinam omnes fere
melancholici, Aristoteles.
all learned men, famous Philosophers, and Law-giuers, ad vnum fere omnes
Melancholici, have still been melancholy; is a Problem much controverted.
Jason Pratensis will have it understood of natural Melancholy, which opinion
Melancthon inclines to in his books de Anima, and Marsilius Ficinus de san.
tuen. lib. 1. cap. 5. but not simple, for that makes men stupid, heavy, dull,
being cold and dry, fearful, fools, and solitary, but mixed with the other
humors, fleame only excepted: and they not adust, Adeo miscentur vt sit duplu^
sanguinis ad reliqua duo.
but so mixed as that blood be half, with little or no adustion, that they be
neither too hot nor too cold. Aponensis cited by Melancthon, thinks it proceeds
from melancholy adust, excluding all natural melancholy as too cold.
Laurentius condemns his Tenent, because adustion of humors makes men mad, as
Lime burns when water is cast on it. It must be mixed with blood, and somewhat
adust, and so that old Aphorism of Aristotle may be verified, Nullum magnum
ingenium sine mixtura dementiae. no excellent wit without a mixture of
madness. Fracastorius shall decide the controversy, Lib. 2. de Intellectione.
pingui sunt Minerva phlegmatici; sanguinei amabiles, grati, hilares, at non
ingeniosi, cholerici celeres motu and ob id contemplationis impatientes.
Melancholici solum excellentes etc.
Phlegmatic are dull: Sanguine lovely, pleasant, acceptable and merry, but
not witty: Choleric are too swift in motion and furious, impatient of
contemplation, deceitful wits; Melancholy men have the most excellent wits,
but not all, this humor may be hot or cold, thick or thin, if too hot they
are furious and mad, if too cold, dull, stupid, timorous and sad, if temperate,
excellent, rather inclining to that extreme of heat then cold. And this
sentence of his will agree with that of Heraclitus, a dry light makes a wise
mind, temperate heat and dryness are the chief causes of a good wit;
therefore says Aelian, an Elephant is the wisest of all brute beasts, because
his brain is driest, and ob atrae bilis copiam, this reason Cardan approues
subtle. lib. 12. and Io. Baptista Silvaticus, a Physician of Millan, in his
first controversy, has copiously handled this question: Rulandus in his
Problems, and others.

Weeping, Sighing, Laughing, Itching, Trembling, Sweating, Blushing, hearing
and seeing strange noyses, visions, wind, cruditie, are motions of the body,
depending upon those precedent motions of the mind; Neither are tears,
affections, but actions, as Scaliger holds, Trepidantum vox tremula quia cor
queritur.
the voice of such as are afraid, trembles, because their heart is shaked.
Conimb. prob. 6. sect. 3. de somno. why they stutte or faulter in their speech,
Mercurialis, and Montaltus cap. 17. give like reasons out of Hippocrates, Ob
ariditatem que reddit nervos lingue torpidos.
dryness, which makes the nerves of the tongue torpid. Fast speaking which is
a symptom of some few, Aetius will have caused Incontinentia lingue ex copia
slatuum, and velocita^ Imaginationis.
from abundance of wind, and swiftness of Imagination: Calvities ob ^^ccitatis
excessu^
baldness comes from excess of dryness, hirsutenesse from a dry temperature.
The cause of much wakeing is a dry brain, continual meditation, discontent,
fears, and cares, that suffer not the mind to be at rest. Incontinency is from
wind and an hot liver, Montanus consil. 26. Rumbling in the gutts is caused
from wind, and wind from ill concoction, weakness of natural heat, or a
distempered heat and cold. Aetius.
Palpitation of the heart from vapors, and heaviness, and aching from the same
cause. Tetrabil. 2. ser. 2. cap 10.
That the belly is hard wind is a cause, and of that leaping in many parts.
Redness of the face, and itching, as if they were fleabitten, or stung with
pisse-mires, from a sharp subtle wind. Laurent. c. 13.
Cold sweat from vapors arising from the Hypocondries, which pitch upon the
skin, leanenesse for want of good nourishment. Why their appetite is so great,
Aetius answeares. Os ventris frigescit, cold in those inner parts, cold belly
and hot liver causes crudity, and intention proceeds from perturbations, Ant.
Ludovicus prob. lib. 1. sect. 5. de atraebilarijs.
our soul for want of spirits cannot attend exactly to so many intentive
operations being exhaust, and overswayd by passion, she cannot consider the
reasons, which may dissuade her from such affections.

Subrusticus pudor, vitiosus pudor.
Bashfulnesse and blushing, is a passion proper to men alone, and is not only
caused for Ob ignominia^ aut turpidme^ facti, etc.
some shame or ignomy, or that they are guilty unto themselves of some foul
fact committed, but as De Symp. and Antip. cap. 12. laborat facies ob
praesentiam eius qui defectum nostrum videt and natura quasi open latura,
calore illuc mittit calor s^nguinem trahit. vnde rubor, audacesnon rubent, etc.
Fracastorius well determines, ob defectum proprium, and timorem, from fear,
and a conceit of our defects; The face labors and is troubled at his presence
that sees our defects and nature willing to help sends thither heat, heat
draws the subtilest blood, and so we blush. They that are bold, arrogant, and
careless seldom or never blush, but such as are fearful. Anthonius
Lodovicus, in his book de pudore, will have this subtle blood to arise in the
face, not so much for the reverence of our betters in presence, Ob gaudium and
voluptatem for as exit sanguis aut ob melio^is revertentiam aut ob subitum
occursum aut si quid incautius exciderit.
but for joy and pleasure, or if any thing at unawares shall pass from us: a
sudden accident, occurse, or meeting. Any object heard or seen, or that we
be stayed before our betters, or in company we like not, or if any thing
molest and offend us, erubescentia turns to rubor, blushing to a continuate
redness. Alexander Aphrodiensis makes all bashfulnesse a virtue, eamque
serefert inseipso experiri solitum etsi esset admodum senex.
Sometimes the extremity of the ears tingle and are red, sometimes the whole
face. Etsi nihil vitiosum commiseris, as Ludovicus holds: though Aristotle is
of opinion, omnis pudor ex vitio commisso. All shame from some offense. But we
find otherwise, it may as well proceed Saepe post cibii apti ad ruborem ex
potu vini, ex timore saepe and ab hepate calido cerebro calido, etc.
from fear, a hot liver says Duretus, notis in Hollerium. From a hot brain,
from wind, the lungs heated, or after drinking of wine, strong drink,
perturbations, etc.

Laughter what it is, says 2. De oratore quid ipse risus quopacto concitetur
vbi fit, etc
Tully, how it is caused, where it is, and so suddenly breaks out, that
desirous to stay it we cannot, and how it comes to possess and stir our
face, veins, eyes, countenance, mouth, sides, let Democritus determine. The
cause that it often affects melancholy men so much, is given by Gomesius lib.
3. de sale, genial. cap. 18. abundance of pleasant vapors, which in sanguine
melancholy especially, break from the heart, Diaphragma titillant quia
transversum and numerosum. qua ti^illatione motu fe^^u atque arterijs distentis
spiritus inde latera venas os otulos occupant.
and tickle the midriffe, because it is transverse and full of nerves: by which
titillation the sense being moved, and arteries distended, or pulled, the
spirits from thence move and possess the sides, veins, countenance, eyes. See
more in Iossius de risu and fletu, Vives 3 de Anima. Tears, as Scaliger
defines, proceed from grief and pity, Excalesaectione humidi cerebri nam ex
sicco lachryme non flu^nt.
or from the heating of a moist brain, for a dry cannot weep.

That they see and hear so many phantasmes, Chimeraes, noyses, visions, etc.
as Fienus has discoursed at large in his books of Imagination, and Res
mirandas imaginantur and putant se videre quae nec vident nec audiunt.
Lauater de spectris part. 1. cap. 2.3.4. their corrupt fantasy makes them
see and hear that which indeed is neither heard nor seen. Qui multum iciunant
aut noctes ducunt insomnes, they that much fast, or want sleep, as melancholy
and sick men commonly do, they see visions or such as are very timorous by
nature, or mad and distracted. As they that drink wine think all runs
round, when it is in their own brain; so is it with these men, the falt and
cause is inward, as Galen affirms, Insani, and qui morti vicinisunt, res quas
extra se videre putant intra oculos habent.
mad men and such as are near death, quas extra se videre putant Imagines
intra oculos habent, it is in their brain, which seems to be before them, the
brain as a convexe glass reflects solid bodies. The Organs corrupt by a
corrupt fantasy, as Lemnius lib. 1. cap. 16. well quotes. Pravoru^ humorum
and spirituu^ agitatio v^ro citr^que (...) cerebri pere^antes, etc.
cause a great agitation of spirits, and humors, which wander too and fro in
all the creekes of the brain, and cause such apparitions before their eyes.
Sickness is an ordinary cause of such sights. Cardan. subtle. lib. 18. M^ns
aegra laboribus and ieiunijs fracta, facit eos videre, audire etc. And.
Osiander saw strange visions, and Alexander ab Alexandro both in their
sickness which he relates, de rerum variet at. lib. 8. cap. 44. Albategnius
that noble Arabian on his death bed, saw a ship ascending and descending,
which Fracastorius records of his friend Baptista Turrianus. Pentheus in his
madness too sons, Euripides.
and too Thebes, every thing double. Weak sight and a vain persuasion
withal, may cause as much, and second causes concurring, as an Ore in water
makes a refraction, and seems bigger, bended, double, etc. The thickness of
the air may cause such effects, or any object not well descerned in the dark,
fear and fantasy will suspect to be a Ghost, a devil, etc. Seneca. quod
metuun nimis nunquam amoveri posse, nec tolli putant.
Quod nimis miseri timent, hoc facile credunt. We are apt to believe, and
mistake in such cases. Marcellus Donatus, lib. 2. cap. 1. brings in a story out
of Aristotle, of one Antepheron which likely saw wheresoever he was, his own
Image in the air, as in a glass. Vitello lib. 10. perspect. has such another
instance of a familiar acquaintance of his, that after the want of three or
four nights sleep, as he was riding by a rivers side, saw another riding with
him, and using all such gestures as he did, but when more light appeared, it
vanished. Eremites and Anachorites have many such absurd visions, revelations
by reason of much fasting, and bad diet, many are deceived by legerdemain, as
Scot has well showed in his book of the discovery of witchcraft, and Cardan.
subtle. 18. by suffites, perfumes and suffumigations, perspectiue glasses, and
such natural causes, as you may perceive in Baptista Porta, Albertus and
others, Glow-wormes, Fiere-drakes, Meteors, rotten wood, etc. But most part it
is within the brain, although I may not deny, but that oftentimes the devil
deludes them, and takes his opportunity to suggest and represent such vain
objects to sick melancholy men, and such as are ill affected.

The hearing is as frequently deluded as the sight, from the same causes
almost, as he that hears Bells, will make them sound what he list. Theophilus
in Galen, thought he heard music, from vapors which made his ears sound,
etc. Some are deceived by Echoes, some by roaring of waters, or concaues and
reverberation of air in the ground and hollow places or walls. Blowing of
Bellows and knocking of Hammers, if they apply their care to the cliffe.
At Barry an Isle in the Severne mouth they seem to hear a smiths forge: so
at Lypara and those sulphurious Isles, and many such like which Olaus speaks of
in the continent of Scandia, and those Northern countries. Cardan. de rerum
var. lib. 15. cap. 84. mentions of a woman, that still supposed she heard the
Devil call her, and speaking to her, she was a Painters wife in Millan: and
many such illusions of voices, which proceed most part from a corrupt
Imagination.

Whence it comes to pass, that they prophecy, speak several languages,
talk of Astronomy, and other unknown sciences to them: (of which they have
been ever ignorant.) Memb. 1. Sub. 3. of this Partition. cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis.
I have in brief touched, only this I will here add, that Arculanus, Bodin
lib. 3. cap. 6. daemonol. and some others Signa daemonis nulla sunt nisi quo^
loquantur ea quae ante nes^^ebant vt Teut^n^cu^ aut aliud Idioma. etc.
hold, as a manifest token that such persons are possessed with the Devil: so
does Hercules de Saxonia, and Apponensis, and fit only to be cured by a Priest.
But Tract. 15. c. 4.
Guianerius, Cap. 9.
Montaltus, and Lemnius, lib. 2. cap. 2. refer it wholly to the ill
disposition of the Miravis concitat humores ard^^que vehemen^ ^entem exagitat
quum, etc.
humor, and that out of the authority of Aristotle prob. 30.1. because such
symptoms are cured by purging, and as by the striking of a flint fire is
enforced, so by the vehement motions of spirits, they do elicere voces
inauditas, compel strange speeches to be spoken: another argument he has from
Platoes reminiscentiae, but in this I should rather hold with Avicenna and his
associats, that such symptoms proceed from evil spirits, which take all
opportunities of humors decayed, or otherwise to pervert the soul of a man,
and besides the humor it self, is Balneum Diaboli, the Devils bath and as
Agrippa proves, does entice him, to seize upon them.

SECT. 4.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Prognostics of Melancholy.
Prognostics, or signs to come, are either good or bad. If this malady be not
hereditary, and taken at the beginning, there is good hope of cure, recens
curationem non habet difficilem, says Avicenna, lib. 3. Fen. 1. tract. 4. c.
18. That which is with laughter, of all others is most secure, gentle, and
remiss. Herc. de Saxonia. Si melancholicis h^moroides supervenerint aut
varices v^l vt quibusdam placet aqua inter cutem, soluitur malum.
If that evacuation of haemrods, or varices which they call the water between
the skin, shall happen to a melancholy man, his misery is ended. Hippocrates
Aphor. 6.11. Galen. lib. 6. de morbis vulgar. com. 8. confirms the same, and
to this Aphorism of Hippocrates all the Arabians, new and old Latins
subscribe; Montaltus. cap. 25. Her. de Sax. Mercurialis, Vittorius Faventinus,
etc Skenkius lib. 1. observat. med. cap. de Mania. illustrats this Aphorism,
with an example of one Daniel Federer a Coppersmith, that was long melancholy,
and in the end mad about the 27 year of his age, these varices or water
began to arise in his thighs, and he was freed from his madness. Marius the
Roman was so cured some say, though with great pain. Skenkius has some other
instances of women that have been cured by flowing of their months, which
before were stopped. That the opening of the haemrods will do as much for men,
all Physicians jointly signify, so they be voluntary some say, and not by
compulsion. All melancholy men are better after a quartane Cap 10. de quartana.
Iobertus says, scarce any man has that Ague twice: But whether it free him
from this malady, it is a question. for many Physicians ascribe all long Agues
for especial causes, and a quartane Ague amongst the rest. Cum sanguis exit
per supersiciem and residet melancholia per scabiem, morpheam nigram, vel
expurgatur per inferiores parts vel per vrina^ etc non erit. etc and splen
magnificatur and varices apparent.
Rhasis cont. lib. 1. tract. 9. When melancholy gets out at the superficies of
the skin, or settles breaking out in scabbs, leprosy, morphew, or is purged
by stools, or by the Urine, and that the spleen is enlarged, and those
varices appear, the disease is dissolved. Guianerius cap. 5. tract. 15. adds
Dropsy, Iandise, Disentery, Leprosy, as good signs, to these Scabbes,
Morphewes, and breaking out, and proves it out of the 6. of Hippocrates
Aphorisms.

Evil Prognostics on the other part. Inveterata melancholia incurabilis, if
it be inveterate it is Quia iam conversa in natural.
incurable, a common axiom, aut difficulter curabilis, as they say that make
the best, hardly cured. This Galen witnesses, lib. 3. de loc. affect. cap. 6.
In quocunque sit a quacunque causa Hypocond. praesertim semper est longa,
morosa nec facile curari potest.
be it in whom it will, or from what cause soever, it is ever long, wayward and
tedious, and hard to be cured, if once it be habituated. As Lucian said of the
Gout, she was the Regina morborum and inexorabilis.
Queen of diseases, and inexorable, may we say of melancholy. And yet
Paracelsus will have all diseases whatsoever curable, and laughs at all them
which think otherwise, as T. Erastus par. 3. objects to him. Although in
another place, hereditary diseases he accounts incurable, and by no art to be
removed. Omne dilirium quod oritur a paucitate cerebri incurabile Hildesheim,
spicel. 2. de mania.
Hildesheim spicel. 2. de mel. accounts it less dangerous if only Sisola
Imaginatio laedatur and non ratio.
Imagination be hurt, and not reason, Mala a sanguine servete, deterior a bile
assata pessima ab atra bile putrefacta.
the gentlest is from blood, Wourse from choler adust, but the worst of all
from Melancholy putrified. Difficilier cura eius quae fit vitio corporis totius
and cerebri.
Bruel esteems hypocondriacall least dangerous, and the other two species
(opposite to Galen) hardest to be cured. Difficilis curaetu in viris multo
difficilior in faeminis.
The cure is hard in man, but much more difficult in women. And both men and
women must take notice of that saying of Montanus consil. 230. pro Abbate
Italo, Ad interitum plerumque homines comitatur licet medici levent plerumque
tam^a non tollunt vnquam sed recedit ace^bior quam antea minima occasion aut
errore.
This malady does commonly accompany them to their grave, Physicians may ease
and it may lie hid for a time, but they cannot quite cure it, but it will
return again more violent and sharp then at first, and that upon every small
occasion or error. Periculum esine degeneret in Epilepsiam Apoplexiam,
Convulsionem, caecitatem.
Oftentimes it degenerats into Epilepsy, Apoplexy, Convulsions, and blindness:
by the authority of Hippocrates and Montalt. c. 25. Laurentius. Herc. de Saxon.
Galen all aver, If once it possess the ventricles of the brain, Salust
Salvianus adds, if to the optic nerves, blindness. Mercurialis consil. 20.
had a woman to his patient, that from Melancholy became Epilepticke and blind.
Her. de Saxonia, Aristotle, Capivaccius.
If it come from a cold cause or so continue cold, or increase, Epilepsy,
Convulsions follow and blindness, or else in the end they are moped, sottish,
and in all their actions, speeches, gestures, ridiculous. Favent. humor
frigidus sola deliris causa. furoris vero humor calidus.
If it come from an hot cause, they are more furious, and boisterous, and in
conclusion mad. Calescentem melancholiam saepius sequitur mania, Hernius calls
madness sobolem melancheliae
if it heat and increase that is the common event, Alexander. lib. 1 cap. 18.
per circuitus, aut semper insanit, by fits, or altogether. If it come from
melancholy natural adust, and in excess, they are often daemoniacall,
Montanus.

Montalt c. 15 Raromors aut nunquam nisi sibi ipsis inferant'
Seldom this malady procures death, except, which is the greatest and most
grievous calamity, and the misery of al miseries, to make away themselves,
which is a frequent thing and familiar amongst them. It Is Lib. de Insania.
Fabio Calu^ interpret.
Hippocrates observation, and Galens words, etsi mortem timent, tamen plerunque
sibi ipsis mortem consciscunt, lib. 3. de locis affect. cap. 7. the doom of all
Physicians. It Is Nonnulli violent as manus sibi inserunt.
Rabbi Moses Aphorism. The prognosticon of Avicenna, Rhasis, Aetius,
Gordonius, Valescus, Altomarus Salust Salvianus, Capivaccius, Hercules de
Saxonia, Piso, Bruel, Fuchsius all etc. Inerat. lib. 3.
Et saepe vsque adeo mortis formidine vitae
Percipit infalix odium, lucisque videndae,
Vt sibi consciscat maerenti pectore lethum.
And so far forth deaths terror does affright,
He makes away himself, and hates the light:
To make an end of fear and grief of heart,
He voluntary dies to ease his smart.
So far forth does the torture and extremity of his misery torment him, that
he can take no pleasure in his life, but is in a manner enforced to offer
violence unto himself, to be freed from his present insufferable pains. So
some, says Lib. 2. de Intell. saepe mortem sibi consciscunt ob timorem and
tristitiam taedio vitae affecti ob furore and desperationem. Est enim inferi
etc. Ergo sic perpetuo afflictati vitam odiunt se pre ipitant his malis
carituri aut intersiciunt aut tale quid committunt.
Fracastorius, in fury, but most in despair, sorrow, fear, and out of the
anguish and vexation of their souls, offer violence to themselves: for their
life is unhappy and miserable. They can take no rest in the night, nor sleep,
or if they do slumber, fearful dreams astonish them. In the day time they
are affrighted still by some terrible object, and torn in pieces with
suspicion, fear sorrow, discontents, cares, shames, anguish etc. as so many
wild horses, that they cannot be quiet an hour, a minute of time, but even
against their wills they are intent, and still thinking of it, they cannot forget
it, it grindes their souls day and night, they are perpetually tormented, they
can neither eat, drink, or sleep. Psalm. 107.18. their soul abhors all
meat, and they are brought to deaths door, V. 10. Ps. 107
being bound in misery and iron: they Job. 3.3.
curse their stars with Job, Job. 6.8.
and day of their birth, and wish for death, and murmr many times against the
world, friends, mankind, themselves, even against God himself in the
bitterness of their passion, Seneca.
vivere nolunt, mori nesciunt, live they will not, dye they cannot. And in the
midst of these squalid, ugly, and such irksome days, they seek at last,
finding no comfort, In salutis suae desperatione proponunt sibi mortis
desiderium Oct. Horat. lib. 2. cap. 5.
no remedy in this wretched life, to be eased of all by death. Omniae appetunt
bonum, and for their good as they hope, sub specie at least, vel quia mori
pulchrum putant, says Lib de Insaniae Sic sic iuvat ire pervmbr^s.
Hippocrates, vel quia putant indese maioribus malis liberari, to be freed as
they hope. Though many times as Aesopes fishes they leap from the drying pan
into the fire it self, yet they hope to be freed by this means, and
therefore, says Cap. 3. de mentis alienat vasli degunt dum ta^dem mortem quam
timent suspendio aut submersione aut a'iqua vel al a vi vt multa tristia
exempla vimus.
Faelix Platerus, after many tedious days at last, either by drowning,
hanging, or some such fearful end, they precipitate, or make away themselves:
many lamentable examples are daily seen amongst us. It Is a common calamity,
Arculanus in 9. Rhasis cap. 16. cauendum ne ex alto se praecipitent aut
aliosledant.
a fatal end to this disease: They are condemned to a violent death by a Jury
of Physicians, and furiously disposed, carried headlong by their tyrannising
wills, enforced by miseries, and there remains no more to such persons, if that
heavenly physitio^ by his assisting grace and mercy alone do not prevent, no
humane persuasion, or art can help, to be their own butchers, and to f execute
themselves. Socrates his cicutae, Lucretias dagger, Timons halter, are yet to
be had, and Catoes knife, Neroes sword are left behind them, as so many fatal
engines bequeathed to posterity, and will be used to the worlds end, by such
distressed souls, so intolerable, insufferable, grievous and violent is their
pain, O omnium opinionibus incogitabile malum. Lucian. mortesque mill mill
dum viuit neces gerit, peritque. Heinsius Austriaco.
so unspeakable, so continuate. One day of grief is as an hundred years, as
Cardan observes: It Is carnificina hominum, angor animi, as well says Areteus,h
a plague of the soul, an epitome of hell, and if there be an hell upon earth,
it is to be found in a Melancholy man's heart: And that which scoffing Lucian
said of the gout in ^est I may truly say of Melancholy in earnest. O triste
nomen, o dijs odibile
Melancholia lachrymosa, cocyti filia,
Tu Tartari specubus opacis aeditae,
Erinnys vtero quam Megaera suo tulit,
Et ab vberibus aluit, cuique paruulae,
Amarulentum in os lac Alecto dedit,
Omnes abominabilem te daemones
Produxere in lucem, exitio mortalium. Et paulo post

Non Iuppiter fert tale telum fulminis,
Non vlla sic procella saevit aequoris,
Non impetuosi tanta vis est turbinis.
An asperos sustineo morsus Cerberi?
Number virus Echidnae me^bra mea depascitur?
Aut tunica sanie tincta Nessi sanguinis?
Illachrymabile and immedicabile malum hoc.
O sad and odious name: a name so fell,
Is this of Melancholy, brat of hell:
There borne in hellish darkness does she dwell,
The Furies brought her up, Megera's teate,
Alecto gave her bitter milk to eat.
And all conspired a bane to mortal men,
To bring this devil out of that black den.
Jupiters thunderbolt, nor storm at Sea.
Nor whirlewind does our hearts so much dismay.
What am I bit by that fierce Cerberus?
Or stung by serpent so pestiferous?
Or put on shirt that is dipped in Nessus blood?
My pain's past cure, physic can do no good.
Siculi non invenere tyranni maius tormentum. No torture of body like unto it,
no strappado's, hot-irons, Phalaris bulls: all fears, griefs, suspicious,
discontents are swallowed up and drowned in this Euripus, this Irish sea, this
Ocean of misery, as so many small brooks. This is the Hic omnis imbonitaes and
insu^uitas consistit vt Tertulliani verbis vtar. orat. ad martyrs
Quintescence of humane adversity; all other diseases whatsoever are but
fleabitings to Melancholy in extent. It Is the pith of them all, and a
melancholy man is that true Prometheus which is bound to Caucasus, the true
Titius whose bowels are still by a vulter devoured, as Poets feign, and so does
Vita Herculis
Lilius Giraldus interpret it, of anxieties and those griping cares. In all
other maladies whatsoever, we seek for help, if a leg or an arm ache
through any distemperature or wound, or that we have any ordinary disease
above all things whatsoever, we desire help and health, a present recovery, if
by any means possibly it may be procured. We will freely part with all our
other fortunes substance, endure any misery, drink bitter potions, swallow
those distasteful pills, suffer our ioints to be feared, to be cut off, any
thing for future health; so sweet, so dear, so precious above all other things
in this world is life: but to a melancholy man, nothing so tedious, nothing so
odious, that which they so carefully seek to preserve, Quid est miserius in
vita quam velle mori. Seneca.
he abhorres: he alone, so intolerable are his pains. Some make a question
graviores morbi corporis an animi, whether the diseases of the body or mind be
more grievous, but there is no comparison, no doubt to be made of it, multo
enim saeuior longeque atrocior, est animi quam corporis cruciatus, Lemnius lib.
1. cap. 12. the diseases of the mind are far more grievous. So Cardan
testifies de rerum var. lib. 8 cap. 40. Tom. ^. Libello an graviores passiones
etc.
Maximus Tyrius a Platonist, and Plutarch have made just volumes to prove it.
Ter.
Dies adimit agritudinem hominibus, in all other diseases there is some hope
likely, but these unhappy men are borne to misery, past all hope of recovery,
incurably sick, and the longer they live, the worse they are, death alone must
ease them.

Another doubt is made by some Philosophers, whether it be lawful for a man in
such extremity of pain and grief, to make away himself, and how such men
that so do, are to be censured. The Platonists approve of it, that it is
lawful in such cases, and upon a necessity, Plotinus lib. de beatitud. cap. 7.
and Socrates himself defends it, in Plato's Phaedon, if any man labor of an
incurable disease, he may dispatch himself if it be to his good. The Stoics
in general, and Patet exitus, si pugnare non vultis, licet fugere quis vos
tenet invitos? De provid. cap 8.
Seneca amongst the rest, quamcunque veram esse viam ad libertatem, any way is
allowable that leads to liberty. Epist. 24.71.82.
He co^mends Cato, Dido and Lucretia, for their generous courage in so doing,
and others that do it, to avoid a greater mischief, or to free themselves from
misery, and to save their honor, De ponte deijcere.
or vindicate their good name, as Cleopatra did, as Vibius Virius, and those
Campanian Senators in Livy, (Dec. 3. lib. 6.) to avoid the Roman tyranny, that
poisoned themselves: how many myriads besides in all ages, qui sibi lethum
insontes peperere manu etc. Mac. 14.42.
Razis in the Machabees is magnified for it; Sampsons death approved. And in
wars for a man to run rashly upon imminent danger and present death, is
accounted valor and magnanimity, As amongst Turks and others.
to be the cause of his own, and many a thousands ruin besides, to commit
wilful murder in a manner, of himself and others, is a glorious thing, and he
shall be crowned for it. The Bohemus de morbis gentium.
Maessegatae of old, or I know not what nation besides, did stifle their old
men, to free the^ from those grievances incident to that age. Sr Thomas Moore
in his Vtopia commends a voluntary death, if he be sibi aut alijs molestus,
troublesome to himself or others, ( Lib. 2. praesertim quum tormentum ci vitae
sit bona spe fretus acerba vita velut a carcere se eximat vel ab alijs eximi
sua voluntate patiatur.
especially if life be a torment to him) let him free himself with his own
hands from this tedious life, as from a prison, or suffer himself to be freed
by others. It is an ordinary thing in China, says Mat. Riccius the Jesuit,
Expedit. ad Sinas lib. 1. cap. 9 vel bonorum desperatione, vel malorum
perpessione fracti and fatigati, vel manus violentas sibi inferunt vel vt in
micis suis aegre faciant, etc.
if they be in despair of better fortunes, or tired and tortured with misery,
to bereave themselves of life, and many times to spite their enemies the more,
to hang at their doors. Austin himself de Civit. dei lib. 1. cap. defends a
violent death, so that it be undertaken in a good cause, nemo sic mortuus, qui
non fuerat aliquando morit urus, quid autem interest quo mortis genere vita
ista finiatur, quand^ ille cus finitur, iterum mori non cogitur? etc. no man so
voluntarily dies, but volens n^lens, he must dye at last, and our life is
subject to innumerable casualties, who knows when they may happen, vtrum
satius est vnam perpeti moriendo, an omnes timere vivendo, So did Anthony,
Galba, Vitellius, Otho, Aristotle him self etc. Ajax in despair etc. Cleopatra
to save her honor.
better suffer one, then fear all. Inertius deligitur diu vivere quam in
timore tot morborum semel moriendo, nullam deinceps formidare.
And a harder choice to live in fear, then by once dying, to be freed from
all. Theombrotus. Ambrociata persuaded I know not how many hundreds of his
auditors, by a luculent oration he made of the miseries of this, and happiness
of that other life to precipitate themselves. Cuetius lib. 1^
Calenus and his Indians hated of old, to dye a natural death, the
Circumcellians and Donatists, lothing life, compelled others to make them away,
with many such: but these are false and Pagan positions, and upon a wrong
ground. No evil is to be done, that good may come of it: reclamat Christus,
reclamat scriptura, God, and all good men are Summum nec metuas diem, nec
optes. Hor.
against it. Plautus.
Male meretur, qui dat mendico quod edat, nam and illud quod dat perit, and
illi producit, vitam ad miseriam: he that gives a beggar an alms, as that
Comical Poet said, does ill, because he does but Laequeus praecisus cont. 1.
l^b. 5. quidam naustragio facto, amissis tribue liberis, and vxore, suspendit
se, precidit illi quidam ex praeterenutibus laqueum, A liberato reus fit
maleficij. Seneca. See D Kings 14. Lect. on Jonas. D Abbots 6 Lect. on the same
Prophet.
prolo^g his miseries. But Lactantius lib. 6. cap. 7. de vero cultu, calls it a
detestable opinion and fully, confutes it lib. 3. de sap. cap. 18. and Austin
cap. 61. ad Dulcitium Tribunu^, Hierom to Marcella of Blesillas death, Non
recipio tales animas etc. he calls such men martyrs stultae Philosophiae.
Cyprian de duplici martyrio, Si qui sic moriantur, aut infirmitas, aut ambitio,
aut dementia cogit eos. Arist. 3. Echic. 7. it needs no confutation. This only
let me add, that in some cases those As to be buried out of Christian burial
with a stake etc. lose their goods etc.
hard censures of such as offer violence to themselves, are to be mitigated, as
in such as are mad, beside themselves, or known to have bin long melancholy,
and that in extremity, they know not what they do, deprived of reason,
Judgment, all Navis destituta nauclero in terribilem aliquem scopuium impingit.
as a ship that is void of a Pilot, must needs impinge upon the next rock or
sands, and suffer shipwreck. Observat.
P. Porestus has a story of two melancholy brethren, that made away
themselves, and for so foul a fact, were accordingly censured to be infamously
buried, etc. as in such cases they use: but upon father examination of their
misery and madness, the censure was Seneca tract. 1. lib. 8. cap. ^ Lex
Homici^ta inse insepulrus abiciatur, contradicitur ^o quod asserre sibi manus
coactus sit assiduis malis, summam infaelicitatum suarum in hos (...) quod
existima bat licere misero mori.
revoked, and they were solemnly interred. Thus of their goods and bodies we
can dispose, but what shall become of their souls, God alone can tell, his
mercy may come inter pontem and fontem, inter gladium et ingulum: quod cuivis
contigit cuiquam potest. Who knows how he may be tempted? is it his case, it
may be thine; we ought not to be too rash and rigorous in our censures, as some
are, charity will judge the best. God be merciful to us all.

FINIS.
THE SYNOPSIS OF THE SECOND PARTITION.
Cure of melancholy is either Sect. 1. General to all which contains Unlawful
means forbidden. Memb. 1. From the Devil, Magitians, Witches etc. by charms,
spells, incantations, Images etc. Quest. 1. Whether they can cure this or other
such like diseases? Quest. 2. Whether if they can so cure, it be lawful to seek
to them for help?
or Lawful means which are Memb. 2. Immediately from God, A love principium,
by prayer etc. Memb. 3. Quest. 1. Whether Saints and their Relics can help
this infirmity? Quest. 2. Whether it be lawful in this case to sue to them for
aid?
or Memb. 4. Mediatly by Nature, which concerns and works by Subsect. 1.
Physician, in whom is required science, confidence, honesty etc. Subsect. 2.
Patient, in whom is required obedience, constancy, willingness, patience,
confidence, bounty etc. not to practice on himself. Subsect. 3. Physic which
consists of Diaeteticall Pharmaceutical Chirurgicall



Particular to the three distinct species. Sect. 5.
Sect. 2. Diaeteticall which consists in reforming those six non-naturall
things, as in Diet rectified. 1. Memb. Matter and quality. 1. Subsec. Such as
are easy of digestion, well dressed, hot, sod, etc. young, moist, of good
nourishment etc. Bread of pure wheat, well baked. Water clear from the
fountain. Wine and drink not too strong. etc. Flesh Mountain birds,
partridge, phesant, quails etc. Hen, capon, mutton, veale, kid, rabbet etc.
Fish That live in gravelly waters, as pike, perch, trowt. Seafish, solid,
white etc. Herbs Borage, buglosse, bawme, succory, endive, violets, in broth,
not raw etc. Fruits and roots Ray sins of the Sun, apples corrected for
wind, oranges etc. parsnips, potatoes etc.
or 2. Quantity At seasonable and usual times of repast, in good order, not
before the first be concocted, sparing, not overmuch, of one dish.
2. Rectification of Retention and Evacuation, as costiuenesse, Venery,
bleeding at nose, months stopped, bathes, etc, 3. Air rectified, with a
digression of the Air. Naturally in the choice and site of our country,
dwelling place, to be hot and moist, light, wholesome, pleasant, etc.
Artificially, by often change of air, avoiding winds, fogs, tempests, opening
windows, perfumes etc.
4. Exercise Of Body and Mind but moderate, as hawking, hunting, riding,
shooting, bowling, fishing, fowling, walking in fair fields, galleries,
tennis, bar etc. Of mind, as Chests, cards, tables, etc. to see plays,
maskes, etc. serious studies, business, all honest recreations.
5. Rectification of waking and terrible dreams. 6. Rectification of passions
and perturbations of the mind..
Memb. 6. Passions and perturbations of the mind rectified. From himself
Subsect. 1. By using all good means of help, confessing to a friend, etc.
Avoiding all occasions of his infirmity. Not giving way to passions, but
resisting to his utmost.
or from his friends. Subsect. 2. By fair and foul means, counsel, comfort,
good persuasion, witty devices, fictions, and if it be possible to satisfy his
mind. Subsect. 3. Music of all sorts aptly appplyed. Subsect. 4. Mirth, and
merry company. Sect. 3. A consolatory digression containing remedies to all
discontents and passions of the mind. Memb. 1. General discontents and
grievances satisfied. Memb. 2. Peculiar discontents, as deformity of Body,
sickness, baseness of birth, etc. Memb. 3. Poverty and want, and such
calamities and adversities. Memb. 4. Against servitude, loss of liberty,
Imprisonment, Banishment etc. Memb. 5. Against vain fears, sorrows, for
death of friends, or otherwise. Memb. 6. Against Envy, livor, hatred, malice,
emulation, ambition, and selfeloue etc. Memb. 7. Against repulses, abuses,
injuries, contempts, disgraces, contumelies, slanders, and scoffs etc. Memb.
8, Against all other grievous, and ordinary symptoms of this disease of
Melancholy.



Sect. 4. Pharmaceutice or Physic which cures with medicines, with a
digression of this kind of Physic, is either Memb. 1. Subsect. 1. Generalll
to all, Alteratiue Simples altering melancholy, with a digression of Exotic
Simples 2. Subsect. Herbs. 3. Subsect. To the heart, borage, buglosse,
Scorzenera etc. To the head bawm hoppes, nenuphar etc. Liver, Eupatory,
artimesia etc. Stomach, wormwood, centaury, penyroyall. Spleen, Ceterache,
ash, Tameriske. To purify the blood, endive, succory, etc. Against wind,
origan, fennel, anniseed etc.
4. Precious stones, as smaragdes, chalidonies etc. Minerals, and metals, gold
etc.
or co^pounds altering mela^choly, with a digression of compounds. 5. Subsect.
Inwardly taken Liquid fluid Wines, as of Hellebor, buglosse, Tameriske etc.
Syrups of borage, buglosse, hops, Epithyme, endive succory etc.
or consisting Conserues of violets, maydenhair, borage, buglosse, roses etc.
Confections; Treacle, Methridate, Elegmes or Linctures.

or solid as those aromati all confections. hot Diambra dianthos.
Di^margeritum calidum. Diamoschum dulce. Electuarium de gemmis. Laetificans
Galeni and Rhasis.
or cold Diamargeritum frigidum. Diarrodon A^batis. Diacorolli, Diacodium,
with their tables.
Condites of all sorts etc.

or Outwardly used, as Oils of camamile, Violets, Roses, etc. Ointments;
alablastritum, populeum etc. Liniments; plasters, caerotes, cataplasmes,
frontals, fomentations, Epithimes, sacks, bags, odorame^ts, posies etc.


or Or Purging.
or Particular to the the three distinct Species..
Medicines purging melancholy are either Memb. 2. Simples purging melancholy. 1.
Subsect. Upward as vomits. Asrabecca, laurel, white Hellebor, Scylla, or
Sea-onyon, Antimony, Tobacco. or downward. 2. Subsect. More gentle; as Sena,
Epithime, Polipodie, Mirabolanes, Fumitory etc. Stronger; aloes, lapis
Aremenus, lapis lazuli, Black Hellebor.

or 3. Subsect. co^pounds purging mela^^holy. Superior parts Mouth swallowed
Liquid, as potions, Iulipes, Syrupes, wine of hellebor, buglosse etc. Solid, as
lapis Armenus, and Lazuli, pills Indie, pills of Fumitory etc. Electuaries,
Diasena, confection of Hamech, Hierologadium etc.
or Not swallowed, as gargarisms, masticatories etc.
or Nostrils; sneezing powders, odoraments, perfumes etc.
or Inferior parts, as Clisters strong and weak, and suppositories of
Castilian soap, honey boiled etc.

Chirurgicall Physic, which consists of Memb. 3. Phlebotomy, to all parts
almost, and all the distinct Species. With knife, horseleeches. Cuppinglasses.
Cauteries, and searing with hot irons, beating. Dropax and Synapismus. Issues
to several parts, and upon several occasions.
Sect. 5. Cure of head melancholy. Memb. 1. 1. Subsect. Moderate diet, meat of
good juice, moistning, easy of digestion. Good Air. Sleep more then ordinary.
Excrements daily to be avoided by art or nature. Exercise of Body and mind not
too violent, or too remiss, passions of the mind, and perturbations to be
avoided. 2. Blood-letting if there be need, or that the blood be corrupt, in
the arm, forehead etc. or with Cupping-glasses. 3. Preparatiues and purgers.
Preparatiues, as Syrup of borage, buglosse, Epithime, hoppes, with their
distilled waters etc. Purgers, as Montanus and Mathiolus, Helliborismus,
Quer^etans Syrup of Hellebor, Extract of Hellebor, Pulvis Hali, Antimony
prepared, Rulandi aqua mirabilis: which are used, if gentler medicines will not
take place, with Arnoldus vinu^ buglossatum, Sena, cassia, mirobolanes, aurum
potabile, or before Ham^ch, Pil. Indae. Hiera, P^l. de lap. armeno, lazuli.
4. Averters. Cardans nettles, frictions, clisters, suppositories, sneezings
masticatories, nasals, Cupping-glasses. To open the haemrods with horseleeches,
to apply horseleeches, to the forehead without s^arification, to the shoulders,
thighs* Issues; boaring, cauteries, hot irons in the suture of the crown.
5. Cordials, resolvers, hinderers. A cup of wine, or strong drink. Bezars
stone, amber, spice, Conserues of borage, buglosse, Roses, Fumitory. Confection
of Alcermes. Electuariu^ laetificans Ga^eni, Rhasis etc. Diamargeritu^ frig.
diaboraginatu^ etc. Odoraments of roses, violets. Irrigations of the head, with
the decoctions of nymphea, lettice, mallows etc. Epithemes, ointments, bags
to the heart Fomentations of oil for the belly. Bathes of sweet water, in
which were sod mallows, violets, roses, water lillies, borage flowers, rams
heads etc.
6. Correctors of Accidents, as To procure sleep. Inwardly taken Simples
Poppy, Nymphs, lettice, roses, purslan, henbane, ma^drake, nightshade, opium
etc. or co^pounds. Liquid, as syrupes of poppy, verbasco, violets, roses.
Solid, as requies Nicholai, Philonium Romanu^ Laudanum Paracelsi.

or outwardly used as Oils of Nymphea, poppy, violets, roses, mandrake,
nutmegs. Oderaments of vinegar, rosewater, opium. Frontals of rosecake,
rosevineger, nutmeg. Ointments, alablastritum, vnguentum populeum, simple or
mixed with opium. Irrigations of the head, feet, spo^ges, Music, murmr and
noise of waters. Frictions of the head, and outward parts, sacculi of Henbane,
wormwood at his pillow etc.

and are Against terrible dreams, not to suppe late, or eat pease, cabbage,
venison meats heavy of digestion: use bawme, horsetongue etc, Against
ruddinesse and blushing, inward and outward remedies.

2. Memb. Cure of melancholy over the Body Diet, preparatiues, purgers,
averters, cordials, correctors as before, Phlebotomy in this kind more
necessary and more frequent, To correct and cleanse the blood with Fumitory,
Sena, Succory, dandelion, endive etc.

Cure of Hypondriacal or windy melancholy. 3. Memb. Subsect. 1. Phlebotomy if
need require. Diet, preparatiues, averters, cordials, purgers as before, saving
that they must not be so vehement. Use of penyroyall, wormwood, centaury sod,
which alone has cured many. To provoke urine with Anniseed, daucus, asarum
etc. and stools if need be by clisters and suppositories. To respect the
spleen, stomach, liver, hypocondries. To use treacle now and then in winter. To
vomit after meals sometimes if it be inveterate.
2. To expel wind. Inwardly taken Simples Roots. Galanga, gentian, Enula,
Angelica, calamus Aromaticus, Zeodary, China, condite ginger, etc. Herbs.
Penyroyall, rue, calamint, Bay leaves, and Berries, Scordium, Bettany,
Lavander, camamile, Centaury, wormwood, Cumin, brom, orange pills. Spices.
Saffron; cynamom, mace. nutmeg, pepper, musk, Zeodary with wine etc. Seeds.
Anniseede, fennel seed, anmi, carry, cumin, nettle, Bays, parsley, grana
paradisi.
or compounds, as Dianisum, Diagalanga, Diacimnu^ Diacalaminthes, Electuarium
de bacchis Lauri, Benedicta laxativa etc. pulvis Carminatinus, and pulvis
descript. Antidotario Florentino, Aromaticum rosatu^, Methridate.
or Outwardly used, as Cupping-glasses to the Hypoco^dries without
scarification, oil of camamile, rue, anniseed, their decoctions etc.


THE SECOND PARTITION THE CVRE OF MELANCHOLY.
THE FIRST SECTION.
THE FIRST MEMBER.
THE FIRST SVBSECTION. Unlawful Cures rejected.
INveterate Melancholy, howsoever it may seem to be a continuate, inexorable
disease, and most hard to be cured, accompanying them to their graves most
part, as Consil. 23^, pro Abbate Italo.
Montanus observes, yet many times it may be helped even that which is most
violent, or at least, according to the same Consil. 23. aut curabitur aut certe
minus afficietur, si volet.
author, it may be mitigated and much eased. Nil desperandum. It may be hard,
but not impossible, for him that is most grievously affected, if he be but
willing to be helped.

Upon this good hope I will proceed, using the same method in the Cure, which I
have formerly used in the rehearsing of the causes; first General, and then
Particular, and those according to their several species. Of these Cures some
be Lawful, some again Unlawful, which though frequent, familiar, and often
used, yet justly censured, and to be controverted. As first, whether by these
diabolical means, which are commonly practiced by the Devil and his
Ministers, Sorcerers, Witches, Magicians, etc. by Spells, cabalisticall words,
Charms, Characters, Images, Amulets, Ligatures, Philtures, Incantations, etc.
This Disease and the like may be cured? and if they may, whether it be lawful
to make use of them, or for our good to seek after such means in any case?
The first whether they can do any such cures, is questioned amongst many
writers, some affirming, some denying. Valesius cont. med. lib. 5. cap. 6.
Malleus Malleficar, Hernius, lib. 3. pract. med. cap. 28. Caelius lib. 16. cap.
16. Delrio Tom. 3. Wierus lib. 2. de praestig. daem. Lavater. de spect. part.
2. cap. 7. Holbrenner. the Lutheran in Pistorium, Polydor. Virg. lib 1. de
prodig. Tandlerus, Lemnius, (Hippocrates, and Avicenna amongst the rest) deny
that spirits or devils have any power over us, and refer all with Pomponatius
of Padua to natural causes and humors. Bodinus Daemonomantiae. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Arnoldus, Marcellus Empiricus, I. Pistorius, Paracelsus Apodix. Magic. Agrippa
lib. 2. de occult. Philos. cap. 36.69.71.72. and lib. 3. cap. 23. and 10.
Marsilius Ficinus de vit. caelit. compar. cap. 13.15.18.21. etc. Gale^ttus de
promiscua doct. cap. 24. Iouianus Pontanus To. 2. Plin. lib. 28. cap. 2. Strabo
lib. 15. Geog. Leo Suavius: Goclenius de vng. armar. Cardan de subtle. brings
many proofs out of Solomon's decayed works, old Hermes, Artesius, Costaben
Luca etc. that such cures may be done. They can slanch blood cure gouts,
Epilepsies, biting of mad dogs, Melancholy, etc. by their spells and charms.
Alij dubitant an demon possit morbos curare quos non fecit alij negant sed
quotidiana experientia confirmat magos magno multorum slupore morbos curare
singulos corporis parts citra impedime^tum permeare and medijs nobis ignotis
curare.
Many doubt, says Nicholas Taurellus, whether the devil can cure such
diesases as he has not made, and some flatly deny it, howsoever common
experience confirms to our astonishment, that Magitians can work such feats,
and that the devil without impediment can penetrate through all the parts of
our bodies, and cure such maladies by means to us unknown. Daneus in his
tract de Sortiarijs subscribes to this of Taurellus, Erastus de lamijs, and so
do most Divines, that out of their excellent knowledge and long experience
they can commit Agentia cum patient bus coniungunt.
agentes cum patientibus, colligere semina rerum, eaque materiae applicare, as
Austin inferres de civ. Dei and de Trinit. lib. 3. cap. 7. and 8. they can
work stupend and admirable conclusions; we see the effects only but not the
causes of them. Nothing so familiar as to hear of such cures, Sorcerers are
too common, Cunning men, Wisards, and whitewitches, as they call them, in every
village, that if they be sought unto, will help almost all infirmities of body
and mind, that to doubt of it any longer, Haec alij rident, sed vereor ne dum
nolumus esse creduli vicium non effugiamus incredulitatis.
or not to believe, were to run into that other Scepticall extreme of
incredulity, says Taurellus. Leo Suavius in his Comment upon Paracelsus,
seems to make it an art, which ought to be approved. Pistorius and others
stiffly maintain the use of charms, words, characters, etc. Ars vera est, sed
pauci artifices reperiuntur, The art is true but there be but a few that have
skill in it. Marcellus Donatus lib. 2 de hist. iur. cap. 1. proves out of
Josephus eight book of antiquities, that Refert Solomonem mentis morbos
curasse, and daemones abegisse ipsos carminibus, quod and coram Vespasiano
fecit Eliaser
Solomon so cured all the diseases of the mind by spells, charms, and drove
away Devils, and that Eliaser did as much before Vespasian. Langius in his
med. epist. holds Iuppiter Menecrates, that did so many stupend cures in his
time, to have used this art, and that he was no other then a Magician. Many
famous cures are daily done in this kind, this Devil is an expert Physician,
as Godelman calls him, lib. 1. cap. 18. and God permits many times these
Witches and Magicians to produce such effects, as Lavater, cap. 3. lib. 8.
part. 3. cap. 1. Polid. Virg. lib. 1. de prodigijs, Delrio and others admit.
Such cures may be done, and as Paracels. Tom. 4. de morb amen. stiffly
maintains, Spirituales morbi spiritualiter curari debent.
they cannot otherwise be cured but by spells, seals, and spiritual physic.
Sigillum ex auro peculiare ad Melancholiam, etc.
Arnoldus lib. de sigillis sets down the making of them, so does Rulands and
many others.

Hoc posito, they can effect such cures, the maine question is whether it be
lawful in a desperate case, to crave their help, or ask a Wisards advice? It Is
a common practice of some men to go first to a VVitch, and then to a
Physician, if one cannot the other shall, Flectere si nequeunt superos
Acheronta mouebunt. Lib 1. de occult. Philos. nihil refert an deus an diabolus
angeli an immundi spiritus aegro open ferant modo morbus curetur.
It matters not, says Paracelsus, whether it be God or the Devil, Angels or
unclean spirits cure him, so that he be eased. He calls a Magus Minister and
Vicarius Dei.
Magician Gods Minister and his Vicar, applying that of vos estis Dij
profanely to them, for which he is lashed by T. Erastus part. fol. 45. And
else where he encourages his patients to have a good faith, Vtere forti
Imaginatione and experieris essectum, dicant in adversum quicquid volunt
Theologi.
a strong imagination, and they shall find the effects, let Divines say to the
contrary what they will. He proves and earnestly contends that many diseases
cannot otherwise be cured, Incantione orti, incantione curari debent. If they
be caused by incantation, Idem Plinius contendit quosda^ esse morbos qui
incantationibus solum curentur.
they must be cured by incantation. Constantius lib. 4. approues of such
remedies, Bartolus the lawyer. Peter Aerodius rerum Iudic. lib. 3. tit. 7.
Salicetus, Godefridus, with others of that sect, allow of them; modo sint ad
sanitatem quae a magis fiunt secus non. So they be for the parties health and
good or not at all. But these men are confuted by Remigius, Bodin dam. lib. 3.
cap. 2. Godelmannus lib. 1. cap. 8. Wierus, Delrio lib. 6. quaest. 2. To. 3.
mag. inquis. Eraestus de Lamijs, all our Qui talibus credunt aut adcorum domu^
euntes aut suis domibus introducunt aut interrogant sciant se fide christianam
and Baptismum prev aricasse and Apostatas este. Austin. de superst, observe. boc
pacto a Deo deficitur ad diabolum P. M^rt.
Divines, Schoolmen, and such as write cases of conscience are against it, the
Scripture it self absolutely forbids it as a mortal sin, Levit. cap.
18.19.20. Deuteronomy. 18. etc. Romans 8.19. Evil is not to be done that good may come
of it. Much better it were for such patients as are so troubled, to endure a
little misery in this life, then to hazard their souls health for ever, and as
Delrio counsels, Mori praestat quam superstitiose sanari disquis. mag. lib.
2. cap. 2. sect. 1. quaest. 2. Tom. 3.
much better dye then be so cured. Some take upon them to expel Devils by
natural remedies, and magical exorcismes, which they seem to approve out of
the practice of the primitive Church, as that above cited of Josephus, Eliaser;
Iraenius, Tertullian, Austin. Eusebius makes mention of such, and Magic it
self has been publicly professed in some Universities, as of old in
Salamanca: but condemned Anno 1318 by the Chancellor and University of P.
Lumbard.
Paris. Our Pontificiall writers retain many of these adiurations, and forms
of Exorcismes still in their Church, besides those in Baptism used, they
exorcise meats, and such as are possessed as they hold, in Christ's name. Read
Hieron. Mengus cap. 3. Thyreus part. 3. cap. 58. what exorcismes they
prescribe, besides those ordinary means of Suffitus, gladiorumictus, etc.
suffumigations, cutting the air with swords, cap. 57. herbs, oders. Of which
Tostat. treates. 2. Reg. c. 16. quaest. 43. you shall find many vain frivolous
superstitions, forms of exorcismes among them not to be tolerated.

MEMB. 2. Lawful cures first from God.
BEing so clearly evinced as it is, that all unlawful cures are to be
refused, it remains to treat of such as are to be admitted, and those are
commonly those which God has appointed, The Lord has created medicines of the
earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them. Eccles. 38.4.
by virtue of stones, herbs, plants, mettles, etc, and such like which are
prepared and applied to our use, by art and industry of Physicians, who are the
dispensers of such treasures for our good, and to be s honored for
necessities sake, Gods immediate ministers, to whom in our infirmities we are
to seek for help. Yet not so that we rely too much, or wholly upon them, A
Jove principium, we must first begin with prayer, and then use Physic, not
one without the other, My son fail not in thy sickness but pray unto the Lord
and he will make thee whole, Eccles. 38.9. Hue omne principium ^ut refer
exitum Hor. 3. carm. Od. 6.
but both together. To pray alone and reject ordinary means, is to do like
him in Aesope, that when his cart was stalled, lay flat on his back and cried
aloud help Hercules, but that was to little purpose, except as his friend
advised him, rotis tute ipse annitaris, he whipped his horses withal, and put
his shoulder to the wheel. God works by means, as Christ cured the blind man
with clay and spittle. Orandum est vt sit men's sana in corpore sano. As we must
pray for health of body and mind, so we must use our utmost endeavors to
preserve and continue it. Some kind of Devils are not cast out but by fasting
and prayer, and both necessarily required, not one without the other. For all
the physic we can use, art, excellent industry, is to no purpose without
calling upon God Nil iuvat immensos Cratero promittere montes. It is in vain
to seek for help, run, ride, except God bless us. -- non Sicula dapes
Music and fine fare can do no good.
Dulcem elaborabunt saporem --
-- non animum cytheraeue cantus.
Hor. l. 1. ep. 2.
Non domus and fundus non aeris aceruus and auri
Aegroto possunt domino deducere febres.
Sint Craesi and Crassilicet no bos Pactolus aureas vndas agens eripiet vnquam
e miserijs.
With house, with land, with money, and with gold,
The masters fever will not be controlled.
We must use prayer and physic both together: and so no doubt but our prayers
will be availeable and our physic take effect. It Is that Ezechiah practiced
2. Kings 20. Luke the Evangelist, and which we are enjoined Coloss. 4. not the
patient only, but the Physician himself. Hippocrates an heathen required this
in a good practitioner, and so did Galen. lib. de Plat. and Hipp. dog. lib. 9.
cap. 15. and in that tract of his, an mores sequntur temp. cor. cap. 11. it is a
thing which he does inculcate, Scientia de Deo d^bet in medico infixa esse.
Mesue Arabs. sanat omnes langores deus.

For you shall pray to your Lord that he would prosper that which is given for
ease and then physic for the prolonging of life. Eccl. 38.14


and many others. Hiperius in his first book de sacr. scrip. lec. speaking of
that happiness and good success, which all Physicians desire, and hope for in
their cures, Omnes optant quandam in medicina faelicitatem sed hanc no^ est
quod expectent nisi deum vera fide inuocent atque aegros similirer ad ardentem
vo^tionem excitent.
tells them that it is not to be expected, except with a true faith they call
upon God, and teach their patients to do the like. The council of Lateran
Canone 22. decreed they should do so, the Fathers of the Church have still
advised as much, whatsoever thou take in hand, says Lemnius e Gregor exhor
ad vitam opt instit. cap. 48. quicquid meditaris aggredi aut perficere deum in
consilium adhibeto.
Gregory, let God be of thy counsel, and consult with him. That heals those
that are broken in heart (Ps. 147.3.) and binds up their sores. Otherwise as
the Prophet Jeremy cap. 46.11. denounced to Egypt, in vain shall thou use
many medicines, for thou shall have no health. It is the same counsel which
Commentar lib. 7 ob infelicem pugnam contristatus in aegritudinem incidit ita
vt a medicis curari non poterat.
Cominaeus that politic historiographer gives to all Christian princes, upon
occasion of that unhappy overthrowe of Charles Duke of Burgundy, by means of
which he was extremely melancholy, and sick to death: In so much that neither
physic, nor persuasion could do him any good, percauing his preposterous
error belike, advises all great men in such cases, In his anuni malis
princeps imprimis ad deum precetur and peccatis ve^iam exoret inde ad
medicinam, etc.
to pray first to God, and with all submission and penitency to confess their
sins, and the^ to use physic. The very same fault it was which the Prophet
reprehends in Asa king of Judah that he relied more on physic then on God,
and by all means would have him to amend. And is a fit caution to be observed
of all other sorts of men. The Prophet David was so observant of this precept,
that in all his misery and vexation of mind, he put this rule first in
practice. Psalm. 77.3. When I am in heaviness I will think on God. Psalm. 86.4.
Comfort the soul of thy servant, for unto thee I lift up my soul. and ver. 7.
In the day of trouble will I call upon thee for thou hear me. Ps. 54.1. Save
me O God by thy name etc. Psalm. 87. Psalm. 20. And it is the common practice of
all good men. Ps. 107.13. when their heart was humbled with heaviness, they
cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them from their
distress. And they have found good success in so doing, as David confesses,
Psalm. 30.11. Thou have turned my joy into mourning, thou have loosed my sack,
and girded me with gladness. And therefore he advises all others to do the
like, Psalm. 31.24. All ye that trust in the Lord, be strong and he shall
establish your heart. It is reported by Greg. Tholoss. To. 2. lib. 28. c. 7.
Syntax. In vestibulo templi Solomon. liber remediorum cuiusque morbi fuit quem
revulsit Ezekias quod populus neglecto deo nec invocato sanitatem inde peteret.
Suidas, speaking of Ezekiah, that there was a great book of old, of king
Solomon's writing, which contained medicines for all manner of diseases, and lay
still open as they came into the Temple: but Ezekiah king of Jerusalem caused
it to be taken away, because it made the people secure, to neglect their
duties in calling and relying upon God, out of a confidence on those remedies.
Livius lib. 23. strepunt aures clamoribus plorantium socioru^, saepius nos quam
deorum invocantium opem.
Minutius that worthy Consul of Rome in an Oration he made to his soldiers,
was much offended with them, and taxed their ignorance that in their misery,
called more on him then upon God. A general fault it is all over the world,
and Manutius his speech concerns us all, we rely more on Physic, and seek
more to Physicians then to God himself. And as much falty are they that
prescribe, as they that ask, respecting more their gain, and trust to their
ordinary receipts and medicines many times, then to him that made them. I would
wish all patients in this behalf, in the midst of their melancholy to remember
that of Siracides, Ecc. 1.12. and 12. The fear of the Lord is glory and
gladness and rejoicing. The fear of the Lord makes a merry heart, and gives
gladness and joy, and long life. And all such as prescribe physic to begin
in nomine Dei, as Mesue did, to imitate Lelius a Font Eugubinus, Rula^dus
adiu^git optimamorationem ad finem empiricorum.

Mercurialis consil. 25. ita concludit. Montanus passim etc. and plures alij
etc.


that in all his consultations still concludes with a prayer for the good
success of his business, and to remember that of Crato one of their
predecessors, fuge avaritiam, and sine oratione, and invocatione Deinihil
facias. Avoid covetousness, and do nothing without invocation upon God.

MEMB. 3. Whether it be lawful to seek to Saints for aid in this Disease.
THat we must pray to God no man doubts, but whether we should pray to Saints
in such cases, or whether they can do us any good, it may be lawfully
co^troverted. Whether their Images, Shrines, Relliques, consecrated things,
holy water, benedictions, those divine amulets, holy exorcismes, and the sign
of the Cross be availeable in this disease. The Papists on the one side
stiffly maintain, how many melancholy, mad, daemoniacall persons are daily
cured at Saint Anthonies Church in Padua, at St Vitus in Germany, by our Lady
of Loretta in Italy, our Lady of Sichem in the low Countries? Lipsius.
Quae and caecis lumen, agris salutem, mortuis vitam, claudis gressum reddit,
omnes morbos corporis, animi, curat, and in ipsos daemones imperium exercet,
she cures halt, lame, blind, al diseases of body and mind, and commands the
devil himself, says Lipsius, 25000. in a day come thither, 1. Cap. 26.
quis nisi numen in vnu^locum sic induxit? who brought them? in auribus, in
oculis omniu^ gesta, nova nouitia. New news lately done, all our eyes and ears
are full of her cures, and who can relate them all. They have a peculiar Saint
almost for every peculiar infirmity, for poison, gowts, agues, Petronella; Sr
Romanus for such as are possessed, Valentine the falling sickness. S^ Vitus for
madmen, etc. and as of old Lib. 2. cap. 7. de Deo. morbisque in genera
descriptis deos reperimus.
Pliny reckons up gods for all diseases, Febri fanum dicatum est, Seldom.
prolog. cap. 3. de dijs Siris Rosinus.
And Lilius Giraldus repeats many of her ceremonies: all affections of the mind
were heretofore accounted gods. Love and Sorrow, Virtue, honor, liberty,
Contumely, Impudency, had their temples, Tempests, seasons, Crepitus ventris,
dea Vacuna, dea Cloacina, there was a goddess of Idleness, a god desse of the
draught, or Ieakes, Prema, Premunda, Priapus, bawdy gods, and gods for See
Lilij Giraldi syntae^ma de dijs etc.
all offices. Varro reckons up 30000 gods, Lucian makes Podagra the Gowt a
goddess, and assigns her Priests and Ministers; and Melancholy comes not
behind: for as Austin mentions lib. 4. de Civit. dei cap. 9. there was of old
Angerona dea, and she had her chapel and feasts, to whom says 12. Call.
Iaunarij forias celebrabant vt angores and animi sollicitudines propitiata
depellat.
Macrobius, they did offer sacrifice yearly, that she might be pacified as
well as the rest. It Is no new thing you see, this of Papists, and in my
judgment that old doting Lipsius might have fitter dedicated his Hanc dive
penna^ consecravi Lipsius.
pen after all his labors, to this our goddess of Melancholy, then to his
Virgo Hallensis, and have bin her Chaplin, it would have becomed him better.
But he poor man, thought no harm in that which he did, and will not be
persuaded but that he did well, he has so many patrons and honorable
precedents in the like kind, that iustifies as much, as eagerly, and more then
he there says of his Lady and Mistress: read but superstitious Coster and
Gretsers Tract de Cruce. Laur. Arcturus Fanteus de Invoc. Sanct. Bellarmine,
Delrio dis. mag. Tom. 3. lib. 6. quaest. 2. sec. 3. Greg. Tholosanus Tom. 2.
lib. 8, cap. 24. Syntax. Strozius Cicogna lib. 4. cap. 9. Tyreus, Heironymus
Mengus, and you shall find infinite examples of cures done in this kind, by
holy water, relics, crosses, exorcismes, amulets, Images, consecrated beads,
etc. Barradius the Jesuit boldly gives it out, that Christ's Countenance, and
the Virgin Mary's, would cure Melancholy if one had looked steadfastly on them.
And P. Morales the Spaniard in his book de pulch. Ies. and Mar. confirms the
same out of Carthusianus, and I know not whom, that it was a common proverb in
those days, for such as were trobled in mind, to say, Eamus ad videndum filium
Mariae, as they do now go to St Anthonies in Padua, or to S^ Hilaries at
Poicters in France. Iodocus Sincerus Itin. Galliae edit. 1617. Huc mente captos
deducunt, and statis orationibus, sacrisque peractis in illum lectum dormitum
ponunt etc.
In a closet of this Church there is at this day S^ Hilaries bed to be seen, to
which they bring all the madmen in the country, and after some prayers and
other ceremonies, they lay them down there to sleep, and so they recover. It
is an ordinary thing in those parts to send all their madmen to S. Hilaries
craddle. They say the like of S^ Tubery in In Gallia Narbonensi.
another place. Giraldus Cambrensis Itiner. Camb. cap. 1. tells strange stories
of Sr Cirisius staff, that would cure this and all other diseases. Read
Lipomannus, or that golden Legend of Iacobus de Voragine, and you shall have
infinite stories, or those new relations of our Em. Acosta. com. rerum in
Orient gest. a societ. Jes. Anno 1568. epist. Gonsalui Fernandes. Anno 1560. e
Ia^onia.
Jesuits in Iapona and China of Matt. Riccius, Acosta, Loiola, Xauerius life
etc. Jasper Belga a Jesuit, cured a mad woman by hanging S^ John's Gospel
about her neck, and many such. Holywater did as much in Iapona etc. Nothing so
familiar in their works, as such examples.

But we on the other side seek to God alone. We say with David Psalm. 46.1. God
is our hope and strength, and help in trouble, ready to be found. For their
Catalogues of examples we make no other answer, but that they are false
fictions, or diabolical illusions, counterfeit miracles. We cannot deny but
that it is an ordinary thing on Sr Anthonies day in Padua, to bring diverse mad
men and daemoniacall persons to be cured; but we deny that such parties are so
affected indeed, but so prepared by their Priests, by certain ointments and
drammes, to cosen the commonalty, as Spicel. de morbis demoniacis, sic a
sacrificulis parati vnguentis Magicis corpori illitis, vt stultae plebeculae
persuadeant tales curari a S^ Antonio.
Hildesheim well says; the like is commonly practiced in Bohemia, as Mathiolus
gives us to understand in his preface to his Comment upon Diascorides, tricks
only to get opinion and money, mere impostures. Aesculapius of old that
counterfeit God, did as many famous cures, his Temple, as Greg. lib. 8. tuius
fanum aegrotantiu^ multitudine refertum, vndiqusque and tabellis pendeatibus in
quibus sanati languores erant inscripti.
Strabo relates, was daily full of patients, and as many several tables,
inscriptions, pendants, donaries, etc. to be seen in his Church, as at this day
at our Lady of Loretta's in Italy. It was a custom -- suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta maris deo.
Hor. od. 1. lib. 5 od. to do the like, informer times they were seduced and
deluded as they are now. It Is the same devil still, called heretofore Apollo,
Mars, Neptune, Venus, Aesculapius and. as Mali angeli sumpserunt olim nomen
Iovis, Iunonis, Apollinis, etc. quos Gentiles deos credebant, nunc St i
Sebastiani, Barbarae etc. nomen habent, and aliorum.
Lactantius lib. 2. de orig. erroris cap. 17. observes. The same Jupiter and
those bad Angels, are now worshipped and adored by the names of S^ Sebastian,
Barbara etc. Christopher and George are come in their places. Our Lady
succeedes Venus, and so of the rest, as Part 2. cap. 9. despect. Veneri
subs^ituunt Virginem Mariam.
Lavater writes, and so they are deluded. Ad hec ludibria Deus connivet
frequenter vbi relicto verbo Dei ad Satanam curritur, quales hi sunt qui aquam
lustralem, crucem etc. lubricae sidei hominibus offerunt.
And God often winkes at these impostures, because they forsake his word, and
betake themselves to the devil, as they do that seek after holywater,
crosses etc. Wierus lib. 4. cap. 3. What can these men plead for themselves
more then those heathen gods, the same cures done by both, the same spirit that
seduceth: or put case they could help, why should we rather seek to them, then
to Christ himself? since that he so kindly invites us to him, come unto me all
ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you Mat. 11. and we know that there is
one God, one Mediator betwixt God and man Jesus Christ (Tim. 2.5.) who gave
himself a ransom for all men. We know that we have an Charior est ipsis homo
quam sibi.
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, 1 John 2.1. that there is no other
name under Heaven by which we can be saved but by his, who is always ready to
hear us, and sits at the right hand of God, Paul
and from Bernard.
whom we can have no repulse, solus vult, solus potest, curat vniversos ta^qua^
singulos, and Austin.
vnu^quemque nostrum vt solum. We are all as one to him, and cares for us all
as one, and why should we seek to any other but to him.

MEMB. 4.
SVBSEC. I. Physician, Patient, Physic.
OF those diverse gifts which our Apostle Paul says, God has bestowed on man,
this of Physic is not the least, as most necessary, and especially conducing
to the common good of mankind. Next therefore to God in all our extremities (
for of the most high comes healing, Ecclus 38.2.) We must seek to, and rely
upon the Physician, Ecclus 38. In the sight of great men he shall be in
admiration.
who is manus Dei says Hierophilus, and to whom he has given knowledge, that
he might be glorified in his wondrous works. With such does he heal men, and
takes away their pains, Ecclus 38.6.7. when thou have need of him, let him
not go from thee. The hour may come that their enterprises may have go^d
success, ver. 13. It is not therefore to be doubted, but if we seek a
Physician as we ought, we may be eased of our infirmities, and to such a one as
is sufficient, and worthily so called; for there be many mountebanks,
quacksaluers, Empericks, in every street almost, and in every village, that
take upon them this name, and make this noble and profitable Art to be evil
spoken of, and contemned, by reason of such base and illiterate artificers: but
such a one I speak of, as is approved, learned, skillful, honest, etc. of
whose duty Wecker Antid. cap. 2. and Syntax. med. Crato. Julius Alexandrinus
lib. de med. Hernius prax. med. l. 3. cap. 1. etc. treat at large. For this
particular disease, he that shall take upon him to cure it, Tom. 4. Tract. 1.
de morbis amentium. Horum multos non nisi a Magis curandas, and Astrologis
quoniom origo eius a caelis petenda est.
Paracelsus will have to be a Magician, a Chimist, a Philosopher, an
Astrologer. Thurnesserus, Severinus the Dane, and some other of his followers
require as much: many of them cannot be cured but by Magic: and Lib. de
Podagra.
Paracelsus is so stiff for his Chimicall medicines, that in his cures he will
admit almost of no other Physic, deriding in the mean time Hippocrates, Galen,
and all their followers: but Magic and all such remedies, I have already
censured, and shall speak of Chimistrie Sec. 5.
elsewhere. Astrology is required by many famous Physicians, Ficinus, Crato,
Fernelius, Langius. I. Caesar Claudilus consult
doubted of and exploded by others, I will not take upon me to decide the
Controversy. Paracelsus goes farther, and will have his Physician
Praedestionatum ad hu^c curandum.
predestined to this man's cure, and this malady, and time of cure, of
gathering of herbs, of administering Astrologically observed, which
Thurnesserus, and some Iatromathimaticall professors, are too superstitious in
my Judgment. Helleborus curat, sed quod ab omni datus medico vanum est.
Hellebor will help, but not always, not given by every Physician etc. but
these men are too peremptory, and selfe-conceited as I think. But what do I
do, interposing in that which is beyond my reach? a blind man cannot judge of
colors, nor I of these things. Only this much I would require, Honesty in every
Physician, that he be not over careless or covetous, Harpy like to make a prey
of his patient, as an hungry Surgeon often does prolong and wierdraw his cure
so long as there is any hope of pay, Non missura cutem, nisi plena cruoris
hirudo. Many of them to get a fee, will give Physic to every one that comes,
when there is no cause, and so irritare silentem morbum, as Quod saepe evenit
lib. 3. cap. 1. cum non sit necessitas. Frustra fatigant remediis aegros, qui
victus ratione curari possunt. Hernius.
Hernius complains, stir up a silent disease which often falls out, which by
good counsel alone, good advice alone might have bin composed, or by
rectification of those 6. non-naturall things, otherwise cured. This is naturae
bellum infer, to oppugn Nature, and to make a strong body weak. Arnoldus in
his 8. and 11. Aphorisms, gives cautions against it, and expressly forbids it.
Modestus and sapiens medicus nunquam properabit aapharma cum, nisi cogente
necessitate. 41. Aphor. prudens and pius medicus cibis priux medicinal. qua^
medicinis puri^ morbum expellere satagit.
A wise Physician will not give Physic but upon necessity, and first try
medicinal diet, before he proceed to medicinal cure. And in another place
laughs those men to scorn that think, longis syrupis expugnare daemones, and
animi phantasmata, they can purge the devil by Physic. Another caution is,
that they proceed upon good grounds, if so be there be need of Physic, and not
mistake the disease; Breviar. lib. 1. cap. 18.
they are often deceived by the Similitud^ saepe bonis medicis imponit.
similitude of symptoms says Hernius, and I could give instance in many
consultations, wherein they have prescribed opposite Physic. Sometimes they go
too perfunctorily to work, in not prescribing a just Qui melancholicis
praebent remedia non satis valida. Longiores morbi imprimis solertiam medici
postulant, and fidelitatem, qui enim tumultuarie hos tractant, viresque absque
vllo commodo laedunt and frangunt, etc.
course of Physic, to stir up the humor, and not to purge it, does
oftentimes more harm then good. Montanus consil. 30. inveighs against such
perturbations, that purge to the halfes, and tire Nature, and molest the body
to no purpose. It Is a crabbed humor to purge; and as Laurentius calls this
disease, the reproach of Physicians, and for that cause more carefully to be
respected. Though the Patient be averse, says Laurentius, desire help, and
refuse it again, though he neglect his own health, it behoues a good Physician,
not to leave him helpless. But most part they offend in that other extreme,
they prescribe too much Physic, and tire out their bodies with continual
potions to no purpose. Aetius Tetrabib. 2. ser. 2. cap. 90. will have them by
all means therefore Nature remissionem dare oportet.
to give some respit to Nature, to leave off now and then: and Lelius a Font
Aegubinus in his consultations found it (as he there witnesses) often verified
by experience, Plerique hoc morbo medicina nihil proficisse visi sunt, and sibi
demissi invaluerunt.
that after a deal of Physic to no purpose, left to themselves, they have
recovered. It Is that which Nic. Piso, Donatus Altomarus, still inculcate, dare
requiem Naturae, to give Nature rest.

SVBSEC. 2. Patient.
When all these precedent cautions are accurately kept, and that we have now
got a skillful honest Physician to our mind, if his Patient will not be
conformable unto him, and be content to be ruled by him, all his endeavors will
be to no good end. Many things are necessarily to be observed and continued on
the Patients behalf, first that he be not too niggardly miserable of his
purse, or think it too much he bestows upon himself, to save charges, endanger
his health. Abderitani epist. Hipoc.
The Abderites when they sent for Hipocrates, promised him what reward he
would, quicquid auri apud nos est, libenter persoluemus, etiamsi tota vrbs
nostra ^^rum esset.
all the gold they had, if all their city were gold, he should have it. Another
thing is, that out of bashfulnes, he do not conceal his grief, if ought
troble his mind, let him freely disclose it. Stultorum incurata pudor malus
vlcera celat, and by that means procures to himself great mischief, and
runs into a greater inconvenience: He must be willing by all means to be
cured, and voluntarily desire. Pars sanitatis velle sanari fuit. Seneca. It Is a
part of his cure, to wish his own health. And not defer it too long. Seneca.
Qui blandiendo dulce nutrivit malum,
Sero recusat far quod subijt iugum.
Et Per. 3. Sat.
Helleborum frustra quum iam outis aegra tumebit
Poscentes videas, venienti occurrite morbo.
He that by cherishing, a mischief does provoke,
Too late at last refuses to cast off his yoke.
When the skin swells, to seek it to appease
With Hellebor is vain; meet your disease.
by this means many times, De anima Barbara tamen immanitate, and deploranda
inscitia contemnunt praecepta sanitatis, mortem and morbos vltro accersunt.
or through their ignorance in not taking notice of their disease and danger of
it, contempt, supine negligence, extenuation, wretchedness and peevishness,
they undo themselves, and often out of a prejudice, a lothing, a distaste of
Physic, they had rather dye or do worse, then take any of it. Barbarous
immanity Melancton terms it, and folly, to be deplored, so to contemn the
precepts of health, good remedies, and voluntarily to pull death, and many
maladies upon their own heads. Though many again are in that other extreme
too profuse, suspicious and jelous of their health, too apt to take Physic
upon every small occasion, to aggravate every small passion, imperfection,
impediment; if their finger do but ache, run, ride, send for a Physician, as
many Gentlewomen frequently do; and when he comes, Melancholici plerumque
medicis sunt molesti, vt alia aliis adiungant.
they make it worse then it is, by amplifying that which is not. Consil. 173. e
Scolizio. Melancholicoru^ boc fere proprium est, vt graviora dicant esse
symptomata, quid revera sunt.
Hier. Capivaccius sets it down as a common fault of all melancholy persons,
to say their symptoms are greater then they are, to be lie themselves. And
which Mercurialis notes consil. 53. to be more troublesome to their Physicians,
then other ordinary Patients, that they may have change of Physic.

A third thing to be required in a Patient, is confidence to be of good cheer,
and have good hope that his Physician can help him. Oportet infirmo imprimere
salutem, vtcumque promittere etsi ipse desperet. Nullum medicamentum efficax
nisi medicus etiam fuerit, fortis Imaginationis.
Damascen the Arabian requires likewise in the Physician himself that he be
confident he can cure him, otherwise his Physic will not be effectual, and
promise him withal, that he will certainly help him, make him believe so at
least. De promise. doct. cap. 15. quoniam sanitatis forma anima medici continet.
Galeottus gives the reason, because the form of health, is contained in the
Physicians mind; and as Galen holds, Spes and confidentia plus valent quam
medicina.
confidence and hope do more good then Physic. And he cures most, in whom
most are confident. Paracelsus assigns it for an only cause, why Hipocrates
was so fortunate in his cures, not for any extraordinary skill he had, but
Faelicior in medicina ob fidem Ethnicoru^.
because the common people had a most strong conceit of his worth. To this of
confidence, we may add perseverance, and obedience, constancy, not to change
his Physician, or dislike him upon every toy, for he that so does, says
Aphoris. 89. aeger qui plurimos consulit medicos, plerumque in errorem
singulorum cadit.
Ianus Damascen, or consults with many, falls into many errors, or that uses
many medicines. It was a chief caveat of Nihil ita sanitatem impedit, ac
remediorum crebra mutatio, nec venit vulnus ad cicatrice^ in quo diversa
medicamenta tentantur.
Seneca to his friend Lucilius, that she should not alter his Physician, or
prescribed Physic, Nothing hinders health more, a wound can never be cured
that has several plasters. Crato consil. 186. taxes all melancholy persons
of this fault, Melancholicorum proprium quum exeorum arbitrio non fit subita
mutatio in melius, alterare medicos qui quidvis etc.
It Is proper to them if things fall not out to their mind, and that they have
not present ease, to seek another and another, twenty one after another, and
they still promise all to cure them, try a thousand remedies, and by this
means they increase their malady, and make it most dangerous and difficill to
be cured. They try many says Montanus, and profit by none: and for that cause
consil. 24. he inioynes his patient before he take them in hand, Imprimis hoc
statuere oportet requiri perseverantiam and tolerantiam. Exi^uo enim tempore
nihilex etc.
perseverance and sufferance, for in such a small time no great matter can be
effected, and upon that condition he will administer Physic, otherwise all
his endeavor and counsel would be to small purpose. And in his 31. counsel
for a noble matron, he tells her, Si curari vult;opus est pertinari
perseverantia, fideli obedientia and patientia singulari si tardet aut
desperet, nullum habebit effectum.
if she will be cured, she must be of a most abiding patience, faithful
obedience, and singular perseverance, if she remit or despair she can expect
or hope for no good success. Consil. 230. Consil. 31. Dum ad varia se
conferunt, nullo prosunt
for an Italian Abbat he makes it one of the greatest reasons why this disease
is so incurable, Aegritudine amittunt patientuam, and inde morbi incurebiles.
because the parties are so restless, and impatient, and will therefore have
him that intend to be eased, to take Physic Non ad mense^ aut annum, sed
oportet toto vitae curriculo curationi operam dare.
not for a month, a year, but to apply himself to their prescriptions, all
the days of his life. Last of all it is required that the patient be not too
bold to practice upon himself without an approved Physicians consent, or to
try conclusions, if he read a Receipt in a Book, for so many grossly mistake,
and do themselves more harm then good. Many things says Prasat. deuar. med.
In libellis quae vulgo versantur apud literatos incautiores multae legunt, a
quibus decipiuntur eximia illis, sed portentosum hauriunt venenum.
Penottus, are written in our Books, which seem to the Reader to be excellent
remedies, but they that make use of them are often deceived, and take for
Physic, poison. I remember in Valleriolas observations, a story of one John
Baptist a Neapolitan, that finding by chance a pamphlet in Italian, written in
praise of Hellebor, would needs adventure on himself, and took j for j and had
not he bin sent for, the poor fellow had poisoned himself. From whence he
concludes out of Damascenus 2. and 3. Aphor. Operari ex sibris absque
cognitione and sollerti ingenio periculosum est. vnde monemur quam insipidum
scriptis authoribus credere quod hic suo didicit periculo.
that without exquisite knowledge, to work out of books, is a most dangerous
thing, and how unsavory a thing it is to believe Writers, and take upon trust,
as this Patient perceived by his own peril. I could recite such another
example of mine own knowledge, of a friend of mine, that finding a Receipt in
Brassiuola, would needs take Hellebor in substance, and try it on himself, but
had not some of his friends come to visit him by chance, he had by his
indiscretion hazarded himself, many such I have observed. These are those
ordinary Cautions, which I would think fit to be noted, and he that shall keep
them, as Consil. 23. he omnia si quo ordine decet egerit vel curabitur,
velcerte minus afficietur.
Montanus says shall surely be much eased, if not thoroughly cured.

SVBSEC. 3. Physic.
Physic it self in the last place is to be considered, for the Lord has
created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them,
Ecclus 38.4. and ver. 8. of such does the Apothecary make a confection etc. Of
these medicines there be diverse and infinite kinds, plants, metals, animals,
etc. and those of several natures, some good for one, hurtful to another:
some noxious in themselves, corrected by art, very wholesome and good, simples,
mixed etc. and therefore left to be managed by discreet and skillful Physicians,
and applied to man's use. To this purpose they have invented method, and
several rules of art, to put these remedies in order, for their particular
ends. Physic, as Hipocrates defines it, is naught else but Fuchsius cap. 2.
lib. 1.
addition and substraction, and as it is required in all other diseases, so in
this of melancholy it ought to be most accurate, it being as In pract. med.
haec affectio nostris temporibus frequentissima, ergo maxim pertinet ad nos
huius curatione^ intelligere.
Mercurialis acknowledges, so common an affection in these our times, and
therefore fit to be understood. Several prescripts and methods I find in
several men, some take upon them to cure all diseases with one medicine,
severally applied, as that Panacea, Aurum potabile, so much controverted in
these days, herba solis etc. Paracelsus reduces all diseases to 4 principal
heads, to whom Severinus, Ravelascus, Leo Sauius, and others adhere and
imitate. And those are Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, Falling Sickness. To which they
reduce the rest, as to Leprosy ulcers, itches, surfures, scabbes etc. To Gout,
stone, cholick, toothache, headache etc. To Dropsy, Agues, Iaundies, Cacexia
etc. To the Falling Sickness belong Palsy, Vertigo, Crampes, Convulsions,
Incubus, Apoplexy, Mother, Melancholy etc. Si aliquis horum morborum summus
sanatur, sanantur omnes inferiores.
If any of these four principal be cured, (says Ravelascus) all the
inferior be cured, and the same remedies commonly serve: but this is too
general, and by some contradicted: for this peculiar disease of Melancholy, of
which I am now to speak, I find several cures, several methods, and
prescripts. They that intend the practick cure of Melancholy, says Duretus in
his notes to Hollerius, set down nine peculiar scopes or ends Savanorola
prescribes 7 especial Canons. Aelianus Montaltus cap. 26, Faventinus in his
Empiricks, Hercules de Saxonia etc, have their several injunctions and rules,
all tending to one end. The ordinary is threefold, which I mean to follow.
(...), Pharmaceutica, and Chirurgica. Diet or Living, Apothecary, Surgery,
which Wecker, Crato, Guianerius etc and most prescribe, of which I will insist,
and speak in their order.

SECT. 2.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Diet rectified in substance.
(...) or Victus, Diet, Living, according to Instit. cap. 8. sect. 1. victus
nomine non taem cibus and potus, sed aer, exercitatio, somnus, vigilia, and
reliquae res sex non-naturales continentur.
Fuchsius and others comprehend those six non-naturall things, which I have
before specified, are especial causes, and being rectified, a sole or chief
part of the Cure. Sufficit plaerumque regimen rerum sex nonnaturalium.
Io. Arculanus cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis, accounts the rectifying of these six a
sufficient cure. Guianerius Tract. 15. cap. 9. calls it propriam and primam
curam, the principal cure, so does Montanus, Crato, Mercurialis, Altomarus
etc. first to be tried, Lemnius instit. cap. 22. calls them the hinges of our
health, Et in his potissima sanitas consistit.
no hope of recovery without them Reinerus Solenander in his 7. consultation
for a Spanish young Gentlewoman, that was so melancholy, she abhorred all
company, and would not sit at table with her familiar friends, prescribes this
Physic above the rest, Nihil hic agendum sine exquisita vivendi ratione etc.
no good to be done without it. Si recens malum sit ad pristinum habitum
recuperandum alia medela non est opus.
Areteus lib. 7. cap. an old Physician, is of opinion that this is enough of it
self, if it be not too far gone. Consil. 99 lib. 2 si celsitudo tuae rectam
victus rationem etc.
Crato in a consultation of his for a noble patient, tells him plainly, that if
his Highness will keep but a good diet, he will warrant him his former health.
Moneo. Domine vt sis prudens ad victum, sine quo caetera remedia frustra
adhibentur.
Montanus consil. 27. for a nobleman of France, admonishes his Lordship to be
most circumspect in his Diet, or else all his other Physic will be to small
purpose. The same iniunction I find verbatim in I. Caesar Claudinus, Respon.
34. Scoltzij consil. 183. Tralliauus cap. 16. lib. 1. and Omnia remedia irrita
and vana sine his. Novistis me plerosque ita laborantes victu potius quam
medicamentis curasse.
Laelius a Font Aegubinus often brag that they have done more cures in this
kind by rectification of Diet, then all other Physic. So that in a word I may
say to most melancholy men, as the Fox said to the Wesell, that could not get
out of the garner, macra cauum repetes, quem macra subisti, the six nonnaturall
things caused it, and they must cure it. Which howsoever I do hear treat of,
as proper to the Meridian of melancholy, yet nevertheless that which is here
said, will generally serve Modo non multum elongetur.
most other diseases, and ease them likewise, if it be observed.

Of these six non-naturall things, the first is Diet properly so called, which
consists in meat and drink, in which we must consider Substance, Quantity,
Quality, and that, opposite to the precedent. Si interna tantum pulpa
devoretur, nom superficies torrida abigne.
In Substance such meats are generally commended, which are Lib 1. cap. de
melan. cap 7. calid^^ and humidus cibus co^coctufa ilis. status aexo^tes elixi
non assi, neque cibi frixi sint.
moist, easy of digestion, and not apt to engender wind, not fried nor roasted,
but sod, says Valescus, Altomarus, Piso etc. hot and moist, and of good
nourishment; Crato consil. 21. lib. 2. admits roast meat, if the burned and
scorched superficies, the brown we call it, be pared off. Salvianus lib. 2
cap. 1. cries out of cold and dry meats, Been nutrie^tes cibi tenella aetas
multum valet carnes non virosae, nec pingues.
young flesh and tender is approved, as of kid, rabbets, chickens, veale, mutton,
capons, hens, partridge, Phesant, and all mountain birds. Galen takes
exception at mutton, but without question he means that rammy mutton, which is
in Turkey and Asia minor, which have those great fleshy tails, 28^ weight, as
Vertomanus witnesses navig. lib. 2. The lean of fat meat is best, and all
manner of brothes and pottage, with burrage, lettice, and such wholesome herbs
are excellent good, especially of a cock, all spoon meat. Arabians commend
brains, but Inimica stomacho.
Laurentius cap. 8. excepts against them, and so do many others: Not fried or
buttered, but potched best.
Eggs are justified as a nutritive wholesome meat. Butter and oil may pass,
but with some limitation, so Consil. 16. No^ improbatur butyrum and oleum, si
tamen plus quam par sit non profundatur. sacchari and mellis vsus vtiliter ad
ciborum condimenta comprobatur.
Crato confines it, and to some men sparingly at set times, or in sauce, and so
sugar and honey are approved. Mercurialis consil. 88. acerba omnia evitentur.
All sharp and sour sauces must be avoided, and spices, or at least seldom
used: and so saffron sometimes in broth may be tolerated, but these things may
be more freely used, as the temperature of the party is hot or cold, or as he
shall find offense or inconvenience by them. The thinnest, whitest, smallest
wine is best, not thick, nor strong, and so of Beer, the middling is fittest.
Bread of good wheat, pure, well purged from the bran, Laurentius cap. 8. would
have it kneaded with rain water, if it may be had. Pure water by all means use,
which as Auro aquae melior.
Pindarus holds, Watrr.
is better then gold. It is a wonder to read of those Opera gigantu^ dicit
aliquis.
stupend Aqneductes, and infinite cost has bin bestowed in Rome of old,
Constantinople, Carthage, Alexandria, and such populous cities, to conveigh
good and wholesome waters, read De aquae duct.
Fro^tinus, Lipsius de Admir. Curtius fons a quadragesimo lapide in vrbem opere
arcuato perductus. Plin. lib. 36.15.
Plinius lib. 3. cap. 11. Strabo in his Geogr. that Aqueduct of Claudius was
most eminent, fetched upon arches 11 miles, every arch 109 foot high, they had
14 such other Aqueducts, besides lakes and cisternes, 700 as I take it, Quaeque
domus Romae fistulas habebat and canales etc.
every house had private pipes and channels to serve them for their use. Lib. 2.
cap. 20.
Peter Gillius in his acurate description of Constantinople, speaks of an old
cisterne which he went down to see 336 foot long. 180 foot broad, built of
marble, covered over with archworke, and sustained by 336 pillars, 12 foot
asunder, and in 11 rows, to contain sweet water. Infinite cost in channels and
cisternes from Nilus to Alexandria has bin formerly bestowed to the admiration
of these times, Iod. a Meggen cap. 15. perig. Hieros. Bellonius.
their cisternes so curiously cemented and composed, that a beholder would take
them to be all of one stone: when the foundation is laid, and cisterne made,
their house is half built. That Segouian Aqueduct in Spain, is much wondered
at in these days, Cyprian Echovius delit. Hisp. aqua profluens inde in omnes
fere dom' ducitur in puteis quaeque aestive tempore frigidissima conseruatur.
upon three rows of pillars, one above another, convaying sweet water to every
house: but every city almost is full of such Aqueducts. Amongst the rest Mr
Hugh Middleton.
he is eternally to be commended that brought that new stream to the Northside
of London at his own charge: and Mr Otho Nicholson founder of our waterworks
and elegant Conduit in Oxford. So much have all times attributed to this
Element, to be conveniently provided of it; for private families in what sort
they should furnish themselves, let them consult with P. Crescentius de
Agricult. lib. 1. cap. 4. and the rest.

Among Fishes those are most allowed of, Fish.
that live in gravelly or sandy waters, pikes, perch, trout, gudgeon, smelts,
flounders etc. Hippolitus Salvianus takes exception at Carp, but I dare boldly
say with De piscibus lib. habent omnes in lautitijs modo non sunt e canoso loco.
Dubrauius, it is an excellent meat if it come not from De pisc cap. 2. lib. 7.
plurimum prastat ad vlititatem and iucunditatem. Idem Trallianus lib. 1. cap.
16. Pisces petrosi and molles carne.
muddy waters, that it retain not an unsavory taste, Erinacius Marinus is much
commended by Oribasius. Aetius, and most of our late Writers.

Ecsi omnes putredini sunt obnoxij vbi secundis mensis incepto iam priore
devorentur cemmodi succi prosunt qui dulcedine sunt praediti. vt dulcia cerasa,
poma etc.
Crato consil. 21. lib. 2. censures allmaner of fruits, as subject to
putrefaction, yet tolerable at some times, after meals at second course, they
keep down vapors, and have their use. Sweet fruits are best, as sweet cherries,
plummes, sweet apples and pippins, which Laurentius extols, as having a
peculiar property against this disease, but they must be corrected for their
windiness, ripe grapes are good, and raysins of the Sun, Fruits.
muskemillions well corrected, and sparingly used. Figs are allowed, and
almonds blanched. Trallianus discommends figs, Lib. 2. cap. 7.
Salvianus olives and capers, which Montanus consil. 24.
others espe^ially like of, and so of pistick nuts. Montanus and Mercurialis
out of Avenzoar admit peaches, Pyra qua grate sunt sapore, cocta mala poma,
tosta and saccharo vel anisi semine conspersa vtiliter statim a prandio vel a
coena sumi possunt, eo quod ventriculum roborent, and vapores caput petentes
reprimant. Mont.
pears and apples baked after meals, only corrected with sugar and anniseed
or fennelseed, and so they may be profitably taken, because they stre^gthen the
stomach, and keep down vapors.^ The like may be said of preserved cherries,
plummes, marmalit of plummes, quinces etc. but not to drink after them; Punica
mala aurantia commode permittuntur modo non sint austera and acidae.
pomegranats, Oranges are tolerated, if they be not too sharp.

Mercurialis pract. Med.
Crato will admit of no herbs but borage, buglosse, endive, fennel, anniseed,
bawme. Callenius and Arnoldus admit of lettice, spinach, beets etc. The same
Crato will allow no roots at all to be eaten. Some approve of potato's,
parsnips, but all corrected for wind. No raw fallets; but as Laurentius
prescribes in brothes, and so Crato commends many of them: or to use borage,
hoppes, bawme, steeped in their ordinary drink. Mercurialis pract. Med.
Avenzoar magnifies the juice of a pomegranat if it be sweet, and especially
Rosewater, Olera omnia praeter boraginem, buglossum, intybum, feniculum, anisum
melissum vitari debent.
which he would have to be used in every dish, which they put in practice in
those hot countries, about In Syria.
Damascus, where if we may believe the relations of Vertomannus, many
hogsheads of Rosewater are to be sold in the market, it is in so great request
with them.

SVBSEC. 2. Diet rectified in quantity.
MAn alone, says Lib. 2. de consol. solus homo edit. bibitque etc.
Cardan, eats and drinks without appetite, and uses all his pleasure without
necessity, animae vitio, and thence come many inconveniences unto him. For
there is no meat whatsoever, though otherwise wholesome and good, but if it be
unseasonably taken, or immoderatly used, more then the stomach can well bear,
will engender crudity, and do much harm. And therefore Consil. 21. si plus
ingeratur quam par est, and ventriculus tolerare possit, nocet, and cruditates
generat etc.
Crato advises his patient to eat but twice a day, and that at his set meals,
by no means to eat without an appetite, or upon a full stomach, and to put
seven hours difference betwixt dinner and supper, which rule if we did observe
in our Colleges, it would be much better for our healths. But custom that
tyrant so prevails, that contrary to all good order and rules of Physic we
scarce admit of five. If after 7 hours tarrying he shall have no stomach, let
him differ his meal, or eat very little at his ordinary time of repast. This
very counsel was given by Prosper Calenus, to Cardinal Caesius laboring of
this disease; and Observat. lib. 1. assuescat bis in die cibos sumere certa
semper hora.
Platerus prescribes it to a patient of his to be most severely kept.
Guianerius admits of three meals a day, but Montanus consil. 23. pro. ab.
Italo, ties him precisely to two: and as he must not eat overmuch, so he must
not absolutely fast; for as Celsus contends lib. 1. Iacchinus cap. 15. in 9.
Rhasis, Ne plus ingerat cavendum quam ventriculus far potest. semperque
surgat a mensa non satur.
repletion and inanition may both do harm in two contrary extremes. Moreover
that which he does eat, must be well Siquidem qui semimansum velociter ingerunt
cibum, ventriculo laborem inserunt, and flatus maximos promovent. Crato.
chewed, and not hastily gobbeled, for that causes crudity and wind, and by
all means to eat no more then he can well digest, melancholy men most part
have Multa appetunt, pauca digerunt.
good appetites, but ill digestion, and for that cause they must be sure to
rise with an appetite, and that which Socrates and Disarius the Physicians in
Macrobius so much require, Saturnal. lib. 7 cap. 4.
and St Hierom inioynes Rusticus, to eat and drink no more then will Modicus
and temperatus cibus and carni and animae vtilis est.
satisfy hunger and thirst. Hegiasticon reg. 14.16. vnciae per diem sufficiant
computato pane came ovis vel alijs absonijs, and totidem vel paulo plures
vnciae potus.
Lessius the Jesuit holds 12, 13, or 14 ounces, or in our Northern countries
16. at most, (for all students, weaklings, and such as lead an idle sedentary
life,) of meat, drink, bread etc. a fit proportion for a whole day, and as
much or little more of drink. Nothing pesters the body and mind sooner then to
be still fed, to eat and ingurgitate beyond all measure, as many do, Idem reg.
27. plures in domibus suis brevi tempore pascentes, exstinguuntur, qui si
triremibus vincti fuissent, aut gregario pane pasti sani and incolumes in
longam aetatem vitam prorogassent.
by overmuch eating and continual feasts, stifle Nature, and choke up
themselves, which had they lived coursely, or like gallyslaues bin tied to an
oar, might have happily prolonged many fair years.

As great inconvenience comes by variety of dishes, which causes the precedent
distemperature, Nihil deterius quam diuersa nutrientia simul adiungere, and
comedendi tempus prorogare.
then which, says Avicenna, nothing is worse, to feed on diversity of meats,
or overmuch, Sertorius like in lucem caenaere, and as they commonly do in
Muscovy and Island to prolong their meals all day, or all night. Our Northern
countries offend, especially in this, and we in this Island, ( ampliter
viventes in prandijs and coenis, as Lib. ^. hist.
Polydore notes) are most liberal feeders, but to our own hurt. Excess of
meat breeds sickness, and gluttony causes choleric diseases, by
surfeiting many perish, but he that dieteth himself prolongeth his life,
Ecclus 37.29.30. We account it a great glory for a man to have his table daily
furnished with variety of meats, but hear the Physician, he pulls thee by the
ear as thou sit 'and tells thee, Cib^rum varietate and copia in eadem
mensa nihil nocentius homini ad salutem. Tr. Valeriola ab. lib. 2. cap. 6.
that nothing can be more noxious to thine health, the^ such variety and
plenty. To avoid therefore all those inflations, torments, obstructions,
crudities, and diseases that come by a full diet, the best way is to Nullus
cibum sumere debet nisi stomachus sit vacuus. Gordonius lib. med. lib. 1. cap
11.
feed sparingly of one or two dishes at most, E multis edulijs vnum elige,
relictisque caeteris ex eo comede.
to choose one of many, and to feed on that alone, as Crato advises his
patient. The same counsel Lib. de atra bile Simplex sit cibus, and non varius,
quodlicet dignitati tuae ob co^vivas difficile videatur etc.
Prosper Calenus gives to Cardinal Caesius, to use a moderate and simple diet,
and though his table be iovially furnished, by reason of his state and guests;
yet for his own part to single out some one savory dish and feed of it. The
same is inculcated by Celsitudo tuae prandeat solus absque apparatu aulico,
contentus sit illustrissimus princeps duobus tantum ferculis, vinoque Rhenano
solum in mensa vtatur.
Crato consil. 9. lib. 2. to a noble personage affected with this grievance,
he would have his higlinesse to dine or sup alone, without al his honorable
attendance and courtly company, with a private friend or so, a dish or two, a
cup of Rhenish wine, etc. Montanus consil. 24. for a noble Matrone inioynes her
one dish, and by no means to drink betwixt meals. The like consil. 229. he
will allow his patient Semper intra satietatem a mensa recedat vno ferculo
contentus.
one only dish.

It much availes likewise to keep good order in our diet Crato. Multum refert
non ignorare qui cibi priores etc liquidae praecedant carnium iura, pisces,
fructus etc. Caena brevior sit prandio.
to eat liquid things first, brothes, fish, and such things, as are sooner
corrupted in the stomach, harder meats of digestion must come last. Crato
would have the supper less then dinner, which Cardan. contradic. lib. 1.
tract. 5. contradic. 18. disallowes, and that by the authority of Galen. 7.
art. curat. cap. 6. and for four reasons he will have the supper biggest. I
have read many treatises to this purpose, I know not how it may concern some
few sick men, but for my part generally for all, I should subscribe to that
custom of the Romans, to make a sparing dinner, and a liberal supper. All
their preparation and inuitation was still at supper, no mention of dinner. Many
reasons I could give, but when all is said pro and con. Tract 6. contradict. 1.
lib. 1.
Cardans rule is best, to keep that we are accustomed unto, though it be
naught, and to follow our disposition and appetite in some things is not
amiss, to eat sometimes of a dish which is hurtful, if we have an
extraordinary likeing to it. Alexander Severus loved Hares and Apples above all
other meats, as Lampridius relates in his life; one Pope porke, another
Peacocke, etc. Super omnia quotidianum leporem habuit and pomis indulsit.


These few rules of diet he that shall keep shall surely find great ease and
speedy remedy by it. It is a wonder to relate that prodigious temperance of
some Hermites, Anachorites, and Fathers of the Church, he that shall but read
their lives written by Hierom, Athanasius, etc. how abstemious heathens have
been in this kind, those Curios and Fabricios, the old Philosophers, as Pliny
records lib. 11, Xenophon lib. 1. de vit. Socrat. Emperors and Kings,
Nicephorus Eccles. hist. lib. 18. cap. 8. of Mauritius, Lodovicus pius, etc.
cannot but admire them, this have they done voluntarily, and in health; what
shall these private men do that are visited with sickness, and necessarily
Aegiptij otim omnes morbos curabant vomitu and Ieiunio Bohemus lib. 1. cap. 5.
enjoined to recover, and continue their health? It is a hard thing to observe
a strict diet, and qui medice vivit, misere viuit, as the saying is, yet he
that loves himself, will easily endure this little misery, to avoid a greater
inconvenience, e malis minimu^, better do this then do worse.

MEMB. 2. Rectifying, Retention and Evacuation.
I Have declared in the causes, what harm costiuenes has done in procuring
this disease, if it be so noxious, the opposite must needs be good, or mean at
least, as indeed it is, and to this cure necessarily required, maxim conducit,
says Montaltus cap. 27. it very much availes. Debet per aemaena exerceri, and
loca viridiae excreris prius art vel natura alvi excrementis.
Altomarus cap. 7. commends walking in a morning, into some fair green
pleasant fields, but by all means first, by art or nature he will have these
ordinary excrements evacuated. Piso calls it Beneficium ventris, the benefit,
help, or pleasure of the belly, for it dothmuch ease it. Laurentius cap. 8.
Crato consil. 21. l. 2. prescribes it once a day at least: where nature is
defective, art must supply, by those lenitiue electuaries, suppositaries,
condite prunes, turpentine, clisters, as shall be showed. Prosper Calenus lib.
de atr. bile. commends Clisters in Hypocondriacall melancholy, still to be used
as occasion serves. Hildisheim spicel. 2. de mel. Primum omnium operam dabis vt
singulis diebus habeas beneficium venteis, semper cavendo nealuus sit diutius
astricta.
Peter Cnemand. in a consultation of his pro Hippoe. will have his patient
continually loose and to that end sets down there many forms of Potions and
Clisters. Mercurialis consil. 88. if this benefit come not of it is own accord,
prescribes Si non ^ponie Clisteribus purgatur.
Clisters in the first place, so does Montanus consil. 24 and consil. 31. and
229. he commends Turpentine to that purpose. The same he ingeminats, consil.
230. For an Italian Abbot. It Is very good to wash his hands and face often, to
have fair linen about him, to be decently and comely attired, for sordes
vitiant, nastinesse defiles, and deiects any man that is so voluntarily, or
compelled by want, it dulleth the spirits.

Bathes are either artificial or natural, both have their special uses in
this malady, and as Balneorum vsus dulcium si quid aliud ipsis opitulatur.
Credo haec dici cum aliqua iactantia inquit Montanu^ consil. 26.
Alexander supposes lib. 1. cap. 16. yield as speedy a remedy, as any other
physic whatsoever. Aetius would have the^ daily used, assidua balnea. Tetra.
2. sect. 2. cap. 9. (...)
Galen crakes how many several cures he has performed in this kind by use of
bathes alone, and Ruffus pills, moistning them which are otherwise dry. Rhasis
makes it a principal cure. Tota cura sit in humectando, to bath and afterward
anoint with oil. Jason Pratensis, Laurentius, cap. 8. and Montanus set down
many peculiar forms of artificial bathes. Crato consil. 17. lib. 2. commends
Mallows, Camomile, Violets, Burrage to be boiled in it, and sometimes fair
water alone, and in his following counsel, Balneum aquae dulcis solum
saepissime profuisse compertum habemus. So does Fuchsius lib. 1. cap. 33.
Frisimelica lib. 2. consil. 42. in Trincavelius. Some besides herbs, will
have a Rams head and other things boiled. In quibus ieiunus diu sedeat eo
tepore, ne sudorem excitet, aut manifestum teporem, sed quadam refrigeratione
bumectent.
Fornelius consil. 44. will have them continued 10. or 12. days together, to
which he must enter fasting, and so continue in a temperate heat, and after
that frictions all over the body. Lelius Aegubinus, cons. 142. and Christ.
Aererus. in a consultation of his, holds once or twice a week sufficient to
bathe, the Aqua non sit calida, sed tepida, ne sudor ^^quatur.
water to be warm not hot, for fear of sweating. Faelix Plater. observe. lib.
1. for a melancholy lawyer, Lotiones capitis ex lixiuio, in quo herbas
capitales coxerint.
will have lotions of the head still joined to th^se bathes, with a lie wherein
capital herbs have been boiled. Cap. 8. de mel.
Laurentius speaks of bathes of milk, which I find approved by many others.
And still after bath, the body to be anointed with oil of bitter Almonds, of
Violets, new or fresh butter, Aut axungia pulli. Piso.
Capones grease, especially the back bone, and then lotions of the head,
embrocations etc. These kind of bathes have been in former times much
frequented, and diversely varied, and are still in general use in those
Eastern countries. The Romans had their public Bathes, very sumptuous and
stupend, as those of Antoninus and Dioclesian. Plin. lib. 36. says there were
an infinite number of them in Rome, and mightily frequented, some bathed seven
times a day, as Commodus the Emperor is reported to have done. Usually twice a
day, and they were after anointed with most costly ointments we have many
ruins of such Bathes found in this Island, amongst those parietines and rubbish
of old Roman towns. Lips. de mag. Vrb. Romans lib. 3. cap. 8. Rosin. Scot of
Antwerpe, and other Antiquaries tell strange stories of their Bathes. Gillius
lib. 4. cap. vlt. Topogr. Constant. reckons up 155 public. Therme. Nymphea.
Bathes in Constantinople of fair building, they are still Sands lib. 1
says, their women go twice a week to the bathes at least.
frequented in that city by the Turks of all sorts, men and women, and all
over Greece, and those hot countries. Epist. 3.
Busbequius in his Epistles is very copious in describing the manner of them,
how their women go covered with a maid following with a box of ointment to rub
them. The ritcher sort have private Bathes in their houses, the poorer go to
the common, and are generally so curious in this behalf, that they will not
eat or drink until they have bathed, before and after meals some, Nec alvum
excerau^t, quin aquam secum portext, qua parts obscaenas lavent. Busbequius
ep. 3 Leg. Turciae.
and will not make water (but they will wash their hands) or go to the stool.
Leo Afer, lib. 3. makes mention of 100 several Bathes at Fez in Africa, most
sumptuous, and such as have great revenewes belonging to them. Buxdorf. cap.
14. Synogog. Iud. speaks of many ceremonies amongst the Jews in this kind,
they are very superstitious in their Bathes, especially women.

Natural Bathes are praised by some, discommended by others, but it is in a
diverse respect. Hildisheim spicel. 2. de mel. Hypocon. si non adesset iecoris
caliditas, Thermas laudarem, and si non nimia humoris exsiccatio esset metuenda.
Marcus de oddis in Hip. affec. consulted about Bathes, condemns them, because
of the heat of the liver, and because they dry too fast, and yet by and by in
another Fol. 141.
counsel for the same disease, he approues of them, because they cleanse by
reason of the sulfur, and would have the water of them to be drunk. Areteus
cap. 7. commends alum Bathes above the rest, and Thermas Lucenses adeat ibique
aquas eius per 15 dies potet and calidarum aquarum stillicidijs tum caput, tum
ventrienlum de more subijciat.
Mercurialis consil. 88. those of Luca in that Hypocondriacall passion, He
would have his patient tarry there 15 days together, and drink the water of
them, and to be bucketed or have the water powered on his head. John Baptista
Silvaticus cont. 64. commends all the Bathes in Italy, and drinking of their
water, whether they be Iron, Alum, Sulphur. So does In Panth.
Hercules de Saxonia. But in that they cause sweat, and dry so much, he
confines himself to Hypcondriacall melancholy alone, excepting that of the
head and the other. Trincavelius consil. 14. lib. 1. preferres those Aquae
porrectanae.
Porrectan Bathes before the rest because of the mixture of brass, iron,
alum, and consil. 35. lib. 3. for a melancholy lawyer, and consil. 36. in that
Hypocondriacall passion, the Bathes of Aquae Aquariae.
Aquaria, and 36. consil. the drinking of them. Frisimelica consulted amongst
the rest in Trincavelius, consil. 42, lib. 2. preferres the waters of Ad aquas
Aponenses velut ad sacram anchoram confugiat.
Apona before all artificial Bathes whatsoever in this disease, and would have
one nine years affected with Hypocondriacall passions, fly to them, as to an
10. Baubinus lib. 3. cap. 14. hist. admir. Fontis Bollensis in ducat.
Wirtemberg. laudat aequas Bollenses ad melancholicos morbos maerorem
fascinationem, aliaque animi pathemata.
holy anchor. Of the same mind is Trincavelius himself there, and yet both
put a hot liver in the same party for a cause, and send him to the waters of S.
Helen which are much hotter. Montanus consil. 230. magnifies the Balnea
Chalderina.
Chalderinian bathes, and consil. 237. and 239. he exhorts to the same, but
with this caution, Hepar externe vngatvr ne calefiat.
that the Liver be outwardly anointed with some coolers, that it be not
ouerheated. But these bathes must be warily frequented by melancholy persons,
and such as are very cold of themselves, for as Gabelius concludes of al Dutch
Bathes, and especially of those of Baden, they are good for all cold diseases,
Nocent calidis and siccis cholericis and omnibus morbis ex cholera hepatis
splenisque affectionibus.
naught for choleric, hot and dry, and all infirmities proceeding of choler,
inflammations of the spleen and liver. Our English Bathes as they are hot,
must needs incur the same censure. But D Turner of old, and D Jones have
written at large of them. As for sweating, urine, bloodletting by haemrods, or
otherwise, I shall elsewhere more oportunely speak of them,

Immoderate Venus in excess, a cause, or in defect, so moderatly used to some
parties an only help, a present remedy. Peter Forestus calls it, aptissimum
remedium, a most apposite remedy, Soluit Venus rationis vim impeditam, ingentes
iras remutit, etc.
remitting anger, and reason, that was otherwise bound. Avicenna Fen. 3.20.
Oribasius med. collect. lib. 6. cap. 37. contend out of Ruffus and others,
Multi comitiales, melancholici, insani, huisus vsu solo sanati.
that many madmen, melancholy, and laboring of the falling sickness, have bin
cured by this alone. Montaltus cap. 27. de melan. will have it drive away
sorrow and all illusions of the brain, to purge the heart and brain from all
ill smokes and vapors that offend them, Si omittatur coitus, contristat and
plurimum gravat corpus and animum.
and if it be omitted as Valescus supposes, it makes the mind sad, the body
dull and heavy. Marcellus Donatus lib. 2. med. hist. cap. 1. tells a story to
confirm this out of Alexander Benedictus, of a maid that was mad, ob menses
inhibitos, cum in officinam meritoriam incidisset, a quindecim viris eadem
nocte compressa, mensium largo profluvio, quod pluribus annis ante constiterat,
non sine magno pudore mane menti restituta decessit. But this must be warily
understood; for as Arnoldus objects lib. 1. breviar. 18. cap. quid coitus ad
melancholicum succum? what affinity have these two? Nisi certo constet nimium
semen aut sanguinem causam esse, aut amor precesserit, aut etc.
except it be manifest that superabundance of seed, or fullness of blood be a
cause, or that love, or an extraordinary desire of Venus have gone before.
Montaltus cap. 27. will not allow of moderate Venus to such as have the gout,
palsy, Epilepsy, Melancholy, except they be very lusty, and full of blood.
Athletis, Artheriticis podagricis nocet, nec opportune prodest, nisi fortibus,
and qui multo sanguine abund^nt. Idem Scaliger exer 269. Turcis ideo
luctatoribus prohibitum.
Lodovicus Antoninus lib. med. miscel. in his Chapter of Venus, forbids it
utterly to all wrestlers, ditchers, laboring men etc. De sanit. tuen. lib. 1.
Ficinus and Lib. 1. cap. 7. exhaurit enim spiritus, animu^que debilitat.
Marsilius Cagnatus put Venus one of the five mortal enemies of a student: it
consumes the spirits, and weakeneth the brain. Haliabbas the Arabian 5. Theor.
cap. 36. and Jason Pratensis make it the fountain of most diseases, Frigidis
and ficcis corporibus inimicissima.
but most pernicious to them which are cold and dry, a melancholy man must not
meddle with it, but in some cases. Plutarch in his book de san tuenda, accounts
of it as one of the three principal signs and preseruers of health,
temperance in this kind, Vesci intra sacietatem, impigrum esse ad laborem,
vitale semen conservare.
To rise with an appetite, to be ready to work, and abstain from Venery, tria
saluberrima, are three most healthful things. We see their opposites how
pernicious they are to mankind, as to all other creatures they bring death, and
many ferall diseases. Immodicis brevis est aetas and rara senectus. Aristotle
gives instance in sparrows, Nequitiae est quae te non sinit esse senem.
which are parum vivaces ob salacitatem, short lived because of their salacity,
which is very frequent, as Scoppius in his Priapeijs will better inform you.
The extremes being both bad, Vid Montan. Pet. Godefridum Amorum lib. 2. cap.
6. curiosum, etc.
the medium is to be kept, which cannot easily be Thespiadas genuit.
determined. Some are better able to sustain, such as are hot and moist,
phlegmatic as Hipocrates insinuates, some strong and lusty, well fed, like
Hercules, Vide Lampridium vit. eius, 4
Proculus the Emperor, Et lassata viris etc.
Messalina the Empress, and by Philters, and such kind of lascivious meats,
use all means to Vid. Mizald. cent. 8 IX. Lemnium lib. 2. cap. 16. Catullum ad
Ipsithillam, etc. Ovid. Eleg. 3. and 6. etc.
enable themselves, and brag of it: others impotent, of a cold and dry
constitution cannot sustain those gymnicks without great hurt done unto their
own bodies, of which number are melancholy men for the most part.

MEMB. 3. Air rectified. With a digression of the Air.
AS a long-winged Hawke when he is first whistled off the fist, mounts aloft,
and for his pleasure fetches a many circuits in the Air, still soaring higher
and higher, till he become to his full pitch, and in the end when the game is
sprung, comes down amain, and stoupes upon a sudden: so will I, having now
come at last into these spacious fields of Air, wherein I may freely expatiate
and exercise my self, for my recreation a while roue, and wander round about
the world, and mount aloft to those aetheriall orbs and celestial spheres,
and so descend to my former elements again. In which progress, I would first
see whether that relation of the Friar of Nich. de Lynna cited by Mercator in
his Map.
Oxford be true, concerning those Northern parts under the Pole, as whether
there be such 4. Euripes, and a great rock of Lodestones which may cause the
needle in the compass still to bend that way, and what should be the true
cause of the variatio^ of the compass, Mons Sloto. Some call it the highest
hill in the world next Teneriffe in the Canaries Lat. 81.
is it a magneticall rock or Pole Star as Cardan will, why at the Azores it
looks directly North, otherwise not? whether rules may be made of it: as 11.
grad. Land. variat alibi. 36. etc. Whether the Sea be open and navigable by the
Poles, and which is the likeliest way that of 1612.
Bartison the Hollander, or by fretum Dauies, or Nova Zembla. Whether 1612.
Hudsons discoveries be true of a new found Ocean, or any probability to pass
by the Straights of Anian to China by the Promontory of Tabin. And if there be,
I should soon perceive whether Lib. 2 cap. 64 de nob. civitat. Quinsay, and
cap 10. de Cambalu.
Marcus Polus the Venetians narration be true or false of that great city of
Quinsay and Cambalu, whether there be any such places, or that as Lib 4.
expedit ad Sinas cap 3. and lib. 5. cap, 11.
Mat. Riccius the Jesuit has written, China and Cataia be all one, the great
Cham of Tartary, and the King of China be the same. Xuntain and Quinsay, and
that city of Cambalu be the same with Paquin, or such a wall 400. leagues long
to part China from Tartary. Whether M. Polus in Asia Pres. Johan. meminit.
Presbyter John be in Asia or Afric. Whether Lat. 10. Gr. Aust.
Guinea be an Island or part of the Continent, or that hungry Ferdinando de
Quir. Anno. 1612.
Spaniards discovery of Terra Australis Incognita or Magellanica, be as true as
that of Mercurius Britannicus, or his of Vtopia, or his of Lusinia. And yet in
all likelihood it may be true, for without all question it being extended from
the Tropicke of Capricorn, to the Circle Antarticke, and lying as it does in
the Temperate Zone cannot choose but yield in time, some flourishing kingdoms
to succeeding ages, as America did unto the Spaniards. As I go by Madagascar I
would see that great bird Alarm pennae continent in longitudine 12. passus
Elephantum in sublime tollere potest Polus lib. 3. c. 40.
Rucke that can carry a man and horse, or an Elephant. And afterward in
Afric examine the fountains of Nilus, whether Lib. 2.
Herodotus, Nature. quaest. lib. 4. cap. 2.
Seneca, Plin. lib. 5. c. 9. Strabo lib. 5. give a true cause of his annual
flowing, Lib. de reg. Congo.
or Pagaefetta discourse rightly of it, or of Niger and Senega, Examine Cardan,
Exercit. 47.
Scaligers reasons and the rest. I would observe al those motions of the Sea,
and from what causes, from the Moon, or earths motion. Why in that Ocean of
Sur it is scarce perceived, in our British Seas most violent, in the
mediterranean and Red Sea so vehement, irregular and diverse? Why the current
in that Atlanticke Ocean should still be toward the North, and why they can
come sooner then go? And so from Moabar to Madagascar in that Indian Ocean,
the Marcha^ts come in three weeks, as Exercit. 52 de maris motu causae
inuestigar dae prima reciprocationis, secunda varietatis, tertia celeritatis,
quarta cessationis, quinta privati^nis, sexta contrarietatis.
Scaliger discusseth, they go back scarce in three months, with the same or
like winds. The continual current is from East to West. Whether mount Athos
Caucasus Atlas be so high as Pliny, Solinus, Mela relate, above Clouds,
meteors, and equal to the greatest depths of the Sea, which is as Scaliger
holds, 1580. paces, Exerc. 38. alij 100. paces. I would see those inner parts
of America, whether there be any such great city of Manoa, as he relates, or
golden countries of Guiana, Amazons or giganticall Patagones in Chica.
Patritius says 52 miles in height.
The pike of Teneriffe how high it is? 70 miles or 52, as Patritius holds: see
that strange Luge alij vocant Geor. Wernerus. aquae tanta celeritate erumpunt
and absorbentur vt expedito equiti aditum intercludant.
Cirknick zerksey lake in Carniola, whose waters gush so fast out of the
ground, that they will overtake a swift horseman, and by and by with as
incredible celerity supped up, which Lazius and Warnerus make an argument of
the Argonautes sailing under ground. I would examine the Caspian Sea, and see
where and how it exonerates it self, after it has taken in Volga, Iaxares,
Oxus, and those great rivers; what vent the Mexican lake has, and that of
Trasumene, at Peruziu^ in Italy. I would find out with Traian the fountains of
Danubius, of Ganges, Oxus, see those Egyptian Pyramids, Traianes bridge,
Grotta de Sibilla, Lucullus fish ponds; the Temple of Nidrose, etc. Many
strange creatures, mineralls, vegetalls, Zoophites were fit to be considered in
such an expedition, and amongst the rest that of Commentar. Muscovit.
Herbastein of his Tartar lamb, Hist. Scot. l. 1.
Hector Boethius goose-bearing tree in the Orchades, Vertomannus lib. 5. cap.
16. mentions of a tree that bears fruits to eat, wood to burn, bark to
make ropes wine and water to drink, oil, and sugar and leaves as tiles to
cover houses, flowers for cloths, etc.
Vertomannus wonderful palm, that fly in Hispaniola that shines like a torch
in the night, that one may see well to write. Those sphericall stones in Cuba
which nature has so made. etc. I would examine that demonstration of Alexander
Piccolomineus, whether the earths superficies be bigger then the Sea: or
whether that be true which Iordanus Brunus scoffs at, that if God did not
detain it, the Sea would overflow the earth. I would examine the true site of
that terrestrial Animal insectum Cusino vt quis legere and scribere possit
sine alterius open luminis.
Vid. Pererium in Genesis
Paradise, and where Ophir was, where Solomon did fetch his gold. I would
examine all Plinies, Solinus, Straboes, S. John Mandevills, Olaus Magnus,
Marcus Polus lies. Correct those errors in Navigation, reform Cosmographicall
Chartes, and rectify longitudes, if it were possible, observe some better
means to find them out. Or I would find a convenient place to go down with
Orpheus, Ulysses, Hercules, In Necyomantia Tom. 2.
Lucians Menippus, at S. Patricks Purgatory at Trophonius den, Hecla in Island
Aetna in Sicily, etc. to descend, and see what is done in the bowels of the
earth. If it be 21500 miles in Or plain as Patritius holds which Austin,
Lactantius, and some others held of old, round as a Trencher.
compass, his Diameter is 7000 miles from us to our Antipodes and what shall
be comprehended in all that space? What is in the center of the earth, or is
it pure element only, as Aristotle decrees inhabited as Lib. de Zilphis and
Pigmeis, they penetrat the earth as we do the air.
Paracelsus thinks with creatures, whose Chaos is the earth with Fairies, as
the woods and waters according to him, are with Nymphs or as the air with
spirits. Or is it the place of Hell as Virgill in his Aeneades, Plato, Lucian,
Dantes, and others poetically describe it, and as many of our Divines think,
or of Purgatory and Limbus patrum, as Gallucius, Concl^u^ Ignatii.
or Ignatius parler. Virgil sometimes Bishop of Mentz was therefore called in
question, because he held Antipodes, and so by that means took away the seat
of Hell, or so contracted it that it could bear no proportion to Heaven, and
contradicted that opinion of Austin, Basil, Lactantius, that held the earth
round as a trencher, but not as a ball. If it be no material fire as Soncinas
disputes, it may be there or elsewhere, for sure some where it is. If it be
sollid earth, it is the fountain of mettles, waters, which by his innate te^per
turns air into water, which springs up in several chinks to moisten the earths
superficies, and that in a tenfold proportion, as Aristotle holds, or else
these fountains come directly from the sea by As they come from the Sea so
they return to the Sea again by secret passages as in all likelihood the
Caspian sea vents it self into the Euxine or Ocean.
secret passages, and are so made fresh again by Seneca not. quaest. lib. 3.
cap. 4.5.6 7.8.9.10 11.12 de causis aquarum perpetuis.
running through the bowels of the earth, and are either thick, thin, hot,
cold, as the matter or mineralls are by which they pass. Or else it may be
full of wind, which sometimes breaking out causes those horrible Earthquakes,
which are so frequent in these days in Iapan, China, and oftentimes swallow up
whole Cities. Let Lucians Menippus consult with, or ask of Tiresias, if you
will not believe Philosophers, he shall clear all your doubts when he makes a
second voyage. In the mean time let us consider of that which is sub dio, and
find out a true cause, if it be possible, of such accidents, Meteors,
alterati^ns, as happen above ground. Whence proceed that variety of manners,
and a distinct character as it were to several nations? Some are wise,
subtle, witty; others dull, heavy, some big, some little, as Bodine proves
at large, method. cap. 5. some soft and some hardy, barbarous, civil, Ad caput
bonae spei incolae sunt nigerrimi, Si Sol causa cur non Hispani and Itali aeque
nigri in eadem latitudine aeque dista^tes ab aequatore by ad Austrum illi ad
Borcam? quisub Presbytero Iohanne habitant subfusci sunt in Zeilan and Malabar
nigri aeque distantes ab Aequatore eodemque coeli paralelo, sed hoc magis
mirari quis possit in tota America nusquam nigros inveniri prater paucos in
loco Quarena illis dicto, quae huius caloris causa efficiens celiue an terrae
qualitas an soli proprietas autipsorum hominum innata rario aut omnia Ortelius
in Africa. Theat.
black, dunne: white; is it from the air, or from the soil, or influence of
stars, or some other secret cause? Why does Africae breed so many venom
beasts, Ireland none, whence comes this variety of complections, colors,
plants, birds, beasts, At Quito in Peru plus auri quam terrae foditur in Auri
sodinis. Giraua.
metals, peculiar almost to every place? How comes it to pass that in the same
place, in the same latitude, to such as are Perioeci, there should be such
difference of soil, metal, air, etc. Mosco in 53. degrees. of lat: extreme
cold, as all those countries are, having one perpetual hard frost all winter
long: Regio quocunque anni tempore temperatissima. Ortel multas Galliae and
Italiae regiones molli tepore and benigna quadam temperu prorsus antecellit.
Iouius.
England near the same latitude, and Ireland very moist and warm, and more
temperate in winter then Spain, Italy, or France. Is it the Sea that causes
this difference, and the air that comes from it? why then is Lat. 45. Danubij.
Ister so cold near the Euxine, Queuira. lat. 40.
Quenira, or Nova Albion in America bordering on the Sea, so cold in July, that
our In. S. Francis Drakes voyage.
Englishmen could hardly endure it? Norembega in 45 lat. all the Sea frozen
Ice, and yet in a more Southern latitude then ours. Our climes breed lice,
come to the Azores, by a secret virtue of that air they are instantly consumed
and all our European vermin almost, Ortelius, Egypt is watered with Nilus, and
not far from the Sea, and yet there it seldom or never raines: Rhodes an
Island of the same nature, and yet our Islands ever dropping and inclining to
rain. Is it from Topicke stars, apertio portarum such aspects of Planets, or
dissolving air, or thick air, which causes this and those differences of
heat and cold? that as Bodine relates of a Portingall Ambassador coming from
Lisbon. lat. 38
Lisbon to Da^zik lat. 54.
Danzike in Spruce, found greater heat there then at any time at home. The
torrid Zone was by our Predecessors held to be inhabitable, but by our modern
travelers found to be most temperate, bedewed with pleasant raines, and
moistning shewers, in some parts, as Acosta describes, most pleasant and
fertile. In some again hard, dry, sandy, barren, a very desert and still in
the same latitude. Many times we find great diversity of air in the same The
same variety of weather Lod Guicciardine, observes betwixt Liege and Aix not
far dista^t. descrip. Belg.
country, by reason of the site to Sea, hills or dales, want of water, nature
of soil, and the like: as in Spain, Estramadura is dry, sandy, barren most
part, extreme hot, by reason of his plains, Andalusia another Paradise, and
Valence a most pleasant air, and continually green. And so is it about Magi^.
Quadus.
Granado, on the one side fertile plains, on the other continual snow to be
seen all summer long on the hill tops. In the heat of Su^mer, in the kings
Palace in Escuriall, the air is most temperate, by reason of a cold blast
which comes from the snowy mountains hard by, when as in Toledo it is very
hot, so in all other countries. But the causes of these alterations are common,
by reason of their neerenesse to the middle region, but this diversity of air
in places equally site, elevated, and distant from the Pole can hardly be
satisfied with that diversity of Plants Birds, Beasts, which is so familiar
with us, with Indians, every where: the sun is equally distant, the same
vertical stars, the same irradiations of Planets, aspects alike, the same
neerenesse of Seas, the same superficies, the same soil, or not much
different. The Philosophers of Conimbrae will refer this diversity to the
influence of that Empyraean heaven. Clavius and others conjecture otherwise,
but they be but conjectures. About Damascus in Syria Comagena, is a Vertoman.
Nav. lib. 1. c. 5.
Paradise by reason of the plenty of waters, in promptu causa est, and the
Deserts of Arabia barren because of rocks, and barren sands, dry mountains,
which by no art can be manured, it is evident, Bohemia is cold by reason it lies
all along to the North. But why should it be so hot in Egypt, or there never
rain? Why should those Strabo.
Etesian Eastern winds blow continually in some places, and at set times in
the dog days only, here perpetual drought, there dropping shewers, here foggy
mist, there a pleasant air, here As under the Equator in many parts, shewers
here at such a set time, winds at such a time. etc.
terrible thunder and lightning at such a season, frosen seas, there open in the
same latitude, to the rest no such thing, nay quite opposite is to be found?
Sometimes as in Peru on the one side the mountains it is hot, on the other
cold, with infinite such. Who can give a reason of this diversity of Meteors,
that it should rain Lapidatum est Liuye.
Stones, Ferd. Cortes^us lib. Novus orbis inscript.
Frogs, Mice, etc. Aristotle's reasons are exploded by Paracelsus, his
principles confuted, and other causes assigned. Sal, Sulphur, Mercury, in which
they are so expert that they can alter Elements, and separate at their
pleasure, make perpetual motions, imitate thunder, snow, hail, the Seas
motions, give life to creatures, as they say, without generation, and what not.
P. Nonius Salaciensis, and Kepler, take upon them to demonstrate that no
Meteors, Clouds, Fogges, etc. Cardan. says Vapors rise 288 miles from the
earth, Eratosthenes 48. miles.
Vapors arise higher then 50 or 80 miles, and all the rest to be purer air
or element of fire. Which De subtle. l. 2.
Cardan, In Progymnas.
Tycho, and Praefat. ad Euclid. Catop.
John Pena manifestly confute by refractions, and many other arguments. If as
Tycho proves the Moon be distant from us betwixt 50 and 60 Semediameters of
the earth, and as Peter Nonius will have it, the air be so angust, what
proportion is there betwixt the other three elements and it? to what use serves
it? is it full of spirits which inhabit it as the Paracelsians and Platonists
hold, the higher the more noble, Manucaudiatae, a Bird that lives continually
in the air and are never seen on ground but dead. see Ulysses Aldovrandus
Ornithol. Scal. exerc. 229.
or full of Birds, or a mere Vacuum to no purpose? It is much controverted
betwixt Tycho Brahe and Christopher Rotman the Lansgraue of Hassias
Mathematitian in their Astronomicall Epistles, whether it be the same Diaphanum
cleerenesse, matter, of the Air and Heavens, or two distinct Essences.
Christopher Rotman, John Pena, Iordanus Brunus, with many other late
Mathematitians, contend that it is the same and one matter throughout, saving
that the higher it is the purer it is, and more subtle. Epist. lib. 1. p. 83.
Ex quibus constat nec diversa aeris and aetheris Diaphana esse nec refractiones
aliunde quam a crasso aere causari. -- Non dura aut impervia sed liquida
subtilis motuique planetarum facile cedens.
Tycho will have too distinct matters of heaven and air, but to say truth,
with some small qualification, they have one and the self same opinion, about
the Essence and matter of Heavens, that it is not hard and impenetrable, as
Peripateticks hold, transparent, of a quinta essentia, but that it is
penetrable and soft as the air it self is, and that the Planets move in it as
Birds in the air, fishes in the sea. This they prove by the motion of Comets,
and otherwise, which are not generated, as Aristotle holds in the ayeriall
region of hot and dry exhalations, and so consumed, but as Anaxagoras and
Democritus held of old of a celestial matter, and as In Progimnas.
Tycho, In Theoria nova Met. coelessium. 1578.
Helisaeus Roeslin, Thaddeus Hagesius, Pena, Rotman, Fracastorius, demonstrate
by Paralaxes, refractions, motions, and Multa sane hinc consequntur absurda and
si nihil aliud tot cometae in aethere animadversi quinullius orbis ductum
comitantur idissum sufficienter refellunt. Tycho aftr. epist. page 107.
other sufficient reasons, far above the Monne: exploding in the mean time
those Eccentricks and Epicycles. Which howsoever Ptolomy, Alhasen, Vitello,
Maginus, Clavius, and many of their associats stiffely maintain, to be real
orbs, excentricke, concentricke, circles aequant etc. are absurd and
ridiculous. For who is so mad to think that there should be so many circles,
like subordinate wheels in a clock, al impenetrable and hard, as they feign,
add and substract at their pleasures. In Theoric.
Maginus makes eleven Heavens, all subdivided into their orb^ and circles, and
all too little to serve those several appara^^ces, Fracastorius 72.
Homocentricks, Ticho Brabe, Nicholas Rhamerus, Helisaeus Roeslin, have several
hypotheses of their own inventions, and they be but inventions, as most of
them acknowledge, as we admit of Aequators, Tropicks, Colures for doctrines
sake (though Ramus think them all unnecessary) they will have them supposed
only for method and order, as Tycho has fained: I know not how many
subdiuisions of Epicycles in Epicycles, etc. to calculate and express the
Moons motion: But when all is done, as a supposition and no otherwise. Not (as
they hold) hard, impenetrable, subtle, transparent, etc. or making music, as
Phythagoras maintained. If the heavens be penetrable, as these men deliver and
no lets, it were not amiss in this aeriall progress to make wings, and fly
up, as that Turk in Busbequius, made his fellow Citizens in Constantinople
believe he would perform: and some new fangled wits me thinks should sometime
or other find out: or if that may not be; yet with a Galelies glass, or
Icaro-menippus wings in Lucian, command the Spheres and Heavens, and see what
is done amonst the^. Whether there be generation and corruption in the Heavens
as some think by reason of aetheriall Comets, that in Cassiopea 1570. that Ao
1607, etc. and many like, or that they were created ab initio, and show
themselves at set times; and as Helisaus Roeslin contends, have Poles,
Axeltrees, Circles of their own, and regular motions. Ancoelum sit coloratum?
Whether the Stars be of that bigness, distance, as Astronomers relate, so
many in An sit crux and nubecula in coelis ad PolumAntarcticum; quod ex
Corsalio refert Patritius.
number, 1026. or 1725, as I. Bayerus; or as some Rabbis, 29000. Myriades; or
as Galelye discovers by his glasses infinite, the least Star in the eighth
Sphere 18 times bigger then the earth, Theor. nova coelest. Meteor.
whether they be thicker parts of the orbs, as Aristotle delivers; or so many
habitable worlds, as Democritus; whether they have light of their own, or from
the Sun, or give light round, as Patritius discourses: Whether light be of
there Essence; whether they be hot by themselves, or by accident cause heat?
Whether there be such a Precession of the Aequinoxes, as Copernicus holds, or
that the eight Sphere move. An been Philosophe^tur, R. Bacon, and I. Dee
Aphoris^de multiplicatione specieru^. Whether there be any such Images
ascending with each degree of the Zodiac in the East, as Aliacensis faines. An
aequae super coelum, as Patritius, etc. Or to omit all smaller controversies,
or matters of less moment, to examine that maine controversy of the earths
motion, now so much in question. Pythagoras maintained it of old, Democritus,
and many of their Scholars, reviued since by Copernicus; not as a truth, but
as a supposition, as he confesses himself in his Preface, but now maintained
in good earnest by Kepler, Rotman, Gilbert, Digges, and some other of his
followers. For if the earth be the Center of the world, stand still and the
heavens move, as the most received opinion is, Quis ille furor, etc. What Fury
is that, says de Magnete.
Dr Gilbert. that shall drive the Heavens about with such incomprehensible
celerity in 24 hours, when as every point of the Firmament, and in the
Equator must needs move as Commen in ^. cap sphera Io. de Sac. Bosc.
Clavius calculats, 176660 in 1. l 24^th. part of an hour; and an arrow out of
a bow, must go seven times about the earth, whilst a man can say an Ave
Maria, if it keep the same space, or compass the earth 1884 times in an
hour, which is supra humanam cogitationem, beyond humane conceit. A man could
not ride so much ground, going 40 miles a day, in 2904 years, as the Firmament
goes in quod incredibile videtur: and the Did. 3 gr. a Polo.
Pole star, Alphonsine, or any other tables, which are grounded from those
other suppositions. Now if the earth move, it is a Planet and shines to them in
the Moon, and to the other Planetary Inahbitants, as the Moon and they do to
us upon the Earth: but shine she does, as Galelye, Luna circum^terrestris
Planeta quum sit consentaneum est esse in luna viventes creaturas: and singulis
Planetarum globis sui serviunt circulatores, ex qua consideratione de eorum
incolis summa probabilitate co^cludimus, quod and Tychoni Braheoex sola
consideratione vastitatis eorum vastitatis eorum visum fuit. Kepler dissert.
cum nunc sid, fol. 29.
Kepler, and others prove, and then per consequens the rest of the Planets are
inhabited, as well as the Moon, which he grants in his dissertation with
Galelies Nuncius Siderius, Temperare non possum, quin ex inventis tuis hoc
moneam very non absimile, non tam in luna, sed etiam in love and reliquis
Planetis incolas esse, Kepler. fol. 26 Si non sint accole in Iovis globo qui
notent admirandam hanc variatatem oculis, cui bono quatuor illi Planetae Iovem
circumcursitant.
that there be Iouiall and Saturnine inhabitants etc. and that those several
Planets have their several moons about them, as the earth has hers, as
Galileus has already evinced by his glasses 4 about Jupiter, and 2 about
Saturn (though Sittius the Florentine, cavell at it) and Kepler the Emperors
Mathematician, confirms out of his experience, that he saw as much by the same
helps. Then the earth and they be Planets alike, It may be the green children
came thence, which Nubrigensis speaks of. Rerum Anglic lib. 1. cap. 27. de
viridibus pueris.
inhabited alike, moving about the Sun, the common center of the world alike:
And we may infer with Brunus, that which Melissus, Democritus, Leucippus
maintained in their ages there be Infiniti alij mundi, vel vt Brunus, terre
huic nostrae similes.
infinite worlds and infinite earths, because infinite stars and Planets like
unto this of ours. Kepler. fol. 2. dissert. quid impedit quin credamus ex his
initijs, plures alios mundos detegendos, vel vt Democrito placuit, infinitos.
Kepler betwixt jest and earnest in his perspectiues, Lunar Geography.
dissertat cum nunc syder. seems in part to agree with this, and partly to
contradict, for the planets he yields them to be inhabited, he doubts of the
stars, and so does Tycho in his Astronomical Epistles, out of a consideration
of their vastity and greatness, break out into some such like speeches, that he
will never believe that those great and huge bodies were made to no other use,
then this that we perceive, to illuminate the Earth, a point insensible in
respect of the whole. But who shall dwell in these vast Bodies, Earths, Worlds,
Quid igitur inquies si sint in caelo plures globi, similes nostrae telluris, an
cum illis certabimus, quis meliorem mundi plagam teneat. Si nobiliores illorum
globi nos non sumus creaturarum rationalium nobilissimi, quomoda igitur omnia
propter bominem? quomodo nos domini operum Dci? Kepler. sol. 29.
if they be inhabited, rational creatures, as Kepler demands? or have they
souls to be saved, or do they inhabit a better part of the World then we do,
or are we or they Lords of the World, and how are all things made for man?
Difficile est nodum hunc expedire, eo quod nondum omnia quae huc pertinent,
explorata habemus, it is hard to determine, this only he proves that we are in
praecipuo mundi sinu, in the best place, best world, nearest the Heart of the
Sun. These and such like prodigious Paradoxes, inferences must needs follow, if
it once be granted, which Rotman, Kepler, Gilbert, Diggeus, Galely, and others
maintain of the Earths motion, that it is a Planet, and shines as the Moon
does, which contains in it His argumentis plane satisfecisti, do maculas in
Luna esse maria, do lucidas parts esse ter^a^. Kepler. fol. 16.
both land and sea as the Moon does, for so they find by their glasses, that
Maculae in facie Lunae, the brighter parts are Earth, the duskier Sea. Which
Plutarch and Pythagoras formerly taught: and manifestly discern hills and
dales, and such like concavities, if we may subscribe to, and believe Galelies
observations. But to avoid these Paradoxes of the Earths motion, our later
Mathematitians have rolled all the stones that may be stirred, and to salve all
apparances and objections, have invented new hypotheses, and fabricated new
systemes of the World, out of their own Dedalian heads. Fracastorius will have
the Earth stand still as before, and to avoid that gross supposition of
Eccentricks and Epicicles de has coined 72 Homocentrickes, to solue all
apparances. Nicholas Ramerus will have the Earth the Center of the World, but
moveable, and the eighth Sphere immoueahle, the five upper Planets to move
about the Sun, the Sun and Moon about the Earth. Of which Orbs Tycho Brahe
puts the Earth the Center immovable, the Stars moveable; the rest with
Ramerus, the Planets without Orbs to wander in the Air, and keep time and
distance, true motion according to that virtue which God has given them. Fn
Hypothes. de mundo. Edit. 1597.
Helisaeus Roeslin censureth them both, with Coperinicus and Ptolemaeus as
insufficient: one offends against natural Philosophy, another against Opticke
principles, a third against Mathematical, as not answering to Astronomicall
observations, one puts a great space betwixt Saturnes Orb, and the eighth
Sphere, another too narrow. In his own hypothesis he puts the Earth as before,
the universal Center, the Sun Center to the five upper Planets, to the eighth
Sphere he ascribes diurnal motion, and Eccentricks and Epicycles to the seven
Planets, which has bin formerly exploded, and so dum vitant stulti vitia in
contraria currunt, as a tinker stops one hole, and makes two, he corrects them,
and does worse himself; reformes some, and marres all. In the mean time the
world is tossed in a blanket amongst them, they toss the Earth up and down
like a ball, make her stand and go at their pleasures; one says the Sun
stands, another he moves, a third comes in, taking the^ all at rebound: and
left there should any Paradox be wanting, Io. Fabritius de maculis in Sole.
Witeb. 1611.
he finds certain spots or clouds in the Sun, by the help of glasses, by means
of which the Sun must turn round upon his own center, or they about the Sun.
Fabricius puts only three, and those in the Sun, Apelles 15. and those without
the Sun, floating like the Cyanean Isles in the Euxine Sea. The Lugduni Bat. Ao
1612.
Hollander in his dissertatiuncula cum Apelle censures all, and so whilst
these men contend about the Sun and Moon, like the Philosophers in Lucian, it
is to be feared the Sun and Moon will hide themselves, and be as much offended
as Ne se subducant, and relicta statione decessu^ parent, vt curiositatis finem
faciant.
she was with those, and send another message to Jupiter by some newfangled
Icaromenippus, to make an end of all these curious controversies, and scatter
them abroad. But why should the Sun and Moon be angry, or take exceptions at
Mathematicians and Philosophers? when as the like measure is offered unto God
himself, by a company of Theologasters, they are not contented to see the Sun
and Moon, and measure their site and biggest distance in a glass, calculate
their motions, or visit the Moon in a Poetical fiction, or a dream, as he
says, Hercules tuam fidem Satyra Menippea edit. 1608.
Audax Facinus and memorabile nunc incipiam, neque hoc saeculo vsurpatum prius,
quid in Lunae regno hac nocte gestum sit exponam, and quo nemo vnquam nisi
somniando pervenit: He and Menippus: or as Sardi Venaeles Satyr. Menip. Ao 1612.
Peter Cunaeus, Bona fide agam, nihil eorum quae scripturus sum verum esse
scitote etc. quae nec facta, nec futura sunt, dicam, Puteani Comus sic incipit,
or as Lipsius Satyr in a dream.
stili tantum and ingenij causa, not in jest, but in good earnest they will
transcend Spheres, Heaven, Stars, into that Empyr^an Heaven, soar higher
yet, and see what God himself does, and his Angels, about what he busies
himself. The Jewish Talmudists take upon them to determine how God spends his
whole time, sometimes playing with Leviathan, sometimes overseeing the world etc.
like Lucians Jupiter, to see who offered sacrifice, and tell the hours when it
should rain, how much snow should fall in such a place, which way the wind
should stand in Greece, which way in Afric. In the Turks Alcoran, Mahomet is
taken up to Heaven upon a Pegasus sent a purpose for him, as he lay in bed with
his wife, and after some conference with God, is set on ground again. The
Pagans paint him and mangle him after a thousand fashions, and our Haereticks
and Schismatics, and some Schoolmen, come not far behind, some paint him in
the habit of an old man, and make maps of Heaven, number the Angels, tell their
several Tritemius lib. de 7 secundis.
names, offices, some deny God and his providence, some take his office out of
his hand, and will They have fetched Traianes soul out of Hell, and canonize
for Saints whom they list.
bind and lose in heaven, release, pardon, forgive, and be quarter master with
him, some call his Godhead in question, his power, attributs, omnipotency. an
possit plures similes creare deos, an ex scarabeo deum etc. and quo demum
ruetis sacrificuli? some by visions and revelations, take upon them to be
familiar with God himself, and to be of privy counsel with him, they will tell
how many, Napier. Brightman.
and who shall be saved, and when the World shall come to an end, what year,
what month, and whatsoever else God has reserved unto himself, and to his
Angels. But hoo? I am now gone quite out of sight, I am almost giddy with
roving about, I could have ranged farther yet, but I am an infant, and not Ve
me pluma levat, sic grave mergitonus.
able to diue into these profundities, not able to understand, much less to
discuss: I leave the contemplation of these things, to stronger wits, that
have better ability, and happier leisure to wade into such Philosophical
mysteries: my melancholy spaniels quest, my game is sprung, and I must come
down and follow.

Jason Pratensis in his book de morbis capitis, and Chapter of Melancholy, has
these words out of Galen, Veniant ad me audituri quo esculento, quo item
poculento vti debeant, and praeter alimentum ipsum, potumque ventos ipsos
docebo item aeris ambientis temperie insuper regiones quas eligere, quas vitare
ex vsu sit.
let them come to me to know what meat and drink they shall use, and besides
that I will teach them what temper of ambient Air they shall make choice of,
what wind, what countries they shall choose, and what avoid. Out of which
words of his, this much we may gather, that to this cure of mela^choly, amongst
other things, this Rectification of Air is necessarily required. This is
performed, either in reforming Natural or Artificial Air. Natural, is that
which is in our election to choose or avoid, and it is either general to
Countries, Provinces, or particular to Cities, Towns, Villages, or private
houses. What harm those extremities of heat or cold do in this malady, I have
formerly showed, the medium must needs be good, where the air is temperate,
serene, quiet, free from bogs, fens, mists, all manner of putrefaction,
contagious and filthy noisome smells. The Leo Afer, Maginus etc.
Aegiptians by all Geographers are commended to be hilares, a conceited and
merry Nation, which I can ascribe to no other cause then to the serenity of
their Air. They that live in the Orchades are commended by Lib. 1. Scot. hist.
Hector Boethius and Lib. 1. de rer. var.
Cardan, to be fair of complexion, long-liued, most healthful, free from all
manner of infirmities of Body and mind, by reason of a sharp purifying Air,
which comes from the Sea. The Booetians in Greece were dull and heavy, Crassi
Boeoti, by reason of a foggy Air in which they lived, Attica most acute,
pleasant and refined. The Clime changes not so much customs, manners, wits, as
Bodine has proved at large, method, hist. cap. 5. as constitutions of their
Bodies, and temperature it self. In all particular Provinces we see it
confirmed by experience, as the Air is, so are the Inhabitants dull, heavy,
witty, subtle, neat, cleanly, clownish, sick and sound, In Maginus.
Perigert in France the Air is subtle, healthful, seldom any plague or
contagious disease, but hilly and barren, the men sound, nimble and lusty, but
in some parts of Quienne full of moors and marshes, the people dull and heavy,
and subject to many infirmities. Who sees not a great difference betwixt
Surrey, Sussex, and Rumny marsh, the woods in Lincolnshire, and the Fens. He
therefore that loves his health, if his ability will give him leave, must often
shift place, and make choice of such as are wholesome, pleasant, and convenient,
there is nothing better then change of Air in this Malady, and generally for
health, to wander up and down, as those Haitonus de Tartaris.
Tartari Zamolhenses, that live in hords, and take opportunity of times, places,
seasons. The Kings of Persia had their Summer and Winter houses, in Winter at
Sardes, in Summer at Susa. The Turks live sometimes at Constantinople, sometimes
at Adrianople etc. The Kings of Spain have their Escuriall in heat of Summer,
The Air so clear it never breeds the plague.
Madritte for an wholesome seat, Villadolite a pleasant site etc. variety of
secessus, as all Princes and great men have, and their several progresses to
this purpose. Lucullus the Roman had his house at Rome, at Baiae etc. Leander
Albertus in Campania, e Plutarcho vita Luculli. Cum Cn. Pompeius, Marcus
Cicero, multique nobiles viri L. Lucullum aestivo tempore convenissent,
Pompeius inter coenandum familiariter iocatus est eam villam imprimis sibi
sumptuosam and elegantem videri fenestris, porticibus etc.
When Cn. Pompeius, Marcus Cicero (says Plutarch) and many noble men in the
Summer came to see him, at Supper Pompeius iested with him, that it was an
elegant and pleasant Village, full of windows, galleries, and all offices fit
for a Summer house; but in his Judgment very unfit for Winter: Lucullus made
answer, that the Lord of the house had wit like a Crane, that changes her
Country with the season, he had other houses furnished, and built for that
purpose, all out as commodious as this. So Tully had his Tusculane, Plinius his
Lauretan Village, and every Gentleman of any fashion in our times, has the
like. The Godwin. vita Io, Voysye al. Harman.
Bishops of Exeter had 14 several houses all furnished in times past. In Italy
though they live in Cities all Winter, which is more Gentleman-like, all the
Summer they come abroad to their Country houses to recreate themselves. Our
gentry in England live most part in the Country (except it be some few Castles)
building most part still in bottomes, (says Descript. Brit.
Iovius, or near woods, corona arborum virentium, you shall know a Village by
a tufte of trees at it, or about it, to avoid those strong winds, where with
the Island is infested, and cold Winter blasts. Some discommend all moted
houses, as unwholesome, as Camden says of In Oxford shire.
New-elme, that it was therefore unfrequented, ob stagni vicini balitus, and all
such places as be near lakes or rivers. But I am of opinion, that these
inconveniences will be mitigated, or easily corrected by good fires, as one
reports of Venice that graueolentia, and fog of the moors, is sufficiently
qualified by those innumerable smokes. But it is not water simply that so much
offends, as the slime and noisome smells, that accompany such ouerflow'd places,
which is but at some few seasons after a flood, and is sufficiently recompensed
with sweet smells and aspects in Summer. Ver pingit vario gemmantia prata
color. Howsoever they be unseasonable in winter, or at some times, they have
their good use in Summer. If so be that their means be such, as they may not
admit of any such variety, but must make choice once for all, and make one
house serve all seasons, I know no men that have given better rules in this
behalf, then our husbandry writers. Lib. 1. cap. 2.
Cato and Columella prescribe a good house to stand by a navigable river good
highwayes, and good soil, but that is more for commodity then health. The best
soil commonly yields the worst Air, a dry sandy plat is fittest to build
upon, and such as is rather hilly then plain, as being most commodious for
hawking, hunting, wood, waters, and all manner of pleasures. Perigort in France
is barren, yet by reason of the excellency of the Air, and such pleasure that
it affords, much inhabited by the Nobility; as Noremberge in Germany, Toledo in
Spain. Our Countriman Tusser will tell us so much, that the fieldone is for
profit, the woodland for pleasure and health, the one commonly a deep clay, the
other a dry sand: provision may be had elsewhere, and our towns are generally
bigger in the woodland then the fieldone, more frequent and populous, and
Gentlemen more delight to dwell in such places. Sutton Coldfield in
Warwickeshire (where I was once a Gra^mer Scholar) may be a sufficient witness,
which stands, as Camden notes, loco ingrato and sterili, but in an excellent
Air, and full of all manner of pleasures. And he that built Sr Francis
Willoughbye.
Wullerton in Nottingamshire, is much to be commended (though the tract be
sandy barren about it) for making choice of such a seat. Constantine lib. 2.
cap. de agricult. commends mountainous, hilly, steep places above the rest by
the Sea side, and such as look toward the Montani and maritimi salubriores
acclives, and ad Boream vergentes.
North, such as is the general site of Bohemia, serenat Boreas, the Northwind
clarifies, but near lakes or marshes, in holes, obscure places, or to the
South and West he utterly disproues, those winds are unwholesome, putrefying,
and make men subject to diseases. The best building for health according to him
is Oportet igitur ad sanitatem domus in altioribus aedificare, and ad
speculationem.
in high places, Prope paludes, stagna and locae concava vel ad Austrum, vel ad
occidentem, inclinatae domus sunt morbosae.
and in an excellent prospect. P. Crescentius in his 1. lib. de Agric. cap. 5.
is very copious in this subject, how a house should be wholsomly sited, in a
good coast, good Air, wind etc. Varro de re rust. lib. 1. cap. 12. Hieme crit
vehementer frigida, and aestate non salubris, paludes enim faciunt crassum
aerem, and difficiles morbos.
forbids lakes and rivers, marish grounds, they cause a bad air, gross
diseases hard to be cured: Vendas quot assibus possis, and si nequeas,
relinquas.
if it be so that he cannot help it, better as he advises sell thy house and
land, then lose thy health. He that respects not this in choosing of his seat,
or building his house, is mente captus, mad, Lib. 1. cap. 2. in Orco habitat.
Cato says, and his dwelling next to Hell it self says Columellae, he
commends the middle of an hill upon a descent. Baptista Porta Villae lib. 1.
cap. 22. censures Varro, Cato, Columella, and those ancient Rusticks, approving
many things, disallowing some, and will by all means have the front of an house
stand to the South, which how it may be good in Italy I know not, in our
Northern Countries I am sure it is best. Stephanus a Frenchman praedio rustic.
lib. 1. cap. 4. subscribes to this, approving especially the Descent of an hill
South or South-East, with trees to the North, so that it be well watered, a
condition in all sites, which must not be omitted, as Herbastein inculcates
lib. 1. Julius Caesar, Claudinus a Physician, consult. 24. for a Nobleman in
Poland, melancholy given, advises him to dwell in a house inclining to the
Aurora musis amica. Vitruv.
East, and Aedes Orientem spectaentes v^^ nobilissimus inhabitet and cu-ret vt
sit aer clarus, lucidus, odoriferus. Eligat habitationem optimo aere iucundam.
by all means to provide the Air be clear and sweet, which Montanus consil.
229. counsels the Earl of Monfort his patient, to inhabit a pleasant house,
and in a good Air. If it be so the natural Site may not be altered of our
city, town, village, yet by artificial means it may be helped. In hot
countries therefore they make the streets of their cities very narrow, all over
Spain, Afric, Greece, and many cities of France, in Languedocke especially,
and Provence, those Southern parts: Montpelier the habitation and University
of Physicians is so built, with high houses, narrow streets, to keep out these
scaulding beams, which Tacitus commends lib. 15. Annal. as most agreeing to
their health, Quoniam angustiae itinerum, and altitudo tectorum non perinde
Solis calorem admittit.
because the hight of buildings, and narrowness of streets, keep away the Sun
beams. In our Northern countries we are opposite, we commend straight, broad,
fair streets, as most befitting and agreeing to our Clime. Of that artificial
site of houses I have sufficiently discoursed, if the site of the house may not
be altered, yet there is much in choice of such a chamber or room in opportune
opening and shutting of windows, excluding foreign air and winds, and
walking abroad at convenient times. Consil. 21. lib 2. frigidus acr, nubilosus,
densus vitandus, aque ac venti septentrionales etc.
Crato a German commends East and South site, disallowes cold air and
Northern winds in this case, rayny weather and misty days, free from
putrefaction, bogs and muckhils. If the Air be such, open no windows, come
not abroad. Montanus will have his Patient not to Consil. 24.
stir at all if the wind be big, stand how it will, and consil. 27, and 30.
not to Fenestram non aperiat.

Discutit Sell horrorem crassi spiritus mentens exhilerat, non enim tam corpo^^,
quam and animi mutatione^, inde subeunt pr^ caeli and ventoru^ rat^^^, and sani
aliter affecti sint caelo nubilo aliter sercuo.

De natura ventorum see Pliny lib. 2. cap. 26.27 28. Strabo lib. 7. etc.


open a casement in bad weather, or a boisterous season, and consil. 299. he
especially forbids us to open windows in a South wind. The best site for a
chamber windows in my Judgment are North, East, South, and which is the worst,
West. Levinus Lemnius lib. 3. cap. 3. de occult. not. mir. attributes so much
to Air, and rectifying of wind and windows, that he holds it alone sufficient
to make a man sick or well, to alter body and mind. A clear Air cheares up
the spirits, exhilerates the mind, a thick, black, misty, tempestuous
contracts, overthrows. Great heed is therefore to be taken at what times we
walk, how we place our windows, lights and houses, how we let in or exclude
this ambient Air. The Egyptians to avoid immoderat heat, make their windows
on the top of the house like chimnies, with two tunnels to draw a through Air.
In Spain they commonly make great opposite windows without glass, still
shutting those which are next to the Sun: many excellent means are invented to
correct Nature by Art. If none of these ways help, the best way is to make an
artificial Air, which howsoever, is profitable and good, and that is still to
be made hot and moist, and to be seasoned with sweet perfumes, Altomarus cap.
7. Bruel. aer sit lucidus, been olens, humidus. Montaltus idem cap. 26.
olfactus verum suduium Laurentius c. 8.
and as light as may be, to have roses and violets, and sweet smelling flowers
still in their windows, posies in their hands. Laurentius commends water
lillies, a vessel of warm water still to evaporate in the room, which will
make a more delightsome perfume, if there be added Orange flowers, pills,
citrons, Rosemary, cloves, bays, Rose Water, Rose vinegar, Belzoin, Ladanum,
Styrax, and such like gummes, which make a pleasant and acceptable perfume.
Tract. 15. cap. 9 ex redolentibus herbis and folijs vitis viniferae salicis etc.
Guianerius prescribes the Air to be moistened with water, and sweet herbs
boiled in it, with vine and sallow leaves etc. Pavimentum aceto and aqua
rosacea irrorare.
to besprinkle the ground and posts with rose water, rose-vineger, which
Avicenna much commends. Laurentius cap. 8.
Of colors it is good to behold green, red, yellow and white, and by all means
to have light enough, with windows in the day, wax candles in the night; for
though they love to be dark, yet darkness is a great increaser of it. And
although our ordinary air be good by nature or art, yet it is not amiss as I
have said, still to change it, no better Physic for a melancholy man then
change of air, and variety of places, to travel abroad, and see fashions. Lib.
1. cap. de morb. Afrorum. In Nigritarum regione tanta aeris temperies, vt si
quis alibi morbosus eo advehatur, optimae statim sanitati restituitur, quod
multis accidisse, ipse meis vidi oculis.
Leo Afer speaks of many of his countrymen so cured, without all other Physic:
amongst the Negroes, there is such excellent Air, that if any of them be sick
elsewhere, and brought thither, he is instantly recovered, of which he was often
an eyewitness. Lib. de peregrinat.
Lipsius and Zuinger, and some other, add as much of ordinary travel. No man
says Lipsius, in an Epistle to a friend of his, now ready to make a voyage:
Nec quisquam tam lupis aut frutex quem non titillat emena illa variaque spectio
locorum, vrbium, gentium etc.
can he be such a stock or stone, whom that pleasant speculation of countries,
cities, towns, will not affect? In so much that Mutatio de loco in locum,
Itinera and voiagia longa and indeterminata, and hospitari in diversis
diversorijs.
Rhasis cont. lib, 1. Tract. 2. does not only commend, but inioyne travel, and
such variety of objects to a melancholy man, and to lie in several Innes, to
be drawn into several companies, Montaltus cap. 36. and many Neotericks are
of the same mind. Celsus advises him therefore that will continue his health,
to have varium vitae genus, diversity of callings, occupations, to be busied
about, Modo ruri esse modo in vrbe, saepius in agro venari etc.
sometimes to be in the city, sometimes in the country, now to study or work,
to be intent, then again to hawk or hunt, swim, run, ride, or exercise
himself. A good prospect alone will ease Melancholy, as Gomesius commends lib.
2. cap. 7. de Sale. The citizens In Catalonia in Spain.
of Barcino says he, otherwise penned in, melancholy, and stirring little
abroad, are much delighted with that pleasant prospect their city has into
the Sea, and so are the Neapolitanes, and inhabitants of Genua to see the
ships, boats, and passengers go by, out of their windows, their whole
cities being site on the side of an hill, like Pera by Constantinople, so that
every house almost has a free prospect into the Sea. Every cuntry is full of
such Laudaturque domus longos quae prospuit agros. Some delight to see
Passengers go by in great high Rodewayes etc.
delightsome prospects with us, those of the best note are Glassenbury Tower,
Beuer Castle, Rodway Grange etc. and which I may not omit for vicinities sake;
Oldbury in Warwickeshire, where I have often looked about me with great
delight, and at the foot of which Hill, At Lindley in Lecestershire.
I was borne. In Icon. animorum.
Barcley the Scot commends that of Greenwich Towr for one of the best prospects
in Europe, to see London on the one side, the Thames, ships, and pleasant
meddowes on the other. But I roue, the sum is this, that variety of actions,
objects, air, places, are excellent good in this infirmity and al others, good
for man, good for beast. Aegrotantes oves in alium locum transportan daesunt,
vt alium aerem and aqua^ participantes coalescan^ and corroborentur.
Constantine the Emperor lib. 18. cap. 13. ex Leontio, holds it an only cure
for rotten sheep, and any manner of sick cattle. Lelius a Font Aegubinus
that great Doctor, at the latter end of many of his consultations (as commonly
he does set down what success his Physic had) in melancholy most especially
approues of this above all other remedies, as appears consult. 69. consult.
229. etc. Alia vtilia, sed ex mutatione acris potissimum curatus.
Many other things helped, but change of air was it which wrought the cure,
and did most good.

MEMB. 4. Exercise rectified of Body and Mind.
TO that great Inconvenience, which comes on the one by immoderate and
unseasonable exercise, and too much solitariness and idleness on the other,
must be opposed as an Antidote, a moderate and seasonable use of it, and that
both of Body and Mind, as a most material circumstance, and much conducing to
this cure, and to the general preservation of our health. For which cause
Hierome prescribes Rusticus the Monk, that he be always occupied about some
business or other, Ne te demon otiosu inveniat.
that the devil do not find him idle. The Amasis compelled every man once a
year to tell how he lived.
Egyptians of old, and many flourishing commonwealths since, have enjoined
labor and exercise to all sorts of men, and to give an account of their time,
to prevent those grievous mischiefs that come by Idleness. The Turks inioyne
all men whatsoever, of what degree, to be of some trade or other, the grand
Senior himself is not excused. Nostra memoria Mahometes Othomannus qui Graeciae
imperiu^ subvertit, quum oratorum postulata audiret externarum ge^tiu^,
cochlearia lignea assidue caelabat., aut aliquid in tabula effingebat.
In our memory (says Sabellicus) Mahomet the Turk, he that conquered Greece,
at that very time when he heard Ambassadors of other Princes, did either carue
and cut wooden spoones, or frame something upon a table. Sands fol. 73 of his
voyage to Jerusalem.
And this present Sultan makes notches for bows. The Jews are most severe in
this examination of time, and all well governed places, towns, families, and
every discreet person will be a law unto himself. For this Disease in
particular, Non est cura melior quam in iungere ijs necessaria and oportuna
operum administratio illis magnum incrementum, and que repleant animos eorum,
and incutians ijs diversas cogitationes. Cont. 1. tract. 9.
there can be no better cure, then continual business, as Rasis holds, to
have some employment or other, which may set their mind aworke, and distract
their cogitations. If it be of the Body, Guianerius allows that which is
gentle, Ante exercitium leuet toto corpore fricationes convenient. Ad hunc
morbum exercitationes quum recte and suo tempore fiunt, mirifice conducunt, and
sanitatem tuentur etc.
and that after those ordinary frications, which must be used every morning.
Montaltus cap. 26. and Jason Pratensis use almost the same words, highly
commending Exercise if it be moderate, a wonderful help so used Crato calls
it, and a great means to preserve our health, as adding strength to the whole
Body, increasing natural heat, by means of which the nutriment is well
concocted in the stomach, liver and veins, few or no crudities being left, is
happily distributed over all the Body. Besides it expels excrements by sweat,
and other insensible vapors; in so much, that Lib. 1. de san, tuend.
Galen prefers exercise before all Physic, and rectification of Diet, or any
regiment in what kind soever. Exercitium naturae dormientis stimulatio,
membrorum solatium, morborum medela, fuga vitiorum, medicina languorum,
destruction omnium malorum. Crato.
Fulgentius out of Gordonius, de conser, vit. hom. lib. 1. cap. 7. terms
Exercise, a spur of a dull sleepy nature, the comforter of the members, cure
of infirmities, death of diseases, destruction of all mischiefs and vices. The
fittest time for exercise is a little before dinner, or a little before supper,
Alimentis in ventriculo probe concoctis.
or at any time when the Body is empty. Montanus consil. 31. prescribes it
every morning to his patient, and that as Ieiuno ventre vesica and alvo ab
excrementis purgato fricatis membris, lotis manibus and oculis etc. Lib. de
atra bile.
Calenus ads, after he has done his ordinary needs, rubbed his body, washed
his hands and face, combed his head, and gargarized. What kind of Exercise we
should use, Galen tells us lib. 2. and 3. de sanit. tuend. Quousque corpus
vniversum intumescat, and floridum appareat, sudoremque, etc.
till the Body be ready to sweat, and roused up, ad ruborem, some say, non ad
sudorem, lest it should dry the Body too much; some inioyne frequent and
violent labor and exercises. epid. 6. Hippocrates confounds them, but that is
in some cases to some peculiar men; Omnine sudorem vitent cap. 7. lib. 1.
Valescus de Tar.
they most forbid it, and by no means will have it go farther then a
beginning Sweat, as being Exercitium si excedat, valde periculosum. Salust.
Salvianus de re med. lib. 2. cap. 1.
perilous if it exceed.

Of these labors, exercises and recreations which are likewise included, some
properly belong to the Body, some to the mind, some more easy, some hard, some
with delight, some without, some within doors, some natural, some are
artificial. Amongst bodily exercise Galen commends ludum parvae pilae, to play
at ball, be it with the hand or racket, in tennise courts or otherwise, it
exercises each part of the Body, and does much good, so that they sweat not
too much.

The ordinary sports which are used abroad, are Hauking, hunting, hilares
venandi labores one calls them, because they recreate Body and Mind, Camden in
Staffordshire.
Frideuallius lib. 1. cap 2. optimum omnium exercitationum, multi ab hoc
solummodo morbis liberati. I. Josephus Quercetanus dialec. polit. sec. 2. cap.
II. inter omnia exercitia praesta^tiae laudem meretur.
another the k best exercise that is, by which alone many have been Chyron in
mo^te Pelio praeceptor heroum eos a morbis animi venationibus and puris cibis
tueba tur. Maximus Tyrius.
freed from ferall diseases. Hegesippus lib. 1. cap. 37. relates of Herod, that
he was freed from a grievous melancholy by that means. Xenophon in Cyropaed.
graceth it with a great name, Deorum munus, the gift of the gods, a princely
sport, which they have ever used, says Langius epist. 59. lib. 2. as well for
health as pleasure, and do at this day, it being the sole almost and ordinary
sport of all our Noblemen in Europe and elsewhere all over the World, Bohemus de
mor. gent. lib. 3, cap. 12. styles it therefore studium nobilium, communiter
venantur, quod sibi solis licere contendunt, it is all their study, all their
exercise, ordinary business, all their talk, and indeed some dote too much
after it, they can do nothing else, discourse of naught else. Paulus Iovius
deser. Brit. does in some sort tax our Nobilitas omnis fere vrbes fastidit,
castellis, and liberiore coelo gaudet, generisque dignitatem vita maxim
venatione, and salconum aucupijs tuetur.
English Nobility for it, for living in the Country so much, and too frequent
use of it, as if they had no other means, but hauking and hunting to approve
themselves Gentlemen with.

Hauking comes next to Hunting, the one in the Air, as the other on the Earth,
a sport as much affected as the other, by some preferred. Jos. Scaliger
comment. in Cir. in. fol. 344. Salmutb. 23. de Nov. repert. com. in Pancir.
It was never heard of amongst the Romans, invented some 1200 years since, and
first mentioned by Firmicus lib. 5. cap. 8. The Greek Emperors began it, and
now nothing so frequent, he is no body that in the Season has not a Hawk on
his fist. A great Art, and many books written of it. It is a wonder to hear,
Lonicerus. Geffreus. Jovius. Sr Anthony Shurlies relations.
what is related of the Turks officers in this behalf, how many thousand men
are employed about it, how many hawks of all sorts, how much revenewes
consumed on that only disport, how much time is spent at Adrianople alone every
year to that purpose. The p Persian Kings hawk after butterflies with
sparrowes made to that use and stares, lesser hawks for lesser game, and
bigger for the rest, that they may produce their sport to all seasons. The
Muscouian Emperors reclaim Eagles to fly at Hindes, foxes etc. and such a one
was sent for a present to Hacluit.
Queen Elizabeth: some reclaim ravens, castrils, pies etc. and manne them for
their pleasures.

Fowling is more troublesome, but all out as delightsome to some sorts of men,
be it with guns, lime, nets, gins, strings, pitfals, pipes, calls,
stawking-horses, setting dogs etc. or otherwise, some much delight to take
Larkes with day-nets, small birds with chaffe-nets, plouers, partridge, Herons,
snite etc. Henry the third, King of Castile, as Mariana the Jesuit reports of
him lib. 3. cap. 7. was much affected Coturnicum aucupio.
with catching of quails, and many Gentlemen take singular pleasure at morning
and evening to go abroad with their Quailpipes, and will take any pains to
satisfy their delight in that kind. Tycho Brahe that great Astronomer, in the
Chorography of his Isle of Huena, and castle of Vraniburge, puts down his
nets, and the manner of his catching of small birds, as an ornament, and a
recreation, wherein he himself was sometimes employed.

Fishing is a kind of hunting by water, be it by nets, weeles, boats, Angling,
or otherwise, and yields all out as much pleasure to some men, as dogs, hawks.
Non minorem voluptatem animo capiunt quam qui feras insectantur aut missis
canibus comprehendunt, quum retia trahentes squamosas pecudes in ripas adducunt.
When they draw their Fish upon the bank, says Nic. Henselius Silesiographiae
cap. 3, speaking of that extraordinary delight his countrymen took in Fishing,
and in making of pooles. James Dubravius that Moravian in his book de pisc.
tells, how traveling by the highwayes side in Silesia, he found a Nobleman
More piscatorum cruribus ocreatus.
booted up to the groines, and wading himself, pulling the nets, and laboring
as much as any fisherman of them all: and when some be like objected to him the
baseness of his office, he excused himself, Si principis venatio leporis non
sit inhonesta, nescio quomodo piscatio cyprianorum videri debeat pudenda.
that if other men might hunt hares, why should not he hunt carpes? Many
Gentlemen in like sort with us, will wade up to the armeholes upon such
occasions, and voluntarily undertake that to satisfy their pleasure, which a
poor man for a good stipend would scarce be hired to undergo. Plutarch in his
book de soler animal. speaks against all Fishing, Omnino turpis piscatio nullo
studio digna illiberalis credita est, quod nullum habet ingenium, nullam
perspicaciam.
as a filthy, base, illiberall employment, as having neither wit nor perspicacy
in it not worth the labor. But he that shall but consider the variety of
baits, and pretty devices which our Anglers have invented, peculiar lines,
false flies, several sleights etc. will say, that it deserves as much
commendation, requires as much study, and perspicacy as the rest, and much to
be preferred before many of them. Because hawking and hunting are very
laborious, much riding, and many dangers accompany them, but this is still and
quiet: and if so be the Angler catch no fish, yet he has a wholesome walk to
the brook side, pleasant shade, by the sweet silver streams, he has fresh
air, and sweet smells of fine fresh meddow flowers, he hears the melodious
harmony of birds, he sees the swannes, herons, duckes, waterhens, cootes etc.
and many other foul with their brood, which he thinks better then the noise
of hounds, or blast of horns, and all the sport that they can make.

Many other sports and recreations there be, much in use, as Ringing, bowling,
shooting, which Askam commends in a just volume, and has in former times bin
enjoined by Statute, as a defensive exercise, and an Praecipua hinc Anglis
gloria, crebrae victeriae partae. Iovius.
honor to our land, as well may witness our victories in France. Keelpins,
tronkes, coits, pitching bars, hurling, wrestling, wasters, football,
quintans etc. and many such, which are the common recreations of country
folks. Riding of great horses, running at ring, tilts and tournaments,
horse-races, wilde-goose chases, which are the disports of greater men, and
good in themselves, though many Gentlemen by that means, gallop quite out of
their fortunes.

But the most pleasing of all outward pastimes is that of Cap. 7.
Areteus, deambulatio per amaena loca. Fracastorius.
Visere saepe amnes nitidos, peramaenaque Tempe,
Et placidas summis sectari in montibus auras.
To see the pleasant fields, the Crystal fountains,
And take the gentle air, amongst the mountains.
Ambulationes subdiales quas hortenses aurae ministrant. sub fornice viridi
pampinis vire^tibus concamerata.
To walk amongst Orchards, Gardens, Bowers, and Arbors, arteficiall
Wildernesses, and green thickets, Arches, Groves, Pooles, Fishponds, betwixt
wood and water in a fair Meddowe, by a river side, to disport in some pleasant
plain, or run up a steep hill, or sit in a shady seat, must needs be a
delectable recreation. S. Bernard in his description of his Monastery, is
almost ravished with the pleasures of it. A sick Sedet agrotus cespite viridi
and cum inclementia Canicularis terras excoqui^ and siccat stumina, ipse
securus sedetsub arborea fronde, and ad doloris sui solatium naribus suis
gramineas redolet species, pascit oculos herbarum amaena viriditas, aures suavi
modulamine demulcet pictarum concentus anium etc Deus bone quanta pauperibus
procuras solatia.
man (says he) sits upon a green bank, and when the dog star parcheth the
Plains, and dries up Rivers, he sits in a shady bower, Fronde sub arborea
ferventia temper at astra, and feeds his eyes with variety of objects, herbs
and trees, and to comfort his misery he receaues many delight some smells, and
fills his ears with that sweet and various harmony of Birds; good God, says
he) what a company of pleasures have thou made for man. He that should be
admitted on a sudden to the sight of such a Palace as that of Escuriall in
Spain, or to that which the Moors built at Granada, Fountenblewe in France:
the Turks gardens in his Seraglio, or upon the bancks of that Thracian
Bosphorus, the Popes Beluedere in Rome, those famous gardens of the Lord
Chantelow in France, could not choose though he were never so ill apaid, but be
much recreated for the time; or many of our Noblemens gardens at home. To take
a Boat in a pleasant evening and with music Iucundissima deambulatio iuxta
mare and navigatio prope terram.
to row upon the waters which Plutarch so much applauds, must needs refresh
and give content to a melancholy dull spirit. To see some Pageant, or sight go
by, as at Coronations, Weddings, and such like solemnities, Pet. Gillius Paul.
Hentzeus Itinerar. Italiae. 1617. Iod. Sincerus. Itinerar. Galliae, 1617. Symp.
lib. 1. quest. 4.
to see an Ambassador or a Prince met, received, entertained with Masks,
shows, fireworks, etc. To see two kings fight in single combat, as Canutus and
Edm. Ironside, or a battle fought, or one of Caesar's triumphs in old Rome
reviued, or the like. To be present at an Interviewe, Betwixt Ardes and Guines.
1519.
as that famous of Henry the 8th, and Francis the first so much renowned all
over Europe, to the sight of which many times they will come hundreds of miles,
give any money for a place, and remember many years after with singular
delight. Bodine when he was Ambassador in England, said he saw the Noblemen
go with their robes to the Parliament house, summa cum iucunditate vidimus,
he was much affected with the sight of it. Pomponius Columna, says Iouius in
his life, saw 13. Frenchmen, and so many Italians once fight for a whole army,
Quod iucundissimum spectaculum in vita dicit sua, the pleasantest sight that
ever he saw in his life. Paterculus vol. post.
When Julius Caesar warred about the bancks of Rhine, there came a Barbarian
Prince to see him, and the Roman army, and when he had beheld Caesar a good
while, Quos antea audivi inquit hodie vidi deos.
I see the Gods now, said he, which before I heard of, nec faeliciorem vllum
vitae meae aut optaui, aut sensi diem. It was the happiest day that ever he had
in his life: such a sight alone were able of it self to drive away melancholy,
if not for ever, yet it must needs expel it for a time.

The Country has it is recreations, the City it is several Gymnicks and
exercises, Maygames, Feasts, Wakes, and merry meetings to solace themselves;
the very being in the country, that life itself is a sufficient recreation to
some men to enjoy the pleasures of that life, as those old Patriarchs did.
Dioclesian the Emperor was so much affected with it, that he gave over his
Scepter and turned gardner, Constantine writ 13 books of it. Lysander when
Ambassadors came to see him, bragged of nothing more then of his Orchard, hi
sunt ordines mei. What shall I say of Cincinnatus, Cato, Tully, and many such,
how have they been pleased with it, to prune to plant, Virg. 1. Georg.
Nunc captare feras laqueo, nunc fallere visco,
Atque etiam magnos manibus circundare saltus,
Insidias avibus moliri, incendere vepres.
Sometimes with traps deceive, with line and string
To catch wild Birds and Beasts, encompassing
The grove with dogs, and out of bushes firing.
Iocundus in his preface to Cato, Varro, Columella, etc. put out by him,
confesses of himself that he was mightily delighted with these husbandry
studies, and took extraordinary pleasure in them: if the Theorick or
speculation can so much affect, what shall the place and exercise it self, the
practicke part do? The same confessions I find in Herbastein, Portae,
Camerarius, and many others that have written of that subject. If my testimony
were ought worth, I could say as much of my self. I am Vere Saturninus. No man
ever took more delight in Springs, Woods, Groves, Gardens, Walks, Fishponds,
Rivers, etc. But Tantalus a labris sitiens fugientia captat flamina. And so do
I, Velle licet, potiri non licet.

Every City almost has it is peculiar Walks, Groves, Theaters, Pageants,
Games, and several recreations, every country some peculiar Gymnicks to
exhilerate their minds, and exercise their bodies. The Boterus lib. 3. polit.
cap. 1.
Greeks had their Olympian, Pythian, Istmian games: Athens hers, Corinth hers.
Some for Honors, Garlands, Crowns, for See Athenaeus dipnoso.
buty, dancing, running, leaping, like our silver games. The Ludi votivi,
sacri, ludicri Megalenses, Cereales, Florales Martiales, etc. Rosinus 5.12.
Romans had their Feasts, Plays, Naumachies places for sea fights. See Lipsius
Amphitheatrum Rosmus lib. 5.
Theaters, Amphitheaters able to contain 70000 men, wherein they had several
delightsome shows to exhilerate the people, 1500. Men at once, Tigers, Lions,
Elephantss, horses, Dogs, Bears, etc.
Gladiators, Cumbats of men with themselves, with wild beasts, and wild beasts
amongst themselves; dancers on ropes, Comedies, Tragedies publicly exhibited
at the Emperors and Cities charge, and that with incredible cost and
magnificence. In the low Countries, as Lib. vlt. and l.1. ad finem.
consuetudine non minus laudabili quam veteri co^tubernia Rhetorum Rhythmorum in
vrbibus and municipijs. Certisque diebus exercebant se sagittarij seblopetarij,
gladiatores etc. Alia ingenij animique exercitia quorum praecipuum studium
principem populum tragaedijs, comaedijs fabulis scenicis alijsque id genus
ludis recreare.
Meteran relates, before these wars they had many solemn Feasts, Plays,
Challenges, Colleges of Rimers, Rhetoricians, Poets, as in Italy they have
solemn Declamations, of certain select young Gentlemen in Florence to exercise
themselves. All seasons almost, and al places have their several pastimes,
some in Somer, some in Winter, some abroad, some within, some of the body, some
of the mind, and several men have their several recreations, exercises.
Suetonius.
Domitian the Emperor was much delighted with catching of flies; Lampridius.
Alexander Severus was much pleased to play with whelps and young Pigges.
Spartian.
Adrian was so much enamored on dogs and horses, that he bestowed monuments
and tombs on them, and buried them in graves. In foul wether, or when they
can use no other convenient sports, by reason of the time, as we use
Cock-fighting to avoid idleness. Delectatus lusu catulorum, Porcellorum, vt
perdices inter se pugnarent, aut vt aves paruulae sursum and deorsum
volitarent, his maxim delectatus vt solitudines publicas sublevaret.
Severus used Partridges and Quails, and to keep Birds in Cages, with which
he was much pleased, when at any time he had leisure from public cares, and
business. He had, says Lampridius tame Phesants, Ducks, Partridges, Peacocks,
and some 20000 Ringdoues and Pigeons. Busbequins the Emperors Orator, when he
lay in Constantinople, and could not stir much abroad, kept, to recreat his
mind, and busy himself to see them fed, almost all manner of strange Birds
and Beasts; This was something though not to exercise his body, yet to busy
his mind. Conradus Gesner at Zuricke in Suitzerland kept so likewise for his
pleasure a great company of wild beasts, and as he says himself, took great
delight to see the^ eat their meat. Turkey Gentlewomen that are perpetual
prisoners, still mewed up according to the custom of the place, have little
else besides their household business, or to play with their children to drive
away time, but to dally with their Cats, which they have in delitijs, as many
of our Ladies and Gentlewomen use Monkies, and little Dogs. The ordinary
recreations which we have in Winter, and in most solitary times busy our minds
with, are Cards, Tables, and Dice, Shouelboard, Chesse-play, the Philosophers
game, small truncks, music, masks, singing, dancing, vlegames, catches,
purposes, Brumales laete vt possint protrudere noctes. like that of Psyche in
Apuleius.
merry tales, news, etc. Many too nicely take exceptions at Cards, They account
them unlawful because sortiligious
Tables, and Dice, and such lusorious lots, whom Gataker well confutes. Which
though they be honest recreations in themselves, yet may justly be otherwise
excepted at, as they are often abused, and forbidden as things most pernicious,
insanam rem and damnosam, as Institut c 44. In his ludis plerumque non ars aut
peritia viget sed fraus, fallacia, dolus, astutia, casus, fortuna,
temeritaslocum habent, non ratio, consilium, sapientia etc.
Lemnius calls it, For most part in these kind of disports, it is not art or
skill, but subtilty, cunnycatching, knavery, chance and fortune carries all
away. Not to pass away time for honest disport, but for filthy lucre and
covetousness of money. Abusus tam frequens body in Europa vt plerique crebro
harum vsu patrimonium profundant exhaustisque facultatibus ad inopiam
redigantur.
A thing so common all over Europe at this day, and so generally abused, that
many men are utterly undone by it, their means spent, patrimonies consumed,
they and their posterity beggered, besides swearing, wrangling, drinking, loss
of time, and such inconveniences which are ordinary concomitants. Vbi semel
prurigo ista animu^ occupat aegre discuti potest sollicitantibus vndique
eiusdem farinae hominibus damnosas illas voluptates repetunt, quod and
scortatoribus insitum etc.
For when once they have got a haunt of such companies, and a habit of gaming,
they can hardly be drawn from it, but as an itch it will tickle them, and as
it is with whoremasters once entered, they can hardly lean off. Vexat mentes
insana cupido, they are madd upon their sport. So good things may be abused,
and that which was first invented to Instituitur ista exercitatio non lucri fed
valetudinis and oblectamenti ratione and quo animus defatigatus respiret
nouasque vires ad subeundos labores denuo concipiat.
refresh men's weary spirits, when they come from other labors and studies to
exhilerate the mind, to entertain time and company, tedious otherwise in
those long solitary winter nights, and keep them from wourse matters, an
honest exercise is contrarily perverted.

Chess-play is a good exercise of the mind, for some kind of men, and fit for
such melancholy, as Rhasis holds, as are Idle, and have extrauagant impertinent
thoughts, or are troubled with cares, nothing better to distract their mind,
and alter their meditations: but if it proceed from overmuch study, in such
case it may do more harm then good, it is a game too troublesome for some
men's brains, too full of anxiety, all out as bad as study, and besides it is a
testy, choleric game, and very offensive to him that loses the Mate. D.
Haward vita eius.
William the Conqueror in his younger years playing at Chesse with the Prince
of France. ( Dauphine was not annexed to the Crown of France in those days)
loosing a Mate knocked the Chess-board about his pate, which was a cause
afterward of much enmity betwixt them. For some such reason it is belike, that
Patritius in his 3. book Tit. 12. de reg. institut. forbids his Prince to play
at Chesse, hauking and hunting, riding etc. he will allow of, and this to other
men, but by no means to him. In Muscouy where they live in Stoues and
hot-houses all winter long, and come seldom or little abroad, it is again very
necessary, and therefore in those parts, says ^ Herbastein, much used. At
Pessa in Afric, where the like inconvenience of keeping in doors is through
heat, it is very laudable, and as Inter Cives Fessanos latrunculorum ludus
vsitatissimus, l. 3. de Africa.
Leo Afer relates, as much frequented. A sport fit for idle Gentlemen, and
Soldiers in Garrison, and Courtiers that have naught but love matters to busy
themselves about, but not altogether so convenient for such as are students.
The like I may say of Cl. Bruxers Philosophy game, D Fulks metromachia,
Ouranomachia, and the rest of those curious games.

Dancing, Singing, Masking, Mumming, Stage Plays, howsoever they be heavily
censured by some severe Catoes, yet if opportunely and soberly used, may justly
be approved. Melius est fodere quam saltare, says Austin, but what is that if
they delight in it? Tully.
Nemo saltat sobrius. But in what kind of dance? I know these sports have many
oppugners, whole volumes writ against them, and some again because they are
now cold and wayward, past themselves, cauell at all such youthful sports in
others, as he did in the Comedy, they think them Illico nasci senes, etc. Some
out of preposterous zeal object many times triuiall arguments, and because of
some abuse will quite take away the good use, as if they should forbid wine
because it makes men drunk, but in my judgment they are too stern; there is
a time for all things, for my part I subscribe to the Kings Declaration, and
was ever of that mind, those May-games, Wakes, and Whitson ales, etc. If they
be not at unseasonable times, may justly be permitted. In Franconia a Province
of Germany, says De mor. gent.
Aubanus Bohemus, the old folks after Evening prayer went to the Alehouse, and
the younger sort to dance, and to say with Policrat. lib. 1. cap. 8.
Salsburiensis, Satins fuerat sic otiari, quam turpius occupari; better to do
so, then wourse, as without question otherwise (such is the corruption of man's
nature) many of them will do. And for that cause, Plays, Maskes, Iesters,
Gladiators, Tumblers, Iuglers, etc. and all that crewe is admitted and winked
at. Idem Saris. buriensis.
Tota ^ocularium se e^a procedit, and ide^ spectacula admissa sunt, and
infinita tyrocinia vanitatum, vt his occupentur qui pernicio^iu^ ^tiari solent:
that they might be busied about such toys, that would otherwise more
pernitiously be idle. Evil is not to be done, I confess, that good may come
of it, but this is evil per accidens, and in a qualified sense, to avoid a
greater inconvenience may justly be tolerated. S^ Thomas Moore in his Vtopian
commonwealth, as he will have no man idle, so will he have no man labor over
hard, Nemo desidit otiosus ita nemo asinino more ad seram noctem laborat nam ca
plusquam servilis aerima quae tamen vbique plerumque opificum vita est exceptis
Vtopiensibus qui diem in 24. horas dividunt sex duntaxat operi deputant
reliquum a somno and cibo cuiusque arbitrio permittitur.
to be toyled out like an horse, it is more then slavish infelicity, and the
life of most of our hired servants, and tradesmen elsewhere (excepting his
Vtopians) but half the day allotted for work, and half for honest
recreations, or what soever employment they shall think fit themselves. If one
half day in a week were allotted to our ordinary Servants, for their merry
meetings by their hard masters, or in a year some feasts, like those Roman
Saturnals, I think they would labor harder all the rest of the year, and
both parties would better be pleased; but this needs not you will say, for
some of them do naught but loiter all the week long.

This which I aim at, is for such as are Fracti animis, troubled in mind, to
ease them, overtoyled on the one part to refresh; over idle on the other, to
keep themselves busied. And to this purpose as any labor or employment will
serve to the one, any honest recreation will conduce to the other; of which, as
there be diverse sorts and peculiar to several callings, ages, sexes,
conditions, so there be proper for several seasons and those of several
natures, to fit that variety of humors which is amongst men, that if one will
not, another may take place, some in Somer, some in Winter, some gentle, some
more violent; some for the mind alone, some for body and mind; some without,
some within doors; new, old, etc. as the season serves, and as men are
inclined. It is reported of Philip. Bonus that good Duke of Burgundy, by Lodov.
Vives in epist. and Pont. Heuter in his history, that the said Duke at the
marriage of Eleonora sister to the king of Portugal at Bruges in Flaunders,
which was solemnised in the deep of Winter; when as by reason of unseasonable
weather he could neither hawk nor hunt, and was now tired with cards, dice,
etc. and such other domestical sports, or to see Ladies dance with some of his
Courtiers, he would in the Evening walk disguised all about the Town. It so
fortuned as he was walking late one night he found a country fellow dead
drunk, snorting on a Bulk, he caused his followers to bring him to his
palace, and there stripping him of his old clothes, and tyring him after the
Court fashion, when he waken^d, he and they were all ready to attend upon his
Excellency, and persuaded him he was some great Duke. The poor fellow was
served in state all day long, after supper he saw them dance, heard music,
and all the rest of those Court-like pleasures, but late at night when he was
well tipled and again fast asleep, they put on his old robes, and so conuayed
him to the place where they first found him. And the fellow had not made them
so good sport the day before, as he did now when he returned to himself, all
the jest was to see how he Quid interest, says Lodov. Vives, betwivt this one
days dream and all our life.
looked upon it. In conclusion, after some little admiration the fellow told
his friends he had seen a vision, and constantly believed it, and would not
otherwise be persuaded, and so the jest ended. H. Stephan. praefat. Herado.i
Antiochus Epiphanes would often disguise himself, and steal from his Court,
and go into Merchants, Goldsmiths, and other tradesmens shoppes, and sit and
talk with them, and sometimes ride and walk alone, and fall aboard with any
Tinker, Clown, Seruingman, Carrier, or whomsoever he met first. Sometimes he
would ex insperato, give a poor fellow money to see how he would look, or on
set purpose loose his purse as he went, to watch who found it, and withal how
he would be affected, and with such objects he was much delighted. Many such
tricks are ordinarily put in practice by great men, to exhilerate themselves
and others, all which are harmless jests, and have their good uses.

But amongst all those Exercises, or recreations of the mind within doors,
there is none so general, so aptly to be applied to all sorts of men, so fit
and proper to expel Idleness and Melancholy, as that of Study. To read,
walk and see Mappes, Pictures, Statues, old Coins of several sorts in a
fair Gallery, arteficiall works, perspectiue glasses, old relics, Roman
antiquities, variety of colors. A good picture is muta poesis, and though, as
3. De Anima.
Vives says, artificialia delectant, sed mox fastidimus, artificial toys
please but for a time yet who is he that will not be moved to see those well
furnished Galleries of those Roman Cardinals, so well stored with all modern
Pictures, old statues and antiquities? Or in some Princes or great Noblemens
houses, to see such variety of tyres, faces, so many, so rare, and such
exquisite pieces of me^, birds, beasts, etc. to see those excellent landskips,
and Dutch-works, curious cuts of Sadlier of Prage, Albertus Durer, Vrintes,
etc. such pleasant pieces of perspectiue, Indian Pictures made of feathers,
China works; frames, motions, exotic toys, etc. Who is he that is now wholly
overcome with idleness, or otherwise inuolued in a Labyrinth of worldly cares,
troubles, and discontents, that will not be much lightened in his mind by
reading of some enticing story, Poem, or some pleasant bewitching discourse,
which will draw his attentio^ along with it. To some kind of men it is an
extraordinary delight to study, to look upon a Geographicall map, and to
behold, as it were, all the remote Provinces, Towns, Cities of the world, and
never to go forth of the limits of his study, to measure by a Scale and
Compass, their extent, distance, examine their site, etc. What greater
pleasure ca^ there be then to view those elaborate Maps of Ortelius, Atlas Geog.
Mercator, Hondius, etc. To peruse those books of Cities, put out by Braunus,
and Hogenbergius. To read those exquisite descriptions of Maginus, Munster,
Merula, Boterus, Leander Albertus, Camden, Leo Afer, Adricomius, etc. Those
famous expeditions of Christoph. Columbus, Americus Vesputius, Marcus Polus the
Venetian, Lod. Vertomannus, Alosius Cadamustus, etc. Those acurat diaries of
Portingalls, Hollanders, of Bartison, Oliver a Nort, etc Hacluits voiages, P.
Martyr, Benzo, Lerius, Linchcoftens relations, Hodaeporicums of Iod: a Meggen
Brocard the Monk, Bredenbachius, Io. Dublinius, Sands, etc. to Jerusalem,
Egypt, and other remote places of the world; to read Bellonius observations,
P. Gillius his Survaies, Those parts of America set out and curiously cut in
Pictures by Fratres a Bry. To see a well cut herball, all Herbs, Trees,
Flowers, Plants expressed in their proper colors to the life, as that of
Mathiolus upon Dioscorides, Delacampius, Leobel, Bauhinus, and that last
voluminous and mighty herball of Noremberge, wherein almost every Plant is to
his own bigness. To see all Birds, Beasts, and Fishes of the Sea, Spiders,
Gnats, Serpents, Flies, etc. and all creatures set out by the same art, and
truly expressed in lively colors with a true description of their natures,
virtues, qualities etc. as has been accuratly performed by Aelian, Gesner,
Ulysses Aldrouandus, Bellonius, Hippolitus Salvianus, etc. What more pleasing
studies can there be then the Mathematickes, Theorick or Practick part. Talis
est Mathematum pulchritudo, says Lib. de cupid. divitiarum.
Plutarch, vt his indignum sit divitiarum phaleras istas and bullas and
puellaria spectacula comparari, such is the excellency of those studies, that
al those ornaments and bubbles of wealth are not worthy to be compared to them,
creed mihi ( Leon. Diggs prefat. ad perpet. prognost.
says one) extingui dulce erit Mathematicarum artium studio, I could even live
and dye with those studies, Plus capio voluptatis, etc.
and take more pleasure, true content of mind in them, then thou do in all
thy wealth, how rich soever thou art. The like pleasure there is in all other
studies, to such as are truly addicted to them, as well may witness those
many laborious hours, days, and nights, spent in the voluminous Treatises
written by them; the like content. Poetices lib.
Julius Scaliger was so much affected with Poetry, that he brake out into a
patheticall protestation, that he had rather be the author of such twelve
verses in Lucan, then Emperor of Germany. Seneca prefers Zeno and Chrysippus
two doting Stoics (he was so much enamored on their works) before any Prince
or general of an army, such content there is in study. Isaac Wake Musae
re^nantes.
K. James 1605, when he came to visit our University of Oxford, and amongst
other aedifices, now came to see that famous Library renewed by Sr Thomas
Bodley, in imitation of Alexander, at his departure brake out into that noble
speech, If I were not a King I would be a University man. Si vnquam mihi in
fatis sit vt captivus ducar si mihi daretur optio hoc cuperem carcere concludi
his catenis illigari cum hisce captivis concatenatis aetatem agere.
And if it were so that I must be a prisoner, if I might have my wish, I would
desire to have no other prison then that Library, and to be chained together
with my fellow writers. So sweet is the delight of study, the more learning
they have (as he that has a dropsy, the more he drinks the thirstier he is)
the more they covet to learn, and the last day is prioris discipulus, harsh at
first, radices amarae, but fractus dulces, according to that of Isocrates, the
more they are inamored with the Muses. Hensius the keeper of the Library at
Leiden in Holland, was mewed up in it all the year long, and that which to
their thinking should have bred a lothing, caused in him a greater liking.
Epist. Primiero plerumque in Bibliothecam me confero in qua simulac pedem posui
foribus pessulum obdo, ambitionem autem amorem libidinem etc. excludo quorum
parens estignavia, imperitiae nutrix and in ipso aeternitatis gremio inter tot
illustres animas sede^ mihi sumo, tam ingenti quidem animo, vt subinde magnatum
me miseriaet, qui faelicitatem hanc ignorant.
I no sooner, says he, come into the Library, but I bolt the door to me,
excluding lust, ambition, avarice, and all such vices, whose nurse is idleness
the mother of ignorance, and melancholy her self, and in the very lap of
aeternity, amongst so many divine souls I take my seat, with so lofty a spirit
and sweet content, that I pity all our great ones, and richmen that know not
this happiness. Whosoever he is therefore that is ouerrunne with
solitariness, or carried away with pleasing melancholy and vain conceits, and
for want of employment knows not how to spend his time, or crucified with
worldly care, I can prescribe him no better a remedy then this of study, to
compose himself to the learning of some art or science. Provided always that
his malady proceed not from overmuch study, for in such cases he adds fuel
to the fire, and nothing can be more pernicious; let him take heed he do not
outstretch his wits, and make a Skeleton of himself; or such Inamoratoes as
read nothing but play-bookes, Idle Poems, Jests, Amadis de Gaul, the Knight of
the Sun, the seven Champians, Palmerin de Oliua, Huon of Bordeaux, etc. Such
many times prove in the end as mad as Don Quixot. Study is only prescribed
those that are otherwise idle, troubled in mind, and carried headlong with
vain thoughts and Imaginations, to distract their cogitations (although
variety of study, or some serious subject would do the former no harm) and
divert their continual meditations another way. Nothing in this case better
then study, semper aliquid memoriter ediscant, says Piso, let them learn
something without book, or read some book. Read the Scripture which Hiperius
lib. 1. de quotid. script. lev. fol. 77. holds auailable of it self, Animus
elevatur inde a curis multa quiet and tranquilitate fruens.
the mind is erected thereby from all worldly cares, and has much quiet and
tranquillity. Paul bids pray continually, quod cibus corpori lectio animae
facit, says Seneca, as meat is to the Body, such is reading to the Soul.
Otium sine literis mors est, et vivi hominis sepultura. Seneca.
To be at leisure with out books is a another Hell, and to be buried alive.
Cap. 96. lib. 17 de rer. var.
Cardan calls a Library the physic of the soul, Fortem reddunt animum and
constantem and pium colloquium non permittit animum absurda cogitatione
torqueri.
Divine authors fortify the mind, make men bold and constant, and (as
Hyperius adds) godly conference will not permit the mind to be tortured
with absurd cogitations. Rhasis inioynes continual conference to such
melancholy men, and would have some body still talk seriously, or dispute with
them, and sometimes Altercationibus vtantur quae non permittunt animum submergi
profundis cogitationibus de quibus otiose cogitat and tristatur in ijs.
to cauell and wrangle (so that it break not out to a violent perturbation)
for such alteration is like stirring of a dead fire to make it burn a fresh,
it whets a dull spirit, and will not suffer the mind to be drowned in such
profound cogitations which melancholy men are commonly troubled with. Bodin
prefat. ad meth. hist
Ferdinand and Alphonsus both Kings of Arragon and Sicily, were cured by
reading of history, one of Curtius, the other of Liuy, when no other Physic
would take place. Operum subcis cap. 15.
Camerarius relates as much of Laurence Medices. Heathen Philosophers are so
full of divine precepts in this kind, that as some think they alone are able
to settle a distressed mind. Hor.
Sunt verba and voces quibus hunc lenire dolorem, etc. Epictetus, Plutarch, and
Seneca, qualis ille quae tela, says Lipsius, adversus omnes animi casus
administrat, and ipsam mortem, quomodo vitia cripit, infert virtutes? When I
read Seneca, Fatendum est cacumine Olimpi constitutus supra res humanas mihi
videor, quu^ illum lego supra ventos and procellas and omnes res humanas.
me thinks I am above all humane fortunes, on the top of a hill above
mortality. If this comfort may be got by Philosophy, what shall be had from
Divinity? What shall Austin, Cyprian, Gregory, Bernards divine meditations
afford us? Nay, what shall the Scripture it self? which is like an
Appothecaries shop, wherein are remedies for all infirmities of body and mind,
purgatiues, alteratiues, coroboratiues, lenitiues, etc. Every disease of the
Soul, says In Ps. 36. omnis morbus animi in Scripturis habet medicina^ tantum
opus est vt qui sit aeger non recuset potionem, quam Deus temperavit.
Austin, has a peculiar medicine in the Scripture, this only is required, that
the sick man take but the potio^ which God has already tempered. In moral.
speculum quo nos intueri possimus.
Gregory calls it a Glass wherein we may Hom. 28. vt incantatione virus
fugatur ita lectione malum.
see all our infirmities, ignitum colloquium, Psalm. 118.140. Origin a Charm.
And therefore Hierome prescribes Rustious the Monk, Iterum atque iterum moneo,
ut animae sacrae scrip. lectionem occupes. Masticat diuinum pabulum meditatio.
continually to read the Scripture, and to meditate on that which he has read:
for as mastication is to meat, so is meditation on that which we read. I would
for these causes with him that is melancholy, to use both humane and divine
authors, voluntary to impose some task upon himself, to divert his melancholy
thoughts. To study the art of memory, Cosmus Rosselius, Pet. Rauennas,
Scenkelius detectus, etc. that will ask a great deal of attention, or let him
demonstrate a proposition in Euclide in his 5. last books, extract a square
root, or study Algebra, Napiers Logarithmes, or calculate spaericall Triangles,
cast a Nativity, or go read Suisset the Calculators works, Scaliger de
Emendatione temperum, till he understand it, read Scotus or Suarez.
Metaphysics, or school Divinity, Occam, Entisberus, Durand, etc. If those
other do not affect him: he may apply his mind to Heraldry, Antiquity, or make
a Comment upon Aelia Lelia Crispis, as many Idle fellows have assaid, or rather
then do nothing, vary a Tot tibi sunt dotes virgo quot sidera coelo.
Verse a thousand ways, as Putean has done. If such voluntary tasks, pleasure
and delight, or crabbednesse of such studies will not yet divert their idle
thoughts, and alienate their imaginations, they must be compelled, says
Christopherus a Vega, cogi debent, lib. 3. cap. 14. Upon some mulct, if they
perform it not, ex officio incumbat, or loss of credit or disgrace, such as
are our public University exercises; for as he that plays for nothing will
not heed his game no more will voluntary employment so thoroughly affect a
student, except he be very intent of himself, and take an extraordinary delight
in the study about which he is conversant; it must be of that nature his
business, which volens nolens he must necessarily undergo, and without great
losse^, shame or hinderance he may not omit,

Now for women, instead of studies they have curious needle-workes, cut-workes,
bone-lace, etc. to busy themselves about, household offices, etc. or some
gossippings: old folks have their Beads. An excellent invention to keep them
from Idleness, that are by nature melancholy and past all affairs, to say so
many Paternosters, Avemaries, Creedes, if it were not profane and
superstitious. In a word, Body and mind must be both exercised, not one but
both, and that in mediocrity; otherwise it will cause a great inconvenience. If
the Body be ouertired, it tyres the mind. The mind oppresses the Body; as
with Students oftentimes it falls out, who as Tom 1. de sanit tuenda qui
rationem corporis non habent sed cogunt mortalem immortali ter restrem
aetheriae aequale praestare idustriam caeterum vt Camelo vsu venit quod eibos
praedixerat cum eidem servirent domino and part oneris levare illum Camelus
recusasset paulo post and ipsius cutem and totum onus cogeretur gestare (quod
mortuo boue impletum) Itaanimo quoque contingit dum defatigato corpori, etc.
Plutarch observes, have no care of the Body, but compel that which is
mortal, to do as much as that which is immortal, that which is earthly, as
that which is atheriall, but as the Ox tired, told the Camel, (both serving
one master) that refused to carry some part of his burden, before it were long
he should be compelled to carry all his pack, and his skin to boot (which by
and by the Ox being dead fell out) the Body may say to the Soul, that will
give him no respuit or remission, a little after an ague, Vertigo, Consumption,
seaseth on them both, all his study is omitted; and they must be compelled to
be sick together: he that tenders his own good estate, and health, must let
them draw with equal yoke both alike, Vt pulchra^ illam and amabile^
sanitatem praestemus.
that so they may happily enjoy their wished health.

MEMB. 5. Waking and terrible dreams rectified.
AS Waking that hurts; by all means must be avoided, so Sleep which so much
helps, by all means, Interdicendae Vigiliae, somni paulo longiores
conciliandi. Altomarus cap. 7. somnus supra modum prodest, quouismodo
conciliandus. Piso.
must be procured, by nature or art; inward or outward means, and to be
protracted longer then ordinary, if it may be, as being an especial help. It
moistens and fattens the Body, concocts, and helps digestion, as we see in
Dormice, and those Alpine Mice that sleep all Winter, which Gesner speaks of
when they are so found sleeping under the snow in the dead of Winter, as fat
as butter. It expells cares, pacifies the mind, refreshes the weary limbs
after long work, Ovid.
Somne quies rerum, placidissime somne deorum
Pax animi, quem cura fugit, qui corpora duris
Fessa ministerijs mulces reperasque labori.
The fittest time is Crato cons 21. lib. 2 duabus aut tribus horis post coenam
quum iam cibus ad fundum ventriculi resederit primum super latere dextro
quiescendum, quod in tali decubitu iecur sub ventriculo quiescat, non gravans
sed cibum calfaciens, perinde ac ignis lebetem qui illi admouetur, post primum
somnu^ quiescendum latere sinistro, etc
two or three hours after supper, when as the meat is now settled at the
bottom of the stomach, and it is good to lie on the right side first, because
that at that site the liver does rest under the stomach, not molesting any way
but heating him as a fire does a kettle, that is put to it. After the first
sleep it is not amiss to lie on the left side, that the meat may the better
descend: and sometimes again on the belly, but never on the back. Seven or
eight hours is a competent time for a melancholy man to sleep, as Crato
thinks; but as many do, to ly in bed and not sleep, a day or half a day
together, and give way to pleasing conceits and vain imaginations, is many
ways pernicious. To procure this sweet moistning sleep, is first to take away
the occasions (if it be possible) that hinder it, and then to take such inward
or outward remedies, which may cause it. Heat and dryness must first be
removed, Saepius accidit melancholicis vt nimium excicca to cerebro vigilijs
attenuentur. Ficinus l 1 c. 24
an hot and dry brain never sleeps well, grief, fears, cares, expectations,
anxieties, great businesses, and all violent perturbations of the mind must in
some sort be qualified, before we can hope for any good repose. He that
sleeps in the day time, Vt sis nocte ievis sit tibi caena brevis.
or is in suspense, fear, or any way troubled in mind, or goes to bed upon a
full stomach, may never hope for quiet rest in the night; nec enim meritoria
somnum admittunt, as the Iuven. Sat. 3.
Poet says, Ins and such like troublesome places are not for sleep. He that
will intend to take his rest, must go to bed animo securo, quieto and libero,
with a Sepositis curis omnibus quantum fieri potest vna cum vestibus etc.
Kirkst.
secure and quiet mind: and if that will not serve, or may not be obtained, to
seek then such means as are requisite. To lie in clean linen and sweet,
before he goes to bed to hear Ad horam somni aures suavibus cantibus and sonis
delinire.
sweet Music, which Ficinus commends lib. 1. cap. 24. or as Iobertus med.
pract. lib, 3. cap. 10. Lectio iucunda, aut sermo ad quem attentior animus
convertitur, aut aqua ab alto in subiectum peluim delabetur etc. Ovid.
to read some pleasant Author till he be asleep, or have a basin of water
still dropping by his bed side, or to lie near that pleasant murmr, lene
sonantis aquae, Some floodgates, arches, falls of water, like London Bridge, or
some continuate noyce, which may benumme the common sense. Piso commends
frications, Andrew Board a good draught of strong drink before one goes to be
bed, I say a nutmeg and ale, or a good draught of muscadine, with a toste and
nutmeg, or a posset of the same, which many use in a morning, but me thinks for
such as have dry brains, are much more proper at night: some prescribe a Aceti
sorbitio.
sup of vinegar as they go to bed, a spoonful says Aetius Tetrabib. lib. 2.
ser. 2. cap. 10. and lib. 6. cap. 10. Aegineta lib. 3. cap. 14. Piso, a little
after meat, Attenuat melancholiam. and ad conciliandum somnum iuvat.
because it rarifies. melancholy, and procures an appetite to sleep. Donat. ab
Altomar. cap. 7. and Mercurialis approve of it, if the malady proceed from the
Quod lieni acetum conveniaet.
spleen. Salust. Salvian. lib. 2. cap. 1. de re med. Hercules de Saxonia in Pan.
Aelianus Montaltus de morb. capitis. cap. 28. de Melan. are altogether against
it. Cont. 1. tra. 9. meditandum de ^ceto.
Rhasis seems to deliberate of it, though Simeon commend it (in sauce
peradventure) he makes a question of it: as for bath, fomentations, oils,
potions, simples or compounds inwardly taken to this purpose, I shall speak of
elsewhere. If in the midst of the night they lie awake, which is usual, to
toss and tumble, Sect. 5. Memb. 1. Subsect. 6.
and cannot sleep, Lib. de san^tuenda.
Ranzovius would have them, if it be in warm weather, to rise and walk three
or four turns, till they be cold, about the chamber, and then go to bed
again.

Against fearful and troublesome dreams, Incubus and such inconveniences,
wherewith Melancholy men are molested, the best remedy is to eat a light
supper, and of such meats as are easy of digestion, no hare, venison, beese
etc. not to lie on his back, not to meditate or think in the day time of any
terrible objects, or especially talk of them before he goes to bed. For as he
said in Lucian after such conference, Hecates somniare mihi videor, I can think
of nothing but hobgoblins: and as Tully notes, In Some. Scip fit enim fere vt
cogitationes nostrae and sermones pariant aliquid in somno quale de Homero
scribit Ennius, dequo videlicet saepissime vigilans solebat cogitare and loqui.
for the most part our speeches in the daytime, cause our phantasy to work
upon the like in our sleep, as Ennius writes of Homer. And for that cause when
Aristeae hist.
Ptolomy King of Egypt had posed the 70 Interpreters in order, he asked the
19th man, what would make one sleep quietly in the night, he told him, Optimum
de coelestibus and honestis meditari, and ea facere.
the best way was to have divine and celestial meditations, and to use honest
actions in the day time. Lib. 3. de causis corr. art tam mira monstra
quaestionum saepe nascuntur inter eos, vt mirer eos interdum in somnijs non
terreri, aut de illis in tenebris audere verba facere, adeo res sunt monstrosae.
Lod. Vives wonders how Schoolmen could sleep quietly, and were not terrified
in the night, or walk in the dark they had such monstrous questions, and
thought of such terrible matters all day long. They had need amongh the rest to
sacrifice to God Morpheus, whom Icon. lib. 1.
Philostratus paints in a white and black coat, with a horn and Iuery box full
of dreams, of the same colors, to signify good and bad. If you will know how
to interpret them, read Artemidorus and Cardan, but how to help them I must
refer you to a more Sec. 5. Memb P. Subs 6.
convenient place.

MEMB. 6.
SVBSEC. 1. Perturbations of the mind rectified. From himself, by resisting
to the utmost, confessing his grief to a friend, etc.
Whosoever he is that shall hope to cure this malady in himself or any other,
must first rectify these passions and perturbations of the mind, the chiefest
cure consists in them. Animi perturbationes sum fugiendae, metus potissimum
and tristitia, eorumque loco animus demulcendus hilaritate, animi constantia,
bena spe, removendi terrores, and eorum consortium quos non probant.
Fear and Sorrow are especially to be avoided, and the mind to be mitigated
with mirth, constancy, good hope, all vain terrors, bad objects are to be
removed, and all such persons in whose companies they be not well pleased.
Gualter Bruel-Fernelius consil. 43. Mercurialis consil. 6. Piso, Iacchinus cap.
15. in 9. Rhasis, Capivaeccius, Hildisheim etc. all inculcate this as an
especial means of their cure, that their Phantasiae eorum placide
subvertendae, terrores ab animo removendi.
minds be quietly pacified, vain conceits diverted, if it be possible, with
terrors, cares, fixed studies, cogitations, Ab omni fixa cogitatione quouismodo
avertantur.
and whatsoever it is that shall any way molest or trouble the mind, because
that otherwise there is no good to be done. Cuncta mala corporis ab animo
procedunt, quae nisi curentur, corpus curari minime potest. Charmid.
The Bodies mischiefs as Plato proves, proceed from the Soul: and if the mind
be not first satisfied, the Body can never be cured. Crato in that often cited
Counsel of his for a Nobleman his patient, when he had sufficiently informed
him in diet, air, exercise, Venus, sleep, concludes with these as matters of
greatest moment, quod reliquum est animae accidentia corrigantur, from which
alone proceeds Melancholy, they are the fountain, the subject, the hinges
whereon it turns, and must necessarily be reformed. Jra bilem movet, sanguinem
adurit, vitae'es spiritus accendit, maestitia vniversum corpus infrigidat,
calorem innatum extinguit, appetitum destruit, concoctionem impedit, corpus
exsiceat, intellectum pervertit. Quamobrem haec omnia prorsus vitanda sunt and
pro virils fugienda.
For anger stirs choler, heates the blood and vital spirits, Sorrovv on the
other side refrigerates the Body, and extinguisheth natural heat, ouerthrovves
appetite, hinders concoction, dries up the temperature, and perverts the
understanding. Fear dissolues the spirits, infects the Heart, attenuates the
Soul: and for these causes all pass^ons and perturbations must to the
uttermost of our power, and most seriously be removed. Aelianus Montaltus
attributes so much to them, De Mel. ca 26 ex illis solum remedium muli^ ex
visis auditis etc. sanati sunt.
that he holds the rectification of them alone to be sufficient to the cure of
Melancholy in most patients. Many are fully cured when they have seen or heard
etc. enjoy their desires, or be satisfied in their minds; and Galen the common
master of them all, from whose fountain they fetch water, brags lib. 1. de
san. tuend. that he for his part has cured many of this infirmity, solum
animis ad rectu^ institutis, by right settling of their minds. Yea but you will
here infer, that is excellent good indeed if it could be done, but how shall
it be effected, by whom, what Art, what means? hic labor hoc opus est. It Is a
Natural infirmity, a most powerful adversary, all men are subject to passions,
and Melancholy above all others, as being distempered by their innate humors,
abundance of choler adust, weakness of parts, outward occurrences, and how
shall they be avoided; the wisest men, greatest Philosophers of most excellent
wit, reason, Judgment, divine spirits, cannot moderate themselves in this
behalf, such as are found in Body and Mind, Stoics, heroes, Homers gods, all
are passionate, and furiously carried sometimes, and how shall we that are
already crased, fracti animis, sick in Body, sick in Mind resist? we cannot
perform it. You may advise and give good precepts, as who cannot? but how
shall they be put in practice? I may not deny but our passions are violent, and
tyrannize over us, yet there be means to curb them, though they be headstro^g,
they may be tamed, they may be qualified, if he himself or his friends, will
but use their honest endeavors, Treviribus annitendum tum in praedictis, tum in
alijs, a quibus malum velut a primaria causa occasionem nactum est,
imaginationes absurdae, falsaeque and maestitia quaecunque subierit,
propulsetur, aut aliud agendo, aut ratione persu^dendo, earum mutationem subito
facere.
or m^ke use of such ordinary means, as are commonly prescribed.

He himself (I say) for from the Patient himself, the first and chiefest
remedy must be had, for if he be averse, peevish, waspish, and give way wholly
to his passions, and will not seek to be eased, or be ruled by his friends, how
is it possible he should be cured? but if he be willing at least, gentle and
tractable, and desire his own good, no doubt but he may magna^ morbi dep^nere
parte^, be eased at least, if not cured. He himself must do his utmost
endeavor to resist, and withstand the beginnings, principijs obsta. Give not
water passage, no not a little, Ecclus 25.27. if they open a little, they will
make a great breach at length. Whatsoever it is that runs in our minds, vain
conceit, be it pleasing or displeasing, which so much affects or troubles us,
Lib. 2. cap. 16. de occult. not. q^s^uis huic malo obnoxious est, acriter
obsistat, and summa cura obluctetur, nec vllo modo foveat Imaginationes tacit
obrepentes animo, blandas ab initio and amabiles, sed quae adeo convalescunt,
vt nulla ratione excuti queant.
by all p^ssible means he must withstand it, expel those vain, false,
frivolous Imaginatious, absurd conceits, vain sorrovves, from which says
Piso, this Disease primarily proceeds, and takes his first occasion or
beginning, by doing something or other that shall be opposite unto the^,
thinking of something else, persuading by reason, or howsoever to make a
sudden alteration of them. Though he have hitherto run in a full Career, and
precipitated himself, following his passions, given reins to his appetite, let
him now stop upon a sudden, curb himself in; and as Lib. 2. cap. 16. de
occult. not. q^s^uis huic malo obnoxious est, acriter obsistat, and summa cura
obluctetur, nec vllo modo soveat Imaginationes tacit obrepentes animo, blandas
ab initio and a^^biles, sed quae adeo convalescunt, vt nulla ratione excuti
queant.
Lemnius advises, strive against with all his power, to the utmost of his
endeavor, and not cherish those fond Imaginations, which so covertly creep
into his Mind, most pleasing and amiable at first, but bitter as gall at last,
and so headstrong, that by no reason, art, counsel, or persvvasion they may be
shaken off. Though he be far gone, and habituated unto them, yet as 3 Tusc.
ad Apollonium.
Tully and Plutarch advise, let him oppose, or prepare himself against them,
by premeditation or reasons, or as we do by a crooked staff, bend himself
another way. Fracastorius.
Tu tamen interea effugito quae tristia mentem,
Sollicitant, procul esse iube curasque, metumque,
Pallentem, vltrices iras, sint omnia laeta.
In the mean time expel them from thy mind,
Pale fears, sad cares and griefs which do it grind,
Revengefull anger, pain and discontent,
Let all thy Soul be set on merriment.
Curas toll graves, irasci creed profanum.
If it be idleness has caused this infirmity in him, or that he perceive
himself given to solitariness, to walk alone, and please himself with fond
Imaginations, let him by all means avoid it, it will in the end be his
undoing, let him go presently, task or set himself a-worke, get some good
company. If he proceed, as a gnat flies about a candle, till at length he burn
himself, so in the end he will undo himself. If it be any harsh object, ill
company, let him presently go from it. If by his own default through ill diet,
bad air, want of exercise etc. let him now begin to reform himself. It
would be a perfect remedy against all corruption, if as Epist. de secretis
artis and naeturae cap. 7. de retard. sen. remedium esset contra corruptionem
propriam, si quilibet exerceret regimen sanitatis, quod consistit in rebus sex
non-naturalibus.
Roger Bacon has it, we could but moderate our selves in those six
non-naturall things. Pro aliquo vituperio non indigneris, nec pro amissione
alicuius rei, pro morte alicuius, nec pro carcere, nec pro exilio, nec pro alia
re, nec irascaris, nec timeas, nec doleas, sed cum summa presentia bec
sustineas.
If it be any disgrace, temporal loss calumny, death of friends,
imprisonment, banishment, be not troubled with it, do not fear, be not
angry, grieve not at it, but with all courage sustain it. Tu contra audentior
ito, Gordonius lib. 1. cap. 15 de conservit. Quod si incommoda aduersitatis
infortunia boc malum invexcrint bis infractum animum opponas Dei verbo, eiusque
siducia te suffulcias etc. Lemnius lib. 1.16.
If it be sickness, ill success, or any adversity that has caused it, oppose
an invincible courage, fortify thy self by; Gods word, Or otherwise,
malabonis persuadendae, set prosperity against adversity, as we refresh our
eyes by seeing some pleasant meadow, fountain, picture, or the like, recreate
thy Mind by some contrary object, some more pleasing meditation, divert thy
thoughts. Yea but you infer again facile consilium damus alijs, we can easily
give counsel to others, every man as the saying is, can tame a shrew, but he
that has her, si hic esses, aliter sentires, if you were in our misery, you
would find it otherwise, it is not easily performed. We know this to be true, we
are led captives by passion, appetite, we should moderate our selves, but we
are furious^y carried, we cannot make use of such Precepts, we are overcome,
sick male sani, distempered, and habituated in these courses, we can make no
resistance; you may as well bid him that is diseased not to feel pain, as a
melancholy man not to fear, not be sad, it is within in his blood, his brains,
his whole temperature, it cannot be removed. But he may choose whether he will
give way too far unto it, he may in some sort correct himself. A Philosopher
was bitten with a mad dog, and as the nature of that disease is to abhor all
waters, and liquid things, and to think still they see the picture of a dog
before them: He went for all this reluctante se to the Bathe, and seeing there
as he thought in the water, the picture of a dog, with reason overcame this
conceit, quid cani cum balneo? what should a dog do in a bathe, a meeee
conceit. Thou think thou hear and see devils, black men etc. it is not
so, it is thy corrupt phantasy, settle thy Imagination thou art well. Thou
think thou have a great nose, thou art sick, every man laughes thee to
scorn, persuade thy self it is no such matter, this is fear only and vain
suspicion. Thou art discontent, thou art sad and heavy, but why, upon what
ground? consider of it, thou art ielous, timorous, suspicious, for what cause?
examine it thoroughly, thou shall find none at all, or such as is to be
contemned, such as thou thy self wilt deride, and condemn in thy self, when
it is past. Rule thy self then with reason, satisfy thy self, accustom thy
self, weane thy self from those fond conceits, vain fears, strong
Imaginations, restless thoughts. Thou may do it, Est in vobis assuescere,
as Plutarch says, we may frame our selves as we will. As he that wears an
upright shoe, may correct the obliquity, or crookednes, by wearing it on the
other side: we may overcome passions if we will. Quicquid sibi imperauit animus
obtinuit, as Lib. 2. de Ira.
Seneca says, nulli tamferi affectus, vt non disciplina perdomentur,
whatsoever the Will desires she may command, no such cruel affections, but by
discipline they may be tamed. Voluntarily thou will not do this or that which
thou ought to do, or refrain etc. but when thou art lashed like a dull
Jade, thou will reform it, fear of a whip will make thee do or not do. Do
that voluntary then which thou can do, and must do by compulsion: thou
may refrain if thou will, and master thine affections. Cap. de affectibus
animae, vt in civitatibus contumaces, qui non cedunt politico imperio, vi
coercendisunt, ita Deus nobis indidit alteram imperij formam, si cor non
deponit vitiosum affectum, membra for as coercenda sunt, ne ruant in quod
affectus impellat, and locom otiva quae herili imperio obtemperat, alteri
resistat.
As in a city says Melancton, they do by stubborn rebellious roagues that
will not submit themselves to political government, compel them by force, so
must we do by our affections. If the heart will not lay aside those vicious
motions, and the phantasy those fond Imaginations, we have another form of
government, to enforce and restrain our outward members, that they be not led
by our passions. If appetite will not obey, let the Moving faculty ouerrule
her, let her resist, and compel her to do otherwise. As in an ague, the
Appetite could drink, sore eyes that itch would be rubbed; but Reason says
no, and therefore the Moving faculty will not do it. Our Phantasy would
intrude a thousand fears, suspicions, Chimeras upon us, but we have reason to
resist, yet we let our Reason be ouerborne by our appetite. Imaginatio impellit
spiritus, and inde ne^vi moventur, etc. and obtemperant, Imaginationi and
Appetitui mirabili federe ad exequendum quod iubent.
Imagination enforces spirits, which by an admirable league of Nature, compel
the nerves to obey, and they our several lims; we give way to our passions. And
as to him that is sick of an ague, all things are distastefull and unpleasant,
non ex cibi vitio says Plutarch, not in the meat, but in our taste, so many
things are offensive to us, not of themselves, but out of our corrupt Judgment,
ielousy, suspicion, and the like, we pull these mischiefs upon our own heads.

If then our Judgment be so depraved, our reason ouer-ruled, Will precipitated,
that we cannot seek our own good, or moderate our selves, as in this Disease
commonly it is, our best way for ease is to impart our misery to some friend,
not to Strangulat inclusus dolor, atque exe^tuat intus. Ovid. Trist. lib. 5.
smother it up in our own breast, alitur vitium, crescitque tegendo etc. Virg.
3. Geor.
and that which was most offensive to us, a cause of fear and grief, quod
nunc te coquit, another hell, when as we shall but impart it to some discreet,
trusty and loving friend, is Participes inde calamitatis ^ nostrae sunt, and
velut exonerata in eos sarcina onere levamur. Arist. Ethic. lib. 9.
instantly removed by counsel happily, wisdom, persuasion, advise, his good
means, which we could not otherwise apply unto our selves. Lenit animu^
simplex vel saepe narratio, the simple narration many times eases our
distressed mind, and in the midst and greatest extremities so many have bin
relieved by As David did to Jonathan 1. Sam. 20.
exonerating themselves to a faithful friend, he sees that which we cannot see
for passion and discontent, he pacifies our minds. Whosoever then labors of
this malady, by all means let him get some trusty friend, Ovid.
semper habe^s Pylademque aliquem qui curet Orestem, a Pylades, to whom freely
and securely he may open himself. It is the best thing in the world,as De
Tranquil. cap. 7 optimum est amicum fidelem nancisci, in quem secreta nostra
infundamus, nihil aeque oblectat animu^, quam vbi sint preparata pectora, in
quae tuto secreta descenda^t, quorum co^scientia aeque ac tua. Quorum sermo
solitudinem leniat, sententia consilium expediat, hilaritas tristitiam
dissipet, conspectusque ipse delectet.
Seneca advises in such a case, to get a trusty friend, to whom we may
freely and securely pour out our secrets, nothing so delights and eases the
mind, as when we have a prepared bosom, to which our secrets may descend,
of whose conscience we are assured as our own, whose speech may ease our
succorlesse estate, counsel relieve, mirth expel our mourning, and whose
very sight may be acceptable unto us. It was the counsel which that Politic
Commentar. lib. 7. Ad Deum confugiamus, and peccatis veniam precemur, inde ad
amicus, and cui plurimum tribuimus, nos patesaciamus totos and animi vulnus quo
affligimur, nihil ad reficiendum animum efficacius.
Commineus gave to all Princes and others distressed in mind, by occasion of
Charles Duke of Burgundy, that was much perplexed, first, to pray to God, and
lay himself open to him, and then to some special friend, whom we hold most
dear, to tell all our grievances to him, nothing so forcible to strengthen,
recreate and heal the vvounded soul of a miserable man.

SVBSEC. 2. Help from friends, by counsel, comfort, fair and foul means,
vvitty devices, satisfaction, alteration of his course of life, removing
objects etc.
When the Patient of himself is not able to resist, o^ overcome these
heart-eating passions, his friend; or Physician must be ready to supply that
which is wanting. If his weakness be such, that he cannot discern what is
amiss, correct or satisfy, it behoues them by counsel, comfort or
persuasion, by fair or foul means to alienate his mind by some artificial
invention, or by some contrary passion, to remove all objects, causes,
companies, occasions, as may any ways molest him, to humor him, please him,
divert him, and if it be possible, by altering his course of life, to give him
satisfaction. If he conceal his grievances, and will not be known of them.
Observando motus, gestus, manus, pedes, oculos, phantasiam. Piso.
They must observe by his looks, gestures, motions, phantasy, what it is that
offends him, and then to apply remedies unto him: many are instantly cured,
when their minds are satisfied. Mulier melancholia correpta ex longa viri
peregrinatione, and iracunde omnibus respondens quum marius, domum reversus
praeter spem etc.
Alexander makes mention of a woman, that by reason of her husbands long
absence in travel, that was exceeding peevish and melancholy, but when she
heard her husband was returned, beyond all expectation, at the first sight of
him she was freed from all fear, wvithout help of any other Physic,
restored to her former health. Trincavelius consil. 12. lib. 1. has such a
story of a Venetian, that being much trobled with melancholy, Prae dolor
moriturus, quum nunciatum esset vxorem peperisse filium, subito recuperauit.
and ready to dye for grief, when he heard his wife was brought to bed of a
son, instantly recovered. As Alexander concludes, Nisi affectus longo tempore
iusestauerit tali artificio Imaginationes curare oportet praesertim vbi malum
ab his velut a primaria causa occasionem babuerit.
if our Imaginations be not inveterate, by this art they may be cured,
especially if they shall proceed from such a cause. No better way to satisfy,
then to remove the object, cause, occasion, if by any Art or means possibly we
may find it out. If he grieve, stand in fear, be in suspicion, suspense, or
any way molested, satisfy his mind, Solvitur malum, give him satisfaction, the
cure is ended, alter his course of life there needs no other Physic. If the
party be sad, or otherwise affected, consider says Lib. 1. cap. 16. si ex
tristitia aut alio affectu ceperit speciem considera, aut aliud quid little quae
subitam alterationem sacere possunt.
Trallian, the manner of it, and all circumstances, and forthwith make a sudden
alteration, by removing the occasions, avoid all terrible objects, heard or
seen, Evitandi monstrifici aspictus, etc.
monstrous and prodigious aspects, tales of devils, spirits, ghosts, tragical
stories, to such as are in fear they strike a great impression, and renew many
times, and recall many chimeras and terrible fictions into their minds. Neque
enim tam actio aut r^^c^datio (...) edi ^^^cet sed c^^ vel gestu alter us
Imaginationi oduntr^^e ^4even (...) Galat de mor cap 7 de Tranquil praee^ue
vitentur ^rif^es. and omnia deplorantes, tra^quilluati inimicus est comes
perturbatus omnia gemens.
Make not so much as mention of them in private talk, or a dumb show tending
to that purpose, such things says Galateus, are offensive to their
Imagination. And to such as are in sorrowu Seneca forbids all sad companions,
and such as lament, a groaning companion is an enemy to quietness. Illorum
quoque hominum a quorum consortio abhorret presentia amovenda, nec sermonibus
ingratis obtundendi, si quis insaniam ab insania, sic curari aestimet, and
proterue vtitur magis quam aeger insanit. Crato consil. 184. Scoltzij.
Or if, there be any such party with whose presence the Patient is not well
pleased, he must be removed, gentle speeches, and fair means must first be
tried, no harsh language used, uncomfortable words, and not expel, as some
do, one madness with another, he that so does is madder then the Patient
himself: all things must be quietly composed, eversa non evertenda, sed
erigenda, things down must not be dejected, but e^ea^ed as Crato counsels,
Moltiter ac suaviter aeger tractetur, nec adea adigatur quae non curat.
he must be quietly and gently used, and not to do any thing against his mind,
but by little and little. As an horse that starts at a d^um or trumpet, and
will not endure the shooting of a piece, may be so manned by Art, and animated,
that he can not only endure, but is much more generous at the hearing of such
things, much more courageous then before, and much delights in it: they must
not be reformed ex abrupto, but by all Art and insinuation, made to such
companies, aspects, objects, they could not formerly away with. Many at first
cannot endure the sight of a green wound, a sick man, which afterward become
good Surgeons bold Empericks: a horse starts at a rotten post afar off, which
coming near, he quietly passes. It Is much in the manner of making such kind
of persons, be they never so averse from company, bashful, solitary, timorous,
they may be made at last with those Roman matrons, to desire nothing more then
in a public show, to see a full company of gladiators breathe out their last.
If they may not otherwise be accustomed to brook such distastefull and
displeasing objects, the best way then is generally to avoid them. Montanus
consil. 229. to the Earl of Momfort a courtier, and a Melancholy Patient of
his, his advice is to go leave the Court, by reason of those continual
discontents, Ob suspitiones, curas, aemulationem, ambitio^e^, iras etc. quas
locus ille ministrat, and quae secissent melancholicum.
cares suspicions, emulations, ambition, anger, Ielousy, which that place
afforded, and which surely caused him to be so Melancholy at first: maxima
quaeque domus seruis est plena superbis, a company of scoffers and proud Iacks,
are commonly conversant and attendant in such places, and able to make any man
that is of a soft quiet disposition, as many times they do, ex stulto insanum,
if once they humor him, a very Idiot or stark mad. A thing too much practiced
in all common societies, and they have no better sport then to make themselves
merry by abusing some silly fellow, or to take advantage of another man's
weakness. In such cases, as in a plague; the best remedy is, cito, long,
tarde: (for to such a party, especially if he be apprehensiue, there can be no
greater misery) to get him quickly gone, far enough off, and not be ouerhasty
in his return. If he be so stupid, that he do not apprehend it, his friends
should take some order with him, and by their discretion supply that which is
wanting in him, as in all other cases they ought to do. If they see a man
Melancholy given, solitary, averse from company, please himself with such
private and vain Meditations, though he delight in it, they ought by all means
to seek to divert him from it, to dehort him, to tell him of the event and
danger that may come of it. If they see a man idle, that by reason of his
means otherwise, will be take himself to no course of life, they ought
seriously to admonish him, he makes a noose to entangle himself, his want of
imploiment will be his undoing. If he have sustained any great loss, suffered
a repulse, disgrace etc. if it be possible relieve him. If he desire ought, let
him be satisfied, and if it may conveniently be, give him his hearts content.
If that may not be hoped or expected, yet ease him with comfort, cheerful
speeches, fair promises, and good words, persuade him, advise him. Many says
Et nos non paucos sanavimus animi motibus ad debitum recovocatis lib. 1. de
sanit. tucu.
Galen have bin cured by good counsel and persuasion alone. Heaviness of the
heart of man does bring it down, but a good word rejoices it Prove. 12.25.
and there is be that speaks words like the pricking of a sword, but the
tongue of a wise man is health Verse. 18. Oration namque saucij animi est
remedium, a gentle speech is the cure of a wounded Soul, as Consol. ad
Apollonium. Si quis sapienter and suo tepore adbibeat. Remedia morbis diversis
diversa sunt, dolentem sermo benignus sublevat.
Plutarch contends out of Aeschylus and Euripides: if it be wisely administered,
it eases grief and pain, as diverse remedies do many other diseases. A wise
and well spoken man may do much in such a case, a good Orator alone, as De
not. deoru^. consolatur afflictos, deducit perterritos a timore, cupiditates
imprimis and iracundias comprimit.
Tully holds, can alter affections by power of his eloquence, comfort such as
are afflicted, erect such as are depressed, expel and mitigate fear, lust,
anger etc. and how powerful is the charm of a discreet and dear friend. Ille
regit dictis animos, and temperat iras. What may not he effect? As Heauton.
Act. 1. Sc. 1. Ne metue, ne verere, creed inquam mihi aut consolando, aut
consilio, aut reiuvero.
Chremes told Menedemus, fear not, conceal it not O friend, but tell me what
it is that troubles thee, and I shall surely help thee by comfort, counsel,
or in the matter it self. Novi faeneratorem avarum apud meos sic curatum, qui
multam pecuniam amiserat.
Arnaldus lib. 1. breviar. cap, 18. speaks of an Usurer in his time, that upon
a loss much melancholy and discontent, was so cured. As Imagination, fear,
grief, cause such passions, so conceits alone, rectified by good hope,
counsel etc. are able again to help: and it is incredible how much they can do
in such a case, as Lib. 1. consil. 12 Incredibile dictu quantum iuuent.
Trincavelius illustrates by an example of a Patient of his. Porphyrius the
Philosopher in Plotinus life, written by him, relates of himself, that being
in a discontented humor through insufferable anguish of mind he was going to
make a way himself, but meeting by chance his master Plotinus, who perceiving
by his distracted looks all was not well, urged him to confess all unto him;
which when he had heard, he used such comfortable speeches to him, that he
redeemed him e faucibus Erebi, pacified his unquiet mind, in so much, that he
was easily reconciled to himself, and much abashed to think afterward that
he should ever entertain so vile a motion. By all means therefore, all manner
of fair promises, good words, gentle persuasions are to be used, not to be to
rigorous at first, Nemo istius modi conditionis hominibus insultet, aut in
illos sit severior verum miseriae potius indilescat, vicemque deplo et lib 2
cap. 16.
or to insult over them, not to deride, neglect or contemn, but rather as
Lemnius exhorts, to pity them, and by all plausible means to seek to
reduce them: but it satisfaction may not be had, mild courses, promi^es,
comfortable speeches, and good counsel will not take place, then as
Christopherus a Vega determines lib. 3. cap. 14. de Mel. to handle them more
roughly, Cap. 7. Idem Piso. Laurentius cap 8.
to threaten and chide says Altomarus, terrify sometimes, or as Salvianus will
have them, to be lashed and whipped, as we do by a starting horse, Quod timet
nihil est, vbi cogitur and videt.
that is affrighted without a cause, or as Vna vice bla^diantur, vna vice ijsdem
t^rroreni^cutiant.
Rha sis, one while to speak fair and flatter, another while to terrify and
chide, as they shall see cause.

When none of these precedent remedies will avail, it will not be amiss,
which Savanorola and Aelian Montalius so much commend, clavum clavo pellere, Si
vero fucrit ex novo malo audito, vel exanimi accidente, aut de amissione
mercium, aut morte amici, introducantur noua contraria his, quae ipsum ad
gaudia moueant, de hoc semper niti debemus etc.
to drive out one passion with another, or by some contrary passion, as they
do bleeding at nose by letting blood in the arm to expel one fear with
another one grief with another. Lib 3 ca 14.
Christophorus a Vega accounts it rational Physic, non alienum a ratione: and
Lemniut much approues it, Lib. 1. cap. 5. sic morbum morbo, vt clavism clauo
retu^d mus and malo nodo malum cuneum adhibemus. Novi ego qui ex subito hostium
incursu, and inopinato timore quartanam depulerat.
to use a hard wedge to an hard knot, to drive out one disease with another, to
pull out a tooth, or wound him, that the pain of the one, may mitigate the
grief of the other, and I knew such a one that was so cured of a quartan ague,
by the sudden coming of his enemies upon him. If we may believe Lib. 7. cap
50. In acie pugnens febre qu^^tana liberatus est.
Pliny, whom Scaliger calls mendaciorum patrem, the father of lies, Q Fabius
Maximus, that renowned Consul of Rome, in a battle fought with the King of the
Allobroges, at the river Isaurus, was so rid of a Quartanague. Valesius in his
controversies, holds this an excellent remedy, and if it be discreetly used in
this malady, better then any Physic.

Sometimes again by some Iacchinus cap. 15. in 9. Rhasis. Mont. c. ^6
fained lie, strange news, witty device, artificial invention, it is not
amiss to deceive them. As they hate those says Lib. 1. cap. 16. aversantur
eos qui ecrum affectus rident contemnunt. Si ranas aut viperas comedisse se
puta^t comedere, debemus and spem de cura saecere.
Alexander, that neglect or deride them, so they give ear to them that will
sooth them up. If they say, they have svvallovued frogs or a snake, by all
means grant it, and tell them you can easily cure it: it is an ordinary thing.
Philodotus the Physician cured a Melancholy King, that thought his head was
off, by putting a leaden cap thereon, the weight made him perceive it, and
freed him of his fond Imagination. A woman in the said Alexander, swallowed a
serpent as she thought, he gave her a vomit, and conveyed a serpent, such as
she conceived, into the basin, upon the sight of it she was amended. The
pleasantest dotage that ever I read, says Cap. 8. de mel.
Laurentius, was of a Gentleman of Senes in Italy, who was afraid to piss,
left all the town should be drowned, the Physicians caused the bells to be rung
backward, and told him the town was on fire, whereupon he pissed, and was
immediately cured. Another thought his nose so big, that he should dash it
against the walls if he stirred; his Physician took a great piece of flesh, and
holding it in his hand, pinched him by the nose, and made him believe that
flesh was cut from it. Forestus observat. lib. 1. had a melancholy patient, who
thought he was dead, Cistam posuit ex medicorum consilio prope eum in quem
alium semortuum fingentem posuit, hic in cista iacens etc.
he put a fellovv in a chest, like a dead man by his bed side, and made him
erease himself a little, and eat: the melancholy man asked the counterfeit,
whether dead men use to eat meat, he told him yea, vvhereupon he did eat
likewise, and was cured. Lemnius lib. 2. cap. 6. de 4. complex. has many
such examples. And Iovianus Pontanus lib. 4. cap. 2 of Wisd. of the like: but
amongst the rest I find one most memorable, registered in the French Chronicles,
Series 155^.
of an Advocate of Paris before mentioned, who believed verily he was dead,
etc. I read a multitude of such examples, of melancholy men so cured by such
artificial inventions.

SVBSEC. 3. Music a remedy.
MAny and sundry are the means, which Philosophers and Physicians have
prescribed to exhilerate a sorrowful heart, to divert those fixed and intent
cares and meditations, which in this malady so much offend; but in my Judgment
none so present, none so powerful, none so apposite as a cup of strong drink,
mirth, Music, and merry company. Ecclus 40.20. Wine and Music rejoice the
heart. Rhasis cont. 9. Tract, 15. Altomarus cap. 7. Aelianus Montaltus cap. 26.
Ficinus, Bened. Victor. Faventinus, are almost immoderate in the commendation
of it, In 9. Rhasis. magnam vim habet Musica.
a most forcible medicine, Cap. de Mania^. Admiranda profecto res est, and
digna expensione quod sonorum concinnitas mentem emolliat, fistatque
procellosas ipsius affectiones.
Iacchinus calls it. Jason Pratensis, a most admirable thing, and worthy of
consideration, that can so mollify the Mind, and stay those tempestuous
affections of it. Musica est mentis medicinae maestae, a roaring-meg against
Melancholy, to ereare and reviue the languishing Soul, Languensanimus inde
erigitur, and reviuiscit nec tam aures assicit, sed and sonitu per arterias
vndique diffuso spiritus tum vitales, tum animales excitat mentem reddens
agilem etc.
affecting not only the ears, but the very arteries, the vital and animal
spirits, it erects the mind, and makes it nimble. Lemnius instit. cap. 44. And
this it will effect in the most dull, severe, and sorrowful Souls, Musica
venustate sua mentes severiores capit etc.
expel grief with mirth, and if there be any clouds or dust, or dregs of
cares yet lurking in our thoughts, most powerfully it wipes them all away.
Salisbur. polic. lib. 1 cap. 6. and that which is more, it will perform all
this in an instant. Animos tristes subito exhilerat, nubilos vultus serenat,
austeritatem reponit, iucunditatem exponit. Barbariemque facit deponere gentes;
mores instituit, iracundiam mitigat.
Cheer up the countenance, expel austerity, bring in hilarity (Girald. Camb.
cap. 12. Topog. Hiber.) inform our manners, mitigate anger; Athenaeus
Dipnosophist lib. 14. cap, 10. calls it, an infinite treasure to such as are
endowed with it. Dulcisonum reficit tristia corda melos, Eobanus Hessus. Many
other properties Cythara tristitiam iocundat, timidos furores attenuat,
cruentam saeuitiam blande reficit, languorem, etc.
Cassiodorus epist. 4. reckons up of this our divine Music, not only to expel
the greatest griefs, but it does extenuate fears and furies, appeaeseth
cruelty, awakeneth heaviness, and to such as are watchful, it causes quiet
rest, it takes away spleen and hatred, and cures all irksomeness and heaviness
of the Soul: Castilio de aulic. lib. 1. fol. 72.
laboring men that sing to their work, can tell as much, and so can soldiers
when they go to fight, who^ terror of death cannot so much affright, as Music
animates. It makes a child quiet, the nurses song etc. In a word it is so
powerful a thing, that it ravisheth the Soul, and carries it beyond it self,
helps, eleuates, extends it. Scaliger exercit. 302. gives a reason of these
effects, Quod spiritus qui in cord agitant, tremulum, and subsultantem
recipient aerem in pectus, and inde excita^tur, a spiritu musculs moventur etc.
because the spirits about the Heart, take in that trembling and dancing air
into the Body, and are moved together, and stirred up with it, or else the mind,
as some suppose, harmonically composed, is rowsed up at the tunes of Music.
And it is not only men that are affected with it, but almost all other
creatures. You know the tale of Orpheus, that could saxa movere sono testudinis
etc. make stocks and stones as well as beasts, other animals dance after his
pipe. Arion that made Mr Anthony in Descript. Cornwall, says they will come and
dance at the sound of a trumpet.
fishes follow him, which as common experience evinceth, are much affected with
Music. De cervo, equo, cane, v^so idem compertum musica afficiuntur.
All singing birds are much pleased with it, especially nightingales, if we may
believe Calcagninus, and bees amongst the rest, though they be flying away, when
they hear any tinkling sound, will tarry behind. Hearts, hinds, horses, dogs,
bears, are exceedingly delighted with it, Scal. exero. 30 2. Elephants Agrippa
adds lib. 2. cap. 24. and in Lidia in the midst of a lake there be certain
floating Islands, that after good Music will dance. But to leave all
declamatory speeches in praise of Numen inest numeris.
divine Music, I will confine my self to my proper subject: besides that
excellent power it has to expel many other diseases, it is a sovereign
remedy against Saepe^ graves morbos modulatum carmen abegit, and desperatis
conciliavit opem.
Despair and Melancholy, and will drive away the Devil himself. Canus a
Rhodian Fiddler in Lib. 5. cap. 7. maerentibus maerorem adim^m, laetantem, vero
seipso reddam hilariorem, ama^tem calidiorem, religiosum divino numine
correptum, and ad deos colendos paratiorem.
Philostratus, when Apollonius was inquisitiue to know what he could do with
his pipe, told him, that he could make a melancholy man merry, and him that was
merry, much merrier then before, a lover more inamored, a Religious man more
divine. Natalis Comes Myth. lib. 4 c. 12
Chyron the Centaure is said to have cured this and many other Diseases by
Music alone: as now they do those, says Lib. 5. de rep. curat musica
furore^, Sancti Viti.
Bodine, that are troubled with St Vitus bedlam dance. Exilire e convivia.
Cardan. subtle. lib. 13.
Timotheus the musician compelled Alexander to skip up and down, and leave his
dinner (like the tale of the Friar and the Boy) whom Austin de civ. dei lib.
17. c. 14. so much commends for it. Who has not heard how David's harmony drove
away the evil spirits from King Saul, 1. Sam. 16. and Elisha when he was much
troubled by importunate Kings, called for a Minstrell, and when he played the
hand of the Lord came upon him, 2. Kings, 3. Jason Pratensis cap. de Mania has
many examples, how Clinias and Empedocles cured some desperately melancholy,
and some mad by music alone. And because it has such excellent virtues,
belike Ilid. 1.
Homer brings in Phemius playing, and the Muses singing at the banquet of the
Gods. The Greeks and Romans, and all civil commonwealths have graced Music,
and made it one of the liberal sciences, all Princes and Emperors, and
persons of any quality, maintain it in their Courts; No mirth without Music.
Sr Thomas Moore in his absolute Vtopian commonwealth, allows Music as an
appendix to every meal, and that throughout to all sorts. Cormineus.
Jews the xi. when he invited Edward the 4. to come to Paris, told him that as
a principal entertainment, he should hear sweet voices of children,
exquisite music, he should have a -- and the Cardinal of Burbon to be his
Confessor, which he used as a most plausible argument: as to a sensual man,
indeed it is. In musicis supra onmem fidem capior and oblector choreas
libentissime aspitio, pulcharum saeminarum venustate detineor otiari inter has
solutus curis possum.
Scaliger of himself ingeniously confesses, exercit. 274. I am beyond all
measure affected with Music, I do most willingly behold them dance, and am
mightily detained and allured with that grace and comeliness of fair women,
and I am well pleased to be idle amongst them. And what young man is not? As it
is acceptable to most, so especially to a melancholy man. Provided always, his
disease proceed not originally from it, that he be not some light inamorato,
some idle phantasticke, who capers in conceit all day long, and thinks of
nothing else, but how to make Gigges, Sonnets, Madrigals in commendation of his
Mistress. In such cases Music is most pernicious, as a spur to a free
horse, it will make him run himself blind or break his wind, it will make
such melancholy persons mad, and the sound of those Gigges and Horne-pipes,
will not be removed out of their ears a week after. Many men are melancholy
by hearing music, but it is a pleasant melancholy that it causes, and
therefore to such as are discontent, in woe, fear, sorrow, or dejected, it is
a most present remedy, it expells cares, alters their grieved minds, and eases
in an instant. Otherwise, says Sympos. quaest. 5. musica multos magis dementat
quam vinum.
Plutarch, Musica magis dementat quam vinum. Music makes some men mad; like
Astolphos horn in Ariosto: and Animi morbi vel a musica curantur vel
inferuntur.
Theophrastus right well prophesied, that diseases were either made by Music,
or mittigated.

SVBSEC. 4. Mirth and merry company remedies.
MIrth and merry company may not be separated from Music, both concurring
and necessarily required in this business. Mirth says Lib. 3. de Anima
laetitia purgat sanguinem valetudinem co^firmat, colorem induit, florentem
nitidum, gratum
Vives, purges the blood, confirms health, causes a fresh, pleasing fine
color, proroges life, whets the wit makes the body young and lively and fit
for any manner of employment. The merrier heart the longer life, a merry heart
is the life of the flesh, Pro. 14.30. and this is one of the three Salernitan
Doctors. Doctor Merriman, D. Diet, and D. Quiet Spiritus temperat, calorem
excitat, naturalem virtutem corroborat, iuuenile corpus diu seruat, vitam
prorogat ingenium acuit, and hominem necotijs, quibustibet aptiorem reddit.
Schola Salern.
which cure all diseases. Men's hilaris, requies, moderata dieta. Dum contumelia
vacant and festiua lenitate mordent mediocres animi aegritudines saenare
solent, etc.
Gomesius praefat. lib. 3. de sael. genesis is a great magnifier of honest mirth,
by which (says he) we cure many passions of the mind in our selves, and in our
friends, which De mor. fol. 57. amamus ideo eos quisunt saceti and iocundi.
Galateus assigns for a cause, why we love merry companions: and well they
deserve it, being that as Regi sanit. part 2. nota quod amicus bonus and
dilectus socius narrationibus suis. iucundis superat omnem melodiam.
Magninus holds, a merry companion is better then any music. And as the
saying is, comes incundus in via pro vehiculo, as good as a wagon to him that
is wearied on the way. For these causes, our Physicians generally prescribe
this as a principal engine, to b^tter the walls of Melancholy, a chief
Antidote, and a sufficient cure of it self. By all means, says De aegritud.
capitis. omni modo generes letitiam in ijs de ijs quae audiuntur and videntur
aut odorantur aut gustantur aut quocunque modo sentiri possut, and aspectu
formaru^ multi decoris and ornatus and negotiatione incunda and blandientibus
ludis and promissis distrahantur eorum animi de re aliqua quam timent aut
dolent.
Mesue procure mirth to such men, in such things as are heard, seen, tasted,
or smelled or any way perceived, and let them have all entisements and fair
promises, the sight of excellent beauties, tiars, ornamts, delightsome
passages, to distract their minds from fear and sorrow, and such things on
which they are so fixed and intent. Vtantur venationibus, ludis, iocis,
amicorum consortijs, quae non sinunt animum turbari vino and cantu and loci
mutatione and biberia and gaudio, ex quibus praecipus delectantur.
Let them use Hunting, sports, plays, jests, merry company, as Rhasis
prescribes, which will not let the mind to be molested, a cup of good drink
now and then, hear music and such companions, with whom they are especially
delighted, or such sports. Piso. Ex fabulis and ludis quaerenda delectatio
Altomarus cap. 7. His versetur qui maxim grati sunt, cantus and chorea
adlaetitiam prosunt.
Merry tales, or toys, singing, dancing, and whatsoever else may procure
mirth: and by no means Praecipue valet ad expellendam melancholiam stare in
cantibus, ludis and sonis and habitare cum familiaribus and praecipue cum
puellis iocundis.
, says Guianerius, suffer them to be alone. Benedictus Victorius Faventinus in
his Empericks, accounts it an especial remedy against Melancholy, to hear and
see singing, dancing, maskers, mummers, to converse with such merry fellows,
and fair maids. Not to be an auditor only, or a spectator, but sometimes an
Actor himself. Dulce est desipere in loco, to play the fool now and then is
not amiss, there is a time for all things. Socrates himself would be merry
sometimes, and sing, and dance, and take his liquor too, or else Theodoret
belies him, and old Cato and the rest. Xenophon in his Sympos. brings in
Socrates as a principal actor, no man merrier then himself, and sometimes he
would ride a cockhorse with his children, though Valor. Max. cap. 8. lib. 8.
Interposita arundine cruribus suis cum silijs ludens ab Alcibiade risus est.
Alcibiades scoffed at him for it; and well he might for now and then, says
Plutarch, the most virtuous, honest, and grauest men will use Feasts, jests,
and toys, as we do^ sauce to our meats. Machiauel in the 8th book of his
Florentine history, gives that note of Cosmus Medices, the wisest and grauest
man of his time in Italy, That he would Hominibus facetis and ludis puerilibus
vltra modum deditus, adeo vt si cui in eo tam grauitatem quam leuitatem
considerare liberet, duas personas distinctas in eo esse diceret.
sometimes play the most egregious fool in his carriage, and was so much given
to iesters, players, and childish sports to make himself merry, that he that
should but consider his gravity on the one part, his folly and lightness on
the other, would surely say that there were two distinct persons in him. And me
thinks he did well in it, though De nugis curial. lib. 1.4. magistratus and
viri graves a ludis levioribus arcendi.
Salisburiensis be of opinion that Magistrates, Senators, and grave men should
not descend to lighter sports, ne respub. ludere videatur: But as Themistocles,
still keep a stern and constant carriage. I commend Cosmus Medices, and that
Castruccius Castrucanus, then whom Italy never knew a worthier Captain,
another Alexander, if Machiauel do not deceive us in his life: when a friend
of his reprehended him for dancing beside his dignity (belike at some cushen
dance) he told him again, qui sapit interdiu, vix vnqua^ noctu desipit, he
that is wise in the day, may dote a little in the night. Machiauel vita eius,
ab amico reprehensus quod praeter dignitatem tripudijs operam daretrespondit,
etc
Paulus Iovius relates as much of Pope Leo Decimus, that he was a grave,
discreet, stayed man, and yet sometimes most free and too open in his sports.
And it is not altogether There is a time for all things, to weep, laugh,
mouine, and dance, Eccles, 3.4.
unfit or misbeseeming the gravity of such a man, if that Decorum of time and
place, and such circumstances be observed. Hor.
Misce stultitiam consilijs brevem, and as Sr John Harrington Epig. 50.
he said in an Epigram to his wife, I would have every man say to himself, or
to his friend. Moll Once in pleasant company by chance,
I wished that you for company would dance,
Which you refused, and said your years require
Now, matron like both manners and attire.
Well Moll, if needs thou will be matrone like,
Then trust to this, I will a matron like:
Yet so to you my love may never lessen,
As you for Church, House, Bed, observe this lessen.
Sit in the Church as solemn as a Saint,
No deed, word, thought, your due devotion taint,
Veil if you will your head, your Soul reveal,
To him that only wounded Souls can heal:
Be in my house as busy as a Be,
Having a sting for every one but me,
Buzzing in every corner, gathering honey,
Let nothing wast that costs or yields money,
And when thou see my heart to mirth incline,
The tongue, wit, blood warm with good cheer and wine,
Then of sweet sports let no occasion escape,
But be as wanton toying as an Ape.
Those old Lil. Giraldus hist. deor. Syntag. 1.
Greeks had their Lubentiam Deam goddess of Pleasance, and those
Lacedaemonians instructed from Lycurgus did Deo Risuisacrificare, after their
wars especially and in times of peace, which was used in Thessaly, as it
appears by that of Lib. 2. de aur. as.
Apuleius, who was made an instrument of their laughter himself: Eo quod risus
esset laboris and modesti victus condimentum.
Because laughter and merriment was to season their labors and modester life.
C. Calcag. epig.
Risus enim divum atque hominum est aeterna voluptas. Princes use Iesters,
Players, and have those Masters of Revels in their Courts. The Romans at every
supper (for they had no solemn dinners) used music, Gladiators, Iesters,
etc. And so did the Greeks. Besides music, in Xenophons Sympos. Philippus
ridendi artifex, Philip a Iester was brought in to make sport. Ctesias reports
of a Persian King, that had 150 Maids attending at his table to play, sing, and
dance by turns, and Syntag. de Musis.
Lil. Giraldus of an Egyptian Prince that kept 9. Maids still to wait upon
him, and those of most excellent feature and sweet voices, which afterward
gave occasion to the Greeks of that fiction of the 9. Muses. And this and many
such means, to exhilerate the hearts of men, have been still practiced in all
ages, as knowing there is no better thing to the preservation of man's life.
What shall I say then, but to every melancholy man, Eobanus Hessus.
Vtere convivis non tristibus vtere amicis,
Quos nugae and risus and ioca salsa iuvant.
Feast often, and use friends not still so sad,
Whose jests, and merriments may make thee glad.
Use honest and chaste sports, scenicall shows, plays
Fraecastorius.
Accedant invenumque Chori, mistaeque puellae.
And as Marsilius Ficinus concludes an Epistle to Bernard Canisianus, and some
other of his friends, will I to all good students. Vivite ergo laeti O amici
procul ab angustia vivite laeti.
Live merrily O my friends, free from cares, perplexity, anguish, grief of
mind, live merrily, laetitia coelum vos creavit, Jterum precor and obtestor
viuite leti illud quod cor vrit negligite.
Again and again, I request you to be merry; if anything trouble your hearts,
or vex your souls, neglect and contemn it, Laetus in praesens animus quod
vltra oderit curare, Hor
let it pass. He was both Sacerdos and Medicus, haec autem non tam vt sacerdos
animi mando vobis quam vt medicus nam absque hac vna tanqua medicinaru^ omniam
vita medicinae omnes ad vitam producendam adhihitae moriuntur. viuite laeti.
And this I inioyne you not as a Divine alone, but as a Physician, for without
this mirth, which is the life and Quintescence of all Physic, all medicines
and whatsoever is used or applied to prolong the life of man, is dull, dead,
and of no force, du^ fata sinunt vivite laeti, Seneca. Be merry. It was
Tiresias the Prophets counsel to Lucian Necyomantia. To 2.
Menippus, that traveled all the world over, and down to Hell it self to
seek content, and his last farewell to Menippus, to be merry. Omnia mundana
nugas aestima. hoc solu^ tota vita persequere vt praesentibus been compositis,
minime curiosus, aut vlla in re sollicitus, quamplurimum potes vitam hilarem
traducas.
Contemn the World (said he) and count all that is in it vanity and toys,
this only covet all thy life long, not be curious, or over sollicitous in any
thing, but with a well composed and contented state to enjoy thy self, and
above all things to be merry. It Is the same advice which every Physician in
this case rings to his patient, as Capivacoious to his, Hildesheim Spicel. 2 de
Man. sol. 161. Studia literarum and animi perturbationes fugiat and quantum
potest incunde vivat
aevoid overmuch study and perturbations of the mind, and as much as in thee
lies live at hearts ease. Prosper Calenus to that melancholy Cardinal Caesius,
Lib. de atra bile. Grauioribus curis ludos and facetias aliquando interpone
iocos and quae solent animum relaxere.
amidst thy serious studies and businesses, use jests and conceits, plays, and
toys, and whatsoever else may recreate thy mind. Nothing better then mirth,
and merry company in this malady, Consil. 30. Mala valetudo aucta ac consracta
est tristitia, ac propterea exhileratione animi remouenda.
It begins with sorrow, says Montanus, it must be expelled with hilarity.

But see the mischief, many men knowing that merry company is the only
medicine against melancholy, will therefore neglect all other business, and in
another extreme spend all their days amongst good fellows in a Tavern, or an
Alehouse, and know not otherwise how to spend their time but in drinking.
Flourishing wits and men of good parts, good fashion, good worth, basely
prostitute themselves to every rogues company, to take Tobacco, and drink, to
sing scurrile songs. Iuven. Sat. 8.
Invenies aliquem cum percussore iacentem, permistum nautis aut furibus, aut
fugitivis. which Thomas Erastus objects to Paracelsus: that he would lie
drinking al day long with Car-men and Tapsters in a brothell house. They drown
their wits, sees their brains in ale, consume their fortunes, loose their
time, weaken their temperatures, and confound their Souls, go from Scilla to
Charybdis, and use that which is an help to their undoing, Hor.
Quid refert ferro per eamue ruina? As good be melancholy still as drunken
beggars. Company a sole comfort, and an only remedy to al manner of discontent,
is their sole misery and cause of perdition, as Hermione lamented in Euripides,
malae mulieres me fecerunt malam. Evil company marred her, may they justly
complain bad companions have been their bane. For, Ter.
malus malum vult vt sit sui similis, one drunkard in a company, one thief,
one whoremaster, will by his good will make all the rest as bad as himself,
Hor.
Etsi nocturnos iures te formidaere vapores, be of what complexion you will,
inclination, love or hate, be it good or bad, if you come amongst them you must
do as they do, yea (...).
though it be to the prejudice of your health you must drink. And so like
Grasshoppers, whilst they sing over their cups all summer, they starve in
winter, and for a little vain merriment, shall find a sorrowful reckoning in
the end.

SECT. 3.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. A Consolatary Digression, containing the Remedies of all manner of
Discontents.
BEcause in the praecedent Section, I have made mention of good counsel,
comfortable speeches, perswation, how necessarily they are required to the cure
of a discontented or troubled mind, how present a remedy they yield, and many
times a sole sufficient cure of themselves; I have thought fit in this
following Section a little to Digress, (if at least it be to digress in this
subject) and to collect and gleane a few remedies, and comfortable speeches out
of our best Orators, Philosophers, Divines, and Fathers of the Church, tending
to this purpose. I confess many have copiously written of this subject, Plato,
Seneca, Plutarch, Xenophon, Epictetus, Theophrastus, Xenocrates, Crantor,
Lucian, Boethius, and so of late, Sadoletus, Cardan, Budeus, Stella, Petrarch,
Erasmus, Lib. de lib. propriis Hos libros scio multos spernere, nam faelices
his se non indigere putant, infaelices ad solatium miseriae non sufficere. Et
tamen faelicibus moderationem, dum inconstantiam humanae faelicitatis docent
praestant, infaelices si omnia recte aestimare velint faelices reddere possunt.
besides Austin, Cyprian, Bernard. etc. And I shall but actum agere, yet
because these Tracts are not so obuious and common, I will Epitomize and
briefly insert some of their divine precepts, reducing their voluminous and
vast Treatises to my small scale, for it were otherwise impossible to bring so
great vessels into so small a creek. And although (as Cardan said of his book
de consil:) I know before hand, this Tract of mine many will contemn and
reject: they that are fortunate, happy, and in flourishing estate, have no need
of such consolotary speeches; they that are miserable and unhappy, think them
insufficient to ease their grieved minds, and comfort their misery. Yet I will
go on, for this must needs do some good to such as are happy, to bring them
to a moderation, and make them reflect on and know themselves, by seeing the
inconstancy of humane felicity, others misery: and to such as are distressed,
if they will but attend and consider of it, it cannot choose but give some
content and comfort. Nullum medicamentum omnes sanare potest, sunt affectus
animi qui prorsus sunt insanabiles, non tamen artis opus sperni debet, aut
medicine, aut Philosophiae.
It Is true no medicine can cure all diseases, some affections of the mind are
altogether incurable, yet these helps of art, Physic and Philosophy must not
be contemned. Arrianus and Plotinus are stiff in the contrary opinion, that
such precepts can do little good, but sure I think they cannot choose but do
some, and upon that hope I will adventure. Hor.
Non men's hie sermo, sed quem precepit. Not my speech this, but of Seneca,
Plutarch, Epictetus, Austin, Bernard, Christ and his Apostles. If I make
nothing, as Lib. 2. Essays, cap. 6.
Montagne said in like case, I will mar nothing, it is not my doctrine but my
study, and I hope I shall do no body wrong to speak what I think, and shall
not be blamed in imparting my mind. If it be not for thy ease, it may for mine
own, so Tully, Cardan, and Boethius writ de consol. as well to help
themselves as others, be it as it will, I will assay.

Discontents and grieuances are either general or particular: general are
wars, Plagues, dearths, fires, inundations, unseasonable weather, Epidemicall
diseases which afflict whole kingdoms, territories, cities: or peculiar to
private men, Alium paupertas alium orbitas, hunc morbiillum timor, alium
iniuriae hunc insidiae illum vxor filij distrahu^t. Card.
as cares, losses, death of friends, poverty, wan^, sickness, orbities,
injuries, abuses, etc. generally all discontent, Boethius lib. 1. met. 5.
homines quatimur fortunae salo. No condition free, quisque suos patimur manes.
Even in the midst of our mirth and i^llity there is some grudging, some
complaint, as Apuleius 4. storid. Nihil homini tam prospere datum divinitus
quin ei admixtum sit aliquid difficultatis in amplissima quaque laetitia subest
quaedam querimonia coniugatione quadam mellis and fellis.
he says our whole life is a Glucupicron, a bitter sweet passion, honey and
gall mixed together, we are all miserable and discontent who can deny it? If
all, and that it be a common calamity an inevitable necessity, all distressed,
then as Cardan inferres, Si omnes premantur quis tu es qui solus evadere cupis
ab ca lege quae neminem praeterit, cur te non morta^emsa^tum and vniuersi orbis
regem fieri non doles.
who art thou that hopest to go free? Why do thou not grieve thou art a
mortal man, and not governor of the world? Far quam sorte^ patienter omnes
nemo recuset. Puteanus epist. 75. Neque cuiquam praecipue dolendum in eo quod
acciait vniversis.
If it be common to all, why should one man be more disquieted then another? If
thou alone wer'st distressed, it were indeed more irksome, and less to be
endured, but when the calamity is common, comfort thy self with this, thou
have more fellows, Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris, it is not thy sole
case, and why should thou be more impatient? Lorchan Gallobelgieus lib. 3.
Anno 1598. de Belgis. Sed ehe^ inquis euge quid agamu^-vbi pro Epithalanis
Bellonae stagellu^, pro musica ^armenia terribiliu^ lituorum and titbarum
audios clangorem, pro^taedis nuptiali-^^bus villarum pagorum vrbium videas
incendis, vbi pro iubilo lamenta, prorisufietus aerem co^plent.
I, but alas we are more miserable then others what shall we do? besides
private miseries, we live in perpetual fear and danger of common enemies, we
have Bollonas whips and pitiful outcries, for Epithalamiums; for pleasant
music, that fear full noise of ordinance, Drums, and warlike Trumpets
still sounding in our ears; instead of nuptial torches we have firing of
towns and cities; for triumphs, lamentations; for joy, tears. Jta est
profecto and quisquis haec videre abnuis huic saeculo parum aptus es aut potius
nostrorum omnium conditionem ignoras quibus reciproco quodam nexu laeta
tristibus, tristia laetis invicem succedunt.
So it is, and so it was, and ever will be. And he that refuses to see and
hear this, to suffer this is not fit to live in this world, and knows not the
common condition of all men, to whom so long as they live with a reciprocal
course joys and sorrows are annexed, and succeed one another. It is
inevitable it may not be avoided, and why the^ should thou be so much
troubled? Grave nihil est homini quod fert necessitas, as In Tusc. e vet. Poeta.
Tully deemes out of an old Poet, that which is necessary, cannot be greiuous.
If it be so, then comfort thy self in this. Cardan. lib. 1 de consol. est
consolationis genus non leave, quod a necessitate sit sieve feras, five non feras
ferendum est tamen.
That whether thou will or no, it must be endured: make a virtue of necessity,
and conform thy self to undergo it, Seneca.
Si longa est levis est, si gravis est brevis est, If it be long it is light, if
grievous it will not long last. It will away, dies dolorem minuit, and if
naught else, yet time will wear it out, Omni dolori tempus est medicina ipsum
luctum extingit iniurias delet omnis mali oblivionem affe^t.
oblivion is a common medicine for all losses, injuries, griefs, and
detriments whatsoever, Habet hoc quoque commodum omnis infelicitas suaviorem
vitam cum abierit relinquit.
and when they are once past, this commodity comes of infelicity, it makes the
rest of our life sweeter unto us. Virg.
Atque haec olim meminisse iuuabit, the privation and want of a thing many
times makes it more pleasant and delightsome then before it was. We must not
think the happiest of us all to escape here without some misfortunes, Heaven
and Earth are much unlike.d Those heavenly bodies indeed are freely carried in
their orbs without any impediment or interruption, Lorchan. Sunt namque infera
superis humana terrenis long disparia. Etenim beatae mentes feruntur libere
and sine vllo impedimento stellae aetherijque erbes cur sus and conversiones
suas iam saeculis innura erabilibus constantissime co^ficiu^t: verum homines
magnis angustijs. Neque hac naturae lege est quisqua^ mortalium solutus.
to continue their course for innumerable ages, and make their conversions, but
men are urged with many difficulties, and have many hindrances, oppositions,
still crossing, interrupting their endeavors and desires. And no mortal man
is free from this law of nature. We must not therefore hope to have all things
answer our own expectation, and to have a continuance of our good success
and fortunes. Fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona, and as Minutius Faelix the
Roman Consul told that insulting Coriolanus, drunk with his good fortunes,
look not for that success thou have hitherto had, Dionysius Halicar. lib. 8.
non enim vnquam contigit, nec post homines natos invenies quenquam cui omnia ex
animi sententia successerint, ita vt nulla in re fortuna sit ei adversata.
It never yet happened to any man since the beginning of the world, nor ever
will to have all things according to his desire, or to whom fortune was never
opposite and averse. Whatsoever is under the Moon is subject to corruption,
alteration, and so long as thou live upon earth look not for other. In
terris puru^ illum aetherem non invenies, and serenos animos, nimbos potius
procellas, calumnias. Lips. cent. misc. ep. 8.
Thou shall not here find peaceable and cheerful days, quiet times, but
rather clouds, storms, calumnies, such is our fate.

I, but thou think thou art more miserable then the rest, other men are
happy in respect of thee, their miseries are but flea-bitings to thine, thou
alone art unhappy, none so bad as thy self. Yet if as Socrates said, Si omnes
homines sua mala s^asque curas in vnum cumulum conferrent aequis divisuri
portionibus, etc.
All the men in the world should come and bring their grievances together, of
body, mind, fortune, sores, ulcers, madness, Epilepsies, agues, and all those
common calamities of beggary, want, servitude, imprisonment, and lay them on a
heap to be equally divided, would thou share alike and take thy portion, or
be as thou art? Without question thou would be as thou art: Quod vnusquisque
propria mala novit, aliorum nesciat, in causa est, vt se inter alios miserum
putet. Cardan. lib. 3. de Consol. Plutarch. de Consol ad Apollonium.
every man knows his own but not other men's defects and miseries; and it is
the nature of all men still to reflect upon themselves, their own misfortunes,
not to examine or consider other men's, not to confer themselves with others.
To recount their miseries, but not their good gifts, fortunes, benefits, which
they have, to ruminate on their adversity, but not once to think on their
prosperity, not what they have, but what they want, to look still on them that
go before them, but not on those infinite numbers that come after them. Quam
multas putas quise coelo proximos putarent totidem regulos si de fortunae tuae
reliquijs pars ijs minima contingat. Boeth. de consol. lib. 2. pros 4.
Where as many a man would think himself in heaven, a petty Prince, if he had
but the least part of that fortune which thou so much repinest at, abhorrest
and accountest a most vile, a wretched estate. How many thousa^ds want that
which thou have, how many myrriades of poor slaves, captives, of such as work
day and night in Cole-pits, Tin mines, with sore toil to maintain a poor
living, of such as labor in body and mind, live in extreame-anguish, and pain,
all which thou art free from. O fortunatos nimiu^ bona si sua norint, thou art
most happy, if thou could be content, When thou come here after to want
that which now thou have thou will say thou wast happy.
and acknowledge thy happiness, be silent then, Hesiod. 1. oper. Esto quod es
quod sunt alii sine quemlibet esse, quod no^ es nolis, quod potes esse velis.
rest satisfied, desine, intuensque in aliorum infortunia solare mentem,
comfort thy self with other men's misfortunes, and as the moldiwarpe in Aesope
told the Fox, complaining for want of a tail, and the rest of his companions,
tacete quando me oculis captum videtis, you complain of toys, but I am blind,
be quiet. It is Aesop. Fab.
said of the Hares, that with a general consent they went to drown themselves,
out of a feeling of their misery, but when they saw a company of Frogs more
fearful then they were, they began to take courage and comfort themselves.
Confer thine estate with others, Similes aliorum respice caesus, mitius
istaferes. Be content and rest satisfied, for thou art well in respect of
others, consider aright of it, thou art full well as thou art. Seneca.
Quicquid vult habere nemo potest, no man can have what he will, Illud potest
nolle quod non habet. He may choose whether he will desire that which he has
not. Thy lot is fallen, make the best of it. Si dormirent semper omnes nullus
alio faelicior esset. Cardan
If we should all sleep at all times, who then were happier the^ his fellow?
Our life is but short, a very dream and while we look about, Seneca de Ira
Immortalitas adest, eternity is at hand. Plato Axiocho. An ignoras vitam hanc
perigrinationem etc quam sapientes cum gaudio percurrunt.
Our life is a pilgrimage on earth, which wise men pass with great alacrity.
If thou be in woe, sorrow, want, or distress, in pain or sickness, think of
that of our Apostle, God chastises them whom he loves: They that sow in
tears, shall reap in joy, Ps. 126.6. As the Furnace proves the Potters
vessel, so does temptation try men's thoughts, Ecclus 25.5. it is for Sic
expedit, medicus non dat quod patiens vult sed quod ipse bonum seit.
thy good. Perijsses nisi perijsses. Had thou not been so visited, thou
had been utterly undone, as gold in the fire, so men are tried in adversity,
Deus vnicum habet filium sine peccato nullum sine flagello: God, says Confess
6.
Austin, had one Son without sin, none without correction. Nauclerum
tempestas, athletam stadium, ducem pugna, magnanimum calamitas, Christianum
vero le^tatio probat and examinat.
An expert sea man is tried in a tempest, a runner in a race, a Captain in a
battle, a valiant man in adversity, a Christian in temptation and misery,
Basil. Homil. 8. We are sent as so many soldiers into this world, to strive
with the world, flesh, devil, our life is a warfare, and who knows it not,
Ideo Deus asperum fecit iter ne dum delectantur in via obliviscantur eorum quae
sunt in patria.
and therefore peradventure this world here is made troublesome unto us, that
as Gregory notes, we should not be delighted by the way, and forget whether we
are going. Boethius, l. 4. mel vlt.
Ite nunc fortes, vbi celsa magni
Ducit exempli via, cur inertes
Terga nudatis, superata tellus sidera donat.
Go on merrily to heaven. If the way be troublesome, and you in misery, in
many grieuances, on the other side you have many pleasant objects, sweet
smells, delight some tastes, music, meats, herbs, flowers, etc. to recreat
your senses. Or put case thou art now forsaken of the world, dejected,
contemned, yet comfort thy self, as it was said to Agar in the Wilderness,
Boeth. pros^ult Manet spectator cunctorum desuper praescius deus, bonis praemia
malis supplicia dispensans.
God sees thee, he takes notice of thee. There is a God above that can
vindicate thy cause, that can relieve thee. For thy part then cast all thy care
on him, thy burden on him, rely on him 1. Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 55.22.
trust in him, and he shall nourish thee, care for thee, give thee thine hearts
desire, say with David. God is our hope and strength in troubles ready to be
found. 46.1. for they that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which
cannot be removed. Ps. 1 24.1.2 as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is
the Lord about his people, from hence forth and for ever.

MEMB. 2. Deformity of Body. Sickness. Baseness of Birth, peculiar
Discontents.
PArticular discontents and grieuances, are either of Body, Mind, Fortune,
which as they wound the Soul of man, and produce this of melancholy, and many
great inconveniences, by that Antidote of good counsel and persuasion they may
be eased or expelled. Deformities and imperfections of our bodies, as
lamenesse, crookedness, deafness, blindness, be they innate or accidental
torture many men: yet this may comfort them, that those imperfections of the
body do not a whit blemish the soul, or hinder the operations of it, but
rather help and much increase it. Thou art lame of Body, deformed to the eye,
yet this hinders not but that thou may be a good, a wife, upright honest man.
Raro sub eade^ lare honestas and forma habitant.
Seldom, says Plutarch Honesty and Beauty dwell together. And oftentimes
under a thredbare coat, lies an excellent understanding, saepe sub attrita
latitat sapientia vest. A silly fellow to look to, may have more wit,
learning, honesty, then he that struts it out Ampullis iactans, etc. and is
admired in the worlds opinion, Vilis saepe cadus nobile nectar habet. The best
wine comes out of an old vessel. How many deformed Princes, Kings, Emperors,
could I reckon up, Philosophers, Orators, Hanniball had one eye, Appius
Claudius, Timoleon, blind, John King of Bohemia, and Tiresias the Prophet. Nox
habet suas voluptates.
The night has his pleasures; and for the loss of that one sense, such men
are commonly reco^penced in the other; they have excellent memories, and other
good parts, music, and many recreations. Many Philosophers and Divines have
euirated themselves, and put out their eyes voluntarily the better to
contemplate. Angelus Politianus had a tetter in his nose continually running,
fulsome in company, yet no man so eloquent and pleasing in his works. Aesope
crooked, Socrates purblind, long legged, hairy, and Democritus withered, Seneca
lean and harsh, ugly to behold, yet show me so many flourishing wits, such
divine spirits. Rebid. vit. eius.
Ignatius Loiola the founder of the Jesuits, by reason of an hurt he received
in his leg, at the siege of Pampelona the chief town of Navarre in Spain,
unfit for wars and less serviceable at Court, upon that accident betook
himself to his beads, and by that means got more honor, then ever he should
have done with the use of his limbs, and propernesse of person, Macrobius.
Vulnus non penetrat animam: a wound hurts not the Soul. Galba the Emperor
was crookbacked, Epictetus lame, that great Alexander a little man of stature,
Augustus Caesar of the same pitch A Alexander Gaguinus hist. Polandiae. Corpore
parvus eram cubito vix altior vno, sed tamen in parvo corpore magnus eram.
Dom. 1306. Vlad^slaus Cubitalis that Pigmy king of Poland reigned, and fought
more victorious battles, then any of his long shanked predecessors. Nullam
virtus respuit staturam, Virtue refuses no stature, and commonly your great
vast bodies, and fine features, are sottish and dull, leaden spirits. Their
body, says Lib. 2. cap. 20. oneri est illis corporis moles, and spiritus minus
viuidi.
Lemnius, is a burden to them, and their spirits not so lively, nor they so
erect and merry. Non est in magno corpore mica saelis. Let Bodine in his 5.
cap. method. hist. plead the rest, the lesser they are, as in Asia, Greece,
they have generally the finest wits.

Sickness, diseases trouble many, but without a cause, Multis ad salutem anime
profuit corporis agritudo, Petrarch.
It may be it is for the good of their Souls. Pars fati fuit, the flesh rebels
against the spirit, that which hurts the one, must needs help the other.
Sickness is the mother of modesty, and puts us in mind of our mortality,
and when we are in the full careere of worldly pomp and iollity, she pulls
us by the ear, and makes us know our selves. Lib ^7. summa est totius
Philosophiae si tales, etc.
Pliny calls it the sum of Philosophy, If we could but perform that in our
health which we promise in our sickness. And were it not for such gentle
remembrances, men would have no moderation of themselves, they would be wourse
then Tigers, Lions. If thy disease be continuate and painful to thee, it will
not surely last: bear it with patience, women endure much sorrow in childbed,
and yet they will not contain, and those that are barren wish for this pain:
be courageous, Non tam mari quam praelio virtus etiam lecto exhibetur. vincetur
aut vincet aut tu sebre^ relinques aut ipsate. Seneca.
There is as much valor to be showed in thy bed, as in an army, or at a
sea fight, aut vincetur aut vincet, thou shall be rid at last. In the mean time
let it take his course, thy mind is not any way disabled. Bilibaldus Pirkimerus
Senator to Charles the 5. ruled all Germany lying most part of his days sick
on the gout upon his bed. The more violent thy torture is, the less it will
continue: and though it be severe and hideous for the time, comfort thy self
as Martyrs do, with honor and immortality.

Baseness of birth is a great disparagement to some men, especially if they be
wealthy, bear office, and come to promotion in a commonwealth, then as
Boethius lib. 2 pros. 4. huic sensus exuperat sed est pudori degener sanguis.
he observes, if their birth be not answerable to their calling, and to their
fellows, they are much abashed and ashamed of them selves. Some scorn their
own father and mother, deny brothers and sisters, and the rest of their kindred
and friends, and will not suffer them to come near them, when they are in
their pomp, accounting it a scandal to their greatness, to have such
beggarly beginnings. Simon in Lucian having now got a little wealth, changed
his name from Simon to Simonides, because there were so many beggars of his
kin, and set the house on fire where he was borne, because no body should
point at it. Others buy titles and cotes of Arms, and by all means skrew
themselves into ancient families, falsifying pedegrees, usurping Scutchions,
and all because they would not seem to be base. The reason is, for that this
Gentility is so much admired by a company of outsides, and so much honor
attributed unto it, Gasper. Ens polit. these.
as amongst Frenchmen and Venetians the Gentry scorn the Commonalty, and will
not suffer them to match with them, they depresse them, and make them as so
many Asses to carry burdens. In our ordinary talk and fallings out, the most
opprobrious and most scurrile name we can fasten upon a man, or first give, is
to call him base rogue, beggarly rascal, and the like. Whereas in my judgment
this ought of all other grieuances to trouble men least, of all vanities and
fopperies, to brag of gentility is the greatest; for what is it they crake so
much of, and challenge such superiority, as if they were demy-Gods? Birth? it
is, non ens: a mere flash, a ceremony, a toy, a thing of naught. Consider the
beginning, present estate, progress, ending, and then tell me what it is?
Alij pro pecunia emunt nobilitatem, alij illu^ lenacinio alij ve, neficijs,
alii parricidiis multis proditio nobilitatem conciliat, plerique adulatione
detractione, calumniis, etc. Agrippa de vanit. sci.
Oppression, fraud, cosening, usury knavery, baudery, murder, and tyranny, are
the beginnings of many ancient families: Ex homicidio saepe orta nobilitas and
strenua carnificina.
One has been a bloodsucker, a parricide, the death of many a silly soul in
some unjust quarrels, and seditions, made many an Orphan and poor widow, and
for that he is made a Lord or an Earl, and his posterity Gentlemen for ever
after. Another has been a Bawd, a Pander to some great man, a parasite, a
slave Plures ob Prostitutas filias vxores nobiles facti, multos venationes,
rapinae, raedes praestigia, etc.
prostituted himself, his wife, daughter, to some lascivious Prince, and for
that he is exalted. Tiberius preferred many to honors in his time, because
they were famous whoremasters, and sturdy drinkers; Many come into this roe by
flattery or cosening, search your old families, and you shall scarce find of a
multitude, as Aeneas Silvius observes, qui sceleratum non habent ortum. Cum
enim hos dici nobiles videmus qui divitiis abundant, divitiae veroraro virtutis
sunt comites, quis no^ vidit ortum nobilitatis degenerem, hunc vsurae ditarunt,
illum spolia, proditiones, hic venesitiis ditatus, ille adulationibus huic
adulteria lucrum pr^bent. nonnullis mendacia, quidam ex coniuge quaestum
faciunt, plerique ex natis etc.
That have not a wicked beginning. They are commonly noble that are wealthy,
and virtue and riches seldom settle on one man, who then sees not the base
beginning of nobility, spoils enrich one, usury another, treason a third,
witchcraft a fourth, flattery a fifth, lying, stealing, bearing false witness a
sixth, adultery the seventh, etc. One makes a fool of himself to make his
Lord merry, another dandles my young master, a third marries a cracked piece,
etc. Now may it please your good worship, your Lordship, who was the first
founder of your family? the Poet answers, q Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud quod
dicere nolo. Are he or you the better Gentleman? If he, then we have traced him
to his form. If you, what is it of which thou boastest of so much that thou
art his son. Thy great great great Grandsier was a rich citizen, and then in
all likelihood an Usurer, a Lawyer, and then a -- a Courtier and then a -- a
country Gentleman, and then he scraped it out of sheep and, etc. And you are
his heir of all his virtues, fortunes, titles, so then what is your gentry,
but as Hierom says, Opes antiquae, inveteratae divitiae, ancient wealth. That
is the definition of gentility. The Father goes often to the Devil to make his
Son a Gentleman. For the present. What is it? It began, says Robusta
improbitas. a tyrannide incepta, etc.
Agrippa, with strong impiety, with tyranny, oppression, etc. and so it is
maintained, wealth began it, (no matter how got) wealth con^inueth and
increases it. Those Roman Knights were so called, if they could dispend per
annum so much, Gasper Ens thesauro Polit.
In the Kingdom of Naples, and France, he that buies such lands buies the
honor, title, Barony together with it, and they that can dispend so much
amongst us, must be called to bear office, to be Knights or fine for it. And
what now maintains our Gentry but wealth, Hor.
Nobilitas sine reproiecta vilior alga. Without wealth Gentry is nothing worth,
nothing so contemptible and base. Syl^up. lib. 4. number 111.
Disputare de nobilitate generis sine diuitijs, est disputare de nobilitate
stercoris, says Neuisanus the Lawyer, to dispute of gentry without wealth, is
(saving your reverence) to discuss the original of a Mard. So that it is
wealth alone that denominates, that which maintains it, gives esse to it: and
what is their ordinary exercise, wherein lies their worth and sufficiency?
Omnium nobilium sufficientia in eo probatur si venaticam, noverint si ale^, si
corporis vires ingentibus poculis commonstre^t si naturae robur numeroso venere
probent, etc.
If he can hauk and hunt, ride a horse, play at Cards and dice, swagger and
drink, take Tobacco with a grace, wear his clothes in fashion, court and
please his mistress, talk big sustian, Dissicile est vt non sit superbus
dives Austin. ser. 24.
insult, scorn, contemn others, and use a little mimicall and apish
complement above the rest, he is a complete, well qualified Gentleman, these
are most of their employments. What is Gentry, Nobility then but as Nobilitas
nihil aliud nisi improbitas, furor, rapina, latrocinium, humicidium, luxus,
venatio, violentia etc.
Agrippa defines it, a sanctuary of knavery and naughtiness, a cloak for
wickedness, and execrable vices, of pride, fraud, contempt, boasting,
oppression, dissimulation, lust, gluttony, malice, fornication, adultery,
ignorance, impiety, a nobleman therefore in some likelihood, as he concludes,
an Atheist, an oppressor, an Epicure, The fool took away my Lord in the mask
it was apposite.
a gull, a disard, an illiterat idiot, an outside, a proud fool, and an arrant
ass. What do thou vant of now? Miraris aureas vestes, equos, canes ordinem
famulorum, lautas mensas, aedes villas, praedia, piscinas, sylvas, etc. haec
omnia stultus assequi potest. Pandalus noster lenocinio nobilitatus est.
Aenaeas Sylvius.
What do thou gape and vvonder at? admire him for his brave apparel,
horses, dogs, brave houses, manors, orchards, gardens, walks? Bellonius
observe. lib. 2.
Why, a fool may be possessor of this as well as he, and he that accounts him
a better man, a noble man for having it, he is a fool himself Now go and
brag of thy gentility? This is it belike which makes the Turks at this day
scorn nobility, and all those huffing bumbast titles, which so much elevate
their poles: except it be such as have got it at first, or maintain by some
supereminent quality, or excellent worth, And for this cause the Ragusian
commonwealth, Suitzers, and the United Provinces, exclude all such degrees of
hereditary honors, and will admit of none to bear office, but such as are
learned, like those Athenian Areopagites, wise, discreet, and well brought up.
The Mat, Riccius lib. 1. cap. 3. ad regendam remp. soli doctores aut licentiati
adsciscuntur etc
Chinenses observe the same customs, no man amongst them noble by birth, out
of their Philosophers and Doctors they choose magistrates, their Loisij,
Mand^rini, literati, licentiati, and such as have raised themselves by their
worth, are their noblemen only, thought fit to govern a commonwealth, and why
then should any that is otherwise of worth, be ashamed of his birth? how much
better is it to say with him, Egomeis maioribus virtute praeluxi, to boast
himself of his virtues, then of his birth. Pertinax, Philippus Arabs,
Maximinus, Probus, Aurelius etc. from common soldiers became Emperors. Cato,
Cincinnatus etc. Pius 2 dus. Sixtus 5^, etc. Popes. Socrates, Virgil, Horace,
libertino patrenatus. Olaus Magnus lib 18. Saxo Grammaticus. a quo rex Sueno,
and caetera Danorum regum stemmata.
The Kings of Denmark fetch their pedigree, as some say, from one Vlfo, that
was the son of a bear. Hercules, Romulus, Alexander, out of Olympias
Confession, Themistocles, King Arture, William the Conqueror etc. bastards,
and almost in every kingdom, the most ancient families have bin at first
Princes bastards, and their worthiest captains, brauest spirits in all our
Annals, have bin base. Castruccius Castrucanus a poor child, found in the
fields exposed to misery, became Prince of Luke and Senes in Italy, a most
complete soldier, and worthy captain, Machiauel compares him to Scipio or
Alexander. And it is a wonderful thing, Vita Castruccij. Nec praeter rationem
mirum videri debet, si quis rem considerare velit omnes eos vel saltem maxima^
partem qui in hoc terrarum orb res praestantiores aggressi sunt, atque inter
caeteros aevi sui heroes extell^er ^t aut obscuro, aut abiecto loco editos, and
prognatos fuisse obscuris and abiectis parentibus. Eorum ego Catalogum
infinitum recenfere possem etc.
says he, to him that shall consider of it, that all those, or the greatest
part of them, Curtius.
that have done the brauest exploits here upon earth, and have excelled the
rest of the Nobles of their time, have bin still borne in some abject obscure
place, or of base and obscure abject Parents. I could recite a great Catalogue
of them, every kingdom, every Province will yield innumerable examples: and
why then should baseness of birth be objected to any man? who thinks worse of
Tully for being Arpinas, or Agathocles that Sicilian King, for being a Potters
son. Iphicrates and Marius were meanly borne. Who thinks better of any man f^r
his nobility? To speak as I think, as Vt merito dicam quod simpliciter sentia^
Paulum Schalichium scriptore^, and doctorem, pluris facio quam comitem Hunnorum
and Barone^ Zkradinu^. Encyclopaediam tuam, and orbem disciplinaru^ omnibus
provincijs antefero. Baleus epist. nuncupat. ad 5. cent. vltimas, script Brit.
Bale did to P. Schalichius, I more esteem thy worth, learning, honesty, then
thy Nobility, honor thee more that thou art a Writer, a Doctor of Divinity,
then Earl of the Hunnes, Baron of Zkradine, or title to such and such
Provinces, etc. who does not so indeed? Abdolominus a Gardner, whom Alexander
for his virtues made King of Syria. How much better is it to be borne of mean
parentage, and to excel in worth, to be learned, and well qualified, and to be
fit for any manner of emploiment in country and commonwealth, war and peace,
then to be Degeneres Neoptolemi, as may Nobles are, only wise, because rich,
otherwise idiots, illiterate, unfit for any manner of service. Thou have had so
many noble Ancestors, what is that to thee? vix ea nostra voco, If children be
proud, haughty, foolish, they defile the nobility of their kindred Ecclus 22.8
when thou art a disard thy self, quid prodest Pontice longo stemmate censeri?
etc. I conclude, have thou a found body, and a good Soul, good bringing up,
art thou virtuous, honest, well learned, well qualified, religious, are thy
conditions good? thou art a true Noble man, be not ashamed of thy birth, thou
art a Gentleman all the world over, and shall be honored, when as he, strip him
of his fine clothes, Send them both to some strange place, ad ignotos you
shall see the difference. Bacon. Essays.
dispossess him of his wealth, is a funge, like a piece of coin in another
country, that no man will take, and shall be contemned.

Let no terrae filius, or vpstart, insult at this which I have said, or worthy
Gentleman take offense, I speak it not to detract from such as are well
deserving, truly virtuous and noble: I do much respect and honor true gentry
and Nobility, I was borne of worshipful Parents my self, in an ancient
family, but I am a younger brother, it concerns me not: or had I bin some great
Heir, richly endowed, so minded as I am, I should not have bin elevated at al
by it, but so esteemed of it, as of all other humane happiness, honors etc. they
have their period, are brittle and unconstant. As Fluvius hic illustris
humanarum rerum Imago, quae par vis ductae sub initijs in immensum crescunt,
and subito evanescunt. exilis hic primo fluvius in admirandam magnitudinem
excrescit, tandemque in mari Euxino evanescit. I. Stukius perip. mar. Euxini.
he said of that great river Danubius, it rises from a small fountain, a
little brook at first, sometimes broad, sometimes narrow, now slow, then swift,
increased at last to an incredible greatness by the confluence of many rivers,
it vanishes in conclusion, loses his name, and is suddenly swallowed up of
the Euxine Sea I may say of our greatest families, they were mean at first,
augmented by rich marriages, purchases, offices, they continue for some ages,
with some little alteration of circumstances, fortunes, places etc. by some
prodigal son, or for want of issue they are defaced in an instant, and their
memory blotted out.

So much in the mean time I do attribute to gentility, that if he be well
descended of worshipful or noble Parentage, he will express it in his
conditions. -- nec enim feroces
Progenerant aquilae columbam.
he will be more affable and courteous, gently disposed, of fairer carriage,
better temper, of a more magnanimous, heroical and generous spirit, then that
vulgus hominum, those ordinary boores and pesants, qui adeo improbi, agrestes,
and inculti plerumque sunt, ne dicam malitiosi, vt nemini vllum humanitatis
officium praestent, ne ipsi Deo si advenerit, as Sabinus in 6. Ovid. Met. fab.
4.
one observes of them, a rude, brutish, uncivil, wild, a cu^rish generation,
cruel and malicious, incapable of discipline, and such as have scarce common
sense. And it may be generally spoken of all, which Lib. 1. de 4
co^plectionibus.
Lemnius the Physitia^ said of his travels into England, the common people were
silly, sullen, dogged clownes, sed mitior Nobilitas, ad omne humanitatis
officium paratissima, the Gentlemen were courteous and civil. If it so fall out
(as often it does) that such pesants are preferred by reason of their wealth,
chance, error, etc. or otherwise, yet as the cat in the fable, when she was
turned to a fair maid, would play with mice; a curre will be a curre, a clown
a clown, he will likely savor of the stock whence he came, and that innate
rusticity can hardly be shaken off. And though by their education such men may
be better qualified, and more refined; yet there be many symptoms by which
they may likely be descried, an affected fantastical carriage, a tayler-like
sprucenes, a peculiar garb in all their proceedings, a beggars brat will be
commonly more scornful, imperious, insulting, insolent then another man of
his rank.

Asperius nihil est humili cum surgit in altum^. set a beggar on horseback, and
he will ride a gallop, a gallop, etc. Claudian. lib. 9. in Eutrop.
-- desaeuit in omnes
Dum se posse putat, nec bellua saevior vlla est,
Quam serui rabies in libera colla furentis.
he forgets what he was, domineeres etc. and many such other symptoms he has,
by which you may know him from a true Gentleman. Many errors and obliquities
are on both sides, noble, ignoble: yet still in all callings as some
degenerate, some are well-deseruing, and most worthy of their honors. And as
Busbequius said of Solomon the magnificent, he was tanto dignus imperio, worthy
of that great Empire, many meanly descended are most worthy of their honor, and
well deserve it, And many of our Nobility, (which one said of Hephaestion,
Ptolomaeus, Antigonus etc. and the rest of Alexanders followers, they were all
worthy to be Monarchs and Generals of Armies) deserve to be Princes. Many
Noblemen are an ornament to their order, many poor men's sons are singularly
well endowed, and most eminent, and well-deseruing for their worth, wisdom,
learning, virtue, valor, integrity, excellent members, and pillars of a
commonwealth. And therefore to conclude that which first I intended, to be
base by birth, meanly borne, is no such disparagement.

MEMB. 3. Against poverty and want, with such other adversity.
ONe of the greatest miseries that can befall a man in the worlds esteem, is
Poverty or want, which makes men steal, bear false witness, swear and
forswear, contend, murder and rebel, which breaks sleep, and causes death
it self, (...), Nullu^ paupertate gravius onus.
no burden, says Menander, so intolerable as Poverty, it makes men desperate,
it erects and deiects, census honores, census amicitias, money makes, but this
marres etc. and all this in the worlds esteem, yet if it be considered aright,
it is a great blessing in it self, a happy estate, and yields no such cause of
discontent, or that men should therefore account themselves vile, miserable,
unfortunate. CHRIST himself was poor, borne in a manger, and had not a house
to hide his head in all his life, Ne quisirae divine aut Iudi^iu^ putaret, aut
paupertas exosa foret. Gualter in cap. 2. ver. 18. Luc.
lest any man should make Poverty a Judgment of God, or an odious estate. And
as he was himself, so he informed his Apostles and Disciples, they were all
poor, Prophets poor, Apostles poor. Act 3. Silver and gold have I none: as
sorrowing says Paul, and yet always rejoicing, as having nothing, and yet
possessing all things, 2. Cor. 6.10. All your great Philosophers have bin
voluntarily poor, not only Christians, but all the rest. Crates Thebanus was
adored for a god in Athens, Inter proceres Thebanos nume^atus lectum habuit
(...), frequens famulitium, domus amplas etc Apaleius Flo^. lib. 4.
a noble man by birth, many servants he had, and honorable attendance, much
wealth, many manors fine apparel, but when he saw that all this all the wealth
in the world was but brittle, uncertain, and no whit auailing to live well, he
flung his burden in the Sea, and renounced his estate. Those Curij and Fabritij
will be renowned to the worlds end, for contempt of these fopperies, wherewith
the world is so much affected: amongst Christians I could reckon up many Kings
and Queens that have forsaken their Crowns and fortunes, and wilfully
abdicated themselves from these so much esteemed toys, P. Blesensis epist, 72,
and 232. oblatos respui honores ex onere metiens motus ambitiosos rogatus non
ivi etc.
many that have refused honors, titles, and all this vain pomp and happiness,
'which others so ambitiously seek, and carefully study to compass and attain.
But Sudat pauser for as in opere, dives cogitatione, hic os aperit oscitatione,
ille ructatione, gravius ille fastidio quae^ hic inedia cruciatur. Bernard. ser.
confer both estates, and it will easily appear, there is no such odds, no
such extraordinary happiness in the one, or misery in the other. He is rich,
wealthy, fat, what gets he by it? Pride, insolency, lust, ambition, cares,
fears, suspicion, troble, anger, emulation, and many filthy diseases of body
and mind. He has indeed variety of dishes, better fare, swet wine, pleasant
sauce, dainty Music, gay clothes etc. and all that which Missyllus admired in
Gallo. Tom. 2.
Lucian, but withal he has the gowt, dropsies, Apoplexies, palsies, stone,
pox, rhumes, catarres, crudities, oppilations, Et e contubernio faediatque,
olidi ventris mors tandem educit. Seneca epist. 103.
Melancholy etc. lust enter in, anger, ambition, with their variety of dishes,
and many such maladies, which the poor man knows not of. As Saturn in Satur.
'epist.
Lucian, made answer to the poor commonalty (which because of their neglected
Saturnall Feasts in Rome, made a grievous complaint and exclamation against the
Richmen) that they were much mistaken in supposing such happiness in riches, you
see the best said he, but you know not their several gripings and discontents:
they are like painted walls, fair without, rotten within, diseased, filthy,
crasy, full of intemperances effects. Et quota pars haec eorum quae istos
discruciant sinoscetis metus and curas quibus abnoxy sunt, plane fugiendas
vobis divitias existimaretis.
And who can reckon half, if you but knew their fears, cares, Vos quidem
divitos putatis faelices, at nescitis eorum miserias.
anguish of mind and vexation, to which they are subject, you would hereafter
renounce all riches. Yea, but he has the world at will that is rich, the good
things of the Earth, he is a happy man, Et diis similes stulta cogitatio facit.
adored like a god, a Prince, every man seeks to him, applauds, honors, admires
him. He has honors indeed, abundance of all things, but as I said, withal
Flamma simul ^ibidinis ingreditur, ira, furo^ and superbia, divitiarum sequeld.
pride, lust, anger, emulation, fears, cares, suspicion enter in with his
wealth, for his intemperance he has aches, crudities, gowts, and all manner of
diseases. Chrysostom. Omniu^ oculis, odio, insidys expositus somper sollicitus,
fortunae ludibriu^.
He is exposed to hatred, envy, peril and treason, fear of death, of
degradation etc. and the higher he climes the greater is his fall. -- Hor. ^d.
2. l. 10 (...).
cellae graviore casu decidunt turres, feriuntque summos fulgura montes, the
lightning commonly sets on fire the highest towers, Quid we faelicem toties
iactastis amici, qui cecidit stabili non fuit ille locu. Boeth.
in the more eminent place, he is the more subject to fall. For the rest of his
prerogatives which wealth affords, as he has more, his expen^es are the
greater, when goods increase, they are increased that eat them, and what good
comes to the owners thereof, but the beholding thereof with their eyes Ecclus
4.10. an evil sickness Solomon calls it, and reserved to them for their evil
12 verse. And therefore S. James bids them, weep and howl for the miseries that
shall come upon them, their gold shall rust and canker, and eat their flesh as
fire. James 5.1.23. I may then boldly conclude with Cap. 6. de curat. graec.
affect. cap. de providentia^. quotiescunque divitijs affluente^ hominem videmus
eumque pessimum, ne quaeso hunc beatissimii imputemus, sed infaelicem censeamus
etc.
Theodoret, quotiescunque divitijs affluentem,f As often as you shall see a man
abounding in wealth, and naught withal, I beseech you call him not happy, but
esteem him unfortunate, because he has many occasions offered to live
iniustly: on the other side, a poor man is not miserable, if he be good, but
therefore happy, that those evil occasions are taken from him. Wherein now
consists his happiness, or what privileges has he more then other men? or
rather what miseries, what cares and discontents has he not more then other
men?

Hor. lib. 2.
Non enim gazae, neque consularis
Summovet lictor miseros tumultus
Mentis, and curas laqueata circum tecta volantes.
Nor' treasures, nor' majors officers remove
The miserable tumults of the mind:
Or cares that lie about, or fly above
Their high-roof'd houses, with huge beams co^bind
It Is not his wealth can vindicate him, nil iuvat immensos Cratero promittere
montes. sint Craesi and Crassi licet, non hos pactolus aureas vndas agens
eripiet vnquam e miserijs. Craesus or rich Crassus cannot now command health,
or get himself a stomach. Florid lib. 4. dives ille cibo interdicitur, and in
omni copia sua cibum non accipit, cum intereatotum eius servitium hilave fit,
atque epuletur.
His worship, as Apuleius describes him, in all his plenty and great provision
is forbidden to eat, or else has no appetite, when as in the mean time, all
his household are merry, and the poorest servant that he keeps, does
continually feast. It Is bracteata falicitas, as Epist. 115.
Seneca terms it, tin-foyl'd happiness if it be happiness at all. His gold and
guard, and clattering of harneys, and fortifications against outward enemies,
cannot free him from inward fears and cares.

Reveraque metus hominum, curaeque sequaces
Nec metuunt fremitus armorum, aut ferrea tela,
Audacterque inter reges requmque potentes
Versantur, neque fulgorem reuerentur ab auro.
Indeed men still attending cares and fears,
Nor armors clashing, nor fierce weapons fear:
With Kings converse they boldly, and Kings Peers,
Fearing no flashing that from gold appears.
Look how many servants he has, and so many enemies, he suspects, for liberty
he intertaines ambition, his pleasures are no pleasures, and that which is
worst, he cannot be private, or enjoy himself as other men do, his states is
a servitude. Hor. and mihi curto Ire licet mulo vel si libet vsque Tarentum.
A country man may travel from kingdom to kingdom, Province to Province,
city to city, and glut his eyes with delightful objects, hawk and hunt, and
use all ordinary disports, without any notice taken, all which a Prince or a
great man cannot do. A poor man takes more delight in an ordinary meals
meat, which he has but now and then, then they do with all their exotic
dainties and continual Viandes, quippe voluptatem comendat rarior vsus, it is
the rarity that makes a thing acceptable and pleasant: which made Epicurus
sometimes voluntarily fast. But they being always accustomed to the same Et in
cupedijs gulae cocus and pueri illotis manibus ab exoneratione ventris omnia
tractant etc. Cardan lib. 8 cap. 46. de rerum varietate.
dishes, of fish, flesh, or whatsoever else, are therefore cloved, Nectar it
self grows, loathsome to them, they are weary of all their fine palaces, they
are to them but as so many prisous. A poor man drinks in a wooden dish, and
eats his meat in wooden spoones, wooden platters, earthen Vessels, and such
homely stuff: the other in gold, silver, and precious stones, but with what
success? in auro bibitur venenum, fear of poison in the one, security in the
other. And such is the whole tenor of their lives, and that which is the
consummation and vpshot of all, death it self. The rich man lives like Dives
Iovially here on Earth, make the best of it; and boastes himself in the
multitude of his riches Psalm. 49.6. and 11. he thinks his house called after
his own name, shall continue for ever, but he perishes like a beast, ver. 20.
his way vtters his folly, ver. 13. male parta, male dilabuntur, like sheep they
lie in the grave 14. Puncto descendunt ad infernum, for all their Physicians
and medicines enforcing Nature, a souning wife, families complaints, friends
tears, Dirges, Masses, naenias, funerals, for all Orations, counterfeit hired
acclamatio^s, elogiums, Epithaphes, herses, black mourners, solemnities,
obelisks, and Mausolean tombs, if he have them at least, Ad generum cereris
sine caede and sanguine pauci descendunt reges and sicca morte tyranni.
he dies like a hog, goes to hell with a guilty conscience, and many a poor
man's curse: his memory stinkes like the snuff of a candle when it is put out,
scurrile libels, and infamous obloquies accompany him. When as poor Lazarus is
Dei sacrarium, the Temple of God, lives and dies in true devotion, has no more
attendants but his own innocence, the heaven a tomb, desires to be dissolved,
buried in his mothers lap, and has a company of God shall deliver his soul
from the power of the grave, Psalm. 49.15.
Angels ready to convay his soul into Abraham's bosom, he leaves an
everlasting and a sweet memory behind him. Crassus and Sylla are indeed still
recorded, but not so much for their wealth, as for their victories: Croesus for
his end, Solomon for his wisdom.

But consider all those other unknown, concealed happinesses which a poor man
has (I call them unknown, because they be not acknowledged in the worlds
esteem, or so taken.) O fortunatos nimium bona si sua norint: but happy they
are in the mean time if they would take notice of it, or make use, or apply it
to themselves. A poor man wise is better then a foolish King. Eccl. 4.13.
Austin in Psalm. 76. omnis philosophiae magistra, ad coelum via.
Poverty is the way to heaven, the mistress of Philosophy, the mother of
religion, virtue, sobriety, sister of innocency and an Bonae mentis soror
paupertas.
upright mind. How many such Paedagoga pietatis, sobria, pia matter, cultu
simplex, habitu secura, consilio benesuada. Apulcius.
encomions might I add out of the Fathers, Philosophers, Orators. It troubles
many that they are poor, and they account of it as a great disgrace, a shame
and a reproach, but to whom, or why? Cardan. Opprobrium non est paupertas: quod
latro eripit, aut pater non reliquit cur mihi vitio daretur? fortuna divitias
invidit, non aquilae, non, etc.
If fortune has envied me wealth, thieves have robbed me, my father have not
left me such revenewes as others have, that I am a younger brother, basely
borne, am I therefore to be blamed? an eagle, a bull, a lion is not rejected
for his poverty, and why should a man? I live sparingly, am clad homely, fare
hardly, is this a reproach? am I the worse for it? am I conte^ptible for it? am
I to be reprehended? A learned man in Lib. 4. number. 218. quidam deprehensus quod
sederet loco nobilium, mea nobilitas ait, est circa caput, vestrae declinat ad
caudem.
Neuisanus was taken down for sitting amongst Gentlemen, but he replied, my
nobility is about the Head, yours declines to the tail, and they were silent.
Let them mock, scorn and revile. it is not thy scorn, but him that made thee
so. He that mocketh the poor, reprocheth him that made him. Prove. 11.5. and he
that rejoices at affliction, shall not he unpunished. And for the rest, the
poorer thou art, the happier thou art, ditior est and non melior, says Tanto
beatior es, quanto collectior.
Epictetus, he is richer, not better then thou art, nor so free from lust,
envy, hatred, ambition. -- Beatus ille qui procul negotijs
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis.
Happy he, in that he is Non amoribus inseruit, nonappetit honores, and
qualitercumque relictus satis habet hominem se esse meminit, invidit nemini,
neminem despicit, nemi^^m miratur, sermonibus mal gnis non attendit aut alitur.
Plinius.
freed from the tumults of the world, he seeks no honors, gapes after no
preferment, flatters not, envies not, but lives privately, and well contented
with his estate, Nec spes cord auidas, nec curam pascit inanem
Securus quo fata cadant,
He is not troubled with successions, fear of invasions, factions, emulations,
Politianus in Rustico.
Faelix ille animi, divisque simillimus ipsis,
Quem non mordaci resplendens gloria fuco
Sollicitat, non fastosi mala gaudia luxus,
Sed tacitos sinit ire dies, and paupere cultu
Exigit innocuae tranquilla silentia vitae.
An happy Soul, and like to God himself,
Whom not vainglory macerates or strife,
Or wicked joys of that proud swelling pelf,
But leads a still, poor and contented life.
Gyges regno Lydiae inflatus suscitatum misit Apollinem ax quis mortalium se
faelicior esset. Aglaium Arcadum pauperimum Apollo praetulit, qui terminos agri
sui nunquam excesserat, rure suo contentus. Valor, lib. 1. cap. 7.
A secure, quiet, Hor. -- haec est Vita solutorum misera ambitione, gravique.
hapy state he has, if he could but acknowledge it. But here is the misery,
that he will not take notice of it, he repines at richmens wealth, brave
hangings, dainty fare, as Xenoph. Tyran.
Simonides objected to Hieron, he has all the pleasures of the world, and it
troubles him that he has not the like; but in the mean time he does not
consider the others miseries, his infirmities of body and mind, that accompany
his estate, but still reflects upon his false conceived woes and wants, whereas
if the matter were duly examined, Omnes divites qui caelo and terra frui
possunt.
he is in no distress at all, he has no cause to complain -- Hor. lib. 1.
ep. 12.
toll querelas,
Pauper enim non est cui rerum suppetit vsus.
he is not poor, he is not in need. Seneca epist. 15. panem and aquam natura
desiderat, and haec qui babet ipso cum love de faelicitate contendat, Cibus
simplex, famem sedat vestis tenuis frigus arcet. Sen. ep. 8.
Nature is content with bread and water, and he that can rest satisfied with
that, may contend with Jupiter himself for happiness. Jacob desired no more
of God but bread to eat, and clothes to put on in his journey, Genesis 28.20. Been
est, cui deus obtulit, parca quod saetis est manu, bread is enough Psalm. 84.
to strengthen the heart. And if you study Philosophy aright, says Sirecte
philosophemini quicquid aptam moderationem supergreditur oneri potius quam vsui
est.
Maudarensis, whatsoever is beyond this moderation, is not useful, but
troublesome. Lib. 7.16. Cereris munus and aquae poculum mortales quaerunt
habere, and quorum saties nunquam est, luxus autem sunt caetera, non epulae.
Agellius out of Euripides, accounts bread and water enough to satisfy Nature,
of which there is no surfeit, the rest is not a feast, but riot. Satis est dives
qui pane non indiget, ni^niu^ potens qui seruire non cogitur. Ecquid cum
faeuces vrit sitis, aurea querit pocula? ambitiosa non est fames etc.
S^ Hierome esteems him rich, that has bread to eat, and a potent man that
is not compelled to be a slave: hunger is not ambitious so that it have to
eat, and thirst does not prefer a cup of gold. It was no Epicurean speech of
an Epicure, he that is not satisfied with a little, will never have enough. And
if thou can be content, thou have abundance, nihil est, nihil deest, thou
have nothing, and thou want nothing. Hor.
Si ventri been si lateri, pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae poterunt regales addere maius.
If belly, sides and feet be well at ease,
A Princes treasure can thee no more please.
It Is thy want alone that keeps thee in health of body and mind, and that
which thou persecutest and abhorrest as a ferall plague, is thy Physician and O
noctes caenaeque deum.
chiefest friend. -- o vitae tuta facultas
Pauperis, angustique lares, Lucan.
o munera nondum
Intellecta deum --
how happy art thou if thou could but be content. Godliness is great gain,
if a man can be content with that which he has. 1 Timothy 6.6. And all true
happiness in a mean estate. I have a little wealth as he said, I ipsuis
miscell ep. 40.
sed quas animus magnas facit, a kingdom in conceit. -- Sat. 6. lib. 2. scr.
nihil amplius opto
Maia nate, nisi vt propria haec mihi munera faxis.
I have enough, and desire no more. Let them take wealth, so that I may have
security, been qui latuit, been vixit, though I live obscure, (...) vi^ereeti^^
(...) as D^men said Adelph. (...) 4, quam (...) eg^^, quam (...) non (...), v^
S^c. (...).
yet I live clean and honest, and when as the lofty oak is blown down, the
silly reed may stand. Let the^ take honor, so that I may have hearts ease. I
do not envy at their wealth, titles, offices, ^iemus ep. 62.
erimus (as he comforted himself) quando illi non erunt, when they are dead
and gone, and all their pomp vanished, our memory may flourish. Let him be my
Lord, Patron, Baron, Earl, and possess so many goodly Castles, it is well for
me Hoc erat in votis modus agri non ita parvus hortus vb^ and tecto vicinus
iugis aquae fons, and paulu^ silue and t. Hor. Sat. 6. lib. 2 ser.
that I have a poor house, and a little wood, and a Well by it etc. -- his me
consolor victurum suavius ac si
Quaestor avus pater atque meus patruusque suissent.
I live I thank God as merrily as he, and triumph as much in this my mean
estate, as if my father and uncle had bin my Lord Treasurer, or my Lord Mayor.
He feeds of many dishes, I have one, Hierome.
qui Christum curat, non multum curat quam de pretiosis cibis stercus
conficiat, what care I of what stuff my excrements be made? Seneca consil. ad
Albinum ca. 11. qui continet se intra naturae limits paupertatem non sentit,
qui excedit eum in opibus, paupertas sequitur.
He that lives according to Nature, can not be poor, and he that exceedes, can
never have enough, totus non sufficit orbis, the whole world cannot give him
content. A small thing that the righteous has, is better then the riches of
the ungodly Psalm. 37.16. and better is a poor morsel with quietness, then
abundance with strife, Prove. Be content then, enjoy thy self: for what want
thou to expostulate the matter? or what have thou not better then a rich man?
Quid non habet melius pauper quam dives, vitam, valetudinem, cibum, somnum,
libertatem, etc. Cardan
health, children, security, sleep, friends, liberty, diet, apparel, and what
not, and that which I am sure he wants, a merry heart. Passing by a village in
the Territory of Millan, says S. Austin, I saw a poor beggar, that had got
belike his belly full of meat, jesting and merry, I sighed and said to some of
my friends that were then with me, What a deal of trouble, madness, pain and
grief do we sust^in and exaggerate unto our selves, Confess. lib. 6.
Transiens per vicum qnendum Mediolanensem animadverti pauperem quendam mendicum
iam credo saturum iocantem atque ridentem, and ingemui and loquutus sum cum
amicis qui mecum erant etc.
to get that secure happiness, which this poor beggar has prevented us of and
which we peradventure shall never have. For that which he has now attained
with the begging of some small pieces of silver, a temporal happiness, and
present hearts ease, I cannot compass with all my careful windings, and
running in and out. Et certe ille laetabatur, ego anxius, securus ille, ego
trepidus. Et si percotaretur me quispiam an exultare mallem, an metucre,
responderem exultare: and sirursus interrogaret, an ego talis essem, an qualis
nunc sum, meipsum curis consectum eligerem, sed perversitate, non veritate.
And surely the beggar was very merry, but I was heavy: he was secure, but I
timorous. And if any man should ask me now, whether I had rather be merry, or
still so sollicitous and sad, I should say, merry. If he should ask me again,
whether I had rather be as I am, or as this beggar was, I should sure choose
to be as I am, tortured still with cares and fears, but out of peevishnes,
and not out of truth. That which S^ Austin said of himself here in this
place, I may truly say to thee thou discontented wretch, thou covetous
niggard, thou churl, thou ambitious and swelling toade, it is not want but
peevishness which is the cause of thy woes, settle thine affection thou have
enough. Hor.
Denique sit finis quaerendi quumque habeas plus
Pauperiem metuas minus and finire laborem
Incipias, parto quod avebas vtere.
O si nunc m^r^rer inquit quanta and qualia mihi imperfecta ma^erent, sed
simensibus december vel octo supervixe^o, omnia redigam ad libe^am ab omni debito
creditoque me explicabo, praetereunt interim men, es de^em and octo and cum
illis anni and adhuc restant plura quam prius, quid igitur speras o insane
finem quem rebus tuis non inveneras in inventa, in senecta impositurum. O
dementiam quum ob curas and negotia tuo iudicio sis insaelix, quid putas
futurum quum plura supererint. Cardan lib. 8. cap. 40. derer, variet, tacete
inquit talpa, quando me oculis captum videtis.
make an end of scraping, purchasing this manor, this field, that house, for
this and that child, thou have enough for thy self and them, enjoy thy self
at length, and that which thou have, the mind is all, be content, thou art not
poor, but rich. How many deaf and dumb, halt and lame, blind, miserable
persons could I reckon up, that are poor, and withal distressed, in
imprisonment, banishment, gallyslaues, condemned to the mines, quarries, to
gins and dungeons, perpetual thraldom, then all which thou art richer, thou
art more happy, to whom thou art able to give an alms, a Lord in respect, a
petty Prince, Non in paupertate, sed in paupere (Seneca) non re, sed opinione
laboras.
be contented then I say, repine and mutter no more.

Yea but this is good counsel indeed, and rightly applied to such as have it,
and will not use it, that have a competency, that are able to work and get
their living by the sweat of their brows by their trade, that have something
yet, he that has birds, may catch birds, but what shall we do that are slaves
by nature, impotent and unable to help our selves, mere beggars, that languish
and pine away, that have no means at all, no hope of means, no hope of
delivery, or of better success? It is an easy matter when ones belly is full,
to declame against fasting, qui satur est pleno laudatieiunia ve^tre. Seneca
pleaded hard for poverty, and so did these Philosophers, but in the mean time
One of the richest men in Rome.
he was rich himself, they had wherewithal to maintain themselves; but no man
living can express the anguish and bitterness of our souls, but we that endure
it, we are distressed, forsaken, in torture of Body, of mind, in another hell:
and what shall we do? Qui iacet in terra non habet vnde cadat. Comfort thy
self with this yet, thou art at the worst, and before it be long it will
either overcome thee, or thou it. If it be violent it cannot endure, aut
solvetur, aut solvet: thou art not so poor as thou wast borne, and as some
hold, much better to be pitied, then to be envied. And though thou be now
peradventure in extreme want James 1.2. My brethren, count it an exceeding joy
when you fall into diverse temptations.
and misery, Afflictio dat intellectum, quos Deus diligit castigat. Deus
optimum quemque aut mala valetudine aut luctu afficit. Seneca.
it may be it is for thy farther good to try thy patience, and exercise thee in
this life, trust in God, and rely upon him, and thou shall be Quam sordet mihi
terra quum coelum i^t^eor.
crowned in the end. The world has forsaken thee, thy friends and fortunes all
are gone, yet know this, that the very hairs of thine head are nu^bred, that
God is a Spectator of all thy miseries, he sees thy wrongs, woes and wants, and
Psalm. 12.7. de terra inopem, de stercore crigit pauperem.
can help thee in an instant, when it seems to him good. Micah 7.8.
Rejoice not against me O mine enemy, for though I fall, I shall rise, when I
sit in darkness, the Lord shall lighten me, Remember all those Martyrs what
they have endured, the utmost that humane rage and fury could invent, with what
Preme preme ego cum Pindaro (...) immersabilis sum sicut suber super maris.
septum. Li^sius.
patience they have borne, with what willingness embraced it. Though he kill
me, says Job, I will trust in him: thou may be restored as he was. The poor
shall not always be forgotten, the patient abiding of the meek shall not perish
for ever Psalm, 10.18. and ver. 9. The Lord will be a refuge of the oppressed, a
defense in due time of trouble. Non si male nunc and olim, Hic ure hic seca vt
in aeternum parcas, Austin.

Dijs fruitur iratis, superat and crescit malis. Mutium ignis, Fabritium
paupertas, Regulum, tormenta, Socratem venenum superare non potuit.


sic erit semper, a good hour may come upon a sudden. dabit Deus his quoque
finem.
expect a little. Yea but this expectation is it which tortures me in the mean
time. Seneca.
futura expectans praesentibus angor, whilst the grass grows, the horse
starues: Nemo desperet me^ora lapsus.
despair not, and hope well. Spes alit agricolas, he that sowes in tears
shall reap in joy Ps. 126.7. that may happen at last which never was yet. A
desire accomplished delights the soul, Prove. 13.19. ^ Grata superveniet quae
non sperabitur hora.
Which makes m'inioy my joys long wished at la^^,
Welcome that hour shall come when hope is past.
a lowering morning may turn to a fair afternoon: the ^^pe that is deferred
is the fainting of the heart, but when the desire comes it is a tree of life,
Prove. 13.12. Many men ^^e most wretched and miserable at first, but afterward
mo^^ happy, and oftentimes it so falls out, as Lib 7. Flor. hist. Omnium
faelicissim^s and ^ocupletissim^s etc. incarceratus saepe adolescentiam
periculo mortis habu^t, solicitudinis and discriminis plenam etc.
Machiavel relates of Cosmus Medices that most fortunate and renowned citizen
of Europe, that all his youth was full of perplexity, danger and misery, till
40 years were past, and then upon a sudden the Sun of his honor brake out as
through a cloud. Huniades was fetched out of prison, and Henry the 3 of
Portugal out of a poor Monastery, to be crowned Kings. Multa cadunt inter
cali^em supremaque labra, beyond all hope and expectation many things fall out,
and who knows what may happen? nondum omnium dierum Soles occiderunt, as
Philippus said, all the Suns are not yet set, a day may come to make a mendes
for all, Though my father and mother forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me
up. Psalm. 27.10. wait patiently on the Lord and hope in him Psalm. 37.7. be
strong, hope and trust in the Lord, and he shall comfort thee, and give thee
thine hearts desire Ps. 27.14. Fret not thy self because thou art poor, or
not so well for the present as thou would be, or not respected as thou
ought to be, by birth, place, or that which is a double corsiue, that thou
have been happy, honorable and rich, and art now distressed and poor, a
scorn of men, a burden to the world, irksome to thy self and others, thou
have lost all. Miserum est fuisse faelicem I confess it is a great misery to
have been happy, to have been rich, but yet easily to be endured. Laetior
successit securitas quae simul cum divitijs cohabitare nescit, Cambden.
Security succeeds, and to a judicious man a far better estate. The loss of
thy goods and money is no loss, Pecuniam per didisti fortassis illa te perderet
manens, Seneca.
thou have lost them, they would otherwise have lost thee. If thy money be gone,
Expeditior es ob pecuniarum i^cturam. Fortuna opes auferre non animum potest,
Seneca.
thou art so much the lighter, and as S^ Hierome persuades Rusticus the Monk,
Bonae men's nullum tristioris fortunae recipit incursum, Valor. lib. 4. cap. 1.
Qui nil potest ^per^re desp^ret n^hil.
to forsake all and follow Christ, gold and silver are too heavy metals for
him to carry that seeks heaven. Zeno the Philosopher lost all his goods by
shipwreck, Iubet me posthac fortuna ex^e^^tius Philosophari.
he made light of it, fortune had done him a good turn. Come then what can
come, befall what may befall, infractum invictu^que animum opponas, rebus
angustis animosus atque fortis appare. Hor. Od. 11. lib. 2. Hope and Patience
are two sovereign Remedies for all, Hor.
Durum sed levius fit patientia
quicquid corrigere est nefas.
If it cannot be helped, Aequam memento reb^s in arduis servare mentem. lib. ^.
Od. 3.
make the best of it, as at a game at tables, so do by all such inevitable
accidents. Ita vita est hominum, quasi cum ludas tesseris.
Ter. Adel. act. 4. Sc 7.
Si illud quod est maxim opus iactu non cadit,
Illud quod cecidit forte, id art vt corrigas,
If thou can not fling what thou would, play thy cast as well as thou
can. Vt quimus quod aiunt qua^do quod volum' non licet. Ter. And. Act. 4. Sc.
6.
Conform thy self to thy present fortune, and cut thy coat according to thy
cloth. Be contented with thy loss, non licet omnibus adire Corinthum, we may
not all be Gentlemen, all rich but because mortal men want many things, Cap. 6.
de providentia. Mortales cum sint rerum omnium indigi ideo Deus alijs divitias
aliis paupertatem distribuit vt qui opibus pollent materiam subministrent qui
vero inopes exercitatas artibus manus admoueant.
Therefore, says Theodoret, has God diversely distributed his gifts, wealth to
one, skill to another, that rich men might encourage and set poorer men aworke,
poor men might learn several trades to the common good. As a piece of Arras
is composed of several pieces, some wrought of silk, some of gold, silver,
cruel of diverse colors all to serve for the exornation of the whole, Music
is made of several discords and keys, a total sum of many small numbers:
so is a Commonwealth of several inequall trades and callings. Si sint omnes
aequales necesse est vt omnes fame periant quis aratro terram sulcaret quis
sementem faceret quis plantas sereret quis vinum exprimeret?
If all should be Craesi and Darij, all idle, all in fortunes equal, who
should till the land? As Live. lib. 1.
Menenius Agrippa well satisfied that tumultous rout of Rome, in his elegant
Apologe of the belly and the rest of the members. Who should build houses make
our several stuffes for rayments? we should all be starved for company, as
Poverty declared at large in Aristophanes Plutus, and sue at last to be as we
were at first. All things then being rightly examined and duly considered as
they ought, there is no such cause of so general discontent, it is not in the
thing it self but in our mind, as we moderate our passions and esteem of
things. Nihil aliud necessarium vt sis miser (says Cardan) quam vt te miserum
credas. Let thy fortune be what it will, it is thy mind alone that makes thee
poor or rich, Lib. 3. de consol.
miserable or happy. So for all other things, they are as old Heautontim, Act.
1. Sc. 2.
Chremes told us, as we use them. Parents, patriam, amicos, genus, cognatos,
divitias,
Haec perinde sunt ac illius animus qui ea possidet,
Qui vti scit, ei bona, qui vtitur non recte, mala.
Parents, friends, fortunes, country, birth, aliance, etc. ebb and flow with
our conceit; please or displease, as we accept and conster them, or apply them
to our selves. Faber quisque fortunae suae, and in some sort I may truly say,
prosperity and adversity are in our own hands. But will we or nill we, make
the worst of it, and suppose a man in the greatest extremity, it is a fortune
which some indefinitly prefer before prosperity, of two extremes it is the
best. Luxuriant animi rebus plerumque secundis, men in Fo^tuna quem nimium
fouet stultum facit Pub. Mimus.
prosperity forget God and themselves. In adversity many mutter and repine,
despair, etc. both bad I confess, -- Hor.
vt calceus olim Si pede mayor erit subvertet, si minor vret. And as a shoe
too big or too little, one pincheth, the other sets the foot awry. sed e malis
minimu^. Adversity is to be preferred, Boeth. lib. 2.
haec fraeno indiget illa solatio, illa fallit haec instruit. The one deceaues,
the other instructs, and therefore many Philosophers have voluntarily sought
adversity, and so much commend it in their precepts. Demetrius in Seneca
esteemed it a great infelicity, that in his life time he had no misfortune,
miserum cui nihil vnquam accidisset adversi, adversity then is not so heavily
to be taken, and we ought not in such cases so much to macerate our selves;
there is no such odds in poverty and riches. To conclude in Epist. lib. 3. vit.
Paul Ermit. libet eos nunc interrogare qui domus marmoribus vestiunt qui vno
filo villarum ponunt precia huic seni modo quid vnquam defuit, vos gema bibitis
ille concavis manibus naturae satisfecit ille pauper paradisum capit vos avaros
gehenna suscipiet.
Hieroms words, I will ask our magnificos that build with marble, and bestow a
whole manor on a thread, what difference betwixt them and Paul the Ermite, that
bare old man: they drink in Jewels, he in his hand; he is poor and goes to
Heaven, they are rich and go to Hell.

MEMB. 4. Against Servitude, loss of liberty, Imprisonment, Banishment.
Servitude, loss of liberty, Imprisonment, are no such miseries as they are
held to be: we are all slaves and servants the best of us all: as we do
reverence our masters, so do our masters their superiors; Gentlemen serve
Nobles, and Nobles are subordinate to Kings, Omne sub regno graviore regnum,
Princes themselves are Gods servants, reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis. They
are subject to their own laws, and as the Kings of China, endure more then
slavish imprisonment, to maintain their state and greatness, they never come
abroad. Lovers are slaves to their mistress, rich men to their money, Courtiers
to lust and ambition, and all slaves to our affections, who is free? Why then
do thou repine? Satis est potens, Hierom says, qui servire non cogitur. Thou
carriest no burdens, thou art no prisoner, no drudge, and thousands want that
liberty, those pleasures which thou have. Thou art not sick, and what would
thou have? but nitimur in vetitum, we must all eat of the forbidden fruit. Were
we enjoined to go to such and such places, we would not willingly go: but
being barred of our liberty, this alone torments our wa^dering soul that we
may not go. A cittezen of ours, says Consol. lib. 5.
Cardan, was 60 years of age, and had never been forth of the walls of the
city of Millan, the Prince hearing of it commanded him not to stir out,
being now forbidden that which all his life he had neglected, he earnestly
desired, and being denied, dolor confectus mortem obijt, he died for grief.

What I have said of servitude, I say again of imprisonment. We are all
prisoners. What is our O Generose, quid est vita nisi carcer animi.
life but a prison? We are all imprisoned in an Island. The world it self to
some men is a prison, our narrow seas as so many ditches, and when they have
compassed the Globe of the earth, they would same go see what is done in the
Moon. In Herbastein.
Muscovy and many other northern parts, all over Scandia they are imprisoned
half the year in Stoues, they dare not peep out for cold. At Vertomannus
Aden in Arabia they are imprisoned all day long with that other extreme of
heat, and keep their markets in the night. What is a ship but a prison? And so
many cities are but as so many hiues of Bees? But that which thou abhorrest
many seek. Women keep in all winter, and most part of summer to preserve
their bewties, some for love of study: Demosthenes shaued his beard because he
would cut off all occasion of going abroad: how many Monks and Friars,
Anachorites, abandon all the world? Monachus in vrbe piscis in arido. Art' in
prison? make right use of it, and mortify thy self; Vbi verior contemplatio
quam in solitudine, vbi studium solidius quam in quiet?
Where may a man contemplate better then in solitariness, or study more then
in quietness. Many worthy men have been imprisoned all their lives, and it
has been occasion of great honor and glory to them, much public good by their
excellent meditation. Boethius never writ so elegantly as in prison, Paul so
devoutly, for most of his Epistles were dictated in his bands. Joseph, says In
Ps. 76. non ita laudatur Joseph cum srumenta distribueret ac quum carcerem
habitaret.
Austin, got more credit in prison, then when he distributed corn, and was
Lord of Pharaoh's house. It brings many a lewd fellow home, many wandering
rogues it settles, that would otherwise have been so many ranging Tigers, and
have ruinated themselves and others.

Banishment is no grieuance at all, Omne solum forti patria etc. and patria est
vbicunque been est. That Is a man's country where he is well at ease. Many
travel for pleasure to that city, says Seneca, to which thou art banished;
and what a part of the Citizens are strangers borne in other places, Boethius.
Incolentibus patria, it is their country that are borne in it, and they would
think themselves banished to go to the place which thou leauest, and from
which thou art so loath to part. It Is a childish humor to be discontent at that
which others seek, to prefer, as base Islanders and Norvegians do their
own ragged Island, before Italy or Greece, the Gardens of the world, it is want
of judgment. All places are distant from heaven alike, and the Sun shines
happily as warm in one city as in another, and to a wiseman there is no
difference of climes: friends are every where to him that behaues himself
well, and a Prophet is not esteemed in his own country. Alexander, Caesar,
Traian, Adrian, were as so many land leapers, now in the East, now in the West,
little at home, and Polus Venetus, Lod. Vertomannus, Pinzonus, Cadamistus,
Columlumbus, Americus Vesputius, etc. Vascus Gama, Drake, Candish, Schouten,
got al their honor by voluntary expeditions. But you say such men's travel is
voluntary, we are compelled, and as malefactors must depart: the pleasure of
peregrination, variety of objects will make amends for it, and so many nobles
Tully, Aristides, Themistocles, Theseus, Codrus, etc. as have been banished,
will give sufficient credit unto it.

MEMB. 5. Against Sorrow for death of friends or otherwise, vain fear, etc.
DEath and departure of friends are things generally grievous, Cardan. de
consol. lib. 2.
Omnium quae in humana vita contingunt, luctus atque mors sunt acerbissima, the
most austere and bitter accidents that can happen to a man in this life, in
aeternum valedicere, to part for ever, to forsake the world and all our
friends, it is vltimum terribilium, the last and the greatest terror, and most
irksome and troublesome unto us. And though we hope for a better life,
aeternall happiness, after these painful and miserable days yet we cannot
co^pose our selves willingly to dye, the remembrance of it is most grievous
unto us, especially to such as are fortunat and rich, they start at the name of
death, as a horse at a rotten post. Say what you can of that other world, with
Benzo.
Metezuma that Indian Prince, Bonum est esse hic, they had rather be here. And
many generous spirits, and grave staid wise men otherwise are so tender in
this, that at the loss of a dear friend they will cry out, houle and roar,
and tear their hair, Summo mane vlulatum oriuntur p^ctora percutientes etc.
miserabile spectaculum exhibentes Ortelius in Graecia.
lamenting many months after, houling as those Irish women and Greeks at their
graves, and commit many indecent actions, and almost go besides themselves, as
he said in the Poet. Quis dabit in lachrymas fontem mihi, quis satis altos
Accend^t gemitus, and acerbo verba dolori?
Exhaurit pietas oculos: and hiantia frangit
Pectora, magna adeo iactura. --
Who can lend tears and sighs to express my grief,
Or words befitting my sour passion,
Mine eyes are dry, mine heart is torn in pieces,
My loss is such beyond all consolation.
What shall I do? Catullus.
Sed totum hoc studium luctu fraterna mihi mors
Abstulit, hei misero frater adempte mihi.
My brothers death my study has undone,
Wees me, alas my brother he is gone.
Mezentius would not live after his son. Virg.
Nune vivo nec adhuc homines lucemque relinquo,
Sed linquam. --
and Pompe'is wife cried out at the news of her husbands death. Lucan.
Turpe mori post te solo non posse dolor. and she would needs run upon the
swords point after Eurialus departure. Virg.
Figite me si qua est pietas in me omnia tela
Conijcite o Rutili. --
O let me die, some good man or other make an end of me. How did Achilles
take on for Patroclus death? a black cloud of sorrows ouershadowed him, says
Homer. Jacob rent his clothes, and put sackcloth about his Ioynes, and
sorrowed for his son a long season, and would not be comforted, but would
needs go down into the grave unto his son. Genesis 37.34. Many years after,
the remembrance of such friends, of such accidents is most grievous unto us, to
see or hear of it, though it concern not our selves but others. Scaliger
says of himself, that he never read Socrates death, in Platoes Phaedon, but
he wept: Confess. lib. 1.
Austin shed tears when he read the destruction of Troy. But howsoever this
passion of sorrow be violent and bitter, and seaseth familiarly on wise,
valiant, discreet men, yet it may be withstood, it may be diuerted. For what is
there in this life, that it should be so dear unto us? Or that we should so
much deplore the departure of a friend? The greatest pleasures are common
society, to enjoy one another presence, feasting, hauking, hunting, woods,
hills, music, dancing, etc. all this is but vanity and loss of time, as I
have sufficiently declared. As Alcumists spend that little which they have to
get gold and never find it, we lose and neglect aeternity, for a little
momentary pleasure which we cannot enjoy, nor shall never attain to in this
life. We abhor death, pain and grief, all, and yet we will do nothing of
that which should vindicate us from it, but rather voluntarily thrust our
selves upon it. Amator scortum vitae praeponit, iracundus vindictam parasitus
gulam, ambitiosus honores, avarus opes, miles rapinam, fur praedam, morbos odim
and accersumus. Card.
A Letcher preferres his Whore before his life, or good estate, an angry man
his revenge, a parasite his gut, ambitious honors, covetous wealth, a thief
his boety, a soldier his spoil, we abhor diseases, and yet we pull them
upon us. We are never better or freer from cares then when we sleep, and yet
which we so much avoid and lament, death is but a perpetual sleep: our life
is tedious and troublesome unto him that lives best, death makes an end of our
miseries, and yet we cannot consider of it; no pleasure here but sorrow is
annexed to it, repentance follows it. Comedi ad sa^ietatem grauitas me
offendit, parcius edi non est expletum desiderium, venereas delitias sequor,
hinc morbus lass^^udo, etc
If I feed liberally I am likely sick or surfeit; If I live sparingly my hunger
and thirst is not allaid, I am well neither full nor fasting: if I live honest
I burn in lust; If I take my pleasure, I tire and starve my self, and do
injury to my body and soul. It Is both ways troublesome to me to rise and go
to bed, to eat and provide my meat, cares and contentions attend me all day
long, fears and suspicions all my life, I am discontented, and why should I so
much desire to live? But an happy death will make an end of all my woes and
miseries, why should not I then say with old Simeon, since I am so well
affected, Lord now let thy servant depart in peace, or with Paul, I desire to
be dissolved and to be with Christ. Beata mors quae ad beatam vitam aditum
aperit, it is a blessed hour that leads us to a Est enim mors piorum faelix
transitus de labor ad refrigerium, de expectatione ad praemium de agone ^d
brauium.
blessed life, and blessed are they that die in the Lord. But life is sweet, and
death is not so terrible in it self, as the concomitants of it, a loathsome
disease, pain, horror, etc. and many times the manner of it, to be hanged, to
be broken on the wheel, to be unburied or so. As Socrates told Cato it
concerns me not, what is done with me when I am dead. Facilis iactura
sepulchri. I care not so long as I feel it not, let them set mine head on the
pike of Teneriffa, and my four quarters in the four parts of the world, let
Wolves or Bears devour me.

-- L^^.
Coelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam. The heavens cover him that has no tomb.
So likewise for our friends, why should their departure so much trouble us?
they are better, as we hope, and why then do thou lament, as those do, whom
Paul taxed in his time, 1 Thessalonians. 4.13. that have no hope. It Is fit there
should be some solemnity, and it is a natural passion to weep for our friends,
an irresistible passion to lament, yet after a days mourning or two comfort
thy self for thy heaviness, Ecclus. 38.17. When Phaedon.
Socrates was dying, his friends Apollodorus and Crito with some others, were
weeping by him, which he perceauing asked them what they meant, Ob hanc causam
muliores ab ligaram ne talia fa^erent, nos haec audientes er^buimus and
destitimus a lachrymis.
for that very cause he put all the women out of the room, upon which words of
his they were abashed, and ceased from their tears. Lib. de consol.
Tully was much grieved for his daughter Tulliola's death at first, until such
time that he had confirmed his mind with some Philosophical precepts,
Praeceptis p^ilosophiae confirmatus adversus omnem fortunae vim and te
consecrata in coelumque recepta tanta affectus laetitia sum ac voluptate
quantum animo capere possum ac exultare plane mihi videor, victorque de omni
do^ore and fortuna triumphare.
and then he began to triumph over fortune and grief, and for her reception
into heaven to be much more ioyed, then before he was trobled for her loss. If
an heathen man could so fortify himself from Philosophy, what shall a
Christian from Divinity? Why do thou so macerate thy self? it is an
inevitable chance, an everlasting act of Parliament, all must Vt lignum vri
natum, arista secari sic homines meri.
dye. Boeth. lib. 2. met. 3.
Constat aeterna positumque lege est
Vt constet genitum nihil.
It cannot be revoked, we are all mortal, and these all commanding Gods and
Princes dye like men. O weak condition of humane estate, Sylvius exclaimes,
Nic. Henselius Breslagr sol. 47.
Ladislaus King of Bohemia 18 years of age, in the flower of his youth, so
potent, rich, fortunate and happy, in the midst of all his friends, amongst so
many 20 Then present.
Physicians, now ready to be To Magdalen the daughter of Charles the 7. of
France Obeunt noctesque diesque, etc.
married, in 36 hours sickned and died. Tombs and monuments have the like fate
data sunt ipsis quoque fata sepulchris, Kingdoms, Provinces, Towns, and
Cities have their periods, and are consumed.

Epist. Tul. l. 3.
Returning out of Asia, when I sailed from Aegina toward Magera, I began (says
Servius Sulpitius in a consolatory Epistle of his to Tully) to view the country
round about. Aegina was behind me, Megera before, Pyraeus on the right hand,
Corinth on the left, what flourishing towns heretofore, now prostrat and
overwhelmed before mine eyes. I began to think with my self. Alas why are
we me^ so much disquieted with the departure of a friend, whose life is much
shorter? Quum tot oppidorum cadavera ante oculos proiecta iaceant.
when so many goodly Cities lie buried before us. Remember o Servius thou art a
man, and with that I was much confirmed, and corrected my self: Correct then
thy self likewise, and comfort thy self in this, that we shall rise again;
and as Tully said Iucundiorque multo congressus noster futurus, quam insuavis
and acerbus digressus. Our meeting again shall be much more pleasant, then our
departure was grievous. I but he was my most dear and loving friend, my sole
friend. Thou may be ashamed, says Deremed. sortuit.
Seneca to confess it in such a Erubesce tanta tempestate quod ad vnam
anchoram stabas
tempest as this to have but one anchor, go seek another: and for his part
thou do him great injury to desire his longer life, Vis aegrum morbidum and
sitibundum -- gaude potius quod his malis liberatus sit.
Will thou have him crased and sickly still, or to be freed from his miseries?
thou have more need rejoice that he is gone. Another he complains of a most
sweet wife, such a wife as no mortal man ever had so good a wife: I reply to
him in Senecae's words, if such a woman at least ever was to be had, Vxorem
bona^ aut inuenisti, aut sic fecisti, si inueneris, aliam habere te posse ex
hoc intelligamus: si feceris been speres, salvus est artifex.
He did either so find her or make her, if he found her, he may as happily
find another; if he made her, as Critobulus in Xenophon did by his, he may as
good cheap inform another, he need not despair, so long as the same master is
to be had. But was she good? had she been so tried peradventure as that
Ephesian widow in Petronius, by some swaggering soldier, she would not have
held out. Many a man would be willingly rid of his: before thou wast bound, now
thou art free, Stulti est compedes licet aureos amore.
and it is but a folly to love thy fetters, though they be of gold. Come into a
third place you shall have an aged father sighing for a son, or a forlorn
son for his deceased father. But why? Prior exijt, prior intravit, he came
first and he must go first. What would thou have the laws of nature altered,
and him to live always? Iul. Caesar, Augustus, Alcibiades, Galen, Aristotle,
lost their fathers young* and why on the other side should thou so heavily
take the death of thy little son, was he not mortal? He was a fine child
indeed, but who can tell whether he would have been an honest man? He might
have proved a thief, a rogue, a spendthrift, a disobedient child, vexed and
galled thee more then all the world beside, he might have wrangled with thee
and disagreed, or with his brothers, as Eteocles, and Polynices, and broke thy
heart; he is now gone to eternity as another Ganymede in the flower of his Deus
quos diligit inveues rapit. Menander.
youth, as if he had risen, says Consol. ad Apol Apollonius filius tuus in
flore decessit ante nos ad aeternitatem digressus ta^quam e conuivio abiens
priusqua^ in errerem aliqueme Temulentia incideret. quales in longa senecta
accidere solent.
Plutarch, from the midst of a feast, before he was drunck, the longer he had
lived the wourse he would have been, and quo vita longior, Ambrose thinks,
culpa numerosior, more sinful, more to answer for he would have had. If he
was naught thou may be glad he is gone, if good be glad thou had such a
son. Or art thou sure he was good? It may be he was an hypocrite as many are,
and howsoever he spoke thee fair; it may be he prayed amongst the rest that
Icaromenippus heard at Jupiters whispering place in Lucian, for his fathers
death. Or put case he was good, suppose the best, may not thy dead son
expostulate with thee, as he did in the same Tom. 1. tract. de luctu. Quid me
mortuum miserum voca^ qui te sum multo faelicior? aut quid acerbi mihi putas
contigisse? an quia non sum malus, senex, vt tu facie rugosus, incurvus, etc. O
demens quid tibi videtur in vita boni? nimirum amisi dicis caenas, etc Long
melius non esurire quam edere; non fitire, etc. Gaudepotius quod m^rbos and
febres effugerim augorem animi, etc. E^ulatus quid prodest, quid lachrymae, etc.
Lucian. Why do thou lament my death, or call me miserable, that am much more
happier then thy self, what misfortune is befalne me? Is it because I am not
bald, crooked, old, rotten, as thou art? What, have I lost some of your good
cheer, gay clothes, singing, dancing, kissing, merry meetings, etc. is that
it? Is it not much better not to hunger at all then to eat, not to thirst then
to drink to satisfy thirst, not to be a cold then to put on clothes to drive
away cold? You had more need rejoice that I am freed from diseases, agues,
cares, anxieties, liuor, love, covetousness, hatred, envy, malice, that I
fear no more thieves, tyrants, enemies as you do. What good do your tears,
to what end? Weep no more then it is to no purpose? And as Tully advises us in
the like case, Non quos amisimus, sed quantum lugere par sit cogitemus. Think
what we do, not whom we have lost. So David did 2. Sam. 12.22. While the child
was yet alive, I fasted and wept, but being now dead why should I fast? can I
bring him again, I shall go to him, but he cannot return to me. The
Thracians weept still when a child was borne, and feasted and made mirth when
any man was buried, Sardus de mor. gent.
and so should we rather be glad for such as dye well, that they are so
happily freed from the miseries of this life. If our present weakness be such,
we cannot moderate our passions in this behalf; we must divert the^ by all
means by doing something, thinking of some other thing, or by Praemeditatione
facilem reddere quemque casum. Plut. consol ad Apollonium. Assuefacere nos
casibus debemus Tully 3. Tusc.
premeditation make such accidents familiar unto us, as Ulysses that wept for
his dog, but not for his wife quod paratus esset animo obfirmato, (Plut. lib.
de anim. tranq.) accustom our selves, and harden before hand by seeing other
men's calamities, and applying them to our selves. And so for false fears and
all other fortuit inconveniences, mischances, calamities, to resist and prepare
our selves, not to faint or to be discouraged at all. Boeth. lib. 1. pros. 4.
Nam quisquis trepidus pauet vel optat,
Abiecit clypeum, locoque motus --
Nectit qua valeat trahi catenam.
for he that so faints and fears, and yields to his passion, flings away his
own weapons, makes a cord to bind himself, and pulls a beam upon his own
head.

MEMB. 6. Against Envy, liuor, emulation, hatred, ambition, selfeloue, and all
other affections.
AGainst all those other Qui Invidiam far non potest, far contemptum
cogitur.
passions and Affections, there is no better remedy, then as Mariners when
they go to Sea, provide all things necessary to resist a tempest; to furnish
our selves with Philosophical and divine precepts: to balance our hearts with
love, charity, meekness, patience, and counterpoise those irregular motions of
envy, liuor, spleen hatred, with those opposite virtues, as we bend a crooked
staff another way. To oppose bounty to covetousness, fortitude to
pusillanimity, meeknes to anger, humility to pride, to examine our selves for
what cause we are so much disquieted, on what ground, what occasion is it, a
just or a fained cause, and then either to pacify our selves by reason, or to
divert by some other object or contrary passion: or as they that play at
wasters, exercise themselves by a few cudgells how to avoid an enemies blows:
arm our selves against all such violent incursions, which may invade our
minds. Many times we repine and mutter without cause, we give way to passions,
we may resist and will not. Socrates was bad by nature, envious, as he
confessed himself, lascivious, but as he was Socrates, he did correct and
amend himself. Thou art malicious, envious, covetous, no doubt and lascivious,
yet as thou art a Christian correct and moderate thy self. It Is something I
confess, and able to move any man, to see himself contemned, neglected,
disgraced, Occupet extremum scabies mihi turpe relinqui est. Lipsius epist.
left behind, some cannot endure it, not Lipsius himself, a man discreet
otherwise, yet too weak and passionate in this as his words express, collegas
olim quos ego sine fremitu non intueor, nuper terrae filios, nunc Maecenates
and Agrippas, summo iam monte potitos. But he was much to blame for it, to a
wise staid man all this is nothing, we cannot all be honored and rich, all
Caesar's, if we can be content, our present state is good, and in some men's
opinion to be preferred. Let them go on, get wealth, offices, titles, honors,
and preferments, and what they will themselves, by fraud, imposture, simony,
and indirect means, as many do, by bribery, flattery, and parasiticall
insinuation, by impudence, and time-seruing, let them go before, cross me on
every side, Lipsius epist.
me non offendunt modo non in oculos incurrunt, as he said, correcting his
former error, they do not offend me, so long as they run not into mine eyes.
I am inglorious and poor, composita paupertate, but I live secure and quiet:
they are dignified, and have great means, pomp and state, they are glorious,
but what have they with it? Gloria comitem habet invidiam pari onere premitur
retinendo ac acquirendo.
Envy, trouble, anxiety, as much labor to maintain their place with credit,
as to get it at first. I am contented with my fortunes, spectatore longinquo,
and love Neptunu^ procul a terra spectare furentem: he is ambitious and not
satisfied with his: but what Quid aliud ambitiosus sibi parat quam vt probra
eius pateant nemo vivens qui non habet in vita plura vituperatione quam laud
digna, his malis non melius occurritur, quam si been latueris.
gets he by it? to have all his life laid open, his reproaches seen, not one of
a thousand but he has done more worthy of dispraise and animadversion, then
worthy of commendation, no better means to help this then to be private. Let
them run, ride, strive as so many fishes for a crumme, scrape, clime, catch,
and snatch, cosen, and collogue, temporise and fleire, take all amongst them,
Et omnes fama per vrbes garrula laudet.
and get what they can, it offends me not, -- Sen. Her fur.
me mea tellus
Lare secreto tutoque tegat.
I am well pleased with my present fortunes. -- Hor.
Viuo and regno simul ista relinquens. I have learned in what state soever I am
therewith to be content. 1. Philip. 11. Come what can come I am prepared, Nave
ferar magna an parva ferar vnus and idem. I am the same. I was once so mad to
bussell abroad, and seek about for preferment, tire my self and trouble al my
friends and had my proiects, hopes, and designs, amongst the rest, but now as
a mired horse that struggles at first with all his might and mean to get out,
but when he sees no remedy, that all his beating will not serve, lies still, I
have labored in vain, and rest satisfied, Inveni portum spes and fortuna
valete,
Nil mihi vobiscum, ludite nunc alios.
Mine hauen's found, fortune and hope adue,
Mock others now for I have done with you.


MEMB. 7. Against Repulse, Abuses, Injuries, Contempts, Disgraces, Contumelies,
Slanders, Scoffs, etc.
I May not yet conclude, or hope to remove passions, or quiet the mind, till
such time as I have likewise removed some other of their more eminent and
ordinary causes, which produce such grievous tortures and discontents, to
remove all I cannot hope, to point alone at some few of the chiefest, is all I
aim at.

Repulse.
Repulse and Disgrace are two maine causes of discontent, but to an
understanding man not so hardly to be taken, Caesar himself has been denied,
Paederatus in 300. Lacedemoniorum numeru^ non electus risit, gratulari se
dicens civitatem habere 300. cives se meliores.
and when two stand equal in fortune, birth, and all other qualities alike,
one of necessity must lose. Why should thou take it so grievously? It has
been a familiar thing for thee thy self to deny others. If every man might
have what he would, we should all be deified, Emperors, Kings, Princes, if
whatsoever vain hope suggests insatiable appetite affects, our preposterous
judgment thinks fit, should be granted, we should have another Chaos in an
instant, a mere confusion. It is some satisfaction to him that is repelled,
that dignities, honors, offices are not always given by desert, or for worth,
but for love, affinity, friendship affection, Kissing goes by favor.
great men's letters, or as commonly they are bought and sold. Indignissimus
plerumque praefertur, Vatinius to Cato, illaudatus laudatissimo. It is an
ordinary thing in these times to see a base, impudent ass, illiterate,
unworthy, insufficient to be preferred before his betters, because he can put
himself forward, because he looks big, has a fair outside, can temporise,
collogue, insinuate, or has good store of money, whereas a more discreet,
modest, and better deserving man shall have a repulse. Erasmus, Lipsius,
Budaeus, Cardan, died poor, Gesner was a silly old man, baculo innixus,
amongst all those huffing Cardinals and swelling Bishopps that flourished in
his time and rid on foot-cloaths. It is not learning, worth, wisdom that
preferres men, but as the wise man said, Solomon. Eccles. 9. 11.
Chance. They had wealth and honor, but Cardan comforted himself with that,
Stella Fomahant immortalita em dabit.
the star Fomahant would make him immortal. But why should thou take thy
Ca^vas so to heart? It may be thou art not fit. Ovid. Met.
Magna petis Phaethon and quae non viribus istis, etc. as James and John the
sons of Zebedy did ask they knew not what, nescis temerarie nescis, thou do
as another Suffenus ouerweene thy self, thou art wise in thine own conceit,
but in other men's more mature judgment altogether unfit to manage such a
business. Or be it thou art more deserving then any other, God in his
providence has reserved thee for some other fortunes, sic superis visum. Thou
art art humble as thou art, it may be had thou been preferred, thou would
have forgotten God and thy self, insulted over others, contemned thy friends,
Magistratus virum indicat.
been a block, or a tyrant or a demigod, sequiturque superbia formam. Ideo
boni viri aliquando gratiam non accipiu^t ne in superbiam eleventur ventositate
iactantiae ne altitudo muneris negligentiores essiciat.
Therefore, says Chrysostom, good men do not always find grace and favor,
least they should be pressed up with turgent titles, grow insolent and proud.

Injuries are very offensive, and so much the more in that they think veterem
ferendo inuitant novam, by taking one they provoke another: but it is an
erroneous opinion: for if that were true, there would be no end of abusing one
another, lis litem generat; it is much better with patience to bear or quietly
to put it up. If an ass kick me, said Socrates, shall I strike him again, and
when Aelian.
his wife Xantippe stroke him and misused him, to some friends that would have
had him strike her again, he replied that he would not make them sport, or
that they should stand by, and say Eia Socrates eia Xantippe, as we do when
dogs sight animate them the more by clapping of hands. Many men spend
themselves, their goods, friends, fortunes, upon small quarrels, and sometimes
at other men's procurements, with much vexation of spirit and anguish of mind,
that with good advise, or mediation of friends might have been happily
composed, or if patience had taken place. Patience in such cases is a most
sovereign remedy, put it up, conceal, or dissemble it, to Iniuriarum remedium
est oblivio.
forget and forgive, Mat. 18.22. Mat.5 39.
not 7 but 77 times, as our Savior inioines us stricken, to turn the other
side: as our Romans 12.17.
Apostle perswads us, to recompense no man evil for evil, but as much as is
possible to have peace with all men. Not to avenge our selves, and we shall
heap burning coals upon his head. If he contend with thee, submit thy self
unto him first, yield to him, it may be by that means thou may win him,
Hehodorus.
favore and benevolentia etiam immanis animus mansucseit, soft words pacify
wrath, and the fiercest spirits are so soonest overcome; a generous Lion will
not hurt a beast that lies prostrate. It is reported by Gualter Mapes an old
Historiographer of ours, that lived 400 years since, that king Edward Senior,
and Leolin Prince of Wales, being at an Interview near Aust upon Severne in
Glostershire, Camden in Glouc.
and the Prince sent for, refused to come to the King, he would needs go over
to him: which Leolin perceiving, Vsque ad pectus ingressus est, aquam and
cimba^ amplectens, sapientissime rex ait, tua humilitas meam vicit superbiam,
and sapientia triumphauit ineptiam coll^ ascend, quod contra te fatuus erexi,
intrabi^ terram quam hodiefecit tuam benignitas etc.
went up to the arms in water, and embracing his boat, would have carried him
out upon his shoulders, adding that his humility and wisdom had triumphed over
his pride and folly. And thereupon was reconciled unto him, and did his homage.
If thou can not so win him, put it up, if thou be a true Christian, a
good divine, an imitator of Christ, thou will pray for thine enemies, Romans
12.14.
and bless them that persecute thee, be patient, meek, humble etc. An honest
man will not offer thee injury, probus non vult, if he were a brangling knave,
it is his fashion so to do, Pro.
do not answer a fool according to his folly. If he be thy superior,
Contend not with a greater man. Pro.
bear it by all means, grieve not at it, it is an ordinary thing for great men
to vilify and insult, oppress, iniure, to take what liberty they list, and
who dare speak against them? Miserum est ab eo laedi, a quo non possis queri,
from whom is no appeal: it is hard I confess to be so injured, but be thou
patient, and leave revenge unto the Lord. Ps 45. Romans 12.
Vengeance is mine, and I will repay says the Lord. Nemesis comes after, sero,
sed serio, stay but a little, and thou shall see Gods just Judgment overtake
him. Thou shall see that of Samuel to Agag 1 Samuel 15, 33. thy sword has made
many women childlesse, so shall thy mother be childlesse amongst other women ^
they shall be recompensed according to the works of their hands, they shall
have sorrow of heart, and be Haman shall be hanged on that gallhouse he
provided for Mordocheus. Este^ 7.
destroyed from under the heaven, Three. 3.64.65.66. only be thou patient, Apud
Christianos non qui patitur, sed qui facit iniuriam miser est. Leo. ser.
vincit qui patitur, and in the end thou shall be crowned, but if thou resist,
and go about vim vi repellere, as the custom of the world is, to right thy
self, or have given just cause of offense, it is no injury the^ but a condign
punishment, thou have deserved as much. A te principium, in te recidit crimen
quod a te fuit, peccasti quiesce, as Ambrose expostulats with Cain l. 3. de
Abel and Cain. Valerius lib. 4. cap. 1.
Dionys. of Syracuse in his exile was made stand without door, patienter
ferendu^, fortasse nos tale quid fecimus, quum in honor essemus, he wisely put
it up, and laid the fault where it was, in his own pride and scorn, which in
his prosperity he had formerly showed others. By many indignities we come to
dignities. Tibi subijcito quae siunt alijs furtum, convitia etc. and in ijs in
te admissis non excandesces. Epictetus.
This is thank worthy says our Apostle, if a man for conscience toward God,
1 Pet. 2.
endure grief, and suffer wrong undeserved: for what praise is it, if when ye
be buffeted for your faults, you take it patiently? but if when you do well,
ye suffer wrong, and take it patiently, there is thanks with God, for hereunto
verily were ye called. Qui mala non fert, ipse sibi testis est per impatientiam
quod bonus non est, he that cannot bear injuries, witnesses against himself
that he is no good man, as Gregory holds. Siquidem maelorum propriu^ est
inserre damna, and honorum pedissequa est iniuria.
It Is the nature of all wicked men to do injuries, as it is the property of
all honest men patiently to bear them. Injury is their footboy, and as a
lacky, follows them wheresoever they go. And if there were no other respect
then of Christianity, religion and the like, to induce men to be long-suffering
and patient, yet me thinks the nature of injury it self, is sufficient to keep
them quiet, the tumults, vproares, miseries, discontents, anguish, dangers that
attend upon it, the common experience might stay them. Hoc scio pro certo quod
si cum stercore certo, Vinco seu vincor, semper ego maculor.
The more they contend, the more they are involved in a Labyrinth of woes, it is
an hydras head, the more they strive, the more they may; and as Praxiteles did
by his glass, when he saw a scurvy face in it, brake it in pieces: but for
that one, he saw many more as bad in a moment: for one injury done, they
provoke another cum foenore, and twenty enemies for one. Noli irritare
crabrones, oppose not thy self to a multitude; Obloquutus est, probrumque tibi
intulit quispiam, sieve vera is dixe^it, sive falsa, maximam tibi corona^
texueris, si ma^suete convicium tuleris. Chrysostom. in 6. cap. ad Romans ser. 10.
but if thou have received a wrong, wisely consider of it, and if thou can
possibly, compose thy self with patience to bear it: This is the safest
course, and thou shall find greatest ease to be quiet.

o I say the same of scoffs, slanders, co^tumelies, obloquies, pasquilling
libels, and the like, which may tend any way to our disgrace, it is but our
opinion, if we could neglect or contemn them, or with patience digest them,
they would reflect on those that offered them first. As he that had a scold to
his wife, when she brawled, he played on his drum, and by that means madded
her more, because she saw that he would not be moved Diogenes in a crowd when
one called him back, and told him how the boys laughed him to scorn, ego
inquit, non rideor, he took no notice of it. Socrates was brought upon the
Stage by Aristophanes, and misused to his face, but he laughed as if it
concerned him not, and as Aelian relates of him, whatsoever good or bad
accident or fortune befell him, going in, or coming out, Socrates still kept
the same countenance. Even so should a Christian soldier do, as Hierome
describes him, per infamiam and bonam famam grassari ad immortalitatem, march
on through good and bad reports to immortality, Tullius epist. Dolabe^^e. tu
forti sis animo, and tua moderatio, constantia, eoru^ infamet iniuria^.
not to be moved. No better way, then to neglect contemn, or seem not to
regard it, to make no reckoning of it, deesse robur arguit dicacitas. They
scoff and rail at me, says one, Lipsius elect. lib. 2. cap. vlt. Latrant me,
iaceo ac taceo. etc.
and bark at me, on every side, but I like that Albanian dog, sometimes given
to Alexander for a present, vindico me ab illis solo contemptu, I lie still and
sleep, vindicate my self by sole contempt alone. Let them rail then, scoff
and slander, sapiens contumelia non afficitur, a wise man Seneca thinks, is
not moved, because he knows, contra Sycophantae morsum non est remedium, there
is no remedy for it, Kings and Princes, wise, grave, prudent, holy, good men,
divine, are all so served alike. Pers. Sat. 1.
O Jane a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit, God himself is blasphemed: nondum
faelix es se te nondum turba deridet. It is an ordinary thing so to be misused,
Regium est cum been feceris male audire, the chiefest men, and most undeserving
of it, are so served, let him take his course. And as that lusty courser in
Aesope, that contemned the poor Ass, Tuate conscientia solare in cubiculum
ingredere, vbi secure requiescas. Minuit se quodammodo probantis conscientiae
secretum. Boethius lib 1. pros. 4.
came by and by after with his bowels burst, and a pack on his back, and was
derided of the same Ass, co^temnentur ab ijs quos ipsi prius contempsere, and
irridentur ab ijs quos ipsi prius irrisere, they shall be contemned and laughed
to scorn of those whom they have formerly derided. Let them curse and swear,
feign and lie, do thou comfort thy self with a good conscience, in sinu
gaudeas, when they have all done, a good conscience is a continual feast,
innocence will vindicate it self. Elogium mihi pro foribus, my posy is, not to
be moved, that Ringa^tur licet and maledicant Palladium illud pectori oppono.
Non Moueri: consisto modestiae veluti sudi innitens, excipio and frango
stultissimum impetum liuoris. Putean. lib. 2. ep. 58.
my Palladium, my brestplate, my buckler, with which I ward all injuries,
offenses, lies, slanders, I lean upon that stake of modesty, and so receive
and break asunder all that foolish force of Liuor and Spleen, And he whosoever
he is that shall observe these short instructions, without all question he
shall much ease and benefit himself. Many men are very testy by nature, apt to
mistake, apt to quarrel, apt to provoke and misinterprete to the worst, every
thing that is said or done, and thereupon heap unto themselves a great deal of
trouble, and disquietnesse to others, smatterers in other men's matters,
tale-bearers, whisperers, liers, and by those bad courses accumulate much evil
to their own souls, qui contendit, sibi convitium facit, their life is a
perpetual braule, they snarle like so many dogs with their wives, children,
servants, neighbors, and all the rest of their friends, they can agree with no
body; But to such as are judicious and meek, and quiet, these matters are
easily remedied: they will forbear upon all such occasions, neglect or
contemn, or take no notice of them, dissemble, or wisely turn it off. If it
be a natural impediment, as a red nose, squint eyes, crooked legs, or any such
imperfection or infirmity or disgrace, reproach, the best way is to speak of
it first thy Bion said his father was a rogue, his mother a whore to prevent
obloquy, and to show that naught belonged to him but goods of the mind.
self, and so thou shall surely take away all occasions from others to jest at
it, or to contemn it, that they may perceive thee to be careless of it.
Vatinius was wont to scoff at his own deformed feet, to prevent his enemies
obloquies and sarcasmes in that kind, or else by prevention, as Cotys King of
Thrace, that brake a company of fine glasses presented to him, with his own
hands, lest he should be overmuch moved when they were broken by chance. And
sometimes again, so that it be discreetly and moderatly done, it shall not be
amiss to make resistance, to take down such a saucy companion, no better means
to vindicat himself to purchase final peace: for he that suffers himself to be
ridden, or through pusilanimity or sottishnes will let every man baffle him,
shall be a common laughing stock for all to flowt at. As a curre that goes
through a Village, if he clap his tail between his legs, and run away, every
curre will insult over him, but if he brisle up himself, and stand to it, give
but a countersnarle, there is not a dog dare meddle wi^h him: much is in a man's
courage and discreet carriage of himself.

Many other grievances there are, which happen to a man in this life, from
friends, wives, children, servants, masters, companions, neighbors, our own
defaults, ignorance, errors, infirmities, etc. and many good remedies to
mitigate and oppose them, many divine precepts to counterpoise our hearts,
special antidotes both in Scriptures and humane Authors, which who so will
observe, shall purchase much ease and quietness unto himself, I will point at a
few. Those Prophetical Apostolical admonitions, are well known to all, what
Solomon, Siracides, our Savior CHRIST himself has said tending to this
purpose: as Fear God, obey the Prince: be sober and watch: pray continually:
be angry, but sin not: remember thy last: fashion not your selves to this world
etc. strive not with a mighty man: recompense good for evil: let nothing be
done through contention or vainglory, but with meeknes of mind every man
esteeming of others better then himself. Or that Epitome of the Law and the
Prophets, which our Savior inculcated, love God above all, thy neighbor as
thy self. And whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, so do unto
them, which Alexander Severus writ in letters of gold, and used as a motto, and
Lib. 2. ep. 25.
Hierom comme^ds to Celantia as an excellent way, amongst so many intisements
and worldly prouocations to rectify her life. Out of humane Authors take these
few cautions, Nosce teipsum.
know thy self. Sort tua contentus abi.
Be contented with thy lot. Ne fidas opibus, neque parasitis trahunt in
praecipitium.
Trust not wealth, beauty nor parasites, they will bring thee to destruction.
Pacem cum hominibus habe, bellum cum vitijs. Otho 2 Imperat symb.
Have peace with all men, war with vice. Demon te nunquam oti^sum inveniat.
Hierom.
Be not idle. Diu deliberandum quod statuendum est semel.
Look before you leap. Insipientis est dicere non putaram.
Beware of had I wist. Ames parente^ siaequum, aliter feras, praesles
parentibus pietatem, amicis dilectionem.
Honor thy parents, speak well of friends. Be temperate in 4 things, lingua,
loculis, oculis, and poculis, watch thine eye, Comprime linguam. Quid de quoque
viro and cui dicas saepe caveto. Libentius audias quam loquaris.
moderat thine expenses, Hear much, speak little. Keep thine own counsel,
reveal not thy secrets, be silent in thine intentions, Fuge
susorrones.Perco^tatore^ fugito. etc.
Give not ear to tale-tellers, bablers, be not scurrilous in conversation:
jest without bitterness: give no man cause of offense: set thine house in order.
Sponde praesto noxa.
Ta^e heed of suretyship. Tecum habita.
Live not beyond thy means. Bis dat qui cito dat.
Give chearefully. Pay thy dues willingly. Be not a slave to thy money. Post
est occasio calva.
Omit not occasion, loose no time. Be humble to thy superior, respective to
thine equal, affable to all, Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum.
but not familiar. Flat^er no man. Mendacium servile vitium.
Lie not, dissemble not. Keep thy word and promise, be constant in a good
resolution. Speak truth. Be not opinatiue, maintain no factions. Lay no
wagers, make no comparisons. Arcanum neque tu scrutaberis vllius vnquam,
commissumque teges. Hor. lib, 1. ep. 19. Nec tua laudabis studia aut aliena
repre^des. Hor. ep. lib. 18.
Find no faults, meddle not with other men's matters. Admire not thy self. Ne
te quaesiueris extra.
Be not popular. Insult not. Fortunam reverenter habe. Stultum est timere, quod
evitari non potest.
Fear not that which cannot be avoided. Accuse no man, commend no man rashly.
Go not to Law without great cause. Ama tanquam osurus.
Cast not off an old friend, Be not fond of fair words. Be not a neuter in a
faction. Moderate thy passions. Nullum locum putes sine test.
Think no place without a witness. Secreto amicos admone, lauda palam.
Admonish thy friend in secret, commend him in public. Keep good company. Vt
ameris amabilis esto.
Love others to be beloved thy self. Do not prostitute thy soul for gain.
Make not a fool of thy self to make others merry. Marry not an old Cronie or
a fool for money. Be not over sollicitous or curious. Dum fata sinunt vivite
laeti^ Seneca.
Live merrily as thou can. Id apprime in vita vtile, Ex alijs observare sibi
quod ex vsu siet. Ter.
Take heed by other men's examples. Go as thou would be met, sit as thou
would be found, Dum furor in cursu currenti cede furori Cretis^ndum cum
Crete. Temporibus servi nec contra flamina flato.
Yield to the time, follow the stream. Will thou live free from fears and
cares? Nulla certior custodia innocentia, inexpugnabile munime^tum munimento
non egere.
live innocently, Keep thy self upright, Neminem cito lauds vel accuses.
thou need no other keeper etc. Look for more in Seneca, Plutarch, Epictetus
etc. and for defect, consult with cheese-trenchers, and painted clothes.

MEMB. 8. Against Melancholy it self.
Vnicuique suum onus intolerabile videtur.
EVery man says Seneca, thinks his own burden the heaviest, and a melancholy
man above all others complains most, Wearines of life, abhorring all company
and light; fear, sorrow, suspicion, bashfulnes, and those other dread
Symptoms of body and mind, must needs aggravate this misery: yet conferred to
other maladies, they are not so heinous as they be taken. For first this
disease is either in habit or disposition, curable or incurable. If new and in
disposition, it is commonly pleasant, and it may be helped. If inveterate, or an
habit, yet they have lucida intervalla, sometimes well, and sometimes ill. And
amongst a many of inconveniences, some comforts are annexed to it. As first it
is not catching, and as Erasmus comforted himself, when he was grievously sick
of the stone, though it was most troublesome, and an intolerable pain to him,
yet it was no whit offensive to others, not loathsome to the spectators, ghastly,
fulsome, terrible, as plagues, Apoplexies, leprosies, wounds, sores, tetters,
pestilent agues are, which either admit of no company, or terrify or offend
those that are present. In this malady that which is, is wholly to themselves:
and those symptoms not so dreadful, if they be compared to the opposite
extremes. They are most part bashful, suspicious, solitary etc therefore no
such ambtious, impudent intruders, as some are, no smell-feasts, praters,
pa^ders, parasites, bawdes, drunkards, whoremasters, necessity compels them to
be honest. They are freed in this from many other infirmities, solitarines
makes them more apt to contemplate, suspicion wary, which is a necessary humor
in these times Plautus.
Nam pol qui maxim cavet, is saepe cautor captus est, he that takes most heed,
is often circumvented and overtaken. Fear and sorrow, bashfulnes keeps them
temperate and sober, and frees them from many dissolute acts, which iollity and
boldness thrust men upon. They are no sicarij, thieves assassinates. As they are
soon dejected, so they are as soon, by soft words and good persuasion
ereared. If they dote in one thing they are wise and well understanding in most
other. If it be inveterate, they are insensati, most part doting, or quite mad,
insensible of any wrongs, ridiculous to others, but most happy and secure to
themselves. And Dotage is a state which many much magnify and commend:
simplicity, folly, as he said, Petronius Catal.
hic furor o superi, sit mihi perpetuus. Some think fools and disards live the
merriest lives, they are not macerated with cares, tormented with fears,
anxieties as other wise men are: and in some Busbequius Sands lib. 1. fol. 86.
conntries, as amongst the Turks, honored as Saints, and abundantly maintained
out of the common stock. They are no dissemblers, liers, hypocrites, for fools
and madmen tell commonly truth. In a word as they are distressed, so are they
pitied, which some hold better then to be envyed, better to be sad then merry,
better to be miserable then happy: of two extremes it is the best.

SECT. 4.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Of Physic which cures with Medicines.
AFter a long and tedious Discourse of these six non-naturall things, and their
several rectifications, all which are comprehended in Diet, I am come now at
last to Pharmaceutice, or that kind of Physic which cures by medicines, which
Apothecaries most part make or mingle, or sell in their shops. Many cavil at
this kind of Physic, and hold it unnecessary, unprofitable to this or any
other disease, because those countries which use it least, live longest, and
are best in health, as Lib. 1. hist.
Hector Boethius relates of the Isles of Orchades, the people are still sound
of Body and Mind, without any use of Physic, they live commonly an 120
years. Damianus A-Goes, Saxo Grammaticus, Bohemus, say the like of them that
live in Norway, Lapland, Finmarke, Biarmia, Corelia, and all over Scandia, and
those Northern countries, they are most healthful, and very long lived, in
which places there is no use at all of Physic, the name of it is not once
heard. Dithmarus Bleskenius in his accurate description of Island 1607, makes
mention amongst other matters, of the inhabitants manner of living, Victus
eorum caseo and lacte consistit, potus aqua and serum, pisces loco panis habent
ita multos annos saepe 250. absque medico and medicina vivunt.
which is dried fish instead of bread, milk, butter and cheese and salt
meats, most part they drink water and whay, and yet without Physic or
Physician, they live many of them 250 years. I find the same relation by
Lerius, and some other Writers of the Indians in America. Paulus Iovius in his
description of Britain, and Levinus Lemnius observe as much of this our
Island, that there was of old no use almost of Physic amongst us, and but
little at this day, except it be for a few nice citizens, surfeiting courtiers,
Lib. de 4 complex.
and staulfed Gentlemen lubbers. The country people use kitchen Physic, and
common experience tells us, that they live freest from all manner of
infirmities, that make least use of Physic. Many are overthrown by
preposterous use of it, and thereby get their bane, that might otherwise have
escaped, some think Physicians kill as many as they save, and who can tell
Iuven.
quot Themison aegros autumno occiderit vno? many that did ill under the
Physicians hands, have happily escaped, when they have bin given over by them,
and left to God and Nature, and themselves. It Was Pliny's dilemma of old, Omnis
morbus laethalis aut curabilis, in vita^ definit, aut in mortem. Vtroque igitur
modo medicina inutilis, si laethalis, curari non potest, si curabilis, non
requirit medicum^ Natura expellet.
Every disease is either curable or incurable, a man recouers of it, or is
killed by it, both ways Physic is to be rejected. If it be deadly, it cannot
be cured, if it may be helped, it requires no Physician, Nature will expel it
of her self. Plato made it a great sign of an intemperate and corrupt
commonwealth, where Lawyers and Physicians did abound, and the Romans
distasted them so much, that they were often banished out of their city. It is
no art at all, as some hold, the beginning, practice, and progress of it, all
is naught, full of imposture, incertainty, and does generally more harm then
good. The Devil himself was the first inventor of it, Inventum est medicina
meum, said Apollo, and what was Apollo but the Devil. The Greeks first made an
art of it, and they were all deluded by Apollos sons, priests, oracles. If we
may believe Varro, Pliny, Columella, most of their best medicines were derived
from his oracles. Aesculapius his son had his temples erected to his Deity, and
did many famous cures, but as Lactantius holds, he was a Magitian, a mere
impostor, and as his successors, Phaon, Podalirius, Melampius, Menecrates
(another god) by charms, spells, and ministry of bad spirits, did most of
their cures. The first that ever wrote in Physic to any purpose, was
Hippocrates, and his Disciple and commentator Galen, whom Scaliger calls
Fimbriam Hippocratis, but as Praefat. de contrad. med.
Cardan censures them both, immethodicall and obscure, as all those old ones
are, their precepts confused, their medicines absolete, and now most part
rejected. Those cures which they did, Paracelsus holds, were rather done out of
their patients confidence, Opinio facit medicos: a fair gown, a velvet cap,
the name of a Doctor is all in a^l.
and good opinion they had of them, then out of any skill of theirs, which was
very small he says, and they themselves Idiots and Infants, and all their
Academicall followers. The Arabians received it from the Greeks, and so the
Latins adding new precepts and medicines of their own, but so imperfect still
either through ignorance of Professors, Impostors, Mountebanks, Empiricks,
disagreeing of Sectaries, envy, covetousness and the like, they do much harm
amongst us. They are so different in their consultations, prescriptions,
mistaking many times the parties constitution, disease and causes of it, they
give quite contrary Physic, Contrarias proferunt sententias. Cardan.
one says this, another that, out of singularity or opposition, as he said of
Adrian, multitudo medicorum principem interfecit, a multitude of Physicians
has killed the Emperor. Besides there is much imposture and malice amongst
them, all arts says Lib. 3. de sap. Omnes arts fraudem admittunt, sola
medicina spon^e eam accersit.
Cardan, admit of cosening, Physic amongst the rest does appropriate it to her
self, and tells a story of one Curtius a Physician in Venice, because he was a
stranger, and practiced amongst them, the rest of the Physicians did still
cross him in all his precepts. If he prescribed hot medicines, they would
prescribe cold, miscentes pro calidis frigida, pro frigidis humida, pro
purgantibus astringentia, binders for purgatiues, omnia perturbabant. If the
party miscarried, Curtium damnabant, then Curtius killed him, that disagreed
from the^: If he recovered, then Omnis agrotus propria culpa perit, sed nemo
nisi medici beneficio restituitur Agrippa.
they cured him themselves. Much emulation, imposture, malice there is amongst
them: or if they be honest and mean well, yet a knave Apothecary that
administers the Physic, and makes the medicine, may do infinite harm, by
their old absolete doses, adulterine drugs, bad mixtures, quid pro quo etc. see
Fuchsius lib. 1. sec. 1. cap. 8. Cordus Dispensatory, and Brassiuolas examen
simpl. etc. But it is their ignorance that does most harm, their art is wholly
coniecturall, uncertain, imperfect, and got by killing of men, many diseases
they cannot cure at all, as Apoplexy, Epilepsy, Stone strangury, Gowt, Tollere
nodosam nescit medicina Podagram, quartan agues, a common ague sometimes
stumbles them all, they cannot so much as ease, they know not how to judge of
it. If by pulses, that doctrine some hold is wholly suspicious, and I dare
boldly say with Lib. 3. Crat. epist. Winceslao Raphaeno, Ausum dicere tot
pulsorum differentias quae describuntur a Galeno, nec a quoquam intelligi, nec
obseruari posse.
Andrew Dudeth, that variety of pulses described by Galen, is neither observed
nor understood of any. And for urine, that is meretrix medicorum, the most
deceiptfull thing of all, as Forestus and some other Physicians, have proved at
large. The most rational of them, and most skillful are so often deceived,
that as Lib. 28. cap. 7. syntax art. mirab. Mallem ego expertis credere solum
qua^ mere ratiocinantibus, neque satis laudare possum institutum Babylonicum
etc.
Tholosanus inferres, I had rather believe and commit my self to a mere
Empirick, then to a mere Doctor, and I cannot sufficiently commend that
custom of the Babylonians, that have no professed Physicians, but bring all
their Patients to the market to be cured. Which Herodotus relates of the
Egyptians, Strabo, Sardus, and Aubanus Bohemus of many other nations: but I
will urge these cavilling arguments no farther, left some Physician should
mistake me, and deny me Physic when I am sick: for my part, I am well
persuaded of Physic. I can distinguish the abuse from the use, in this and
many other Arts and Sciences. I honor the name, and magnify the calling, as I
am enjoined to honor the Physician for necessities sake. The knowledge of the
Physician lifts up his head, and in the sight of great men he shall be
admired. The Lord has created medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will
not abhor them, Eccles. 58.1. Only this I will add, that this kind of Physic
is very moderatly and advisedly to be used upon good occasion, when the former
of Diet will not take place. And it is no other which I say, then that which
Arnoldus prescribes in his 8 Aphoris. Brudens and pius medicus morbum ante
expellere s^tagit cibis medicinalibus quam puris medicinis.
A discreet and godly Physician does first endeavor to expel a disease by
medicinal diet, then by pure medicine, and in his ninthe, Modestus and sapiens
medicus nunquam properabit ad Pharmaciam nisi cogente necessitate.
he that may be cured by Diet, must not meddle with Physic: and in his 11
Aphoris. A modest and wise Physician will never hasten to use medicines but
upon urgent necessity, and that sparingly too: because as he adds in his 13
Aphoris. Cuicunque potest per alimenta restitui sanitas, fugiendus est penitus
vsus medicamentorum.
Quicunque pharmacatur inventute, deflebit in senectute.
Whosoever takes much Physic in his youth shall soon bewail it in his old
age: Purgative Physic especially, which does much debilitate Nature. For which
causes some Physicians refrain from the use of Purgatiues, or else sparingly use
them. H^ldish spic. 2. de mol. fol. 276 Nulla est ferme medicina purgans, quae
non aliquam de viribus and partibus corporis depredatur.
Henricus Ayrerus in a consult for a melancholy person, would have him take as
few purges as he could, because there be no such medicines, which do not
steal away some of our strength, and rob the parts of our body, weakes Nature,
and cause that Cachochimia, which Lib. 1. and Bart. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Celsus and others observe, or ill digestion, and bad juice through all the
parts of it. Galen himself confesses, that purgative Physic is contrary to
Nature, and takes away with it some of our best spirits, and consumes the very
substance of our body. But this without question is to be understood of such
purgers as are unseasonably or immoderatly taken, they have their excellent use
in this as well as most other infirmities. Of alteratiues and Cordials, no man
doubts, be they simples or compounds. I will amongst that infinite variety of
medicines which I find in every Pharmacopea, every Physician, Herbalist etc,
single out some of the chiefest. 2. de vict. acut. Omne purgans medicamentum,
corpori purgato contrarium etc. succos and spiritus adducit, substantiam
corporis ausert.


SVBSEC. 2. Simples proper to Melancholy. Against Exoticke Simples.
MEdicines properly applied to Melancholy, are either Simple or Compound.
Simples are Alteratiue or Purgative. Alteratiues are such as correct,
strengthen Nature, alter, or any way hinder or resist the disease, and they be
herbs, stones, minerals etc. all proper to this humor. For as there be
diverse distinct infirmities, continually vexing us, Hesiod. op.
(...)
(...)
(...).
Diseases steal both day and night on men,
For Jupiter has taken voice from them.
so there be several remedies, as Hernius praef. prax. med. Qunt morborum sunt
Id^ae, tol remediorum g^nera ^arijs potentijs decorata.
he says, for every disease a medicine, for every humor; and as some hold,
every clime, every country, and more then that, every private place has his
proper Remedies growing in it, peculiar almost to the domineering and most
frequent maladies of it. As P^nottus denar. med. Quaecunque regio producit
simplicia, pro ^orbis regionis. Crefcit raro absin^b^um in Italia, quod ibi
ple^unque morbi cal^di, sed cicuta, papaver, and herba frigidae apud nos
Germanos and Polonos vbique provenit abs^nthium.
one discourses, Wormwood grows sparingly in Italy, because most part there
they be misaffected with hot diseases, but henbane, poppy, and such cold
herbs, With us in Germany, Poland, great store of it in every waste. Baptista
Porta Physiognomicae lib. 6. cap. 23. gives many instances and examples of it,
and brings many other proofs. For that cause belike that learned Fuchsius of
Noremberge, Quum in villun venit, considera^it quae ibi crescebant medicamenta,
simplicia frequentiora, and ijs plerunque vsus distillatis and aliter alimbecu^
id^o argenteum circumferens.
when he came into a Village, considered always what herbs did grow most
frequently about it, and those he distilled in a silver limbecke, and made use
of others amongst them as occasion served. I know that many are of opinion, our
Northern simples are weak, imperfect, not so well concocted, of such force as
those in the Southern parts, not so fit to be used in Physic, and will
therefore fetch their drugs a far off, Sena, Cassia out of Egypt, Rubarbe
from Barbary, Aloes from, Zocotora, Turbith, Agerick, Mirabolanes,
Hermodactils, from the East Indies, Tobaccho from the West, and some as far
as China, Hellebor from the Antycerae, or that of Austria which bears the
purple flower, which Mathiolus so much commends, and so of the rest. In the
Kingdom of Valence in Spain, Herbae medicis vtiles omnium in Apulia
feracissimae.
Geog. Ad quos magnus berbariorum numerus vndique consiuit. Sincerus Itiner.
Galliae.
Maginus commends two mountains, Mariola, and Rena Golosa famous for simples.
Leander Albertus, Baldus mons prope Be^acum herbilegis maxim notus.
Baldus a mountain near Benacus in the territory of Verona, to which all the
herbalists in the country continually flock. Ortelius Apulia, Munster mons
mayor in Histria: others Montpelier in France. Prosper Altinus preferres
Egyptian simples, Garcias ab Horto, Ind^an before the rest, another those of
Italy, Crete etc. Many times they are over curious in this kind, whom Fuchsius
taxes Instit. lib. 1. sec. 1. cap. 8. that think they do nothing, except they
rake ^uer all India, Arabia, Aethiopia for remedies, and fetch their Physic
from the three quarters of the World, and from beyond the Gar^mentes. Many an
old wife or country woman does often more good with a few known and common
garden herbs, Qui se nihil efficisse arbitra^tur nisi Indiam, Aethiopiam,
Arabiam, and vltra Garama^tesatribus mundi partib^s exquisita remedia
corradant. Tutius saepe medetur rustica anus vna etc.
then our bumb^st Physicians, with all their prodigious, sumptuous
farre-fe^ched, (...), coniecturall medicines. Without all question if we have
not these rare Exotic simples, we have that at home which is in virtue
equivalent unto them, ours will serve as well as theirs if they be taken in a
proportionable quantity, be fitted and qualified aright, if not much better,
and more proper to our constitutions. Opium in Turkey does scarce offend, with
us in a small quantity if stupifies, cicuta or hemblock is a strong poison in
Greece, but with us it has no such violent effects, so that I conclude with
Part 2. de pest. cap. 17.
Io. Voschius, (who as he much inveyes against those Exotic medicines, so he
promises by our European, a full cure, and absolute of all diseases a capite
ad calcem.) nostrae regionis herbae nostris corporibus magis corducunt, our own
simples agree best with us. It was a thing that Fernelius much labored in his
French practice, to reduce all his cures to our proper and domestic Physic.
So did Martin Rulandus in Germany, and T.B. with us, as appears by a Treatise
of his divulged in our tongue 1615, to prove the sufficiency of our English
medicines, to the cure of all manner of diseases. If our drugs be not
altogether of such force, or so apposite, it may be, if like industry were
used, those far-fetched drugs would prosper as well with us, as in those
countries whence now we have them, as well as Cherries, Artichokes, Tobacco,
and many such. There have bin many worthy Physicians, which have tried
excellent conclusions in this kind, and many diligent, painful Apothecaries,
as Gesner, Gerard, etc but amongst the rest those famous public Garde^s of
Padua in Italy, Noremberge in Germany, Leiden in Holland, Montpelier in France,
(and ours in Oxford now in fieri, at the cost and charges of the right
Honorable the Lord Dauers) are much to be commended, wherein all Exotic Plants
almost are to be seen, and a liberal allowance yearly made for their better
maintenance, that young students may be the better informed in the knowledge of
them: which as Instit. lib. 1. cap. 8 sec. 1. ad exquisitam curandi rationem,
quorum cognitio imprimis necessaria est.
Fuchsius holds is most necessary for that exquisite manner of curing, and and
as great a shame for a Physician not to know them, as for a workman not to
know his axe, saw, squire, or any other tool, which he must of necessity use.

SVBSEC. 3. Alteratiues. Herbs. Other Creatures, etc.
AMongst those 800 simples, which Galeottus reckons up lib. 3. de promisc.
doctr. cap. 3. and many exquisite Herbalists have written of; these few
following alone, I find appropriated to this humor: Of which some be
Alteratiues, Quae caeca^ vi as specifica qualitate morbos futuros arcent. (Lib.
1. cap. 10. Instit. Phar.
which by a secret force says Renodaeus, and special quality expel future
diseases, and perfectly cure those which are, and many such incurable effects.
This is as well observed in other plants, stones, minerals, and creatures as in
herbs, in other maladies as in this. How many things are related of a man's
scull? what several virtues of corns in a horse leg, Galen lib. epar lupi
epaticos curat.
of a Wolfes liver, etc. of several Stercus pecoris ad Epilepsiam etc.
excrements of beasts, all good against several diseases. What extraordinary
virtues are ascribed unto plants? Satyrium and eruca. Penem erigunt, vitex and
nymphea semen extinguunt, Sabina faetum educit.
some herbs provoke lust, some again, as aguus Castus, water-lilly, quite
extinguish feed, poppy causes sleep, Prestpintle, rocket.
Cabbige resists drunkenness etc. and that which is more to be admired, that
such and such plants, should have a peculiar virtue to such particular parts,
Wecker. Vide Osw^ldum Crollium lib. de Internis ^erum signaturis, de herbis
particularib^s particui^ convenientibus.
as to the head Anniseeds, foalesoot, Betony, Calamint, Eye bright, Lauander,
Bays, Roses, Rue, Sage, Marjoram, Piony etc. for the lungs Calamint, Lichoras,
Enula campana, hysop, horehound, water Germander etc. for the heart, borage,
buglosse, saffron, bawme, basil, Rosemary, Violets, roses etc. For the stomach
woormewood, mintes, betony, bawme, centaury, Sorel, purslane. For the Liver,
Darthspineor Camaepitys, germander, agrimony, fennel, Endive, Succory,
Liuerwort, Barbaries. For the spleen, maiden-haire, fingerfearne, dodder of
thyme, hops, the rind of ash. For the kidneyes grummell, parsley, saxifrage,
plantaine, mallow. For the womb, magwort, pennyriall, fetherfew, savine etc.
For the joints Cam^mile, S Iohnswort, Organ, rue, couslips, Centaury the less,
etc. and so to peculiar diseases. To this of melancholy you shall find a
Catalogue of herbs proper, and that in every part. See more in Wecker,
Renodeus, Hernius lib. 2. cap. 19. etc. I will briefly speak of some of them,
as first of alteratiues, which Galen in his third book of diseased parts,
preferres before diminutiues, and Trallianus brags, that he has done more
cures on melancholy men Idem Laurentius cap. 9. Borage.
by moistning, then by purging of them.

In this Catalogue, Borage and Bugl^sse may challenge the chiefest place,
whether in substance, juice, roots, seeds, flowers, leaves, decoctions,
distilled waters, extracts, oils, etc for such kind of herbs be diversely
varied. Buglosse is hot and moist, and therefore worthily reckoned up amongst
those herbs, which expel melancholy, and D^cor Borage gaudiasemper eg^.
exhilerate the heart. Galen. lib. 6. cap. 80. de simpl. med. Dioscorides lib.
4. cap 123. Pliny much magnifies this plant. It may be diversely used; as in
Broth in Vino infusum hilaritatem facit
Wine, In Conserues, Syrups, etc. It is an excellent cordial, and against this
malady most frequently prescribed.

Melissa Baume, has an excellent virtue to alter Melancholy, Bawme.
be it steeped in our ordinary drink, extracted or other wise taken Cardan.
subtle. lib. 18. much admires this herb. It heats and dries, faith Lib. 2.
cap. 2. prax. med. mira^ vilaetitiam praebet, and cor confirmat, vapores
m^lancholices purgat a spiritib^s.
Hernius in the second degree, and with a wonderful virtue it comforts the
heart, and purges all melancholy vapors from the spirits. Mathiol in lib. 3.
cap. 10. in Dioscoridos. Besides they ascribe other virtues to it, Proprium est
ei^s animum bilarem reddere, concoctionem iuvare, cerebri obstructiones
resecare, solitudines sugare, solicitas imaginationes tollere.

Scorzonera


as to help concoction, to cleanse the brain, and expel all careful
thoughts, and anxious imaginations: The same words in effect are in Avicenna,
Pliny, Simon Sethi, Fuchsius, Leobel, Delaca^pius, and every Herbalist. Nothing
better for him that is melancholy then to sleep this and Borage in his ordinary
drink.

Mathiolus in his fifth book of medicinal Epistles, reckons up Scorzonera, Non
solum ad viperarum morsus comitiales vertiginosos, sed per se accommodata radix
tristiti^m discutit, bilaritatemque, conciliat.

Gerard. Hop.


not against poison only, falling sickness, and such as are vertiginous, but
to this malady; the root of it taken by it self expells sorrow, and causes
mirth and lightness of heart.

Lupulus hop is a sovereign remedy, Fuchsius cap. 58. Plant hist. much extols
it, Bilem vtramque, detrabit. sanguinem purgat.
it purges all choler, and purifies the blood Mathiol. cap. 140. in 4.
Dioscor. wonders the Physicians of his time made no more use of it, because it
rarifies and cleanses, we use it in our ordinary bear, which before was thick
and fulsome.

Worwood, Centaury, Penneriall, are likewise magnified and much prescribed, as
I shall after show, especially in Hypocondriake melancholy, daily to be used
sod in whay: and as Ruffus Ephesius, Lib. 7. cap. 5.
Areteus relate, by breaking wind, helping concoction, many melancholy men have
been cured by the frequent use of them alone.

And because the Spleen and blood are often misaffected in melancholy, I may
not omit Endive, Succory, Dandelyon, Fumetory, etc. which cleanse the blood,
Scolopendria Cuscuta, Ceteratche, mugwort, Liuerwort, Asne, Tamerisk, Genist,
Maydenhaire, etc. which much help and ease the Spleen.

To these I may add Roses, Violets, Capers, Fethersewe, Scordium, Staechas,
Rosemary, Ros Solis, Betony, Saffron, ocyme, sweet Apples, Wine, Tobacco,
Sanders, etc. And to such as are cold, the Hernius lib. 2. consil. 185.
Scoltzij cons. 77.
Decoction of Guacum, Salsaperilla, Sassafras, the flowers of Carduus
Benedictus, which I find much used by Montanus in his consultations, Julius
Alexandrinus, Lelius Aegubinus, and others. Praef^denar. med. Omnes capitis
dolores and phantasmata tollit, scias nullam herbam in terris huic comparandam
viribus and bonitate nasci.
Bernardus Penottus preferres his Herba Solis, or dutch Sindawe, before all the
rest in this disease, and will admit of no herb upon the earth to be
comparable unto it. It excels Homers Moly, and cures this, falling sickness,
and almost al other infirmities. The same Penottus speaks of an excellent
Balm out of Apponensis, which taken to the quantity of three drops in a cup of
wine, Optimum medicamentum in celeri cordis confortatione, and ad omnes qui
tristantur etc.
will cause a sudden alteration, drive away dumps, and cheer up the heart.
Ant Guianerius in his Antidotary has Rondoletius Elenum quod vim habet miram
ad hilari^^tem, and multi pro secreto habent. Sckenkius observe. med. cen. 5.
obser. 86.
many such, and Iacobus de Dondis the Aggregator, repeats ambergreese, nutmegs,
and all spice amongst the rest. But that cannot be general, Amber and spice
will make a hot brain mad, good for moist. Garcias ab Horto has many Indian
plants, whose virtues he much magnifies in this disease. Lemnius instit. cap.
58. admires Rue and commends it to have excellent virtue, to Afflictas mentes
releuat, vanas animi Imaginationes and Daemones expellit.
expel vain imaginations, Devils, and to ease afflicted souls. Other things
are much magnified by Sckenkius. Mizaldus. Rhases.
writers, as an old Cock, a Rams head, a Wolfes heart borne or eaten, which
Mercurialis approues; Prosper Altinus, the water of Nilus, Gomesius all Sea
water, and at seasonable times to be sea sick: gotes milk, whay. etc.

SVBSEC. 4. Precious st^nes, Metals, Minerals, Alteratiues.
Precious stones are diversely censured, many explode the use of them or any
minerals in Physic, of whom Thomas Erastus is the chief, in his Tract
against Paracelsus, and in an Epistle of his to Peter Monavius Cratonis epist.
vol 1. Credat qui vult gemmas mirabilia efficere, mihi qui and ratione and
experientia didici aliter rem habere, nullus facile persuadebit falsum esse
verum.
that stones can work any wonders, let them believe that list, no man shall
persuade me, for my part I have found by experience there is no virtue in the^.
But Mathiolus in his Comment upon Lib de gemmis
Dioscorides is as profuse on the other side in their commendation, so is
Cardan, Renodeus, Encelius, Marbodeus, etc. Margaritae and corallum ad
melancholiam praecipue valent.
Mathiolus specifies in Chorall, and Oswaldus Crollius Basilchim. preferres the
salt of Chorall. Christoph. Encelius. lib. 3. cap. 131. will have them to be as
so many sovereign medicines against Melancholy, sorrow, fear, dullness, and
the like. Praefat ad lap. prec. lib. 2. sec. 2. de mat. med. Regum coronas
ornant, digitos illustrant, supellectilia ditant, a fascino tuentur, morbis
medentur, sanitatem conseruant, mentem exhilerant, tristitiam pellunt.
Renodeus admires them besides they adorn Kings Crowns, grace the fingers,
Margaritae and gemmae spiritus confortant cor and melan^holiam fugant.
enrich our household stuff, defend us from enchantments, preserve health, cure
diseases, they drive away grief and cares, and exhilerate the mind The
particulars be these.

Granatus a precious stone so called, because it is like the kernels of a
Pomegranate, an imperfect kind of Ruby, though somewhat ruddy, yet more obscure
then a Ruby, it comes from Calecut, Encelius lib. 3. ep. 4. Suspens^s vel
^bibitus trist^tie multum resistit, and correcreat.
if hung about the neck, or taken in drink, it much resists sorrow, and
recreates the heart. The same properties I find ascribed to the Iacinthe and
Topaze, Idem cap 5. and cap 6. de Hyacintho and Topazio. Iram sedat, and animi
tristitiam p^llu.
they allay anger, grief, diminish madness, and much delight and exhilerate
the mind. Lapis hic gestatus aut ebib^tus prudentiam auget, nocturnos timores
pellit, insanos hac sa^^vi and quum lapidem abiecerint, erupit iterum stultiti^.
If it be either carried about, or taken in a potion, it will increase wisdom,
says Cardan, expel fear, he brags that he has cured many mad men with it,
which when they laid by the stone, were as mad again as ever they were at
first. Petrus Bayerus, lib. 2. cap. 13. veni mecum. says as much of the
Cryselite, Inducit sapientiam, fugat stultitiam. Idem Cardanus. lunaticos iuvat.
a friend of wisdom, an enemy to folly Pliny lib. 37. Solinus cap. 55. Albertus
lapid. Cardan. Encelius, lib. 3. c. 66. much magnifies the virtue of the
Beryll, Confert ad bonum intellectum comprimit malas cogitationis, etc. Alacres
reddit.
it much availes to a good understanding, and represseth vain conceits, evil
thoughts, causes mirth, etc. In the belly of a swallow, there is a stone food
called Chelidonius, Albertus Encelius cap. 44. lib. 3. Plinius lib. 37. cap.
10. Iacobus de Dondis: dextro brachio alligatus sanat lunaticos, insanos, facit
amabiles, iucundos.
which if it be lapped in a fair cloth, and tied to the right arm, will cure
lunaticks and mad men, and make them amiable and merry.

There is a kind of Onyx called a Chalcidonye, which has the same qualities,
and Valet contra phantasticas illusiones ex melanch^lia.
availes much against phantasticke illusions which proceed from melancholy, and
preserues the vigor and good estate of the whole body.

The Eban stone which Goldsmiths use to slicken their gold with, borne about,
or given to drink, Amentes sanat, tristitiam pell^t, ir^n etc.
has the same properties or not much unlike.

Levinus Lemnius Institut. ad vit. c. 58. amongs other Jewels makes mention of
two. Carbuncle and Coral, Valet ad fugandos timores and daemones, turbulenta
somnia ab^git, and nocturnos puerorum timores compescit.
which drive away childish fears, devils, overcome sorrow, and hung about
the neck repress troublesome dreams, all which properties almost Cardan
gives to that green colored Somnia laeta facit argenteo annulo gestatus.
Emm^tris, if it be carried about, or worn in a ring.

Mercurialis admires the Emerald for his virtues in pacifying all affections of
the mind, others the Saph^re, which is the Atrae bili adversatur, omnium
gemmarum pulcherrima, caelicolorem refert, animam ab (...), ^ores in melius
mutat.
fairest of all precious stones, of sky c^lour, and a great enemy to black
choler frees the mind mends manners, etc. Iacobus de Dondis in his Catalogue
of Simples, ^ath A^ber Greece, os in Cord cerui, Longis moeroribus faeliciter
medetur, (...) etc.
the bone in Stagges heart, a Monocerots horn, Bezoors stone, Sec. 5. Memb. 1.
S^bs. 5.
of which elsewhere, it is found in the belly of a beast in the East Indies,
brought into Europe by Hollanders and our country men Merchants. Renodeus cap.
22. lib. 3. de meant. med. says he saw two of those beasts alive, in a Castle
of the Lord of Vitry at Conbert.

Lapis Lazuli and Armenus because they purge, shall be mentioned in their
place.

Of the rest in brief thus much I will add, out of Cardan Renodeus, cap. 23.
lib. 3. Randoletius lib. 1. de Testat. cap. 15. etc That ^estamen lapidum and
gemmarum maximu^ fert auxilium and iuuamen vnde qui dites sunt gemmas secum
far student.
almost all Jewels and precious stones, have excellent virtues to pacify the
affections of the mind, for which cause rich men so much covet to have them:
Margaritae and unions quae a conchis and piscibus apud Persas and Indos, valde
cordiales sunt, etc.
and those smaller unions which are found in shells amongst the Persians and
Indians, by the consent of all writers, are very cordial, and most part avail
to the exhileration of the heart.

Most men say as much of Gold, and some other Minerals as these have done of
precious stones. Erastus still maintains the opposite part. Disputat in
Paracelsum cap. 4. fol. 196. he confesses of Gold, Aurum laetitiam generat,
non in cord, sed in arca avarorum.
that it makes the heart merry, but in no other sense but as it is in a misers
chest: at mihi plaudo simul ac nummos contemplor in arca, as he said in the
Poet: aurum potabile, he discommends and inueighs against, Minerals.
by reason of the corrosiue waters which are used in it. Which argument our Dr
Guinne urges against Dr Antonius. Epist ad Monauium. Metallica omnia in
vniversum quuvismodo paratae, nec tuto, nec commode intrae corpus sumi.
Erastus concludes all their Philosophical stones and potable gold, etc. to
be no better then poison. Paracelsus and his Chymisticall followers will cure
all manner of diseases with Mineralls, Aurum non aurum. Noxium ob aquas
rodentes.
accounting them the only physic on the otherside. Paracelsus calls Galen,
Hippocrates, and al their adherents, Infants, Idiots, Sophisters, etc. not
worthy the name of Physicians, for want of these remedies, and bragges that by
them he can make a man live 160 years, or to the worlds end. But these are
both in extremes, the middle sort approve of Mineralls, though not in so high
a degree. Lemnius lib. 3. cap. 6. de occult. not. mir. commends Gold inwardly
and outwardly used, as in Rings, excellent good in medicines; and such mixtures
as are made for melancholy men, says Wecker. Antid. spec. lib. 1. to whom
Renodeus subscribes, lib. 2. cap. 2. Ficinus lib. 2. cap. 10. Fernel. meth.
med. lib. 5. cap. 21. de Cardiacis, Andernacus, Quercetanus, Oswaldus Crollius,
Euonymus, Rubeus, and Mathiolus in his fourth book of his Epistles, Andreas a
Blawen epist. ad Mathiolum, as commended and formerly used by Avicenna,
Arnoldus, and many others. Nonnulli hic supra modum indulgent, vsum etsi non
adeo magnum non tamen abijciendu^ censeo.
Mathiolus in the same place approues of potable Gold, Mercury, and many other
Chymicall confections, and goes so far in approbation of them, that he holds
Ausum dicere neminem medicum excellentem qui non in hac distillatione chimica
sit versatus. Morbi Chronici devinci citra metallica vix possunt aut vbi
sanguis corrumpitur.
no man can be an excellent Physician that has not some skill in Chymicall
distillations, and that Chronicke diseases can hardly be cured without mineral
medicines. Look for Antimony amongst purgers.

SVBSECT. 5. Compound Alteratiues, censure of Compounds, and mixed Physic.
Frauds hominum and ingeniorum capturae officinas invenere istas, in quibus
sua cuique venalis pro mittitur vita, statim compositiones and mixturae
inexplicabiles ex Arabia and India, vlceri parvo medicina a rubro mari
importatur.
PLiny lib. 24. cap. 1. bitterly taxes all compound medicines. Men's knavery,
imposture, and captious wits have invented these shops, in which every man's
life is set to sale: and by and by came in those compositions and inexplicable
mixtures, far fetched out of India and Arabia, a medicine for a botch must be
had as far as the red Sea, etc. And it is not without cause which he says,
for without question they are much to Arnoldus Aphor. 15. Fallax, medicus qui
potens mederi simplicibus, composita dolose aut frustra quaerit
blame in their compositions, whilst they make infinite variety of mixtures, as
Lib. 1. sec. 1. cap. 8. Dum infinitae medicamenta miscent, laudem sibi
comparare student, and in hoc studio alter alterum superare conatur, dum
quisque quo plura miscuerit, eo se doctiorem putet, inde fit, vt suam prodant
inscitiam, dum ostentant peritiam and se ridiculos exhibeant etc.
Fuchsius notes, They think they get themselves great credit and excel
others, and to be more learned then the rest, because they make more
variations, but he accounts the^ fools, and whilst they brag of their skill,
and think to get themselves a name, they become ridiculous, and bewray their
ignorance and error. A few simples well prepared and understood, are far better
then such a heap of nonsense confused compou^ds. Many times as Agrippa taxes,
there is by this means, Multo plus periculi a medicamento quam a morbo etc.
more danger from the medicine then from the disease, when they put together
they know not what, or leave it to an illiterate Apothecary to be made, they
cause death and horror for health. Those old Physicians had no such mixtures; a
simple potion of Hellebor, in Hippocrates time was the ordinary purge, and at
this day, says Expedit in Sinas lib 1. cap. 5. Praecepta medici dant nostris
diversa, in medendo non infaelices, pharmacis vtuntur simplicibus herbis,
radicibus etc. tota eorum medicinae nostrae herbariae praeceptis continetur
nullus ludus huius artis quisque privatus a quolibet magistro eruditur.
Mat. Riccius in that flourishing commonwealth of China, Their Physicians give
precepts quite opposite to ours, not unhappy in their Physic: they use
altogether roots, herbs, and simples in their medicines, and all their
physic in a manner is comprehended in an herball, no science, no school, no
art, no degrees, but like a trade, every man in private is instructed of his
master: Let the best of our rational Physicians demonstrat, and give a
sufficient reason of those intricate mixtures, why just so many simples in
Methredate, or Treacle, why such or such quantity, may they not be reduced to
half, to a quarter? Frustra fit per plura (as the saying is) quod fieri potest
per pauciora. 300 simples sometimes in a Iulip, potion or a little pill, to
what end or purpose? I know what Opusc. de Dos.
Alkindus, Capivaccius, Montagna, and Simon Eitouer, the best of them all, and
most rational have said in this kind; but nether he nor they nor any one of
them, gives his Reader in my judgment, that satisfaction which he ought, why
such, so many simples. Rog. Bacon has taxed some errors in his tract de
graduationibus, explaned some things but not cleared. Mercurialis in his book
de composit, medicin. gives instance in Hamech, and Philonium Romanum, which
Hamech an Arabian, and Philonius a Roman long since composed, but crasse as the
rest. If they be so exact, as by him it seems they were, and those mixtures
so perfect, why does Fernelius alter the one, and why is the other absolete?
Subtle. cap. de scientijs.
Cardan taxes Galen for presuming out of his ambition to correct Theriacum
Andronachi, and we as justly may tax all the rest. Galens medicines are now
exploded and rejected, and what Nicholas Meripsa, Mesve, Celsus, Scribanius,
Actuarius, etc. writ of old, are now most part contemned. Mellichius, Cordus,
Wecker, Quercetan, Rhenodeus, the Venetian. Florentine states have their
several receipts, and Magistralls: They of Noremberge have theirs, and
Augustana Pharmacopea, peculiar medicines to the Meridian of their city:
London hers, every City, Town, almost every private man has his own
mixtures, compositions, receipts, magistralls, precepts, as if he scorned
antiquity, and all others in respect of himself, but every man must correct
and alter to show his skill, every opinatiue fellow must maintain his own
paradox, be it what it will. Delirant reges plectuntur Achivi: they dote, and in
the mean time the poor patients pay for their new experiments, and the
Commonalty rue it.

Thus others object, thus I may conceive out of the weakness of my
apprehension, but to say truth there is no such fault, no such ambition, no
nouelty, or ostentation as some suppose, but as Quercitan pharmacop. restitut.
cap. 2. nobilissimum and vtilissimum inventum summa cum necessitate adinuentum
and introductum.
one answers, this of co^pound medicines, is a most noble and profitable
invention, found out, brought into physic, with great judgment; wisdom,
counsel and discretion. Mixed diseases must have mixed remedies, and such
simples are commonly mixed, as have reference to the part affected, some to
qualify, the rest to comfort, some one part, some another, Cardan and
Brassiuola both hold that Nullum simplex medicamentum sine noxa, no simple
medicine without hurt or offense, and although Hippocrates, Erasistratus,
Diocles of old, in the infancy of this art, were content with ordinary
simples, yet now, says Cap. 25. Tetrabib. 4. ser. 2. necessitas nunc cogit
aliquando nova quaerere remedia, and ex simplicibus composita facere tum ad
saporem, odo rem, palati gratiam, ad correctionem simplitium, tum ad futuros
vsus conseruationem, etc
Aetius, necessity compels to seek for new remedies, and to make compounds
of simples, as well to correct their harms, if cold, dry, hot, thick, thin,
insipid, noisome to smell, to make them sauory to the palate, pleasant to taste
and take, and to preserve them for continuance by admixtion of sugar, honey, to
make them last months, and years for several uses. In such cases compound
medicines may be approved, and Arnoldus in his 18 Aphorism does allow of it.
Cum simplicia non possunt necessitas cogit ad composita.
If simple cannot, necessity compells us to use compounds, and for receipts and
magistralls, dies diem docet, one day teaches another, and they are as so many
words or phrases, quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula si volet vsus. Ebb and
flow with the season, and as wits vary so they maybe infinitely varied.
Quisque suum placitum quo capiatur habet. Every man as he likes, Lips. Epist.
and so many men so many minds, and yet all tending to good purpose, though not
the same way. As all arts and sciences, so physic is daily perfected amongst
the rest, horae musarum nutrices, and experience teaches us every day many
things, which our predecessors knew not of. Nature is not effe^te as he says,
or so lavish to bestow all her gifts upon an age, but has reserved still some
for posterity, to show her power, that she is still the same and not old or
consumed. But I digress.

Compound medicines are inwardly taken, or outwardly applied. Inwardly taken be
either liquid or solid, liquid, are fluid or consisting. Fluid as Wines and
Syrupes. The wines ordinarily used to this disease, are Wormwood wine,
Tamarisk, and Buglossatum, wine made of Borage and Buglosse. The composition of
which is specified in Arnoldus Villanonanus, of Borage, Bawme, Buglosse,
Cinnamon, etc. And highly commended for his virtues. Sanguinem corruptum
emaculat scabiem abulet lepram curat spiritus recreat and anima exhilerat.
Melancholicos humores per vrinam educit and cerebrum a crassis aerumnosis
melancholiae sumis purgat quibus addo dementes and furiosos vinculis retixendos
plurimum iuvat and ad rationis vsu^ ducit. Testis est mihi conscientiae quod
viderim matronam quandam hinc liberatam quae frequentius ex iracundia demens
and impos animi dicendae tacenda loquebatur adeofurens vt ligari cogeretur.
Fuit ei praestantissimo remedio viniistius vsus indicatus a peregrino homine
mendico eleemosina^ praeforibus dictae matronae implorante.
It drives away Leaprosie, Scabbes, cleeres the blood, recreats the spirits,
exhilerates the mind, purges the brains of those anxious black melancholy
fumes, and cleanses the whole body of that black humor by urine. To which I
add, says Villanonanus, that it will bring mad men and such raging Bedlams
as are tied in chains to the use of their reason again. My conscience bears
me witness that I do not lie, I saw a grave matron helped by this means, she
was so choleric and so furious sometimes, that she was almost mad, and beside
her self, she said and did she knew not what, scolded, beat her maids, and
was now ready to be bound, till she drank of this Borage wine, and by this
excellent remedy was cured, which a poor forriner, a sillye beggar taught her
by chance, that came to crave an alms from door to door. The juice of Borage
if it be clarified and drunk in wine will do as much, the roots sliced and
steeped, etc. says Ant. Mizaldus art. med. who cites this story verbatim out
of Villanovanus, and so does Magninus a Physician of Millan in his Regyment of
health. Such another excellent compound water I find in Rubeus d^ destil. sec.
3. which he highly magnifies out of Savanarola, Iis qui tristantur sine causa
and vitant amicoru^ societatem and tremunt cord.
for such as are solitary, dull, heavy, or sad without a cause, or be troubled
with trembling of heart. Other excellent compound waters for melancholy he
cites in the same place, Modo non inflammetur Melancholia aut calidiore
temperamento sint.
if their melancholy be not inflamed, or their temperature over hot. Euonymus
has a protious Aquavitae to this purpose, for such as are cold. But he and
most commend Aurum potabile, and every writer prescribes clarified whay with
Borage, Buglosse, Endive, Succory etc. of Goats milk especially, some
indefinitely at all times, some 30 days together in the spring, every morning
fasting a good draught. Syrupes are very good and often used to digest this
humor in the heart, spleen, liver, etc. As syrup of Borage, de pomis of King
Sabor absolete, of Thyme and Epithyme, Hops, Scolopendria, Fumitory,
Maidenhaire, Bizantine, etc. These are most used for preparatiues to other
physic, mixed with distilled waters of like nature, or in Iulips otherwise.

Consisting are conserues or confections, conserues of Borage, Buglosse, Bawme,
Fumitory, Succory, Maidenhaire, Violets, Roses, Wormwood, etc. Confections,
Treacle, Mithridate, Eclegmes or Linctures, etc. Solid, as Aromaticall
confections, hot, Diambra, Diamargaritum calidum, Dianthus, Diamoschum dulce,
Electuarium de gemmis, laetificans Galeni and Rhasis. Diagalinga, Diacimynu^,
Dianisum, Diatrion piperion, Diazinziber, Diacapers, Diacinamomum. Cold, as
Diamargaritum frigidum, Diacorolli, Diarhodon abbatis, Diacodion, etc. as every
Pharmacopoeia will show you, with their tables or losinges that are made out of
them; with Condites and the like.

Outwardly used as occasion serves, as Amulets, Oils, hot and cold, as of
Camomile, Staechados, Violets, Roses, Almonds, Poppy, Nymphea, Mandrake, etc.
to be used after bathing, or to procure sleep.

Ointments composed of the said species, oils and wax, etc, as Alablastritum,
Populeum, some hot, some cold, to moisten, procure sleep, and correct other
accidents.

Liniments are made of the same matter to the same purpose, Emplasters made of
herbs, flowers, roots, etc. with oils and other liquors mixed and boiled
together.

Cataplasmes, salues, or pultises made of green herbs pounded, or sod in
water till they be soft, which are applied to the Hypocondries, and other parts
when the body is empty.

Caerotes, are applied to several parts, and Frontalls to take away pain,
grief, heat, procure sleep. Fomentations or spunges wet in some decoctions.
Epithemata or those moist medicines laid on linen to bath and cool several
parts misaffected.

Sacculi or little bags of herbs, flowers, seeds, roots, and the like,
applied to the head, heart, stomach. etc. odoraments, balls, perfumes, posies
to smell to, all which have their several uses in melancholy, as shall be
showed, when I treat of the cure of the distinct Species by themselves.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 1. Purging simples. Upward.
MElanagoga, or melancholy purging medicines, are either Simple or Compound,
and that gently or violently purging upward or downward. These following purge
upward. Hernius datur in sero lactis aut vino.
Asarum or Asrabecca, which as Mesue says, is hot in the second degree and dry
in the third, it is commonly taken in wine, whay, or as with us the juice of
two or three leaves or more sometimes, pounded in posset drink, qualified with
a little liquorish or aniseeds, to avoid the fulsomenesse of the taste, or as
Diaserum Fernelij. Brassiuolam Catart. reckons it up amongst those simples that
only purge melancholy, and Ruellius confirms as much out of his experience,
that it purges Veratri modo expurgat cerebrum, roborat memoriam, Fuchsius.
black choler like Hellebor it self. Galen lib. 6. simplic. and Crassos and
bi^osos humores per vomitum educit.
Mathiolus ascribe other virtues to it, and will have it purge other humors
as well as this.

Laurel, by Hernius methodiad prax. lib. 2. cap. 24. is put amongst the strong
Vomitum and menses cit valet ad Hydrop. etc.
purgers of melancholy, it is hot and dry in the fourth degree, Dioscorides
lib. 4. cap. 114. adds other effects to it. Pliny sets down 15 berries in
drink for a sufficient potion, it is commonly corrected with his opposites,
cold and moist, as juice of Endive, Purslane, and is taken in a potion to
seven grains and a half. But this and Asrabecca every Gentlewoman in the
country knows how to give, two known vomits.

Scillae or Sea onyon is hot and dry in the third degree, Brassiuola in Catart.
out of Mesue and others, and out of his own experience will have this Simple to
purge Materias atras educit.
melancholy alone. It is an ordinary vomit, vinum Scilliticu^ mixed with rubell
in a little white wind.

White Hellebor, which some calls sneezing powder, a stroge purger upward, which
some reject as being too violent, Mesve and Averroes will not admit of it, Ab
art id^o reijciendum ob periculum suffocationis.
by reason of the danger of suffocation, Cap. 26. magna vi educit and molestia
cum summa.
and great pain and trouble it puts the poor patient to, says Dodonaeus. Yet
Galen, lib. 6. simpl. med. and Dioscorides cap. 145. allow of it. It was indeed
Quondam terribile.
terrible in former times, as Pliny notes, but now familiar, in so much that
many took it in his time Multi studiorum gratia ad providenda acrius quae
commentabantur.
that were students, to quicken their wits, which Persius Sat. 1. objects to
Accius the Poet, Ilias Acci ebria veratro. Medetur comitialibus melancholicis
pod^gricis vetatur senibus pueris mollibus and effaeminatis, etc.
It helps Melancholy, the falling sicknesses: madness, gout, etc. but not to
be taken of old men, youths, such as are weaklings, nice or esseminate,
troubled with headache, high colored, or fear strangling, says Dioscorides.
Collect. lib. 8. cap. 3. In affectionibus ijs quae diffi ul^er curantur Hellebo
rum damu^.
Oribasius an old Physician has written very copiously of it, and approues of
it, in such affections, which can otherwise hardly be cured. Hernius l. 2.
prax. med. de vomitorijs, will not have it used, Non sine summa cautione hoc
remedio vtemur est enim validissimum, and quum vires Antimonij contemnit
morbus, in auxilium evo^atur, modo validae vires efflorescant.
but with great caution, by reason of his strength, and then when Antimony will
do no good, which caused Herm philus to compare it to a stout Captain as
Codronchus observes c. 7. comment. de Helleb. that will see all his soldiers
go before him, and come last himself, Aetius tetrabib cap. 119. ser. 2. iis
s^lum dari vult Hellebo^um album qui s^cus spem non habent, non iis qui
Syncop^n timent etc.
when other helps sail in inveterate melancholy in a desperate case, this
vomit is to be taken. And yet for all this if it be well prepared it may be
Cum salute muliorum.
securely given at first. Cap. 12 de morbis cap.
Mathiolus bragges that he has often to the good of many made use of it, and
Hernius, that he has happily used it prepared after his own prescript, and
with good success. Christopherus a Vega, lib. 3. cap. 14. is of the same
opinion, that it may be lawfully given, and our country Gentlewomen find it by
their common practice, that there is no such great danger in it. Dr Turner
speaking of this plant in his herball, tells us that in his time, it was an
ordinary Receipt among good wives, to give white Hellebor in powder to ij Nis
fael^issime (...) nos^ro ^^^ parat^ He^^^bo^o (...).
weight, and he is not much against it. But they do commonly exceed, for who so
bold as blind bayard, and prescribe it by penniworths, and such irrational
ways, as I have heard my self market folks ask for it in an Apot^ecaries
shop: but with what success God knows, they smart often for their rash
boldness and folly and break a vain, or make their eyes ready to start out of
their heads, or kill themselves. So that the fault is not in the Physic, but
in the rude and indiscreet handling of it. He that will know therefore how,
when to use it, how to prepare it a right, and in what dose, let him read
Hernius lib. 2. prax. med. Brassiuola de Catart. Godefridus Stegius the Emperor
Rodolphus Physician c. 16. Mathiolus in Dioscor. and that Exquisite commentary
of Baptista Codronchus, which is instar omnium, de Helleb. alb. where he shall
find great diversity of examples and Receipts.

Antimony or Stibium which our Chimists so much magnify, is either taken in
substance or infusion, etc. and much prescribed in this disease. It helps all
infirmities, says Jn lib. 5. Di^scor. cap. 59. omnibus opitulatur morbis quos
atrabilis excitaevit c^m^ialibus iisq, presertim qui Hypocondriacas obtinent
passiones.
Mathiolus, which proceed from black choler, falling sickness, and all
Hypocondriacall passions, and for farther proof of his assertion he gives
several instances, of such as have been freed with it. Andreas Gallus
Tridentinus medicus salutem huic medicamento post deum debe^.
One of Andrew Gallus a Physician of Trent, that after many other essaies,
imputes the recovery of his health, next after God, to this remedy alone.
Another of George Handshius, that in like sort when other medicines failed,
Integrae sanitati brevi r^stitutus Id quod alijs accidissescio, qui hoc
mirabili medicamento vsi sunt.
was by this restored to his former health, and which of his knowledge others
have likewise tried, and by the help of this admirable med^cine, have been
restored. A third of a parish Priest at P^age in Bohemia, Qui melanchol^^us
factus p^^ne d^si^i^bat, mult^q, st^lte loque^atur, h^ic exhibitum 12
gr^subium, quod paulo po^^ ^^ram bilem ex alvo eduxit (vt (...) vid^ qui (...)
tanquam ^d miracul^m ad^ui testari possam) and ram^nta t^nquam ^^rn^s disse^^a
in part^s to^um exc^em^tu^ (...) repr^s^^^abat.
that was so far gone with melancholy that he pla^^ely doted, and spoke he
knew not what, but after he had taken (...) grains of Stibium (as I my self
saw and can witness, (...) I was called to see this miraculous accident) he
was purged of a d^ale of black choler, like little gobbets of ^le^h, and all
his (...) were like black blood* (a medicine fitte^ for a horse (...) yet it
did him so much good that the next day he was (...) cured. This very story of
this Bohemian P^i^st (...) relates verbatim, Exoter. experiment* ad ^ar (...)
6. with great approbation of it. Hercules d^ Saxo^^^ ^^lls it a profitable
medicine, if it be taken after me^t to 6 o^ 8 (...) to such as are apt to
vomit. Iacobus (...) a (...) P^^sitian on the other side, lib. 2. de Ve^e^is
(...) (...) this, and says he took 3 grains only upon (...) and some others
commendation, but it almost killed him, ^^^^^vpon he concludes Anti^o (...)
venea^^n, non med (...).
Antimony is rather a (...) med^cine. Th. Erastus concurres with him in his
opinion, and (...) does A^lian Montaltus cap. 30. de melan. but what do I
talk? it is the subject of whole books, I might cite ^ century of authors pro
and con. I will conclude with Crato^is ep^st. sec vo^ ad Monavium (...). In
^tramque partem (...) medicamentum, si recte vtantur secus venenum.
Zu^^ger, Antimony is like Scand^rbegs sword, which is either good or bad,
strong or weak as the party is that prescribes it, or that uses it, a worthy
medicine if it be rightly applied to a strong man, otherwise poison. For the
preparing of it, look in Evonimi thesaurus, Q^ercetan, Oswaldus Crollius Basil.
Chim. Ba^il. Valentius etc.

Tobacco, divine, rare, superexcellent T^bacco, which goes far beyond all
their Panaceas, potable gold, and Philosophe^s stones, a sovereign Remedy to
all diseases. A good vomit I confess, a virtuous herb if it be well
qualified, opportunely taken, and medicinally used, but as it is commonly
abvsed by most men, which take it as Tinkars do ale, it is a plague, a
mischief, a violent purger of goods, lands, health, hellish, divelish and
damned Tobacco, the ruin and overthrow of Body and Soul.

SVBSEC. 2. Simples purging melancholy downward.
POlipodye and Epythime are without all exceptions gentle purgers of
melancholy. Dioscorides will have them purge fleame, but Brassiuola out of his
experience averreth, that they purge this humor, they are used in decoction,
infusion etc. simple, mixed etc.

Mirabolanes all five kinds, are happily (...) d^^tur melancholicis and
quaternarijs.
used against melancholy and quartan agues, Brassivola speaks out ^f a thousand
experiences, he gave them in pills, decoction etc. look for peculiar receipts
in him.

Staechas, Fumitory, Dodder, herb Mercury, roots of capers, Genista or broom,
pennyriall, and half boiled Cabbage, I find in this Catalogue of purgers of
black choler, Mill^es horum vi^es expertus sum.
Origan, fetherfew, Ammoniack Salnitrum, sal ammonia^^^, Draco^^ij ^adix,
dictam^m.
salt, saltpeter. But these are very gentle, alypus, dragon root, centaury,
ditany, Colutea, which Fuchsius cap. ^168 and others take for Seen, but most
distinguish. Seen is in the middle of violent and gentle purgers downward, hot
in the second degree, dry in the first. Brassiuola calls it Calet ordine
secundo, sic at pri^^, a^ue^sus o^^ia vitia atrae bil^s valet, sanguin^m
^^^dat, ^pirit^s illustrat, maerorem discutit he^ba mirisica.
a wonderful herb against melancholy, it scowres the blood, illightens the
spirits, shakes off sorrow, a most profitable medicine, as Cap. 4. lib. 2.
Dodoneus terms it, invented by the Arabians, and not heard of before. It is
taken diverse ways in powder, infusion, but most commonly in the infusion, with
ginger or some cordial flowers added to correct it. Act^arius commends it sod
in broth with an old cock, or in whay which is, the common convayer of all such
things as purge black choler, or steeped in wine, which Hernius accounts
sufficient without any farther correction.

Aloes by most is said to purge choler, but Aurelianus lib. 2. cap. 6. de morb.
cron. Arculanies cap. 6. in 9 Rhasis, Julius Alexandrinus consil. 185. Scoltz.
Crato consil. 184. Scoltz. prescribe it to this disease, as good for the
stomach, and to open the Haemrods, out of Mesue, Rhasis, Serapio, Avicenna.
Menardus epist. lib. 1, epist. 1. opposes it, Aloe Recentiores negant ora
venarum r^secare.
does not open the veins, or move the Haemrods, which Leonhartus Fuchsius
paradox. lib. 1. likewise assumes; An aloe aperiat ora venarum lib 9 cont. 3
but Brassiuola and Dodoneus defend Mesae out of their experience, let Valesius
end the controversy.

Lapis Armenus and Lazuli, are much magnified by Vapores absterg^t a vitalibus
partibus.
Alexander, lib. 1. cap. 16. and Auicenna, A^tius, Ac^^arius, if it be well
washed that the water be no more colored, fifty times some say. Tract. 15.
cap. 6. Banus Alexander tantam lapide Armeno confidentiam habuit, vt omnes
melancholicas passi^nes ab co curari posse ^rederet, and ego indesaepissim^
vsus sum, and in eius exhibitione nunquam fraudatus fui.
That good Alexander says Guianerius, put such confidence in this one
medicine, that he thought all melancholy passions might be cured by it, and I
for my part have often times happily used it, and was never deceived in the
operation of it. The like may be said of Lapis Lazuli, though it be somewhat
weaker then the other. Garcias ab Horto hist. lib. 1. cap. 65. relates that the
Maurorum medici hoc lapide plerumque purgant melancholiam etc.
Physicians of the Moors, familiarly prescribe it to all melancholy passions,
and Mathiolus epist. lib. 3. Quo ego saepe faeliciter vsus sum and magno cum
auxilio.
Bragges of that happy success which he still had in the administration of
it. Nicholas Meripsa puts it amongst the best remedies sec. 1. cap. 12. in
Antidotis, Si non hoc nihil restat nisi Helleborus and lapis Armenus.
and if this will not serve says Rhases, then their remains nothing, but
Lapis Armenus and Hellebor it self. Valescus and Jason Pratensis much commend
Puluis Hali which is made of it, James Damascen lib. 2. cap. 22. Hercules de
Saxonia etc. speak well of it. Consil, 184. Scoltzij.
Crato will not approve of it, this and both Hellebors he says, are no better
then poison. Victor Trincauelius lib. 2. ca. 14. Found it in his experience
Multa corpora vidi gravissime hinc agitata, and stomacho multu obfuisse.
to be very noisome, to trouble the stomach, and hurt their bodies that take
it overmuch.

Black Hellebor that most renowned plant, and famous purger of melancholy,
which all antiquity so much used and admired, was first found out by Melampus a
shepherd as Pliny records lib. 25. cap. 5. Cum vidissat ab eo curari capras
furentes, etc.
Who seeing it to purge his goats when they raued, practiced it upon Elige and
Caelene king Praetus daughters, that ruled in Arcadia, near the fountain
Clitorius, and restored them to their former health. In Hippocrates time it was
in only request; in so much that he writ a book of it, a fragment of which
remains yet, Theophrastus, Lib. 6. simpl. mea.
Galen, Pliny, Caelius Aurelianus, as ancient as Galen, lib 1. cap. 6. Areteus
lib. 7. cap. 5. Oribasius lib. 7. suorum collect; a famous Greek, Aetius ser.
3. cap. 112 and 113. P, Aegineta Galens ape lib. 7. cap. 4. Actuarius and
Trallianus lib. 5. cap. 15. Cornelius Celsus only remaining of the old Latins
lib. 3. cap. 23. extol and admire this excellent plant, and it was generally
so much esteemed of the ancients for this Disease amongst the rest, that they
sent all such as were crased, or any way doted to the Anticyrae, to be purged,
where this plant was to be had. In Strabos time it was an ordinary voyage,
Nauiget Anticyras. A common proverb amongst the Greeks and Latins, to bid a
disarde or a madman go take Hellebor; as in Lucian Menippus to Tantalus,
Tantale desipis, ellebero epoto tibi opus est, eoque sane meraco. Thou art out
of thy little wit O Tantalus, and must needs drink Hellebor, and that without
mixture. Aristophanes in vespis, drink Hellebor etc. and Harpax in the
Pseudo^. act. 4. s^en. vlt helleboro hisce hominibus opus est.
Comedian, told Simo and Ballio two doting fellows, that they had need to be
purged with this plant. Lilius Geraldus says, that Hercules after all his mad
pranckes upon his wife and children, was perfectly cured by a purge of
Hellebor, which an Anticyrian administered unto him. They that were found
commonly took it to quicken their wits, as I find it registered by Agellius
lib. 17. cap. 15. Carneades the Academicke when he was to write against Zeno
the Stoike, purged himself with Hellebor first, which Petronius puts upon
Chrisyppus. In Satyr.
In such esteem it continued for many ages, till at length Mesue and some other
Arabians began to reject and reprehend it, upon whose authority for many
following ages, it was much debated and quite out of request, held to be poison
and no medicine; and is still oppugned to this day by Crato consil. 16 lib. 2.
and si multi magni viri probent, in honam partem accipiant medici si non probem.
Crato and some Junior Physicians. There reasons are, because Arist^^le lib. 1.
de plant. cap. 3. said Henbane and Hellebor were poison, and Alexander
Aphrodiseus in the preface of his problemes, said (speaking of Hellebor)
Vescuntur veratro coturnices quod hominibus toxicum est.
Quails fed on that which was poison to men. Galen lib. 6. Epid. com. 5.
Tex. 35. confirms as much, Constantine the Emperor in his Geopon^^^,
attributes no other virtue to it, Lib. 23. cap. 7.12.14.
then to kill mice, and rats, flies and mouldewarpes, and so Mizaldus. Nicande^
of old, Geruinus and Skenkius, and some other Neotericks that have written of
poisons speak of Hellebor in a chief place. De var. hist.
Nicholas Leonicus has a story of Solon that beseiging I know not what city,
steeped Hellebor in a spring of water, which by pipes was conuaied into the
middle of the town, and so either poisoned them, or else made them so feeble
and weak by purging, that they were not able to bear arms. Notwithstanding
all these cauels and objections, most of our late writers do much approve of
it. Corpus incolume reddit, and iuvenile efficit.
Garri^pontus lib. 1. cap. 13. Codrochus com. de helleb. Falopius consil. 15.
Trincav^^^^, Montanus 239. Frisemelica consil. 14. Hercules de Saxonia, so that
it be opportunely given. Iacobus de D^ndis Agg. Amatus Lusit. cent. 2. cent.
66. God. Stegius cap. 13. H^llerius and all our Herbalists subscribe. Veteres
non sine causa vsi sunt Difficilis ex Helleboro purgatio, and terroris plena,
sed robustis datur tamen etc.
Fernelius meth. med. lib. 5. cap. 16. confesses it to be a terrible purge and
hard to t^^e, yet well given to strong men, and such as have able (...). P.
^orestus and Capiuaccius forbid it to be taken in su^^tance, but allow it in
decoction or infusion, both which way, Pet. Monauius commends above all
others, Epist. ^^1. Scoltzii, Iacchinus in 9. Rasis commends a receipt of his
own preparing; Hildesheim spicel 2. de melancholia, has many examples how it
should be used, diversity of ^ece^pts. Hernius l^b. ^. prax med. cap. 24.
calls it an Innocens medicamentum modo rite paretur.
innocent medicine howsoever, if it be well prepared. The root of it is only
in use, which may be kept many years, and by some given in substance, as by
Brassiuola amongst the rest, who A^sit. tactantia.
bragges that he was the first that restored it again to his use, and tells a
story how he cured one Melatasta a madman, that was thought to be possessed, in
the Duke of Ferraras court with one purge of black Hellebor in substance: the
receipt is there to be seen, his excrements were like ink, In Catart. Ex vna
sola euacuatione furor cessavit and quietus inde vixit. Tale exemplum apud
S^kenkium and apud Scoltzium epist. 231. P. Monavius se stolidum cu^ ass
iactat hoc epoto tribus aut 4. vicibus.
he perfectly healed at once. Vidus Vidius a Dutch Physician will not admit of
it in substance, to whom most subscribe, but as before in the decoction,
infusion, or which is all in all in the Extract, which he preferres before the
rest, and calls suaue medicamentum, a sweet medicine, an easy, that may be
securely given to women, children and weakelings. Quercetan in his Spagir:
Phar: and many others tell wonders of this Extract, Paracelsus above all the
rest is the greatest admirour of this plant; and especially his extract, he
calls it Theriacum, terrestre Balsamum, an other Treacle, a terrestiall Bawme,
instar omnium, all in all, the Vltimum refugium extremu^ medicamentum, quod
caetera omnia claudit, quaecunque aeteris laxativis pelli non pussunt ad hunc
pertinent, si non huic nulli cedu^t.
sole and last refuge to cure this malady, the gout, Epilepsie, leprosy etc.
If this will not, no Physic in the world will but mineral, it is the vpshot
of all. Mathiolus laughes at all those that except against it, and though some
abhor it out of the authority of Mesue, and dare not adventure to prescribe
it, Testari possum me sexcentis hominibus Helleborum nigrum exhibuisse nullo
prorsus incommodo etc.
yet I (says he) have happily used it six hundredth times without offense, and
have communicated it to diverse worthy Physicians, who have given me great
thanks for it. Look for receipts, dose, preparation, and other cautions
concerning this simple in him, Brassiuola, Codronchus and the rest.

SVBSEC. 3. Compounde purgers.
COmpounde medicines which purge melancholy, are either taken in the superior
or inferior parts: superior at mouth or nostrils. At the mouth swallowed, or
not swallowed: If swallowed liquid or solid: liquid as compound wine of
Hellebor, Scilla or Sea onyon, Sena, Vinum Scilliticum, Helleboratum, which
Pharmacop. Optimum est ad maniam and omnes melancholicos effectus, tum intra
assumptum tum extra secus capiti cum linteolis in eo madefactis tepide admotum.
Quercetan so much applaudes, for melancholy and madness, either inwardly
taken, or outwardly applied to the head, with little pieces of linen dipped
warm in it. Oximel Scilliticum, Syrupus Helleboratus mayor and minor in
Quercetan, and Syrupus Genistae for Hypocondriacall melancholy in the same
Author, compound Syrup of Succorie, of Fumitory, Polipody, etc. Hernius his
purging cockebroth. Some except against these Syrupes, as appears by Epist.
Math. lib. 3. Tales syrupi nocentissimi, and omnibus modis extirpandi.
Vdalrinus Leonoras his Epistle to Mathiolus, as most pernicious and that out
of Hippocrates, cocta mouere and medicari non cruda, no raw things to be used
in Physic; but this in the following Epistle is exploded and soundly confuted
by Mathiolus, many Iulips, potions, Receipts, are composed of these, as you
shall find in Hildesheim spicel. 2. Hernius lib. 2. cap. 14, George Skenkius
Ital. med. prax. etc.

Solid purgers are confections, electuaries, pills by themselves or compound
with others, as de lapide Lazulo, Armeno, Pil. Indae, of Fumitorie, etc.
Confection of Hamech, Diasena, Diapolipodium, Diacassia, Diacatholicon; Weckers
Electuar de Epithymo, Prolomies Hierologadium, of which diverse receipts are
daily made.

Aetius 22.33. commends Hieram Russi, Trincauelius consil. 12. lib. 1. approues
of Hiera, non inquit inuenio melius medicamentum, I find no better a medecin
he says. Heruius adds pil. Aggregat. pills de Epithymo, pil. Ind. Mesue,
described in the Florentine Antidotary, Pilulae sine quibus esse nolo, Pilulae
Cochiae cum Helleboro, Pil. Arabicae, Foetidae, de quinque generibus
mirabolanorum etc. More proper to Melancholy: not excluding in the mean time,
Turbeth, Manna, Rubarbe, Agaricke, Elescophe, etc. which are not so proper to
this humor. For as Montalius holds cap. 30. and Montanus cholera etiam
purganda, quod atrae sit pabulu^, choler is to be purged because it feeds the
other: and some are of an opinion, as Erasistratus and Asclepiades maintained
of old, against whom Galen disputes, Purgantia censebant medicamenta, non vnta^
humorem attrahere, sed quemcunque attigerint iu suam naturam convertere.
that no physic does purge one humor alone, but all alike or what is next.
Most therefore in their receipts and magistrals which are coined here, make a
mixture of several simples and compounds, to purge all humors in general as
well as this. Some rather use po^ions then pills to purge this humor, because
that as Hernius and Crato observe, hic succus a sicco remedio aegre trahitur,
this juice is not so easily drawn by dry remedies, and as Montanus advises
25. cons. All Religantur omnes exsiccantes medicine, vt Aloe, Hiera, piula
quaecunque.
drying medicines are to be repelled as Aloe, Hiera, and all pills whatsoever,
because the disease is dry of it self.

I might hear insert many receipts of prescribed potions, boles etc. the doses
of these, but that they are common in every good Physician, and that I am loath
to incur the censure of Forestus lib. 3. cap. 6. de vrinis, Contra eos qui
lingua vulgari and Vernacula remedi^ and medicamenta praescribunt, and
quibusvis communia faciunt.
against those that diuulge and publish medicines in their mother tongue, and
least I should give occasion thereby to some ignorant Reader to practice on
himself, without the consent of a good Physician.

Such as are not swallowed, but only kept in the mouth, are Gargarismes, used
commonly after a purge when the body is soluble and loose, Or Apophlegmatismes,
masticatories, to be held and chewed in the mouth, which are gentle, as Hysope,
Origan, Penneriall, Thyme, Mustard, strong as Pellitorie, Pepper, Ginger, etc.

Such as are taken into the nostrels, Errhina are liquid or dry, juice of
Pimpernell, Onyons etc. Castor, Pepper; white Hellebor etc. To these you may
add odoraments, perfumes, and suffumigations etc.

Taken into the inferior parts are Clysters strong or weak, suppositaries of
Castilian soap, honey boiled to a consistence, or stronger of scammony,
Hellebor, etc.

These are all used, and prescribed to this malady upon several occasions, as
shall be showed in his place.

MEMB. 3. Chirurgicall Remedies.
IN letting of blood three maine circumstances are to be considered. Quis,
quantum, quando.
Who, how much, when. That is, that it be done to such a one as may endure it,
or to whom it may belong, that is, that he be of a competent age, not to young
nor to old, over weak, fat or lean, sore labored, but to such as have need,
and are full of bad blood, and noxious humors, and may be eased by it.

The quantity dependes upon the parties habit of body, as he is strong or
weak, full or empty, may spare more or less.

In the morning is the fittest time, some doubt whether it be best fasting or
full, Cum cruditas abest a ventriculo.
whether the moons motion or aspects of planets be to be observed, some
affirm, some deny, some grant in acute but not in Cronicke diseases, whether
before or after Physic. It Is Hernius Aphorism a Phlebotomia auspicandam esse
curationem, non a pharmacia, you must begin with blood-letting and not
Physic; some except this peculiar malady. But what do I? Horatius Augenius a
Physician of Padua has lately writ 17 books of this subject, Iobertus etc.

Particular kinds of blood-letting in use Fernelius lib. 2 cap. 19.
are three, first is that opening a vein in the arm with a sharp knife, or
in the head, knees, or any other parts as shall be thought fit.

Cupping glasses with or without scarification, ocissime compescunt, says
Fernelius they work presently, and are applied to several parts, to divert
humors, aches, wind etc.

Horse-leaches, are much used in melancholy, applied especially to the
haemrods. Horatius Augenius lib. 10. cap. 10. and many others, prefer them
before any euacuations in this kind.

Renodeus lib. 5 cap. 21. de h is Mercurialis lib. 3. de composit. med. cap.
24. Hernius lib. 1. prax. med. Wecker etc.
Cauteries or fearings with hot yrons, combustions, boarings, launcings, which
because they are terrible, Dropax and Synapismus are invented, by plasters to
raise blisters, and eating medicines of pitch, mustardseed, and the like.

Issues still to be kept open, and made as the former, and applied in and to
several parts, have their use hear on several occasions, as shall be showed.

SECT. 4
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Particular cure of the three several kinds of head Melancholy.
THe general cures thus briefly examined and discussed, it remains now, to
apply these medicines to the three particular species or kinds, that according
to the several parts affected, each man may tell in some sort how to help or
ease himself. Of head Melancholy first, In which, as in all other good cures
we must begin with Diet, as a matter of most moment, able oftentimes of it
self to work this effect. I have read says Laurentius cap. 8. de Malanch.
That in old diseases which have gotten the upper hand or an habit, the manner
of living is to more purpose, then whatsoever can be drawn out of the most
precious boxes of the Apothecaries. This Diet as I have said, is not only in
choice of meat and drink, but of all those other non-naturall things. Air to
be clear and moist most part. Diet moisting, of good juice, easy of
digestion, and not windy, drink clear, and well brewed, not to strong nor to
small. Make a melancholy man fat, as Cont. lib. 1. cap. 9. festines ad
impinguationem, and cum impinguantur, remouetur malum.
Rhases says, and thou have finished the cure. Exercise not too remiss nor
too violent. Sleep a little more then ordinary. Excrements daily to be
avoided by Art or Nature, and which Fernelius inioynes his patient consil. 44.
above the rest to avoid all passions and purturbations of the mind. Concerning
the medicinal part, Beneficium ventris.
he that will satisfy himself at large (and this precedent of Diet,) and see
all at once; the wholr cure and manner of it in every distinct speties; let him
consult with Gordonius, Valescus, with Prosper Calenius lib. de atrabile ad
Card. Casium, Laurentius cap. 8. and 9. de mel. Aelian. Montaltus de mel. cap.
26.27.28.29.30. Donat ab Altomari cap. 7. artis med. Hercules de Saxonia in
Panth. cap. 7. Sauanorola Rub. 82. Tract. 8. cap. 1. Scenkius in Prax. curat.
Ital. med. Hernius cap. 12. de morb. cap. Victorius Fauentinus Pract. Magn. and
Empir. Hildshem Spicel. ^. de man. and mel. F. Platter, Stockerus, Bruel, P.
Bayerus, Forestus Fuchsius, Capiuaccius, Jason Pratensis. Salust. Saluian. de
re med. lib. 2. cap. 1. Iacchinus in 9. Rhasis, Piso, Hollerius etc. That have
culled out of those old Greeks, Arabians, and Latins, whatsoever is
obseruable or fit to be used. Or let him read those counsels and consultations
of Hugo Senesis consil. 13. and 14. Renerus Solinander consil. 6. sec. 1. and
consil 3. sec. 3. Crato consil. 16. lib. 2. Montanus consil. 20.22.229. and his
following counsels, Laelius a Font Egubinus consult 44.69.77.125.129.142.
Fernelus consil. 44.45.46. Iul. Caesar Claudinus, Mercurialis, etc. Where in he
shall find particular receipts, the whole method, preparatiues, purgers,
correctors, averters, cordials in great variety and abundance. Out of which,
because every man cannot attend to read or peruse them, I will collect for the
benefit of the reader, some few notes.

SVBSECT. 2. Blood-letting.
PHlebotomy is promiscuously used before and after Physic, commonly before,
and upon occasion is often reiterated, if there be any need at least of it. For
Galen and many others make a doubt of bleeding at all in this kind of head
melancholy. If the malady says Piso cap. 23. and Altomarus cap. 7. Fuchsius
cap. 33. Si ex primario cerebri affectu melancholici euaserint, sanguinis
detractione non indigent nisi ob altas caus^^ sanguis mittatur, vt si multus in
vasis etc. frustra enim fatigatur corpus etc.
shall proceed primarily from the misaffected brain, the patient in such case
shall not need at all to be let blood, except the blood otherwise abound, the
veins be full, inflamed blood, and party ready to run mad. Laurentius cap. 9.
approues of it out of the authority of the Arabians, but as Mesue, Rhases,
Alexander, Competit ijs phlebotemia frontis.
especially in the head, to open the veins of the forehead, nose and ears,
they set cupping glasses on their shoulders, having first scarrified the place,
they apply horseleaches on the head, and in all melancholy diseases, whether
essential or accidental they cause the haemrods to be opened, having the
eleventh Aphorism of the 6 book of Hippocrates, for their ground and warrant,
which says, that in melancholy and madmen, the varicous tumor haemorroides
appearing does heal the same. Valescus prescribes blood-letting in all, three
kinds, whom Salust. Saluian follows, Si sarguis ab^^det quod scitur ex venarum
repletione victus ratione praecedente, risu aegri, ^t^te and alus. Tundatus
mediaena and ^ anguis apparet cla^us and ^^ber supprimatur, aut si vere, si
niger aut crossus permittatur fluere pro viribus aegri, dein post 8 vel 12 diem
aperiatur cephalica partis magis affectae, and venaf^ontis aut. sanguis
provocatur setis per nares. etc.
If the blood abound, which is discerned by the fullness of the veins, his
precedent diet, the parties laughter, age, etc. begin with the median or middle
vein of the arm, if the blood be ruddy and clear stop it, but if black in
the springetime, or a good season, or thick, let it run, according to the
parties strength, and some eight or twelve days after, open the head vein,
and the veins in the forehead, or provoke it out of the nosthrils, or with
cupping glasses, etc. Trallianus allows of this, Si quibus consuctae suae
suppressae sunt menses etc. talo secare oportet aut vena frontis si sanguis
peccet cerebro.
if their have been any suppression or stopping of blood at nose, or haemords,
or women's months, then to open a vein in the head or about the ancles. Yet he
does hardly approve of this course, if melancholy be fited in the head alone,
or in any other dotage, Nisi ortum ducat a sanguine, ne morbus inde augeatur
phlebotomia refrigerat and exiccat, nisi corpus sit valde sanguineum rubicundum.
except it primarily proceed from blood, or that the malady be increased by it,
for blood-letting refrigerates and dries up, except the body be very full of
blood, and a kind of ruddinesse in the face. Therefore I conclude with Areteus,
Cum sanguinem detrahere ^portet, deliberatione indiget. Aretaeus lib. 7. cap. 5.
before you let blood, deliberate of it: and well consider all circumstances
belonging to it.

SVBSECT. 3. Preparatiues and purgers.
AFter blood-letting we must proceed to other medicines, first prepare, and
then purge, Augeae stabulum purgare, make the body clean before we can hope to
do any good. Gualter Bruel would have a practitioner begin first with a
Clyster of his, which he prescribes before blood-letting, the common sort as
Mercurialis, Montaltus cap. 30. etc. first proceed from lenitiues to
preparatiues, and so to purges. Lenitiues are well known, electuarium
lenitiuum, Diaphenicum, Diacatholicon, etc. preparatiues are usually syrups of
Borage, Buglosse, Apples, Fumitory, Thyme and Epithyme, with double as much of
the same decoction or distilled water, or of the waters of Buglosse, Bawme,
Hoppes, En^iue, Scolopendry, Fumitory, etc. or these sod in whay, which must be
reiterated and used for many days together. Purges come last, which must not
be used at all, if the malady may be otherwise helped, because the weaken
nature and dry so much, and in giving of them, A lenioribus auspicandum.
Valescus, Piso, Bruel, rariusque medicamentis pu rgantibus vtendum, ni sit opus.
we must begin with the gentlest first. Some forbid all hot medicines as
Alexander and Saluianus etc. Ne insaniores inde siant, Hot medicines increase
the disease Quia corpus exiccant, morbu^ augent.
by drying too much. Purge downward rather then upward, use potions rathen
then pills, and when you begin Physic, persevere and continue in a course,
for as one Guianerius Tract 15. cap. 6.
observes, mouere and non educere in omnibus malum est. To stir up the humor
(as one purge commonly does) and not to prosecute, does more harm then good.
They must continue in a course of Physic, yet not so that they tire and
oppress nature, da^da quies naturae, they must sometimes remit, and let nature
have some rest. The most gentle purges to begin with, are Piso.
Sena, Cassia, Epithyme, Myrabolanes, Catholicon. If these prevail not, we may
proceed to stronger as the confection of Hameche Pil. Indae, Fumitorie, de
Assaieret, of Lapis Armenus and Lazuli, Diasena, Or if pills be to dry;
Rhasis saepe^ valent ex Helleboro.
some prescribe both Hellebors in the last place, among the rest Areteus Lib.
7. Exiguis medicamentis, morbus non obsequitur.
because this disease will resist a gentle medicine. Laurentius and Hercules de
Saxonia, would have Antimony tried last Modo caute ^etur and robustis.
if the party be strong, and it warily given. C^nsil 10 lib. 1
Trincauelius preferres Hierologodium, to whom Francis Alexander in his Apol.
rad. 5. subscribes, a very good medicine they account it. But Crato in a
counsel of his, for the Duke of Bauarias Chauncellor wholly reiects it.

I find a vast Chaos of medicines, and confusion of receipts and magistralls,
amongst writers appropriated to this disease, some of the chiefest I will
rehearse. Plinius lib. 31 cap. 6. Navigationes ob vomitionem prosunt plurimis
mo^bis capitis and omnibus ob quae Helleborum bibitur. Idem Diascorides lib 5.
cap. 13. Avicenna tertia imprimis.
To be Sea-sicke, first is very good at seasonable times. Helleborismus
Mathioli, with which he vaunts and boasts he did so many so great and such
excellent cures, Nunquam ded^^us quin ex ^na aut altera assumptione Deo invante
fue^int ad salutem restituti.
I never gave it says he, but after once or twice taken, by the help of God
they were happily cured. The manner of making of it he sets down at large in
his third book of Epist: to George Hanshkius a Physician. Gualter Bruel and
Hernius make mention of it with great approbation, and so does Skenkius in his
memorable cures, and experimental medicines cent. 6. obser. 87. That famous
Helleborisme of Montanus, which he so often repeats in his consultations and
counsels, as 28. pro melan. sacerdote, and consil. 248. pro Hypocondriaco, and
crackes Longo experimento a se obseruatum esse ad melancholices sine essensa
egregie curandos valere.
to be a most sovereign remedy for all melancholy persons, Lib. 2. inter
composita purgantia melancholiam.
which he has often given without offense, and found by long experience and
observation to be such.

Quercetan preferres a Syrup of Hellebor in his Spagirica pharmac: and
Hellebors Extract cap. 5. of his invention likewise ( a most safe medicine,
Jdem Responsione ad Aubertum, veratrum nigrum alias timidum and periculosum
vini spiritu etiam and oleo commodum sic vsui redditur, vt etiam pueris tuto
administrari possit.
and not unfit to be given children) before all remedies whatsoever.

Paracelsus in his book of black Hellebor, admires this medicine, but as it
is prepared by him. Certum est huius herbae virtutem maxima^ and mirabilem
esse, parumque distare a balsamo. Et qui norit eo recte vti plus habet artis
quam tota s^r bentium cohors, aut omnes Doctores in Germania.
It is most certain says he, that the virtue of this herb is great, and
admirable in effect, and little differing from Balm it self, and he that
knows well how to make use of it, has more Art then all their books
contain, or all the Doctors in Germany can show.

Aelianus Montaltus in his exquisite work de morb capitu ca. 31. de melan. sets
a special receipt of Hellebor of his own, which in his practice Quo foeliciter
vsus sum.
he fortunatly used, because it is but short, I will set it down. R Syrup de
pomis ij, aquae borag. iiij,

Ellebori nigri per noctem infusi in ligatura

6. vel 8. gr. mane facta colatura exhibe.

Other receipts of the same to this purpose you shall find in him. Valescus
admires puluis Hali, and Jason Pratensis after him, the confection of which our
new London Pharmacopaea has lately revived. Hoc posito quod alie medicinae,
non valiant, isla tune Dei miseri cordia valebit, and est medicina coron ta,
quae secretissime teneatur.
Put case, he says, all other medicines fail, by the help of God this alone
will do it, and it is a crowned medicine which must be kept in secret. R
Epithymi ss, lapidis lazuli agarici ana ij,

Scammonij, j, Chariophillorum numero 20. pulueri

sentur omnia, and ipsius pulueris scrup 4. singulis septimanis assumat.

To these I may add Arnoldi vinum Buglossatum or Borrage wine before
mentioned, which Lib. de artis^^, ^med.
Mizaldus calls vinum mirabile, a wonderful wine, and Stockerus vouchsafes
torepeate verbatim amongst other receipts. Rubeus his Sect 3. Optimum remedium
aqua composita Savanorolae.
compound water out of Savanor^la. Pinetus his Balm; Cardans puluis Hyacinthi,
with which in his book de curis admirandis, he boastes that he had cured many
melancholy persons in eight days, which Sckenkius obseru. med cent. 2 observe.
31.
Sckenkius puts amongst his obseruable medicines: Altomarus his Syrup, with
which Donatus ab Altomari cap. 7 Testor Deum me multos melancholicos (...)
solius syru^pi vsu curasse, facta prius purgatione.
he calls God so solemnly to witness, he has in this kind done many excellent
cures, and which Sckenkius cent. 7. med. obser. 80, mentions. Rulandes
admirable water for mela^choly, which cent. 2. cap. 96. he calls Spiritum
vitae aureum, Panaoeam, what not, and his absolute medicine of 50. Eggs,
curat. empir, cent. 1* cur. 5. to be taken three in a morning with a powder of
his. Centum ova and vnum quoiibet mane sumant tria ova sorbilia cum sequenti
pulvere supra ovum asperso, and continuent quousque assumpserint centum and
vnu^, maniacis and melanchol^cis vtilissimum remedium.
Fauentinus prac Empir: doubles this number of eggs, and will have 101. to be
taken by three in like sort, which Salust Saluian approoues de re med. lib. 2.
cap. 1. with some of the same powder till all be spent, a most excellent remedy
for all melancholy and madmen. R Epithymi, thymi ana drachmas duas, sacchari
albi vnciam vnam, croci grana tria, Cinamomi drachmam vnam, misce fiat puluis.

All these yet are nothing to those Quercetan cap 4. Phar. Oswoldus Crollius.
Chimicall preparatiues, of Aqua Chelidonia, quintesence of Hellebor, salts,
extracts. Aurum Potabile etc. D^ Anthony in his book de auro potab. edit.
1600. is all in all for it. Cap. 1. Licet tota Gallenistarum schola, mineral a
non sine impio and ingrat^ fastu a sua practica detestentur tamen in
gravioribus morbis omni vegetabilium derelicto subsidio ad mineralia
confugiunt, licet ea temere ignaviter and inutiliter vsurpent. Ad finem libri.
And though all the school of Gallenists, with a wicked and unthankful pride
and scorn detest it in their practice; yet in more grievous diseases, when all
their vegetalls will do no good, they are compelled to seek the help of
mineralls, though they use them rashly, slackely, unprofitably, and to no
purpose.

Rheuanus a Dutch Chimist, in his book de Sole e puteo emergente takes upon
him to Apologize for Anthony, and sets light by all that speak against him.
But what do I meddle with this great controversy, which is the subject of many
Volumnes? Let Paracelsus, Quercetan, Crollius, and the brethren of St. Roses
cross defend themselves as they may. Crato, Erastus, and the Galenists oppugn
Paracelsus, he bragges on the other side, he did more famous cures by this
means, then all the Galenists in Europe, and calls himself a Monarche, Galen,
Hippocrates, infants, illiterate, etc. Codronchus de sale absinthij.
One drop of their Chimicall preparations, shall do more good, then all their
fulsome potions* Erastus and the rest of the Galenists vilify them on the
other, as Heretics in Physic, Idem: Paracelsus in medicina quod Lutherus in
Theologia.
Paracelsus did that in Physic, which Luther in Divinity. Disput. in eundem
part 1. Magus, ebrius, illiteratus, daemonem praeceptorem (...) familiares etc.
A drunken rogue, he was a base fellow, a Magitian, he had the devil for his
master, devils his familiar companions, and what he did was done by the help
of the devil. Thus they contend and rail, and every Mart write books Pro
and Con. and adhuc sub Iudice lis est, let them agree as they will, I proceed.

SVBSEC. 4. Auerters.
AVerters and purgers must go together, as tending all to the same purpose, to
divert this rebellious humor, and turn it another way. In this range Clysters
and Suppositories challenge a chief place, to draw this humor from the brain
and heart, to the more ignoble parts. Piso.
Some would have them still used some few days between, and those to be made
with the boiled seeds of Annis, Fennel, and bastard Saffron, Hoppes, Thyme,
Epithyme, Mallows, Fumitory, Buglosse, Polypody, Seen, Diasene, Hamech,
Cassia, Diacatholicon, Hierologodiu^, oil of Violets, sweet Almonds, etc. Such
things as provoke urine most commend, but not sweat. Trincauellius consil. 16.
cap. 1. in head melancholy forbids it, P. Byarus and others approve frictions
of the outward parts, and to bathe them with warm water.

Add to these Cardans nettels.
Sneesings, masticatories and nasalls, are generally received, Montaltus cap.
34. Hildesheim spicel. 2. fol. 136. and 138. give several receipts of all
three, Hercules de Saxonia relates of an Empirick in Venice, Aqua fortissima
purgans os, nares, quam non vult auro vendere.
that had a strong water to purge by the mouth and nosthrils, which he still
used in head melancholy, which he would sell for no gold.

To open months and Haemrod^, is very good Physic, Mercurialis consil. 6. and
39. haemorroidum and mensium provocatio i^uat, modo ex eorum suppressione ortum
habuerit.
If they have been formerly stopped, Fauentinus would have them opened with
horse-leaches, and Hercules de Sax. Julius Alexandrius constable. 185. Scoltzij,
thinks aloes fitter, Laurentius, Bruel etc.
most approve horse-leaches in this case, to be applied to the forehead, P.
Bayerus lib. 2. cap. 13 naribus. etc.
nosthrils, and other places.

Montaltus cap. 29. out of Alexander and others prescribes Cucurbitulae siccae,
and fontanelia crure sinistro.
cupping glasses and issues in the left theigh, Areteus, lib. 7. cap. 5.
Hildisheim spicel 2. Vapores a cerebro trahendi sunt frictionibus vniuersi,
cucurbitulis siccis humeris ac dorso affixis, circa pedes and crura.
Paulus Regolinus, Syluius, will have them without scarification, applied to
the shoulders and back theighs and feet. Fontanellam aperi iuxta occipitium aut
brachium.
Montaltus cap. 34. Biddes open an issue in the arm, or hinder part of the
head. Balani, ligaturae, frictiones etc.
Piso inioynes ligatures, frictions, suppositories, and cupping glasses, still
without scarification, and the rest.

Cauteries and hot irons are to be used Cauterium fiat sutura coronali diu
fluere permitta^tur loca vlcerosae Trepano etiam cranij densitas imminui
poterit, vt vaporibus fuliginosis exitus pateat.
in the future of the crown, and the seared or vlcerated place suffered to run
a good while. It Is not amiss to bore the scull with an instrument to let out
the fuliginous vapors. Salust Saluianus de re med. lib. 2. cap. 1. Quoniam
difficulter cedit alijs medicamentis ideo fiat in vertice cauterium, aut crure
sinistro infra genu.
Because this humor hardly yields to other Physic would have the head
cauterised, or the left leg beneath the knee, Fiant duo aut tria cauteria cum
ossis perforatione.
and the head bored in two or three places, because it much auailes to the
exhalation of the vapors. Vidi Rome melancholicum, qui adhibitis multis
remedijs, sanari non poterat, sed cum craneum gladio fractum osset, optime
sanatus est.
I saw says he a melancholy man at Rome, that by no remedies would be healed,
but when by chance he was wounded in the head, and scull broken, he was
excellently cured. And another to the admiration of the beholders, breaking his
head with a fall from on high, was instantly recovered of his dotage. Gordonius
cap. 19. part. 2. would have these cauteries tried last, Et alterum vidi
melancholicu^, qui ex alto cadens, non sine astantium admiratione liberatus est.
when no other Physic will serve, Radatur caput, and fiat cauterium in
capite, procuidubio ista faciunt ad fumorum exhalationem, vidi melancholium a
fortuna gladio vulneratum, and cran^um fractum, quamdiu vulnus opertum curatus
optime, at quum vulnus sanatum reversa est mania.
The head to be shaued and bored to let out fumes, which without doubt will do
much good. I saw a melancholy man by chance wounded in the head with a sword,
his brainepan broken, so long as the wound was open he was well, but when his
wound was healed his dotage returned again.

Guianerius cap. 8. Tract. 15. cured a nobleman in Sauoy by boring alone, Vsque
ad duram matrem trepanari feci, and per mensem aperte stetit.
leaving the hole open a month together, by means of which after two years
melancholy and madness he was delivered. All approve of this remedy in the
future of the crown, but In 9 Rhasis.
Arculanus would have the cautery to be made with gold. In many other parts
these cauteries are prescribed for melancholy men, as in the thighs, (
Mercurialis consil. 86.) arms, legs. Idem consil. 6. and 39. and 25.
Montanus consil. 86. etc. but most in the head, Sinullum aliud sufficit
medicamentum.
If other Physic will do no good.

SVBSECT. 5. Alteratiues and Cordialls, corroberating, resolving the relliques,
and mending the Temperament.
BEcause this humor is so malign of it self, and so hard to be removed, the
relics are to be cleansed, by alteratiues, cordialls, and such means, the
temper is to be altered and amended, with such things as fortify and
strengthen the heart and brain, Cordis ratio semper habenda quae cerebro
co^patitur, and sese invicem afficiunt.
which are commonly both affected in this malady, and do mutually misaffect
one another: which are still to be given every other day, or some few days
inserted after a purge or such other Physic, as occasion serves, and are of
such force, that many times they help alone, and as Arnoldus holds in his
Aphorisms, Aphor. 38. medicina Theriacalis prae caeteris eligenda.
are to be preferred before all other medicines in what kind soever. Amongst
this number of Cordialls and Alteratiues,, I do not find a more present
remedy then a cup of wine or strong drink, and if it be soberly and
opportunely used. It makes a man bold, hard, coragious, Galen. de temp. lib. 3.
cap. 3. moderate sumptum acuit ingeniu^.
whetteth the wit, if moderately taken, and as Plutarke says, Symp. 7. quaest.
10. it makes those which are otherwise dull, Tardos aliter and tristes thuris
in modum exhalare facit.
to exhale and euaporate like franckincense. Viribus resiciendis cardiacu^
eximium, nutriend^ corpori alimentum optimum, aetatem floridam facit, calorem
innatum sovet, concoctio^em iuvat, stomachum roborat, excrementis viam parat,
vrinam mouet, somitum conciliat, venena frigida, status dissipat, crassos
humores attenuat, coquit, discutit etc.
A famous Cordial Mathiolus in Dioscoridem, calls it, and an excellent
nutriment to refresh the body, it makes a good color, a flourishing age, helps
concoction, fortifies the stomach, takes away obstructions, provokes urine,
expells excrements, procures sleep, cleares the blood, expells wind and all
cold poisons, attenuates, concocts, dissipates all thick black vapors, and
fuligenous humors. And that which is all in all and to my purpose, it takes
away fear and sorrow: It glads the heart of man, Psalm. 104.15. and gives life
it self, spirits, wit, etc. For which cause the ancients called Bacchus, Liber
pater a liberando, and Pausanias.
sacrificed to Bacchus and Paltas still upon an alter. Siracides 3^. 28.
Wine measurably drunk, and in time brings gladness and cheerfulness of
mind, it cheareth God and men. Judges 9.12. laetitiae Bacchus dater, it makes
an old wife dance, and such as are in misery to forget all and be Legitur and
prisci Catonis saepe mero caluisse virtus.
merry. Bacchus and afftictis requiem mortalibus affert, Crura licet duro
compede vincta forent. Therefore Solomon Prove. 31. 6. bids wine be given to him
that is ready to perish, and to him that has grief of heart, let him drink
that he forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. Sollicitis animis
onus eximit. Nothing speedier, nothing better: which the Prophet Zachary
perceived when he said, Cap. 10.7.
that in the time of Messiah they of Ephraim should be glad, and their heart
should rejoice as through wine. It is a most easy and parable remedy, a
common, a cheap, still ready against fear, sorrow, and such troublesome
thoughts that molest the mind; as brimstone with fire, the spirits on a
sudden are enlightened by it. No better physic, says Tract. 1. cont. lib. 1
Non est res laudabilior eo vel cura melior. qui melancholicus, vtatur societate
hominum and biberia and qui potest sustinere vsum vini non indiget alia
medicina, quod. eo sint omnia ad vsum necessaria huius passionis.
Rhasis, for a melancholy man; and he that can keep company and carouse,
needs no other medicines, it is enough. His countriman Avicenna. 3.1. doct. 2.
cap. 8. proceeds farther yet, and will have him that is troubled in mind or
melancholy, not to drink only but now and then to be drunk: excellent good
physic for this and many other diseases. Magninus Reg. san. part. 3. cap. 31.
will have them to be so once a month at least, and gives his reasons for it,
Tum quod sequatur inde fudor vomitus vrina a quibus superfluitates a corpore
removentur and remanet corpus mundum.
because it scoures the body by vomit, urine, sweat of all manner of
superfluities, and keeps it clean. Of the same mind is Seneca the Philosopher
in his book de tranquil. animae lib. 1. cap. 15. nonnunquam vt in alijs morbis
ad ebrietatem vsque veniendum. Curas deprimit, tristitiae medetur. It is good
sometimes to be drunk, it helps sorrow depresseth cares, and so concludes his
tract with a cup of wine: Habes Serene charissime qua ad tranquilitatem animae
pertinent. But these are Epicureall tenants, tending to looseness of life,
luxury and Atheism, maintained alone by some Heathens, dissolute Arabians,
profane Christians, and are exploded by Rabby Moses Tract. 4. Guliel.
Placentius lib. 1. cap. 8. Valescus de Taranta, and most accuratly by Io.
Silvaticus, a late writer and Physician of Millan, med. cont. cap. 14. where
you shall find this tenent copiously confuted.

Howsoever you say, if this be true, that wine and strong drink have such
virtue to expel fear and sorrow, and to exhilerate the mind, ever hereafter
lets drink and be merry. Hor.
Prome reconditum Lyda strenua caecubum.
Capaciores puer huc affer Scyphos
Et Chia vina aut Lesbia.
Come lusty Lyda fill's a cup of sack,
And sir drawer bigger pots we lack,
And Scio wines that have so good a smacke.
I say with him in Lib. 15.2. noct Alt. Vigorem animi moderato vini vsu tucamur
and calefacto simul refotoque animo si quid in eo vel frigidae tristitiae vel
torpentis verecundiae fuerit diluamus.
Agellius, let us maintain the vigor of our soul with a moderate cup of wine,
and drink to refresh our minds, if there be any cold sorrow in it, or torpid
bashfulnesse lets wash it all away. Let Us drive down care with a cup of Ale:
and so say I, Theocritus edil. 13. vino dari letitiam and dolorem.
for all this may be done, so that it be modestly, soberly, opportunely used:
Otherwise, as Lib. 14.5. nihil pernitiosies viribus, si modus absit, venenum.
Pliny tells us. If singular moderation be not had, nothing so pernicious,
it is poison it self. Let not good fellows triumph therefore (says Mathiolus)
that I have so much commended wine, if it be immoderatly taken, instead of
making glad, it confounds both body and soul, it makes a giddy head, a
sorrowful heart. And 'twas well said of that Poet of old. Wine causes mirth
and grief, Renodeus.
nothing so good for some, so bad for others, especially as Mercurialis consil.
25. Vinu^ frigida optimum, and pessimum ferina melancholia.
one obseues, qui a causa calida male habent, that are hot or inflamed. And so
of spices, they alone, as I have showed cause head melancholy themselves, they
must not use wine as an Fernelius consil 44. and 45. vinum prohibet assiduum
and aromata.
ordinary drink, or in their diet; but to determine with Laurentius c. 8. de
melan. Wine is bad for madmen, and such as are troubled with heat in their
inner parts or brains, contrary to them, but to melancholy which is cold, as
most is, Wine is very good.

I may say the very same of the Decoction of China roots, Sassafras,
Sarsaparilia, Guaiacu^. China, says Manardus makes a good color in the face,
takes away melancholy and all infirmities proceeding from cold, and so
Salsaperilla prouokes sweat mightily. Guaiacum dries, Claudinus consult. 89.
and 46. Montanus, Capivaccius consult. 188. Scoltzij, make frequent and good
use of Guaiacum, and China, Modo ie^ur non incendatur.
so that the liver be not incensed, good for such as are cold, as most
melancholy men are, but by no means to be mentioned in hot.

Borage, Bawme, Saffron, Gold, I have spoken of, Montaltus cap. 23. commends
Scorzonera roots condite, Garcius ab Hor to plant. hist. lib. 2. cap. 25. makes
mention of an herb called Datura, Per 24 horas sensum doloris omnem tollit
and ridere facit.
which if it be eaten for 24 hours following takes away all sense of grief,
and makes them incline to laughter and mirth: and another called Bauge, like in
effect to Opium In extasim cogit omni solitudine liberat and tenue quid videre
facit.
which puts them for a time into a kind of Extasis, and makes them gently to
laugh. One of the Roman Emperors had a seed, which he did ordinarily eat to
exhilerate himself.

Hildrsheim spicel. 2.
Christopherus Ayrerus preferres Bezoars stone, and the confection of Alkermes
before all other cordials, and Amber in some cases. Alkermes omnia vitalia
viscera mire confortat.
Alkermes comforts the inner parts, and Bezoar stone has an especial virtue
against all melancholy affections, Contra omnes melancholicos affectus confert
ac certum est ipsius vsu omnes cordis and corporis vires mirum in modum refici.
it comforts the heart and corroborats the whole body. Succinum vero albissimum
confortat ventriculum, statum discutit, vrinam mouet. etc.
Amber prouokes urine, helps the stomach, breaks wind, etc. After a purge 3 or
4 gr. of Bezoar stone, and 3 gr. of Amber Greece, drunk or taken in Borage or
Bugloffe water, in which gold hot has been quenched, will do much good, and
the purge shall diminish less (the heart so refreshed) of the strength and
substance of the body. R. confect. Alkermes ss lap: Bezoar j.

Succini albi subtilis. puluerisat. ij cum

Syrup: de cort: citri, fiat electuarium.

To Bezaors stone most subscribe Manardus, and Garcias ab Horto aromatum lib.
1. cap. 15 aduersus omnes morbos melancholicos conducit and venenum. Ego inquit
vtor in morbis melancholicis etc. and deploratoshuius vsu, ad pristinam
sanitatem restitui See more in Banhimus book de lap, Bezaor. cap. 45.
many others, it takes away sadness, and makes him merry that uses it, I have
seen that have been much displeased with faintness, swounding and
melancholy, and taking the weight of three grains of this stone, in the water
of Oxtongue have been cured. Garcius ab Horto brags, how many desperate cures
he has done upon melancholy men by this alone, when all Physicians had
forsaken them. But Alchermes many except against, in some cases it may help if
it be good and of the best, such as that of Montpelier in France, which Edit.
1617. Monspelij electuarium sit preciosissimum Alchermes etc.
Todocus Sincerus Itinerario Galliae so much magnifies, and would have no
traveler to omit to see it made. But it is not so general a medicine as the
other. Fernelius consil. 49. suspects Alchermes by reason of his heat, Nihil
morbum hunc aeque exasperat, ac alimentorum, vel calidorum vsus. Alchermes ideo
suspectus, and quod semel moneam, caute adhibenda calida medicamenta.
nothing, says he, sooner exasperats this disease then the use of hot working
meats and medicines, and would have them therefore warily taken.

Diamargaritum frigidum, diambra, Diaboraginatum, Electuarium latificans Galeni
and Rhasis, De gemmis, Dianthos Diamoscum dulce and amarum, Electuarium
Conciliatoris, syrup. Cidoniorum de pomis, conserues of Roses, Violets,
fumitory, Enula campana, Satyrion, Lemans, Oranges Pills condite, etc. have
their good use. R Diamoschi dulcis and amari ana ij, diabuglossati daboraginati
sacchari violacij ana j. misce cum syrupo de pomis.

Every Physician is full of such receipts; one only I will add for the
rareness of it, which I find recorded by many learned Scenkius lib. 1
observat. de Mania, ad mentis alienationem, and desipientiam vitio cerebri
abortam in manuscripto codice Germanico tale medicamentum reperi.
Authors, as an approved medicine against dotage, head melancholy and such
diseases of the brain. Take a Caput arietis nondum experti venerem vno ictu
amputatum, cornibu^ tantum demotis integrii, cum lana and pelle, been elixabis,
tum aperto cerebrum eximes, and addens ar^mata etc.
Rams head that never meddled with an Ewe, cut off at a blow, and the horns
only cut away, boil it well skin and wool together, after it is well sod
take out the brains, and put these spices to it, Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmeg,
Mace, Cloves ana ss, mingle the powder of these spices with it, and heat them
in a Platter upon a chafingdish of coals together, stirring the^ well that they
do not burn, take heed it be not overmuch dried, or drier then a calves
brains ready to be eaten. Keep it so prepared, and for three days give it
the patient fasting, so that he fast two hours after it. It may be eaten with
bread, in an egg or broth, or any way so it be taken. For 14 days let him
use this diet, drink no wine etc. Gesner. hist. animal. lib. 1. page 917.
Caricterius pract. cap. 13. in Nichol de metxi page 129. Iatro. Witenberg,
edit. Tubing. page 62. mention this medicine, though with some variation, he
that list may try it, Cinis testudinis vstus and vino potus melancholiam curat.
and rasura cornu Rhinocerotis etc. Sckenkius.
and many such.

Odoraments to smell to, of Rose water, Violet, Flowers, Bawme, Rose-cakes,
Vinegar, etc. do much recreate the brains and spirits, and as some say
nourish, it is a question commonly controuerted in our schools, an odores
nutriant; let Ficinus lib. 2. cap. 18. decide it, Instat in matrice quod sursu^
and deorsum ad odoris sensum. praecipitatur.
many arguments he brings to prove it. Montanus consil. 31. prescribes a form,
which he would have his melancholy patient never to have out of his hands. If
you will have them spagirically prepared, look in Oswaldus Crollius basil.
Chimica.

Irrigations of the head shaven, Ex decocto florum nympheae, lactucae,
violarii, chamomillae, altheae, capitum veruecum etc.
of the flowers of water lillies, Lettice, Violets, Chamomile, wild Mallows,
wethers heads, etc. must be used many mornings together. Montanus consil. 31.
would have the head so washed once a week. Lelius a Font Egubinus consult.
44. for an Italian count troubled with head melancholy, repeats many medicines
which he tried, Inter auxilia multa adhibila duo visa sunt remedium adferre
vsus seri caprini cum extracto Hellebori, and irrigatio ex lacte Nympheae
violarum etc. suturae coronali adhibita, his remedijs sanitatem pristinam
adeptus est.
but two alone which did the cure, use of whay made of Goats milk with the
extract of Hellebor, and Irrigations of the head, with water lillies, lettice,
violets, camomile, etc. upon the suture of the crown. Confert and pulmo
arietis, calidus agnus per dorsum divisus exenteratus admotus sincipiti.
Piso commends a Rams lunges applied hot to the forepart of the head, or a
young lamb divided in the back, exenterated etc. all acknowledge the chief
cure to consist in moistning throughout. Some, says Laurentius, use powders
and caps to the brain; but forasmuch as such aromaticall things are hot and
dry, they must be sparingly used.

Unto the Heart we may do well to apply bags, Epithemes, ointments, of which
Laurentius c. 9. de melan. gives examples. Bruel prescribes an Epitheme for the
heart of Buglosse, Borage, water-lilly, Violet waters, sweet wine, Bawm leaves,
Nutmegs, cloves, etc.

For the Belly make a Fomentation of oil, Semina Cumini, rutae, dauci, anethi,
cocta.
in which the seeds of cummin, Rue, Carrets, Dill, have been boiled.

Bathes are of wonderful great force in this malady, much admired by Lib. 3.
de locis affect.
Galen, Tetrab. 2. ser. 3. cap. 10.
Aetius, Rhasis, etc. of sweet water in which is boiled the leaves of Mallows,
Roses, Violets, Waterlillies, Wethers heads, flowers of Buglosse, Camomile,
Melilot, etc. Guianer. cap. 8. tract. 15. would have them used twice a day, and
when they come forth of the Bathes, their back-bones to be anointed with oil
of Almonds, Violets, Nymphaea, fresh capon grease etc.

Amulets and things to be borne about, I find prescribed, taxed by some,
approved by others, look for them in Mizaldus, Porta, Albertus, etc. A ring
made of the hooffe of an Asses right forefoot carried about, etc. I say with
Phar. lib. 1. cap. 12.
Renodeus they are not altogether to be rejected, Piony does help Epilepsie,
precious stones most diseases, Aetius cap 31 Tetr 3. ser. 4.
a Wolves dung carried about helps the Cholick, Dioscorides, Ulysses
Aldouerandus de aranea.
a Spider an Ague, etc. Such medicines are to be exploded that consist of
words, characters, spells, and charms, which can do no good at all, but out of
a strong conceit, as Pomponatius proves; or the Devils poliicy, that is the
first founder and teacher of them.

SVBSEC. 6. Correctors of accidents to procure steep. Against fearful
dreams, redness, etc.
When you have used all good means and helps of alteratiues, auerters,
diminitiues, yet there will be still certain accidents to be corrected and
amended, as waking, fearful dreams, flushing in the face to some, to some
ruddinesse, etc.

Waking by reason of their continual cares, fears, sorrows, dry brains, is
a symptom that much crucifies, melancholy men, and must therefore be speedely
helped, and sleep by all means procured, which sometimes is a sufficient
remedy of it self without any other physic. Skenkius in his observations has
an example of a woman that was so cured. The means to procure it, are inward
or outward. Inwardly taken, are simples or compounds, simples, as Poppy, Solo
somno curata est citra medici auxiliu^. fol. 154.
Nymphaea, Violets, Roses, Lettice, Mandrake, Henbane, Nightshade or Solanum,
Saffron, Hempseed, Nutmegs, Willowes: with their seeds, juice, decoctions,
distilled waters, etc. Compounds are syrups or opiats. syrup of Poppy, Violets,
Verbasco which are commonly taken with distilled waters. R diacodij j
dioscordij ss aquae lactucae iij ss mista fiat potio ad horam somni sumenda.

Requies Nicholai, Philonium Romanum, Triphera magna, pilulae de Cynoglossae,
Dioscordium, Laudanum Paracelsi, Opium, are in use, etc. Country folks commonly
make a posset of hempe-seede, which Fuchsius in his berball so much
discommends, yet I have seen the effect, and it may be used where better
medicines be not to be had.

Laudanum Paracelsi is prescribed in two or three grains, with a dram of
Dioscordium, which Oswald. Crollius commends. Opium it self is most part used
outwardly, j to smell to in a ball, though commonly so taken by the Turks to
the same quantity Bellonius obseruat li. 3. c. 15. lassitudinem and labores
animi tollunt inde Garcias ab Hor to lib. 1. cap. 4. simp. med.
for a cordial, and at Goa in the Indies the dose 40 or 50 grains.

Rulandus calls requiem Nicholai, vltimum refugium, the last refuge; but of
this and the rest look for peculiar receipts in Victorius Faventinus cap. de
phrenesi, Hernius cap. de Mania Hildesheim spicel. 4. d^ somno and vigil. etc.
Outwardly used as oil of Nutmegs by extraction, or expression with Rosewater
to anoint the temples, oils of Poppy, Nenuphar, Mandrake, Purslan, Violets to
the same purpose.

Montanus consil. 24. and 25. much commends odoraments of Opium, Vinegar, and
Rosewater, Laurentius cap. 9. prescribes Pomanders and nodules, see the
receipts in him. Codronchus Abs^^thium somnos allicit olfactu.
wormwood to smell to.

Vnguentum Alablastritum, populeum, to anoint the temples, nostrils, or if
they be too weak to mix Saffron and Opium. Take a grain or two of Opium, and
dissolve it with three or four drops of Rose-vineger in a spoone, and after
mingle with it as much vnguentum populeum as a nut, use it as before: or else
take half a dram of opium, vnguentum populeum, oil of Nenuphar, rosewater,
rosevineger, of each half an ounce, with as much virgin wax as a nut, anoint
your temples with some of it. ad horam somni.

Sacks of wormwood, Read Lemnius li. ber. bib. ca. 2. of mandrake.
Mandrake, Hyoscyamus sub ceruicali veridis.
Henbane, Roses made like pillows and laid under his head are mentioned by
Plantam pedis inungere pinguedine gliris dicunt efficacissimum and quod vix
credi potest dentes inunctos ex sorditie aurium canis somnum profundum
conciliare etc. Cardan de rerum variet.
Cardan and Mizaldus, to anoint the soles of the feet with fat of a dormouse,
the teeth with earewax of a dog swines gaul, hares ears: charms, etc.

Frontlets are well known to every good wife, Rosewater and Vinegar with a
little woman's milk, and Nutmegs grated upon a Rosecake applied to both temples.

For an emplaster take of Castorium a dram and half, of Opium half a
scruple, mixed both together with a little water of life, and make two small
plasters thereof, and apply them to the Temples.

Rulandus cent. 1. cur. 17. cent. 3. cur. 94. prescribes Epithemes and lotions
of the head, with the decoction of the flowers of Nymphaea, Violet leaves,
Mandrake roots, Henbane, white Poppy. Hercules de Saxonia, stillicidia or
droppings, etc. Lotions of the feet do much avail of the said herbs, by
these means, says Laurentius, I think you may procure sleep to the most
melancholy man in the world. Some use horseleeches behind the ears, and apply
Opium to the place.

Plantam pedis inungere pinguedine gliris dicunt efficacissimum and quod vix
credi potest dentes inunctos ex sorditie aurium canis somnum profundum
conciliare etc. Cardan de rerum variet.
P. Bayerus lib. 2. c. 13. Veni mecum lib.
sets down some remedies against fearful dreams, and such as walk and
talk in their sleep. Baptista porta Mag. not. lib. 2. c. 6. to procure
pleasant dreams and quiet rest, would have you take Hippoglossa, or the herb
horsetongue, Bawme, to use them or their distilled waters after supper, etc.
Such men must not eat Beans, Pease, Garlic, Onyons, Cabbidge, Venison,
Hare, Black wines, or any meat hard of digestion to supper, or lie on their
backs, etc.

Rusticus Pudor, bashfulnesse, flushing in the face high color, ruddinesse are
common greiuances which much torture many melancholy men, when they meet a man
or come in Aut si quid incautius exciderit aut, etc.
company of their betters, strangers, or after a meal, or if they drink a cup
of wine or strong drink, they are as red and flect and sweat, as if they had
been at a Majors feast, praesertim si metus accesserit, it exceedes, Nam qua
part pauor simul est pudor additus illi Statius.
they think every man observes it, takes notice of it, and fear alone will
effect it, suspicion without any other cause. Sckenkius obseruat. med. lib. 1.
Speaks of a waiting gentlewoman in the Duke of Sauoyes Court, that was so much
offended with it, that she offered Byarus a Physician, all that she had to be
cured of it. And it is most true, that Olisipponensis medicus. pudor aut iuuat
aut laedit.
Antony Lodouicus, says in his book De Pudore, Bashfulnesse either much
hurtes or helps, such men I am sure it hurtes. If it proceed from suspicion
or fear, De mentis alienat.
Foelix Platter prescribes no other remedy but to reject and contemn it. Id
populus curat scilicet, suppose one look red, what matter is it, make light of
it.

If it trouble at, or after meals, (as Facies nonnullis maxim calet rubetque
si se paululum exercuerint nonnullis quiescentibus idem accidit faeminis
preserti^, causa quicquid seruidum aut halituosum sanguinem facit.
Iobertus observes, med. pract, lib. 1. lib. 7.) or after a little exercise or
stirring, as many are hot and red in the face, or if they do nothing at all,
and especially women, he would have them let blood in both arms, first one,
then another, two or three days between if blood abound, to use frictions of
the other parts feet especially, and washing of them, because of that consent
which is betwixt the head and the feet. Interim faciei prospitiendum vt ipsa
refregeretur vtrumque p^aestabit freques lotio ex aqua rosarum violarum
nenupharis, etc.
And with all to refrigerate the face, by washing it often with rose, violet,
nenuphat, lettice, louage waters and the like: but the best of all is that lac
virginale, or strained liquor of Litargy. It is diversely prepared by Iobertus
thus. R. lithar. argentij j cerussae candidissimae. iij. caphurae. ij.
dissoluantur aquarum solani, lactucae, and nenupharis ana iij. aceti vini albi.
ij. aliquot horas resideat, dein de transmittatur per philt. aqua seruetur in
vase vitrio, ac ea bis terue facies quotidie irroretur. Ad faciei rubarem aqua
spermatis ranarum.
Quercetan spagir. phar. cap. 6. commends the water of frogs spaune for
ruddinesse in the face. Recte vtantur in estate floribus Cichory saccharo
conditis veisaccharo rosaceo, etc.
Crato consil. 283. Scoltzij would feign have them use all summer, the condite
flowers of Succorie, strawbury water, roses, (cupping glasses are good for the
time) consil. 286. and 285. and to defecate impure blood with the infusion of
Seen, Sauory, Bawme water. Solo vsu decocti Cichorij.
Hollerius knew one cured alone with the use of Succory boiled, and drunk for
five months, every morning in the summer.

Vtile imprimis noctu faciem illinire sanguine leporino and mane aqua fragorum
vel aqua e floribus verbasci cu succo limonum distillato abluere
It is good ouernight to anoint the face with Hares blood, and in the morning
to wash it with Strawbury water, and cowslip water, of the juice of distilled
Lemmons, or to use the seeds of Mellons, or kernells of Peaches, beaten small,
or the roots of Aron, and mixed with wheat branne, to bake it in an oven, and to
crumble it in strawbury water, Vtile rubenti faciei caseum recentem imponere.
or to put fresh cheese curdes to a red face.

If it trouble them at mealetimes that flushing, as often it does, with sweating
or the like, they must avoid all strong drink, and drink very little, Consil
21. lib. unico vini haustu sit contentus.
one draught says Crato, and that about the midst of their meal, avoid at
all times indurate salt, (...) especially spice and windy meat.

Idem consil. 283. Scoltzij laudatur condit. rose caninae fuctus ante praendium
and caenam ad magnitudinem castaneae Decoctum radicum Sonchi si ant^ cibum
sumatur valet plurimum.
Crato prescribes the condite fruit of wild rose, to a nobleman his patient to
be taken before dinner or supper, to the quantity of a Chestnut. It is made of
sugar, as that of Quinces. The decoction of the roots of sowthistle before
meat by the same Author is much approved. To eat of a baked apple some
advise, or of a preserved Quince, Comminsced prepared, with meat in stead of
salt, to keep down fumes: not to study or to be intentive after meals. R.
nucleorum persic seminis melonum ana ss. aquae fragorum ll.ij. misce vtatur
mane.

Cucurbit. ad scapulas appositae.
To apply cupping glasses to the shoulders is very good. For the other kind of
ruddinesse which is settled in the face with pimples etc. because it pertaines
not to my subject, I will not meddle with it. I refer you Cratos Councels,
Arnoldus lib. 1. breuiar cap. 39. 1. Rulande, Peter Forestus de Fuco lib. 31.
obser. 2. To Platerus, Mercurialis, Vlmus, Randoletius, Hernius, and others
that have written largely of it.

Those other grieuances and symptoms of headache, Vertigo, deliquium, etc.
which trouble many melancholy men, because they are copiously handled a part in
every Physician, I do voluntarily omit.

MEMB. 2. Cure of melancholy over all the Body.
Where the melancholy blood possesses the whole Body with the Brain, Piso.
it is best to begin with bloodletting. Mediana prae caeteris.
The Greeks prescribe the Mediana prae caeteris.
Median or middle vein to be opened, and so much blood to be taken away as the
patient may well spare, and the cut that is made must be wide enough. The
Arabians hold it fittest to be taken from that arm, on which side there is
more pain and heaviness in the head. If black blood issue forth, bleed on,
if it be clear and good, let it be instantly suppressed, Succi melancholici
malitia a sanguinis bonitate corrigitur.
because the malice of melancholy is much corrected by the goodness of the
blood. If the parties strength will not admit much euacuation in this kind at
once, it must be assayed again and again, if it may not conveniently be taken
from the arm, it must be taken from the knees and ancles: especially to such
men or women whose haemrodes or months have been stopped. Perseuerante mal^
ex quacunque, part sanguis detrahi debet.
If the malady continue, it is not amiss to euacuate in a part, in the
forehead, and to virgins in the ancles, which are melancholy for love matters,
so to widows that are much grieved and troubled with sorrow and cares: for
bad blood flows to the heart, and so crucifies the mind. The haemrods are to
be opened with an instrument or horseleaches, Obseruat. fol.
etc. see more in Montaltus cap. 29. Skenchius has an example of one that was
cured by an accidental wound in his thigh, much bleeding freed him from
melancholy. Diet, Diminutiues, Alteratiues, Cordialls, correcters as before,
intermixed as occasion serves, Studium sit omne vt melancholicus impinguetur: ex
quo enim pingues and carnosi illico sani sunt.
all their studdy must be to make a melancholy man fat, and then the cure is
ended. Diuretica or medicines to procure urine are prescribed by some in this
kind, hot and cold: hot where the heat of the liver does not forbid, cold
where the heat of the liver is very great, Hildesheim spicel. 2. Inter calida
radix petroselini apij feniculi Inter frigida emulsio seminis mellonum cum sero
caprino quod est commune vehiculum.
amongst hot are Parsley roots, Louage, Fennel etc. cold Mellon seeds,
etc, with Whay of Goats milk, which is the common conueigher.

To purge and purify the blood, use Sow thistle, Succory, Sena, Endive,
Carduus Benedictus, Dandelion, Hoppe, Medenhaire, Fumitorie, Buglosse, Borage
etc. with their juice decoctions, distilled waters, Syrrups, etc.

Oswaldus Crollius basil. Chim. much admires salt of coralls in this case, and
Aetius Tetrabib. ser. 2. cap. 114. Hieram Archigenis, which is an excellent
medicine to purify the blood, Non est aliud medicamentum quod huic co^^arari
possit.
for all melancholy affections, falling sickness, none to be compared to it.

MEMB. 3.
SVBSECT. 1. Cure of Hypocondriacall Melancholy.
IN this Cure as in the rest, is especially required the rectification of those
six non natural things, above all a good Diet, which Montanus consil. 27.
Inioynes a French Nobleman, Hoc vnum premoneo domine vt sis diligeas circa
victum sine quo caetera remedia frustra adbibentur.
To have an especial care of it, without which all other remedies are in
vain. Bloodletting is not to be used, Piso.
except the patients body be very full of blood, and that it be derived from
the liver and spleen to the stomache and his vessels, then Laurent^^s cap. 15.
renul^o^is gratia ^enam internam alterius Brachij se^a^^^.
to draw it back, to cut the inner vain of either arm some say the
saluatella, and if the malady be continuat, Si Pertinax morbus venam front
secabis. ^ruel.
to open a vein in the forehead.

Praeparatiues and Alteratiues may be used as before, saving that here must be
respect had as well to the liver, spleen, stomach, hypocondries, as to the
heart and brain. To comfort the Ego maxima^ curam stomacho delegabo. Octa.
Horatianus lib. 2. cap. 5.
stomach and inner parts against wind and obstructions, by Areteus, Galen,
Aetius, Aurelianus, etc. and many later writers, are still prescribed the
Decoctions of Wormwood, Centaury, Penneriall, sod in Whay and daily drunk:
many have been cured by this medicine alone.

Codronchus in his book De sale absin, magnifies the salt of Wormwood above
all other remedies, Citius and efficatius suas vires exercet quam solent
decocta as diluta in quantitate multa, and magna cum assumentium molestia de
sumpta. Flatus hic sal efficaciter dissipat vrinam mouet humores crassos
abstergit, stomachum egregie confortat cruditatem nauseam appetentam mirum in
modum renouat, etc.
which works better and speedier then any other simple whatsoever, and much to
be preferred before all those fulsome decoctions and infusions, which much
offend by reason of their quantity, this alone in a small measure taken expells
wind, and that most forcibly, mooues urine, cleanses the stomach of all
gross humors, crudities, helps appetite etc. Arnoldus has a Wormwood wine
which he would have used, which every Pharmacopaea speaks of.

Diminutiues and purgers may Piso. Altomarus Laurentius cap. 15.
be used as before, of hiera, manna, cassia, which Montanus consil. 230, For an
Italian Abbat in this kind preferres before all other simples. His vtendum
saepius iteratis, a vehementioribus semper abstinendum ne ventrem exasperent
And these must be often used, still abstaining from those which are more
violent, least they do exasperate the stomach etc. and the mischief by that
means be increased. Though in some Physicians I find very strong purgers,
Hellebor it self prescribed in this affection. If it long continue, vomits may
be used after meat, or otherwise gently procured with warm water, oximell
etc. now and then. Fuchsius cap. 33. prescribes Hellebor it self, but still
take heed in this malady, which I have often warned of hot medicines, Lib. 2.
cap. 1. Quoniam caliditate coniuncta est siccitas quae malum auget.
because (as Saluianus adds) drought follows heat, which increases the
disease: and yet Baptista Siluaticus contro. 34. forbiddes cold medicines,
Quisquis frigidis auxilijs hoc morbo vs^s fuerit is obstructionem aliaque
symptomata augebit.
because they increase obstructions, and other bad symptoms. But this varies
as the parties do, and ^is not easy to determine which to use. Ventriculus
plerumque frigidus epar calid^^, quomodo ergo ventriculum califaciet vel
refrigerabit hepar sine alterius maximo detrimento.
The stomach most part in this infirmity is hot, the liver cold, scarce
therefore which Montanus insinuates consil. 229. for the Earl of Monfort, can
you help the one, and not hurt the other: much discretion must be used, take
no Physic at all he concludes, without great need. Lelius Aegubinus consult.
77. for an Hypocondriacall German Prince, used many medicines, Significatum
per literas in^red^bilem vtilitatem ex decocto Chinae and Sassafras percepisse.
but it was after signified to him in letters, that the decoction of China and
Sassafras, and salt of Sassafras, wrought him an incredible good. In his 108.
Consult. he used as happily the same remedies: this to a third might have bin
poison, by ouerheating his liver and blood.

For the other parts look for remedies in Sauanarola Gordonius, Johnson etc.
one for the Spleen amongst many other I will not omit, cited by Hildeshiem
spicel. 2. and prescribed by Matt. Flaccus and out of the authority of
Beneuenius. Antony Beneuenius in an Hypocondriacall passion, Tumorem ^plenis
incurab^lem sola cappari curauit cibo tali agritudini apti^simo. So'oque vsu
aquae in quo faber serrarius saepe candens ferrum extin^erat, etc.
Cured an exceeding great swelling of the Spleen with Capers alone, a meat
befitting that infirmity, and frequent use of the water of a Smithes forge, by
this Physic he cured a sick man, whom all other Physicians had forsaken,
that for seven years had been Spleniticke. And of such force is this water,
Animalia quae apud hos fabros educ^ntur exiguos habent lienes.
that such creatures as drink of it have commonly little or no Spleen. See
more excellent medicines for the Spleen in him. Auerters must be used to the
liver and Spleen, and to scour the Meseriack veins, and they are either to
open, or provoke urine. You can open no place better then the haemrods, which
if by horse-leaches they be made to flow, Si hemorroides fluerent nullum
praestantius esset remedium quae sanguisugis admotis prouocari poterunt,
obseruat lib. 1. pro hypoc. leguleio.
there may not be again such an excellent remedy, as Plater holds. Salust.
Saluian will admit no other blood-letting but this, and by his experience in an
hospital which he kept, he found all mad and melancholy men worse for other
blood-letting. Laurentius cap. 15. calls this of horse-leaches, a sure remedy
to empty the Spleen and Meseriacke membrane. Only Montanus consil. 248., is
against it, Alijs apertio haec in hoc morbo videtur vtilissima mihi non admodum
probatur quia sanguinem tenuem attrabit and crassum relinquit.
to other men says he, this opening of the haemrods seems to be a profitable
remedy, for my part I do not approve of it, because it draws away the
thinnest blood, and leaves the thickest behind.

Aetius, Vidus Vidius, Mercuriaelis, Fucshius recommend Diuretickes, or such
things as provoke urine, as Anniseeds, Dill, Fennel, Germander, ground Pine,
etc. sod in water or drunk in powder, and yet Lib. 2 cap. 13. omnes
melancholici debent omittere vrinam prouocantia quonia^ pe^ ea educitur subtle
and remanet crassum.
P. Bayerus is against them. All melancholy men says he, must avoid such
things as provoke urine, because by them the subtle or thinnest is euacuated,
the thicker matter remains.

Clysters are in good request, Trincauellius lib. 3. consil. 38. for a young
Nobleman, esteems of them in the first place, and Hercules de Saxonia Panth.
lib. 1. cap. 16. is a great approuer of them. Ego experientia prohaui multos
Hypocendriacos solo usu Clysterum fuisse lanatos.
I have found (says he) by experience, that many hypocondriacall melancholy
men, have been cured by the sole use of Clysters, receipts are to be had in
him.

Besides those fomentations, irrigations, inunctions, odoraments prescribed for
the head, In eruditate optimum ventriculum arctius alligari.
there must be the like outwardly used for the liver and Spleen, Stomach,
Hypocondries, etc. In crudity says Piso, it is good to bind the stomach hard,
to hinder wind, and to help concoction.

Of inward medicines I need not speak, the same cordialls as before. j.
Theriacae vere preser^^^ and aestate.
In this kind of melancholy, some prescribe Treacle in winter, especially
before or after purges, or in the Spring as Auicenna, Consil. 12. lib. 1
Trincauellius Mithridate, Cap. 33.
Montaltus Piony seeds, Unicorns horn; os de cord cerui, etc.

Amongst Topickes or outward medicines, none are more precious then bathes, but
of them I have spoken. Fomentations to the hypocondries are very good, of wine
and water in which are sod Sothernwood, Melilot, Epithyme, Mugwort, Sena,
Polypody, as also Trin^auellius consil. 15 cerotum prosene melancholi^ho ad
iecur optimum.
Cerotts, Emplastra pro spleen Fernelius consil. 45.
Playsters, Liniments, Ointments, for the spleen and liver, hypocondries, of
which look for examples in Laurentius, Iobertus lib. 2. cap. 1. prac. med.
Montanus consil. 231. Montaltus cap. 33. Hercules de Saxonia, Faventinus: and
so of Epithemes, digestive powders, bags, oils, Octauius Horatianus lib. 2^
cap. 5. prescribes calasticke Cataplasmes, or dry purging medicines. Piso
Dropax e pice nauali and oleo rutatio affigatur ventriculo and toti metaphreni.
Dropaces, of pitch and oil of Rue applied at certain times to the stomach,
to the metaphrene, or part of the back which is ouer-against the heart. Aetius
synapismes, Montaltus cap. 35. would have the thighs to be Cauteria cruribus
inusta.
cauterised, Mecurialis prescribes beneath the knees, Lelius Aegubinus, consul.
77. for an Hypocondriacall Dutchman, will have a cautery made in the right
thighe, and so Montanus consil. 55. The same Montanus consil. 34. approues of
Issues in the arms, or hinder part of the head. Bernardus Paternus in
Hildishem spicel. 2. would have Fontanelle sint in vtroque crure.
Issues made in both thighs. Ligatures, Frictions and cupping glasses may be
used as before.

SVBSEC. 2. Correctors, to expel wind, Against costiuenesse, etc.
IN this kind of Melancholy, one of the most offensive symptoms is wind,
which as in the other species, so in this has great need to be corrected and
expelled.

The medicines to expel it, are either inwardly taken or outwardly. Inwardly
taken to expel wind, are simples or compounds. Simples, are herbs, roots,
etc. as Galanga, Ge^tian, Angelica, Enula, Calamus Aromaticus, Valerean,
Zeodori, Iris, condit Ginger, Aristolochy, Cicliminus, China, Dittander,
Pennerial, Rue, Calaminte, Bayberries, and Bay-leaues. Betany, Rosemary,
Hissope, Sabine, Centaury, Minte, Chamomile, Staechas, Agnus castus, Broom
flowers, Origan, Orange pills, etc. Spices, as Saffron, Cinnamon, Bezoa^ stone,
Myrrh, Mace, Nutmegs, Pepper, Cloves, Ginger, seeds of Annise, fennel amni,
Carry, Nettle, Rue, etc. Iuneper berries, grana Paradisi. Compounds, Dianisum,
Diagalanga, Diaciminu^, Diacalaminth, Electuariu^ de baccis lauri, Benedicta
laxativa, Pulvis ad flatus Antid. Florent, pulvis Carminativus, Aromaticum
Rosatum, Triacle, Mithridate, etc. This one caution of Cavendum hic. diligenter
a multu^ calesacientibus atque exiccantibus sieve alimenta suerint haec sieve
medicam en ^a nonnulli enim vt ventositates and rugitus compescant buinsmodi
vientes medicamentis plurimum peccant morbu^ sic augentes, debent enim
medicamenta declinare ad calidum vel frigidum secundum exigentiam
circumstantiarum vel vt patiens inclinat ad call. and frigidum.
Gualter Bruel is to be observed in the administering of these hot medicines and
dry, that whilst they covet to expel wind they do not inflame the blood, and
increase the disease, sometimes as he says, medicines must more decline to
heat, sometimes more to cold, as the circumstances requires, and as the parties
are inclined to heat or cold.

Outwardly taken to expel winds, are oils, as of Camomile, Rue, Bays, etc.
fomentations of the hypocondries, with the decoctions of Dill, Penneriall, Rue,
Bay leaves, cummin etc. bags of Camomile Flowers, Anniseed, Cummin, Bays,
Rue, Wormwood, oyntme^ts of the oil of Spikenard, Wormwood, Rue, etc. Cap. 5.
lib. 7.
Areteus prescribes Cataplasmes of Camomile Flowers, Fennel, Anniseeds,
Cummin, Rosemary, Wormwood leaves, etc.

Piso. Bruel. mire status resoluit.
Cupping lasses applied to the hypocondries, without scarification do
wonderfully resolve wind. Fernelius consil. 43 much approues of them at the
lower end of the belly, Julius Caesar Claudinus respons. med. resp. 33. admires
these cupping glasses, which he calls out of Galen, Velut incantamentum quoddam
exfloucso spiritu dolorem ortum levant.
a kind of enchantment, they cause such present help.

Empiricks have a myriade of medicines, which I voluntarily omit. Amatus
Lusitanus cent. 4. cura. 54. for anhypocondriacall person, that was extremely
tormented with wind, prescribes a strange remedy. Put a pair of bellows end
in a Clyster pipe, and putting it into the fundamen^ open the bellows, so
draw forth the wind Natura non admittit vacuum. He vaunts that he was the
first invented this remedy, and by means of it speedely eased a melancholy
man. Of the cure of this flatuous melancholy read more in Fienus de Flatibus
cap. 20. and passim alias.

Against Headache, Vertigo, vapors which ascend forth of the stomach to molest
the head, read Hercules de Saxonia, and others.

If Costiuenesse offend in this, or in any other of the three species, it is to
be corrected with suppositories, clysters, or lenitiues, powder of Seen,
condite Prunes, etc. R, Elect. lenit. e succo rosar. an j. misce. Take as much
as a nutmeg at a time, half an hour before dinner or supper. or pil.
mastichinae j. in six pills, a pil or two at a time. See more in Montanus
consil. 229. Hildesheim spicel. 2. P. Cnemander, and Montanus commend
Terebinthina^ cypriam haebeant familiarem ad quantitatem deglutiant nucis
parvae tribus horis ante prandium vel coenam, ter singulis septimanis provt
expedire videbitur Nam praeterqua^ quod aluum mol lem essicit, obstructiones
aperit, ventriculum purgat, vrinam provocat, hepar mundificat.
Cyprian Turpentine, which they would have familiarly taken, to the quantity of
a small nut, two or three hours before dinner and supper, twice or thrice a
week if need be, for besides that it keeps the belly soluble, it cleeres the
stomach, opens obstructions, cleanses the liver, provokes urine

These in breife are the ordinary medicines which belong to the cure of
melancholy, which if they be used aright, no doubt may do much good, not one,
but all or most, as occasion serves.

Et quae non prosunt singula, multa invant. Partitionis Secundae Finis
ANALYSIS OF THE THIRD PARTITION
Love and Love Melancholy, Memb. 1. Sect. 1. Praeface or introduction. Subsect.
1. Loves definition, Pedigree, Object, Fair, Amiable, Gracious and pleasant,
from which comes beauty, grace, which all desire and love, parts affected
Division or kinds Subsect. 2. Natural in things without life, as love and
hatred of elements, and with life as vegetall wine and elm, sympathy,
antipathy, etc. Sensible as of Beasts, for pleasure, preservation of kind,
mutual agreement, custom, bringing up together, etc. or Rational Simple which
has three objects as Memb. 2. Profitable, Sub. 1. Health, wealth, honor, we
love our benefactors, nothing so amiable as profit, of that which has a show
of commodity. Pleasant. Sub. 2. Things without life, made by art, pictures,
sports, games, sensible objects, as Hawks, Hounds, Horses. Or men them selves
for similitude of manners, natural affection, as to friends, children,
kinsmen, etc. for glory, such as commend us. Of women, as Before marriage as
Heroical Melancholy, Sect 2. vide. Or after marriage, as Iealousy. Sect. 3.
vide..

Honest Sub. 3. Fucate in show by some error or hypocrisy, some seem and are
not, or truly for virtue, honesty, good parts, learning, eloquence. etc.
or Mixed of al 3 which exte^ds to Memb. 3. Common good, our neighbor, country,
friends, which is Charity, the defect of which is cause of much Discontent and
Melancholy. or God. Sect. 4. In Excess, vide. In Defect. vide.



Heroical, or Love Melancholy in which consider. Memb. 1. His pedigree, power,
extent to vegetalls and sensible creatures as well as men, to spirits, devils,
etc. His name, definition, object, part affected, tyranny. Causes. Memb. 2.
Stars, temperature, full ^iet, place, country, clime, condition, Idleness.
Subs. 1. Natural allurements, and causes of love, as Beauty his praise how it
allureth? Comeliness, grace, resulting from the whole or some parts, as face,
eyes, hair, hands, etc. Sub. 2. Artificial allurements and provocations of
lust and love, gestures, apparel, dowre, money, etc. Quaest. Whether beauty owe
more to art or nature. Subs. 3. Opportunity of time and place, conference,
discourse, Music, singing, dancing, amorous tales, lascivious objects,
familiarity, gifts, promises, etc. Subs. 4. Bauds and philters, Subs. 5.
Symptoms, or signs. Memb. 3. Of Body Dryness, palenesse, leanesse, waking,
sighing, etc. Quaest. An detur pulsus amatorius. or of mind. Bad as Fear,
sorrow, suspision, anxiety, etc. An hell, torment, fire, blindness, etc Dotage,
slavery, neglect of business
or Good as Sprucenes, neatnes, courage, aptness to learn music, singing,
dancing, poetry, etc.

Prognostics Despair, madness, frenzy, death, etc. Memb. 4. Cures Memb. 5.
By labor, diet, physic, abstinence. Subs. 1. To withstand the beginnings,
avoid occasions, fair and foul means, change of place, centrary passion,
witty inventions, discommend the former, bring in another. Subs. 2. By good
counsel persuasion, from future miseries, inconveniences, etc. Subs. 3. By
Philters, magical, and poetical cures, Subs 4. To let them have their desire
disputed pro and con. Impediments removed, reasons for it. Subs. 5.

Jealousy, Sect. 3. His name, definition, extent, power, Tyranny. Memb. 1.
Division Aequivocations kinds Subs. 1. Improper To many beasts, as swannes,
Cocks, Bulls. To kings and Princes of their subjects, successors. To friends,
parents, tutors over their children or otherwise.
Or Proper Before marriage, corrivals, etc. After as in this place our present
subject.

Causes. Sect. 3. In the parties themselves Idleness, impotency in one party,
melancholy, long absence. They have been naught themselves. Hard usage,
unkindness, wantonness. Inequality of years, persons, fortunes, etc.
Or From others. Outward entisements and provocations of others.
Symptoms Memb. 2. Fear, sorrow, suspicion, anguish of mind, strange actions,
gestures, looks, speeches, locking up, outrages, severe laws, prodigious
trials, etc. Prognostics. Memb. 3. Despair, madness, to make away them
selves and others. Cures. Memb. 4. By avoiding occasions, Always busy, never
to be idle. By good counsel, advise of friends, To contemn or dissemble it.
Subs. 1. By prevention before marriage, Platoes communion, To marry such as are
equal in years, birth, fortunes, beauty, of like conditions, etc. Of a good
family, good education. To use them well.

Religious Melancholy. Sect. 4. In excess or such as do that which is not
required. Mem. 1. A proof that there is such a species of Melancholy, Name
Object God, what his beauty is, how it allureth? Part and parties affected,
superstitious Idolaters, Prophets, Heretics, etc Subs. 1. Causes. Subs. 2.
From others The devils allurements, false miracles, Priests for their game
Politicians to keep men in obedience, Bad instructors, Blind Guides.
Or From themselves Simplicity, fear, ignorance, solitariness, melancholy,
curiosity, pride. vaineglory, decayed Image of God.
Symptoms Subs. 3. General Zeal without knowledge, obstinacy, superstition,
strange devotion, stupidity, confidence, stiff defense of their tenants,
mutual love, and hate of other sects, belief of incredibilities,
impossibilities. Or Particular Of Heretics, pride, contumacy, contempt of
others, wilfulnes, vaineglory, singularity, prodigious paradoxes In
superstitious, blind zeal, obedience, strange works, fasting, sacrifices,
oblations, prayers, vows, pseudomartyrdome mad and ridiculous customs,
observations. In Pseudoprophetes, visions, revelations, dreams, prophecies new
doctrines, etc. of Jews, Gentiles, Mahometans, etc.

Prognostics Subs. 4. New doctrines, paradoxes, blasphemies, madness,
stupidity, despair, damnation. Cures. Subs. 5. By Physic if need be,
conference, good counsel, persuasion, compulsion, correction, punishment, qu.
an cogi debent? affir.

In Defect. Vide paginam sequentem.
Religious melancholy in defect as Memb. 2. Secure, void of grace and fear.
Epicures, Atheists, Magitians, Hypocrites, such as have cauterised consciences,
or in a reprobate sense, worldly secure, some Philosophers, Impenitent Sinners.
Subs. 1. Or Distrustful, or too timorous, as desperate. In despair consider.
His definition, Equivocations, part and parties affected. Causes. Subs. 2. The
devil and his allurements. Rigid Preachers, that wound their consciences,
Melancholy, contemplation, solitariness. How Melancholy and Despair differ
Distrust, weakness of faith. Guilty conscience for some offense committed,
misunderstanding Scriptures.
Symptoms Subs. 3. Fear, sorrow, anguish of mind, extreme tortures and horror
of conscience, fearful dreams, conceits, visions, etc. Prognostics,
Blasphemy, violent death. Subs. 4. Cu^es Subs. 5. Physic as occasion serves,
conference, not to be idle or alone. Good counsel, good company, all comforts
and contents, etc.





FINIS.
THE THIRD PARTITION LOVE MELANCHOLY.
THE FIRST SECTION.
THE FIRST MEMBER.
THE FIRST SVBSECTION. The Preface.
THere will not be wanting, I presume, some or other that will much discommend
some part of this Treatise of Love Melancholy, and object (which Encom. Moriae
leviores essenugas quam vt Theologum deceant.
Erasmus in his Preface to Sr Thomas Moore suspects of his) that it is too
light for a Divine, too Comicall a subject to speak of Love Symptoms, and fit
alone for a wanton Poet, or some such idle person. And some again out of an
affected gravity will dislike all for the name sake before they read a word,
dissembling with him in Quoties de amatorijs mentio facta est tam vehementer
excandui tam severa trislitia violari aures meas obsc^no sermon nolui, vt me
ta^quam vnum ex Philosophis intuerentur.
Petronius, and seem to be angry that their ears are violated with such
obscene speeches, that so they may be admired for grave Philosophers, and staid
carriage. But let these Cavilleirs and counterfeit Catoes know, that Love is a
species of Melancholy, and a necessary part of this my Treatise, which I may
not omit, of which many grave and worthy men have written whole volumes, Plato,
Plutarch, Plotinus, Avicenna, Leon: Hebreus in three large Dialogues, Xenophon
sympos. Theophrastus, if we may believe Atheneus lib. 13. cap. 9. Picus
Mirandula, Marius Aequicola, both in Italian, Kornmannus de linea Amoris, lib.
3. Petrus Godefridus has handled in three books, etc. and which almost every
Physician, as Arnoldus Villanouanus, Valleriola obseruat. med. lib. 2. obser.
7. Aelian: Montaltus, and Laurentius in their Treatises of Melancholy, Jason
Pratensis de morb. cap. Valescus de Taranta, Gordonius, Hercules de Saxonia,
Savanarola, Langius, etc. have treated of a part, and in their works. I excuse
my self therefore which Peter Godefridus, Valleriola, Ficinus, and in Med.
epist. li. 1. epist. 24. Cadmus Milesius test Suida, de hoc Erotico Amore. 14.
libros scripsit nec me pigebit in gratiam adolescentum hac scribere epistolam.
Langius words. Cadmus Milesius writ fourteen books of Love, Carpunt alij
Platonicam maiestatem quod amori nimium indulserit Dycearchus and alij sed
male. Omnis amor honestus and bonus and amore digni qui been dicunt de Amore.
and why should I b e ashamed to write an Epistle in favor of young men, of
this subject? Dycearchus, and some other carpe at Platoes majesty that he
would vouchsafe to write of such love toys, but without cause (as Ficinus
pleads) for all love is honest and good, and they are worthy to be loved that
speak well of love. Being to speak of this admirable affection of love (says
Valleriola.) there lies open a vast and philosophical field to my discourse,
by which many lovers become mad: let me leave my more serious meditations, and
wander in these philosophical feildes, and look into these pleasant groves of
the muses, Med. obser. lib. 2. cap. 7. de admirando amoris affectu dicturus
ingens patet ca^pus and Philosophicus, quosaepe homines dicuntur ad insaniam
libeat modo vagaris, etc. Que non ornent modo sed fragrantia and succulentia
Iucunda before alant, etc.
where with unspeakable variety of flowers, we may make garlands to our selves,
not to adorn us only, but with their pleasant smell and juice to norish our
souls, and fill our minds desirous of knowledge etc. After an harsh an
unpleasing discourse of melancholy, which has hitherto molested your patience,
and tired the author, give him leave with Lib. 1. praefat. de amoribus agens
relaxandi animi causa laboriosissimis studijs satigati quando and Theologi si
his invari and invare illaesis moribus volunt.
Godefridus the lawier, and Laurentius cap. 5. to recreate himself in this
kind after his laborious studdies, since so many grave divines and worthy men
have without offense to manners, to help themselves and others voluntarily
written of it. Heliodorus a Bishop penned a love story of Theagines and
Cariclia, and when some Cato's of his time reprehended him for it, choase
rather says Hist. lib. 12. cap. 34.
Nicephorus, to leave his bishopric then his book. Aeneas Sylvius an ancient
Divine, and past 40. years of age as Prefat. quid quadragenario convenit cum
amore. Ego vero agnosco a matorium scriptum mihi non convenire. Aeneas Silvius
praefat. qui iam meridiem praetergressus in vesperum feror.
he confesses of himself, (after Pope Pius quintus) endited that wanton
history of Eurialus and Lucretia. And how many superintendents of learning,
could I reckon up that have written of light subjects, Beroaldus, Erasmus, etc.
give me leave then to refresh my muse a little and my weary Readers, to Vt
severiora studia his amaenitatibus lector condire possit. Accius.
season a surly discourse; with a more pleasing aspersion of love matters:
edulcare vitam convenit, as the Poet inuites us, curas nugis etc. it is good to
sweeten our life with some pleasing toys to relish it, and as Pliny tells us,
magna pars studio sorum amaenitates quaerimus, most of our students love such
pleasant toys. And though Macrobius teach us otherwise, that those old Saeges
banished all such light Treatises from their studies, to Nurses cradles, to
please only the ears; yet out of Apuleius I will oppose as honorable Patrons,
Solon, Plato, Babylonius and Ephesius qui de Amore scripserunt vterque amores
Myrrae Cyrenes and Adonidis. Suidas.
Xenophon, Adrian etc. And which he urges for himself, accused of the same
fault, In Some. Scip. esacrario sue tum ad cunas nutricum sapientes olim
eliminarunt, solas aurium delicias profitentes.
Mart.
Lasciua est nobis pagina, vita proba est. howsouer my lines err, my life is
honest. But I need no such Apologies, I need not as Socrates in Plato did cover
his face when he spoke of love: it is no such lascivious, obsceane or wanton
discourse, but chaste and honest, and most part serious and even of religion it
self. Ficinus comment. cap. 17. Amore incensi inveniendi amoris, amorem
quaesivimus and invenimus.
Incensed (as he said) with the love of finding love, we have sought it, and
found it. And thus much I have thought good to say by way of preface, least any
man (which Haec praedixi ne quis temere nos putaret scripsisse de amore,
lenocinijis de praxi fornicationibus adulteriis etc.
Godefridus supected) should object unto me lightness, wantonness, rashness,
in speaking of loves causes, entisements, symptoms, remedies, lawful and
unlawful loves, and lust it self, Taxando and ab his deterrendo humanam
lasciuiam and insaniam sed and remedia docendo non igitur candidus lector nobis
succenseat, etc. Commonitio erit invenibus haec hisce vt abstineant nugis, and
omissa lascivia quae homines reddit insanos virtutis incumbant studijs. (Aeneas
Silvius) and curam amoris si quis nescit hiuc poterit scire.
I speak it only to tax and deter others from it, not to teach it, but to
apply remedies unto it. Condemn me not good Reader then, or censure me hardly,
if some part of this Treatise to thy thinking be too light, but consider better
of it, pardon what is amiss, speak well at least and if thou likest it, wish
me good success. Extremum hunc Arethusa mihi concede laborem. I begin.

SVBSEC. 2. Loves beginning, Object, Definition, Division.
Loves limits are ample and great, and a spacious walk it has beset with
thorns, and for that cause, which Exercitat. 301 Campus amoris maximus and
spinis obsitus nec lovissimo pede transvolandus.
Scaliger reprehends in Cardan, not lightly to be passed over. Least I incur
the same censure, I will examine all the kinds of love, his nature, beginning,
differences, objects, how it is honest or dishonest, a virtue or vice, a
natural passion or a disease, his power and effects, how far it extends: of
which although something has been said in the first Partition, in those
Sections of Perturbations ( Grad. 1. c. 29. Ex Platone, primae and
communissimae perturbationes ex quibus caeterae oriuntur, and earum su^^
pedishiquae.
for love and hatred are the first and most common passions, from which all the
rest arise, and are attendant, as Picolomineus holds) I will now more copiously
dilate through all his parts and several branches, that so it may better
appear what Love is, and how it varies with the objects, how in defect, or
(which is most ordinary and common) immoderate and in excess, it causes
Melancholy.

Love universally taken, is defined to be a Desire, as a word of more ample
signification: and though Leon: Hebreus the most copious writer of this
subject, in his third Dialogue makes no difference, yet in his first Dialogue,
he distinguishes them again, and defines love by Desire. Amor est
^oluntarius affectus and desiderium re bona fruendi.
Love is a volu^tary affection and desire to enjoy that which is good.
Desiderium optantis amor eorum quibus fruimur amoris principium desiderii
finis, a natum adest, optatum deest.
Desire wishes, Love inioyes, the end of the one is the beginning of the
other: that which we love is present, that which we desire is absent. Principio
lib. de amore. O^er^ p^etium est de am^^e considera^e, vtrum Deus an Demon, an
passio quaedam anime, an parim Deus, partim Demon, passio partim, etc. Amor
est actus ^nimi bonum desiderans.
It is worth the labor, says Plotinus, to consider well of Love, whether it be
a God or a Devil, or passion of the mind, or partly God, partly Devil, partly
passion. He concludes love to participate of all three to arise from Desire, of
that which is beautiful and fair, and defines it to be an action of the
mind, desiring that which is good. Magnus Demon con^i^io.
Plato calls it the great Devil, for his vehemence and souerainty over all
other passions, and defines it an Appetite, Boni pulchrique fruendi desiderium
by which we desire some good to be present. Ficinus in his Comment adds the
word Fair to this Definition, Love is a desire of inioying that which is good
and fair. Austin dilates this common Definition, and will have love to be a
Delectation of the heart, Godefridus, lib. 1. cap. 2 Amor est delectatio cordis
alicuius ad aliquid propter aliquod desiderium in apperendo and gaudium
perfruendo per desiderium currens, requiescens per gaudiu^.
for something which we seek to win or joy to have, coveting by desire,
resting in joy. Non est amor desiderium aut appetitus vt ab omnibus bactenus
traditum. Nam potimur cum amata re non manet appetitus. Est igitur affectus quo
cum re amata aut vnimur, aut vnionem perpetuamus.
Scaliger exerc. 301. taxes all these former Definitions, and will not have
Love to be defined by Desire or Appetite, for when we enjoy the thing we
desire, there remains no more Appetite, as he defines it, Love is an affection
by which we are either united to the thing we love, or perpetuate our union,
which agrees in part with Leon Hebreus.

Now this love varies as his object varies, which is always Good, Amiable,
Fair, Gracious and Pleasant. Omnia appetunt bonum.
All things desire that which is good, as we are taught in the Ethics, or at
least that which to them seems, to be good, from this goodness comes beauty,
from beauty grace, and comeliness, which result as so many rays from their
good parts, which makes us to love it, and so to covet it: for were it not
pleasing and gracious in our eyes, we should not seek it. Nemo amore capitur
^isiqui fuerit ante fo^ma specieque delectatus.
No man loves (says Aristotle 9. mor. cap. 5.) but he that was first
delighted with comeliness and beauty. As this fair object varies, so does our
love, for as Proclus holds, Omne pulchrum amabile, every fair thing is
amiable, and what we love is fair and gracious in our eyes. or at least we do
so apprehend, and esteem of it still. Amabile obiectum amoris and scopus cuius
adeptio est finis cuius gratia amamus. Animus enim aspirat vt eo fruatur, and
formam boni habet and praecipue videtur and placet, Picolomineus, grad. 7. cap.
2. and grad. 8. cap. 35.
Amiablenesse is the object of love, the scope and end is to obtain it, for
whose sake we love, and which our mind couets to enjoy. And it seems to us
especially fair and good, for good, fair, and unity, cannot be separated.
Beauty shines Plato says, and by reason of it is spendor and shining causes
admiration, and the fairer the object is, the more eagerly it is sought. For as
the same Plato defines it, Forma est vitalis fulgor ex ipso bono manans per
ideas s^mina, rations umbras effusus, animos excitans vt per honum in vnum
redigantur.
Beauty is a lively shining or glittering brightness, resulting from effused
good By Ideas, seeds, reasons, shadows, stirring up our minds, that by this
good they may be united and made one. Others will have beauty to be the
perfection of the whole composition, Pulchritudo est perfectio co^positi ex
congruente ordine men sura and ratione partium consurgens, and venustas inde
prodiens gratia dicitur and res omnes pulcbrae gratiosae.
caused out of the congruous symmetry, measure, order and manner of parts, and
that comeliness which proceeds from this beauty is called grace, and from
thence all fair things are gracious. And grace and beauty are so wonderfully
annexed, Gratia and pulchritudo ita suauiter animos demulcent ita vehementer
alliciunt and adeo mirabiliter connectuntur vt invnum confundant and distingui
non possint, and sunt tanqua^ radii and splendores divine solis in rebus variis
vario modo fulgentes.
so sweetly and gently win our souls, and strongly allure, that they
confound our judgment and cannot be distinguished. Beauty and Grace are like
those beams and shinings that come from the glorious and divine Sun, which are
diverse, as they come from the diverse objects and please and affect our
several senses. Species pulchritudinis hauriuntur oculis auribus aut
concipiuntur interna mente.
As the species of beauty are taken at our eyes, ears, or conceived in our
inner Soul as Plato disputes at large in his Dialogue de Pulchro, Phaedro,
Hyppias, and after many sophistical errors confuted, concludes that Beauty is
a grace in all things, delighting the eyes, ears, and Soul it self; and as
as Valesius inferres hence, whatsoever pleases our ears, eyes, and Soul must
needs be beautiful and fair, and delightsome to us. Nihil hinc magis animos
concil^at quam Musica pulchrae picturae ades, etc.
And nothing can more please our ears then Music, or pacify our minds,
fair houses, pictures, Orchards, Gardens, Fields, a fair Hawke, a fair horse
is most acceptable unto us: whatsoever pleases our eyes and ears, we call
beautiful and fair, In reliquis sensibus voluptas in his pulchritudo and
gratia.
Pleasure belongs to the rest of the senses, but Grace and Beauty to these
two alone. As the objects vary and are diverse, so they diversely affect our
eyes, ears, and Soul it self. which gives occasion to some, to make so many
several kinds of Love as their be objects: One Beauty arises from God,
another from his creatures, their is a beauty of the Body, a beauty of the
soul, a Beauty from virtue, forma martyrum as Austin calls it, quam videmus
oculis animi, which we see with the eyes of our soul, which Beauty as Tully
says, if we could discern with these corporal eyes, admirabiles sui amores
excitaret, would cause admirable affections, and ravish our Souls. This other
Beauty which arises from those extreme parts, and those graces which proceed
from gestures, speeches and several motions and proportions of creatures, men
and women, (especially from women, which made those old Poets put the three
Graces still in Venus company, as attending on her, and holding up her train)
are infinite almost, and vary their names with their objects, as love of money,
covetousness, love of Beauty, Lust, Conuinio Platonis.
Immoderate desire of any pleasure, concupiscence, friendship, love, good will,
etc. and is either virtue or vice, honest, dishonest, in excess, defect, as
shall be showed in his place: Heroical Love: Religious Love, etc. which may be
reduced to a twofold Division, according to the principal parts which are
affected, the Brain and Liver. Amor and amicitia which Scaliger exercitat.
301. Valesius and Melancthon warrant out of Plato, (...). Out of that speech of
Pausanias belike, that makes two Veneres and two loves. Duae veneres duo amores
quarum vna antiquior and sine matre caelo nata quam caelestem venerem
nuncupamus, altera vero Junior a Jove and Dione prognata quam vnigarem venerem
vocamus.
One Venus is ancient without a mother, and descended from heaven, whom we call
caelestiall; The younger, begotten of Jupiter and Dione, whom commonly we call
Venus. Ficinus in his Coment upon this place cap. 8. following Plato, calls
these two loves, two devils, Altera ad superna crigit altera deprimit ad
inferna.
or good or bad angels according to us, which are still houering about our
Souls, Alter excitat hominem ad divinam pulchritudinem lustrandam cuius causa
philosophiae studia and iustitiae, etc.
The one rears us to heaven, the other depresseth us to hell; the one good
which stirs us up to the contemplatio^ of that divine beauty for whose sake
we perform Justice, and all godly offices, study Philosophy, etc. the other
base in respect and bad, and yet to be respected, for indeed both are good in
their own natures: procreation of children is as necessary as that finding out
of truth, but therefore called bad, because it is abused, and which draws our
souls from the speculation of that other, to viler objects. So far Ficinus. St
Austin lib. 15. de civ: Dei and sup. Psalm. 64. has delivered as much in
effect. Omnis creatura cum bona sit and been amari potest and male.
Every creature is good, and may be loved well or ill. And Duas civitates duo
faciunt amores Jerusalem facit amor Dei, Babilonem amor saeculi, vnusquisque se
quid amet interroget and inveniet vnde sit civis.
Two cities make two loves, Jerusalem and Babylon, the love of God the one,
the love of the world the other, of these two cities we are all citizens, as
by examination of our selves we may soon find, and of which. The one love is
the root of all mischief, the other of all good. And in his 15. cap. lib. de
mor. Ecclesiae, he will have those four cardinal virtues to be naught else
but love rightly composed, in his 15 book de civitat. Dei cap. 22. he calls
Virtue the order of Love, whom Thomas following 1. part. 2. quaest. 55. art. 1.
and quaest. 56.3 quaest. 62. art. 2. confirms as much, and amplifies in many
words. Alter mari ortus ferox varius fluctuans inanis Iuvenum mare referens,
etc. Alter aurea catena caelo demissa bonum furorem mentibus e mittens, etc.
Lucian to the same purpose has a division of his own, One love was borne in
the Sea, which is as various and raging in young men's breasts as the Sea it
self, and causes burning lust: the other is that golden chain which was let
down from heaven, and with a divine Fury rauisheth our Souls, made to the
image of God, and stirs us up to comprehend that innate and incorruptible
beauty, to which we were once created. Beroaldus has expressed all this in an
Epigram of his, Dogmata divini memorant si vera Platonis,
Sunt geminae veneres, and geminatus amor,
Coelustis Venus est nullo generata parente,
Quae casto sanctos nectit amore viros.
Altera sed Venus est totum vulgata per orbem,
Quae diuum mentes alligat atque hominum,
Improba, seductrix, petulans, etc.
If divine Platoes Tenants they be true,
Two Veneres two loves there be
The one from heaven, unbegotten still,
Which knitts our souls in unity,
The other famous over all the world,
Binding the hearts of God and men,
Dishonest wanton and seducing she,
Rules whom she will, both where and when.


This twofold division of Love, Origin likewise follows in his Comment on the
Canticles, one from God, the other from the devil as he holds (understanding
it in the worser sense) which many others repeat and imitate. Both which (to
omit all subdiuisions) in excess or defect, as they are abused or degenerate
cause melancholy in a particular kind, as shall be showed in his place. Austin
in another place makes a threefold Division of this Love, which we may use
well or ill. Triasunt que amari a nobis been vel male possunt Deus proximus
mundus. Deus supra nos iuxta nos proximus infra nos mundus. Tria Deus, duo
proximus, vnu^ mundus babet, etc.
God our neighbor, and the world: God above us, our neighbor next us, the
world beneath us. In the course of our desires God has three things, the world
one, our neighbor two. Our desire to God is either from God, with God, or to
God, and ordinarily so runs. From God when it receives from him, whence and
for which it should love him: with God when it contradicts his will in nothing:
to God, when it seeks to repose and rest it self in him. Our Love to our
neighbor, may proceed from him, and run with him, not to him: from him, as
when we rejoice of his good safety, and well doing: with him, when we desire to
have him a fellow^ and companion of our iourny in the way of the Lord: not in
him, because there is no aid or hope or confidence in man. From the world our
love: comes, when we come to admire the creator in his works, and glorify
God in his creatures. With the world it should run, if according to the
immutability of all temporalties, it should be dejected in adversity, or over
elevated in prosperity: To the world if it would settle it self in his vain
delights and studies. Many such partitions of love I could repeat and
subdiuisions, but least (which Scaliger objects to Cardan Exercitat. 501.) Ne
confundam vesanos and faedos amores beatos, scelerum cum puro divino and vero,
etc.
I confound filthy burning lust with pure and divine Love, I will follow that
accurate Division of Leon. Hebreus dial. 2. Betwixt Sophia and Philo, where he
speaks of Natural, Sensible, and Rational love, and handles each a part.
Natural love or hatred, is that Sympathy or Antipathy which is to be seen in
animate and inanimate creatures, in the four Elements, Mettalls, Stones,
Plants, Herbs, and is especially observed in vegetalls: as betwixt the Vine
and Elm a great Sympathy, betwixt the Vine and Cabbage, betwixt the Vine and
Olive, Aliciat.
Virgo fugit Bromium, betwixt the Vine and Bays, a great Antipathie, the Vine
loves not the Bay, Porta. vitis laurum no^amat nec eius odorem si prope crescat
enecat. lappa lenti ad versatur.
nor his smell, and will kill him, if he grow near him; the Burre and the
Lintle cannot endure one another; the Olive and the Myrtle embrace one another,
in roots and branches if they grow near. Read more of this in Picolomineus
grad. 7. cap. 1. Sympathia olei and myrti ramorum and radinum se
complectentium. Mizaldus. secret. cent. 1.47.
Crescentius lib. 5. de agric. Baptist a porta de mag. lib. 1. cap. de plant.
odio and Element. sym. Fracastorius de sym. and Antip. of the love and hatred
of Planets, consult with every Astrologer: Leon Hebreus gives many reasons, and
moraliseth them withal.

Sensible Love, is that of brute beasts, of which the same Leon Hebreus dial.
2. assigns these causes. First for the pleasure they take in the act of
generation, male and female love one another. Secondly, for the preservation of
the species, and desire of young brood. Thirdly, for that mutual agreement as
being of the same kind. Fourthly, for custom, use, and familiarity, as if a
dog be brought up with a Lion and a Bear, contrary to their natures, they
will love each other. Hawks, dogs, horses love their masters and keepers,
many stories I could relate in this kind, but see Gillius de hist. Anim. lib.
3. cap. 14. those two epistles of Lipsius of dogs and horses, Agellius etc.
Fifthly. for bringing up, as if a bitch bring up a kid, a hen ducklings, an
hedgesparrow a cuckowe etc.

The third kind is Amor cognitionis, as Leon calls it, Ratitionall love and is
proper to men, on which I must insist. This appears in God, Angels, Men. God
is love it self, the fountain of love, the disciple of love as Plato styles
him, the servant of peace, the God of love and peace, have peace withal men,
and God is with you. -- Mantuan.
Quisquis veneratur Olympum
Ipse sibi mundum subijcit atque, Deum.
Charitas munifica qua mercamur de Deo regnum Dei.
By this Love says Gerson we purchase heaven, and buy the kingdom of God.
This Polanus partit. Zanchius de natura Dei c. 3. copiose de hoc amore Dei agit.
Love is either in the Trinity it self, for the holy Ghost is the Love of the
Father and the Son, etc. John 3.35. and 5.20. and 14.31. or toward us his
creatures, as in making the world. Amor mundum fecit, Love says Dial. 3.
Leon made the world, and afterward in redeeming of it, God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son for it. John. 3.16. Behold what
love the Father has showed on us, that we should be called the sons of God.
1. Ioh. 3.1. Or in his providence in protecting of it: either all in general,
or his Saints elect and Church in particular: whom he keeps as the apple of
his eye, whom he loves freely, as Hosea 14.5. speaks. Juven.
Charior est ipsis homo quam sibi. Not that we are fair, nor for merit or
grace of ours, for we are most vile and base, but out of his incomparable love
and goodness, out of his divine nature. And this is that Homers golden chain,
which reaches down from heaven to earth, by which every creature is anexed
and depends of his Creator. He made all says Genesis 1.
Moses and it was good, and he loves it as good.

The love of Angels and living souls is mutual amongst themselves, and
toward us militant in the Church, and that love God, there is joy in heaven
for every sinner that repents, they pray for us, are sollicitors for our
good, Theodoret. e Plotino.
Castigenij. Vbi regnat, charitas, suaue desiderium.
Laetitiaque and amor deo coniunctus.
Love proper to mortal men, is the third member of this subdiuision, and the
subject of my following discourse.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSEC. 1. Love of men, which varies as his objects, profitable, pleasant,
honest.
VAlesius lib. 3. contro. 13. defines this Love which is in men, To be Affectus
nunc appetitiuae potentiae nunc rationalis alter cerebro residet alter epate,
cor etc.
an affection of both powers, Appetite and Reason. The rational resides in the
Brain, the other in the Liver, (as before has bin said out of Plato and
others) the Heart is diversely affected of both, and carried a thousand ways by
consent. The Sensatiue most part ouerrules Reason, the soul is carried
hudwinked, and the understanding captive like a beast. Cor vary inclinatur
nunc gaudens nunc maerens statim ex timore nascitur Zelotipia, furor, spes,
desperatio.
The Heart is diversely inclined, sometimes they are merry, sometimes sad, and
from Love arise hope and Fear, Jealousy, Fury, Desperation. Now this love of
men is diverse, and varies as the object varies, by which they are entised, as
virtue, wisdom, eloquence, profit, wealth, money, fame, or honor,
comeliness of person, etc. Leon Hebreus in his first Dialogue reduces them
all to these three, Vtile, Iucundum, Honestum, Profitable, Pleasant, Honest: of
which he discourses at large, and whatsoever is beautiful and fair, is
referred to them, or any way to be desired. Ad vtile sanitas refertur vtilium
est ambitio, cupids, desiderium, potius quae amor, excessus auaritia.
To profitable, is ascribed Health, Wealth, Honor, etc. Which is rather
ambition, Desire, Covetousness then Love. Friends, children, love of women,
and all delightful and pleasant things are referred to the second. The love of
honest things consists in virtue and wisdom, and is preferred before that
which is profitable and pleasant. Picolom. grad. 7. cap. 1.
The moral virtues are conversant about that which is profitable and pleasant:
Intellectual about that which is honest. Lib. de amicit. vtile mundanum
carnale Iucundum spirituale honestum.
Saint Austin calls profitable, worldly, Pleasant carnal, Honest spiritual.
Ex singulis tribus fit charitas and amicitia quae respicit deum and proximum.
Of and from all three result, Charity, Friendship, and true Love, which
respects God and our neighbor. Of each of these I will briefly dilate and show
in what sort they cause melancholy.

Amongst all these fair entising objects which procure Love, and bewitch the
Soul of man, there is none so moving, so forcible as profit, and that which
carries with it a show of commodity. Health indeed is a precious thing, and
to recover and preserve which we will undergo any misery, drink bitter
Potions, freely give our goods: restore a man to his health, his purse lies
open to thee, bountiful he is, and thankful and beholding to thee, but give
him wealth and honor, give him gold, or what shall be for his advantage and
preferment, and thou shall command his affections, oblige him eternally to
thee, heart and hand, life and all is at thy service, thou art his dear and
loving friend, good and gracious Lord and master, Mecaenas, he is thy slave and
thy vassal, most affectioned and bounden in all duty, tell him good tidings
in this kind, there spoke an angel, a blessed honor that brings in gain, he
is thy creature, and thou his creator; he hugges thee and admires thee: he is
thine for ever. No Lodestone so attractiue as that of profit, none so fair an
object as that of gold, Benefactores praecip^e amamus. Viues 3. de Anima.
nothing winnes a man sooner then a good turn; bounty and liberality command
Body and Soul. Munera creed mihi placant hominesque deosque,
Placatur donis Iupitur ipse datis.
Good turns do pacify both God and men,
And Jupiter himself is won by them.
Gold of all other is a most delitious object, a sweet light, a goodly luster
it has, gratius aurum quam solemn intuemur says Austin, and we had rather see
it then the Sun. Sweet and pleasant in getting, keeping, it seasons all our
labors, intolerable pains we take for it, base employments, bitter flouts and
taunts, long iourneyes, heavy burdens, all are made light and easy by this
hope of gain, At mihi plaudo simul ac nu^mos conte^plor in arca. The sight of
gold refreshes our spirits, and rauisheth our hearts, as that Babylonian
garment and Ios. 7.
golden wedge did Achan in the camp, the very sight and hearing of it will set
a fire his soul with desire of it, and make a man run to the Antipodes, or
tarry at home and turn parasite, lie, flatter, prostitute himself, swear and
bear false witness, he will venture his body, kill a king, murder his father,
and damn his Soul to come at it. Formos^^r auri massa, as Petronius Arbiter.
he well observed, the mass of gold is fairer then all your Grecian pictures,
what ever Apelles, Phydias, or any doting painter could ever make, we are
inamored with it, Invenalis.
Prima fere vota and cunctius notissima templis, diuitiae vt crescant. All our
labors, studies, endeavors, vows, prayers and wishes are to get it, how to
compass it. If we get it, as we think we are made for ever thrice happy,
princes, lords, etc. if we loose it, we are dull, heavy, dejected, discontent,
miserable, desperate and mad. Our estate, and been esse ebbes and flows with
our commodity, and as we are endowed and enriched so are we beloved: it lasts
no longer then our wealth, when that is gone and the object removed, farewell
friendship: as long as bounty and good cheer and rewards were to be hoped,
friends enough; and they were tied to thee by the teeth, and would follow thee
as Crows do a carcass: but when thy goods are gone and spent, the lamp of
their love is out, and thou shall be contemned, scorned, hated, injured. Lucian
in Timon.
Lucians Timon when he was in prosperity, was the sole spectacle of Greece,
only admired, who but Timon, every body, loved, honored, applauded him, every
man offered him his service, and sought to be kin to him, but when his gold
was spent, and his fair possessions, farewell Timon, none so ugly, none so
deformed, so odious an abject as Timon, no man so ridiculous of a sudden, they
gave him a penny to buy a rope, no man would know him.

And it is the general humor of the world, commodity stirs our affections
throughout, we love those that are fortunate and rich, or by whom we may
receive mutual kindness, or hope to receive like courtesies, or get any good,
or gain, or profit, and hate those, and abhor on the otherside, which are
poor and miserable, or by whom we may sustain loss or inconvenience. And
even those that were even now familiar and dear unto us, our loving and long
friends, neighbors, kinsmen, alies, and with whom we have conuersed and lived
as so many Geryons for many years past, striving still to give one another all
good content and entertainment, with mutual inuitations, feastings, disports,
offices, for whom we would ride, run, spend our selves, and of whom we have so
freely and honorably spoken, and given all those turgent tiltes and magnificent
elogiums, most excellent and most noble, worthy, wise, grave, and magnified
beyond measure, learned, valiant, etc. If any controversy arise betwixt us,
some trespass, injury, some part of our goods be detained, a piece of land
come to be litigious, or any way cross us in our suit, or touch the string of
our commodity, we detest him and depresse him upon a sudden, neither affinity,
consanguinitie, or old acquaintance can contain us, but rupto iecore exierit
Caprisicus, a golden apple sets Per.
altogether by the ears, as if a marow bone were flunge amongst Bears, father
and son, brother and sister, kinsmen are at odds, and look what malice,
deadly hatred can invent, that shall be done, Terribile, dirum, pestilens,
atrox ferum, mutual injuries, desire of revenge and how to hurt him and his,
are al our studdies. If our pleasuers be interrupte we can tollorate it, our
bodies hurt we can put it up, and be reconciled, but touch our commodities,
we are most impatient, fair becomes foul, the graces are turned to Harpyes,
friendly salutations to bitter imprecations, mutual feastings, to plotting
villainies, minings and counterminings, good words to Satyrs and inuectiues, we
revile, econtra, naught but his imperfections are in our eyes, he is a base
knave, a devil, a monster, a caterpiller, a viper, an hogrubber etc. desinit
in pisce^ mulier formosa superne, the scene is altered on a sudden, love is
turned to hate, mirth to melancholy: so furiously are we most part bent, and
our affections fixed upon this object of our commodity, upon money. The desire
of which in excess is covetousness, ambition tyranniseth over our Souls, as
Part. 1. Sec. 2, memb. Sub. 12.
I have showed, and in defect crucifies as much, as if a man by negligence, ill
husbrandry, improuidence, waste and consume his goods and fortunes, beggary
follows, melancholy, he becomes an abject, odious, 1. Tim. 5.8.
and worse then an infidel in not providing for his family.

SVBSEC. ^. Pleasant obiectes of Love.
PLeasant obiectes are infinite^, whether they be such as have life or be
without life. Inanimate Countries, Provinces, Towers, Towns, Cities, as he
said. Lipsius epist. Camdeno.
Pulcherimam insulam videmus, etiam cum non videmus, we see a fair Island by
description when we see it not, The Leland of Sr. Edmondsbury.
Sun never saw a fairer City, Thessala Tempe. Orchardes, Gardens, pleasant
Walks, Groves, Fountains, etc. The heaven it self is said to be Caelum
serenum, caelum visu foedum, Polidorus lib. 1. de Anglia.
fair or foul, fair buildings, fair pictures, all artificial, elaborate
and curious works, and clothes give an admirable luster, we admire good
clothes and gaze upon them vt pueri Iunonis auem, as children do on a peacock.
A fair dog, Credo equidem viuos ducent e marmore vultus.
a fair horse and hawke, etc. are most gracious in our sight, and acceptable
unto us, and whatsoever else may cause this passion, if it be superfluous or
immoderately loved, as Guianerius observes. These things in themselves are
pleasing and good, singular ornaments, necessary, comely, and fit to be had,
but when we fix an immoderate eye and dote on them over much, this pleasure
may turn to pain, may cause much more sorrow, discontent unto us, work our
final overthrow, and cause melancholy in the end. Many are carried away with
those bewitching sports of gaiming, hawking, hunting, and such vain pleasures
as Part. 1. sec. 2. memb. 3.
I have said, some with immoderate desire of fame, to be crowned in the
Olympikes, knighted in the field, etc. and by these means ruinate themselves.
The lascivious dotes on his fair mistrisse, the Glutton on his dishes, which
are infinitely varied to please the palate, The Epicure on his several
pleasures, The superstitious on his Idol, and fattes himself with future
joys, as Turks feed themselves with an imaginary persuasion of a sensual
paradise, and several pleasant objects diversely affect diverse men. But the
fairest objects, and enticings, proceed from men themselves, which most
frequently captiuate and allure men, and make them dote beyond all measure upon
one another, and that for many respects. First, as some suppose by some secret
force of stars, quod me tibi temperat astrum? Similitudo morum parit
amicitiam.
They do singularly dote on such a man, and hate again, and can give no
reason for it. Mart.
Non amo te Sabidi, etc. Alexander admired Ephestion, Adrian Antinous, etc. The
Physicians refer this to their Temperament, Astrologers to trine and sextile
aspects, or opposite of their several Ascendents, lords of their genitures,
love and hatred of planets, but most to outward graces. A merry companion is
welcome and acceptable to most men, and therefore says De sale geniali lit. 3.
cap. 15.
Gomesius, Princes and great men entertain iester's, and Players commonly in
their Courts. But pares cum paribus facillime congregantur, it is that
similitude of manners which ties most men in an inseparable link, as if they
be addicted to the same studies or disports, they delight in one another
companies, birds of a feather will gather together: if they be of diverse
inclinations or opposite in manners, they can seldom agree. Secondly, Viues 3.
Aima.
affability, custom, and familiarity may convert nature many times, though
they be different in manners, as if they be country me^, fellow stude^ts,
colleagues, or have bin fellow soldiers, Qui simul fecere naufragium, aut vna
pertulere vincula, vel consilij coniurationis^e societate (...) guni^^ (...)
and (...) sensos Caesaria^ dominatus conciliauit. Aemilius Lepidus and Julius
Flaccus quum essent inimicissimi, censores renu^citi simu^t^tes illico
deposu^re. Scultetus cap. 4. de causis Amor.
brethren in affliction, affinity, or some such accidental occasion, though
they cannot agree amongst themselves, they will stick together like burres,
and hold against a third, or after some discontinuance enmity cease, or in a
foreign place. A third cause of Love and hate may be mutual offices, commend
him, use him kindly, take his part in a quarrel, relieve him in his misery,
thou winnest him for ever, do the opposite, and be sure of a perpetual enemy.
Isocrates Daemonico praecipit vt quum alicuius amicitiam uellet illum laudet,
quod laus initium amoris sit, vituperatio simultatum.
Praise and dispraise of each other do as much, though unknown, as Suspec.
lect. lib. 1. cap. 2.
Scoppius by Scaliger, and Casaubonus, mulus mulum scabit. Who but Scaliger
with him, what Encomions, Epithites, Elogiums. Antistes sapientiae, perpetuus
dictator literarum, ornamentum, Europae miraculum, noble Scaliger incredibilis
ingenij praestantia etc. dijs potius qua^ hominibus per omnia comparandus.
scripta eius aurea ancylia de caelo delapsa, poplitibus veneramur flexis etc.
but when they began to vary, none so absurd as Scaliger so vile and base, as
his Books de Burdonum familia, and other Satyricall invectiues may witness,
Ovid in Ibin, Archilochus himself was not so bitter. Another great tie or
cause of love is consanguinity, parents are dear to their children, children
to their parents, brothers and sisters, cosens of all sort^, as an hen and
chickens all of a knott: every crow thinks her ow^e bird fairest. Many
memorable examples are in this kind, and it is portenti simile, if they do not:
a mother cannot forget her child, Solomon so found out the true mother: love
of parents cannot be concealed, it is natural, and they that are inhumane in
this kind, are unworthy of that air they breathe, and of the 4 elements. yet
many unnatural examples we have in this rank, Rara est concordia fratrum.
of hardhearted parents, disobedient children, of disagreeing brothers, nothing
so common. The love of kinsmen is grown cold, many kinsmen (as the saying is)
few friends, if thine estate be good, and thou able par pari refer to
requite their kindness, their will be mutual correspondence, otherwise thou
art a burden most odious to them above all others. The last object that ties
man and man is comeliness of person, and beauty alone, as men love women with
a wanton eye: which (...) is called Heroical or Love Melancholy. Other loves
says grad. 1. cap. ^^.
Picolomineus are so called with some contraction, as the love of wine, gold,
etc. but this of women is predominant, in an higher strain, whose part
affected is the liver, and this Love deserves a longer explication, and shall
be dilated a part in the next Section.

SVBSECT. 3. Honest objects of Love.
Beauty is the common object of all Love, Viues 3. de Anima. vt paleam
succinum sic formam amor.
as let draws a straw, so does beauty love; virtue and honesty are as great
motives, and give as fair a luster as the rest, especially if they be sincere
and true, and not fucate, but proceeding from true form, and an incorrupt
Judgment! For many times me^ are deceived by their flattering Gnathoes,
dissembling Camelions, outsides, hypocrites, that make a show of great love
learning, pretend honesty, virtue, zeal, modesty, with affected looks and
counterfeit gestures: feigned protestations steal away many times the hearts
and favors of men, and deceive them, specie virtutis and vmbra, when as reuera
and indeed, there is no worth or honesty at all in them, no truth, but mere
hypocrisy, subtlety, knavery, and the like. As true friends as he that Caelius
Secundus met by the highwaies side; and hard it is, in this temporizing age to
distinguish such kind of men, or to find them out. Such men as these for the
most part belong to great men, and by this glozing slattery, affabilities and
such philters of theirs, so diue and insinuate into their favors, that they
are taken for men of excellent worth, wisdom, learning, demygods, and so
screw themselves into dignities, honors, offices: but these men cause rash
confusion often, and as many stirs, as Ieroboams councillors in a
commonwealth, and overthrow themselves and others. Tandlerus and some others
make a doubt whether love and hatred may be compelled by philters, or
charracters, Cardan and Marbodius by precious stones and amulets, Astrologers
by election of times, etc: as Sect. sequent.
I shall elsewhere discuss. The true object of this honest love is virtue,
wisdom, honesty, and Nihil divinius homine probo.
real worth, and this love cannot deceive or be compelled, vt ameris amabilis
esto, love it self is the most potent philtrum, virtue and wisdom, gratia
gratum faciens, the sole and only grace, not counterfeit but open, honest,
simple, naked, James. 3.17.
descending from heaven, as our Apostle has it, an infused habit from God,
which has given several gifts, as wit, learning, tongues, for which they shall
be amiable and gracious, Ephesians. 4.11. as to Saul stature and a goodly presence,
1. Sam. 9.1. Joseph found favor in Pharao's court, Genesis 39. for his Gratior
est pulchro veni^s e corpore virtus.
for his person. And Daniel with the prince of the Eunuchs, Dan. 19.19. Christ
was gracious with God and men, Luke 2.52. there is still some peculiar grace as
of good discourse, eloquence, wit, honesty, which is the primouent, and a most
forcible loadstone to draw the favors and goodwils of men's eyes, ears, and
affections unto them. When Jesus spoke they were all astonished at his answers
(Luke 2.47.) and wondered at his gracious words which proceeded from his mouth.
An orator steals away the hearts of men, and as another Orpheus; quo vult, vnde
vult, he pulls the^ to him by speech alone, a sweet voice causes admiration,
and he that can utter himself in good words, in our ordinary phrase we call
him a proper man, a divine spirit. For which cause belike those old Poets made
Mercury the gentleman usher to the Graces, and captain of eloquence, and
those Charites to be Jupiters and Eurymones daughters, descended from above.
Though they be otherwise deformed, crooked, ugly to behold, these good parts of
the mind denominate them fair. Plato commends the beauty of Socrates, yet who
was more grim of countenance, stern and ghastly to look upon, and so are and
have bin most of your Philosophers, as Orat. 28 deformes plerumque philosophi
ad id quod in aspectii cadit, ea part elegantes quae oculos sugit.
Gregory Nazianzen observes, deformed most part in that which is to be seen
with the eyes, but most elegant in that which is not to be seen. Saepe sub
attrita latitat sapientia vest. Aeesope, Politianus, Melancthon, Gesner, etc:
withered old men, very harsh and impolite to the eye, but who was so terse,
polite, eloquent, generally learned, temperate and modest? Honesty, virtue,
fair conditions are great entisers to such as are well given, and much avail
to get the favor and good will of men. Abdolominus in Curtius, a poor man, (but
which mine Author notes, Causa ei paupertatis sicut plerisque probitas fuit.
the cause of his poverty was his honesty) was for his modesty and continency
from a private person, for they found him digging in his garden, saluted king,
and preferred before all the magnificoes of his time, iniecta ei vestis purpura
auroque distincta, a purple embrodered garment was put upon him, Ablue corpus,
and cape regis animum and in came fortunam qua^ dignus es, continentiam istam
pr^fer.
and they bad him wash himself, and as he was worthy take upon him the style
and spirit of a king, continue his continency, and the rest of his good parts.
Operae pretium audire, etc. It is worthy of your attendance Livie cries, Qui
prae divitijs humana spernunt nec virtuti locum putani nisi opes effluant, Q.
Cincinnatus consensu patrum in dictatorem Romanum electus.
you that scorn all but riches, and give no esteem to virtue, except they be
wealthy withal, Q. Cincinnatu had but sour acres, and by the consent of the
Senate was chosen Dictator of Rome. Of such account were Cato, Fabritius,
Aristides, Antoninus, Probus. For their eminent worth, so Caesar Traian
Alexander admired for valor, Titus delitiae humani generis and which Aurelius
Victor has of Vespatian the dilling of his time, as Edgar Etheling Englands
darling.
Edgar Etheling was in England, for his Morum suaevitas obuia comitas promptae
officia mortalium animos demerentur.
excellent virtues, their memory is yet fresh and sweet, and we love them many
ages after, though they be dead. Suavem memoriam sui reliquit, says Lipsius of
his friend, living and dead they are all one. Epist. lib. 8. semper amaui vt tu
scis M. Brutum propter eius summum ingenium suavissimos mores, singularem
probitatem and constantiam, nihil est mihi creed virtute formosius nihil
amabilius.
I have ever loved as thou know (so Tully wrote to Dolobella) Marcus Brutus
for his great wit, singular honesty, constancy, sweet conditions, and believe
it there is nothing so amiable and Ardentes amores excitaret si simulacbrum
cius ad oculos penetraret. Plato Phaedone.
fair as virtue. And as S. Austin comments on the 84. Psalm, Est quaedam
pulchritudo iustitiae quam videmus oculis cordis amamus and exardescimus vt i^
martyribus quum eorum membra bestiae lacerarint, etsi alias deformes, etc.
There is a peculiar beauty of Justice, which we see with the eyes of our
hearts, and love, and are inamored with, as in Martyrs, though their bodies be
torn a pieces with wild beasts, yet this beauty shines, and we love their
virtues. The Lipsius ma^^dus ad Phys. Stoic. lib. 3. diff. 17. solus sapiens
pulcher.
Stoikes are of opinion, that a wise man is only Fair, and Cato in Tullies 3.
de Finibus, contends the same, that the lineaments of the mind are far
fairer then those of the body, and a wise and good man is only fair. Franc.
Belforest in hist. An. 1430.
It is reported of Magdalen Queen of France, and wife to Jews the 11th, a
Scottish woman by birth, that walking forth one evening with her Ladies, she
spied Mc Alanus one of the kings Chaplines, a silly, old, Erat antem faede
deformis et ea forma, quacitius pueriterreri possent, qua^ inuitari ad osculum
puellae
hardfavoured man, fast a sleep in a bower, and kissed him sweetly; and when
the young Ladies laughed at her for it, she replied that it was not his
person, but she did embrace and reverence the divine beauty of Deformis isle
etsi videatur seneae diuinum animum habet.
his Soul. Thus in all ages virtue has bin adored, admired, and a singular
luster has proceeded from it, and the more virtuous he is, the more gracious,
the more admired. No man so much followed upon earth as Christ himself; and as
the Psalmist says, 44.3. he was fairer then the sons of men. Chrysostom,
hom. 8. in Mat. Bernard ser. 1. de omnibus sanctis, Austin, Cassiodore, Hier.
in 9. Mat. interpret it of the Fulgehat vultu suo, fulgor, and divina maiestas
homines adse trahens.
beauty of his person, there was a divine Majesty in his looks, and it shined
like lightning, and drew all men to it, but Basil, Cyril, lib. 5. super 53.
Esaias, Theoderet, Arnobius, etc. of the beauty of his divinity, Justice, Grace,
eloquence, etc. Thomas in Psalm. 44. ^of both, and so does Baradius and Peter
Morales, lib. de pulchritud. Jesus. and Mariae, adding as much of Joseph and the
vergin Mary. Be they present or absent, near us or a far of, this beauty
shines, and will attract men many miles to come and see it. Plato and
Pythagoras left their country, to see those wise Egyptian Priests. Apollonius
traveled into Aethiopiae, Persia, to consult with the Magi, Brachmanni,
Gymnosophists. The Q. of Sheba came to visit Solomon, and many says Praefat.
bib. vulgar.
Hierome came out of Spain and remote places 1000 miles, to see that eloquent
Livy. No beauty leaves such an impression, or strikes so deep, A true-loues
knot.
or linkes the souls of men closer then virtue. For that reason belike Homer
faines the three Graces to be linked and tied hand in hand, because the hearts
of men are so firmly united with such graces. O dulcissimi laquei qui tam
faeliciter deuinciunt vt etiam a vinctis deligantur, qui a gratijs vincti sunt
cupiunt arctius deligari, and in vnum redigi.
O sweet bands (Seneca exclaimes) which so happyly combine, that those which
are so bound by them, love their binders, and desire with all much more harder
to be bound, and as so many Geryions to be united into one. For the nature of
true friendship is to combine, to be like affected, of one mind, Statius.
Velle and nolle ambobus idem, satiataque toto men's aeuo, as the Poet says
still to continue one and the same. And where this love takes place there is
peace and quietness, a true correspondence, perfect amity, a Diapason of vows
and wishes, the same opinions, as betwixt David and Jonathan, He loved him as
he loved his own soul. 1. Sam. 15.1.
Damon and Pithias, Pilades and Orestes, Virg. 9 Ae^. Qui super exanimem sese
coniecit amicum confossus.
Nysus and Euryalus, Theseus and Pyrithous, Amicus animae them dium. Austin.
confess. 4. cap. 6.

Quod de virgilio Horatius and serves animae demidium meae.


they will live and die together. Where this true love is wanting there can be
no firm peace, friendship from teeth outward, counterfeit, or for some by
respects, so long dissembled til they have satisfied their own ends, which
upon every small occasion breaks out into enmity, open war, defiance,
heartburnings, whisprings, calumnies, contentions, and all manner of bitter
melancholy discontents. And those men which have no other object of their love,
then greatness, wealth, authority etc, are rather feared then beloved; and
howsoever borne with for a time, yet for their tyranny and oppression, griping,
coueteousnesse, currish hardness, folly, intemperance, impudence and such like
vices they are ingenerally odious, Nec amant quemquam nec amantur ab vllo.
abhored of al, both God and men. Non vxor saluum te vult non filius, omnes
vicini oderunt, wife and children friends neighbors all the world forsakes
them, would feign be rid of them, and are compelled many times to lay violent
hands on them or Gods judgments overtake them, instead of graces come furies.
So when fair 1. Sam. 25.3.
Abigall, a woman of singular wisdom, was acceptable to David, Naball was
churlish and evil conditioned, and therefore rejected. Ester.
Mardochy was received when Haman was executed. And though they flourish many
times, such hypocrites and temporising foxes, and bleare the worlds eyes by
flattery, briberie, dissembling their natures, or other men's weakness that
cannot so soon apprehend their tricks, yet in the end they will be discerned,
and precipitated on a sudden, surely says David, thou have set them in
slippery places, ps. 73.5. as so many Seiani they will come down to the
Gemonian scales, and Eusebius in Amm. Marcellinus lib. 14.
Ammianus, he that was in such authority ad iubendu^ imperatore^, castdowne
headlong on a sudden. Or put case they escape and rest unmasked to their lives
end, and after their death, their memory stinkes as a snuff of a candle put
out, and those that durst not so much as mutter against them in their lives,
will prosecute their name with Satyrs, Libells, and bitter imprecations, and
they shall male audire in all succeeding ages, and be odious to the worlds end.

MEMB. 3. Charity, composed of all three kinds, Pleasant, Profitable, Honest.
BEsides this love that proceeds from Profit, Pleasure, Honesty, as one good
turn asks another in equity, or that proceeds from the law of nature, or
from discipline and Philosophy; there is yet another love compound of all these
three, which is Charity, commanded by God, which no man can well perform, but
he that is a Christian, and a true regenerate man. That is, Vt mundus duobus
polis sustentatur, ita lex dei amore dei and proximi duobus bis fundame^tis
vincitur, machina mundicorruit si v^a de polis turbatur, lex perit diuina si
vna ex his.
To love God above all, and our neighbor as our self. Other Objects are fair
and very beautiful I confess, kindred, alliance, friendship, the love that we
owe to our Country, nature, wealth, pleasure, honor, and such moral
respects, etc. A man is beloved of a man in that he is a man, but all these are
far more eminent and great, when they shall proceed from a sanctified
spirit, that has a true touch of Religion, and a reference to God. Nature
binds a man to love his Parents, and this love cannot be dissolved, as Tully
holds, De amicit. charitas parentum dilui nisi detestabili scelere non p^test.
without detestable offense: but much more Gods Commandment, which enioynes a
filial love and obedience in this kind. Fraternitas lapidum fornicibus
similima casura nisi se inuicem sustentaret Senec.
The love of brethren is great, and like an arch of stones, where if one be
displaced, all comes down, no love so forcible and strong, honest, to the
combination of which nature, fortune, virtue happily concur, yet this love
comes short of it. Dulce and decorum pro patria mori, Dij immortales dici non
potest quantum charitatis nomem illud habet. Tully.
and it cannot be expressed, what a deal of Charity that one name of Country
contains. The Decij did se devouere Horatij, Curtij, Regulus, Codrus,
sacrifice themselves for their Countries peace and good. Ovid. Fast.
Vna dies Fabios ad bellum miserat omnes,
Ad bellum missos perdidit vna dies.
Fifty thousand native English men, lost their lives willingly at Battle
Albye in defense of their Country. Anno. 1347. Jacob Mayer. Annal Fland. lib.
12.
P. Aemilius l. 6. speaks of six Senators at Callis, that came with halters in
their hands, to the K. of England to die for the rest. This love makes so many
writers take such pains, so many Historigraphers, Physicians, etc. or at least
as they pretend for common good, and their Countries sake. Tully.
Sanctum nomen amicitia sociorum communio sacra, Friendship is an holy name and
a sacred communion of friends. Lucianus Toxari. amicitia vt sol in m^^^lo, etc.
As the Sun is in the firmament, so is friendship in the world, a most divine
and heavenly band, take this away and take all pleasure, all joy, comfort,
happiness and true content out of the world, the greatest tie, and as the Poet
decides, is much to be preferred before the rest. Spencer Fairy Queen lib. 5.
cant. 9. staff. 1.2.
Hard is the doubt, and difficult to deem,
When all three kinds of love together meet;
And do dispart the heart with power extreme,
Whether shall weigh the balance down, to wit,
The dear affection unto kindred sweet,
Or raging fire of love to women kind,
Or zeal of friends combind by virtues meet.
But of them all the band of virtuous mind,
Me thinks the gentle heart should most assured bind.
For natural affection soon does cease,
And quenched is with Cupids greater flame,
But faithful friendship does them both suppress,
And them with mastering discipline does tame,
Through thoughts aspiring to eternal fame.
For as the Soul does rule the earthly mass,
And all the service of the body frame
So love of Soul does love of Body pass,
No less then perfect gold surmounts the meanest brass.


Sirac^des.
A faithful friend is better then Plutarke pretiosu^ numisma.
gold, a medicine of misery, and Zenophon. verus amicus prestantissima
possessio.
an only possession, yet all this love of friends, all three loves put
together, are little worth, if they proceed not from a true Christian
illuminated soul, if it be not done for Gods sake. Though I had the gift of
Prophecy, spoke with tongue of men and angels, though I feed the poor with
all my goods, and give my body to be burned, and have not this love, it
profits me nothing. 1. Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. This is an all apprehending love,
love with an addition, love (...), love of God, and love of men, Greg. per
amore dei proximi gignitur and per hunc a more^ proximi, dei nutritur.
The love of God begets the love of man, and by this love of our neighbor, the
love of God is nourished and increased. By this happy Union of love, Pi^
colomineus grad. 7. cap. 27. hoc faelici amoris nodo ligantur familiae
civitates etc.
all well governed families and cities are combined, the heavens annexed, and
divine souls complicated, the world it self composed, and all that is in it
conjoined in God and reduced to one. Veras absolutas haec parit vertutes, radix
omnium virtutum men's and spiritus.
This love causes true and absolute virtues, the life and spirit and root of
every virtuous action, it finisheth prosperity, Diuino calore animos incendit
incensos purgat purgatos cleuat ad Deum, deum plac^t hominem deo conciliat.
Bernard.
eases adversity, corrects all natural encumbrances, inconveniences,
sustained by Faith and Hope, which with this our love make an indissoluble
twist, a Gordian knot, an Aequilater Triangle. And yet the greatest of them is
love, 1. Cor. 13.13. which inflames eur souls with a divine heat, and being
so inflamed purges, and so purged eleuates to God, makes an atonement and
reconciles us unto him. Ille inficit hic perficit ille deprimit hic eleuat, hic
tranquillitatem ille curas parit, hic vitam recte informat ille deformat, etc.
That other love infects the soul of man, this cleanses, that depresseth,
this creares, that causes cares and troubles, this quietness of mind, this
informs, that deformes our life, that leads to repentance, this to heaven.
For if once we be truly linct' and touched with this Charity, we shall love
God above all, our neighbor as our self, as we are enjoined, Mark. 12.31.
Mat. 19.19. and perform all those duties and exercise those operations of a
good Christian.

This love suffers long, it is bountiful, it enuieth not, boasts not it
self, is not puffed up, It desceiueth not, it seeks not his own things, is
not provoked to anger, it thinks not evil, it rejoices not in iniquity, bu
in truth. It suffers all things, believes all things, hopetht all things, 1.
Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. it covers all trespasses, Prou. 10.12. a multitude of
sins, 1. Pet. 4. it will defend the fatherless and widow, Isai. 1.17. will
seek no revenge or be mindful of wrong, Leuit. 19.18. Will bring home his
brothers ox if he go astray as he is commanded, Deu. 22.1. Will resist evil,
give to him that asks, and not turn from him that borrows, bless them,
that curse him, love his enemy, Mat. 5. bear his brothers burden, Galat. 6.2.
He will be Hospital, and distribute to the necessities of the Saints, he will
if it be possible have peace with all men, feed his enemy if he be hungry, if
he be a thirst give him drink, he will make himself equal to them of the
lower sort, rejoice with them that rejoice, weep with them that weep Romans 12.
he will speak truth to his neighbor, courteous and tender hearted, Forgiving
others for Christ's sake, as God forgave him. Ephe. 4.32 he will be like minded,
Phil. 2.2. Of one Judgment. Be humble, meek, long suffering, Coloss. 3.
forbear, forget and forgive, 12.13.23. and what he does shall be heartily done
to God, and not to men. Be pitiful and courteous, 1. Pet. 3. seek peace and
follow it. He will love his brother not in word and tongue, but in deed and
truth, Ioh. 3.18. and he that loves God, Christ will love him that is begotten
of him, John 5.1. etc. This should we willingly do, if we had a true touch of
this Charity, of this divine love, if we would perform this which we are
enjoined, forgette and forgive, and compose ourselves to those Christian laws
of love. Boethius lib. 2. met. 8.
O foelix hominum genus,
Si vestros animos amor
Quo caelum regitur regat.
Angelical souls, how blessed, how happy should we be, how might we triumph
over the devil, and have another heaven upon earth.

But this we cannot do, and which is the cause of all our woes, miseries,
discontent, melancholy, Deliquium paetitur Charitas odium eius loco succedit
Basil. 1. ser. de institut. mon.
want of this Charity. We do inuicem angariare, contend, consult, vex,
torture, molest and hold one another nose to the grinstone hard, provoke,
rail, scoff, calumniate, challenge, hate, (hard-hearted, implacable,
malicious, peevish, inexorable as we are) to satisfy our lust or private
spleen, for Nodum in scirpo quaerentes.
toys trifles, and impertinent occasions, spend our selves, goods, friends,
fortunes, to be revenged on our adversary, to ruin him and his. It Is all our
study our practice and business, how to plot mischief, mine and countermine,
defend and offend, ward our seluess, injury others, hurt all: as if we were
borne to do mischief, and that with such egernesse and bitterness, with such
rancor, malice, rage, and fury, we prosecute our intended designs, that
neither affinity or consanguinitie, love or fear of God or men can contain
us, no satisfaction, no composition will be accepted, no offices will serve, no
submission, though he shall upon his knees as Sarpedon did to Glaucus in Homer,
acknowledging his error, yield himself with tears in his eyes, beg his
pardon, we will not relent, forgive, or pardon, till we have confounded him and
his, made dice of his bones as they say, see him rot in prison, friends,
followers, and omne inuisum genus, rooted him out and all his posterity.
Monsters of men, as we are Dogs, Wolves, Hircanae que admorunt vbera tigres.
Tigers, Bulls, Bears, Feindes and Devils, we do not only contend,
oppress, and tyrannise our selves, but as so many firebrands we set on, and
animate others, our whole life is a perpetual combat, a conflict, a set
battle, a snarling fit, Eris dea, is settled in our tents, Heraclitus.
Omnia de lite, opposing wit to wit, wealth to wealth, strength to strength,
fortunes to fortunes, friends to friends, as at a Sea Fight, we turn our
broad sides, or two milstones with continual attrition we fire our selves, or
break another backs, and both are ruined and consumed in the end. Miserable
wretches as we are to fat and enrich our selves we care not how we get it, how
many thousands we undo, whom we oppress, by whose ruin and downfall we
arise, whom we injury, fatherless children, widows, common societies to
satisfy our own private lust. And though we have myriades, abundance of
wealth and treasure (pitiless, merciless, remorseless^ as we are, and
uncharitable in the highest degree) and our poor brother in need, sickness,
and in great extremity, and now ready to be starued for want of food, we had
rather as the fox told the Ape, his tail should sweep the ground still, then
cover his buttockes, rather spend it idly, consume it with dogs, hawks,
hounds, unnecessary buildings, apparel, ingurgitate, or let it be lost, then
they should have part of it, Si in ge^enna^ abit, pauperi qui non dat, quid de
eo fiet qui pauperem denud^t, Austin.
rather take from him that little which he has, then relieve him.

Or like the dog in the manger, neither use it our selves, nor let others
make use of it, or enjoy it, part with nothing while we live, and for want of
disposing our household, and setting things in order, set all the world together
by the ears after our death. Poor Lazarus lies howling at his gates, for a
few crumbs, he only seeks chippings, offalls, let him roar and howl, famish
and eat his own flesh, he respects him not. A poor decayed friend and
kinsman of his sets upon him by the way in all his iollity, and runs begging
bareheaded by him, coniuring by those former bands of friendship, alliance,
consanguinitie etc. uncle, cosen, brother, father. Per ego has lachrimas
dextramque, tuam te, si quidquam de te merui, fuit aut tibi quidquam dulce
meum, miserere mei. Show some pity for Christ's sake, pity a sick man, an old
man, he cares not, ride on, pretend sickness, incuitable loss of limbs,
goods, plead suertiship, and shipwreck, fires, common calamities, show thy
wants and imperfections.

Ets^ per sanctum iuratus dicat Osyrim, credit non ludo
Crudeles tollite claudum, swear, protest, take God and all his Angels to
witness, quaere peregrinum, he is not touched with it, pauper vbique iacet,
ride on, he takes no notice of it. Put up a supplication to him in the name of
a thousand Orphans, an hospital, a spittle, a prison as he goes by, they
cry out to him for aid, ride on, surdo narras, he cares not, let them eat
stones, devour themselves with vermin, rot in their own dunge he cares not.
Show him a decayed haven, a bridge, a school, a fortification etc. or some
public good, ride on, good your worship, your honor, for Gods sake, for your
countries sake etc. ride on. But show him a role, wherein his name shall be
registered in golden letters, and his bounty commended to all posterity, his
arms set up, and his devices to be seen, and then peraduentue he will stay and
contribute, or if thou can thunder upon him as Papists do with satisfactory
and meritorious works, or persuade him by this means he shall have his soul
out of hell, and free it from Purgatory, then in all likelihood he will listen
and stay, or that he have no children, no near kinsman, heir he cares for at
least, or cannot well tell how and where to bestow his possessions (for carry
them with him he cannot) it may be then he will build some school or
hospital in his life, or be induced to give liberally to pious uses after his
death, for I dare boldly say that vaineglory, that opinion of merit, and this
enforced necessity, when they know not otherwise how to leave them, or what
better to do with them, is the maine cause of most of our good works. I will
not say this to derogate from any good man's charitable devotion or bounty in
this kind, or censure any good work, no doubt there be many sanctified,
heroical, and worthy minded men, that out of true zeal and for virtues sake,
divine spirits, that out of commiseration and pity extend their liberalty, and
as much as in them lies do good to all men, cloth the naked, feed the
hungry, comfort the sick and needy, relieve all, forget and forgive injuries,
as true charity requires; yet most part there is simulatum quid a deal of
hypocrisy in this kind, much default and defect. Ionius vitae eius.
As Cosmus Medices that rich citizen of Florence confessed to a near friend
of his, that would know of him why he built so many public and magnificent
buildings, and bestowed so liberally on Scholars, not that he loved learning
more then others, but to Immortalitatem beneficio literarum immortali gloriosa
quadam cupiditate concupiuit. Quod cives quibus benefecisset perituri maenia
ruitura etsi regio sumptu aedisicaeta non libri.
eternize his own name, to be immortal by the benefit of Scholars: for when
his friends were dead, walls decayed, and all inscriptions gone, books would
remain to the worlds end. Vaineglory and emulation (as to most men) was the
cause efficient, and to be a trumpeter of his own same was his sole intent, so
to do good that all the world may take notice of it. Such for the most part is
the charity of our times, such our benefactors, Mecaenates and Patrons. Show me
amongst so many myriades a truly devout, a right, honest, upright, meek,
humble, a patient, innocuous innocent, a merciful, a loving, a charitable man.
Hor.
Probus quis nobiscum vivit? Show me a Caleb, or a Joshua. He that shall examine
this Durum genus summus.
iron age wherein we live, where charity is cold, and iam terras Astraea
reliquit, and the Devil loose, and see one man vilify and insult over his
brother, Tull. pro Rosc. mentiri vis causa mea ego vere cupide and libenter
mentiar tua causa and si qua^do mea vis peierare vt palulum tu compendy facias
paratum fore scito.
as if he were an innocent, oppress, tyrannise, pray upon, torture him, vex,
gaul, torment and crucify him, starve him, where is charity? to see men swear
and forswear, lie, and bear false witness, to advantage themselves,
prejudice others, hazard goods, lives, fortunes, to be revenged on their
enemies, men so unspeakable in their lusts, unnatural in malice, such bloody
designements, Italian Blaspheaming, Spanish renouncing, etc. where is charity?
He that shall see so many law suits, such endless conte^tions, such plotting,
undermining, so much money spent with such egernesse of fury, every man for
himself his own ends, the Devil for all, so many distressed souls, such
lamentable complaints, so many factions conspiracies, seditions, such grudging,
repining, discontent, so much emulation, envy so many brawles, quarrels,
monomachies, etc. where is charity? To see and read of such cruel wars,
tumults, vproares, bloody battles, so many Gallienus in Treb. Pollio lacera
occide mea mente irascere. Rabie^iecur incendente feruntur praecipites Vopiscus
of Aurelian tantum fudit sanguinis qua^tum quis vini potauit.
men slain, so many cities ruinated etc. (for what else is the subject of all
our stories almost, but Bills, Bows, and Gunnes) so many murders and
massacres, etc. where is charity? To see men wholly deuote to God, Churchmen,
professed Divines, holy men, Euangelij tubam belli tubam faciunt in pulpitis
pacem in colloquijs bellum suadent.
to make the trumpet of the Gospel the trumpet of war, a company of helborne
Jesuits, and fiery spirited Friars, facem praeferre to all seditions as so many
fierbrands set all the world by the ears (I say nothing of their contentions
and railing books, whole ages spent in writing one against another, and that
with such virulency and bitterness Bioneis sermonibus and sale nigro) and by
their bloody inquisitions that in 30. years Bale says consumed 39 Princes,
148 Earls, 235 Barons, 14755 Commo^s worse then those ten persequtions, where
is charity? He that shall observe and see these things may say to them as Cato
to Caesar, credo quae de inferis dicuntur falsa existimas, sure I think thou
art of opinion there is neither Heaven nor Hell. Let them pretend religion,
zeal, make what shows they will, give alms, peace makers, frequent sermons,
if we may guess the tree by the fruit, they are no better then Hyprocrites,
Epicures, Atheists, with the Psalm. 13.1.
fool in their hearts they say there is no God. It Is no marvel then if being
so uncharitable, hard-hearted as we are, we have so frequent and so many
discontents, such melancholy fits, so many bitter pangs, mutual discords, all
in a combustion, often complaints, so common grieuances, general mischiefs,
so many plagues, wars, vproares, losses, deluges, fires, inundations, Gods
vengeance, and all the plagues of Egypt come upon us, since we are so
uncharitable one toward another, so respectlesse of God, and our neighbors,
and by our crying sins pull these miseries upon our own heads. If we had any
sense or feeling of these things sure we should not go on as we do, in such
irregular courses, practice all manner of impieties, our whole carriage would
not be so auerse from God. If a man would but consider, when he is in the midst
and full career of such prodigious and uncharitable actions, how displeasing
they are in Gods sight, how noxious to himself, as Solomon told Ioab. 1. Kings
2. the Lord shall bring this blood upon their heads. Prove. 1.27. sudden
desolation and destruction shall come like a whirlewind upon them: affliction,
anguish, the reward of his hand shall be given him. Isa, 3.11. etc. they shall
fall into the pit they have dug for others, and when they are scraping,
tyrannising, getting, wallowing in their wealth, This night, O fool, I will
take away thy soul, what a severe account they must make, and how Benefacit
animae suae vir misericors.
gracious on the other side a charitable man is in Gods eyes, haurit sibi
gratiam. Mat. 5.7. blessed are the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. He
that lends to the poor gives to God, and how it shall be restored to them
again how by their patience and long suffering they shall heap coals on their
enemies heads. Romans 12. and he that follows after righteousness and mercy
shall find righteousness and glory. Surely they would check themselves, curb
in their unnatural inordinate affections, agree amongst themselves, abstain
from doing evil, amend there lives and learn to do good. Behold how comely
and good a thing it is for brethren to live together in Concordia magnaeres
crescunt discordia maximae delabuntur.
union: it is like the precious ointment, etc. How odious to contend one with
the other. Lipsius.
Miseri quid luctatiunculis hisce volumus, ecce mors supra caput est, and
supremum illud tribunal, vbi and dicta and facta nostra examinanda sunt.
Sapiamus. Why do we contend and vex one another, behold death is over our
heads, and we must shortly give account of all our uncharitable words and
actions, think upon it, and be wise.

SECT. 2.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Heroical love causing melancholy. His Pedigree, Power, and Extent.
IN the precedent Section mention was made amongst other pleasant objects, of
this comeliness and beauty which proceeds from women, which causes Heroical,
or love melancholy, and is more eminent above the rest, and properly called
Love. The part affected in men is the liver, and therefore called Heroical,
because commonly Gallants and Noble men, the most generous spirits are
possessed with it. His power and extent is very large, Memb. 1. Subject. 2.
and in that twofold division of Love, Amor and amicitia.
(...) and (...), those two Veneres which Plato and some others make mention
of, it is most eminent, and (...) called Venus, as I have said, or Love it
self. Which although it be denominated from men, and most evident in them, yet
it extends and shows it self in vegitall and sensible creatures, and those
incorporeall substances (as shall be specified) and has a large dominion and
sovereignty over them. His pedigree is very ancient, and derived from the
beginning of the world, as Phaedrus orat. in laudem amoris ^l^tonis convivio.
Phaedrus contends, and his Ante Deos omnes primum generauit amorem.
parentage of such antiquity, that no Poet could ever find it out. Hesiod makes
See the moral in Plutarch of that fiction.
Terra and Chaos to be Loves parents, before the Gods were borne: Plutarch
amator: libello, will have love to be the son of Iris and Favonius, but
Socrates in that pleasant dialogue of Plato when it came to his turn to speak
of Love, tells this tale. When Venus was bo^ne all the Gods were invited to ^
banquet, and amongst the rest, Affluentie Deus.
Porus the God of bounty and wealth. Penia or poverty came a begging to the
door. Porus well whitled with Nectar (for there was no wine in those days)
walking in Iuppiters garden, in a Bower met with Penia, and in his drink got
her with child, of whom was borne Love, and because he was begotten on Venus
birth day, Venus still attends upon him. The moral of this is in Cap. 7.
comment. in Plat. conuinium.
Ficinus. Another tale is there borrowed out of Aristophanes: See more in
Valesius lib. 3. cont. med. and co^tr. 13.
In the beginning of the world, men had four arms and four feet, but for
their pride because they compared themselves with the Gods, they were parted
into halfs and now peradventure by Love they hope to be united again and made
one. Otherwise thus, Viues 3. de anima Oramus te vt tuis artibus and caminis
nos resingas and ex duobus vnum facias quod and fecit and exinde amatores vnum
sunt and vnum esse petunt.
Vulcan met two Lovers, and bid them ask what they would and they should have
it, but they made answer, O Vulcane faber Deorum etc. O Vulcan the Gods great
Smith, we beseech thee to work us a new in thy furnace, and of two nake us
one, which he presently did, and ever since true lovers are all one, and
desire to be united. Many such tales you shall find in Leon Hebraeus dial. 3.
and their See more in Natales Comes Imagiues Deoru^ Philostratus de Imaginibus.
Lihus Giraldus Syntag. de diis etc.
moral to them. The reason why love was still painted young, because young men
are most apt to love: soft fair and fat, because such folks are soonest
taken: naked, because all true affection is simple and opens he smiles, because
merry and given to delights: has a quiver, to show his power, none can escape:
is blind, because he sees not where he strikes, whom he hits, etc. His power
and Sovereignty is expressed by the ^ pety Pope ^^a^cs habet superorum and
inferorum as Orpheus, etc.
Poets, in that he is held to be a God, and a great commanding God, above
Iuppiter himself, Magnus Demon, as Plato calls him, Iuvenis pingitur quod
amore plerumque, i^uen^s capiantur sic and ^ollis, formosus. nudus quod simplex
and a^^rtus hic affect^^, ridet quod obteclamentum per se ferat, cum pharetra,
etc
and the strongest and merriest of all the Gods according to Lib. ^3. cap. 5.
Dypnosophist.
Atheneus. Amor vivorum, rex amor rex and deum, as Euripides, the God of Gods,
and governor of men, that conquers all, Regnat and in superosius habet ille
deos Ovid.
domineers over all, and can make mad and sober whom he list; insomuch that
Cecilius in Tullies Tusculanes, holds him to be no better then a fool or an
Idiot, that does not acknowledge love to be a great God. Seldom proleg. 3. cap
de dus Syris.
Cui in manu sit quem esse dementem velit,
Quem sapere, quem sanari, quem in morbum inijci, etc.
That can make sick and cure whom he list. Homer and Stesichorus were both
made blind, if you will believe Dial 3.
Leon Hebraeus for speaking against his godhead: he is of that power, majesty,
omnipotency, and dominion, that no creature can withstand him: Iuppiter
himself was turned into a Bull, a Swanne, and what not for Love, how did he
insult over all the other Gods? Dial Deorum
Lucian brings in Iuppiter complaining of Cupid that he could not be quiet for
him, that monster conquering Hercules was tamed by him: Quem non mill ferae,
quem non Stenileius hostis,
Nec potuit Juno vincere, vicit amor.
Whom neither beasts nor enemies could tame,
Nor Juno's might subdue, love quei'd the same. Fulmine concitatior.

Apollo that could cure all diseases, Nullis amor est medicabilis herbis.
could not cure himself of this, and therefore Plutarch in Amatorio, Dictator
quo creato cessant reliqui magistratus.
Socrates calls Love a tyrant, and brings him triumphing in a Chariot, whom
Petrarch imitates in his triumph of Love, and Fracastorius in an elegant Poem
expresses at large, Cupid riding, Mars and Apollo following his Chariot,
Psyche weeping, etc.

In vegetall creatures what a Sovereignty Love has, by many pregnant proofs
and familiar examples may be proved, especially of Palm trees, which are both
he and she, and express not a sympathy but a love passion, as by many
observations has been confirmed. Constantine de Agric. l.10. cap. 4. gives an
instance out of Florentius his Georgickes, of a Palm tree that loved most
fervently, Neque prius in iis desiderium cessat dum diiectus consoletur. videre
enim est ipsam arborem incurvatam vltro ramis ab vtrisque vicissim ad osculum
exporrectis. Man^festa dant mutui desiderii signa.
and would not be comforted until such time her love applied himself unto
her, you might see the two trees bend and of their own accords stretch out
their boughs to embrace and kiss one another: They will give manifest signs
of mutual love. Ammianus Marcelimus lib. 24. reports that they marry one
another, and fall in love if they grow in sight, and when the wind brings the
smell to them, they are maruellously affected. Philostratus in Imaginibus
observes as much, and Galen. lib. 6. de locis affectis, cap. 5. y they will be
sick for love, and ready to die and pine away, which the husbandmen
perceauing, says Multas palmas contingens quae simul crescunt rursusque ad
amantem regrediens eamque manu attingens quasi osculum mutuo ministrare videtur
and expetiti concubitus gratiam facit.
Constantine, stroke many Palms that grow together, and so stroking again
the Palm that is enamoured, they carry kisses from the one to the other: or
tying the leaves and branches of the one to the stem of the other, will make
them both flourish and prosper a great deal better: Quam vero ipsa desideret,
affectu ramoru significat and ad illum respicit amanter, etc.
which are enamored they can perceive by the bending of their boughs, and
inclination of their bodies. If any man think this which I say to be a tale
let him read that story of two Palm trees in Italy, the male growing at
Brundusium, the female at Otranto (related by Iouianus Pontanus in an excellent
Poem, sometimes Tutor to Alphonsus Junior King of Naples, his Secretary of
State, and a great Philosopher) which were barren, and so continued a long
time, til they came to see one another by growing up higher, though many
Stadiums asunder. Pierius in his Hierogliphiks, and Melchior Guilandinus memb.
3. tract. de papyro, cites this story of Pontanus for a truth. See more in
Salmuth comment in Pancirol. de Nouarepert. Tit. 1. de nouo crbe, Mizaldus
Arcanorum lib. 2. Sands voyage lib. 2. fol. 103. etc.

If such fury be in Vegetals what shall we think of sensible creatures, how
much more violent and apparent shall it be in them? Virg. 3. Georg
Omne adeo genus in terris hominumque ferarumque
Et genus aquoreum, pecudes, pictaeque volucres
In furias ignemque ruunt, amor omnibus idem.
All kind of creatures in the earth,
And Fishes of the Sea.
And painted birds do rage alike,
This love bears equal sway.
Propertius.
Hic Deus and terras and maria alta domat.
Common experience and our sense will inform us, how violent bruit beasts are
carried away with this passion, horses above the rest. -- furor est insignis
equarum. Dial. deorum. confide matter leonibus ipsis familiaris iam factus sum
and saepe conscendi eorum terga and apprehendiiubas equorum more insidens, eos
agito and illi mihi caudis adblandiuntur.
Cupid in Lucian bids Venus his mother be a good cheer, for he was now
familiar with Lions, and often times did get on their backs, and hold them by
the mane, and ride them about like horses, and they fawn upon him with their
tails. Bulls, Bears, and Bores are so furious in this kind that they kill
one another: but especially Cocks, Leones prae amore furunt. Plin. l.8. cap.
16. Arist. l.6. hist. animal. cap. 17. of his book of Hunting.
Lions and Hearts, Which are so fierce that you may hear them fight half a
mile off, says Turberuile, and many times kill one another, or compel them to
abandon the Rutte, that they may remain masters in their places; and when one
has driven his corrivall away, he raises his nose up into the air, and
looks aloft as though he gave thanks to nature, which gave him such great
delight. How Birds are affected in this kind, appears out of that of
Aristotle, that will have them to sing ob futuram Venerem for joy or in hope of
their venery which is to come. Fishes pine away for love and wax lean, if De
sale lib. 1. cap 21. Pisces ob amorem marcescunt, pallescunt etc.
Gomesius authority may be taken so love tyranniseth in dumb creatures. Yet
this is natural for one beast to dote upon another of the same kind, but what
strange fury is that, when a Beast shall dote upon a man? Saxo Grammaticus lib.
10. Dan. hist. has a story of a Bear that loved a woman, and kept her in his
den a long time, and begot a son of her, out of whose loins proceeded many
Northern Kings: this is the original belike of that common tale of Valentine
and Vrson. Aelian, Pliny, Peter Gillius are full of such relations. A Peacock
in Leucadia loved a maid, and when she died, the Peacock pined. Plin. 1 b. 10.
cap 5 quumque ab orta tempestate periisset Hernias in sicco piscis expirauit.
A Dolphin loved a boy called Hernias, and when he died, the Fish came a land
and so perished. The like ads Gellius lib. 10. cap. 22. out of Appion Egypt.
lib. 15. a Dolphin at Puteoli loved a child, and would come often to him, and
let him get on his back and carry him about, Postquam puer morbo abiit, and
ipse Delphinus periit.
and when by sickness the child was taken away, the Dolphin died. Pleni sunt
libri quibus serae in homines insta matae fuerunt in quibus ego quidem semper
ascensum sustinui veritus ne fabulosa crederem. donec vidi lyncem quem habui ab
Assyria sic affectum erga vnum de meis hominibus, etc.
Every book is full (says Busbequius the Emperors Orator with the Grand
Senior not long since, epist. 3. legate. Turc.) and yields such instances, to
believe which, I was always afraid, least I should be thought to give credit to
fables, until I saw a lynx which I had from Assyria, so affected toward one
of my men, that it cannot be denied but that he was in love with him. When my
man was present, the beast would use many notable entisements and pleasant
motions, and when he was going, hold him back, and look after him when he
was gone, very sad in his absence, but most iocund when he returned: and when
my man went from me, the beast expressed his love with continual sickness, and
after he had pined away for some few days, died. Such another story he has
of a Crane of Maiorca that loved a Spaniard, that would walk any way with him,
and in his absence would seek about for him, and make a noise that he might
hear her, and knock at his door, Desiderium sum testatus post iuediam
aliqunt dierum interiit.
and when he took his last farewell, famished her self. Such pretty pranks can
Love play with Birds, Fishes, Beasts: and if all be true that is credibly
reported, with the Spirits and Devils themselves: who are as much inamored,
and dote (if I may use that word) as any other creature whatsoever. For if
those stones be true that are written of Incubus and Succubus, of Nymphs,
lascivious Faunes and Satyrs, and those heathen Gods which were Devils, or
those familiar meetings in our days and company of Witches and Devils, there
is some probability for it. I knew that Biarmannus, Wierus lib. 3. cap. 19. and
24. and some others stoutly deny it, that the Devil has no carnal copulation
with women, that the Devil takes no pleasure in such facts, mere fantasies
all such relations of Incubi, Succubi, lies and tales. But Austin. lib. 15. de
ciuit. Dei. does acknowledge it. Erastus de Lamijs, Iacobus Sprenger, and his
colleagues, etc. Zanchius cap. 16. lib. 4. de oper. Dei. Dandinus in Arist. de
anima lib. 2. Text, 29. com. 30. Bodin lib. 2. cap. 7. and Paracelsus, Qui haec
in at^e bilis aut Imaginationis vim refer conati sunt, nihil faciunt.
a great champion of this Tenent amongst the rest, which give many peculiar
instances, and by many testimonies, proofs, and confessions euince it. Hector
Boethius in his Scottish history has three or four such examples, which
Cardan confirms out of him lib. 16. cap. 43. of such as have had familiar
company many years with them, and that in the habit of men and women.
Philostratus in his 4th book de vita Apollonij, has one memorable in this
kind, which I may not omit: Of one Menippus Lycius a young man of 25 years of
age, that going betwixt Cenchreas and Corinth met such a phantasine in the
habit of a fair Gentlewoman, which taking him by the hand carried him home to
her house in the suburbs of Corinth, and told him she was a Phaenitian by
birth, and if he would tarry with her, Cantantem audies and vinum bibes, qual^
antea nunquam bibisti, te riualis turbabit nullus, pulchra autem pulch^o
contenta viuam, and mo^iar.
she should hear him sing and play, and drink such wine as never man druncke,
and no man should molest him, but she being fair and lovely, would live and
dye with him, that was fair and lovely to behold. The young man a Philosopher
otherwise stayed and discreet, and able to moderate his passious, though not
this of love, stayed with her a while with great content, and at last married
her, to whose wedding amongst other guests came Apollonius, who by some
probable conjectures found her out to be a Serpent, a Lamia, and that all her
furniture, was but as Tantalus gold described by Homer, no substance but mere
illusions. When she saw her self descried, she wept, and des^ed Apollonius to
say nothing; but he would not be moved, and thereupon she, Plate, House, and
all that was in it vanished in an instant, Multifactum hoc cognovere quod in
media Graecia gestii sit
many thousands took notice of this fact, for it was done in the middle of
Greece. Sabine in his comment on the 10th of Ovids Metamorphosis, at the tale
of Orpheus, tells us of a Gentleman of Bavaria, that for many months together
bewailed the loss of his dear wife, at length the Devil in her habit came
and comforted him, and told him because he was so importunate for her, that she
would come and live with him again, on that condition he would be new married,
and never swear and blaspheame as he used formerly to do, for if he did she
would be gone: Rem curans domesticam vt ante peperit aliquot liberos semper
tamen tristis and pallida.
He vowed it, and married, and lived with her, she brought him children, and
governed his house, but was still pale and sad, and so continued, till one day
falling out with him, he fell a swearing. she vanished thereupon, and was
never after seen. Haec audivi a multis fide dignis qui asseuerabant Ducem
Bavariae eadem retu^^sse Duci Sax^^iae pro veris.
This I have heard, says Sabine, from persons of good credit, which told me
that the Duke of Bauaria told it for a certainty to the Duke of Saxony. One
more I relate out of Florilegus, an honest historian of our nation, because he
tells it so confidently, as a thing in those days talked of all over Europe.
A young Gentleman of Rome the same day that he was married, after dinner with
the Bride and his friends went a walking into the fields, and toward Evening
to the Tennis court to recreate himself, whilst he played, he put his ring
upon the finger of Venus statua, which was thereby made in brass, after he had
sufficiently played, and now made an end of his sport, he came to fetch his
ring, but Venus had bowed her finger in, and he could not get it off. Whereupon
loath to make his company tarry at the present, there left it, intending to
fetch it the next day, or at some more convenient time, and went thence to
supper, and so to bed. In the night when he should come to perform those
nuptial rites, Venus steps between him and his wife (unseen, unfelt of
her) and told him that she was his wife, and that he had betrothed himself
unto her by that ringe, which he put upon her finger, she troubled him for some
following nights. He not knowing how to help himself, made his move to one
Palumbus, a learned Magician in those days, who gave him a letter, and bade
him at such a time of the night, in such a cross way at the towns end, where
old Saturn would pass by with his associates, in precession, as commonly he
did, deliver the letter with his own hands to Saturn himself: the young man
of a bold spirit accordingly did it, and when the old feind had read it, he
called Venus to him, which ^id before him, and commanded her to deliver his
ringe, which forthwith she did, and so the Gentleman was freed. Many such
Fabula Daemarati and A^iri^oni^ in Herodoto. lib. 6. Er^to
stories I find in several Authors, to confirm this which I have said; and
though many be against it, yet I for my part will subscribe to Lactantius lib.
14. cap. 15. Deus angelos misit ad ^^^elam (...) generis humanised illos cum
hominibus commorantes dominator ille terrae salacissimus p^ulatim ad vitiae
pellexit, and mulierum congressibus inquinauit.
God sent Angels to the tuition of men, but whilst they lived amongst us, that
mischievous all commander of the earth, and hot in lust, entised them by
little to this vice, and defiled them with the company of women: And to
Anaxagoras de resurrec. Quidam ex illis capti sunt amore virginum and libidine
vict^ defecerunt ex quibus gigantes qui vocantur na tisunt.
Many of those spiritual bodies overcome by the love of maids, and lust
failed, of whom those were borne we call Giants. Justin Martyr, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Sulpitius Seuerus, Eusebius, etc. to this sense make a twofold
fall of Angels, one from the beginning of the world, another a little before
the deluge, as Moses teaches us, openly professing that these Genij can beget,
and have carnal copulation with women, many Divines stiffely contradict this,
but I will conclude with Phisiologie Stoicorum lib. 1. cap. 20. si spiritus
vnde semen iis etc. at exempla turbant ros mulierum quotidianae confessiones de
mis^ione omnes asserunt and sunt in ^ac (...) Lo^^nio exempla
Lipsius, that since examples, testimonies, Pererius in Genesis lib. 8 cap 6 ver.
2. Zanc. etc
and confessions of those unhappy women are so manifest on the other side, and
many even in this our town of Louan, that it is likely to be so. Vnum dixero
non opinari me vllo retro aeuo ta^tam copiam Sa^yrorum and salacium istorum
Geniorum se oftendisse quantum nunc quotidiane narrationes and iudiciales (...)
proserunt.
One thing I will add, that I suppose that in no age past, I know not by what
destiny of this unhappy time, there have never appeared or showed themselves so
many lecherous devils, Satyrs and Genij, as in this of ours, as appears by
the daily narrations, and judicial sentences upon Record. Read more of this
question, in Austin de ciui^at. dei lib. 15. Wierus lib. 3. de Praestig. Daem.
Giraldus Cumbrensis Itinerar. Camb. lib. 1 Malleus malefic. quaest. 5 part. 1.
Iacobus Ruessus. lib. 5. cap. 6. fol. 54. Godelman lib. 2. cap. 4. Erastus,
Delrio, Lipsius, Bodine demono. lib. 2. cap. 7. Pererius in Genesis lib. 8. in 6.
cap. ver. 2. etc.

SVBSEC. 2. How love tyranniseth over men. Love or Heroical melancholy, his
definition, part affected.
YOu have heard how this tyrant Love rages amongst brut beasts and spirits,
now let us consider what passions he causes amongst men. Virg.
Improbe amor quid non mortalia pectora cogis? Horresco referens, I am almost
afraid to relate, amassed, For it is a shame to speak of those things which are
done of them in secret. Ephe. 5.12.
and ashamed, it has wrought such stupend and prodigious effects, such foul
offenses. Love indeed (I may not deny) first united Provinces, built Cities,
and by a perpetual generation preserues mankind; propagates the Church, but if
he rage, he is no more Love, but burning lust, a disease, Frenzy, Madness,
Hell.

Plutarch amator lib.
Est orcus ille, vis est immedicabilis, est rabies insana.

He subuerts kingdoms, overthrows cities, towns, families, and makes a
massacre of men; thunder and lightning, wars, fires, plagues, have not done
that mischief to mankind, as this burning lust, this brutish passion. Let
Sodom and Gomorrha, Troia, and I know not how many Cities bear record, and
fuit ante Helenam, etc. Besides those daily monomachies, murders, effusion of
blood, rapes, riot and immoderate expense, to satisfy their lusts, beggary,
shame, loss, torture, punishment, disgrace, loathsome diseases, that proceed
from thence, worse then calentures and pestilent feauers, those often Gouts,
Pox, conbustians, etc. which torment the body, and that ferall melancholy
which crucifies the Soul in this life, and everlasting torments in the world
to come.

Notwithstanding they know, these and many such miseries, threats, tortures
will surely come upon them, rewards, exhortations, e contra, yet either out of
their own weakness, a depraved nature or loves tyranny, which so furiously
rages, they suffer themselves to be led like an ox to the slaughter.
Facilis descensus Auerni, they go down headlong to their own perdition, they
will commit folly with beasts, men leaving the natural use of women, as Paul
says, Romans 1.27.
burned in lust one toward another, and man with man wrought filthiness.

Semiramis equo, Pasyphae tauro, Aristo Ephesius asinae se commiscuit, Fuluius
equae, alij canibus, capris, etc. vnde monstra nascuntur aliquando, Centauri,
Syluaui, and ad terrorem hominum prodigiosa spectra. Nec cum brutis sed ipsis
hominibus rem habent, quod peccatum Sodomia vulgo dicitur, and frequens olim
vitium apud Orientales illos fuit, Gracos nimirum, Italos, Afros, Asianos.
Lilius Giraldus vitacius.
Hercules Hylam habuit, Policletum, Dionem, Perythoonta, Abderum and Phryga,
alij and Euristium ab Hercule amatum tradunt. Socrates pulchorum Adolescentum
causa frequens gymnasium obibat, flagitiosoque spectaculo pascebat oculos,
Pueros amare solis philosophis relinquendum vult Lucianus dial. Amorum.
quod and Philebus and Phaedon, Riuales, Charmides and reliqui Platonis dialogi
satis superque testatum faciunt, quod vero Alcibiades de code^ Socrate
loquatur, lubens conticesco, sed and abhorreo; tantum incitamentum praebent
libidini. At hunc perstrinxit Theodoretus lib. de curat. graec. affec. cap.
vltimo. Quin and ipse Plato suum demiratur Agathonem, Xenophon Cliniam,
Virgilius Alexin, Auacreon Bathyllum, Quod autem de Nerone, Claudio,
caeterorumque portentosa libidine memoriae proditum, mallem a Petronio,
Suetonio, caeterisque petatis, quando omnem fidem excedant, quam a me
expectetis: sed vetera querimur. Busbequius.
Apud Asianos, Turcas, Italos, nunquam frequentius hoc quam hodierno die
vitium; officinae horum alicubi apud Turcas, and frequentes querelae, etiam
inter ipsos coniuges hac de re, quae virorum concubitum illicitum calceo iu
oppositam partem verso magistratui indicant; nullum apud Italos familiare magis
peccatum, qui and post Achilles Tatius lib. 45
Lucianum and Lucia^us Charidemo.
Tatium, scriptis volumnibus defendunt. Johannes de la Casa Beneuentinus
Episcopus diuinum opus vocat, suaue scelus, adeoque iactat se non alia vsum
Venere. Nihil vsitatius apud monachos, Cardinales, sacrificulos, etiam Non est
haec mentula demens mart.
furor hic ad mortem, ad insaniam. Joui^s musaeo.
Angelus Politianus ob pueri amorem violentas sibi manus iniecit. Et horrendum
sane dictu, quantum apud nos patrum memoria scelus detestandum hoc saeuierit.
Quum enim Anno 1538. prudentissimus Rex Henricus Octauus, cucullatorum,
caenobia and sacrificorum collegia, votariorum, per venerabiles legum doctores
Thomam Leum, Richardum Laytenum visitari fecerat etc. tanto numero reperti sunt
apud eos scortatores, cinaedi, ganeones, padicones, puerarij, paederastae,
Sodomita, ( Prefat lectori lib. de vitis pontif.
Balei verbis vtar) Ganymedes, etc. vt in vnoquoque eorum nouam credideris
Gomorrham. Sed vide si lubet eorundum Catalogum apud Baleum, puellae, inquit,
in lectis dormire non poterant ob fratres neeromanticos. Haec si apud votarios,
monathos, sanctos scilicet homunciones, quid in foro quid in aula factum
suspiceris? quid apud nobiles, quid inter fornices, quam non faeditatem, quam
non spurcitiem? Sileo interim turpes illas and ne nominandas quidem monachorum
Mercurialis cap. de Priapismo.
mastrupationes, Tribades illas mulierculas, quae se inuicem fricant, and
praeter Eunuchos etiam ad venerem explendam, artificiosa illa veretra habent:
Et quod magis mirere, foemina foemnia^ Constantinopoli non ita pridam depetijt,
ausa rem plene incredibilem, mutato cultu mentita virum de nuptijs sermonem
init, and breui nuptaest: sed authorem ipsum consule Busbequium. Omitto
Herodotus lib. 2. Euterpe vxores insignium virorum non stati m vita sunctas
tradunt condiendas, ac ne eas quidem foemin^rs quae formosae sunt, sed
qua^riduo ante defunctas, ne cum ijs salinarij concuban^ etc.
salinarios illos Aegyptiacos, qui cum formosarum cadaueribus concumbunt, and
eorum vesanam libidinem, qui etiam Idola and imagines deperiunt. Nota est
fabula Pigmalionis apud Metamor. 13.
Ouidium. Mundi and Paulini apud Aegesippum belli Iud. lib. 2. cap, 4. Pontius
C. Caesaris legatus referente Plinio lib. 35. cap. 3. quem suspicor eum esse
qui Christum crucifixit, picturis Atalantae and Helenae adeo libidine incensus,
vt tollere eas vellet, si natura tectorij permisisset, alius statua^ bonae
Fortunae deperijt, ( Aelianus lib. 9. cap. 37.) alius bonae deae, etc. Et ne
qua pars probro vacet. Seneca de ^ra li. 11. ca. 18.
Raptus ad stupra, (quod ait ille) and ne Nullus est meatus ad que^ non pateat
aditus impudicitiae Clemens Alex. paedag li. 3. ca. 3.
os quidem a libidine exceptum* Heliogabalus per omnia caua corporis libidinem
recepit, Lamprid. vita eius. Vt verum plane sit, quod apud Tom. ^. Gryllo.
Plutarchum Gryllus Vlissi obiecit. Adhunc vsque diem apud nos neque mas marem
neque foemina foeminam amauit, qualia multa apud vos memorabiles and praeclari
virifecerunt, vt viles missos faciam, Hercules imberbem sectans socium, amicos
deseruit etc. Vestra libidines intra suos naturae fines coercerinon possunt,
quin instar fluuij exudantes atrocem foeditatem, tumultum, confusionemque
naturae gignant in re venerea, nam and capras, porcos, equos, inieru^t viri and
foeminae insano bestiarum amore exarserunt, vnde Minotauri, Centauri, Syluani,
Sphinges etc. Sed ne confutando doceam, nolo quem diutius hisce sordibus
inquinare.

I come at last to that Heroical Love, which is proper to men and women, and
is a frequent cause of melancholy, and deserves much rather to be called
burning lust, then by such an honorable title. There is an honest love I
confess which is natural, and no man living can avoid it. Aeneas Siluius.
Iuvenal. qui nunquam visae flagrauit amore puellae.
Et qui vim non sensit amoris, aut lapis est aut bellua. He is not a man but a
block, a very stone that has not felt the power of it, dote we either young
or old as Chaucer.
he said, and none are excepted but Minerua and the Muses, for Cupid in Tom. 1.
dial. deorum Lucianus. amore non ardent musae.
Lucian complains to his mother Venus, that amongst all the rest his arrows
could not pierce them. But this is a common passion, an honest, for men to love
in the way of marriage. You know marriage is honorable, a blessed calling,
appointed by God himself in Paradise, it breeds true peace, tranquillity
content and happiness, when they live without iarring, scolding, lovingly as
they should do. Hor.
Foelices ter and amplius,
Quos irrupta tenet copula,
Dinulsis queremonijs,
Suprema citius soluit amor die.
Thrice happy they and more then that,
Whom bands of Love so firmly ties,
That without braules till death them part,
It Is vndissolu'd and never dies.


As Seneca lived with his Paulina, Abraham and Sara, Orpheus and Euridice,
Arria and Poetus, Artemisia and Mausolus, and Rubenius Celer, that would needs
have it engraven on his tomb, that he had lived with Ennea his wife, 43.
years, 8. months, and never fell out: there is no happiness like unto it, no
love so great as this of man and wife, no such comfort. Omnis amor magnus,
Propert.
sed aperto in coniuge mayor, when they love at last as fresh as they did at
first, as Homer brings Paris kissing Helena, after they had bin married ten
years, protesting withal, that he loved her as dear as he did the first
hour he was married. And in their old age when they make much of one another,
and say as he did to his wife in the Poet. Ausonius.
Vxor vinamus quod viximus, and moriamur,
Servants nomen sumpsimus in thalamo,
Nec ferat vlla dies vt commutemur in aeuo.
Quin tibi sim iuuenis, tuque puella mihi.
Dear wife lets live in love and die together,
As hitherto we have in all good will,
Let no day change, or alter our affections,
But lets be young to one another still.


It Is an happy state this indeed, but this love of ours is immoderate,
inordinate, and not to be comprehended in any bounds. It will not contain it
self within the union of marriage, or apply it self to one object, but it is
a wandering extrauagant, a domineering, a boundless, an irrefregable passion:
sometimes this burning lust rages after marriage, and then it is properly
called Jealousy, sometimes before, and then it causes this Heroical
melancholy, it extends sometimes to corriualls, sometimes it produces rapes,
incests, murders, etc. and is confined within no terms, of years, sex or
whatsoever else. Some furiously rage before they come to discretion or age.
Junonem habeam iratam si vnquam meminerim me virginem fuisse. Infans enim
paribus inquinata sum, and subinde maioribus me applicui, donec ^d aetatem
perueni, vt milo vitulum, inde ta^rum, etc.
Quartilla in Petronius never remembered she was a maid, and the wife of Bath in
Chaucer cracks, Since I was twelve years old beliue,
Husbands at Kirk door had I five.


Generally women begin Pubescere as they call it, Epictetus cap. 42 mulieres
statim ab anno 14. mouere incipiunt etc. attrectari se sinu^t and exponunt.
Leuinus, Lemnius.
at 14 years old, and then they begin to offer themselves, and some to rage.
Lib. 3. fol. 126.
Leo Afer says that in Afric a man shall scarce find a maid at 14, years
old, they are so forward, and many amongst us after they come into the teenes,
do not live but linger. What prankes in this kind the middle age has played,
is not to be recorded. Si mihi sint centum linguae, sint oraque centum, no
tongue can sufficiently declare, every story is full of men and women's
insatiable lust, Nero's, Heliogabali, Bonosi, etc. They neye after other wives
(as Jeremy cap. 5.8. complains) like fed horses, or so many towne-bulles, as
many of our great ones do. Of women's unnatural, De mulierum inex hausta
libidine luxuque insatiabi iomnes aeque regiones conqueri posse existimo,
Stephanus.
insatiable lust, what country, what village does not complain. -- Sed amor,
sed aeffranata libido,
Quid castum in terris intentatumque reliquit?


What breach of vows, and oaths, fury, dotage, madness might I reckon up.
Yet this is more tolerable in youth, and such as are yet in their hot blood;
but for an old fool to dote, and an old leacher, what more odious, what more
absurd? and yet what so common? How many decrepit, hoarie, harsh, writhen,
burstenbellied and crooked, toothlesse, bald, bleare-eyed, impotent, rotten old
men shall you see flickering still in every place. One gets him a young wife,
another a Curtisan, and when he can scarce lift his leg over a sil, and has
one foot already in Charons boat, when he has the trembling in his joints,
the gout in his feet, a perpetual rhume in his head, and all his moisture
dried up and gone, and cannot spit from him; a very child again that cannot
dress himself, or cut his own meat, yet he will be dreaming of, and honinge
after wenches, what can be more unseemly? Worse it is in women then in men,
when she is Hiatque turpis inter arid^s nates podex.
so old a crone, a beldame, she can neither see, nor hear, go nor stand, a
mere Cadauerosa adeo vt ab inferis reversa videri possit, vult adhuc
catullire. Erasmus. mor.
carcass, a witch, and can scarce feel; yet she catter woules, and must have
a stallion, a Champion, she must and will marry again, and betroth her self
to some young man, Nam and matrimonijs est despectum senium. Aeneas Siluius
that hates to look on, but for her goods, abhorres the fight of her, to the
prejudice of her good name, her own undoing, grief of her friends, ruin of
her children.

But to enlarge or illustrate this power and effects of love, is to set a
candle in the Sun. Quid toto terrarum orb communius, quae ciuitas, quod
oppidum, quae familia vacat amatorum exemplis? Aeneas Siluius. quis trigesimum
annum natus nullum amoris causa peregit i^sig^: facinus, ego de me facio
coniecturam quem amor in mill pericula misit.
It rages amongst all sorts and conditions of men, but it is most evident
amongst such as are young and lusty, in the flower of their years, nobly
descended, high fed, and such as live idle and at ease, and for that cause
which our Divines call lust, or this Forestus, Plato.
ferinu^ insanus amor, this mad and beastly passion, as I have said, is
calcalled by our Physicians, Heroical love, and a more honorable title put
upon it, Amor nobilis as Pract. mayor. Tract. 6. cap. 1. Rub. 11. de aegrit.
cap. quod his multum contingat.
Sauanorola styles it, because noble men make a common practice of it, and are
so commonly affected with it, Auicenna lib. 3. Fen. 1. tract. 4. cap. 23.
calls this passion Hishi, and Haec agritudo est sollicitudo melancholica in
qui homo applicat sibi continuam cogitatione super pulchrit u^ine ipsius quam a
mat, gestuum, morum.
defines it, to be a disease or melancholy vexation or anguish of mind, in
which a man continually meditates of the beauty, gesture, manners of his
mistress, and troubles himself about it. And desires as Sauanorola adds with
all intention and egernesse of mind, to compass or enjoy her, Animi forte
accidens quo quis rem habere nimia auiditate con^upiscit vt ludos venatores,
aurum and opes auari.
as melancholy hunters trouble themselves about their sports, covetous their
gold and goods, so is he tormented still about his mistress. Arnoldus
Villanouanus in his book of Heroical love, defines it, Assidua cogitatio
super r^m desiderat^m, cum confidentia obtinendi, vt ^pe apprehensum
deiectabile, etc.
a continual cogitation of that which he desires with a confidence or a hope
of compassing it; which definition his commentator cauells at. For continual
cogitation is not the genus, but a symptom of love, we continually think of
that which we hate and abhor, as well as that which we love, and many things we
covet and desire, without all hope of attaining. Carolus a Lorme in his
questions, makes a doubt, An Amor sit morbus, whether this Heroical love be a
disease: Morbus corporis petius quam ^nimi.
Arnoldus will have it improperly so called, and a disease rather of the body,
then of the mind. Tully in his Tusculanes, calls it a furious disease of the
mind, Plato madness it self, Ficinus his Commentator cap. 12. a species of
madness, but Rhases a Amor est passio melancholica
melancholy passion, and most Physicians make it a species, or kind of
melancholy (as will appear by the Symptoms) and treat of it apart: whom I
mean to imitate, and to discuss it in all his kinds, to examine his several
causes, to show his symptoms, prognostickes, effects, that so it may be with
more facility cured.

The part affected in the mean time as Ob calefactionem spirituum pars
anterior capi^is laborat ob consumptionem^^^ (...).
Arnoldus supposes, is the former part of the head for want of moisture, which
his Commentator reiects. Langius med. epist. lib. 1. cap. 24. will have this
passion fited in the liver, and to keep residence in the heart, (...) in mente
concepto spiritus in cord and ^^core incendens.
and proceed first from the eyes to be carried by our spirits, and kindled
with imagination in the liver and heart, cogit amare iecur, as the saying is.
For that cause Hemer faines, that Tityus liver (who was enamored on Latona) was
still gnawed by two vultures day and night in hell, Quod talem carnificinam in
adolescentum visceribus amor faciat inexplebilis.
For that young men's bowels that are inamored, are so continually tormented by
love. Gordonius cap. 2. part. 2. Testiculi quoad causa^ coniunctam, e par
antecedentem possunt esse subiectum.
will have the stones an immediate subject or cause, the liver an Antecedent.
But Proprie passio cerebri est ob corruptam imaginationem.
properly it is a passion of the brain, Odiss. and metam or 4. Ovid.
as all other melancholy, by reason of corrupt immagination, and so does Jason
pratensis, cap. 19. de morb. cerebri, (who writes copiously of this Eroticall
love) place and reckon it amongst the affections of the brain. Cap. de
assectibus.
Melanthon de anima confutes those that put the liver a part affected, and
Guatinerius Tract. 15. cap. 13. and 17. though many put all the affections in
the heart, referres it to the brain. Ficinus cap. 7. in Conuiuium Platonis,
will have the Est in sanguine melancholico huiusmodi aestus.
blood to be the part affected. Io. Frietagius cap. 14. noct med. will have all
four affected, heart, liver, brain, blood, but the mayor part concur upon
the brain, Est corrup^io imaginatiuae and aestimatiuae facultatis, ob formam
fortiter affixam corrupt uque indicium vt semper de eo cogitet, ideoque recte
melancholicus appellatur. Concupiscentia vehemens ex corrupto iudicio
aestimatiue vi^tutis.
it is imaginatio laesa, and both imagination and reason are misaffected,
because of his corrupt judgment, and continual meditation of that which he
desires, he may truly be said to be melancholy. If it be violent, or (...)
disease inueterate, as I have determined in the precedent partitions, both
imagination and reas^n are misaffected, first one, then the other.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSEC. 1. Causes of Heroical Love. Temperature, full Diet, Idleness, Place,
Climat, etc.
OF all causes the most remote are stars. Comment i^ conuiuium Platonis.
Irretiuntur cito quibus nascentibus Venus fuerit in Leone, vel Luna ven^r^m
vehementer a^pe^erit, and qui eadem complectione sunt praediti.
Ficinus cap. 19. says they are most prone to this burning lust, that have
Venus in Leo in their Horoscope, or that the Moon and Venus be mutually
aspected, or such as be of Venus complexion. Plerumque am^tores sunt, and si
faemine mere, trices, lib. de audiend. Poet.
Plutarch interpretes Astrologically that tale of Mars and Venus, That in whose
genitures Mars and Venus are in coniu^ction, they are commonly lascivious, and
if women queanes, as the good wife of Bath confessed in Chaucer. I followed aye
mine inclination,
By virtue of my constellation.
Aptiores ad masculinam venere^ sunt quorum genesi venus est in signo
masculino, and in Saturni finibus aut oppositione, etc. Prolomeus in
quadripart: plurade his and specialia habet Aphorismata longo procul dubio vsu
confirmata, and ab experientia multa perfecta, inquit commentator eius
Cardanus. Chiromantici ex cingulo veneris plerumque coniecturam saciunt, and
monte veneris, de quorum decretis, Tasnerum, Johan. de Indagine, Goclenium,
caeterosque si lubet, inspicias. Physicians conjecture wholly from the
temperature and complexion, Phlegmatic persons are seldom taken according
to Ficinus Comment. cap. 9. natural melancholy less then they, but once taken
they are never freed, though most are of opinion flatuous or hypocondriacall
melancholy are most subject of all others to this infirmity. Valescus assigns
^^^ir strong imagination for a cause, Bodine abundance of wind. Sanguine are
soon cost, and most apt to love, and by their good wills says h Lucian,
would have about with every one they see: the colts evil is common to all
complections. Guianerius Tract. 15. cap. 14. referres it i to the hot
temperature of the coddes, and such as are very spermaticke and full of seed,
for which cause young men, such as are strong set, of able bodies, are subject
to it. Hercules de Saxonia, has the same words in effect. But most part such
are most apt that (...) young and lusty, and live at ease, stall-fed, free from
(...) Idle persons.

(...).
Men's erit apta capitum quum laetissima rerum,
Vt seges inpingui luxuriabit humo.
The mind is apt to lust, and hot or cold,
As corn luxuriates in a better molde.
The place it self makes much wherein we live, the clime and air, and
discipline if they concur. In our Misnia says Galen near to Pergamus, thou
shall scarce find an adulterer, but many at Rome, by reason of the delights of
the place. All hot and Southern Countries are prone to lust, and far more
incontinent, then those that live in the North, as Bodine discourses at large
Method. hist. cap. 5. Molles A^^atici, so are Turks, Greeks, Spaniardes,
Italians, and all that latitude: and in those Countries, such as are more
fruitful, Agri Neapolitani delectatio elegantia amaenitas vix intrae modum
huma^um consistere videtur vnde etc. Leander, Albertus in Campania.
plentiful, and delitious, as Valence in Spain, Capua in Italy, as Haniballs
soldiers can witness, Canopus in Egypt, Sibarys, Baiae, Tota Cypri insula
del tijs incumbit, and ob id tantum luxurae dedita vt sit olim veneri sacrata.
Ortelius. Lampsacus olim Priapo sacer ob vinum generosum, and loci deli^^^s,
Idem.
Cyprus, Lampsacus. In Naples, the fruits of the soil and pleasant air
eneruates their bodies, and alters constitutions. In Italy and Spain, they
have their stews in every great City, as in Rome, Venice, Florence: which as
some say has 90000. inhabitants, of which 10000. are whores, and yet for all
this, every gentleman almost has a peculiar mistress, fornications, adulteries,
are no whereso common: how should a man live honest amongst so many
prouocations? Now if youth, greatness, liberty I mean, and that i^punitie of
sin, which Princes take unto themselves in this kind shall meet, what a gappe
must it needs open to all manner of vice. For commonly Princes and great men
make no scruple at all of such matters, but with that whore in Spartian:
quicquid libet licet, they think they may do what they list, profess it
publicly, and rather brag of it with Proculus, that write to a friend of his
in Rome, Lampridius. Quod december noctibus centum virgins fecisset ^ mulieres.
what famous exploits he had done in that kind, then any way be abashed at
it. Vita cius.
Nicholas Saunders relates of Henry the 8. (I rather think slanders) quod
paeucas vidit pulchriores quas non concupierit, and paucissimas non
concupierit, quas non violarit. He saw few fair maids that he did not desire,
and desired few whom he did not enjoy; nothing so familiar amongst them, it is
most of their business: Sardanapalus, Messalina, and Ione of Naples, are not
comparable to If they contain themselves many times it is not virtutis amore,
non deest voluntas sed facultas.
meaner men and women. Solomon of old had a thousand concubines, Assuerus his
Eunuchs, and keepers, Nero his Tigillinus panders and baudes, the Turks and
Muscouites Xeriffes, and Persians, are no whit inferior to them in our times.
Delectus fit omnium puellarum toto regno forma praestantiorum, (says In
Musco^ia.
Ionius) pro imperatore, and quos ille linquit, nobiles habe^t. They muster up
wenches as we do soldiers, and have their choice of all the beauties their
countries can afford, and yet all this cannot keep them from adultery, incest,
Sodomy, and such prodigious lusts. We may conclude that if they be fortunate
and rich, high fed and idle withal, it is almost impossible they should live
honest, or not rage and precipitate themselves into all those inconveniences of
burning lust. Catullus ad Lesbiam.
Otium and reges prius and beatas,
Perdidit vrbes.
Idleness overthrows all. Vacuo pectore regnat amor, love tyranniseth in an
idle person. If thou have nothing to do, Hor.
Inuidia vel amore miser torquebere. Thou shall be hailed apieces with envy,
lust, or some passion or other, Polit. 8. number. 28. vt naptha ad ignem sic a^mor
ad illos qui torpescunt otio.
Homines nihil agende male agere discunt; It Is Aristotle's Simile, as a match or
touchwood takes fire, so does an idle person love. Quaeritur Aegistus quare sit
factus adulter etc. was Aegistus a whoremaster? You need not ask a reason of
it. Ismenedora stole Baccho a woman a man, no marvel says In amatorio.
Plutarch, Luxurians opibus more hominum mulier agit. Principes plerumque ob
licentiam and affluentiam diui^tartum is^am possionem solent incur^^re
She was rich, and does but as men do in that case. The Poets therefore did
well to feign all shepherds lovers, and to give themselves to songs and
dalliances, because they lived such idle lives. For love as Seneca describes
him, Iuuentae gignitur, luxu nutritur, ferijs alitur, otioque, inter laetae
fortunae bona. Youth begets him, riot mainetains him, idleness nourishes him,
etc. which makes Gordonius the Physician cap. 20. part. 2. call this disease
the proper passion of nobility. And if a weak judgment and a strong object
shall concur, how says Hercules de Saxonia shall they resist? Sauanorola
appropriates it almost to Ardenter appetit quictiosam vita^ agit and co^muniter
incurrit haec passio solitarios deliciose viuentes, in comi^etes, religiosos.
etc.
Monks, Friars, and religious persons, because they live solitary, fare well,
and do nothing as well he may, for how should they otherwise choose? Diet
alone is able to cause it: A rare thing to see a young man or woman, that lives
idly, and fares well, of what condition soever, not to be in love. As the
wife of Bath in Chaucer tells. For all to seeker as cold engenders hail,
A liquerish tongue must have a liquorish tail.
Especially if they shall further it by choice Diet, as many times they do,
feed liberally, and by their good will eat nothing else but lascivious meats,
Vinum inprimis generosum, legumen, fabas, radices omnium generum been conditas
and largo pipere aspersas, carduos hortulanos, lactucas, Sed nihil eru^e
faciunt bulbique salaces. Improba nec prosit iam satureia tibi. Ovid.
erucas, rapas, porros, caepas, nucem piceam, amigdalas dulces, electuaria,
syrupos, succos, cocleas, conchas, pisces optime praeparatos, auiculas,
testiculos ainmalium, oua, condimenta diuersorum generum: molles lectos
puluinaria, etc. Et quicquid fere medici impotentiae rei venereae laboranti
praescribunt, hoc quasi diasatyrio^ habent in delitijs, and his dapes multo
delicatiores, mulsum, exquisitas and exoticas fruges, aromata, placentas,
expressos succos mul^is serculis variatos, ipsumque vinum suauitate vincentes,
and quicquid culina, pharmacopaea, aut quaeque fere officina subministrare
possit. Et hoc plerunque victu quum se ganeones infarciant, Petronius. curani
(...) m^x cibis validio ^ibus etc.
vt ille ob Creseida suam, se bulbis and cocleis curauit, etiam ad venerem se
parent, and ad hanc palaestram se exerceant, qui fieri possit vt non misere
depereant, vti ille apud Scenkium qui post potionem, vxorem and quatuor
ancillas proximo cubiculo cubantes compresit.
vt non penitu^ insaniant? Aestuans venture cito despuit in libidinem,
Hieronimen ait. Pers. Sat. 3.
Post prandia, Callyroen dae, quis enim continere se potest? Siracides. non
amor and vinum nil non moderabile suadent.
Luxuriosares vinum, fomentum libidinis vocat Augustinus. Non Aetna non
Vesuvius tantis ardoribus aestuant, ac iuueniles medullae vino plenae, addit
Epist ad olimpiavi.
Hieronimus: vnde ob optimum vinum Lampsacus olim Priapo sacer; Et haec si
vinum simplex and per se sumptum praestare po^^it, quam non insaniam, quem non
furorem a caeteris expectemus? De sale lib. 1. cap. 3. cap. 21.
Gomesius salem enumerat inter ea, quae intempestiua^ libidinem prouocare
solent, Et salatiores fieri foeminas ob esum salis contendit, Venerem ideo
dicunt ab Oceano ortam, and foeta matter Salacea Oceani coniux, and verbum
fortasse salax a sale esfluxit. Mala Bacchica tantum olim in amoribus
praeualuerunt, vt coronae ex illis statuae Bacchi ponerentur. Garcias ab Horto
aromatum lib. 1. cap. 28
Cubebis in vino maceratis vtunt^r Indi orientales, ad venerem excitandam, and
Surax radix ad coitum sum facit si quis comedat aut infusionem bibat membrum
subito erigitur. Leo Aser lib. 9. cap. vltimo.
Surax radice Africani. Chinae radix eosdem effectus habet, talisque herbae
meminit mag. not. lib. 2. cap. 16. Que non solum edentibus sed and genitalia
tangentibus tantum valet vt coire suaquse desiderent, quoties fere velint,
possint, alios duodecies prosecisse alios ad 60. vices peruenisse resert.
Baptista Porta ex India allatae, cuius mentionem facit and Theophrastus. Sed
insinita his similia apud Rhasin Mathiolum, Mizaldum, caeterosque medicos
occurrunt, quorum ideo mentionem feci, ne quis imperitior in hosscopulos
impingat, sed pro virili tanquam syrtes and cautes consulto effugiat.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 2. Other causes of Love Melancholy. Sight, Beauty from the face,
eyes, other parts, and how it pierces.
MAny such causes may be reckoned up, but they cannot avail, except
opportunity be offered of time, and place, and those other beautiful objects,
or artificial entisements, as kissing, conference, discourse, gestures
concur, and such like lascivious prouocations. Kornmanus in his book de
Linea Amoris, makes five degrees of lust, out of Lucian Tom. 4. dial. Amorum.
Lucian belike, which he handles in five Chapters. Visus, colloquium,
conuictus, Oscula, Tactus. Sight of all other is the first step to this
unruly love, though sometime it be prevented by relation or hearing, or rather
incensed. For there be those so apt and credulous and facile to love, that if
they hear of a proper man or woman, they are in love before they see them, and
that merely by relation as Achilles Tatius observes. Ea enim hominum
intemperantium libido e^^ vt etiam fama ad amand^^ impellantur, and audientes
aeque affici^ntur, acvidentes.
Such is their imtemperance and lust, that they are as much maimed by report,
as if they saw them. Calisthenes a rich young Gentleman of Byzance in Thrace,
hearing Formosam Sostrato filiam audiens v^orem cupit and fola illius auditione
ardit.
of Leucippe Sostratus fair daughter, was far in love with her, and out of
fame and common rumor was so much incensed, that he would needs have her to be
his wife. And sometimes by reading they are so affected, ^^^^ines. Quo^ies, de
^anthe^ Xenopho^^s lo^sum perlogo, itaariums affectus sum, ac si coram^utue^^r
As he in Pulchritudinem sibi ipsi confi^gunt.
Lucian confesses of himself, I never read that place of Panthea in Xenophon,
but I am as much affected as if I were present with her. Such persons commonly
feign a kind of beauty to themselves, and so did those three Gentlewomen in
Balthazar Castilio, fall in love with a young man; whom they never knew, but
only heard him commended, De aulico lib. 2. fol. 116.
for there is a grace comes from hearing, Gratia venit ab ^^^itur aeque ac
visu et species amoris in phantasiam recipiuntur sola relatione. Piccolomineus,
grad. 8. cap. 38.
as a moral Philosopher informs us. as well as from sight, and the species
of love are received into the fantasy by relation alone, Interdu^ and
absentes amanues: sometimes we love those that are absent, says Epist.
Philostratus, and gives instance in his friend Athenodorus, that loved a Maid
at Corinth whom he never saw, non oculi sed men's videt. Beauties encomion.
We see with the eyes of our understanding. But the most familiar and usual
cause of Love, is that which comes by sight, which conuayes those admirable
wrayes of beauty and pleasing graces to the heart. Plotinus deriues Love from
sight, (...), quasi (...), Proper.
si neseis oculi sunt in amore duces, the eyes are the harbengers of love, and
the first step of love is sight, as Amoris primum gradum visus habet, vt
aspiciatrem amatam.
Lilius Giraldus proves at large, hist. deor. syntag. 13. which a^ two sluices
let in the influence of that divine, powerful, Soul rauishing, and
captiuating Beauty: which, as Achilles Tatius lib. 1. Forma telo quouis acutior
ad inferendum vulnus perque oculos amatorio vulneri aditum patefaciens ^n
animum penetrat.
one says is sharper then any dart or needle, and wounds deeper into the
heart, and opens in a gap through our eyes to that lovely wound, which pierces
the soul it self: Eccles. 18. through it love is kindled like a fire. This
amazing, confounding, admirable amiable Beauty, In tota rerum natura nihil
f^rm^ diuinius nihil augustius nihil pre^iosius, cui^s vires hinc facil^
intelliguntur etc.
then which in all natures treasure, says Isocrates, there is nothing so
maiesticall and sacred, nothing so divine, lovely, precious, whose power hence
may be descerned, we contemn and abhor generally such things as are foul
and ugly to behold, but love and covet that which is fair. It Is Beauty in all
things which pleases and allureth us. It was Beauty first that ministered
occasion to art, to find out the knowledge of caruing, painting, building, to
find out models, perspectiues, rich furnitures, and so many rare inventions.
Whitenes in the Lilly, red in the Rose, purple in the Violet, a luster in all
things without life, the clear light of the Moon, the bright beams of the
Sun, splendour of Gold, pure marble, sparkling Diamond, the excellent feature
of the Horse, the majesty of the Lion, the color of Birds, Peacocks tails,
the silver scales of Fish, we behold with singular delight and admiration. v
And which is rich inplants, S. L.
delightful in flowers, wonderful in beasts, Bau^s. prob. ^^. deform^.
but most glorious in men, does make us affect it and earnestly desire it, as
when we hear any sweet harmony an eloquent tongue, see any excellent quality,
curious work of man, elaborate art, or any thing that is exquisite, there
arises instantly in us a longing for the same. We love such men but most part
for comeliness of person. Inuidemus sapientibus justice nisi beneficijs assidue
amorem extorquent solos formosos amamus and primo velut aspectu benevolentia
co^iungimur and eos tanquam Deos co^imus, libentius iis seruimus qua^ aliis
imperamus maioremque etc.
We envy (says Isocrates) wise, just, honest men, except with mutual offices
and kindness, some good turn or other, they extortibis love from us, only
fair persons we love at first sight, and desire their acquaintance, and adore
them as so many Gods: we had rather serve them then command others, and account
our selves more beholding to them the more service they enjoin us. Though they
be otherwise vicious, dishonest: we love them, favor them, and are ready to
do them any good office for their Formae maiestatem Barbari verentur nec alii
maiores quamquos eximia forma natura donata est. Herod. lib. 5. Curtius 6.
Arist. Polit.
beauties sake; though they have no oth^^ good quality beside. Many men have
been preferred for their person alone, chosen Kings, Saeul was a goodly person
and a fair, Maximinus chosen Emperor, etc. Beauty is a dowre of it self, a
sufficient patrimony, an ample commendation, an accurate epistle, as Dial.
Amorum.
Lucian, c Apuleius, Tiraquellus, and some others conclude. Imperio digna
forma, Beauty deserves a kingdom, says Abulensis, paradox. 2. cap. 101.
immortality, and more have got this honor and eternity for their beauty,
then for all other virtues besides: and such as are fair Lucian. Tom. 4
Charidemo qui pulchri merito apud Deos and apud homines ho^ore affecti.
are worthy to be honored of God and men. Ganymedes was therefore fetched by
Iuppiter into heaven, Hephaestion dear to Alexander, Antinous to Adrian, 2. de
magia. Lib. 2. connub. cap. 27. virgo formosa etsi oppido pauper abunde est
dotata
Plato calls Beauty therefore a privilege of nature, naturae gaudentis opus,
Muta commentatio quavis epistolae ad commendandum efficatior.
a dumb comment, Theophrastus, a silent fraud, still Rhetoric Carneades,
that persuades without speech, a kingdom without a guard, because beautiful
persons command as so many Captains, Socrates a tyranny, Isocrates. plures ob
formam immortalitatem adepti sunt quam ob reliquas omnes virtutes.
which In ipsos tyrannos tyrannidem exerect.
tyranniseth over tyrants themselves. And it is a great matter, says Illud
certe magnum ob quod gloriari possunt formosi, quod ro^^stis necessarum sit
laborare fortem periculis se obiiccere sapientem, etc.
Xenophon, and of which all fair persons may worthily brag of that a strong
man must labor for his living, if he will have ought, a valiant man must fight
and endanger himself for it, a wise man speak and show himself and take
pains; but a fair and beautiful person does all with ease, he compasses his
desire without any pains taking: God and men, Heaven and Earth conspire to
honor him, every one pitties him above othe^s, if he be in need, Maiorem vim
habet ad commendandum forma, quam accurate scripta epistola. Arist.
and all the world is willing to do him good. Heliodor. lib. 1.
Cariclia fell into the hands of Pirates, but when all the rest were put to the
sword, she alone was preserved for her person. Kno^les hist. Turcica.
When all Constantinople was sacked by the Turk, Irene escaped, and was so far
from being made a captive with the rest, that she even captivated the grand
Signior himself. Formosam barbari verentur and ad aspectum pulchrum immanis
animus mansueseit, Helud. lib. 5. The Barbarians stand in awe of a fair woman,
and at a beautiful aspect, a fierce spirit is pacified. Beasts them^elues are
moved with it. Sinalda was a woman of such excellent feature, Tantae formae
fuit vt cum vincta loris, feris exposita foret equorum calcibus obterenda,
ipsis iumentis admirationi suit; laedere no^^erunt.
and a Queen, that when she was to be trodden on by wild horses for a
punishment, the wild beasts stood in admiration of her person, (Saxo
Grammaticus lib. 8. Dan. hist.) and would not hurt her. Inanimate creatures I
suppose have a couch of it; when a drop of Apuleius aur asmi.
Psyches Candle fell on Cupids shoulder, I think sure it was to kiss it; and
as ^ Helidorus holds, aer ipse Amore inficitur, the air it fel^^ is in love.
But men are mad, Parum abfuit quo minus faxu^ ex homine faetus sum, ipsis
statuis immobiliorem me fecit.
stupefied many times at the (...) of it, amassed, as Lib. 3.
Lucian in his Imagines, confesses of him (...) was at his mistress presence
voi^ of all (...) if he had seen a Gorgons head: which was no (...), as Veteres
Gorgonis fabula confinxerunt eximium formae decus stupidos reddens.
Cael^us interprets it, lib. 13. cap. 9. but (...) ^scence of Beauty, as
without doubt the (...) the first fiction of it. Hor. Ode. 5.
Miseri (...), poor wretches are compelled at the very sight (...) looks to
run mad, or make away themselves* (...) lib. 1. brings in Thyamis almost
besides himself, when he saw Cariclia first, Aspectum virginis sponte fugit
insa^us fere, and impossible existimans vt simul eam aspicere quis possit, and
intra temperantiae metas se continere.
and not daring to look upon (...) time, for he thought it ^mpossible for any
man (...) to ^ee her and contain himself. The very same of Beauty will fetch
them to it many miles of, such an attractiue power this loadstone has, over
hedge, ditch, thick and thin, as they did to see Apu^ ^ lib. 4. Mu't mer^^s
h^gis ui^er^us etc.
Psyche, many mortal men came far and near to see that glorious object of
her age. Paris for Helena, Corebus to Troia. Illis Romam qui forte diebus
venerat insano Cassandra incensus amore. And not only come to see, but as to a
F^ulkoner does an hungry hawk houer about and follow, and give attendance and
service, and spend goods lives and all their fortunes, look after and run to
see. When fair Museus^ ^ila autem be^e mora a^er aedem quacunque vagabatur,
Sequentem mentem hab^bat and oculos and corda virorum.
Hero came abroad, the eyes, hearts, and affections of her spectators were
still attendant on her. Charmides in Plato was a pro^er young man, and in
comeliness of person, and all good qualities far exceeding other men,
whenever fair Charmides came abroad, Praecaeteris corporis proceritate and
egregia ind^le mira^d^s apparebat, caeteri autem capti eius amore vid^^antur,
etc.
they seemed all to be in love with him (as Critias describes their carriage)
and were troubled as it were at the very sight of him, many came near him,
many followed him wheresoever he went. Many a man will condemn these men that
are so enamored, for fools, but some again commend them for it, many reject
Paris judgment, and yet Lucian approues of it, and much admires Paris for his
choice, he would have done as much himself, and by good desert in his mind,
Beauty is to be preferred In Charidemo sapientiae merito putchritudo praefertur
and opibus.
before wealth or wisdom. Ind^g^^ nihil est Troas fortes and Achiuos tempore
ta^^ longo p^pessus e^^e labores.
Athaeneus D^pnosophist. lib. 13. cap. 7. holds it no such indignity for the
Trojans and Greeks to contend ten years, to spend so much labor, so many
men lives for Helens sake, Di^na quidem fac^^es p^o qua ^elebires Achilles v^^
Priamus, belli ^^^sa pro^a (...) pro^^^^a
for so fair a Ladies sake.

Ob talem vxorem cui praestantissima forma.
Nil mortale refert.
That one woman was worth a kingdom, 100000 other women, a world it self. The
same testimony gives Homer of the old men of Troy, that were spectators of that
single combat betwixt Paris and Menelaus at the Seian gate, when Helena her
self stood in presence, they said all, the war was worthily prolonged and
undertaken (...) mat^^ (...)
for her sake. Curtius lib. 5
Great Alexander married Roxane, a poor man's child only for her person, and
'twas well done of Alexander, and heroically done, I admire him for it: Orlando
was mad for Angelica, and who does not condole his mishap. Thisbe died for
Piramus, Dido for Aeneas, who does not weep, as Confess.
Austin did in commiseration of her estate; she died for him, me thinks (as
he said) I could weep for her.

But this is not the matter in hand, what prerogative this Beauty has, of what
power and sovereignty she is, and how far such persons that so much admire
her, and dote upon her, are to be justified no man doubts: the question is how
and by what means this Beauty produces this effect? By sight: the Eye
betraies the soul, and is both Active and Passive in this business; it wounds
and is wounded, and is an especial cause and instrument, both in the subject
and in the object. It conuayes these beauteous rays, as I have said, unto the
heart. Vt vidi vt perij. Quid. Fastis.
Mars videt hanc, visamque cupit. Shechem saw Dinah the daughter of Leah, and
he defiled her. Genesis 34.2. Jacob, Rahel. 29.17. for she was beautiful and
fair* David espied Bersheba a far off, 2. Reg. 11.2. the Elders Susanna, and
were captiuated in an instant. Ammon fell sick for Thamars sake, 2. Sam. 13.2.
The Beauty of Ester was such, that she found favor not only in the fight of
Assuerus but of all those that looked upon her. Gerson, Origin, and some
others, contend that Christ himself was the fairest of the sons of men, and
Joseph next unto him, spetiosus praesilijs hominum, and they will have it
literally taken, his very person was such, that he found grace and favor of
all such as looked upon him. Joseph was so fair, that as the ordinary Gloss
has it, filiae decurrerent per murum, and ad fenestras, they ran to the top of
the walls, Antonius vbi vexit in Asiam and vidit Clopatrameandem exarsit.
and to the windows, as we do commonly to see some great personage go by:
as Matthew Paris describes Matilda the Empress going through Cullin. Lib. de
pul^brit. Jesus and Mariae.
P. Morales the Jesuit says as much of the Virgin Mary. Anthony no sooner saw
Cleopatra, but, says Appian lib. 1. he was enamored on her. Lucian Charidemo.
supra omnes mortales foelicissimum si hac frui possit.
Theseus at the first sight of Helen was so besotted, that he esteemed
himself the happiest man in the world if he might enjoy her. When Venus came
first to heaven, her comeliness was such, that (as my author says) Omnes dij
complexi sunt, and in vxorem fibi dari petierunt, Not. Comes de Venere.
all the Gods came and saluted her, and each of them went to Iuppiter, and
desired he might have her to be his wife. When fair Antilogus came in
presence, as a candle in the dark his beauty shined, and all men's cies (as Vt
cum lux noctu affulget, omnium oculos incurrit sic Antiloquus, etc.
Xenophon describes the manner of it) were instantly fixed on him, and moved at
the sight, in somnoh that they could not conceal themselves, but that in
gesture or looks it was discerned and expressed. These other senses, hearing,
touching, may much penetrate and affect, but none so much, none so forcible as
Sigh^. Forma Briseis medijs in armis mouit Achillem, Achilles was touched in
the midst of a battle. Judith captiuated that great captain Holofernes,
Dalilah Sampson, Rosamond Deleuit omnes ex animo mulieres.
Henry the second, Roxolana, Solymon the Magnificent, etc.

Spencer in his Fairie Queen.
Naught under heaven so strongly does allure,
The sense of man and all his mind possess,
As beauties loueliest bait, that does procure
Great warriers erst their rigor to suppress,
And mighty hands forget their manliness,
Driven with the power of an heart-burning eye,
And wrapped in flowers of a golden tresse,
That can with melting pleasure mollify,
Their hardened hearts inured to cruelty.
Achilles Tatius lib. 1.
Clitiphon ingeniously confesses, that he no sooner came in Loucippes
presence, but that he did cord tremere, and oculis laseiuius intueri, Statim
ac eam contemplatus sum, occidi oculos a virgin auertere conatus sum sed illi
repugnabant.
he was wounded at the first sight, his heart panted, and he could not possibly
turn his eyes from her. So does old Calysiris in Heliodorus. lib. 2. Isis
Priest, and a reverent old man, that by chance at Memphis seeing that Thracian
Rodophe, could not hold his eyes off her, Pudet dicere, non celabo tamen
Memphim ve^iens me vicit and continentiam expugnauit, quam ad senectutem vsq,
seruaram; oculis corporis, etc.
I will not conceal it, she overcame me with her presence, and quite assalted
my continency, which I had kept unto mine old age, I resisted a long time my
bodily eyes with the eyes of my understanding, at last I was conquered, and as
in a tempest carried headlong. No, says Imag. Polystrato. si illam saltem
intuearis statuis immobiliorem se faciet si conspexeris eam, non relinquetur
facultas oculos ab ea amouendi abducet te alligatum quocunque voluerit vt
ferrum ad se trahere ferunt adamantem.
Lucian of his mistress, she is so fair, that if thou do but see her, she
will stupesie thee, kill thee straight, and Medusa like turn thee to a stone,
thou can not pull thine eyes from her, but as an adamant does iron, she will
carry thee bound headlong whether she will her self.

Obstupuit primo aspectu Sydonia Dido.
It holds both in men and women, Dido was amazed at Aeneas presence; and as he
feelingly verified out of his experience.

Plaut. Mer^.
Quam ego postquam vidi non ita amaui vt sani solent
Homines, sed eodem pacto vt insani solant.
I loved her not as others soberly,
But as a mad man rages, so did I.
So Museus of Leander, nusquam lumen detorquet ab illa. and In the Knights Tale.
Chaucer of Palamon.

He cast his eye upon Emilia
And there with he blent and cried ha ha
As though he had bin stroke unto the harca.
If you desire to know more particularly what this Beauty is, how it does
Influere, how it does fascinate (for as all hold love is a fascination) thus in
brief. Ex debita totius proportione aptaque partium compositione.
Piccolomineus.
This comeliness or beauty arises from the due proportion of the whole, or
from each several part. For an exact delineation of which, I refer you to
Poets, Historiographers, and those amorous writers, To Lucians Imagines, and
Charidemus, Xenophons description of Panthea, Petronius Catalectes, Heliodorus
Cariclia, Tatius Leucippe, Longus Sophistas Daphnis and Cloe, Balthazar
Castilio, lib. 14. de aulico, Laurentius cap. 10. Aeneas Siluius his Lucretia,
and every Poet almost, which have most accurately described a perfect beauty,
an absolute feature, and that through every part, both in men and women. Each
part must concur to the perfection of it, for as Seneca says, Epist. 33.
lib. 4. Non est formosa mulier cuius crus laudatur and brachium, sed illa,
cuius simul vniuersa facies admirationem singulis partibus dedit. She is no
fair woman, whose arm, thigh, etc. are commended, except the face and all the
other parts be correspondent, and the face especially gives a luster to the
rest. The Face is it which commonly denominates fair or foul, arx forma
facies, the Face is Beauties Tower, and though the other parts be deformed, yet
a good face carries it, ( facies non vxor amatur) that alone is most part
respected, principally valued, and of it self alone able to captiuate.

Hor. ed. 19. lib. 1.
Vrit te Glyceraenitor --
Vrit grata proteruitas
Et vultus nimium lubricus aspici.
Glyceras too fair a face was it that set him on fire, too fair to be beheld.
It was Aeneas countenance ravished Q. Dido, Os humerosque Deo similis, he had
an angelical face.

Petronius Catell.
O sacros vultus Baccho vel Apolline dignos,
Quos vir, quos tuto foemina nulla videt.
O sacred looks besitting Majesty,
Which never mortal wight could safely see.
And though for the most part this beauty be most eminent in the face, ye^
many times those other members yield a most pleasing grace, and are alone
sufficient to enamour, as a high browe like unto the bright heavens, white and
smooth like the polished alabaster, a pair of cheeks of Vermilian color, a
black browe, coral lip, white and round neck, dimple in the chinne, black
eyebrows, sweet breath, white and even teeth, which some call the sale-peece:
a fine soft round pappe, which gives an excellent grace, ( Ovid.
Forma papillarum quam fuit apta premi: and vrebant oculos durae stantesque
mamillae.) A flexen hair, golden hair was ever in great account, for which
Virgil commends Dido, When Cupid slept. Caesariem auream habentem vbi Psyche
vidit mollemque ex ambrosia ceruicem inspexit crines crispos purpureas genas
candidasque etc. Apuleius.
Nondum sustulerat flavum Proserpina crinem. And crines nodantur in aurum.
Apollonius Argonaut. lib. 4. Iasonis flaua coma incendit cor Medeae. Homer
commends Helena, and makes Patroclus, and Achilles yellow and golden hair'd,
Pulchricoma Venus: and Cupid himself was yellow hair'd:

-- and Hero the fair
Whom young Apollo courted for her hair.
Leland commends Guithera King Arthurs wife for a fair flaxen hair, and
Paulus Aemilius, Clodoueus that fair King of France. In laudem calui:
splendida coma quisque adulter est, allicit aurea coma.
Sinesius holds every effeminate fellow or adulterer is fair hair'd: and
Apuleius, that Venus herself, Goddess of Love cannot please, Venus ipsa non
placeret comis nudata capite spoliata si qualis ipsa Venus cum fuit Virgo omni
gratiarum choro stipata and toto cupidinum populo concinnat^, baltheo suo
cincta cinnama fragrans and balsama si calua processerit placere no^ potest
Vulcano suo
Though she come accompanied with the Graces, and all Cupids train to attend
upon her, girt with her own girdle, and smell of Cinnamon and Bawme, yet if
she be bauld, or bad haird, she cannot please her Vulcan. A little hand, a
straight and slender body, a small foot, and well proportioned leg, a soft
and white skin, etc. have their peculiar graces. Plautus Cas.
Nebula haud est mollior ac huius cutis est, aedipol papillam bellulam. Though
in men these parts are not so much respected; a grimme Saracen sometimes a
martial hirsute face pleases best, a black man is a pearl in a fair woman's
eye, and many women, as Fol. 5. Siservum viderint aut statorem altius cinctum
aut puluere' perfusu^ aut histrionem in scenam traductum, etc.
Petronius observes, sordibus calent (As many men are more moved with kitchen
wenches, and a poor country market-maid, then with all these illustrious Court
and City Dames.) will sooner dote upon a slave, a Servant, a Durt-dawber, a
Cook, a Player, if they see his naked legs, or arms, though he be all in
rags, obscene and durty, then upon a Noble Gallant, Embroadered Courtiers all
in Gold. Galen.
Iustines wife a Citizen of Rome fell in Love with Pylades a Player, and was
ready to run mad for him, had not Galen himself helped her by chance. Faustina
the Empress on a Fencer. There is not one of a thousand falls in love but
their is some one part or other, which pleases him most, and enflames him
above the rest: All parts are attractiue, but especially the eyes, which are
loves fowlers, Hensius.
Aucupium amoris, the shoowinghornes, and as Athaeneus lib. 13. dip. cap. 5.
and Tatius hold, Sunt enim oculi praecipuae pulchritudinis sed es lib. 6.
the chief feats of love, as James Lernutius has facetely expressed in an
elegant Ode of his. Amorem ocellis flammeolis herae
Vidi infidentem, Ocellis carm. 17. cuius and Lipsius epist. quaest. lib. 3.
cap 12. meminit ob elegantiam.
credit posteri:
Fratresque circumludibundos
Cum pharetra volitare and arcu.
I saw love sitting in my mistress eyes,
Believe it all posterity --
And his attendants playing round about,
With bow and arrows for to fly.
Scaliger calls the eyes, Cynthia prima suis miserum me cepit ocellis,
contactum nullis ante cupidinibus Proper. lib. 1.
Cupids arrows, the tongue, the lightning of love, the papps, the tents:
Balthazar Castilio, the causes, the chariots of love, the lamps of love, --
amula lumina stellis,
Lumina quae possent sollicitare Deos.
Eyes emulating stars in light,
Entising Gods at the first sight.
Loves Orators, In Catalect.
Petronius, O blandos oculos and o facetos,
Et quadam propria nota loquaces,
Illic est Venus and leves amores,
Atque ipsa in medio sedet voluptas.
O sweet and pretty speaking eles,
Where Venus love and pleasure lies.
Loves Torches, Tuchbox and Matches, De Sulpitia lib 4.
Tibullus. Illius ex oculis quum vult exurere diuos,
Accendit geminas lampadas acer amor.
Tart love when he will set the Gods on fire,
Lightens the eyes as Torches to desire.
Lean^^r at the first sight of Hero's eyes was incensed says Musaeus. Simul in
Pulchritudo ipsa per occultos radios in pectus amantis dimanans amatae rei
formam insculpsit. Tatius lib. 5
oculorum radijs crescebat fax amorum,
Et corferuebat inuicti ignis impetu.
Pulchritudo enim celebris immaculatae foeminae,
Acutior hominibus est veloci sagitta.
Oculus vero via est, ab oculi ictibus
Vulnus dilabitur, and in praecordia viri manat.
Loves torches ganne to burn first in her eyes,
And set his heart a fire, which never dies,
For the fair beauty of a virgin pure,
Is sharper then a dart, and does inure
A deeper wound, which pearceth to the heart
Byth' eyes, and causes such a cruel smart.
Jacob. Cornelius Am^on traegaed. act. 1. sc. 1.
A modern Poet brings in Ammon complaining of Thamar. -- and me fascino
Occidit ille risus, and formae lepos
Ille nitor, Rosae formosarum oculis nascuntur, and hilaritas vultus elegantiae
corona. Philostratus delitijs.
illa gratia, and verus decor,
Illae aemulantes purpuram and rosas genae,
Oculique, vinctaeque aureo nodo comae. --
It was thy Beauty, 'twas thy pleasing smile,
Thy grace and comeliness did me beguile,
Thy rose like cheeks, and unto purple fair
Thy lovely eyes and golden knotted hair.
Epist. and in deli^is. Abi and oppugnationem relinque quam flamma non
extinguit nam ab amore ipsa flamma sentit incendium: quae corporum penetratio,
quae tyrannis haec, etc.
Philostratus Lemnius cries out of his mistress eyes, they had so enflamed his
foul, that no water could quench it. What a tyranny, says he, what a
penetration of bodies is this, thou drawest me with violence, and swallowest me
up, as Charybdis does Sailors, with thy rockie eyes, he that falls into this
gulf of Love can never get out. The strongest beams of beauty are still
darted from thy eyes, and as men catch dotrells, by putting out a leg or an
arm, by those mutual glances of the eyes they first inveagle one another. Of
all eyes, by the way, black are the most amiable, entising, and the fairest.
Ovid. amoru^ lib. 2. eleg. 4.
Spectandam nigris oculis nigroque capillo -- and
Leda fuit nigra conspicienda coma.
Jliad. 1.
Homer uses that Epithet of Ox-eyed, in describing Juno, because a round
black eye is the best, and the farthest from black the worse. Which Hist.
lib. 1.
Polidore Virgil taxes in our nation, Angli vt plurimum caesiis oculis, we
have gray eyes for the most part. Many commend on the other side Spanish
Ladies, and those Sands relations. fol. 67.
Greek Dames at this day, for the blackness of their eyes.

Now last of all, I will show you by what means Beauty does fascinate,
bewitch, as some hold, and work upon the Soul of a man by the eye. For
certainly I am of the Poets mind, Love does bewitch us, and strangely change
us, Mantuan.
Ludit amor sensus, oculos perstringit, and ausert
Libertatem animi, mira nos fascinat art.
Credo aliquis demon subiens praecordia flammam
Concitat, and raptam tollit de cardine mentem.
Love mocks our senses, and curbs our liberties.
And does bewitch us with his art and ringes,
I think some Devil gets into our entrals,
And kindles coals, and heaues our souls from the hinges.
Heliodorus lib. 3. proves it at large, Amor per oculus nares poros instuens,
etc. Mortales tum summopere fascinan^ur quando fre^uentissimo intuitu aciem
visus ad aciem d^rigentes ^amp;c. Ideo si quis nito^e polleat oculorum, etc.
that Love is witchcraft, it gets in at our eyes, pores, nostrels, and
ingenders the same qualities, and affections in us, as were in the party whence
it came. The manner of the fascination, as Ficinus comm. 10. cap. con. Plat.
declares it, is thus. Mortal men are then especially bewitched, when as by
often gazing one on the other, they direct sight to sight, and join eye to
eye, and so drink and suck in love between them, for the beginning of this
disease is the Eye. And therefore he that has a clear eye, though he be
otherwise deformed, by often looking upon him will make one mad, and ty^ him
fast to him by the eyes. Leonard. Varius lib. 1. cap. 2. de fascinat. tells
us that by this enteruew, Spiritus puriores fascinantur, oculus a se ^adios
emittit, etc.
the purer spirits are infected, the one eye pearceth through the other with
his rays, which he sends forth: and many men are of such excellent piercing
eyes, that which Suetonius relates of Augustus, their brightness is such they
compel their spectators to look off, and they can no more endure them, then
the Sun beams. Lib. de pulchr. Ies. and Mar.
Barradius lib. 6. cap. 10. de Harmonia Evangel. reports as much of our Savior
Christ, and Lib. 2. cap. 23. color triticum referente crine slaua acribus
oculis.
Peter Morales of the Virgin Mary, whom Nicephorus describes likewise to have
been yellow hair'd, of a wheat color, but of a most amiable and piercing eye.
The rays, as some think, sent from the eyes, carry certain spiritual vapors
with them, and so infect the other party. I know they that hold visio fit
intra mittendo will make a doubt of this, but Ficinus proves it from bleare
eyes, ^ippi solo intuitu alios lippos faciunt and patet vna cum radio va^o^em
corrupti sanguinis emanare cuius contagione oculus spectantis infi^itur.
That by sight alone make others bleare-eyed, and it is more the^ manifest,
that the vapor of the corrupt blood does get in together with the rays, and
so by the contagion the spectators eyes are infected. Other arguments there are
of a Basilisk, that kills a far off by sight alone, as that Ephesian did, of
whom Vita Apollo^.
Philostratus speaks, of so pernicious a sight, he poisoned all he looked
steddily on: and that other argument menstruae faeminae, out of Aristotle's
Problems, that contaminats a looking glass with beholding it. Sic radius a
cord percutientis missus regimen proprium repetit cor vulnerat per oculos and
sanguinem inficit and spiritus subtili quadam vi. Castil. lib. 3, de aulico.
so the beams come from the agents heart, and by the eyes infect the spirits
about the patients and inwardly wound, and so the spirits infect the blood. So
she complained in Apuleius, Thou art the cause of my grief, thy eyes peircing
through mine eyes to my inner parts, have set my bowels on fire, and therefore
pity me that am now ready to die for thy sake. Ficinus illustrates this with a
familiar example of that Marhusian Phaedrus and Lycias. Lycias in Phaedri
vultum inhiat Phaedrus in oculos Lysiae scintillas suorum defigit oculorum
cumque scintillis, etc. Sequitur Phaedrus Lyciam quia cor suum petit spiritum,
Phaedrum Lycias quia spiritus propriam sedem postulat. Verum Lycias. etc.
Lycias he stares on Phaedrus face, and Phaedrus again fastens the balls of
his eyes upon Lycias, and with those sparkling rays sends out his spirits.
Lib. 10. Causa omnis and origo omnis praesentis doloris tute es. Isti enim tui
ocu^i per meos oculos ad intima delapsi praecordia acerrimum meis medullis com
mouent ince^diu^ ergo miserere tui causa pereuntis.
The beams of Phaedrus eyes are easily mingled with the beams of Lycias, and
spirits are joined to spirits. This vapor begot in Phaedrus heart, enters into
Lycias bowels, and that which is a greater wonder, Phaedrus blood is in Lycias
heart, and thence come those ordinary love speeches, my sweet heart Phaedrus,
and mine own self, my dear bowels. And Phaedrus again to Lycias, O my light,
my joy, my soul, my life. Phaedrus follows Lycias, because his heart would
have his spirits, and Lycias follows Phaedrus, because he loves the seat of
his spirits, both follow, but Lycias the more earnest of the two. The river
has more need of the fountain, then the fountain of the river, as iron is
drawn to that which is touched with a loadstone, but draws not it again, so
Lycias draws Phaedrus. But how comes it to pass then, that a blind man loves
that never saw? It Is true indeed of natural and chaste love, but not of this
heroical passion, or rather brutish burning lust, on which we treat, we speak
of wandering, wanton, adulterous eyes, which as Castilio de aulico lib. 3. fol.
228. Oculi vt milites in insidijs semper recubant and subito ad visum sagittas
emittunt, etc.
he says, lie still in wait, as so many soldiers, and when they spy one
fixed on them, sho^t him through and presently bewitch him. Especially when
they shall gaze and glote, as wanton lovers do one upon another, and with a
pleasant eye conflict, participate one another souls. And here you may
perceive how easily and how quickly we may be taken in love, since at the
twinkling of an eye, Phaedrus spirits may so pernitiously infect Lyceas blood.
Nec mirum si reliquos morbos qui ex contagione nascuntur co^sideremus pestem
pruritum scabiem, etc.
And it is no wonder if we but consider how many other diseases as closely, and
as suddenly are token by infection, Plague, Itch, Scabs, Flux, etc. The spirits
taken in will not let him rest, that has received them, but egg him on.
Lucretius.
Idque corpus men's vnde est saucia amore, as we may manifestly perceive a
strange eduction of spirits, by such as bleed at nose after they be dead, at
the sight of the murderer, but read more of this in Lemnius lib. 2. de occult.
not. mir. cap. 7. Valleriola lib. 2. obser. cap. 7. Valesius contro: Ficinus,
Cardan, etc.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 3. Arteficiall allurements of Love, causes and provocations to lust.
Gestures, Clothes, Dowre, etc.
Natural Beauty is a strong loadstone of it self, as you have heard, a great
temptation, and peirceth to the very heart, but much more when those
artificial entisements and prouocations of Gestures, Clothes, Jewels,
Pigments, Exornations, In Beauty that of favor is preferred before that of
Colors and decent motion is more then that of favor. Bacons Essays.
shall be annexed unto it, and other circumstances, opportunities of time, and
place shall concur, which of themselves alone were all sufficient, each one
in particular to produce this effect. It is a question much controuerted by
some wise men, An forma debeat plus arti an naturae, whether natural or
arteficiall objects be more powerful, but not decided: for my part I am of
opinion, that though beauty of it self be a great motive, and give an
excellent luster in sordibus and in beggary, as a Jewel on a dunghill, it will
shine and cast his rays, it cannot be suppressed as Heliodorus faines of his
Cariclia, though she were in beggars weeds: yet as it is used, arteficiall is
of much more force. John Lerius the Burgundian cap. 8. hist. nauigat. in
Brasil. is altogether on my side. For whereas (says he) at our coming
thither, we found both men and women stark naked as they were born, without
any covering, so much as of their priuities, and could not be persuaded by our
French men that lived a year with them to wear any. Multi tacit opinantur
commercium illud adeo frequens cum barbaris nudis ac praesertim cum f^minis ad
libidinem provocare, at minus multo noxia illorum nuditas quam nostrarum
faeminarum cultus. Ausum asseuerare ^^^endidum illum cultum, fucos, etc.
Many will think that our so long commerce with naked women, must needs be a
great prouoc^tion to lust, but he concludes otherwise, that their nakedness
did much less entice them to lasciviousness, then our women's clothes. And I
dare boldly affirm (says he) that those glittering attires counterfeit
colors, head-geares, curled hairs, plaited co^te^, cloakes, gowns, costly
stomachers, guarded and loose garments, and all those other accoutrements,
wherewith our country women counterfeit a beauty, and so curiously set out
themselves, cause more inconvenience in this kind, then that Barbarian
homeliness, although they be no whit inferior unto them in Beauty. I could
euince the truth of this by many other arguments, but I appeal (says he) to
my companions at that present, which were all of the same mind. His country
man Montagne in his Essays, is of the same opinion, and so are many others.
Out of whose assertions thus much in breese we may conclude that Beauty is more
beholding to art then to nature, and stronger prouocations proceed from outward
ornaments, then such as nature has provided. It is true that those fair
sparkling eyes, white neck, coral lips, turgent pappes, Rose-coloured
cheeks, etc. of themselves are potent entisers, but when a comely arteficiall,
well composed look, gesture, an affected carriage shall be added, it must needs
be far more forcible then it was, when those curious needleworkes, variety of
colors, Jewels, pendants, launes, fair and fine linen, embroderies,
calamistrations, ointments, etc. shall be added, they will make the veriest
doudy otherwise a Goddess, when nature shall be farthered by art. For it is
not the eye of it self that entiseth to lust, but an adulterous eye, as Peter
terms it 2.2.14. a wanton, a roling lascivious eye, A wandering eye, which I
say taxes, 3.16. Christ himself, and the Virgin Mary had a beautiful eye, as
amiable an eye as any persons, says Haermo. evangel. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Barradius, that ever lived, but withal so modest, so chaste, that whosoever
looked on them, was freed from that passion of burning lust, if we may believe
Sermon. de concep. virg. phisiognomia virginis omn^^ mouis ad castitatem.
Gerson and 3 sent. d^ 3 q 3 m^rum virgo formosissima sed a n^mine concupita.
Bonaventure, there was no such Antidote against it, as the Virgin Mary's fa^^
It Is not the eye but carriage of it, as they use it, the eye is a secret
Orator, the first bawd, and with private looks, winking glances, and smiles,
as so many dialogues they make up the match many times, and understand one
another meanings, before ever they come to speak word. Aeneas Sylv.
Eurialus and Lucretia were so mutually enamored by the eye, and prepared to
give one another entertainment, before ever they had conference: and that
Heliodor. l. 2. Rodophe Thracia tam ineuitab^l^ fascino Instruct^ tam exact
oculis intuens attraxit v^ si in ill^m quis i^cidisset fieri non posset quin
caperetur.
Thracian Rodophe, was so excellent at that dumb rhetoric, that if she had
but looked upon any one almost, says Calisiris she would have bewitched him
and he could not possibly escape it. For as Lib 3. De providenti^. animi
fenestrae oculi, et omnis improba (...) pe^ ^cel^s s^anquam canales intioit.
Saluianus observes, the eyes are the windows of our sonles, by which as so
many channels, all dishonest concupiscences get into our hearts. They reveal
our thoughts, and as they say, frons animi Index, but the eye of the
countenance. I may say the same of smiling, gate, nakedness of parts,
gestures, etc. To laugh is the proper passion of a man; an ordinary thing to
smile, but those counterfeit composed, affected, artificial and reciprocal,
and counter smiles, are the dumb shows and prognostics of greater matters,
Stultus quando videt quod pulchra puellula ridet,
Tum fatuus credit se quod amare velit.
When a fool sees a fair maid for to smile,
He thinks she loves him, it is but to beguile.
They make an art of it, as the Poet tells us. Ovid. de ar^. amand.
Quis credat discunt etiam ridere puellae.
Quaritur atque illis hac quoque part decor.
Who can believe to laugh maids make an art,
And seek a pleasant grace in that same part.


And it is as great an entisement as any of the rest. Per 3. Sat.
-- subrisit molle puellae,
Cor tibirite salat --
She makes thine heart pant, with Vel cent^m Charites ridere putares Museus of
Hero.
a pleasing gentle smile of hers: Hor. Od 2^. lib. 1.
dulce ridente^ Lalagen amabo, dulce loquente^, I love Lalage as much for
smiling as for discoursing, delectata illa risit tam blandum, as he said in
Petronius, of his mistress, being well pleased she gave so sweet a smile. It
won Ismenius, as he Mustathius l. 5
confesses, Ismene subrisit amatorium, Ismene smiled so lovingly upon me the
second time I saw her, that I could not choose but admire her. All other
gestures of the body will enforce as much (many women dote upon a man for his
complement only, and good carriage, they are won in an instant) and amongst
the rest an upright, a comely carriage, courtesies, gentle salutations, cringes,
a mincing gate, a decent and an affected pace: Which the Prophet Esaias objected
to the daughters of Sion, 3.16. they minced as they went, and made a tinkling
with their feet. When they show their fair hand, fine foot and leg withal,
magnum sui desiderium, nobis relinqunt, says Vel si forte ve stimentum de
industria eleuetur vt pedum ac tibiarum pars aliqua conspiciatur dum templum
aut locum aliquem adi^rit.
Balthazar Castilio lib. 1. they set us a longing, and so when they pull up
their petty-coats, and outward garments as usually they do, to show their fine
stockings, gold fringes, laces, embroderings (it shall go hard but when they
go to Church, or to any other place all shall be seen) it is but a spring to
catch Woodcocks; and as Sermon quod non faem. viris cohabitent. Non loquuta es
lingua sed loqunta e^^gressu non loquuta es voce sed oculis loquuta es clarius
quam voce, etc.
Chrysostom tells them down right, though they say nothing with their
mouths, yet they speak in their gate, they speak with their eyes, they speak
in their carriage of their bodies. And what shall we say otherwise of that
baring of their necks, shoulders, naked breasts, arms and wrists, to what end
are they but only to tempt men to lust. Nakedness, as I have said, is an
odious thing of it self, remedium amoris, yet it may be so used in part,
Plin. lib. 33. c. 10 Campaspen nudam picturus Apelles amore eius illaqueatus
est.
and at such times that there can be no such entisement as it is. David so
espied Bersheba, the Elders Susanna. Apelles was inamored with Campaspe when
he was to paint her naked. Tiberius in Suet. c. 42. supped with Sestius Gallus
an old leacher, libidinoso seen, ea lege vt nudae puellae administrarent some
say as much of Nero, and P. Huter of Carol. Pugnax. Amongst the Babylonia^s, it
was the custom of some lascivious Q. to dance Friskin in that fashion, says
Curtius l. 5. and In Tyrrhenis conviviis nudae mulieres ministrabant.
Sardus de mor. gent. lib. 1. The Tuskans at some set banquets had naked women
to attend upon them, which Leonicus de Varia hist lib. 3. cap. 96. confirms of
some other baudy nations. Nero would have filthy pictures still hanging in his
chamber, which is too commonly used in our times, and Heliogabalus, Etiam coram
agentes, vt ad Venerem incitarent, So things may be abused. Spartian.
Antoninus Caracalla spied his mother in law with her breasts amorously laid
open, he was so much moved, that he said, Ah si liceret, which she by chance
ouerhearing, replied as readily, Quicquid libet licet. And upon that temptation
he married her, this object was not in cause, not the thing it self, but that
unseemly use, indecent carriage of it.

But when you have all done, veniunt a vest sagittae, the greatest
prouocations of lust are from our apparel. God makes, they say, man shapes,
and there is no motive like unto it, a filthy knave, deformed queen, a crooked
carcass, a witch, a rotten post, an hedgestake may be so set out and tricked
up, that it may make all out as fair a show, as much enamour as the rest: many
a filthy fellow is so taken. Primum luxuriae aucupium, one calls it the first
snare of lust, De immod. mulier: cultu,
Bossus aucupium animarum, lethalem arundinem, a fatal reed, the greatest
bawd, forte lenocinium. Not that comeliness of clothes is therefore to be
condemned, and those usual ornaments: there is a decency and decorum in this
as well as in other things, and fit to be used, becoming several persons, and
befitting their estates, he is only fantastical, that is not in fashion,
when a manner of attire is generally received: but when they are so new
fangled, so vnstaide, so prodigious in their attires, beyond their means and
fortunes, unbefitting their age, place, quality, condition, what should we
otherwise think of them. Why do they adorn themselves with so many colors
of herbs, flowers, curious needleworkes, devices of sweet smelling odors, with
those inestimable riches of precious stones, pearls, diamonds, emeralds, etc.
Why do they crown themselves with gold and silver, use coronets and tires of
several fashions, deck themselves with pendants, bracelets, earings, chains,
girdles, rings, pinnes, spangles, embroderies, shadows, rebatoes, ribbins; why
do they make such glorious shows with their feathers, fannes, maskes, furs,
laces launes, tif^^inies, ruffes, falls, calls, cuffes, damaskes, veluets,
tinsells, cloth of gold, silver, tissue? with colors of heavens, stars,
planets, the strength of mettalls, stones, odors, flowers, birds, beasts,
fishes, and whatsoever Afric, Asia, America, sea, land, art and industry of
man can afford? Why do they use and covet such novelty of inventions, such
new f^ngled tyres, and spend such inestimable somes on them? To what end are
those crisped, false hairs, painted faces, as Petronius fol. 95. quo spectant
flexae comae quo comae quo facies medicamine attrita and oculorum mollis
petul^ntia quo incessus tam compositus etc.
the Sat^^ists observe, such a composed gate, not a step awry? why are they
like so many Sybarites, or Neroes Poppaea, Assuerus concubines so costly, so
long a dressing, as Caesar was marshalling his army, or an hawke in pruning?
Ter.
Dum moliuntur, dum comuntur annus est, such setting up with corkes,
streightning with whale-bones, but as a day-net catches larkes, to make young
men stoop unto them. Quid sibi vult pixidum turba, says Tom. 4. dial. Amor.
vascula plena multae in felicitatis, om men maritorum opulentiam in haec
impendunt, dracones pro monilibus habent, qui vtina ^ vere dracones essent,
Lucian.
Lucian, pots, glasses, ointments, irons, combs, bodkins, setting sticks, and
bestow all their patrimonies and husbands yearly revenues on such fooleries,
use dragons, waspes, snakes, for chains, inamelled Jewels on their necks,
ears, dignum potius foret ^e^ro manus is it as religari, atque vtinam monilia
vere dracones essent, they had more need some of them be tied in Bedlam with
iron chains, and have a whippe for a fann, and haire-cloathes next to their
skines, in steed of wrought smocks, and have their cheeks stigmatized with a
hot i^on some of them in steed of painting if they were well served. But why
is all this labor, all this cost; preparation, riding, running, far fetched,
and dear bought stuff? but as he says, Castilio de aulic lib. 1. mulieribus
omnibus hoc imprimis in votis est vt formosae sint aut si reipsa non sunt
videantur tamen esse, and si qua part natura desuit artis suppetias adiungunt,
vnde illae faciei vnctiones dolor and cruciatus in arctandis corporibus, etc.
Because forsooth they would be fair and fine, and where nature is defective,
supply it by art, Sanguine quae vero non rubet, art rubet, Ovid. and to that
purpose they annoint and paint their faces, crush in their feet and bodies, and
hint and crucify themselves, sometimes in laxe clothes, an hundred yeardes I
think in a gown, a sleeue, and sometimes again so close, vt nudos exprimant
artus. Modo caudatas tunicas. etc. Bossus.
Now long tails and trains, and then short, up, down, high, low, thick,
thin, etc. Why is all this, but with the whore in the Proverbs to intoxicate
some or other, to be admired, to be gazed on, to circumuent some nouice? as
many times they do, that instead of a Lady he loves a cappe and feather, in
stead of a maid, a ruff band, fair and fine linen, a coronet, a flower, a
painted wascore, or a pied petticote, in stead of a proper woman. Ovid.
Auferimur cultuque and gemmis, auroque teguntur
Omnia, pars minima est ipsa puella sus.
With gold and Jewels all is covered,
And with a strange tire we are won;
(While she is the least part of her self) and with such baubles quite undone.


Why do they keep in so long together, a whole winter sometimes and will not
be seen, but by torch or candlelight, and come abroad with all the preparation
may be, Orat in ebrios. Impudenter se masculorum aspectibus exponunt insolenter
comas iactantes trahunt tunicas pedibus collidentes oculoque petulanti risu
effuso ad tripudium insanientes omne adolescentum intemperantiam in se
prouocantes ^dque in templis memo^iae martyrum consecratispomoerium ciuitatis
and officina fecerunt impude^tiae.
when they have no business but only to show themselves? Spectatum veniunt,
veniunt spectentur vt ipsae, why do they go with such a counterfeit gate,
which Lib. de victimis. fracto incessu, obtutu, lasciuo, calamistrata
cincinnata, fucata, recens lota purpurissata pretiosoque ami ^tu, palliolo
spirans vnguenta, vt iuuenum animos circuueniat.
Philo Indaeus reprehends them for, and use such gestures, apish, ridiculous,
indecent attires, use those perfumes, ointments in public: come to hear
Sermons so frequent, is it for devotion? or rather as s Basil tells them, to
meet their sweet-hearts, and see fashions, for as he says commonly they come
so provided to that place, with such gestures and tires, as if they should go
to a dauncing-schoole, or to a stage play, or baudie house sitter then a
Church. They make those holy Temples consecrated to Gods martyrs, and religious
uses, the shoppes of impudence, dens of whores and thieves, and little better
then brothel houses. When we shall see these things daily done, their husbands
banckrupts, if not cuckolds, their wives light huswiues, daughters dishonest,
and here of such dissolute acts, as daily we do, how should we think
otherwise, what is their end, but to deceive and inueagle young men? As tow
does fire, such entising objects produce their effects, how can it be
otherwise? When Venus stood befoe Anchises as Hymno veneri dicato.
Homer faines in one of his hymns; in her costly roabes he was instantly
taken. Cum ante ipsum staret Iouis filia, videns eum
Anchises, admirabatur formam and stupendas vestes,
Erat enim induta peplo igneis radijs splendidiore,
Habebat quoque torques fulgidos, flexiles haelices,
Tenerum collum ambiebant monilia, pulchra, aurea, variegata.
When Venus stood before Anchises first,
He was amasd to see her in her tires,
For she had on a hood as red as fire,
And glittering chains, and Iuy twisted spires,
About her tender neck wear costly bruches,
And neckelaces of gold inameld ouches.


And when Medoea came in presence, attended by her Nymphs and Ladies, as she
is described by Argonaut. lib. 4.
Apollonius. Cunctas vero ignis instar sequebatur splendour,
Tantum ab aureis fimbrijs relucebat iubar,
Accenditque in oculis dulce desiderium.
A luster followed them like flaming fire,
And from their golden borders came such beams,
Which in their eyes prouokd' a sweet desire.
Such a relation we have in Plutarch in the life of Anthony, when the Queens
came and offered themselves to Anthony; Regia domo ornatuque certantes, sese ac
formam suam Antonio offerentes, etc. Cum ornatu and incredibili pompa per
cydnum fl^uium nauigare^t aurata puppi ipsa ad similitudinem veneris ornata
puellae gratijs similes, pueri ^upidinibus, Antonius ad visum stupefactus.
with diverse presents and entising ornaments, Asiaticke allurements, with such
wonderful joy and festiuitie, they did so inueigle the Romans, that no man
cold contain himself, all was turned to delight and pleasure. The women
transformed themselves to Bacchus shapes, the men children to Satyrs and Pans,
but Anthony himself was quite besotted with Cleopatras sweet speeches,
Philters, beauty, pleasing tires, for when she sailed along the river Cydnus,
with such incredible pomp in a gilded ship, her self dressed like Venus,
her maids like the Graces, her Pages like so many Cupids, Anthony was amassed
and (...) de lib. prep.
apt beyond himself, Heliodorus lib. 1. brings in Dameneta stepmother to
Cnemon, whom she saw in his robes and coronets, quite mad for the love of him.
It was Iudiths Pantoffles that ravished the eyes of Holofernes. And Amictum
Chlamyde and coronis quum primum aspexit Cnemonem ex potestate mentis excidit.
Cardan is not ashamed to confess, that seeing his wife the first time all in
white, he did admire and instantly love her. If these outward ornaments were
not of such force, why does Ruth. 3.3.
Naomi give Ruth counsel how to please Boaz? and Judith seeking to please
Holofernes, washed and anointed her self with costly ointments, and dressed
her hair, and put on costly tires? The riott in this kind has bin excessive
in times past, Cap. 19.5.
no man almost came abroad but curled and anointed. Iuuen. Sat. 6.
Et matutino sudans Crispinus amomo, quantu^ vix redolent duo funera, one spent
as much as two funerals at once, and with perfumed hairs, Hor. lib. 2. ed. II.
et rosa canos odorati capillos Assyriaque nardo. What strange things does Cap.
27.
Sueton relate in this kind of Caligulas riot? and Pliny li. 12. and 13. Read
more in Dioscorides, Vlmus, Arnoldus, Randoletius de fuco and decoratione, for
it is now an art, as it was of old, as Epist. 90.
Seneca records, officinae sunt odores coquentium. Women are bad, and men are
worse, no difference at all betwixt their and our times, Quicquid est boni
moris leuitate extinguitur, and politura corporis, muliebres munditias
antecessimus, colores meretricios virisumimus, tenero and molli gradu
suspendimus gradum, non ambulamus. not. quaest. lib. 7^. cap. 31.
Good manners as Seneca complains, are extinct with wantonness, in tricking
up themselves men go beyond women, men wear harlots colors and do not
walk, but iet and dance, hic mulier, hac vir, more like Players, Butterflies,
Baboones, Apes, Antickes then men, and so ridiculous we are in our attires,
and for cost so excessive, that as Hierome said of old, Vno filo villarum in
sunt pretia, vno lino decies sestertium inseritur, it is an ordinary thing to
put a thousand Oaks, or an hundred oxen into a suit of apparel, to wear a
whole Manner on his back. What with shooe-ties, hangers, points, cappes and
feathers, scarffes, bands, cuffes, etc. in a short space their whole
patrimonies are consumed. Heliogabalus is taxed by Lampridius, and admired at
in his time for wearing jewels in his shoes, a common thing in our times, not
for Emperors and Princes, but almost for seruingmen and tailors: all the
flowers, stars, and constellations, gold and precious stones do condescend
to set out their shoes. To express the luxury of those Roman matrons, they
had Liu. l. 4. dec 4.
lex Valeria and Oppia, and a Cato to contradict, but no laws will serve to
express the pride and insolency of our times, the prodigious riot in this
kind. Lucullus wardrope is put down by our ordinary citizens, and a cobblers
wife in Venice, a Curtesan in Florence is no whit inferior to a Queen, if our
Geographers say true, and why is all this, Why do they glory in their Jewels
(as Quid exultas in pulchritu dine panni, quid gloriaris ingem mis, vt sacilius
incites ad libidinosum incendium. Mat. Bossus de Immoder. mulie. cultu.
he says) or exult and triumph in the beauty of clothes, why is all this
cost? to incite men the sooner to burning lust. They pretend decency and
ornament, but let them take heed, least whilst they set out their bodies, they
do not damn their souls, it is Epist. 113. sulgent monil^bus moribus sordent,
purpurata vestis conscientiae pannosa. cap. 3 17.
Barnards council: shine in Jewels, stink in conditions, have purple robes
and a torn conscience. Let them take heed of Esayes prophecy, that their
slippers and tires be not taken from them, sweet balls, bracelets, earings,
vailes, wimpells, crisping pinnes, glasses, fine linen, hoods and lawnes and
sweet favors, they become bald, burnt, and stink upon a sudden. And let
maids take heed, as De virginali habitu, dum ornari cultius dum euagari
virgins volunt, desinunt esse virgins. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. de pulchr.
anime, ibidem.
Cyprian advises them, least while they wander too loosely abroad, they loose
not their maidenhead: and like Egyptian temples, seem fair without, but
prove rotten carcasses within. How much better were it for them to follow that
good council of Tertullian, De virginali habitu. dum ornari cultius dum
euagari virgins volunt, desinunt esse virgins. Clemens Alexandrinus lib. de
pulchr. anime, ibidem.
To have their eyes painted with chastity, the word of God inserted to their
ears, Lib. 2. de cultu mulierum. oculos de pictos verecundia, inserentes in
aures sermone^ dei, anneclentes crinibus iugum Christi, caput maritis
subijcientes, sic facile and satis eritis ornatae: vestite vos serico
probitatis, byssino sanctitatis, pur^ura pudicitiae taliter pigmentatae deum
habebitis amatorem.
Christ's yoke tied to their hair, to subject themselves to their husbands. If
they would do so, they should be comely enough, clothe themselves with the
silk of sanctity, damask of devotion, purple of piety and chastity, and so
painted, they shall have God himself to be a suitor: Let whores and queanes
pranke up themselves, Suas habeant Romanae lasciui^^, purpurissa ac cerassa ora
perungat, fomenta lididinum and corruptae mentis indicia, vestrum ornamentu^
deus sit, pudicitia virtutis studium. Bossus.
let them paint their faces with minion and cerusse, they are but fuel of
lust, and signs of a corrupt soul: if ye be good, honest, virtuous and
religious matrons, let sobriety, modesty and chastity be your honor,
Plautus.
and God himself your love and desire. Mulier recte olet vbi nihil olet, then
a woman smelles best, when she has no perfume at all, and more credit in a
wise man's eye and judgment they get by their plainness, and seem more fair
then they, that are set out with bables as a butchers meat is with pricks, and
puffed up and adorned like so many Iayes with variety of colors. It is
reported of Cornelia that virtuous Roman Lady, great Scipios daughter, Titus
Sempronius wife, and the mothor of the Gracchi, that being by chance in
company with a Campanian, a strange gentlewoman, (some light huswife belike,
that was dressed like a may lady, and as most of our gentlewomen are,
Solicitiores de capitis sui decore. quam de salute, inter pectinem and speculum
diem perdunt, concinniores esse malunt quam honestiores and rempub. minus
turbari curantquam caman. Seneca.
was more sollicitous of her head-tires, then of her health, that spent her
time betwixt a comb and a glass, and had rather be fair then honest (as he
said) and her commonwealth turned topsie turuie, then her tyres marred.) And
she did naught but brag of her fine robes, and Jewels, and provoked her to
show hers. Cornelia kept her in talk till her children came from school, and
these said she are my jewels, and so deluded and put off a proud, vain,
fantastical idle huswife. How much better were it for our matrons to do as
she did, to go ciuelly and decently, Lucian.
Honestae mulieris instar quae vtitur auro pro eo quod est, ad ea tantum quibus
opus est, to use gold as it is gold, and for that use it serves, and when they
need it, then to consume it in riotte, beggar their husbands, prostitute
themselves, inueagle others, and peradventure damme their own souls. How much
more would it be for their honor credit? so doing, as Hierome said of
Blesilla, Non sic Furius de Gallis non Papyrius de Sa^^itib ^ Scipio ^ Numan^a
t^ium^h (...) as illa se vincend^i^ hac part.
Furius did not so triumph over Gauls, Papyrius of the Samnites, Scipio of
Numantia, as she did by her temperance; pulla semper vest, etc. they should
insult and domineere over lust, folly, vainglory, and such inordinate,
furious and unruly passions.

But I am ouertedious I confess, and whilst I stand gaping after fine clothes,
there is another great allurement (in the worlds eyes at least) which had like
to have stole out of sight: and that is money, veniunt a dote sagittae. Many
men if they do but hear of a great portion', are more mad then if they had
all the beauteous ornaments, and all those good parts art and nature can
afford, they care not for honesty, bringing up, birth, beauty, person, but for
money. If she be rich, then she is fair, then she burns like fire, they love
her dearly, like pigge and pie, and are ready to hang themselves if they may
not have her. Nothing so familiar in these days, as for a young man to marry an
old wife as they say for a piece of good, and though she be an old crone, and
have never a tooth in her head, neither good conditions, nor good face, a
natural fool, but only rich, she shall have twenty young gallants to be her
suitors in an instant. As she said, non me sed mea ambiunt, it is not for her
sake, but for money, and an excellent match it were (as he added) if she were
away. So on the otherside, many a young maid will cast away her self upon an
old doting disarde, that has some twenty diseases, one eye, one leg, never
a nose, no hair on his head, nor wit in his brains, nor honesty, if he have
Vxorem ducat Danaen, etc.
money she will have him before all her other suitors. Ovid.
Dummodo sit dives barbarus ille placet. If he be rich, he is the man, and a
fine man and a proper man: Iuuenalis.
De moribus vltima fiet quaestio, for his conditions she will enquire after
them another time, or when all is done, the match made, and every body gone
home. This is not amongst your dustwormes alone, poor snakes that will
prostitute their souls for money, but with this bait you may catch your most
potent, puissant, and illustrious Princes. Alexander Gaguinus Sarmat. Europ.
descript.
Iagello the great Duke of Lituania, 1386. was mightily enamored on Hedinga, in
so much that he was turned Christian, and was baptized himself by the name of
Vladislaus, and al his subjects for her sake, but why was it? she was daughter
and heir of Polande, and his desire was to have both kingdoms incorporated
into one. Charles the great was an earnest suitor to Iraene the Empress, but
says Tom. 3. annal.
Zonoras P ob regnum, to annexe the Empire of the East to that of the West. But
what is the event of all such matches, that are so made for money, goods, or by
deceit, or for burning lust, quos foeda libido co^iunxit, what follows? they
are almost mad at first, but it is but a flash, as chafe and straw soon fired
and burn vehemently for a while, but are out in a moment, are all such matches
so made by those allurements of burning lust, where there is no respect of
honesty, parentage, virtue, religion, education, and the like, they are
extinguished in an instant, and in stead of love comes hate, for joy
repentance, and desperation it self. Franciscus Barbarus in his first book de
re vxoria cap. 5. has a story of one Phillip of Padua that fell in love with a
common whore, and was now ready to run mad for her; his father having no more
sons, let him enjoy her, Libido statim deferbuit fastidium caepit and quod in
ea tantopore adamauit aspernatur, and ab aegritudiue liberatus in angorem
incidit.
but after a few days, the young man began to loathe her, and could not so much
as endure the sight of her, and from one madness fell into another. Such event
commonly have all such lovers, and he that so marries, and for such respects,
let him look for no better success, then Menalaus had with Helen, Vulcan with
Venus, Theseus with. Phaedra, Minos with Pasyphae, and Claudius with
Messallinae, shame, sorrow, misery, melancholy, discontent.

SVBSEC. 4. Importunity and opportunity of the place, conference, discourse,
singing, dancing, music, amorous tales, objects, kissing, familiarity,
tokens, presents, dribes, promises, protestations, tears, etc.
ALl these allurements hitherto are afar off, and at a distance, I will come
nearer to those other degrees of Love, which are conference, kissing,
dalliance, discourse, singing, dancing, amorous tales, objects, presents, etc.
which as so many Sirens steal away the hearts of men and women. For as Tatius
observes lib. 2. De puellae voluntate periculum facere solis oculis non ^st
satis, sed ^^ficatius aliquid agere oportet, ibique etiae machinam alteram
adh^bere, itaque manus tange, digitos constringe atque inter stringendum
suspira, si haec agentem, ae quo se animo feret, neque facta huiusmodi
aspernabitu^r tum vero dominam appella eiusque collum suauiare.
It is no sufficient trial of a maids affection by her eyes alone, but you
must say something that shall be more available and use some other forcible
engines. And therefore take her by the hand, wring her fingers hard, and sigh
withal, and if she take this in good part, and seem not to be much auerse,
then call her mistress, and take her about the neck and kiss her, etc. But
this cannot be done, except they first get opportunity of living or coming
together, ingresse, egresse and regresse; letters and commendations may do
much, outward gestures, actions, but when they come to live together in an
house, love is kindled on a sudden. Many a Seruingman by reason of this
opportunity and importunity inueigles his masters daughters, many a gallant
dotes upon a Doudie, many Ladies dote upon their men, as the Queen in Ariosto
did upon the dwarf, many matches are made in have, which had they bin free, or
come in company of others, or seen that variety which other places afford,
would never have looked one upon another. Or had not that opportunity of
discourse and familiarity been offered, they would have loathed those and
contemned; who^ for want of better choice and other objects, they are fatally
driven on, and by reason of their hot blood, idle life, full diet, etc. are
forced to dote upon what comes next. And many times those which at the first
sight cannot fancy or affect each other, but are harsh and ready to disagree
and disgrace, offended with each others carriages, and in whom they find many
faults, by this living together in a house, conference, kissing, colling, and
such like allurements begin at last to dote insensibly one upon another.

It was the greatest motive that Potiphars wife had to dote upon Joseph, and
Tatius lib. 1.
Clitiphon upon Leucippe his uncles daughter, because the plague being at
Bizance, it was his fortune for a time to soiourne with her, to sit next her,
as he tells the tale himself in Tatius lib. 2. (which though it be but a
fiction, is grounded upon good observation, and does well express the passions
of lovers) he had opportunity to take her by the hand, and handle her pappes,
In mammarum attractu non aspernanda inest iucunditas, and attrectatus etc.
which made him mad. Ismenius the orator makes the like confession in Eumathius
lib. 1. That when he came first to Sosthenes house, and sat at table with
Cratistines, his friend, Ismenea Sosthenes daughter, waiting on them with her
arms bare (which moved him much) was still ready to give attendance on him, to
fill him drink, and her eyes were never offhim, but still smiling on him, and
when they were risen, and she had gotten a little opportunity, Manus ad
cubitum nuda, coram astans fortius intuita. Tenuem de pectore spiritum ducens
digitum meum pressit, and bibe^ pedom pressit, mutuae compressiones corporum,
laebiorum commixtiones, pedum co^nexiones, etc. and bibit eodem loco, etc.
she came and drank to him, and withal trodde upon his toes, and would come
and go, and when she could not speak for the company, she would wringe his
hand, and blush when she met him: and by this means first she overcame him,
bibens amore^ hauriebam simul, she would kiss the cup and drink to him, and
smile, and drink where he drank, on that side of the cup, by which mutual
compressions, kissings, wringing of hands, treading of feet, etc. Ipsam mihi
videbar sorbillare virginem, I was drunk in love upon a sudden.

This opportunity of time and place, with their circumstances are so forcible
motives, that it is impossible almost for two young folks equal in years to
live together, and not be in love, especially in great houses, Princes courts,
where they are idle, in summo gradu, fare well, live at ease, and cannot tell
otherwise how to spend their time. Ovid. (...). lib. 2. ele^. ^.
Illic Hippolitum pone, Priapus erit, when as I say, nox, vinum and
adolescentia, youth, wine and night shall concur, it is a wonder they be not
all plunged over head and ears in love. If there be seven servants in an
ordinary house, you shall have three couple in some good liking at least, and
amongst idle persons how shall it be otherwise? Night alone that one
opportunity is enough to set all a fire, and they are so cunning in great
houses, that they make their best advantage of it; Many a gentlewoman, that is
guilty to her self of her imperfections, paintings, impostures, will not
willingly be seen in the day time, but as De aulico lib. 1. fol. 63.
Castilio notes in the night, Diem vt glis odit, taedarum lucem super omnia
mauult. She hates the day like a dormouse, and above all things loves torches
and Candlel-ight, and if she must come abroad in the day, she couets as Vt
Adulterini mercatorum panni.
in a Mercers shop, a very obsuscate and obscure sight. And good reason she
has for it. Nocte latent mendae, and many an amorous gull is fetched over by
that means. Gomesius lib. 3. de sale cap. 22. gives instance in a Florentine
gentleman, that was so deceived with a wife, she was so radiantly set out with
rings and Jewels, lawnes and laces, gold and gaudy devises, that the young man
took her to be a goddess, (For he never saw her but by torchlight) but after
the wedding solemnities, when as he viewed her the next morning without her
tires, and in a clear day, she was so deformed, such a beastly creature in his
eyes, that he could not endure to look upon her. Such matches are frequently
made in Italy, where they have no other opportunity to woo but when they go
to Church, or as Busbequius epist.
in Turkey see them at a distance, they must enterchange few or no words, till
such time they come to be married, and then as Sardus lib. 1. cap. 3. de morib.
genr. and Paranympha in cubi^ulum adducta capillos ad cutem referebat, sponsus
inde ad eam ingress^^ cingulam soluebat, nec prius sponsam aspexit interdi^
quam ex ill^ factus esset pater.
Bohemus relate of these old Lacedaemonians, the bride is brought into the
chamber, with her hair girte about her, the bride-grome comes in, and unties
the knot, and must not see her at all by daylight till such time as he is made
a father by her. In those hotter countries these are ordinary practices at
this day, but in our Northern parts amongst Germans, Danes, Britains, the
continent of Scandia and the rest, we assume more liberty in such cases, we
allow them as Bohemus says, to kiss coming and going, and modo absit
lasciuia, in cauponam ducere, to talk merrily, sport and play, sing and dance,
so that it be modestly done, and go to the alehouse and tavern together. And
it is not amiss, though Sermon. cont. concub.
Chrysostom, Cyprian, Hierome, and some other of the Fathers, speak bitterly
against it: but that is the abuse which is commonly seen at some drunken
matches, dissolute meetings, or great unruly feasts. Lib 2. epist. ad silium
and virginem, and matrem viduam. epist. 10. dabit tibi barba^ulus quispiam
manum, sustentabit lassam, and pressis digitis aut tentabitur aut tentabit, etc.
A young pickitiuanted trimbearded fellow says Hierome, will come with a
company of complements, and hold you up by the arm as you go, and wringing
your fingers, will so be entised, or entise: one drinks to you, another
embraces, third kisseth, and all this while the fiddler plays or finges a
lascivious song, a fourth singles you out to dance, L^quetur ali^^ xutibus
and quicquid metuit dice^e significabit affectibus. Inter bas ta^tas voluptatum
illecebras, etiam ^err^as mentes l^bido (...). Diffici^e inter epulas seruatur
pudicitia.
one speaks by beckes and signs, and that which he dares not say, signifies
by passions: amongst so many and so great prouocations of pleasure, lust
conquers the most hard and crabbed minds, and scarce can a man live honest,
amongst feastings and sportes, or at such great meetings. For as he goes on,
Clamore vestium ad se iuvenes vocat capilli fasciolis comprimuntur cripati,
cingulo pectus arctatur capilli vel infronte^ vel in aures deflu^nt, palliolum
interdum cadit, vt nudet humeros, and quasi videri noluerit ^estinans celat,
quod volens detexerit
she walks along, and with the ruffling of her clothes, she makes men look at
her, her shoes creak, her paps tied up, her wast pulled in to make her look
small, she is straight girded, her hairs hang loose about her ears, her upper
garment sometime falls, and sometimes tarries, to show her naked shoulders,
and as if she would not be seen, she couers that in all haste, which
voluntarily she showed. And not at feasts, plays, Pageants, and such
assemblies, Sermon. contrae concubin. In sancto and reuerendo sacramentorum
tempore multas occasiones, vt illis placeant, qui e^s vident praebent.
but as Chrysostom objects, these tricks are put in practice, at Service time
in Churches, and at the Communion it self. If such dumb shows, signs, and
more obscure significations of love can so move, what shall they do that have
full liberty to sing, dance, kiss, cull, and use all manner of discourse and
dalliance? The very Tone of some of their voices, a pretty pleasing speech, an
affected tone they use, is able of it self to captiuate a young man; but when
a good wit shall concur, art and eloquence, fascinating speech, pleasant
discourse, the Sirens themselves cannot so inchant. Descrip. Brit.
P. Iouius co^mends his countriwomen to have an excellent faculty in this kind,
above all other nations, and amongst them the Florentine Ladies: some prefer
Roman and Venetian curtesans, they have such pleasing tongues, and such Res
est blanda canor discunt cantare puellae pro sacie, etc. Ovid. 3. de art.
amandi.
elegancy of speech, that they are able to overcome a Saint, pro facie multis
vox sua lena fuit. Tanta gratia vocis famam conciliabat says Petronius, tam
dulcis sontis permulcebat era, vt putares inter auras cantare Syrenum
concordiam. She sange so sweetly that she charmed the air, and thou would
have thought thou had heard a consort of Sirens. To hear a fair young
gentlewoman to play upon the Virginalls, Lute, Vial, Imagines si cantantem
audieris ita demulcebere, vt parentum and patriae statim obliuiscaris.
and sing to it, must needs be a great entisement. If thou did but hear
her sing says Edyl. 18. neque sane vlla sic Citheram pul^^re nouit.
Lucian, thou would forget father and mother, forsake all thy friends and
follow her. Helena is highly commended by q Theocritus the Poet for her sweet
voye, and music, none could play so well as she, and Daphnis in the same
Edyllion. Quam tibi os dulce est et vox amabilis o Daphni,
Iucundius est audire te canentem quam mel lingere.
How sweet a face has Daphne, how lovely a voice,
Honey it self is not so pleasant in my choice.
A sweet voice and music are powerful intisers, Centum luminibus cinctum
caput Argus habebat, Argus had an hundred eyes, all so charmed by one silly
pipe, that he lost his head. Clitiphon complains in Lib. 2. puellam ^ithera
canen^^^^ vidim^s.
Tatius of Leucippes sweet tunes, he heard her play by chance upon the lute,
and sing a pretty song to it in commendation of a rose, and that ravished his
heart. It was Iasons discourse as much as his beauty, or any other of his good
parts which delighted Medaea so much. -- Apollonius argonaut lib. 3.
Delectabatur enim
Animus simul forma dulcibusque verbis
It was Cleopatras sweet voice and pleasant speech, which inueagled Anthony
above the rest of her entisements, Verba ligant hominum vt Taurorum cornua
funes, as bulls horns are bound with ropes, so are men's hearts with words.
Her words burn as a fire, Eccle. 9. 10. Roxolana bewitched Solomon the
magnificent, and Shores wife by this engine overcame Edward the fourth,
Catullus.
Omnibus vna omnes surripu it veneris. The wife of Bath in Chaucer confesses
as much. Some folk desire us for richesse,
Some for shape some for fairness,
Some for that she can sing or dance,
Some for gentleness or for dalliance.
Many silly gentlewomen are fetched over in like sort, by a company of gulls
and swaggering companions, that have nothing in them but a few players ends
and complements, and can discourse at table of Knights and Lords, combats, of
other men's trauells, brave adventures, and such common triuiall news, ride and
dance, and sing old ballet tunes, and wear their clothes with a good grace; a
fine sweet gentleman, a proper man, who could not love him? She will have him
though all her friends say no, though she beg with him. Amatorius sermo
vehemens veheme^tis cupiditatis incitatio est. Tacius li. 1.
And some again are incensed by reading amorous toies. Palmerin de Oliua, the
knight of the sun, etc. or hearing such amorous tales of lovers and
descriptions of their persons, lascivious discourses, set them on fire, and
such like pictures or wanton obieands in what kind soever; no stronger engine
then to hear or read of love toys, fables and discourses ( Aeneas Siluius.
nulla machina validior qua^ lectio lasciuae historiae saepe etiam huiusmodi
fabulis ad surorem incenduntur.
one says) and many by this means are quite mad. Ismenius as as he walked in
Sosthenes garden, being now in love, when he saw so many ^umathius li. 1.
picturae parant animos ad venerem etc. Horatius ad res venereas intemperantior
traditur, nam cubiculo suo ^sic specula dicitur habuisse disposita vt quocunque
respixisset imagine^ coitus referrent. Suetonius vit. eius.
lascuious pictures: Thetis marriage and I know not what, was almost beside
himself. And to say truth with a lascivious object who is not moved, to see
others dally, kiss, dance, and much more when he shall come to be an actor
himself.

To kiss and to be kissed, which amongst other lascivious provocations is as a
burden in a song, and a most forcible Battery, a great allurement, a fire it
self, prooemium aut anticoenium the prologue of burning lust as Apuleius adds,
lust it self, Hor.
Venus quinta part sui nectaris imbuit. A strong assault, that conquers
captains and those all commanding forces, Hensius.
domasque ferro sed domaris osculo: And it is a continual assault, Petronius
Catalect.
hoc non deficit incipitque semper, it is allwaies fresh and and as ready to
begin at first, as Catullus ad Lesbia^, da mihi basia mill deinde centum etc.
he said basium nullo fine terminatur sed semper recens est, and has a fiery
touch with it.

-- Petronius.
Tenta modo tangere corpus,
Iam tua mellifluo membra calore fluent.
Especially when they shall be lasciuiously given, Apu^eius lib. 10. and
Catalect.
as he said, and me pressulum deosculata Fotis. Dum semiulco suauio,
Meam puellam suauior,
Anima tunc aegra and saucia,
Concurrit ad labia mihi.


The soul and all is moved, Petronius. Proseleos ad Circen.
Iam pluribus osculis labra crepitabant, animarum quoque mixtura^ facientes,
inter mutuos complexus animas anhelantes: Petronius.
hasimus calentes, and transfudimus hinc and hinc labellis errantes animas,
valete cura. They breathe out their souls and spirits together with their
kisses says Animus coniungitur and spiritus etiam no ster per osculum effluit,
alternatim se in vtriusque corpus in fundentes commiscent. Animae potius quam
corporis connectio.
Balthazar Castilio, and change hearts and spirits, and mingle affections as
they do kisses, and it is rather a connection of the mind then of the body.
And although these kisses be delightsome and pleasant, as Lucian Tom. 4.
Ganymedes kiss to Jupiter, Nectare suauior animarum catena. Sweeter then
nectar honey, or Eumathius lib. 4.
Oscula merum amorem stillantia, Love dropping kisses, for The Gilliflower the
Rose is not so sweet,
As sugared kisses be when lovers meet.


Yet they leave a bitter impression, they are destructive. Ovid. amand. Eleg.
18.
Et quae me perdunt, oscula mill dabat.

They are the bane of these miserable lovers. There be honest kisses, I deny
not, osculum charitatis, friendly kisses, modest kisses, officious and
ceremonial kisses, etc. but these are too lascivious kisses, Ovid.
Implicuitque suos circum mea colla lacertos* and Cum capitae liment solitis
morsiunculis and cum mamillaru^ pressiunculis Lip. od. a^t lec. lib. 3.
Brachia non hederae non vincunt oscula conchae. Columbatimque labia
conferentes morsiunculis labiorum.
they cling like Iuy, or an Oyster, bill as Doves meretritious kisses, biting
of lips, cum additamento: such kisses as she gave to Gyton, innumera oscula
dedit non repugnanti puero ceruicem inuadens, innumerable kisses, etc. More
then kisses, or too homely kisses: as those that Apulcius miles. 6. Et vnum
bland en^is linguae admulsum long mellitum. ^^ post. lib. 11. Arctius eam
complex us caepi suauiari, iamque pariter patentis oris inhali^u cinnameo and
occursantis linguae ill^s^ nectario, etc.
he speaks of, Accepturus ab ipsa venere. 7. suauia etc. with such other
obscenities, that vain lovers use, which are abominable and pernicious. If as
Peter de Ledesm^ cas. cons. holds, every kiss a man gives his wife after
marriage, be mortale peccatum, a mortal sin, what shall become of all such
Oscula qui sumpsit si non and caetera sumpsit, etc.
immodest kisses and obscene actions, the forerunners of brutish lust, If not
lust it self? what shall become of them, that often abuse their own wives? but
what have I to do with this? That which I aim at is to show you the progress
of this burning lust: and to epitomize all this which I have hitherto said,
with a familiar example out of Musaeus: Observe but with me the proceedings of
Leander and Hero. They began first to look one on the other with a lascivious
look, Oblique intuens inde nutibus --
Nutibus mutis inducens in errorem mentem puellae.
Et Illa econtra nutibus mutuis iunenis
Leandri quod amorem non renuit etc. Inde

Adibat in tenebris tacit quidem stringens
Roseos puellae digitos, ex imo suspirabat
Vehementer. -- Inde

Virginis autem been olens collum osculatus,
Tale verbum ait amoris ictus stimulo,
Preces audi and amoris miserere mei, etc.
Sic fatus recusantis persuasit mentem puellae.
With becks and nods he first began,
To try the wenches mind,
With becks and nods and smiles again,
An answer he did find.
And in the dark he took her by the hand,
And wrong it hard, and sighed grievously,
And kissed her too, and would her as he might,
With pity me sweet heart, or else I dye,
And with such words and gestures as there past,
He won his Mistress favor at the last.


The same proceeding is elegantly described by Apollonius in his Argonauticks,
betwixt Jason and Medaea, by Eumathius in his ten books of the loves of
Ismenius and Ismene, Achilles Tatius betwixt his Clitiphon and Leucippe; and in
that famous tale of Petronius of a Soldier and a Gentlewoman of Ephesus, that
was so famous all over Asia for her chastity, and that mourned for her husband,
the Soldier woed her with such Rhetoric as Lovers use to do, -- placitone
etiam pugnabis amori, etc. at last, frangi pertinaciam passa est, he got her
good will, not only to satisfy his lust, Corpus plaecuit mariti sui tolli ex
arca atque illi quae vacabat cruci adfigi.
but to hang her dead husbands body on the cross, which he watched, instead
of the thieves which was newly stolen away, whilst he would her in her Cabin.
These are tales you will say, but they have most significant Morals, and do
well express those ordinary proceedings of doting Lovers.

Many such allurements there are, Nods, Jests, Winkings, Smiles, Wrastlings,
Tokens, Favors, Symbols, Letters, etc. For which cause belike, Godfridus lib.
2. de amor. would not have women learn to write) many such prouocations when
they come in presence, they will and will not. Malo me Galatea petit lasciua
puella,
Et fugit ad salices and se cupit ante videri.
My Mistress with an Apple woes me,
And hastily to covert goes,
To hide her self, but will be seen
With all her heart before, God knows.


They will deny and take, refuse and yet earnestly seek, Denegat and pugnat
sed vult super omnia vinci.
repel to make them come with more eagerness, and have a thousand such
several entisements: for as he says. Petronius Catal.
Non est forma satis, nec quae vult bella videri,
Debet vulgari more placere suis.
Dicta, sales, lusus, sermones, gratia, risus
Vincunt, naturae candidioris opus.
It Is not enough though she be fair of hew,
For her to use this vulgar complement,
But pretty toys and jests, and sawes and smiles,
Are far beyond what Beauty can attempt.
Imagines Deorum, fol. 327. varios amores facit quos aliqui intrepretantur
multiplices affectus and illecebras alios puellos puellas, alatos alios faces
habentes manibus, alios poma aurea, alios sagittas alios laqueos etc.
And for this cause belike Philostratus in his Images, makes diverse loves, some
young, some of one age some of another, some winged, some of one sex, some of
another, some with torches, some with golden apples, some with darts, ginnes,
snares, and other engines in their hands, as Propertius has prettely painted
them out, lib. 2. and 29. and which some interpret diverse entisements, or
diverse affections of Lovers; which if not alone, yet jointly may batter and
overcome the strongest constitutions. It is reported of Decius and Valerianus,
those two notorious persecutors of the Church, that when they could enforce a
young Christian by no means (as Epist, lib. 3. vita Pauli Eremitae.
Hierom records) to sacrifice to their Idols, by no torments or promises, they
took another course to tempt him: they put him into a fair Garden, and set a
young Curtesan to dally with him, Meretrix speciosa caepit delicatius
stringere, colla complexibus and corpore in libidinem co^citato etc.
she took him about the neck and kissed him, and that which is not to be
named, manibusque attrectare etc, and all those entisements which might be
used, that whom Torments could not, Love might batter. But such was his
constancy, she could notouercome, and when this last engine would take no
place, they left him to his own ways. At Camden in Glocestershire. Huic
praefuit nobilis and formosa Abbatissa, Godwinus comes in dolo. subtilis non
ipsam sed sua cupiens reliquit nepotem suum forma elegantissimum ta^quam
infirmum donec reverteretur, instruxit etc
Barclye in Glocestershire, there was in times past a famous Nunnery (says
Gualter Mapes, an old Historiographer of ours, that lived 400 years since) Of
which there was a Noble and a fair Lady abbess: Godwin that subtle Earl of
Kent traveling that way. (seeking not her but hers) leaves a Nephew of his, a
proper young Galla^t, (as if he had been sick) with her, til he came back
again and gives the young man charge so long to counterfeit, till he had
deflowred the Abbess, and as many besides of the Nuns as he could: and
leaves him with all rings, jewels, girdles, and such toys to give them still,
when they came to visit him. The young man willing to undergo such a
business, played his part so well, that in short space he got up most of their
bellies, and when he had done, told his Lord how he had sped. Ille impiger
regem adit Abbatissam and suas praegnantes edocet exploratoribus missis probat
and ijs eiectis a domino suo manerium accept^.
His Lord makes instantly to the Court, tells the King how such a Nunnery was
become a bawdy house, procures a visitation, gets them to be turned out, and
begges their lands to his own use. This story I do therefore repeat, that you
may see of what force such entisements are, if they be opportunely used, and
how hard it is even for the most auerse and sanctified souls to resist such
allurements. John Mayor in the life of John the Monk, that living in the days
of Theodosius, comme^ds the Ermite to have been a man of singular continency,
and of a most austere life, but one night by chance the Devil came to his Cell
in the habit of a young market wench, that had lost her way, and desired for
Gods sake some lodging with him: Post sermones de casu suo suavitate sermonis
conciliat animu^ hominis, manu^que inter colloquia and risus ad barbam
protendit. and palpare cepit ceruicem suam and osculari. quid multa? captiuum
ducit militem Christi. Complex vra euanescit, demones in aere monachum riserunt.
The old man let her in, and after some common conference of her mishappe, she
began to inveagle him with laesciuious talk, and tests, and to play with his
beard, and kiss him, and do wourse, t^ll at last she quite overcame him. As
he went to address himself to that business, she vanished on a sudden, and
the Devils in the air laughed him to skorne. Whether this be a true story, or
a tale, I will not much contend, it serves to illustrate this which I have said.

Yet were it so, that these of which I have hitherto spoken, and such like
entising baits be not sufficient, there be many others which will of
themselves incende this passion of burning lust, amongst which, Dancing is none
of the least, and because it is an engine of such force, I may not omit it.
Incitamentum libidinis, Petrarch calls it, the spur of lust. Multae inde
impudicae domu^ rediere, plures ambiguae, melior nulla.
Many women that use it have come dishonest home, most indifferent, none
better. Turpium delitiarum comes ^est externa saltatio neque certe facile dictu
quae mala hinc visus haurlat, and quae pariat colloquia, monstrosos inconditos
gestus, etc.
Another terms it the companion of all filthy delights and entisements, and
it is not easily told what inconveniences come by it, what scurrile talk,
obscene actions, and many times such monstrous gestures, such lascivious
motions, such wanton tunes, meretritious kisses, homely embracings, -- vt
Gaditana canoro
Incipiat prurire choro, plausuque probatae
Ad terram tremulae descendant clune puella,
Irritamentum veneris languentis. --
That it will make the spectators mad. A thing nevertheless frequently used,
and part of a Gentlewomans bringing up, to sing, and dance, and play on the
Lute, or some such instrument, Iuv. Sat. 11.
before she can say her Pater noster, or ten Commandments, it is the next way
their parents think to get them husbands, they are compelled to learn, and by
that means, Hor. l. 5. Od. 6.
incestos amores de tenero meditantur vngue; It Is a great allurement as it is
often used, and many are undone by it. Thais in Lucian inueagled Lamprias in a
dance. Herodias so far pleased Herod, that she made him swear to give her what
she would ask, John Baptists head. Hauarde vita eius.
Robert Duke of Normandy riding by Falais, spied Arlette a fair maid as she
was dancing on a green, and was so much enamored with the object, that Of whom
he begat William the Conqueror, by the same toke^ she tore her smock down,
saying etc.
he must needs lie with her that night, Owen Tudar won Queen Catharines
affection in a dance, falling by chance with his head in her lap. Who cannot
parallel these stories out of his experience? When Xenophon in Symposio or
Banquet, had discoursed of Love, and used all the engines that might be
devised, to move Socrates amongst the rest, to stir him the more, he shuts up
all with a pleasant Interlude or dance of Dionysius and Ariadne, Principio
Ariadne velut sponsa pro dijt ac sola recedit, prodiens illico Dionysius ad
numeros cantante tibia saltaebat, admirati sunt omnes saltantem iuvenem ipsaque
Ariadne vt vix potuerit conquiescere po^ stea vero cum Dionysius eam aspexit,
etc.

Vt autem surrexit Dionysius erexit simul Ariadnem, licebatque spectare gestus
osenlantium etc inter se complectentium qui a^t^m spectab^nt, etc.

Ad extremum videntes eos mutuis amplexibus implicatos and iam iam ad thalamum
ituros. qui non duxerant vxores iurabant vxores se ducturos, qui autem
du^erant, conscensis equis et incitatis, vt iisdem fruerentur domum festinarunt.


First Ariadne dressed like a Bride, came in and took her place, and by and by
Dionysius entered, dancing to the Music. The spectators did all admire the
young man's carriage, and Ariadne her self was so much affected with the sight,
that she could scarce sit. After a while Dionysius beholding Ariadne, and
incensed with Love, bowing to her knees, embraced her first, and kissed her
with a grace, she embraced him again, and kissed with like affection, as the
dance required: but they that stood by and saw this, did much applaud and
commend them both for it. And when Dionysius rose up, he raised her up with
him, and many pretty gestures, and embraces, and kisses, and love complements
passed between them; which when they saw, fair Bacchus and beautiful Ariadne
so sweetly and so unfeignedly kissing each other, so really, they swore they
loved indeed, and were so enflamed with the object, and began to rouse up
themselves, as if they would have flone. At the last when they saw them still,
and so willingly embracing, and now ready to go to the Bride-chamber, they
were so rauish^d with it, that they that were unmarried, swore they would
forthwith marry, and those that were married, called instantly for their
horses, and gallopped home to their wives. What greater motive can there be to
this burning lust? What so violent an oppugner? Not without a good cause
therefore so many grave men speak against it, Use not the company of a woman,
says Siracides, 8. 4. that is a singer or a dancer, neither hear least thou
be taken in her craftiness. Nemo saltat sobrius, Tully holds, he is not a
sober man that danceth, and for that reason belike Domitian forbad the Roman
Senators to dance, and for that fact removed some of them from the Senate. But
these you will say are lascivious dances, and it is the abuse that causes such
inconvenience, And I do not well therefore to condemn, or speak against it.
You misinterpret, I do not condemn it; I hold it not withstanding an honest
disport, a lawful recreation, if it be modestly and soberly used. I am of
Plutarchs mind, Quae honesta^ voluptatem respicit, aut corporis exercitium
contemni non debet.
that which respects pleasure alone, honest recreation, or bodily exercise
ought not to be rejected and contemned. Salust discommends singing and dancing
in Sempronia, not that she did sing or dance, but that she did it in excess,
it is the abuse of it. Many will not allow men and women to dance together,
Apuleius l. 10. Puelli puellaeque virenti florentes aetatula, forma conspicui,
vest nitidi, incessu gratiosi, graecanicam saltantes pyr^hicam, dispositis
ordinati monibus decoros ambitus inerrabant nunc in orbem flexi, nunc in
obliquam seriem connexi, nunc in quadru^ cuneati, nunc inde seperati, etc.
because it is a provocation to lust: they may as well with Lycurgus and
Mahomet cut down all Vines, forbid the drinking of wine, because it makes some
men drunk. I see no such inconvenience, but that they may so dance, if it be
done at due times, and by fit persons. Let them take their pleasures, and as he
said of old, young men and maids, flourishing in their age, fair and lovely to
behold, well attired, and of comely carriage danced a Greek Galliard, and as
their dance required, kept their time, now turning, now tracing, now a part,
now altogether, etc. and it was a pleasant sight. Our greatest Counselors and
most stayed Senators at sometimes dance. And 10. leg. (...), etc. huius causa
oportet disciplinam constitui, vt tam pueri quam pu^llae choreas celebrent
spectenturque ac spectent, etc.
Plato in his commonwealth, will have dancing schools to be maintained, that
young folks might meet, be acquainted, see one another, and be seen; nay
more, he would have them dance naked, and laughes at those that laugh at it.
But Eusebius praepar. Evangel. lib. 13. c. 12. and Theodoret, lib. 9. curat.
graec. affect. worthily lash him for it; and well they might: for as one says,
Aspectus enim nudorum corporum lam mares quam saeminas irritare solet ad
enormes laesciui^ appetitus.
The very sight of naked parts, causes enormous and exceeding concupiscences,
and stirs up both men and women to burning lust* There is a mean in all
things, this is my censure in breese. Dancing is a most pleasant recreation of
body and mind, if conveniently used, a furious motive to burning lust, if
abused. But I proceed.

If these allurements do not take place, the more effectually to move others,
and satisfy their lust, they will swear and lie, promise, protest, forge,
counterfeit, bribe, flatter, and dissemble of all sides. Many men to fetch over
a young woman, widows, or whom they love, will not stick to give out, as he
did in Petronius, that he was master of a ship, and kept so many servants, and
to personate their part the better, take upon them to be Gentlemen of good
houses, well descended and allied, and hire apparel at brokers, some
Scauingers or prick-louse Taylers to attend upon them for the time, swear they
have great possessions, Nam donis vincitur omnis amor Catullus, l. 1 eleg. 5.
bribe, lie, cog, and foist, how dearly they love, when as they are no such
men, they mean nothing less. Catullus.
Nil metuunt iurare nihil promittere curant.
Sed simul ac cupidae mentis satiata libido est,
Dicta nihil metuere nihil periuria curant.
Oaths, vows, promises, are much protested,
But when their mind and lust is satisfied,
Oaths, vows, promises are quite neglected.
When Lovers swear, Venus laughes, Venus haec periuria ridet. Periuria rid^t
amantum Iuppiter and vent^s irrita serre iubet, Tibul. lib. 3. and 6.
And Iuppiter smiles: if promises, and protestations will not avail, they fall
to bribes, tokens, gifts, Catul.
Plurimus auro conciliatur amor: as Iuppiter corrupted Danae with a golden
shower, they will fall in her lap. And women are not far behind men in this
kind, Chaucer.
For half so boldly there cannon
Swear and lie as women can.
Ah crudele genus, nec tutum faemina nomen Tibul l. 3. eleg 4.
They can counterfeit as well as the best, with handkerchiefs and wrought
nightcaps, purses, poesies, and such toys, as he complained, Iouianus Pont.
Cur mittis violas nempe vt violentius vrar.
Quid violas violis me violenta tuis? etc.
Why do thou send me violets my dear,
To make me burn more violent I fear,
With violets too Violent thou art,
To violate and wound my heart.
When nothing else will serve, their last refuge is their tears. As Quartilla
in Petronius, when nothing would move, fell a weeping, and as Balthazar
Castilio paints them out; Lib. 3. His accedunt vultus subtristis, color
pallidus, gemebunda vox, ignita suspiria lachrimae prope innumerabiles. istae
se statim vmbrae offerunt tanto squalore et in omni fere diverticulo tanta
macie vt illas iamiam moribundas putes.
To these Crocodiles tears, they will add sobbes, fiery sighs, and
sorrowful countenance, pale color, leanenesse, and if you do but sti^re
abroad, these fiends are ready to meet you at every turn, with such sluttish
neglected habit, dejected look, as if they were now ready to dye for your
sake, and how says he shall a young novice thus beset escape? But believe
them not. On either side men are as false, let them swear, protest, and lie;
Ovid.
quod vobis dicunt. Dixerunt mill puellis, they loce some of them those eleven
thousand Virgins at once, and make them believe each particular, he is besotted
on her, or love one till they see another, and then her alone: like Milo's wife
in Apuleius, lib. 2. Si quem conspexerit speciosae formae iuuene^, venustate
eius sumitur, and in eum animum intorquet. it is their common complement in that
case, they care not what they say or do. As for women they have tears at
will, Ovid.
Neue puellarum lachrymis moueare memento,
Vt fierent; oculos erudiere suos.
Care not for women's tears I do exhort thee,
They teach their eyes as much to weep, as see.
When Venus lost her son Cupid, she sent a crier about, to bid every one that
met him take heed. Imagines deorum fol 332. e Moschi Amore fugirivo, quem
Politianus sicla^inum fecit.
Si flentem aspicias, ne mox fallare, caveto,
Sin arridebit, magis effuge, and oscula si fors
Far volet, fugito, sunt oscula nox^a, in ipsis
Suntque venena labris. etc.
Take heed of Cupids tears I thee advise,
And of his smiles and kisses I thee tell,
If that he offert, for they be noxious,
And very poison in his lips does dwell.


Lib 3. Mill vix anni suff^cerent ad omnes illas mach^^ationes dolo^^
commemorandos, quos ^iri and mulieres vt se inuicem ^^^^^mveniant, excogitare
solent.
A thousand years, as Castilio conceaues, will scarce serve to reckon up those
allurements and guiles, that men and women use to deceive one another with.

SVBSEC. 5. Bawds, Philters.
WHen all other Engines sail, and that they can proceed no farther of
themselves, their last refuge is to fly to Bawds, Panders, Magical Philters,
and receipts, rather then fail, to the Devil himself. Flectere si nequeunt
superos Acheronta monebunt. And by those indirect means many a man is
overcome, and precipitated into this malady, if he take not good heed. For
these Bawds first, they are every where so common and so many, that as he said
of old Croton, Petronius.
omnes hic aut captantur aut captant, either inueagle or be inueagled, we may
say of most of our cities, there be so many professed cunning Bawds in them.
Besides bawdery is become an art, or a liberal science, as Lucian calls it,
and there be so many tricks and subtelties, so many nurses, oldwomen Panders,
letter carriers, beggars, Physicians, Friars, Confessors employed about it,
that nullus tradere stylus sufficiat, on says. Such occult notes, Tritemius.
Steganography, Polygraphy, cunning co^uayances in this kind, that neither
Juno's Iealosie, nor Danaes custody nor Argo's vigilance can keep them safe.
It Is the last and common refuge to use a Catull. eleg 5. lib. 1. V^nit in
exitium c^llida le^a meum.
Bawds help, an old woman in the business, as Ovid 10. met.
Myrrha did when she doted on Cyniras, and could not compass her desire, the
old Jade her Nurse was ready at a pinch, dic inquit, opemque me sine far tibi
-- and in hac mea (pone timorem) sedulitas erit apta tibi, fear it not, if it
be possible to be done, I will effect it: let him or her be never so honest,
and watched, reserved, it is hard but one of these old women will get access:
and scarce shall you find, as De vit. Eremit cap. 3. ad sor^re^. Vix aliquam
reclusuram huius temporis solam inuenies, ante cuius fenestram non anus garrula
vel nugigerula m^lier sedet, quae eam fabulis occupet rumoribus pascat, huius
vel illius monachi, etc.
Austin observes, in a Nunnery, a maid alone, but if she cannot have egresse,
before her window, you shall have an old woman, or some prating Gossip tell
her some tales, of this Clarke, and that Monk, or describing, or commending
some young Gentleman or other unto her. As I was walking in the street (says a
good Fellow in Petronius) to see the town served one ^uening, Agreste olus
anus vendebat and rogo inquam matter nunquid scis vbi ego habitem? de^ectata
illa vrbanitate tam stulta and quidni sciam inquit? consurrexitque and caepit
me praecedere; diuinam ego putabam etc. nud^s video meretrices, and in lupanar
me adductum sero execratus aniculae insidias.
I spied an old woman in a corner selling of Cabbages and roots (as our
Hucksters se^ Plummes, Apples, and such like fruits) mother, quoth he, can you
tell where I dwell? she being well pleased with my foolish vrbanity, replied,
and why sir should I not tell? and with that she rose up and went before me; I
took her for a wise woman, and by and by she led me into a by-lane, and told
me there I should dwell; I replied again I knew not the house, I perceived on
a sudden by the naked wher^s, that I was now come into a bawdy house, and
then too late I began to curse the treachery of this old Jade. Such tricks you
shall have in many places, and amongst the rest it is ordinary in Venice, in
the Island of Zante, for a man to be Bawd to his own wife. No sooner shall you
land or come a shore, but as the Comicall Poet has it, Plautus Menech.
Morem hunc meretrices habent,
Ad portum mittunt servulos, ancillulas,
Si qua peregrina navis in portum aderit,
Rogent cuiatis sit, quod ei nomen siet,
Postillae extemplo sese adplicent.


These white Devils have their Panders, Bawds and Factors in every place to
seek about, and bring in customers, to tempt and way-lay silly travelers. And
when they have them once within their clutches, as Aegidius Maserius in his
Comment upon Valerius Flaeccus describes them, Promissis euerberant, molliu^i
dulciloquiis and opportunum tempus aucupantes laqueos ingerunt quos vix
Lucretia vitaret, escam parant quam velsatur Hippolitus sumeret, etc. Hae sane
sunt virgae ^^po^iserae quibus contactae animae ad orcum descendunt, hoc gluten
quo compactae mentium alae euolare ^equesunt daemonis ancillae, quae
sollicitant, etc.
with promises and pleasant discourse, with gifts, tokens, and taking their
opportunities, they lay nets which Lucretia cannot avoid, and baits that
Hippolitus himself would swallow, and make such strong assaults and batteries,
that the Goddess of Virginity cannot withstand them: give gifts, and bribes to
move Penelope, and with threats able to terrify Susanna. How many Proserpinas
with those catchpoles does Pluto take? These are the sleepy rods with which
their souls touched descend to hell; this the glue or lime with which the
wings of the mind once touched cannot fly away, the Devils ministers to
allure, entice, etc. Many young men and maids without all question are
inueagled by these Eumenides, and their associats. But these are trivial and
well known: your most sly, dangerous and cunning Bawds are your knauish
Physicians, Empyrickes, Mass Priests, Monks, Jesuits, and Friars: Though it
be against Hippocrates oath, some of them will give a dram, and promise to
restore maidenheads, and do it without danger, make an abort if need be, keep
down their pappes, hinder conception, procure lust, make them able with
Satyrions, and now and then step in themselves. No Monastery so close, or house
so private, or prison so kept, but these honest men are admitted to censure and
ask questions, to feel their pulse beat at their bed side, and all under
pretense of giving Physic. Now as for Monks, Confessors, and Friars, as he
said. Aeneus Siluius.
Non audet Stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effraenis Monachus, plenaque fraudis aenus.
That Stygian Pluto dares not tempt or do,
What an old Hag or Monk will undergo.
Either for himself to satisfy his own lust, or for another, if he be hired
thereto, or both at once, having such excellent means. For under color of
visitation, auricular confession, comfort and penance, they have free egresse
and regresse, and corrupt God knows how many. They have so many trades some of
them, to practice Physic, to use exorcismes, etc.

Chaucer in the wife of Bathes tale.
That whereas was wont to walk an Elfe,
There now walks the Limiter himself,
In every bush and under every tree,
There needs no other Incubus but he.


H. Stephanus Apol. Herod. lib. 1. cap. 21.
In the mountains betwixt Dauphine and Sauoye, the Friars persuaded the good
wives to counterfeit themselves possessed, that their husbands might give them
free access and were so familiar in those days with some of them, that as one
Bale. Puellae in lectis dormire non poterant.
observes, wenches could not sleep in their beds for Necromanticke Friars: and
the good Abbess in Bocace may in some sort witness, that mistook and put on
the Friars breeches instead of a veil or hat. You have heard the story I
presume of Paulina, a chaste matron in Aegesippus, whom one of Isis Priests did
prostitute to a young Knight, and made her believe it was their God Anubis.
Many such pranks are played by our Jesuits, sometimes in their own habites,
sometimes in others, like soldiers, courtiers, citizens, Scholars, Gallants,
and women themselves. Proteus-like in all forms and disguises, they go abroad
in the night, to inescate and beguile young women, or to have their pleasure of
other men's wives: And if we may believe Liberedit Augustae vendelicorum ^o.
1608.
some relations, they have wardropes of several suits in their Colleges for
that purpose. Howsoever in public they pretend much zeal, and seem to be
very holy men, and bitterly preach against adultery, fornication; there are no
verier Bawds or whoremasters in a country, Quorum animas lucrari debent deo
sacrifi^^nt diabolo.
Whose souls they should gain to God, they sacrifice to the Devil. But I
spare these men for the present.

The last Battering Engines are Philters, Amulets. Spells, Charms, Images, and
such unlawful means, if they cannot prevail of themselves by the help of
Bawds, Panders, and their adherents, they will fly for succor to the Devil
himself. I know there be those that deny the Devil can do any such thing,
as Crato lib. 2. epist. med. and many Divines that there is no other
fascination then that which comes by the eyes, of which I have formerly spoken,
and if you desire to to be better informed, read Camerarius oper. subcis. cent.
2. c. 5 It was given out of old that a Thessalian wench, had bewitched King
Philip to dote upon her, and by Philters enforced his love, but when Olympia
the Queen saw the wench, of an excellent beauty, well brought up and qualified
these, quoth she, were the Philters which inueagled King Philip. In our times
it is a common thing, says Erastus in his book de Lamijs, for Witches to take
upon them the making of these Philters, Sagae omnes si^i arrogant notitiam and
facultatem in amor^ aliciendi quos v^lint, edia inter coniuges serendi
tempestates excitandi, morbos infligendi, etc.
to make men and women love and hate whom they will, to cause tempests,
diseases, etc. by Charms, Spells, Characters, knots. S. Hierom proves that
they can do it, (and in Hilarious life, epist. li. 3.) he has a story of a
young man, that with a Philter made a maid mad for the love of him, which maid
was after cured by Hilarian. Plutarch reports of Lucullus that he died of a
Philter, and that Cleopatra used Philters to inueagle Anthony, amongst other
allurements. Eusebius reports as much of Lucretius the Poet. Panormitan lib. 4.
de gest. Alphonsi, has a story of one Stephan a Neapolitan knight that by a
Philter was forced to run mad for love. Marcus the Heretic is accused by
Irinaeus to have inueagled a young maid by this means; and some writers speak
hardly of the Lady Catharine Cobham, that by the same art she circumuented
Humfrey Duke of Gloucester to be her husband. Sycinius Aemilianus summoned
Apolog. Quod Pudenti^lam viduam ditem and prouectioris aetatis faeminam,
cantaminibus in amorem sui pellexisset.
Apuleius to come before Cneus Maximus Proconsul of Afric, that he being a
poor fellow, had bewitched by Philters Pudentilla, an ancient rich matron to
love him, and being worth so many thousand sesterces, to be his wife. Agrippa
lib. 1. cap. 4.8. occult. philos. attributes much in this kind to Philters,
Amulets, Images; and Salmutz com. in Pan^irol. Tit. 10. de Horol Leo Afer lib.
3. it is ordinarily practiced at Fez in Afric, praestigiatores ibi plures, qui
cogunt amores and concubitus. But Erastus, Wierus, and others are against it;
they grant such things indeed may be done, but as Wierus discourses, lib. 3.
de Lamijs ca. 37. not by charms, incantations, Philters, but the Devil
himself, so lib. 5. cap. 2. he contends as much. So does Freitagius noc. med.
cap. 74. Andreas Cisalpinus cap. 5. Many are of opinion that these feats, which
most suppose to be done by Charms and Philters are merely done by natural
causes, as by Mela insana, Mandrake roots, Mandrake apples Lemnius lib. herb.
bib^ c. 2
Mandrake apples, precious stones, dead men's clothes, candles, mala Bacchica,
panis p^rcinus, Hippomanes, etc. of which Rhasis, Dioscorides, Porta, Wecker,
Rubeus, Mizaldus, Albertus treat: of a Swallows heart, dust of a Doves heart,
etc. which are as forcible, and of as much virtue, as that fountain Salmacis
in Lib. 11. cap. 8. Venere implicat eos qui ex eo bibunt.
Vitrunius, that made all such mad for love that drank of it, or Venus
enchanted girdle, in which says Baltheus veneris, in quo suauitas and dulcia
solloquia beneuolentiae and bla^ ditiae, suasiones frauds and venesicia
include^^ntu^.
Natales Comes, Love toys and dalliance, pleasantness, sweetness,
persuasions, subtelties, gentle speeches, and all withcraft to enforce love was
contained. Read more of these in Agrippa de occult. Philos. lib. 1. cap. 50.
and 45. Malleus malefic. part. 1. quaest. 7. Delrio. tom. 2 quaest. 3. lib. 3.
Wierus, Pompenatius, cap. 8, de Incan. Ficinus. lib. 13. Theol. Plat.
Calcagninus, etc.

MEMB. 3.
SVBSEC. 1. Symptoms of Loue-melancholy.
Symptoms, are either of Body or mind: of Body, palenesse, leanenesse,
dryness, etc. Ovid. Facit hun^ amor ipse colorem met. 4.
Pallidus omnis amans, color hic est aptus amanti, as the Poet describes
Lovers; fecit amor maciem, Love causes leanenesse. Signa eius sunt profunditas
oculorum, priuatio lachrymarum suspiria, saepe rident sibi, ac si quod
delectabile viderent aut audirent.
Auicenna de Ilishi cap. 23. makes hollow eyes, dryness, Symptoms of this
disease, to go smiling to themselus, or acting, as if they saw or heard some
delectable object. Valleriola lib. 2. obseruat. cap. 7. Laurentius cap. 10.
Aelianus Montaltus de Her: amore, Languis epist. 24. lib. 1. epist. med.
deliver as much, corpus exangue pallet, corpus gracile, oculi caui, lean,
pale, holloweyed, their eyes are hidden in their heads, they pine away, and
look ill with waking, cares, sighs, want of appetite, etc. A reason of all
this De morbis cerebride erot amore. ob spirituum dis^^^ ctione^ ^par
o^^iciosuo non f^^gitur, nec ve^^^ ^^^ntum in sanguinem vt debet, Ergomembra
debilia and penuria alibilis succi marcescu^^ (...) vt herbae in horto meo hoc
mense Maio Zeriscae, ob imbrium defectum.
Jason Pratensis gives, because of the distraction of the spirits, the Liver
does not perform his part, nor turns the aliment into blood as it ought, and
for that cause the members are weak for want of sustenance, they are lean and
pine away, as the herbs in my garden do this month of May for want of rain.
The green sickness for this cause often happens to young women, a Cachexia,
or an evil habit to men. When Cariclia was inamored on Theagines, as Lib. 4.
Anima errat and quid vis obuium loquitur, vigilias absque causa sustinet, and
succum corporis subito amisit.
Heliodorus sets her out, she was half distract and spoke she knew not what,
sighed to her self, lay much awake, and was lean upon a sudden. Aeneas Silv.
Eurialus in an Epistle sent to Lucretia his Mist^is, complains amongst other
grieuances, tu mihi and somni and cibi vsum abstulisti, thou have taken my
stomach and my sleep from me. As he describes it aright. His sleep, his
meat, his drink, is him bereft,
That lean be waxes and dry as a shaft.
His eyne hollow and grisly to behold,
His hew pale and ashen to unfold,
And solitary he was ever alone,
And walking all the night making moan.
Chaucer in the Knights tale.
Theocritus Edyl. 2. makes a fair maid of Delphos in love with a young man of
Minda confess as much, Vt vidi vt insanij, vt animus mihi male affectiis est,
Miserae mihi forma tabescebat, neque amplius pompam
Vllam curabam, aut quando domum redieram
Noui, sed me ardens quidam morbus consumebat,
Decubui in lecto dies december and noctes december,
Defluebant capite capilli, ipsaque sola reliqua
Ossa and cutis. --
No sooner seen I had, but mad I was,
My beauty failed, and I no more did care
For any pomp, I knew not where I was.
But sick I was, and evil I did fare,
I lay upon my bed ten days and nights,
A Sceleton I was, in all men's sights.
All these passions are well described by Virg. 2. Aen.
that Heroical Poet in the person of Dido. At non infaelix animi Phaenissa nec
vnquam
Soluitur in somnos, oculisque ac pectore amores
Accipit, ingeminant curae rursusque resurgens
Saeuit amor, etc. --
Unhappy Dido could not sleep at all,
But lies awake and takes no rest: Cum vaga passim sydera fulge^t, numerat
longas tetricus hor^s, and sollicito nixus cubito suspirando viscera rumpit.

And up she gets again, whilst care and grief,
And raging love torment her breast.
Accius Sanezarius Egloga, 2. de Galatea in the same man^er makes his Lycoris
tormenting of her self for want of (...), sighing, sobbing, and lamenting. And
Eumathius his (...) much troubled, and Sa^i^b^t crebro tepidum cor ad as^ectum
Ismene^.
Panting at heart at the sight (...) ^^tris, and could not sleep, his bed
was (...). Gordonius cap 20. a^^^tunt sepe cibum potum and maceratur inde to^^
corpus
All make leanenesse, want of appetite, and this want of s^^^pe ordinary
Symptoms, and by that means they are brought often so low, and so much
altered and changed, that as T^r. Eunuch. Dii boni quid ho^ est^ ade^^e homines
mutari ex (...) vt non cognoscas eundem esse?
he i^^ted in the Comedy, one can scarce know him to be the (...). Attenuant
iuuenum vigilatae corpora noctes,
Curaque and immenso qui fit amore dolor.
Many such Symptoms there are of the body to discern Lovers by, plus quam
mill notis nymphae sensisse seruntur, but two of the most notable are observed
by the Pulse and co^^^enance. When Antiochus the son of Seleucus was si^^e
f^r Stratonice his mother in law, and would not confess his grief or the
cause of his disease, Erasistratus the Physician, found him by his Pulse and
countenance to be in love with her, Ad eius nome^ rub^hat and ad aspectum
^ulsus variabatur.
because that when she came in presence, or was (...), his pulse varied, and he
blushed besides. By the same signs (...) bragges, that he found out Iusta
Boethius the Cons^^^ ^^e, to dote on Pylades the player, because at his name
still f^^e both altered pulse and countenance. Franciscus Valesius. l. 3.
controu. 13. med. contr. denies that there is any such pul^^^amatorius, or that
Love may be so discerned, but A^^^^^^ confirms that of Galen out of his
experience lib. 3. (...) Gordonius cap. 20. Pu^^us ^^rum vel^x and inord^natus
si mulier qu^m amat forte transeat.
Their pulse he says is inord^^^^^, and swift, if she go by whom he loves,
Langius epist. (...) lib. 1. med. epist. Neuisanus. lib. 4. numer. 66. syl.
nup^^^^^s, V^^^scus de Taranta, Guianerius, Tract. 15. sets down this (...)
Symptom, Si^^^ sunt c^ssatio ab omni op^^i (...), p^^^^tio somni, s^^^^ia
^^bra, r^^^r cum sit ser^^^ d^^e amata, and commotis pulsus. Valescus.
difference of pulse, neglect of business, want (...), often sighs, blushings,
when there is any speech of their mistress are manifest signs. But amongst the
rest, Josephus Struthlus that Polonian in the fifth book cap. 17. of his
doctrine of pulses, holds that this and all other passions of the mind may be
discovered by the pulse. Si noscere vis an homines suspecti tales sint, tangito
little ar^^^as.
And if you will know says he whether the men suspected be such or such, touch
their arteries, etc. And in his 4. book 14, chapter, he speaks of this
particular love pulse; Amor facitiaae quales, inordinatos.
love makes an unequal pulse, etc. In nobilis cuiusdam vxore quum sabolfacerem
adulteri amore fuisse correptam, and quam maritus, etc.
he gives an instance in a Gentlewoman a patient of his, whom by this means
he found to be much inamored, and with whom: he named many persons, but at the
last when he named him whom he suspected, Caepit illico pulsus variari and
ferri celerius and sic inveni.
her pulse began to vary and to beat swifter, and so by often feeling her
pulse, he perceived what the matter was. Apollonius Argonaut lib. 4. Poetically
setting down the meeting of Jason and Medaea, makes them both to blush at one
another sight, and at the first they were not able to speak: which very sign
Lib. 1.
Eumathius makes an argument of Ismenes affection, that when she met her
sweetheart by chance, she changed her countenance. And it is a common thing
amongst lovers, as Lexoniensis Episcapus.
Arnulphus that merry conceited Bishop, has well expressed in a Epigram of
his. Alterno facies sibi dat responsa rubore,
Et tener affectum prodit vtrique pudor.
Their faces answer and by blushing say,
How both affected are they do bewray.


But the best conjectures are taken from such symptoms as appear when they
are both present; all their speeches, actions, lascivious gestures will bewray
them, they cannot contain themselves; but that they will be still kissing.
Centum basia centies,
Centum basia millies,
Mill basia millies,
Et tot millia millies,
Quot guttae Siculo mari,
Quot sunt sydera coelo,
Istis purpureis genis,
Istis turgidulis labris,
Ocellisque loquacibus,
Figam continuo impetu.


Hensius
Culling, dallying, feeling their pappes, biting lips, embracing, treading on
their toes, and scarce honestly sometimes: diuing into their bosoms, as the
old man in the Terent.
Comedy well observed of his son, Non ego te videbam manum huic puellae in
sinum inserere? Did not I see thee put thy hand into her bosom? go to. Juno
in Lucian deorum dial. 3. Tom. 3. complains to Jupiter of Ixion Attente adeo
in me aspexit, et interdum ingemiscebat and lachrymabatur. Et si quando bibens,
etc.
he looked so attentively on her, and sometimes would sighe and weep in her
company, and when I drank by chance and gave Ganymede the cup, he would
desire to drink still in that very cup that I drank off, and in the same
place where I drank, and would kiss the cup, and then look steddily on me.
If it be so they cannot come so near to dally, or have not that opportunity,
familiarity, or acquaintance to confer and talk together; yet if they come
in presence, their eye will bewray them: vbi amor ibi oculus, as the common
saying is. Quique omnia cernere debes Leucothoen spectas, and virgin figis in
vna, quos mundo debes oculos. Ovid. met 4.
Alter in alterius iactantes lumina vultus,
Quaerebant taciti noster vbi esset amor.


They cannot look of whom they love, they will be still gazing and staring,
glancing at her, as Apollo on Leucothoe, or if she go by, look after her as
long as they can see her. Lucian in his Imagine., and Tatius, of Clitiphon say
as much, Ille oculos de Leucippe, Lib. 4.
nunquam deijciebat and many lovers confess when they came in their mistress
presence, they could not hold off their eyes. There is a pleasant story to this
purpose in Nauigat. Vertom. l. 3. c. 5. The Sultan of Sanas wife in Arabia,
because Vertomannus was fair and white could not look off him from
sunne-rising to sunne-setting, she could not desist, she made him one day come
into her chamber, and geminae horae spatio intuebatur, non a me vnquam aciem
oculorum auertebat, me obseruans veluti Cupidinem quendam, for two hours space
she still gazed on him. If so be they cannot see them, they will still be
walking and waiting about their mistress doors, taking all opportunity to see
them, as in Longus Sophista, Daphnis and Cloe two lovers, Lib 3.
were still houering at one another gates, he sought all occasions to be in
her company, to hunt and catch birds in the frost about her house in winter,
that she might see him and he her. It Is all his felicity to be with her, to
talk with her, he is never well but in her company, and will walk Vno and
eodem die sex vel septies ambulant per eandem plataeam, vt vel vnico amicae
suae fruantur aspectu. lib. 3. Theat. Medi.
seven or eight times a day through the street where she dwells, and make
sleeuelesse errands to see her: none so merry if he may happily enjoy her
company, he is in heaven for the time, and if he may not, dejected in an
instant, solitary, silent, weeping, lamenting, sighing, complaining still, etc.

But the symptoms of the mind in lovers are almost infifinite, and so diverse,
that no art can comprehend them, though they be merry sometimes, and rapt
beyond themselves for joy, yet most part love is a plague, a torture, a hell.
The Spanish Inquisition is not comparable to it, a torment and Plautus, credo
ego ad hominis carnificinam amore^ inuentum esse.
execution, as he calls in the Poet, an unquenchable fire, and what not; De
ciuitat. lib. 22. cap. 22. ex eo oriuntur mordaces curae, perturbationes,
maerores, formidines, insana gaudia, discordiae, lites, bella, insidiae,
iracundiae, inimicitiae, fallacy, adulatio, fraus, furtum, nequitia,
impudentia.
From it says Austin arise biting cares, perturbations, passions, sorrows,
fears, suspicions, discontents, contentions, discordes, wars, trecheries,
emnities, flattery, cosening, riotte, lust, impudence, cruelty, knavery etc.
these be the companions of lovers, and their ordinary symptoms, as the poets
repeat them. Ter. eunucho.
In amore haec sunt vitia,
Suspitiones, inimicitae, audaciae,
Bellum, pax rursum, etc.
Insomnia, aerumna, error, terror, and fuga,
Excogitantia, excors immodestia,
Petulantia, cupiditas and malevolentia,
Inhaeret etiam auiditas, desidia, iniuria,
Inopia, contumelia and dispendium, etc.
In love these vises are suspicions,
Peace, war, and impudence, detractions,
Dreams, cares, and errors, terrors and affrights, Plautus Market.

Immodest prankes, (...), ^leigh^s and flights,
Heart-burnings, wants, negle^^^, desire of wrong,
Loss continually, expense and (...).


Every Poet is full of such ca^^lo^ues of love symptoms, but fear and sorrow
may justly challenge the chief place. Ovid.
Res est solliciti plena timoris amor. It Is full of fear, anxietie, pain and
Aristotle 2. Rhet puts love therefore in the Irascible part. Ovid.
grief, doubt, ^^re, suspicion, peevishness, and bitterness it self, (...)
Plato calls it, a bitter potion, a plague. Eripite hanc pestem perniciemque
mihi;
Quae mihi subrepens imos vt torpor in ar^^^,
Expulit ex omni pectore laetitias.
O take away this plague, this mischief ^^om (...),
Which as a numnesse over all my body,
Expells my joys, and makes my soul so heavy.
Most part a lovers life is full of anxietie, fear and grief, complaints and
sighs, suspicious cares and discontents, except at such times that he has
lucida interualla, pleasant gales, or sudden alterations, as if his mistress
smile upon him, give him a good look, or kiss, or that some comfortable
message be brought him, his service is accepted etc. then there is no
happiness in the world comparable to this. Catullus de Lesbiam.
Quis me vno viuit foelicior? aut magis hac est
Optandum vita dicere quis poterit.
Who lives so happy as my self? what bliss
In this our life may be compard to this?
He will not change fortune, in that case with a king. Hor. ode. 9. lib. 3.
Donec gratus eram tibi,
Persarum vigui rege beatior?
The Persian kings are not so Iouial as he is; but if he hear ill news, have
ill success, she frown upon him, none so Love is a fiend, a fire, a heaven, a
hell, where pleasure, pain, grief, and repentance dwell. R.T.
dejected as himself, Ingenium vuliu staetque eaditque suo, his fortune ebbes
and flows with her favor, a gracious or bad aspect turns him up or down.
Howsoever his present state be pleasing or displeasing it is continuate, so long
as he loves, he can do nothing, think of nothing else but her; desire has no
rest, she is his Cynosure, his goddess, his mistress, Anima non est vbi animat
sed vbi amat.
his life, his soul, his every thing, dreaming, walking, she is always in his
mouth, his heart, his eyes; his ears, and all his thoughts are full of her, as
Orpheus on his Euridice. Te dulcis coniux te solo in littore mecum,
To veniente die te discedente canebam.
On thee sweet wife was all my song,
Morn, Evening, and all along.
Or as Dido upon Aeneas. -- Et quae me insomnia terrent.
Multa viri virtus, and plurima currit Imago.
And ever and anon she thinks upon the man,
That was so fine, so fair, so blithe, so debonaire.
Clytiphon in the first book of Achilles Tatius, complains how that his
mistress Leucippe tormented him much more in the night, then in the day.
Interdiu oculi and aures occupa^ae dist^ahunt animum, at noctu solus iactor, ad
aurora^, somnus paulum misertus, nec tamen ex animo puella abijt, sed omnia
mihi de Leucippe somnia erant.
For all day long he had some object or other to distract his senses, but in
the night all ran upon her. All night long he lay awake, and could think of
nothing else but her, he could not get her out of his mind, toward morning
sleep took a little pity on him, he slumbred awhile, but all his dreams
were of her. The same complaint Eurialus makes to his Lucretia, day and night I
think of thee, I wish for thee, I talk of thee, call on thee, look for thee,
hope for thee, delight my self in thee, day and night I love thee. Hor. l. 2.
od. 9
Nec mihi vespero
Surgento decedunt amores, Aeneas Siluius te dies noctesque amo, te cogito, te
desidero, te voco, te expecto, te spero, tecum oblecto me totus in te sum.

Nec rapidum fugiente solemn.
Morning, Evening, all is alike with me, -- restselfe thoughts, Petronius.
To vigilans oculis animo, te nocte requiro. Still I think on thee. And that
so violently sometimes, with such earnestness and egernesse, such continuance,
so strong an imagination, that at length he thinks he sees her indeed, he
talks with her, he embraces her, as he said Nihil praeter Leucippen cerno,
Leucippe mihi perpetuo in oculis and animo versatur, as he that is bitten with
a mad dog, thinks all he sees dogs, dogs in his meat, dogs in his
dish, dogs in his drink, his mistress is in his eyes, in his ears, in his
heart, in all his senses. Valleriola had a merchant his patient in the same
predicament, and De Pythonissis.
Vlricus Molitor out of Austin, has a story of one that through vehemence of
this love passion, still thought he saw his mistress present with him, she
talked with him, Et commisceri cum ea vigilans videbatur, still embracing him.
Now if this passion of love can produce such effects, if it be pleasantly
intended, what bitter torments shall it breed, when it is with fear and
continual sorrow, suspicion, care, as commonly it is, still accompanied, what
an intolerable Juno nec ira deum tantum nec tela, nec hostis, quantum tute
nones animis illapsus. Silius Jtal. 15. ^el, Punic. de amore.
pain must it be? -- Non tam grandes
Gargara culmos, quot demerso
Pectore curas longa nexas
Vsque catena, vel quae penitus
Crudelis amor vulnera miscet.
Mount Gargarus has not so many stemmes,
As lovers breast has grievous wounds,
And linked cares, with love compounds.
When the king of Babylon would have punished a courtier of his, for loving of
a young Lady of the royal blood, and far above his fortunes, Philostratus
vita eius. maximum tormentum quod excogitare vel docere te possum, est, ipse
amor.
Apollonius in presence, by all means persuaded him to let him alone, For to
love and not enjoy, was a most unspeakable torment, no tyrant could invent the
like punishment; as a knat at a candle, in a short space he would consume
himself. For love is a perpetual Ausonius c. 35.
flux, angor animi, a warfare, militat omnis amans, a grievous wound is love
still, and a lovers heart is Cupids quiver, a consuming Et caeco carpitur igne,
and mihi sese vltro offert meus ignis Amyntas.
fire, an inextinguible fire. -- Seneca.
Alitur and crescit malum,
Et ardet intus, qualis Aetnaeo vapor
Exundat antro. --
As Aetna rages so does love, and more then Aetna, or any material fire. --
Theocritus edyl. 2. leuibus cor est violabile telis.
Nam amor saepe Lypareo,
Vulcano ardentiorem stammam incendere solet.
No water can quench this fire. -- -- Mautuanus egl. 2.
In pectus c^cos absorbuit ignes,
Ignes qui nec aqua perimi potuere, nec imbre
Diminui, neque graminibus, magicisque susurris.
A fire he took into his breast,
Which water could not quench,
Nor herb, nor art, nor magic spells
Could quell, nor any drench.
It strikes like lightning, which made those old Graecians, Imagines deorum.
paint Cupid in many of their Temples, with Jupiters thunderboults in his
hands, for it wounds and cannot be perceived how, whence it came, where it
pierced. Ovid.
Vrimur and caecum pectora vulnus habent, And can hardly be discerned first. --
-- Aened. 4.
Est mollis flamma medullis,
Et tacitum insano viuit sub pectore vulnus.
A gentle wound an easy fire it was,
And fly at first, and secretly did pass.
But by and by it began to rage and burn amain. -- Seneca.
Pectus insanum vapor
Amorque torret, intus saenus vorat
Penitus medullas, atque per venas meat
Visceribus ignis mersus, and venis latens,
Vt agilis altas flamma percurrit trabes.
This fiery vapor rages in the veins,
And scorcheth entralls, as when fire burns
An house, it nimbly runs along the beams,
And at the last the whole it ouerturnes.
And to say truth, as Lib. 4. nam istius amoris neque principia neque media
aliud habent quid, quam molestias, dolores, cruciatus defatigationes, adeo vt
miserum esse maerore, gemitu, sol^tudine torqueri, mortem optare, semperque
debacchari, sunt certa amantiu^ signa and certae actiones.
Castilio describes it. The beginning, middle, end of love is naught else but
sorrow, vexation, torment, irkesomenesse, wearisomenesse, so that to be
squalid, ugly, miserable, solitary, discontent, dejected, to wish for death,
and to complain, and rave, and to be peevish are the certain signs, and
ordinary actions of a loue-sicke person. And this continual pain and torture,
makes them forget themselves, if they be far gone with it, or in doubt or
despair of obtaining, egerly bent to neglect all ordinary business. To be
careless of themselves and their estates, as the shepherd in Edill. 14.
Theocritus, Et haec barba inculta est squalidique capilli, their beards
flagge, and they have no more care of prancking themselves, or of any
business, they care not as they say, which end g^e^ forward. Mant. eclog. 2
Oblitusque greges, and rura domestica totus
Ovid meta^. 13 de Polyphemo vritur oblitus pecorum antr^rumque suorum Iamque
tibi formae etc.
Vritur, and noctes in luctum expendit amaras.
Forgetting flocks of sheep and country farms,
The silly shepherd always mournes and burns.
Qui olim cogitabat quae vellet and pulcherrimis Philosophiae praeceptis operam
insu^psit qui vniuersi circuitiones caelique naturam, etc.

Hanc vnam intendit operam, de sola cogitat noctes and dies se componit ad
hanc, and ad acerbam seruitutem redactus animus.


He that erst had his thoughts free (as Philostratus Lemrius in an Epistle of
his, describes this fiery passion) and spent his time like an hard student, in
those delightsome Philosophical precepts, he that with the Sun and Moon
wandered all over the world, and with Stars themselves ranged about, and left
no secret or small mystery in nature unsearched since he was inamored, can do
nothing now but think and meditate of love matters, and day and night
composeth himself how to please his mistress, al his study, endeavor, is to
approve himself to his mistress to win his mistress favor, to compass his
desire, to be counted her servant. And to this end and purpose, if there be any
hope of obtaining his suit, to prosequute his cause, he will spend himself,
goods, fortunes for her, and though he loose and alienate all his friends, be
cast of, and disinherited, utterly undone by it, yet for her sweet sake, to
enjoy her he will hazard all he has, goods, lands, and life it self. Non
recedam neque quiescam noctu et interdin,
Prius profecto quam aut ipsam, aut mortem inuestigauero,
I Will never rest or cease my suit,
Til she or death do make me mute.
It Is a common humor this a general passion of all lovers to be so affected.
and which Aemilia told Aretine a courtier in Castilios discourse, Lib. 2. certe
vix credam, and bona fide fateare Aretine, te non amasse, adeo vehementer, si
enim vere amasses nihil prius aut potius optasses, quam amatae mulieri placere.
Ea enim amoris lex est idem velle and nolle.
surely Arctine, if thou wearst not so indeed, thou did not love, ingeniously
confess it, for if thou had been thoroughly inamored, thou would have
desired nothing more then to please thy Mistress. For that is the law of love,
to will and nil the same.

Generally and undoubtedly this may be pronounced of them all they are very
slaves, drudges for the time, madmen fools and disards, beside themselves and
as blind as beetles. Their Immensus amor ipsa stulcitia est Cardas i lib. 2.
de sapic^tia.
dotage is most eminent, Amare simul and sapere ipsi Iovi non datur, as Seneca
holds Jupiter himself cannot love and be wise both together, the very best of
them all, if once they be overtaken with this passion, the most staid and
discreet, grave generous and wise, otherwise able to govern themselves, in
this commit many absurdities, many indecorums, unbefitting their gravity and
persons. Sampson, David, Solomon, Hercules, Socrates etc. are justly taxed of
indiscretion in this point, the middle sort are betwixt hawke and buzard, and
although they do perceive and acknowledge their own dotage, weakness, fury,
yet they cannot withstand it; as well may witness those expostulations, and
confessions of Dido in Virgil, Phaedra in Seneca, Myrrha in Ovid, Meta. 10.

Illa quidem sentit, foedoque repugnat amori,
Et secum quo mente foror, quid molior, inquit,
Dij precor and pietas, etc.
She sees and knows her fault, and does resist,
Against her filthy lust the does contend,
And whither go I, what am I about?
And God forbid, yet does it in the end. And again,
-- Peruigiligne,
Carpitur indomito furiosaque vota retrectat,
Et modo desperate, modo vult tentare: pudetque,
Et cupit, and quid agat, non invenit, etc.
With raging lust she burns, and now recalls
Her vow, and then dispaires, and when it is past,
Her former thoughts shele prosecute at last.
And what to do she knows not at the last.
She will and will not, abhorres and yet as Medaea did, does it.

-- Trahit invitam nova vis, aliudque cupido,
Men's aliud suadet, video meliora proboque,
Deteriora sequor. --
Reason pulls one way, burning lust another,
She sees and knows what is good, but does she neither,
The mayor part of lovers are carried headlong like so many brute beasts,
reason counsels one way, their friends, fortunes, shame, disgrace, danger, and
an Ocean of cares that will certainly follow; yet this furious lust,
praecipitates counterpoiseth, waighes down on the other: though it be their
utter undoing, perpetual infamy, loss, yet they will do it, and become at
last, insensati void of sense; degenerate into dogs, hogs, asses, brutes, as
Jupiter into a Bull, Apuleius an Ass, Lycaon a Wolf, Tereus a Lap-wing, An
immodest woman is like a Bear.
Calisto a Bear, Elpenor and Grillus into Swine by Circe. For what else may we
think those ingenious Poets to have shadowed in their witty fictions and
poemes, but that a man once given over to his lust, as Feram induit dum rossa
comedat. ^^ dum ad se redeat.
Fulgen^ius interprets that of Apuleius Alciat of Tereus, is no better then a
beast. Rex fueram, sic crista docet, sed sordida vitae,
Immundame tanto culmine fecit auem. Alciatus de ^pupa embl. animal immundum
vpupa sler cora amans, auc hac nihil faedius, nihil libidinosius Sabin in Ovid.
met.

I was a king my crown a witness is,
But by my filthiness am come to this.
Their blindness is all-out as great, and as manifest as their dotage, or
rather an inseparable companion, an ordinary sign of it. Love is like a false
glass which represents every thing fairer (...) it is.
Love is blind as the saying is, Cupids blind, and so are all his followers.
Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam. Every lover admires his mistress,
though she be very deformed of her self, ill favored, crooked, bald,
goggle-eyed, or squint-eyed, sparrow mouthed, hookenosed or have a sharp fox
nose, gubber-tussed, rotten teeth, beetle-browed, her breath stink all over
the room, her nose drop winter and summer with a Bauarian poke under her chin,
laue eared, her dugges like two double ingges, bloo di-fal^e-fingers, scabbed
wrists, a tanned skin, a rotten carcass, crooked back, lame, splea-footed,
as slender in the middle as a cow in the waste, goutie legs, her feet
stink, she breeds lice, a very monster, an aufe imperfect, her whole
complexion savors, and to thy judgment looks like a marde in a lantern,
whom thou could not fancy for a world, but hate, lothest, and would
have spit in her face, or blow thy nose in her bosom, remedium amoris, to
another man a doudy, a slut, a nasty, filthy be astly queen, dishonest
peradventure, obscene, base, beggarly, foolish, untaught, if he love her once,
he admires her for all this, he takes no notice of any such errors or
imperfections, of body or mind, he had rather have her then any woman in the
world; If he were a king, she alone should be his queen, his empress, o that
he had but for her sake: Venus her self, Helena, Panthea, and all your
counterfeit Ladies were never so fair as she is. All the gracious elogies,
metaphors, and all hyperbolicall comparisons of the best things in the world,
the most glorious names, whatsoever is pleasant, amiable, sweet, grateful, and
delitious, are too little for her. Phabo pulchrior and sorore Phaebi,
His Phoebe is so fair she is so bright,
She dimmes the Suns luster, and Moons light.
Stars, Suns, Moons, Mettalls, sweet smelling flowers, Odours, Colors,
Gold, Silver, Iuory, Snow, painted Birds, Dounes, Honey, Sugar, Spice, cannot
express her, Catullus.
so soft so sweet, so fair is she. -- Mollior cuniculi capillo etc. Petronij
Catalect.

Lydia bella, puella candida,
Quae been superas lac and lilium,
Albamque simul rosam and rubicundam,
Et expolitum ebur Indicum.
Fine Lydia my mistress white and fair,
The milk the Lilly do not thee come near,
The Rose so white, the Rose so red to see,
And Indian Iuory comes short of thee;
Chaucer in the Knights tale.
That Emilia that was fairer to seen,
Then is Lilly upon the stalk green:
And fresher then May with flowers rewe,
For with the Rose color strove her hew,
I not which was the fairer of the two.


In this very phrase Ovid. met. 13.
Polyphemus courts his Galatea. Candidior folio niuei Galatea ligustri,
Floridior prato, longa procerior alno,
Splendidior vitro, tenero lasciuior haedo, etc.
Mollior and cigni plumis, and lacte coacto.
Whiter Galat then the white withy-wind,
Fresher then a field, higher then a tree,
Brighter then glass, more wanton then a kidde,
Softer then Swannes down, or Cuius avertice and nigricantibus oculis tale
quiddam spirat ac ab aurea venere.

Hesiodus, scut, H^r^.


ought that may be.


To thy thinking she is a most loathsome creature, thou had as live have a
snake in thy bosom, a toade in thy dish, and call her witch, devil, hagge,
and all the filthy names thou can invent, he admires her on the other side,
she is his Idol, Lady, Mistress, Queen, the Quintescence of beauty, an
Angel, a Star, a Goddess, the fragrancie of a thousand Curtesans is in her
face: all the graces, veneres, elegances, pleasures, attend her. He preferres
her before a Myriade of court Ladies.

Ario^^^.
He that commends Phillis or Nerea,
Or Amaerillis, or Galatea.
Tityrus or Melibea, by your leave,
Let him be mute, his love the phrases have.


All the bumbast Epithites, pleasant names may be invented, he puts on her, and
as Ariosto. li. 29. ^ fr ^.
Rhodomant courted Isabella.

By all kind words, and gestures that he might,
He calls her his dear heart, his sole beloved,
His joyful comfort, and his sweet delight.
His mistress, and his goddess, and such names,
As loving Knights apply to lovely dames.


Every cloth she wears pleases him above measure, her hand, o quales digitos
quaes habet illa manus, pretty foot, pretty coronets, her sweet carriage, sweet
voice, her divine and lovely looks, her every thing, lovely, sweet, amiable
and pretty: every action, fire, habit, gesture, he admires, whether she play,
sing, or dance, in what tires, soever she goes, how excellent it was, how well
it became her, never the like seen or heard.

Tibullus.
Mill habet oruatus mill decenter habet.

Let her do what she will, say what she will, he applauds and admires every
thing she says or does.

Tibullus li. 4. de sulpitia.
Illam quicquid agit, quoquo vestigia vertit,
Composuit furtim subsequiturque decor;
Seu soluit crines, fusis decet esse capillis,
Seu compsit, comptis est reuerenda comis.
What ere she does, or whither ere she go,
A sweet and pleasing grace attend forsooth,
Or loose or bind her hair, or comb it up,
She Is to be honored in what she does.


Women do as much by men. What greater dotage or blindness can there be then
this: and yet their slavery is more eminent, a greater sign of their dotage
then the rest. They are commonly slaves, captives, voluntary servants, amator
amica mancipium, as Lib. 3. de aulico alterius affectui se totum componit,
totus placere s^ud^t, and ipsius animam amatae pedisse quam facit.
Castilio terms him, his mistress servant, her drudge, prisoner, bondsman; what
not? He composeth him self wholly to her affections to please her, and as
Aemilia said, makes himself her lackie. All his cares, actions, all his
thoughts, are subordinate to her will and command, her most deuote, obsequious,
affectionate servant and vassal. For love (as Cyroped lib. 5. amor seruitus,
and qui amant, optant eo liberari, non secus a^ alio quouis morbo neque
liberari tamen possunt, sed validiore necessitate ligati sunt quam si inferrea
vincula coniecti forent.
Cyrus in Xenophon well observed) is a mere tyranny and worse then any
disease, and they that are troubled with it desire to be free and cannot, but
they be harder bound then if they were in iron chains. Hear some of their
confessions, protestations, complaints, proferres, expostulations, wishes,
brutish attempts, labors in this kind. Philostratus in an Epistle to his
mistress, Paratus sum ad obeundam mortem, si tu iubeas hoc, sitim aestuantis
seda, quem tuum sydus perdidit, aquae and fontes no^ negant, etc.
I am ready to die sweet heart if it be thy will, alay his thirst whom thy
star has scorched and undone, The fountains and rivers deny no man drink
that comes, the fountain does not say thou shall not drink, nor the apple
thou shall not eat, nor the fair meddow walk not in me, but thou alone wilt
not let me come near thee, or see thee, contemned and despised I die for
grief. Polienus when his mistress Circe did but frown upon him in Petronius,
drew his sword, and bad her Si occidere placet ferrum meum vides, si verberibus
con^enta es, curro nudus ad poenam.
kill him or stabbe him, or whippe him to death, and he would strippe himself
naked and not resist. Intelligo pecuniamrem esse iucundissimam meam tamen
libentius darem Cliniae quam ab alijs acciperem, libentius huie seruirem, quam
alijs imperarem, etc. Noctem and som^u^ aecuso, quod illu^ non videam, luci
autem and soli gratiam habeo quod mihi Cliniam o^tendant. Ego etiam cum Clinia
in ignem currerem and scio vos quoque mecum ingressuros si videretis.
Money (says Zenophon) is a very acceptable and welcome guest, yet I had
rather give it my dear Clinia, then take it of others, I had rather serve him,
then commaud others, I had rather be his drudge, then take my ease undergo any
danger for his sake, then live in security. For I had rather see Clinia then
all the world besides, and had rather want the sight of all other things, then
him alone, I am angry with the night and sleep that I may not then see him,
and thank the light and Sun because they show me my Clinia. I will run
into the fire for his sake, and if you did but see him, I know that you
likewise would run with me. So Philostratus to his mistress. Command me what
you will I will do it, bid me go to Sea, I am gone in an instant, take so
many stripes, I am ready, run through the fire, and lay down my life and soul
at thy feet, it is done, as Aeolus to Juno.

-- Tuus o regina quod optas,
Explorare labor mihi iussa capessere fas est.
o Queen it is thy pains to inioyne me still,
And I am bound to execute thy will.


And Phaedra to Hippolites. Impera quid vis, nauigare iube, nauem conscendo
plagas accipere, plector, animam prosu^dere, in ignem currere, non recuso,
lubens facio.
Me vel sororem Hippolite aut famulam voca,
Famulamque potius omne seruitium feram.
o call me sister, call me servant, choose
or rather servant, I am thine to use.
And again, Non me per altas ire si iubeas niues,
In simpos.
Pigeat gelatis ingredi Pindi iugis,
Non si per ignes ire aut infesta agminae
Cuncter, paratus Huius ero viuus, mort^^^ huius ero, Propert. lib. 2. viuam si
viuat sicadat illa cadam. Idem.
ensibus pectus dare,
Te nunc iubere, me decet iussa exequi.
As Leander to the waters, Parcite dum propero margite dum redeo. Mart.
It shall not grieve me to the snowy hills,
Or frozen Pindus tops forthwith to clime, Seneca in Hipp. art. 2.

Or run through fire, or through an army,
Say but the word, for I am always thine.


Callicratides in Dial Amorem mihi o dij caelestes vltra sit vita haec perpetua
ex aduerso amicae federe and suaue loquentem audire etc. si moriatur viuere non
sustinebo, and i would erit sepulchrum vtrisque.
Lucian breaks out into this passionate speech. o God of heaven, grant me this
life for ever to sit over against my mistress, and to hear her sweet voice, to
go in and out with her; to have every other business common with her. I would
labor when she labors, sail when she sails, he that hates her should hate
me, and if a tyrant killed her, he should kill me, if she should die, I would
not live, and one grave should hold us both. And Theagenes to his Chariclea, so
that I may but enjoy thy love let me die presently.

Ariosto. lib. 1. cant. 1. stas^ 5.
Orlando who long time had loved dear
Angelica the fair, and for her sake
About the world, in nations far and near,
Did high attempts, perform and under take.


It is an ordinary thing for these inamoratos of our times, to say and do as
much, to stabbe their arms, to fight for their mistrisses sakes, to drink
healths upon their bare knees, If she bid them they will go barefoot to
Jerusalem, to the great Chams court, As Xanthus for the love of Eurippe, omnem
Europam peragrauit. Parthenius Erot. cap. 8.
to the East Indies to fetch her a bird to wear in her hat: and with Drake and
Candish, go round about the world for her sweet sake, serve twice seven years
as Jacob did for Rahel; and endure more torments then Theseus or Paris. Adore
and admire, a servant not to her alone, but to all her friends and followers,
they love them for her sake, her dog, picture, and every thing she wears,
they adore it as a relic. If any man come from her, they feast him, love him,
and will not be out of his company, do him all offices for her sake, still
talking of her. So the very carrier that comes from him to her is a most
welcome guest, and if he bring a letter from him, she will read it twenty times
over, and as Aeneas Siluius. Lucretia quum accepit Euriali litteras hilaris
st^tim ^ milliesque pap^ basiauit.
Lucretia did by Eurialus, kiss the letter a thousand times together and then
read it. Plautus Asinar.
Vult placere sese amieae, vult mihi, vult pedissequae,
Vult famulis, uult etiam ancillis, and catulo meo.
He strives to please his mistress and and her maid,
Her servants and her dog, and's well apaid.


If he get any remnant of hers, a buske-point, a feather of her fan, a
shoo-tie, a lace, he wears it for a favor in his hat, or next his heart. Her
picture he adores twice a day, and for two hours together will not look off
it; a gar^er or a bracelet of hers is more precious then any Saints relic;
and he lays it up in his casket, O blessed relic, and every day will kiss
it, if in her presence his eye is never off her, and drink where she drank, if
it be possible in that very place, etc. If absent, he will sit under that tree
where she did use to sit, in that bower, in that very seat, many years after
sometimes, and if she be far off, and dwell many miles off, he loves yet to
walk that way still, to have his chamber window look that way, Happy servants
that serve her, happy men that are in her company.
to confer with some of her acquaintance, Non ipsos solum sed ipsorum memoria^
amant. Lucian.
to talk of her, admiring and commending her still and lamenting, honing,
wishing himself any thing for her sake, to have opportunity to see her, that
he might but enjoy her presence: as Philostratus to his mistress, Epist. o ter
faelix solum beatus ego si me calcaueris vultus tuus amnes sistere potest, etc.
o happy ground on which she treads, and happy were I if she would tread upon
me, I think her countenance would make the rivers stand and when she comes
abroad, birds will sing, and come about her. Another, he sighs and sobbes, and
wishes him a saddle for her to sit on, a poesy for her to smell to, and it
would not grieve him to be hanged, if he might be strangled in her garters: he
would willingly die to morrow, so that she might kill him with her own hands;
Ovid would be a flea, a kat, a ring, Catullus a sparrow, o si tecum ludere,
sicut ipsa possem, 2. eleg. 15.
and tristes animi leuare curas. Anacreon, A glass, Englished by Mr. B.
Holiday in his Technog. act. 2. sce. 7.
a gown, chain, any thing;
But I'a looking glass would be,
Still to be looked upon by thee,
Or I, my love would be thy gown,
By thee to be worn up and down,
Or a pure well full to the brimmes,
That I might wash thy purer limbs:
Or i would be precious baulme to 'noint,
With choicest care each choicest joint,
Or, if I might, I would be feign
About thy neck thy happy chain.
Or would it were my blessed hap
To be the Lawne over thy fair pappe.
Or would I were thy shoe to be
Daily but trod upon by thee.
O thrice happy man that shall enjoy her: as they that saw Hero in Museus, --
Faelices mammae, faelix nutrix --
Sed long cunctis longeque beatior ille, Xenophon Cyropaed. lib. 5.

Quem fructu sponti and socij dignabere lecti.
And as she said of Cyrus, beat a quae illi vxor futura esset, blessed is that
woman that shall be his wife. The Sultan of Savas wife in Arabia; when she had
seen Vertomannus the traveler, lamented in this manner. Lod. Vertomannus
nauigat. lib. 2. cap. 5. O Deus hunc creaasti sole candidiorem, e diverso me
and coniugem meum and natos meos omnes nigricantes. Vt ina^ hic, etc. Iuit
Gazella Tegeia Galzerana and promissis onerauit and donis, etc.


O God thou have made this man whiter then the Sun, but me, and mine
husband, and all man whiter then the Sun, but me, and mine husband, and all
my children black, I would to God he were my husband, or that I had such a
son, and fell a weeping, and was so impatient for Love at last, that as
Potifers wife did by Joseph, she would have had him gone in with her, and sent
away Gazella, Tegeia, and Galzarena her waiting maids, and loaded him with
promises and gifts, and wooed him with all the Rhetoric she could, but when
he would not consent, she would have gone with him, and left all to be his
Page, his servant, or his Lackey, so that she might enjoy him. Men will do as
much and more for women, spend goods, lives, lands, fortunes, and hazard their
souls for their mistress sake.

Musaeus.
Atque aliquis inter inuenos miratus est, and verbum dixit
Non ego in coelo cuperem Deus esse,
Nostram vxorem habens domi Hero
One said to heaven would I not,
desire at all to go;
If that at mine own house I had
such a fine wife as Hero.
Old Ianiuere in Chaucer thought when he had his fair May, he should never go
to heaven, he should live so merrily here on earth; but who can reckon up the
Dotage, madness, servitude, and blindness, the phantasmes and vanities of
Lovers, their to^ments, wishes, idle attempts?

And yet for all this, amongst so many irksome and troublesome Symptoms,
inconveniences, and passions, which are usually incident to such persons, there
be some good qualities in Lovers which this affection causes. As it makes
wisemen fools, so many times it makes fools become wise, Cardan. lib. 2. de
sap ex vilibus generosos efficere solet. ex timidis audaces ex auaris
splendidos, ex agreslibus civiles, ex crudelibus mansuetos, ex impiis
religiosos, ex sordidis nitidos atque cultos ex duris misericordes ex mutis
eloquentes.
It makes base fellows generous, cowards, corragious, as Cardan notes out of
Plutarch, covetous, liberal and munificent; clownes, civil; cruel, gentle;
and wicked profane persons, to become religious; slouens, neat; churles,
merciful; and dumb dogs, eloquent. No passion causes greater alterations,
or more vehement of joy or discontent. Plutarch Sympos. lib. 1. quaest. 5.
Anima hominis amore capti tota referta suffitibus and odoribus, paeanes resonat
etc.
says that the soul of a man in love, is full of perfumes and sweet odors,
and all manner of pleasing tones and tunes, It adds spirits, and makes them
otherwise soft and silly generous and coragious, Ovid.
Audacem faciebat amor. In convivio Amor veneris Martem detinet and fortem
facit adolescente^ maxim erubescere cernimus, quum amator eum surpe quid
committentem offendit.
Plato is of opinion that the love of Venus made Mars so valorous, a young man
will be much abashed to commit any foul offense, that shall come to the
hearing or sight of his mistress. And if it were Si quo pacto fieri civitas aut
exercitus posset partim ex his qui amant partim exbis, etc.
possible to have a city or an army consist of Lovers, such as love, or are
beloved, they would be extraordinary valiant and wise in their government,
modesty would detain them from doing amiss, and aemulation incite them to do
that which is good and honest, and a few of them would overcome a great company
of others. There is no man so pusillanimous so very a dastard, whom Love would
not incense and make a divine temper and an heroical spirit. Lib. 3. de
Aulico. Non dubito quin is qui talem exercitum haberet totius orbis statim
victor esset nisi forte cum aliquo exercitu confligendum esset in quo omn^s
amatores essent.
I doubt not but if a man had such an army of Lovers, (as Castilio thinks) he
might soon conquer all the world, except by chance he met with such another
army of Lovers, to oppose it. Higinius de cane and lepore, calesti.
For so perchance they might fight as that fatal dog and fatal hare in the
heavens, course one another round, and never make an end. Castilio thinks
Ferdinand king of Spain had never conquered Granado, had not Queen Isabell
and her Ladies been present at the seige. Vix ^ici potest quantam inde
audaciam assumerent Hispani, inde pauci infinitas Mauroru^ copias superarunt.
It cannot be expressed what courage the Spanish Knights took, when the
Ladies were present, a few Spaniards overcame a multitude of Moors. They will
undergo any danger whatsoever, as Sr Walter Manny in Edward the thirds time,
stuck full of Ladies favors fought like a Dragon. For soli amantes, as Plato
holds, pro amicis mori appetunt, only Lovers will dye for their friends, and in
their Mistress quarrel, Sr Lancelot and Sr Tristram, Caesar or Alexander shall
not be more resolute, or go beyoud them. And not courage only does love add,
but as I said, wisdom and all manner of ciuility and good behavior. Bocace
has a pleasant tale to this purpose, which he borrowed from the Greeks, and
which Beroaldus has turned into Latin, Bebelius into verse, of Cymon and
Iphiginia. This Cymon was a fool, a proper man of person, and the Governor of
Cyprus son, but a very ass, insomuch that his father being ashamed of him,
sent him to a farm house he had in the country to be brought up. Where by
chance, as his manner was, walking alone, he espied a gallant young
Gentlewoman, named Iphiginia, a Burgomasters daughter of Cyprus with her maid
by a brook side in a little thicket, fast a sleep in her smock, where she had
newly bathed her self: When Hanc vbi conspicatus est Cymon baculo innixus
immobilis stelit and mirabundus, etc.
Cymon saw her he stood leaning on his staff gaping on her, immovable and in
a maze; at last fell to far in love with the glorious object, that he began
to rouse himself up, and to bethink him what he was, and would needs follow
her to the city, and for her sake began to be civil, to learn to sing and
dance, to play of Instruments, and got all those Gentlemen like qualities and
complements in a short space, which his friends were most glad of. In brief,
he became from an Idiot and a Clown, to be one of the most complete Gentlman
in Cyprus and did many valorous exploits, and all for the love of Mistress
Iphiginia. In a word, I may say thus much of them all, let them be never so
clownish, rude and horrid, Gobrians and sluts, if once they be in love, they
will be most neat and spruce and begin to trick up, and to have a good
opinion of themselves. A ship is not so long a rigging, as a young
Gentlewoman a trimming up her self, against her sweetheart comes. A painters
shop, a flowery meddowe, no so gracious an aspect as a young maid, a Nouitsa, or
Venetian Bride, that looks for an husband, or a young man that is her suitor
(composed looks, composed gate, clothes, gestures, actions, all composed) all
the graces, elegances in the world are in her face: their best robes, Jewels,
Laces, Spangles, must come on, Plautus.
praeter quam res patitur student elegantiae, they are beyond all measure coy,
nice, and too curious on a sudden: It Is all their study, all their business,
how to wear their clothes, and to set out themselves. When Mercury was to come
before his Mistress, -- Chlamydemque vt pendeat apt
Collocat, vt limbus totumque appareat aurum,
He put his cloak in order, that the lace,
And hemme, and gold work all might have his grace,
When that hirsute Cyclopicall Polyphemus courted Galatea. Met. 13.
Iamque tibi formae iamque est tibi cura placendi,
Iam rigidos pectis rastris Polypheme capillos,
Iam libet hirsutam tibi falce recidere barbam,
Et spectare feros in aqua and componere vultus.
And then he did begin to prancke himself,
To please and comb his head, and beard to shave,
And look his face in the water, as a glass,
And to compose himself for to be brave.


He now began to have a good opinion of his own feature, and good parts. I am
Galatea veni, nec munera despice nostra,
Certe ego me noui liquidaque in Imagine vidi
Nuper aquae, Sheepheards in their Loves are as coye as Kings.
placuitque mihi mea forma videnti.
Come now my Galatea scorn me not,
Nor my poor presents, for but yesterday
I saw my self in the water, and me thought
Full fair I was, scorn me not I say.


It Is the common humor of all Suitors to trick up themselves: and as Hensius
writ to Primierus, Epist. an vxor literato sit d^cenda. Noctes insomnes
traducendae literis r^nunciandum. Saepe gemendum, nonnunquam et illachrymandu^
sorti and conditioni tuae. Videndum quae vestes quis cultus te deceat, quis in
vsu sit vtrum latus barbae, etc. Cum cura loque^dum, incedendu^, bibendum, and
cu^ cura insanien du^
If once he be besotted on a wench, he must lie awake a nights, renounce his
book, sigh and lament, and now and then weep for his hard hap, and mark
above all things what Hats, Bands, Dublets, Breeches are in fashion, how to cut
his Beard, and wear his loue-locke, to turn up his Munshato's, and curle his
head, prune his Pickitivant, or if he wear it broad that the East side be
corespondent to the West: he must be in league with an excellent Tailor,
Barber, have neat shooe-ties, points, garters, speak in print, walk in print,
eat and drink all in print, and that which is all in all, he must be mad in
print.

Amongst all other good qualities an amorous fellow must have, he must learn
to sing and dance, play upon some Instrument or other, as without all doubt he
will, if he be truly touched with this loadstone of love. For as Chil 4.
cent. 5. pro 15.
Erasmus has it, Musicam docet amor and Poesin, Love will make them Musicians,
and to make Ditties, Madrigalls, Elegies, and love Sonnets, and sing them to
several tunes. It Is their chiefest study to sing, and dance, and without
question, so many gentlemen and gentlewomen would not be so well qualified in
this kind, if love did not incite them. Lib. 3. de aulico. Quis Choreis
insudaret nisi saeminarum causa, quis musicae tantam nauaret operam, nisi quod
illius dulcedine permulcere speret, quis tot carmina co^pon^ret, nisi vt inde
affectus suos in mulieres explicaret.
Who, says Castilio, would learn to play, or give his mind to music, or
learn to dance, or make so many rimes, Loue-songs, as most do, but for women's
sake, but that they hope by that means to purchase their good wills, and win
their favors. Constantine agricult. lib. 11 cap. 18. Makes Cupid himself to
be a great dancer, by the same token as he was capering amongst the Gods,
Craterem nectaris evertit saltans apud deos qui in terram cadens rosam prius
albam rubore infecit.
he flunge down a boule of Nectar, which distilling upon the white Rose, ever
since made it red and Calistratus by the help of Daedalus about Cupids statua,
Puellas choreantes circa iuvenilem Cupidinis statuam fecit. Philostrat. Imag
lib. 3. de statuis. Exercitium amori aptissimum.
made a many of young wenches still a dancing, to signify belike that Cupid
was much affected with it. Praxitiles in all his Pictures of Love, made Cupid
still smiling, and looking upon dancers. And many times this Love will make old
men dance, and mask and mumme, for Comus and Hymen love Maskes, and all such
merriments above measure, and will allow men to put on women's apparel in some
cases, and to dance men of all sorts. Paulus Iouius taxes Augustine Niphus the
Philosopher, Vita eius. Puellae amore septua genarius senex vsque ad insaniam
correptus, multis liberis susceptis: multi non sine pudore conspexerunt, senem
and Philosophum podagricum non sine risu saltantem ad tibie modos.
For that being and old man and a public Professor, a father of many children,
he was so mad for the love of a young maid (that which many of his friends were
ashamed to see) an old gouty fellow dance after Fiddlers. Many laughed him to
scorn for it, but this omnipotent love would have it so, and who can withstand
it. If once we be in love, young or old, though our teeth shake in our heads,
there is no remedy we must dance. Plutarch Sympos. 1. quaest. 5. does in some
sort excuse it, and tells us moreover in what sense, Musicam docet amor,
licet prius fuerit rudis, how Love makes them that had no skill before, learn
to sing and dance, he concludes it is only that power and prerogative Love has
over us. De taciturno loquacem facit and de verecundo officiosum reddit de
negligente industrium de socorde impigru^.
Love, as he holds will make a silent man speak, a modest man most officious,
dull, quick* slow, nimble; and that which is most to be admired, an hardbase
intractable Churl, as fire does Iron in a smithes Forge, facile, gentle, and
easy to be entreated; for which cause many compare Love to wine, which makes
men Iouial and merry, sing and dance,

But above all the other Symptoms of Lovers, this is not lightly to be
ouerpassed, that likely of what condition soever if once they be in love, they
turn to their ability, Rimers, Ballet-makers, and Poets. For as Plutarch
says, Ipsi enim volunt suarum amasiarum pulchritudinis praecones ac testes
esse, eas laudibus and cantilenis and versibus exornare, vt auro statuas vt
memorentur and ab omnibus admirentur.
They will be witnesses and trumpettors of their Paramours good parts,
bedecking them with verses and commendatory songs, as we do statues with
gold, that they may be remembered and admired of all. Old men will dote in this
kind sometimes as well as the best. Tom. 2. Ant. Dialogo.
Iovianus Pontanus makes an old man time, and turn Poetaster to please his
Mistress. Ne ringas Mariana meos ne despice canos,
De seen nam iuuenem Diae refer potes, etc,
Sweet Marian do not mine age disdain,
For thou can make an old man young again.


This Love is the cause of all good conceits, Huic mu^ditias ornatum leporem
delitias ludos el^gantiam omnem denique vitae suauitatem debemus.
neatness, exomatious, plays, elegancies, delights, and all the sweetness of
our life, all our feasts almost, banquets, merry meetings, weddings, pleasing
songs, fine tunes, Poems, Loue-stories, Fescenines, Elegies, Odes, etc.
Emblems, Impreses, deuiles, if we may believe Iouius, Contiles, and Paradine,
may be ascribed to it: Fransus lib. 3. De symbolis qui primus symbolum
excogitauit voluit nimirum hac ratione implicatum animu^ evoluere, eumque vel
dominae vel aliis intuentibus ostendere.
all our Tilts and Tournaments, Orders of the Garter, Golden Fleece, etc. And
many of our histories: by this means, says Iouius, they would express their
minds to their Mistress, and to the beholders. It Is the sole subject almost of
all Poetry, all our invention tends to it, all our songs, what ever those old
Anacrions, Greek Epigrammatists, Love writers, Anthony Diogenes the most
ancient, whose Epitome we find in Phocions Bibliotheca, Longus Sophista,
Eumathius, Achilles Tatius, Heliodorus, Plato, Plutarch, Lucian^, Partherius,
Ovid, Catullus, Tibullus, etc. Our new Ariosto's, Boyardes, autors of Arcadia,
Fairy Q. etc. have written in this kind, are but as so many Symptoms of Love.
Their whole books are a Synopsis of breuiary of Love, the Portuous of Love,
Legends of Lovers lives and deaths, and of their memorable adventures. Nay
more, as Lib 4. number. 102. siluae nuptialis. poetae non inueniunt fabulas aut
versus laudatos faciunt, fuerint excitati. Martial Epi^ 73. lib. ^.


Neuisanus the Lawier holds, thene never was any good Poet, that invented good
fables or made laudable Verses, that was not in love himself.

Cynthia te vatem fecit lasciue Properti,
Ingenium Galli pulchra Lycoris habet,
Fama est arguti Nemesis formosa Tibulli,
Leshia dictauit docte Catullo ribi.
Non me Pelignus nec spernet Mantua vatem.
Si qua Corinna mihi, si quis Alexis crit:
Wanton Propertius, and witty Gallus,
Subtle Tibullus, and Learned Catullus,
It was Cynthia, Lesbia, Lychoris,
That made you Poets all, and if Alexis,
Or Corinna chance my Paramour to be,
Virgil and Ovid shall not despise me.


Petrarchs Laura made him so famous, Astropbell: Stella, and Iouianus Pontanus
Mistress was the cause of his Roses, Violets, Lillies, Nequitiae, blanditiae,
ioci, decor, Nardus, Ver, Coralla, Thus, Mars, Pallas, Venus, Charis, Crocum,
Laurus, Vnguentum, Costum, Laohrymae, Myrrha, Musae, etc. And the rest of his
Poems. The very Rusticks and Hog-rubbers, if once they taste of this
Loue-liquor, are inspired in an instant. They must write and indite all in Rhyme.

Thou Hony-suckle of the Hathorne hedge,
S. R. 1600.
Vouchsafe in Cupids cup my heart to pledge,
My hearts dear blood, sweet Cis is thy Carouse,
Worth all the Ale in Gammer Gubbins house.
I say no more, affairs call me away,
My fathers horse for Prouender does stay.
Be thou the Lady Cressetlight to me,
Sr Trolly Lolly will I prove to thee,
Written in have, farewell my Cowslip sweet,
Pray let us a Sunday at the Alehouse meet.


Your most grimme Stoics, and severe Philosophers will melt away with this
passion, and if Lib. 13. cap. Dypnosophist.
Athanaeus belie them not, Aristippus, Apollidorus, Antiphanes, etc. have
written love Songs and Commentaries of their Mistress praises. Kings and
Emperors instead of Poems, build cities, etc. Adrian built Antinoa in Egypt,
besides Constellations, Temples, Altars, etc. in the honor of his Antinons.
Alexander bestowed infinite sums, to set out his Hephestian to all eternity.
But I conclude, Quis horum scribere molestias potest, nisi qui and is
aliquantu^ insanit. Aeneas Siluius.
there is no end of Loves Symptoms, it is a bottomless pit, Love is subject to
no dimensions; and not to be suruayed by any art or engine.

MEMB. 4. Prognostics of Loue-melancholy
What Fires, Torments, Cares, Iealosies, Suspicions, Fears and Griefs,
Anxieties accompany such as are in love, I have sufficiently said: the next
question is, what will be the event of such miseries, what they foretell. Some
are of opinion that this Love cannot be cured, Nullis amor est medicabilis
herbis, it accompanies them to their Semper moritur, nunquam mortuus est qui
amat Aen. Silu.
last, Ide^ amor exitio est pecoripecorisque magistro, and is so continuate,
that by no persuasion almost it may be relieved. Bid me not to love, said
Eurial Ep. ad Lucretiam apud Aeneam Silviu^. Rogas vt amare deficiam ro^a
montes vt in planum deveniant, vt sontes fluvia repetant, tam possum te non
amare, ac suum Phoebus relinquere cursum.
Eurialus, bid the Mountains come down into the plames, bid the Rivers run
back to their Fountains; I can as soon leave to Love, as the Sun to leave
his course. No Physic can ease it: Quae prosunt domino non prosunt omnibus
arts.

As Apollo confessed, and Jupiter himself could not be cured. Propertiu^ lib.
2. Eleg. 1.
Omnes humanos curat medicina dolores,
Solus amor morbi non habet artificem.
Physic can soon cure every disease,
Est orcus ille vis est immedicabilis est rabies insana,
Excepting Love, that can it notappease.


But whether Love may be cured or no, and by what means shall be explained in
his place, in the mean time, if it take his course and be not otherwise eased
or amended, it breaks out into outrageous often, and prodigious events. Amor
and Liber violenti dij sunt, as Lib. 2.
Tatius observes, and consque animum incendunt vt pudoris obliuisci cogant.
Love and Bacchus are so violent Gods, and so furiously rage in our minds, that
they make us forget all honesty, shame and common ciuility. For such men
commonly as are thoroughly possessed with this humor, are insensati; beside
themselves, and as I have proved, no better then beasts, Irrational, stupid,
headstrong, void of fear of God or men, they frequently forsware themselves,
steal, commit incests, rapes, adulteries, murders, depolutate Towns, Cities,
Countries, to satisfy their lust. R. T.
A Devil it is and mischief such do h work,
As never yet did Pagan, Jew, or Turk.
The war^es of Troy may be a sufficient witness, and as Appian. lib. 5. hist.
says of Antony and Cleopatra, Qui quidem amor vtrosque and totum Aegyptu^
extremis calamitatibus inuolvit.
Their love brought themselves, and all Egypt into extream^ and miserable
calamities. The end of her is as bitter as wormwood, and as sharp as a
two-edged sword. Prou. 5.4.5. Her feet go down to death, her steps lead on
to hell. She is more bitter then death, Eccles. 7. 28. and the sinner shall be
taken by her.

Plautus.
Qui in amore praecipitauit, peius perit quam qui saxo salu. Vt corpus pondere
sic animus amore precipitatur Austin. 2. de ciuit cap. 28.
He that falls headlong from the top of a rock, is not in so bad a case, as he
that falls into this gul^e of Love. For hence, says Dial. Hinc oritur and
paenitentia desperatio non vident ingenium secum re simul amisisse
Platina, comes Repentance, Desperation, Dotage, they loose themselves, their
wits, and make shipwreck of their fortunes altogether, Madness, to make away
themselves and others, violent death, Prognosticatio est talis, says Gordomus,
Idem Savana rola and plures alii, etc. Rabidum facturus Orexin. Iuven.


si non succurratur ijs aut in mani m cadunt, aut moriu^tur, The
prognostication is, they will either run mad, or dye. For if this passion
continue, says Cap. De Heroico Amore. Haec passio durans sanguinem torridum
and atribilarium reddit hic vero ad cerebrum delatus insaniam parat vigiliis et
erebr^ desiderio exiccans.
Aelian Montal^us, it makes the blood hot, thick and black, and if the
inflammation get into the brain, with continual meditation and waking, it so
dries it up, that madness follows, or else they make away themselves. And as
Arnoldus adds, it will speedily work these effects, if it be not presently
helped, In^ani s^unt. aut sibi ipsis desperantes mortem aslerunt. Languentes
cito mortem aut ma^^^m patiuntur.
They will pi^e away and run mad, and dye upon a sudden. Facile incidunt in
Maniam. says Valescus, quickly mad, nisi succurratur, if good order be not
taken. So she confessed of her self in the Poet. -- Theocritus Edill. 14.
Insaniam pr^^squam quis sentiat,
Vix pili interuallo a furore absum.
I shall be mad before it be perceived,
An hair breadth of scarce am I, now distracted.
As mad as Orlando for his Angelica, or Hercules for his Hylas. p At ille
ruebat quo pedes ducebant, furibundus,
Nam illi saeuus Deus intus iecur laniabat,
He went he cared not whether, mad he was,
The cruel God so tortured him, alas.
At the sight of Hero I cannot tell how many ran Lucians Imag. So For Lucians
mistress all that saw her and could not enjoy her ran madd or hanged themselus
mad, Museus.
Alius vulnus celans insanit pulchritudine puellae,
And whilst he does concea^e his grief,
Madness comes on him like a thief.
Go to Bedlam for examples. It is so well known in every village, how many
have either died for love or voluntary made away themselves, that I not need
such labor to prove it. Ovid met. 10. Aeneas Siluius ad eius decessum nunquam
^isa Lucretia ridere nullis facetiis iocis nullo gaud^o potuit in laetitiam
renovari, mox in aegritudinem incidit et sic breui conta^uit.
Nec modus aut requies nisi mors reperitur amoris. Death is the common
Catastrophe to such persons. After that Eurialus departed from Senes, Lucretia
his paramour never looked up, no jests could exhilerate her sad mind, no joys
comfort her wounded and distressed soul: but a little after she fell sick
and died. But this is a gentle end a natural death, such persons commonly make
away themselves: so did Dido Phaedra, Pyramus and Thisbe, Medeaa, and many
Myriades besides. Valleriola lib. 2. obser. 7. Furibundus puta^^t se videre
Imaginem puellae and coram loqui bla^diens illi. etc.
has a lamentable story of a Merchant his patient, that rauing through
impatience of love, had he not been watched, would every while have offered
violence to himself. Amatus Lusitanus cent. 3. cur. 56. has such Iuven.
Hebreus.
another story, and Faelix Platter med. obser. lib. 1. of a young Iuvenis
Medicinae operam dans doctoris siliam d^^er^bat etc.
Gentleman that studied Physic, and for the love of a Doctors daughter having
no hope to compass his desire, poisoned himself. Gotardus Arthus
Gallobelgicus, m^nd. vernul. 16^5. coll^^ nouacul^ aperuit: and inde expirauit.
An 1615. A Barber in Francfort because his wench was betroathed to another,
cut his own throat. Cum renuente parente vtroque and ipsa virgin fr^^ non
posset. ipsum and ipsam interfecit hoc a magistratu petens vt in eodem
sepulchro sepeliri possent.
At Neoburge the same year, a young man because he could not get her parents
consent killed his sweet heart, and afterward himself desiring this of the
Magistrate, as he gave up the Ghost, that they might both be buried in a
grave. You have not yet heard the worst, they do not offer violence to
themselves in this rage of lust, but unto others, their nearest and dearest
friends. Chalcocondilas de reb. Turcicis lib. 9. Nerei vxor Athenarum domina,
etc.
Nereus wife a widow and Lady of Athens, For the love of a Venetian Gentleman
betrayed the City, and he for her sake, murdered his wife the daughter of a
Nobleman in Venice. Nicephorus Greg. hist. lib. 8. vxorem occidit liberos and
Michaelem filium videre abhorruit Thessalonicae amore captus prono^arii silia,
etc
Constantius Despota, made away Katherine his wife, and turned his son
Michael and his other children out of doors, for the love of a base Scriueners
daughter in Thessalonica, with whose beauty ^e was enamored. Parthenius Erot.
lib. cap. 5.
Leucophria betrayed the city where she dwelt, for her sweet-hearts sake that
was in the enemies camp. Idem cap. 21. Gubernatoris silia Achillis amore capta
ciuitatem prodid^t.
Pisidice the Governors daughter of Methinia for the love of Achilles betrayed
the whole Island to him, her fathers enemy. Idem cap. 9.
Diognetus did as much in the city where he dwelt, for the love of Policrita
etc. Such Acts and Scenes has this Tragedy of Love.

MEMB. 5.
SVBSECT. 1. Cure of Loue-Melancholy, by Labor, Diet, Physic, Fasting, etc.
ALthough it be controuerted by some, whether Loue-Melancholy may be cured,
because it is so irresistible and violent a passion, yet without question^, if
it be taken in time it may be helped, and by many good remedies amended.
Avicenna lib. 3. Fen. 1. cap. 23, and 24. setts down 7 good ways, how this
malady may be eased, altered and expelled, Sauanarola. 9. principal
observations, Iasou Pratensis prescribes 8 rules besides Physic, how this
passion may be tamed, Laurentius ^. maine precepts, Arnoldus, Valleriola,
Montaltus, Hildesheim, Langius and others otherwise, all tending to the same
purpose. The sum of which I will briefly Epitomize, and enlarge again upon
occasion, as shall seem best to me and to mine own method. The first rule to
be observed in subduing this stubborn and unbridled passion is Exercise and
Diet. It is an ol^ and we^l known sentence, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget
Venus; As an Otium naufragium castitatis Austin.
idle sendentary life liberal feeding, are great causes of it, so the opposite
labor, slender and sparing diet, with continual business, are the best and
most ordinary means to prevent it. Otia si tollas periere Cupidinis arts,
Contemptaeque iacent, and sine luce faces.
Take Idleness away, and put to flight
Are Cupids arts, his torches give no light.
Minerua, Diana, Vesta, and the 9. Muses were never inamored, because they
never were idle. It Is Sauanorolas 3. rule Occupari in multis and magnis
negotijs. And Avicenna's precept, cap. 24. Ovid. lib. 1. remed.
Cedit amor rebus res age tutus eris. To be busy still, and as Cap. 16. circa
res arduas exerceri.
Guianerius inioynes about matters of great moment, if it may be. Part. 2 cap.
23 reg. San. His praeter horam semni nulla per otium transeat.
Magninus adds, never to be Idle but at the hours of sleep. -- Hor. lib. 1.
Epist. 2.
and ni
Posces ante diem librum cum lumine, si non
Intendas animum studijs and rebus honestis,
Invidia vel amore miser torquebere.
For if thou do not ply thy book,
By candlelight to study bent,
Imploid about some honest thing,
Envy or love shall thee torment.
No better physic then to be still busy, seriously intent. Seneca.
Cur in penates rarius tenues subit,
Haec delicatas eligens pestis domus,
Mediumque sanos vulgus affectus tenet? etc.
Why do thou ask poor folks are often free
And dainty places still molested be?
Because poor people fare coursly, work hard, go wollward and bare. Tract.
16. cap. 18 super nuda carne cilicium portent, tempore frigido sine caligis and
nudis ped^bus in^edant in pane and aqua ieiunent saepius se verberibus caedant,
etc.
Guianerius therefore prescribes his patient to go with haire-cloath next his
skin, to go barefooted and bare-legged in cold weather, to whippe himself
now and then as Monks do, but above all to fast. Not with Mutton and
pottadge, as many of them fast whatsoever they pretend, but from all manner of
meat. Fasting is an all-sufficient remedy of it self, for as Jason Pratensis
holds, the bodies of such persons that feed liberally and feed at ease,
Daemonibus referta sunt corpora nostra illorum praecipue qui delicatis
vescuntur eduliis, aduolitant and corporibus inhaerent hanc obrem ieiunium
impend^o probatur ad pudicitiam.
are full of bad spirits and Devils, devilish thoughts, no better Physic for
such persons then to fast. Heldesheim spicel. 2. to this of hunger adds,
Victus sit attenuatus bal nei frequens vsus and sudationes cold baths not hot,
says Magninus par. 3 cap. 23. to diue over head and ears in a cold river, etc.
often bathes, much exercise and sweat, but hunger and fasting he preferres
before the rest. And it is indeed our Saviors Oracle This kind of devil is
not cast out but by fasting and prayer, which makes the Fathers so immoderate
in commendation of fasting. As Hunger, says Ser de gula fames amica
virginitati est inimica lasciuiae s^turitas vero castitatem perdit and nutrit
illecebras.
Ambrose, is a friend of virginity, so is it an enemy to lasciviousness, but
fullness overthrows chastity, and fastereth all manner of prouocations. If
thine horse be too lusty, Hierome advises thee to take away some of his
Prouender, by this means those Paul's, Hilaries, Antonies, and famous
Anachorits subdued the lusts of the flesh, by this means, Hilarion made his
ass, as he called his own body, leave kicking (as Vita ^ Hilarionis lib. 3.
epist. cum tentasset eum demon titillatione inter caetera. Ego inquit aselle
ad corpus suum, facia^, etc
Hierome relates of him in his life) when the devil tempted him to any such
foul offense. By this means those Strabo lib. 15. Geog. sub pellibus cubant,
etc.
Indian Brachmanni kept themselves continent, they lay upon the ground covered
with skins, as the Redshanks do on Hadder: and dieted themselves sparingly
of one dish: which Guianerius would have all young men put in practice; and if
that will not serve, Cap, 2. part. 2 Si sit iuuenis and non vult obedire
flage^^etur frequenter and fortiter dum incipiat foetere
Gordonius would have them soundly whipped, or to cool their courage kept in
prison, and there fedd with bread and water, till they acknowledge their error
and become of another mind. If imprisonment and hunger will not take them down
according to the direction of that Laertius lib. 6. cap. 5. amori medetur
sames, ^in aeliter tempus, si non hoc laqueus.
Theban Crates, Time must wear it out, if time will not, the last refuge is an
halter. But this you will say is comically spoken. Howsoever fasting by all
means must be still used, and as they must refrain from such meats formerly
mentioned, which cause venery or provoke lust, so you must use an opposite
diet. Viua parant animos veneri, etc.
Wine by all means must be avoided to the younger sort. Women of old for that
cause in hot countries were forbid the use of it, and young folks as Leonicus
has recorded, Var. hist. lib. 3. cap. 87.88. ^ out of Athenaeus and others,
and is still practiced in Italy and some other countries of Europe, and and
Asia, as Claudius Minos has well illustrated in his comment on the 23 Emblem
of Alciat. So of other meats. Nec minus erucas aptum est vitare salaces,
Et quicquid Veneri corpora nostra parat.
Eringo's are not good for to be taken,
And all lascivious meats must be forsaken.
Those opposite meats which are to be used, are Cowcumbers, Mellons, Purslan,
water lillies, Rue, Woodbine, Amni, Lettice, which Lemnius so much commends,
lib. 2. cap. 42. and Mizaldus hort. med to this purpose. Vitex or Agnus castus
before the rest, which says Reg. San. pa^^ 3 cap. 23. ^^rabilem vim habe^
Magninus, has a wonderful virtue in it. see more in Porta, Mathiolus,
Crescentius, lib. 5. etc. and what every herbalist almost and Physician has
written, cap. de Satyriasi and Priapismo. In some cases again, if they be much
dejected and brought low in body, and now ready to despair through anguish,
grief, and too sensible a feeling of their misery, a cup of wine and full diet
is not amiss, and as Valescus advises, cum alia honesta venerem saepe
exercendo, which Langius epist. med. lib. 1. epist. 24. approues out of Rhasis,
assiduationem coitus, and Guianerius cap. 16. tract. 16. as Cum muliere aliqua
gratiosa saepe coire eru vtilissimum. Idem Laurentius c. 11
very profitable Physic, and to be druncke too by fits, but this is mad
physic, if it be at all to be permitted. If not, yet some pleasure is to be
allowed, as that which Vives speaks of lib. 3. de Anima, Amatori cuius est pro
impoten^^ men's amota opus est vt paulatim animus velut a peregrinatione domum
revocetur per musicam couiuia etc. Per aucupium fabulas and sestiuas
narrationes laborem vsque ad sudorem etc.


A lover that has as it were lost himself through impotency, impatience, must
be called home as a traveler by music, feasting, good wine, if need be to
drunkenness it self, which many so much commend for the easing of the mind all
kind of sports and merriments, to see some pictures, hangings buildings,
pleasant fields, Orchards, Gardens, Groves, Ponds, Pooles, Rivers, fishing,
fowling, hauking, hunting, merry tales, and pleasant discourse, reading, and
exercise till he sweat, that new spirits may succeed, or some other vehement
affection or contrary passion, till he be wayned from anger, suspicion, cares,
fears etc. and habituated into another course. And as this method of Music,
merriment, singing, dancing, does augment the passion in some Lovers, as Cap.
de Ilishi Multos hoc affectu sanat cantilena laetitia musica and quidem sunt
quos haec augmentant
Avicenna notes, so it expels it in others, and does very much good. These
things must be warily applied, as the parties symptoms vary, and as they
shall stand diversely affected.

If there be any need of physic, that the humors be altered, or any new
matter aggregated, they must be cured as melancholy men. Carolus a Lorme
amongst other questions, discussed for his degree at Montpelier in France, has
this, an Amantes and amentes ijsdem remedijs curentur? Whether Lovers and
madmen be cured by the same remedies, he affirms it, for love extended is
mere madness. Such physic then as is prescribed, is either inward or
outward, as has been formerly handled, in the precedent Partition in the Cure
of Melancholy. Cent 3. cura 56. Syrrupo helleborato and a lijs quae ad atra^
bilem pertinent.
Amatus Lusitanus cured a young Jew that was almost mad for love, with the
Syrup of Hellebor, and such other euacuations and purges, which are usually
prescribed to black choler: Purgetur si eius dispositio venerit ad adust.
humoris and phlebotomisetur.
Avicenna confirms as much if need require, and Amantium morbus vt pruritus
solvitur venae sectione et cucurbitulis.
blood letting above the rest, which makes amantes ne sint amentes, Lovers to
come to themselves, and keep in their right minds. It Is the same which Schola
Sal^rnitana, Jason Pratensis, Hildesheim etc. prescribe blood-letting still as
a principal remedy. Those old Scythians had a trick to cure al appetite of
burning lust, Cura a Venae sectione per auresvnde semper steriles.
by letting themselves blood under the ears, and to make both men and women
barren, as Sabellicus in his Enneades relates of them. Which Salmuth Tit. 10.
de Horol. comment. in Pancirol. de nou. repert. Mercurialis var. lec. lib. 3.
cap. 7. out of Hippocrates, and Benso says, is still in use amongst the
Indians, a reason of which Langius gives lib. 1. epist. 10.

Huc faciunt medicamenta venerem sopientia, vt Camphora pudendis alligata, and
in bracha gestata (quidam ait) membrum flaccidu^. reddit laborauit hoc morbo
virgo nobilis, cui inter caetera praescripsit medicus, vt lamina^ plumbea^
multis foramimbus pertusam ad dies viginti portaret in dorso, ad exiccandum
vero sperma iussit eam quam parcissime cibari, and manducare frequenter
coriandrum praeparatum, and semen lactucae and acetosae, and sic eam a morbo
liberavit. Porro impediunt and remittunt coitum folia salicis, trita and epota,
and si frequentius, vsurpentur ipsa in totum auferunt. Idem praestat Topatius
annulo gestatus, dexterum lupi testiculum attritum, and oleo vel aqua rosata
exhibitum, Veneris, taedium inducere scribit Alexander Benedictus: lac buturi
commestum and semen Canabis, and Camphora exhibita idem praestant. Verbena
herba gestata libidinem extinguit, puluis ranae decollatae and exiccatae. Ad
extinguendum coitum, vngantur membra genitalia, and renes, and pecten aqua, in
qua opium Thebaicum sit dissolutum, libidini maxim contratia camphora est, and
coriandrum siccum frangit coitu^, and erectionem virgae impedit, idem efficit
synapium ebibitum. Da verbenam in potu and non erigetur verga sex diebus, vtere
mentha sicca cum aceto, genitalia illinita succo Hyoscyami aut cicutae, coitus
appetitum sedant, etc. R. semis lactuc. portulac, coriandri an. j. mentae
siccae ss. sacchari albiss. iiij. puluerisentur omnia subtiliter, and postea
simul misce aqua Neunpharis, f. conefc. solida in morsulis, Ex his sumat mane
vnum quum surgat. Innumera fere his similia petas, ab Hildishemo loco
praedicto, Mizaldo, Porta, caeterisque.

SVBSEC. 2. Withstand the beginnings, avoid occasions, change his place: fair
and foul means, contrary passions, witty inventions: to bring in another, and
discommend the former.
OTher good rules and precepts are enjoined by our Physiti^ns, which if not
alone, yet certainly conjoined may do much. The first of which is obstare
principijs, to withstand the beginning, Seneca. cum in mulierem inciderit, quae
cum forma morum suauitatem coniunctam habet and iam oculos persenserit formae
ad se Imaginem cum auiditate quadam rapere cum eadem, etc.
quisquis in primo obstitit, pepulitque amorem tutor ac victor fuit, he that
will but resist at first may easily be a conqueror at the last. Baltasar
Castilio li. 4. urges this prescript above the rest, when he shall chance
(says he) to light upon a woman, that has good behavior joined with her
excellent person, and shall perceive his eyes with a kind of greediness, to
pull unto them this Image of beauty, and carry it to the heart: and shall
observe himself to be somewhat incended with this influence, which moves
within, when he shall discern those subtle spirits sparkling in her eyes, to
administer more fuel to the fire, he must wisely withstand the beginnings,
and rouse up reason stupefied almost, and fortify his heart by all means, and
shut up all those passages, by which it may have entrance. It Is a precept which
all concur upon. Ovid. de rem. lib. 1.
Opprime dum noua sunt subiti mala semina morbi,
Dum licet in primo limine siste pedem.
Thy quick disease whilst it is fresh to day,
By all means crush, thy feet at first step stay.
Which cannot speedier be done, then if he confess his grief and passion to
some judicious friend ( qui tacitus ardet magis vritur, Aeneas Siluius.
the more he conceales the greater is his pain) that by his good advise may
happily ease him of a sudden; and withal to avoid occasions, or any
circumstance that may aggrauate his disease. To keep out of her company which
Hierome so much labors to Paula, to his Nepotian; Chrysostom so much
inculcates in ser. i^contubern. Cyprian, and many other fathers of the Church.
Siracides in his 9. chapter, Jason Pratensis, Sauanorola, Arnoldus, Valleriola
etc. and every Physician that treats of this subject. Not only to avoid as
Tom. 2. lib. 4. cap. 10. syntag. med. art. mirab. vitentur oscula, tactus,
sermo and scripta impudica literae etc.
Gregory Tholosanus exhorts, kissing, dalliance, all speeches, tokens,
loue-letters and the like, or as Castilio lib. 4. to converse with them, hear
them speak, Tam admirabilem splendorem declinet, gratia^, scintillas, amabiles
risus, gestus suauissimos, etc.
those amiable smiles, admirable graces, and sweet gestures, which their
presence affords: but all sight, they must not so much as see the^, or look
upon them. Gaze not on a maid says Siracides, turn away thine eyes from a
beautiful woman, cap. 9. ver. 7. 8. auerte oculos, says David, or if thou do
see them as Ficinus advises, let not thine eye be intentus ad libidinem, do
not intend her more then the rest: but as Hierome to Nepotian, aut aequaliter
ama, aut aequaliter ignora, either see all alike, or let al alone; and that is
the safest course, let all alone, see none of the^. Nothing sooner reuiues,
Dial 3. de contemptu mundi nihil facilius rec^udescit quam amor, vt pompa visa
renouat ambitionem, auri species auaritiam, spectata corporis forma incendit
luxuriam.
or waxes sore again as Petrarch holds, then love does by sight. As Pomp
renues ambition, the sight of gold, covetousness, a beauteous object sets on
fire this burning lust. Et multum saliens incitat vnda sitim.

The sight of drink makes one dry, and the sight of meat increases
appetite. Especially if he have been formerly inamored, the sight of his
mistress strikes him into a new fit, and makes him rave many days after.

-- Ovid.
Infirmis causa pusilla nocet,
Et poene extinctum cinerem si sulphur tangas,
vinet, and ex minimo maximus ignis erit
Sic nisi vitabis quicquid renouabit amorem,
Flamma recrudescet, quae modo nulla fuit.
A sickely man a little thing offends,
As brimstone does a fire decayed renew,
And make it burn afresh, does loves dead flames,
If that the former object it reuiew.
Or as the Poet compares it to embers in ashes, which the wind blows, Met. 7.
vt solet a ventis alimenta resumere quaeque parua subinductalatuit scintilla
fauilla crescere and in veteres agitata resurgere flammas
vt solet a ventis, etc. a scauld head as the saying is, is soon broaken, and
dry wood soon kindles, and when they have been formerly wounded by sight,
how can they by seeing but be inflamed? Ismenius acknowledges as much of
himself, when he had been long absent, and almost forgotten his mistress,
Eumathij li. 3. aspectus amorem incendit vt marcescentem in palea igne^ ventus,
ardebam interea maiore concepto incendio.
at the first sight of her, as straw in a fire, I burned afresh, and more then
ever I did before. Heliodorus lib. 4. Inflammat mentem nou^s aspectus, perinde
ac ignis materiae admotus Chariclia, etc.
Chariclia was as much moved at the sight of her dear Theagenes, after he had
been long absent, and it is the common passion of all lovers. And for that
cause Alexander foreknowing this inconvenience and danger that comes by sight,
Curtius lib. 3. cum vxorem Darij laudatam audiuisset tantum cupiditati suae
fraenum in iecit, vt illam vix vellet intueri.
when he had heard Darius wife so much commended for her beauty, would scarce
admit her to come in his sight. And when as Araspus in Xenophon, had so much
magnified that divine face of Panthea to Cyrus, Cyripaedia. cum Pantheae forma^
Euexisset Araspas tanto magis inquit, Cyrus abstinere oportet, quanto pulchrior
est.
by how much she was fairer then ordinary, by so much he was the more unwilling
to see her. Scipio a young man 23. years of age, at the siege of a city in
Spain, when as a noble and a most fair young gentlewoman was brought unto
him, Liuius. cum e^m regulo cuidam desponsata^ audiuisset muneribus cumulatam
remisit.
and he had heard she was betrothed to a lord, rewarded her, and sent her
back to her sweetheart. Xenocrates lay with Lais of Corinth all night, and
would not touch her. Heliodorus lib. 4. expertem esse amoris bearitudo est, at
quum captus sis ad moderationem reuocare animum prudentiae singularis.
It is a good happiness to be free from this passion of love, and great
discretion it argues in such a man that can so contain himself, but when thou
art once in love to moderate thy self (as he says) is a singular point of
wisdom.

But for as much as few men are free, or that can contain themselves and
moderate their passions, curb their senses, as not to see them, not to look
lasciuiouslly, not to confer with them, such is the fury of this head strong
passion, and their weakness; we must use some speedy means to correct, and
prevent that and al other inconveniences, that come by conference and the like.
The best, readiest, and surest way, and which all approve, is Loci mutatio, to
send them several ways, that they may neither hear off, nor see, nor have
opportunity to send to one another again. Elongatio a patria it is Sauanorolas
fourth rule, and Gordonius precept, distrahatur ad longinquas regiones, send
him to travel. It Is that which all run upon, as so many hounds with full
cry, Poets, Divines, Philosophers, Physicians, all, mutet patriam, Valesius.
Loci mutatione tanquam non conualescens curandus est, cap. 11.
as a sick man he must be cured with change of air, Tully 4. Tusc. The best
remedy is to get thee gone, Jason Pratensis, change air and soil, Laurentius,
Fuge littus amatum, Virg. Vtile finitimis abstinuisse locis, Amorum lib. 2
Quisquis amas loca nota nocen^. di^s aegritudinem adimit absentia delet. Fre
licet procul hinc paetriaeque relinquere fines Ovid.
Ovid. I procul and long as carpere perge vias -- sed fuge tutus ^ris.
Traveling is an Antidote of love, time and absence wear away pain and
grief. All which Proximum est vt efurias, 2. vt moram temporis opponas 3. and
locum m^tes 4. vt de laqueo cogites
Hensius merrily inculcates in an Epistle to his friend Primierus. First fast,
then tarry. 3. change thy place 4. think of an haltar. If change of place,
continuance of time, absence will not wear it out with those precedent
remedies, it will hardly be removed: but these commonly are of force. Foelix
Plater obser. lib. 1. had a baker to his patient almost mad for the love of his
maid, and desperate; by removing her from him, he was in a short space cured.
Peter Godefridus, in the last chapter of his third book, has a story of Saint
Ambrose, of a young man that meeting his old love after long abscence, on whom
he had extremely doted, would scarce take notice of her, she wondered at it
that he should so lightly esteem her, called him again and told him who she
was, Ego sum inquit. At ego non sum ego. But he replied he was not the same
man, loathing his folly, and ashamed of that which he formerly had done.
Petrarch has such another tale of a young gallant that loved a wench with one
eye, and for that cause by his parents was sent to travel into far
countries, cum post aliquot annos iam reuersus ille obuiam sactus esset quam
vehementer amarat, rogat quo casu illa oculum amisissit, non inquit amisi
oculum sed tu oculos inuenisti.
after some years he returned, and meeting the maid for whose sake he was sent
abroad, asked her how and by what chance she lost her eye, no said she I have
lost none, but you have found yours: Signifying thereby that all lovers were
blind, as Fabius says, Amantes de forma iudicare non possunt, lovers cannot
judge of beauty, nor scarce of any thing else, as they will easily confess
after they return unto themselves, by some discontinuance or better advice,
and wonder at their own folly, madness, stupidity, blindness, condemn
themselves that ever they should be so besotted and misled, and be heartily
glad that they have so happily escaped.

If so be that, (which is seldom) that change of place will not effect his
alteration, then other remedies are to be annexed, fair and foul means as
to persuade, promise, threaten, terrify, or to divert by some contrary
passion, rumor, tales, news, or some witty invention, to alter his
affection, Annuncientur valde tristia vt mayor t^^^titia possit minorem
ob^usc^re.
by some greater sorrow to drive out the less says Gordonius, as that his
house is a fire, his best friends dead, his money stolen, etc. Aut quod sit
^^ctus senescal^^, aut habeat honorem magnum.
That he is made some great Governor or has some honor, office, inheritance
is b^f^l^^ him, he shall be a Knight, a Baron: or by some false accusation, as
they do to such as have the hickehope, to make them forget it. Saint Hierome
lib. 2. epist. 16. to Rusticus the moncke, has an instance of a Adolescens
Gr^cus erat in Aegypti caenobio qui nulla operis magnitudine nulla persuasione
fl^mmam poterat sedare, monasterij pater hac art seruauit. Imperat cuidam e
^ocijs. etc. F^ebat ille, omne^ aduersabant solus pater callide opponere ne
abundantia trist^tiae absorberetur quid multa? hoc inuento curatus est and a
cogitationibus pristinis auocatus.
young man of Greece, that li^^d in a Monastery in Egypt, that by no labor,
no (...), no perswation could be diuerted; but at last by this (...) was
delivered. The Abbot sets one of his convent to quarrel with him. and with
some scandalous reproach or other to defame him before company, and then to
come and complain first, the witnesses were likewise suborned for the
plantiffe. The young man wept, and when all were against him, the Abbot (...)
took his part, least he should be overcome with immodera^e grief: but what
needs many words? by this invention he was cured, and alienated from his
pristine loue-thoughts. Injuries, slanders, contempts, disgraces, are very
forcible means to withdraw men's affections, contumelia affects amatores amare
desinunt as Lucian says, lovers reviled or neglected, contemned or misused,
turn love to hate, Ter 4
redeam, non sime obsecret. I Will never love thee more. So Zephirus hated
Hyacinthus because he scorned him, and preferred his coriuall Apollo
(Palephapus fab. nar.) he will not come again though he be entreated. Tell him
but how he was scoffed at behind his back, that his love is false, and
entertaines another, cares not for him, Tom. 4.
or that she is a fool, a nasty queen, a slut, a fixen, a scolde^ a devil,
or which Italians commonly do, that he or she has some loathsome filthy
disease, gout, strangurie, falling sickness, the Pox, that he has three or
four incurable tetters, issues: that she is balde, her breath stinkes, she is
mad by inheritance, and so are all the kindred, an ^arebraine, with many other
secret infirmities, which I will not so much as name, belonging to women. That
he is an Hermophrodite, an Eunuch, imperfect, a spendthrift, a g^mester, a
gull, a whoremaster, far in debt, and not able to maintain her, a common
drunkard, his mother was a witch, his father hanged, that he has a wolf in
his bosom, a fore leg, some incurable disease, that he will surely beat her,
that he walks in the night, will stabbe his bedfellowe, tell all his secrets
in his sleep, and that no body dare lie with him, his house is haunted with
spirits. with such fearful and tragical things able to auert and terrify
any man or woman living. Gordonius c. 20. part. 2. hinc in modum consulit
paretur aliqua vetula turpissima aspectu, cum turpi et vili habitu, et portet
subtus gremium pannum menstrualem, et dicat quod, amica sus sit ebriosa, et
quodmingai in lecto, et quod est epileptica et impudica, et quod in corpore suo
sint excrescentiae enormes cum foetore anhelitus, et aliae enormitates, quibus
vetulae sunt edoctae, si nolit his persuaderi subito extrahat Hypatia
Alexandrina quendam se adamantem prolatis muliebribus pannis, and in cum
coniectis ab amoris insania, liberauit. Suidas and Eunapius.
pa^num menstrualem, cora^ facie portando, exclamando, talis est amica tua, et
si ex his non demiserit, non est homo sed diabolus incarnatus. Idem fere
Avicenna cap. 24. de cura Ilishi lib. 3. Fen. 1. Tract. 4. narrent res immundas
vetulae, ex quibus abominationem incurrat, and res Sauanarola reg. 5.
fordidas, and hoc assiduent. Idem Arculanus cap. 16. in 9. Rhasis, etc.
Withal as they do discommend the old, for the better effecting a more speedy
alteration, they must commend another Paramour, alteram inducere, set him or
her to be woed, or woe some other, that shall be fairer, of better note, better
fortune, birth, parentage, much to be preferred, by this, which Jason Pratensis
wishes, to turn the stream of affection another way, or as Valesius by
Distributio amoris fiat in plures, ad plures ami^as animum applicet.
subdiuiding to diminish it. Ovid.
Hortor and vt pariter binas habeatis amicas, etc. If you suspect to be taken,
be sure says the Poet, to have two mistresses at once, or go from one to
another: or bring him to some public shows, plays, meetings, where he may
see variety, and he shall likely loathe his first choice. For as he observes,
Tatius lib. 6.
Priorem flammam nouus ignis extrudit, and ea multorum natura, vt praesentes
maxim ament. One fire drives out another, and such is women's weakness, that
they love commonly him hat is present. And so do many men (as he confessed) he
loved. Amye till he saw Floriat, ^ when he saw Cynthia, forgot the^ both: but
fair Phillis was incomparably beyond them all, and yet when he espied
Amarallis, she was his sole mistress, etc. It Is a thing which by Hieromes
report has been usually practiced, Epist. lib. 2.16. Philosophi saeculi
veterem amorem nouo quasi clauum clauo repellere, quod and Assu^ro regi septem
Principes Per^^^^^ esere, vt V^stae reginae desid^^ium amore compensarent.
Heathen Philosophers drive out one love with another, as they do a pegge, or
pin with a pin. Which those seven Persian Princes did to Assuerus, that
they might requite the desire of Queen Vasth with the love of others.
Pausanias in Eliacis says, that therefore one Cupid was painted to contend
with another, and to take the garland from him, because one love drives out
another. Ovid.
Alterius vires subtrahit alter amor Foelix Platter in the first book of his
observations, boasts how he cured a widdower in Basil, a patient of his, by
this stratageme alone, that doted upon a poor servant his maid, when friends,
children nor persuasion could serve to alienate his mind, they motioned him to
another honest man's daughter in the town, whom he loved, and lived with long
after, abhorring the very name and sight of the first. After the death of
Lucretia, Lugubri vest indutus, consolationes non admisit, donec Caesar ex
ducali sanguine formosam virginem matrimonio coniunxit. Aeneas Siluius hist. de
Eurialo and Lucretia.
Eurialus would admit of no comfort, till the Emperor Sigismunde married him
to a noble Lady of his court, and so in short space he was freed.

SVBSEC. 3. By counsel and persuasion, foulness of the fact, men's, women's
faults, miseries of marriage. events of lust, etc.
AS there be many causes of this burning lust or heroical love. So there be
many good remedies to ease and help, amongst which good counsel and
persuasion, which I should have handled in the first place, are of great moment
and not to be omitted; Many are of opinion, that in this blind headstrong
passion, counsel can do no good.

Ter.
Quae enim res in se neque consilium neque modum.
Habet, vllo eam consilio regere non potes.
Which thing has neither Judgment, or an end
How should advice or counsel it amend.
But without question good counsel and advice must needs be of force,
especially if they shall proceed from a wise, fatherly, reverent, discreet
person, a man of authority whom the parties do respect, or stand-in awe of,
or from a judicious friend; of it self alone, it is able to divert and
suffice. q Gordonius the Physician attributes so much to it, that he would have
it by all means used in the first place. Amoueatur ab illa consilio vi^^ quem
timet, ostendendo pericula saeculi, iudicium inferni, gaudia Paradisi. He would
have some discreet man to diswade them, by foreshewing the miserable events and
dangers which will surely happen, the pains of hell, joys of Paradise, and
the like, which by their preposterous courses they shall forfeit or incur. To
expostulate and show them such absurdities, inconveniences, imperfections,
discontents, as usually follow; which their blindness, fury, madness, cannot
apply unto themselves, or apprehend. If he love at all, she is either an honest
woman or a whore? If dishonest let him read or inculcate to him that 5. of
Salomons Pro. 26. Ecclus. Ambrose lib. 1. cap. 4. in his book of Abel and
Cain, Philo Iudaeus de mercede meret. Platinas dial in Amores, Aeneas Siluius
tart. Epistle, which he writ to his friend Nicholas of Wartburge, which he
calls medelam illiciti amoris, etc. Quid enim meretrix nisi iuuentutis
expi^^trix, virorum rapina seu mors patrimonij deuoratrix honoris pernities
pabulu^ di^bo^i ianua mortis inferni supplimentum.
For what is an whore as he says, but a pillar of youth, ruin of men, and a
death, a deuourer of patrimonies, a downfall of honor, fodder for the devil,
the gate of death, and supplement of hell. Let him see the event and success
of others, Sampson, Hercules, Holofernes, etc. those infinite mischiefs attend
it. If she be honest, she is either maid, widow, or another man's wife: if
another man's wife, it is abominable in the sight of God, and men, adultery, and
expressly forbidden in Gods commandment, a mortal sin, able to endanger his
soul, and if he be such a one as fears God, or have any religion, he will
eschew it, and abhor the lothsomenesse of his own fact. If a maid, to abuse
or marry her: if to abuse, it is fornication, a foul fact, and almost equal to
adultery it self. If to marry, let him seriously consider what he takes in
hand, look befoe he leap, and examine first the party and condition of his
estate and hers, whether it be a fit match for fortunes, years, parentage, and
such other circumstances. And whether it be likely to proceed: if not, let him
wisely staue himself off at the first, curb in his inordinate passion, and
moderate his desire. If she be unequal in years, she young and he old, what
an unfit match must it needs be, an unequal yoke, how absurd and indecent a
thing it is as Lycinus in Tom. 2. in votis caluus cum sis, nasum habeas s^^^um.
etc.
Lucian told Timolaus, for an old balde crooke-nosed knave to marry a young
wench, how odious a thing is it to see an old lecher: for a young man to marry
an old wife for a piece of good. But put case she be equal in years, birth,
fortunes, and other qualities correspondent, and he does desire to be coupled
in marriage, which is an honorable estate, but for what respects? her beauty
belike, and comeliness of person, that is commonly the maine object, she is a
most absolute form in his eye at least, but do other men affirm as much? or
is it an error in thy judgment? It may be to thee thy self upon a more
serious examination, or after a little abscence, she is not so fair as she
seems. Quadam videntur and non sunt. It may be not she that is so fair but
her clothes, or put another in her clothes, and she will seem all out as
fair; as the Ovid.
Poet then prescribes, separate her from her clothes: suppose thou saw her
in a base beggars weed, or else dressed in some old hirsute attires out of
fashion, foul linen, course clothes, besmeared with soot, colly, perfumed
with Opoponax, Sagapenum, Assa foetida, or some such filthy gummes, durty,
about some indecent action or other. would thou affect her as thou do?
Suppose thou saw her in a Si ferueat deformis ecce formosa est si frigeat
formosa iam sit informis. Th. Morus Epigram.
frosty morning, in cold whether, or in some passion or perturbation of mind,
reuil'd and ill favored to behold: She many times that in a composed looks
seems so amiable and delitious, if she do but laugh or smile, makes an ugly
sparrowmouthed face, and shows an homely pair of uneven, loathsome, rotten
black teeth. She has a black skin, gouty legs, a deformed crooked
carcass under a fine coat. It may be for all her costly tires she is balde,
and though she seem so fair by dark or by candlelight, or a far of at such
a distance, as Ca^^i^ratides observed in Amorum dial. Tom. 4, si quis ad
auroram contempletur multas mulieres a nocte lecto surgentes turpiores putabit
esse bestijs.
Lucian, If thou should see her near or in a morning, she would appear more
ugly then a beast. Follow my counsel, see her undressed, see her if it be
possible out of her attires, furtiuis nudata^ coloribus, it may be she is like
Aesopes Iaye, or an Egyptian temple, she will be loathsome, ridiculous, thou will not endure her sight: or suppose thou saw her sick, pale, in a
consumption, on her death bed, skin and bones, or now dead. Cuius erat
gratissimus amplexus as Bernard says, erit horribilis aspectus. Her imbracings
were not so acceptable, as now her looks be terrible, thou had better
behold a Gorgons head, then Helenas carcass. Some are of opinion, that to see
a woman naked is able of it self to alter his affection, and it is worthy of
consideration, says Apol. pro Rem. Seb.
Montagne the Frenchman in his Essays, that the skilfullest masters of amorous
dalliances, appoint for a remedy of venereous passions a full suruay of the
body, As the Poet insinuates. Ovid. 2. rem.
Ille quod obscaenas in aperto corpore parts,
Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, haesit amor.
The love stood still, that ran in full carrere,
When once it saw those parts should not appear.
It is reported of Seleucus king of Syria^, that seeing his wife Sratonices
balde pate, as she was vndressing her by chance, he could never affect her
after. Philip the French K. as Nubrigensis lib. 4. cap. 24. relates it, married
the king of Denmarkes daughter, Post vnam noctem incertum vnde offensam cepit,
propter faetentem eius spiritum, alij dicunt vellatentem faeditatem repudiauit,
rem faciens plane illicitam, and regiae personae multum inde coram.
and after he had used her as a wife one night because her breath stunke some
say, or for some other secret fault, sent her back again. Many such matches
are made for by-respects, or some seemly comelines, which after honey moons
past, turn to bitterness, for burning lust is but a flash, and hatred often
follows in the highest degree, dislike and contempt.

Yea but you will say, your mistress is complete, of a most absolute form in
all men's opinions, no exceptions can be taken at her person, she is the myrror
of women for her beauty, comeliness and pleasant grace. Put case she be, how
long will she continue? Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, Pro.
31.30. If she be fair as the saying is, she is commonly a fool, if proud,
scornful, sequiturque superbia foram, or dishonest, rara est concordia formae
atque pudicitiae, can she be fair and honest too? This beauty is but of the
body alone, and what is that but as Pulchritudo corporis temporis and morb.
ludibrium. orat. 3.
Gregory Nazianzen tells us, a mock of time and sickness, or as Boethius
as mutable as a flower, and it is not nature so makes us but most part the
infirmity of the beholder. Or be she fair indeed, golden haired, as Anacreon
his Bathillus, Floru^ mutabilitate fugacior nec sua natura formosas facit, sed
spectantium infi^mitas.
black eyed, of a pure sanguine complexion, little mouth, white teeth, soft
and plumpe body, hands, feet, all fair and lovely to behold, composed of all
graces, elegances, an absolute piece: Bebelius ^ ^^gijs ger.
her head from Prage, pappes out of Austria, belly from France, back from
Brabant, hands out of England, feet from Rhine, buttockes from Swisserland,
let her have the Spanish gate the Venetian tire, Italian complements and
endowments, let her be such a one throughout, as Lucian deciphers in his
Imagines, as Euphanor of old painted Venus, another Helena, Chariclia,
Leucippe, Lucretia, Panthea, whom thou will, or all these in one, a little
sickness, a fever, small pox, a blow, a wound, a scarre, loss of an eye, or
limme, a violent passion, a distemperature of heat or cold, marres all in an
instant, disfigures all childbearing, old age, riuels her upon a sudden; after
she has been carried a small while, and the black ox has trodden on her toe,
she will be so much altered and grow out of fashion, thou will not know her. So
Deianirae describes it in the Poet, as a tree in winter. Seneca act. 2. Herc,
Oeteus.
Deforme solis aspicis truncis nemus?
Sic nostra longum forma percurrens iter,
Deperdit aliquid semper, and fulget minus,
Malisque minus est quidquid in vobis suit,
Olim petitu cecidit, and partu labit,
Materque multum rapuit ex illa mihi,
Aetas citato senior eripuit mihi.
And as a tree that in the green wood grows,
With fruit and leaves and in the summer blows,
In winter like a stock deformed shows:
Our beauty takes his race and journey goes,
And does decrease and loose and come to naught,
Admired of old, to this by childbirth brought:
And mother has bereft me of my grace,
And crooked old age coming on apace.
To conclude with Chrysostom, Vides venustam mulierem fulgidum habentem
oculum, vultu hilari coruscantem eximium quend^^ aspectum (...) decorem (...)
fe^en^^^ (...) esse id quod ^mas, and quod admiraris stercus and quod te vri^,
etc. cogita illam iam s^nescere, iam rugosam cauis genis aegrotare: tantis
sordibus intus plena est. pituita stercore: reputa quid intra nares, oculos,
cerebrum gestat, quas sordes, etc.
when thou see a fair and beautiful person a comely woman, having bright
eyes, a merry count^nance, a shining luster in her look, a pleasant grace,
wringing thy soul, and ^ncreasing thy concupiscence; bethink with thy self
that it is but earth thou love, a mere excrement which so vexes thee, which
thou so admirest, and thy raging soul will be at rest. Take her skin from
her face, and thou shall see all loath somenesse under it, that beauty is but a
superficial skin and bones, nerves, sinews: suppose her sick, now riuil'd,
hoarie-headed, hollow-cheeked, old; within she is full of filthy fleame,
stinking putide, excrementall stuff: snot and sneuill in her nostrils,
spittle in her mouth, water in her eyes, what filth in her brains, etc. Or
take her at best, and look narrowly upon her in the light, stand near her,
and thou shall perceive almost as much, and love less. as Subtle. 13.
Cardan well writes, minus amant qui acute vident, though Scaliger deride him
for it. If he see her near, or look exactly, whosoever he is, and according
to the true rules of symmetrie and proportion, examine him or her, he shall
find many faults in phisiognomie, many indecorums in their other parts. And
it is true that he says, Cardan subtle. lib. 13.
diligenter consideranti raro facies absoluta, and quae vicio caret, seldom
shall you find an absolute face without fault, as I have often observed; see
her angry, merry, laugh, weep, hot, cold, dressed, undressed, in all
attires, gestures, passions, and in some of these she will surely dislike:
Besides these outward naeues or open faults, errors, there be many inward
infirmities, secret and etc. some private which I will omit, and some more
common to the sex. Consideratio faeditatis mulierum quam immundae sunt, quod
Sauanarola proponit regula septima, penitius obseruandum, and Platina dial
Amoris, f^se perstingit. Lodouicus Boncialus mulieb. lib. 2. cap. 2. Albertus
and infiniti fere medici.

I will say nothing of the vices of their minds, their pride, envy,
inconstancy, weakness, malice, selfewill, lightness, insatiable appetite,
jealousy. Ecclus 25.14. No malice to a woman's, no bitterness like to hers,
Eccles. 7.21. and as the same Author, Prou. 31.10. Who shall find a virtuous
woman? He makes a question of it. Ter. Heaut. act. 4. sc. 1. neque ius neque
bonum nec aequum sciunt melius peius prosit absit nihil vident nisi quod libido
suggerit. They know neither equity, good nor bad, be it better or worse (as
the comicall, Poet has it) beneficial or hurtful they will do what they
list. Ariosto lib. 25. st. 70.
For in a thousand good there is not one,
All be so proud, unthankful and unkind,
With flintie hearts, careless of others moan,
In their own lusts carried most headlong blind,
But more herein to speak I am forbidden,
Sometime for speaking truth one may be chidden.
I honor the Sex as all good men do
I am not willing to prosecute the cause against them; let Mantuan, Platina in
d^al. and such women haters bear the blame, if I have said amiss, I have not
said an half of that which might be urged out of them and others. And now to
proceed, if women in general be so bad, (and men worse then they) what an
hazard is it to marry, where shall a man find a good wife, or a woman a good
husband? A woman a man may eschew, but not a wife wedding is undoing, (some
say) marrying, marring; wooing, woing; Febris hectica vxor, and non nisi morte
a^ ellen^a.
a wife is a fever hecticke, as Scaliger calls her, and not to be cured but by
death, as out of Menander, Dynosophist lib. 13. cap. 3.
Athenaeus. In pelagus te iacis negotiorum, --
Non Libyum non Aegaeum vbi ex triginta non pereunt
Tria nauigia: ducens vxorem seruatur prorsus nemo.
Thou wadest into a Sea it self of woes,
In Lybicke and Aegaean each man knows,
Of thirty not three ships are cast away,
But on this rock not one escapes, I say.
The worldly cares, miseries, discontents, that accompany marriage, I pray you
learn of them that have experience, for I have none, many married men exclaim
at the miseries of it, and rail at wives down right; but I never tried.
Plautus Asini act. 1.
Mare haud mare, vos mare accrimum. An Irish Sea is not so turbulent and raging
as a litigious wife, better dwell with a Dragon or a Lion, then keep house
with a (...) wife. Ecclus. 25.18. better dwell in a wilderness. Pro. 21.1^. no
wickedness like to her, Ecclus. 25.21. She makes a sorry heart, an heavy
countenance, and a wounded mind, weak hands, and feeble knees, verse. ^5. as
then the Comicall Poet merrily says, Eubulus in Crisil. Athenaeus
dypnosophist. lib. 13. cap 3.
Perdatur ille pessime qui faeminam,
Duxit secundus, nam nihil primo imprecor,
Ignarus vt puto mali primus fuit.
Foul fall him brought the second match to pass,
The first I wish no harm, poor man alas,
He knew not what he did, nor what it was.
What shall I say to him that marries again and again, I pity him not, for
the first time he must do as he may, bear it out sometimes by the head and
shoulders, and let his next neighbor ride, or else run away, or as that
Gomesius de sale lib. 3 cap. 7.
Syracusian in a tempest, when all ponderous things were to be exonerated out
of the ship, quia maximum pondus erat, Bachelors always are the brauest men.
Bacon, seek eternity in memory not in posterity.
fling his wife into the Sea. But this I confess is Comically spoken, and so I
pray you take it: in sober sadness marriage is a bondage, a thraldom, an
yoke, an hinderance to all good enterprises, a rock on which many are saued^;
many impinge and are cast away: not that the thing is evil in it self or
troublesome, but full of all contentment and happiness: but to indiscreet
sensual persons, that as brutes are wholly lead by lust, it is a serall plague,
many times an hell it self, and can give little or no content, being that they
are often so irregular and prodigious in their lusts, so diverse in their
affections. Vxor nomen dignitatis non voluptatis, as Gallieuus imperator.
he said. A wife is a name of honor, not of pleasure, fit to bear the name,
govern a family, to bring up children, sit at boards end and carue, as some
carnal men say and think, they had rather go to the stews, or have now and
then a snatch as they can come by it, borrow of their neighbors, then have
wives of their own: Except they may do as some Princes and great men do,
keep as many Curtisans as they will themselves, fly out Impune, or that
poligamy of Turks, or Irish deuorcement were in use: but as it is it is hard
and gives not that satisfaction to these carnal men, beastly men as too many
are, Quod licet ingr^tum est.
what still the same? to be tied For b^tter for worse, for richer for poorer,
in sickness and in health, etc. it is du^^s ser^^o to a sensual man.
to one be she never so fair, never so virtuous, is a thing they may not
endure, variet^s delectat, it is loathsome and tedious as he said of Iberina.
Iuuenal.
Vnus Iberinae vir sufficit? ocyus illud
Extorquebis, vt haec oculo contenta sit ^n^.
It Is not one man will serve her by her will,
As soon shel'e have one eye as one man still.
As true a Trojan as mine hostess daughter that Spanish wench in Lib. 28.
Ariosto, as good wives as Messalina. And many men are as constant in their
choice, and as good husbands as Nero himself, they must have their pleasure of
all they see. Being that men and women are so irreligious depraved by nature,
so wandering in their affections, so brutish, so subject to disagreement, so
vnobseruant of marriage rites, what shall I say? If thou be such a one, or
thou light on such a wife, what concord can their be, what hope of agreement?
it is twenty to one thou will not marry to thy contentment. If she be barren,
she is not etc. If she have Chil^ren make misfortunes more bitter. Bacon.
children, and thy state be not good, though thou be wary and circumspect, thy
charge will undo thee, thou will not be able to bring them up, Hensius epist^
Primiero. nihil miserius quam procreare liberos ad quos nihil ex haereditate
tu^ peruenire videas praeter famem and sitim.
and what greater misery can there be then to beget children, to whom thou
can leave n^ other inheritance but hunger and thirst: To leave them to the
wide world, to shift for themselves. No plague like to want: and when thou have
good means, and art very careful of their education, they will not be ruled,
thy sonn's a drunkard, a gamester, a spend-thrift, thy daughter a fool, a
whore, thy Servants thieves, thy neighbors devils, they will make thee weary
of thy life. Lemnius. cap. 6. lib. 1. Si morosa si non in omnibus obsequaris
omnia impacata in aed. bus omnia sursum misceri videas multae tempestates, etc.
If thy wife be froward, if she may not have her will, thou had better to be
buried alive, she will be so impatient, nothing but tempests, all is in an
vproare. If she be soft or foolish, thou had better have a block, she will
shame thee, and reveal thy secrets. If wise, and learned, well qualified,
there is as much danger on the other side, Lib. 2. numer. 101. sil. nup.
mulierem doctam du cere periculosissimum, says Neuisanus, she will be too
insolent and peevish, Iuvenalis.
mala Venusinam quam te Cornelia matter. Take heed. If she be a slut, thou will
loath her; if proud, she will beggar thee: If fair and wanton, she will make thee
a Cuckold; If deformed thou can not love her; that will make thee peradventure
un honest, Cromerus lib. 12. hist. relates of Casimirus, Subegit ancillas quod
vxor eius deformior esset.
that he was unchaste, because his wife Adleida, the daughter of Henry
Landsgraue of Hessia, was so deformed. If she be poor she brings beggary with
her, says Neuisanus, and discontent. If you marry a maid it is uncertain how
she proves; if a rich Sil. nup. lib. 2. number. 55. Dives inducit tempestatem
pauper caram Ducens viduam se induc^t in laqueum.
widow, induces te in laqueum; thou do halter thy self, she will make all
away before hand, to her other children, etc she will hit thee still in teeth
with her first husband. If she be rich, well descended, and bring a great
dowre, or be nobly allied, thy wives friends will eat thee out of house and
home, she will be so proud, so high minded and so imperious, Si dotata erit
imperiosa continuoque viro inequitare conabitur. Petrarch.
she will ride upon thee, domineer as her list, wear the breeches, and beggar
thee besides, vxores divites seruitutem exigunt, as Seneca hits them, declam.
lib. 2. declam. 6. dotem accept, imperium perdidi. They will have sovereignty,
they will have attendance, they will do what they list. If a woman nourish her
husband she is angry and impudent and full of reproach Ecclus. 25.24 scilicet
vxori nubere nolo meae.
In taking a dowre thou loosest thy liberty, hazardest thine estate; thou had
better have taken a good huswifely maid in her smock. Since then there is such
hazard, if thou be wise keep thy self as thou art and withal Let a young man
then mary not yet, an old man not at all. Bacon Ess ayes.
consider how free, how happy, how secure, how heavenly, in respect a single
man is, how merrily he lives, he has no man to care for but himself, none to
please, no charge, Daphne in laurum semper virentem immortalem docet gloriam
parata^ virginibus pudicitiam seruantibus.
none to control him, is tied to no residence, no cure to serve, may go and
come, when, whether, live where he will, his own master, and do what he will
himself; consider of the excellency of Virginity, virgo coelum meruit, it is a
precious Jewel, a fair garland, a fine picture, as Diet. salut. cap. 22.
pulcherrimu^ sertum infiniti precij gemma et ^ictura speciosa.
Bonauenture calls it, a blessed thing in it self, and if you will believe a
Papist, meritorious. If this which I have said will not suffice, see more in
Lemnius lib. 4. cap. 13. de occult. naet. mir. Espenseus de continentia lib. 6.
cap. 8. Kornman de virginitate, Platina in Amor. dial. Practica artis amandi,
Barbarus de re vxoria. Arniseus in polit. cap. 3. and he thatis instar omnium,
Neuisanus the Lawier in his Slva nuptialis, almost in every page.

SVBSEC. 4. Philters magical and Poetical cures.
Where persuasions and other remedies will not take place, many fly to
unlawful means, Philters Amulets, Magic spells, Ligatures, Characters,
Charms, which as a wound with the spear of Achilles, if so made and caused,
must so be cured. If made by Spells and Philters, says Paracelsus, it must be
so eased by Characters, Mag.lib. 2. cap. 28. and by Incantations. Fernelius
Path. lib. 6. cap 13. Extinguitur virilitas ex incantamentor um maleficiis
neque enim fabula est nonnulli reperti sunt qui ex veneficiis amore priuati
sunt vt ex multis historiis patet.
Skenkius lib. 4. obseruat. med. has some examples of such as have been so
magically caused, and magically cured, and by witchcraft, so says Baptist.
Codro^chus lib. 3. cap. 6. de morb. ven. Malleus mallef. cap. 6. It Is not
permitted to be done, I confess, yet often attempted: see more in Wierus lib.
3. cap. 18. de praestig. de remedijs per Philtra. Delrio To. 2. lib. 3. qu^st.
3. see. 3. desquisit magic. Cardan lib. 16. c. 90. reckons up many magneticall
remedies, as to piss through a Ring, etc. Mizaldus, cent. 3.30. Baptista
Porta, Jason Pratensis, Lobelius, page 87. Mathiolus, etc. prescribe many
absurd remedies. Radix mandragorae ebibitae. Annuli ex vngulis asini Stercus
amatae sub ceruical positum, illa nesciente quum odorem foeditatis sentit, amor
soluitur. Noctuae ouum abstemios facit comestum, ex consilio Iarthae Indorum
gymnosophistae apud Philostratum lib. 3. Sanguis amasiae ebibitus omnem amoris
sensum tollit, Faustinam, Marci Aurelij vxorem gladitoris amore captum, ita
penitus consilio Chaldeorum liberatam, refert Julius Capitolinus. Our old Poets
and Fantastical writers have many fabulous remedies for such as are
loue-sicke, as that of Protisilaus tomb in Philostratus, in that Dialogue
betwixt Phaenix and Vinitor: Vinitor upon occasion discoursing of the rare
virtues of that shrine, tells him that Protisilaus alter and tomb, Curat
omnes morbos Ptyses hydropes and oculorum morbos, and febre quartana
laborantes, and amore captos miris artibus eos demulcet.
cures almost all manner of diseases, co^sumptions, dropsies, quartan agues,
sore eyes, and amongst the rest such as are loue-sicke shall there be helped.
But the most famous is The moral is vehement Fear expells Love.
Leucata Petra, that renowned rock in Greece, of which Strabo Geog. lib. 10.
not far from St Maures, says Sands lib. 1. From which Rock if any Lover
flung himself down headlong, he was instantly cured. Venus after the death of
Adonis when she could take no rest for love, came to the Temple of Apollo to
know what she should do to be eased of her pain: Apollo sent her to Leucata
Petra, where she precipitated her self, and was forthwith freed, and when she
would needs know of him a reason of it, he told her again, that he h^d often
observed Quum Iunonem deperiret Jupiter impotenter ibi solitus lauari, etc.
Jupiter when he was enamored on Juno, thither go to ease and wash himself,
and after him diverse others. Ovid. ep. 21.


Hic se Deuoalion Pyrrhae succensus amore
Morsit and illaeso corpore pressit aquas
Nec mora fugit amor, etc. --
Hither Deucalion came, when Pyrrhus love
Tormented him, and leapt down to the Sea,
And had no harm at all, but by and by
His love was gone, and chased quite away.
This medicine Ios. Scaliger speaks of Ausoniarum lectionum lib, 18. Salmutz
in Pancirol. de 7. mundi mirac. and other late writers. Pliny reports that
amongst the Cyzeni, there is a well consecrated to Cupid, of which if any lover
taste, his passion is mitigated. And Anthony Verdurius Imag. deorum de Cupid,
says that amongst the ancients there was Apud antiquos amor Lethes olim fuit,
is ardentes faces in profluentem in clinabat, buius statua veneris Elusinae
templo visebatur, quo amantes confluebant qui amicae memoriam deponere volebant.
Amor Lethes, he took burning torches, and extinguished them in the river,
his statua was to be seen in the Temple of Venus Elusina, of which Ovid makes
mention, and says that all lovers of old went thither a pilgrimage, that
would be rid of their love pangs. Pausanias in Achaicis tells as much of the
river Senelus in Greece, if any Lover washed himself in it, by a secret virtue
of that water he was healed of Loves torments. Where none of all these remedies
will take place, I know no other, but that all Lovers must make an head and
rebel, as they did in Cupido crucifixus lepidum poema.
Ausonius, and crucify Cupid, till he grant their request, or satisfy their
desires.

SVBSECT. 5. To let them have their Desire.
THe last refuge and surest remedy, and to be put in practice in the utmost
place, when no other means will take effect, is to let them go together and
enjoy one another; potissima cura est vt heroes amasia sua potiatur, says
Guianerius cap. 15. tract. 15. The special cure, and if it be possible so let
it be. Patiens potiatur re amata si fieri possit optima cura. cap. 16. in 9.
Rhasis.
Arculanus holds it the speediest and the best cure, it is Si nihil aliud
nuptiae and copulatio cum ea.
Savanarola's last precept, and a principal infallible remedy, the last and
sole refuge. When you have all done, says Cap. de Ilishi non inuenitur
curanisi regime^ connectionis inter eos secundum modum promissionis and legis
and sic vidimus ad carnem restitutum qui iam venerat ad arefactionem euanuit
cura postquam sensit.
Avicenna, There is no speedier or safer course, then to join the parties
together according to their desires and wishes, the custom and form of love,
and so we have seen him quickly restored to his former health, that was
languished away to skin and bones, after his desire was satisfied, his
discontent ceased, and we thought it strange, our opinion is therefore, that
in such cases nature is to be obeyed. Arateus, an old Author, lib. 3. cap. 3.
has an instance of a young man, Fama est melancholicum que^dam ex amore
insanabiliter se habentem vbi puellae se coniunxisset restitutum etc.
when no other means could prevail, was so speedily relieved. What remains
then but to join the^ in marriage. Yea but hic labor, hoc opus, this cannot
conveniently be done, by reason of many and several impediments. Sometimes both
parties themselves are not agreed Parents, Tutors, Masters, Gardians, will not
give consent, Laws, Customs, Statutes hinder, poverty, superstition, fear and
suspicion, and I know not what my self; what shall we do in such a case? He
loves her most impotently, she loves not him, and so e contra. Many
Gentlewomen are so nice, they scorn all Suitors, crucify their poor
Paramours, and think no body good enough for them. They take a pride to pranke
up themselves, to make young men enamored and dote on them, and to run mad
for their sakes. As Atalanta they must be ouerrunne, or wone. Many young men
are as obstinate, and as curious in their choice, as irrefragable and peevish
on the other side, Narcissus like, Metamorp. 3.
Multi illum Iuvenes, multae petierae puellae
Sed fuit in tenera tam dira superbia forma,
Nullae illum Iuuenes nullae petiere puellae.
Young men and maids did to him sue,
But in his youth so proud so coye was he,
Young men and maids bad him adue.
Echo wept and wooed him by all means above the rest, but he was obstinate,
Ante ait emoriar quam sit tibi copiae nostri and would rather dye then give
consent, as many Lovers do hold out so long doting on themselves, stand in
their own light, till in the end they come to be scorned and rejected as
Narcissus was, and to be contemned themselves of others, as he was of his
shaddowe. Yet this is a common humor, and cannot be left.

Hanc volo quae non vult, illam quae vult ego nolo
Vincere vult animos non satiare Venus.
I love a maid she loves me not: full feign
She would have me, but I not her again;
So love to crucify men's souls is bent,
But seldom does he please or give content.
Their love danceth in a ring, and Cupid hunts them round about, he dotes, is
doted on again, dumque petit petitur pariturque accendit and ardet, and their
love cannot be reconciled.

Or suppose it be, both parties pleased, mutuus amor, mutual love and great
affection, their parents cannot agree, and all is dashed, the match is
unequal, one rich, another poor, durus pater, an hard hearted, unnatural, a
covetous father will not marry his son, except he may have so much money, nor
ioyn his daughter in marriage to save her dowry, or for that he wants means to
set her out, he has no money, she must tarry. Many slack and careless parents
measure their childrens affections by their own; they are now cold and decrepit
themselves, and past all such youthful conceits, and they will therefore
starve their childrens Genius, Ter.
Illico nasci senes, they must not marry, nec earum participes esse rerum quas
secum fert adolescentiae: as he said in the Comedy, they will stifle nature,
their young bloods must not participate of youthful pleasures, but be as they
are themselves old upon a sudden. And it is a general fault amongst most
parents in bestowing of their children, the father wholly respects wealth, the
mother good kindred, the son a proper woman. As Plebeius and nobilis
ambiebant puellam puellae certame^ in parts venit. etc.
Livy relates dec. 1. lib. 4. a Gentleman and a yoeman wooed a wench in Rome
(contrary to that statute that the gentry and commonalty must not match
together) the matter was controuerted. The Gentleman was preferred by the
mothers voice, quae quam splendidissimis nuptijs iungi puellam volebat, she
would have her daughter a Lady by all means: the overseers stood on him that
was most worth, etc. But parents ought not to be so strict in this behalf,
Beauty is a dowry of it self, Genesis 26.
Rahel was so married by Jacob, and Non peccat venialiter qui mulierem ducit ob
pulchritudinem.
Bonauenture in 4. sent^ denies that he so much as venially sins, that
marries a wench for comeliness of person. The Jews, Deuteronomy. 21.11. if they saw
amongst the captives a beautiful woman, some small circumstances observed,
might take her to wife. They should not be too severe in that kind, especially
if there be no such urgent occasion, or grievous impediment. Poverty and base
parentage may be sufficiently recompensed by many other good qualities,
modesty, virtue, religion, and good bringing up. They must consider that Amor
cogi non potest, Love cannot be compelled, they must affect as they may: Fatum
est in partibus illis quas sinus abscondit, Iuvenalis.
as the saying is marriage and hanging go by destiny, matches are made in
heaven. And it may be to restrain their ambition, pride and covetousness, to
correct those hereditary diseases of a family, God in his just judgment
assigns and permits such matches to be made. For I am of De repub. cap. de
period. rerum. pub.
Bodines mind that Families have their bounds and periods as well as
kingdoms, beyond which for extent or continuance they shall not exceed, but in
a perpetual tenor (as we see by many pedegrees of Knights, Gentlemen, Yeomen)
continue as they began, for many discents with little alteration. Howsoever let
them give something to youth, to love, they must not think that they can fancy
whom they appoint. Plin. in Pana^
Amor enim non imperatur, affectus liber si quis alius and vices exigens, this
is a free passion, as Pliny said in a Panegericke of his, and may not be
forced, it requires mutual love, a corespondency. And consider withal the
miseries of enforced marriages, take pity upon youth; and such above the rest
as have Puellis inprimus nulla danda occasio lapsus. Lemnius lib. c. 54. de
vit. instit.
daughters to bestow, must be very careful and provident to marry them in due
time, Virgins enim tempestiue locandae, as Lemnius admonishes, lib. 1. cap.
6. Virgins must be provided for in season, to prevent many diseases, and other
inconveniences, and for a thing that I know besides, they perchance will marry
themselves else, or do worse. If Neuisanus the Lawyer do not impose, they may
do it by right; for as he proves out of Curtius, and some other Ciuilians,
siluae nup. lib. 2. numer. 30 Filia excedens annum 25. potest inscio patre
nubere licet indignus sit maritus and eum cogere ad congrue dotandum.
A maid past 25 years of age, against her parents consent may marry such a one
is unworthy of her, and inferieur to her, and her father by law must be
compelled to give her a competent dowry. For if they tarry longer they are past
date, and no body will respect them. A Virgin, as the Poet says, is like a
flower, a Rose withered on a sudden.

Ausonius edyl. 14.
Quam modo nascentem rutilus conspexit Eous,
Hanc rediens sero vespere vidit anum.
She that was erst a maid as fresh as May,
Is now an old Crone, time so sleales away.
Let them take time then while they may, make advantage of youth, and as he
prescribes,

Collige virgo rosas dum flos nouus and noua pubes,
Idem.
Et memor esto aeuum sic properare tuum.
Fair maid go gather Roses in thy prime.
And think that as a flower so goes on time.
But they need no such exhortation, they are commonly too forward. If there be
an escape, and all be not as it should, as Diogenes struck the father when his
son swore, because he taught him no better; if a maid or young man miscarry,
I think their parents often times, Gardians, Overseers, Governors, are in as
much fault, and ought as severely to be punished as the child, in providing
for them no sooner.

Another let or hinderance is strict and severe discipline, laws and rigorous
customs that forbid men to marry at some set times, and in some places. As
Prentises, Servants, Collegiats, states of lives in copy holds, or in some
base inferior offices, Apuleius in Catel nobis Cupido velle dat posse abnegat.
Velle licet in such cases, potiri non licet, as he said. They see but as
prisoners through a grate, they may covet and catch, but as Tantalus a labris,
etc. Their love is lost and in vain in such an estate to attempt. They may
indeed, I deny not, marry if they will, and have free choice; but in the mean
time their case is desperate, Lupum auribus tenent, they hold a woolfe by the
ears, they must either burn or starve. It Is Cornutum sophisma, hard to
resolve, if they marry they forfeit their estates, they are undone and starve
themselves through beggary and want: If they do not marry, in this heroical
passion they furiously rage, and are tormented, torn in pieces by their
predominate affections. Every man has not the gift of continence, better it is
to marry then burn, for their souls health, but for their present fortunes,
by some other means to pacify themselves, and divert the for their souls
health, but for their present fortunes, by some other means to pacify
themselves, and divert the stream of this fiery torrent, to continue as they
are, The Fox would eat no Grapes. If she may not be had, let her go. as
Tur^^^ said: tua sit La^^^^^ (...).
rest satisfied: and with Iepthes daughter to bewail their virginities.

Of like nature is Superstition, those rash vows of Monk^ and Friars, and such
as live in religious orders, but far more tyrannical and much worse. Nature,
youth, and this furious passion forcibly inclines, and rages on the one side:
but their order and vow checks them on the other. What merits and Indulgences
they heap unto themselves by it, what commodities I know not; but I am sure
from such rash vows, and inhumane manner of life proceed many inconveniences,
Mercu^^ali. de P^^apis^o.
many diseases, many vices, mastupration, Satyriasis, Priapismus, melancholy,
madness, fornication, adultery, Sodomy, theft, murder and all manner of
mischiefs, read but Bales Catalogue of Sodomites, at the visitation of Abbeys
here in England, Henry Stephen his Apol. for Herodotus, that which Vlricus
writes in one of his Epistles, Memorabile quod Vlricus epist la re^ert
Gre^orium quu^ ex pis^^na quadam al^ata plus quam sex m^lle ^^^antum cap^ta
vidisset ingemu^^se, and decretu^ de caelib^tu tantam caedis causa^ co^essus
cond^gno illud paenitentiae f^u^tu purgasse Kemnisius ex consil. Trident. part.
3. de co^^ibatu sacerdotum
that Pope Gregory when he saw 600. sculls and bones of Infants taken out of a
Fishpond near a Nunnery, thereupon to have retracted that decree of Priests
marriages, which was the cause of such a slaughter, and was much grieved at it,
and purged himself by repentance. Read many such and then ask what is to be
done; Is this vow to be broke or not? No, says Bellarmine cap. 38. lib. de
Monach melius est scortari and vri, quam de voto coelibatus adnuptias transire,
better burn or fly out then to break thy vow, And Coster in his Eucherid. de
caelibat: sacerdotum. says it is absolutely grauius peccatum, Si nubat quam si
domi concubinam alat.
a greater sin for a Priest to marry, then to keep a Concubine at home.
Gregory de Valence, cap. 6. de caelelat: maintains as much, as those Essei and
Montani^sts of old, But St Paul teaches otherwise, better marry then burn,
and Cyprian Epist. 8. Adulterum est, impium est, sacrilegum est, quodcunque
humano furore statuitur, vt dispositio diuina violetur. It is abominable,
impious, adulterous and sacrilegious, what men make and ordinate after their
own furies to cross Gods laws. It is an unnatural and impious thing to bar
men of this Christian liberty, and too severe and inhumane an edict.

Lidgate in Chaucers flower of courtesy.
The silly Wrenne, the Titmouse also,
The little Redbrest have their election,
They fly I saw and together gone,
Whereas hem lift, about enuiron
As they of kind have inclination,
And as nature Impresse and guide,
Of every thing list to provide.
But man alone, alas the hard stand
Full cruelly by kinds ordinance
Constrained is, and by statutes bound,
And debarred from all such pleasance,
What means this, what is this pretense
Of laws, I wis against all right of kind
Without a cause so narrow men to bind?
Many Laymen repine still at Priests marriages above the rest, and not at
Clergy men only, but all the meaner sort and condition, they would have none
marry but such as are rich and able to maintain wives, because their parish
belike shall be pestered with Orphans, and the world full of beggars, but It Is
not multitude but Idleness which causes beggary.
these are shallow politicians, they do not Or to set them a work and bring
the^ up in some honest trades.
consider that a great part of the world is not yet inhabited as it ought, how
many Colonies into America, Terra Australis incognita, Africa may be sent?
Those politic Romans were of another mind, they thought their City and
Country would never be too populous. Dion Cassius lib. 56.
Augustus Caesar made an Oration in Rome ad caelibes to persuade them to marry,
some countries compelled them to marry of old, as Sardus. Buxdorfius. Riccius.
Jews, and Turks, Indians; Chinese, amongst the rest in these days, much
wonder at our discipline to suffer so many idle persons to live in Monasteries,
and much marvel how they can live honest. Claude Albauille in his hist. of the
Frenchmen to the Isle of Maragnan, An. 1614.
In the Isle of Maragnan, the Governor and petty King there did wonder at the
Frenchmen, and admire how so many Friars, and the rest of their company could
live without wives, they thought it a thing impossible, and would not believe
it. Alexander ab Alexandro lib. 4. cap 8.
In most countries they do much encourage them to marriage, and give great
rewards to such as have many children, and mulct such as will not marry, Ius
trium liberorum, and in Agellius lib. 2. cap. 15. Tres filii^ sratrem ab
excubiis quinque ab omnibus officiis liberabant^.
We read that three children freed the father from painful offices, and five
from all contributions. A woman shall be saved by bearing children. Epictetus
would have all marry, and Precepto primo Cogatur nubere aut mulctator et
pecunia templo Iunonis dedicetur, and publica fiat.
Plato 6. de legibus, he that marries not before 35 years of his age, must
be compelled and punished, and the money consecrated to Juno's Temple, or
applied to public vies. They account him in some countries unfortunate that
dies without a wife, and lament him for it: o my sweet son, etc. See Lucian
de luctu. Sands fol. 83.

And yet not withstanding many with us are of the opposite part, they are
married themselves and for others let them burn, or fire and flame they care
not, so they be not troubled with them, and be well themselves. Many poor
people, and of the meaner sort are too distrustful of Gods providence, they
will not marry for such worldly respects, fear of want, woes, miseries, or
that they shall light, as Qui se capistro matrimonii alligari non pat^u^tur.
Lemnius lib 4^ 13. de occult. not. Abhorrent multi a matrimonio, ne morosam,
querulam acerbam, amaram vxorem prefer coga^tur.
Lemnius says, upon a Scold, a Slut, or a bad wife. But these men are too
distrustful and much to blame, Ovid.
parcite paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes; they must not blame all for some.
As there be some bad, there be many good wives: read what Solomon has said in
their praises, Prove. 31. and Siracides cap. 26. and 36. mimuntur atrae coniuge
curae. A wife is a young man's mistress, a middle ages companion, an old man's
nurse, Bacons Essays.
a woman is the sole and only joy, and comfort of a man's life, because marriage
is troublesome, to avoid it, is no argument; Qui vult vitare molestias vitet
mundum.
he that will avoid trouble must avoid the world, says Eusebius praepar.
Evangel. 5. cap 50. Some trouble there is in marriage I deny not, Etsi grave
sit matrimonium, says Erasmus, edulcatur tamen multis, etc. yet there be many
things to (...) Quid vita est q^^so? quidue est sine ^ypride dulce. Mimner.
sweeten it, a pleasant wife, pretty children dulces nati, etc. And howsoever
though it were all troubles, Erasmus.
vtilitatis publicae causa devorandum, grave quid libenter subeundum, it must
willingly be undergone for public goods sake, and to propagate the Church.
Matrimonium humano generi immortalitatem tribuit, Lib. 3. nu^n. 1.
says Nenisanus, Matrimony makes us immortal. Palingenius.
Indigne viuit per quem non viuit and alter.

And as Noli societatem habere, etc.
Trismegistus to his son Tatius, have no commerce with a single man. They
hold him in some places unfortunate that so dies. Sands fol. 83. If we could
live without wives, as Metellus Numidicus said in Lib. 1. cap. 6. Si inquit,
Quirites sine vxore esse possemus omnes careremus. Sed quoniam sic est saluti
potius publicae quam voluptati consulendum.
Agellius, we would all want them, but because we cannot, let all marry, and
consult rather to the public good then their own private pleasure o^ estate.
Let him that is auerse from marriage read more in Barbarus de re^^or, lib. 1.
cap. 1. Lemnius de institut. cap. 4. P. Godefridus de Amor lib. 3. cap. 1.
Domus non potest consistere sine vxore. Neuisanus lib. 3. number. 18.
Neuisanus lib. 3. Alex. ab Al^vandro, l. 4. cap. 8. Tunstall, Erasmus tracts
inlaudem Matrimonij, etc. And I doubt but in the end he will rest satisfied,
and be as willing to embrace marriage as the rest: Nemo in seuerissima
Stoicoru^ familia qui non barbam quoque et supercilium amplexibus vxoriis
submiserit, aut in ista part a rel quis dissenserit, Hensius Primiero.
No not in that severe family of Stoics, that will not submit his grave beard,
and supercilious looks to the clipping of a wife, or disagree from his
fellows in this point. Since then this of marriage, is the last and best
refuge, and cure of Heroical love, all doubts are cleared, and all impediments
removed; I say again what remains then, but according to both their desires,
they be happily joined, since it cannot otherwise be helped. If all parties
be pleased, it is a match. Ovid.
Potiturque sua pu^r Iphi^ Ianthi. As we commonly conclude a Comedy with a Quid
expectatis intus fiunt nuptiae.
wedding, and shaking of hands, let us shut up our discourse, and conclude all
with an Epithalamium. God give them joy together. Bonum factum. It Is well done.
-- p Iudite vt lubet and breui,
Liberos date. --
Then modestly go sport and play,
And let us have every year a boy.
Catullus.
Hymen o Hymenaee, hymen ades o Hymenae.
Gallieni Epithal.
Ite agite o inuenes, non murmura vestra columbae,
Brachia non hoedere, non vincant oscula conchae.
Go give a sweet smell as incense and bring forth flowers as the Lilly. Ecclus
39.14.
O gentle youths go sport your selves betimes,
Let not the Doves outpasse your murmurings,
Or Iuy clasping arms, or oyster kissings.
And in the morn betime as those Theocritus edyl. 18.
Lacedemo^ian lasses saluted Helena and Menelaus, singing at their windows,
and wishing good success, do we at yours. Salve o sponsa salve faelix det
vobis Latona
Foelicem Sobolem, Venus dea det aequalem amorem
Inter vos mutuo; Saturnus durabiles diuitias,
Dormite in pectora mutuo amorem inspirantes
Et desiderium. --
Goodmorrow Master Bridegroom and Mistress Bride,
Many fair lovely Bernes to your betide,
Let Venus to you mutual love procure,
Let Saturn give you riches to endure,
Long may you sleep in one another arms,
Inspiring sweet desire, and free from harms.
And all your lives long. ^ras^us E^^^tal. P. A^gidii. Nec saltent modo sed duo
charissima pectora indissolubili mutue benevolentiae nodo copule^^ vt nihil
vnquam eos incendere possit irae vel taedii Illa perpetuo nihil audiat nisi mea
lux ille vicissim nihil nisi anime mi: Atque huic iuc^^ ditati ne senectus
d^^rahat. Imo potius a^iquid adaugea^.
Contingat vobis turturum concordia
Corniculae vivacitas --
The love of Turtles hap to you
And Ravens years still to renew.
Let the Muses sing (as he said) the Graces dance, not at their wedding only,
but all their lives long; so couple their hearts that no irke somenesse or
anger ever befall them; Let him never call her other name then my joy, my
light, or her call him otherwise then sweetheart. And to this happiness of
theirs let not old age any whit detract, but as their years, so let their
mutual love and comfort increase. Faeliciter nuptis.

Atque haec de amore dixisse sufficiat, sub correctione, Knormannus de linea
Amoris.
quod ait ille, cuiusque melius sentientis. Plura qui volet de remedijs Amoris
legate Iasonem Pratensem, Arnaldum, Montaltum, Sauanorolam, Langium, Valescum,
Crimisonum, Alexandrum Benedictum, Laurentium, Valleriolam. e Poetis Nasonem, e
nostratibus Chaucerum, etc.

SECT. 3.
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. Iealosie, his Equivocations, Name, Definition, Extent, several
kinds, of Princes, Parents, friends, In Beasts, men, before marriage, as
Corriualls, or after as in this place.
VAicscus de Taranta cap. de Melanchol. Aelian Montaltus, Faelix Platerus,
Guianerius, put Jealousy for a cause of Melancholy, others for a Symptom;
because melancholy persons amongst other passions and perturbations of the
mind, are most obnoxious to it. But me thinks for the latitude it has, and
that prerogative above other ordinary Symptoms, it ought to be treated of as a
Species a part, being of so great and eminent note, so furious a passion, and
almost of as great extent as Love it self, as In his Oration of Ielosie put
out by Fran. Sanseuino
Benedetto Varchi holds, No love without a mixture of Jealousy. For these
causes I will dilate it, and treat of it by it self, as a bastard branch or
kind of Loue-melancholy, and of like note; which as Heroical love goes
commonly before marriage, this usually follows, and tortures and crucifies in
like sort, and deserves therefore to be rectified alike, and requires as much
care and industry in setting out the several causes of it, prognostics, and
cures. Which I have more willingly done; that he that is or has been Jealous,
may see his error as in a glass, he that is not may learn hence to detest it,
avoid it himself, and dispossess others that are any way affected with it.

Iealosie is described and defined to be, Benedetto Varchi.
a certain suspicion which the Lover has of the party he chiefly loves,
least he or she should be enamored of another. or an eager desire to enjoy
so^me beauty alone, to have it proper to himself only: a fear or doubt, least
any forrainer should participate or share with him in his love. Or as Scaliger
adds, Exercitat. 317 cum m^tuimus ne ama^ae rei ex^urbemur possessione.
a fear of loosing her favor whom he so earnestly affects. Cardan calls it, a
Zelus de forma and invidentiae species, ne quis forma, qua^ amamus fruatur
zeal for love and a kind of envy least any man should beguiel us. 3. De
anima.
Lodovicus Viues defines it in the very same words, or little differing in
sense.

There be many other Iealosies, but improperly so called all; as that of
Parents, Tutors, Gardians over their children, friends whom they love, or such
as are left to their wardship or protection. Storax, non redijt hac nocte a
caena Aeschinus, neque seruulorum quispiam qui aduorsum ierant? As the old man
in the Comedy cried out in passion, and out of a sollicitous fear and care he
had of his adopted son, R. De anima. Tangimur Zelotypia de pupillis liberis
cha^isque cur^ nostrae co^creditis non de forma sed ne ma le sit iis aut ne
nobis sibique parent ignominiam
not of beauty, but least they should miscarry or do amiss, or any way
discredit, disgrace (as Viues notes) or endanger themselves and us. Plutarch.
Aegeus was so sollicitous for his son Theseus, when he went to fight with
the Minotaure, of his success, least he should be foiled. Senec.i^ Herc. fur.
Prona est timori semper in peius sides. We are still apt to suspect the worst
in such doubtful cases, as many wives in their husbands absence, fond mothers
of their children, least if absent they should be misled or sick, and are
continually expecting news of them, how they do fare and what is become of
them, they cannot endure to have them long out of their sight: O my sweet
son, O my dear child, etc. Paul was jealous over the Church of Corinth, as
he confesses 2. Cor. 11.2. With a godly Jealousy to present them a pure
Virgin to Christ, and he was afraid still least as the Serpent beguiled Eua
through his subtelty, so their minds should be corrupt from the simplicity
that is in Christ. God himself in some sense is said to be jealous, Exodus 20.
I am a jealous God, and will visit, etc. and Psalm. 79.5. shall thy jealousy
burn like fire for ever. But these are improperly called Iealosies, and by a
Metaphor, to express the care and solicitude they have of them. Although some
Iealosies express all the Symptoms of this which we treat of fear, sorrow,
anguish, anxiety, suspicion, etc. the object only varied. As that of Princes
which is most notorious, Daneus aphoris. polit. semper metuunt ne e^rum
authoritas minu^tur.
as when they fear corrivalls (if I may so call them) successors, aemulators,
subjects, or such as they have offended. Lucian.
Omnisque potestas impatiens consortis erit. They are still suspicious, least
their authority should be deminished, as one observes. And as Camineus truly
has it, Belli Neapol. lib. 5.
It cannot be expressed, what slender causes they have of their grief and
suspicion, a secret disease, that commonly lurkes and breeds in princes
families. Sometimes it is for their honor only, as that of Adrian the
Emperor, Dici non potest quam tenues and infirmas causas habent maeroris and
suspitionis, and hic est morbus occultus qui in familiis principum regnat ^
Omnes aemulos interfecit Lampridius.
that killed all his Emulators, Saul envied David; Domitian, Agricola; because
he did excel him, obscure his honor as he thought, eclipse his fame. Juno
turned Proetus daughters into Kine, becaue they contended with her for beauty,
Cyparissae king Eteocles daughters were envied of the Goddesses for their
excellent good parts, and dancing amongst the rest, says Constant. agricult.
lib. 10. cap. 5. Cyparissae Eteoclis filiae saltantes ad ^mulationem dearu^ in
puteum demolitae sunt sed terra miserata, Cupressos inde produxit.
Constantine, and for that cause flung down headlong from heaven, and buried
in a pit, but the earth took pity of them, and brought out Cypress trees to
preserve their memories. Ovid. Met.
Niobe, Arachne, and Marsias can testify as much. But it is most grievous when
it is for a kingdom it self, or matters of commodity, it produces lamentable
effects, especially amongst Tyrants, and such as are more feared then beloved
of their subjects, that get and keep their sovereignty by force. Seneca.
Quod ciuibus tenere te invitis scias, etc. as Phalaris, Dionysius, Periander,
held theirs. Quis autem carnifex addictum supplicio crudelius afficiat quam
metus? Metus inquam mortis, infamiae, cruciatus sunt ille vltrices furiae quae
tyrannos exagitant, etc. Multo acerbius sauciant and pungunt quam crudeles
domini seruos vinctos fustibus ac tormentis exulcerare possunt.
What slave, what hangman (as Bodin well expresses this passion, l. 2 c. 5. de
rep.) can so cruelly torture a condemned person, as this fear and suspiti^n.
Fear of death, infamy, torments are those furies and vultures that vex and
disquiet tyrants, and tortures them day and night, with perpetual terrors and
affrights, envy, suspicion, fear, desire of revenge, and a thousand such
disagreeing perturbations, turn and fear the soul out of the hinges of
health, and more grievously wound and pierce, then those cruel masters can
exasperate and v^xe their ^prentises and servants with clubbes, whippes,
chains and tortures. Many terrible examples we have in this kind amongst the
Turks, especially many jealous outrages, Lonicerus To^. 1. T^rc. hist. cap. 24.
Selimus killed Carnutus his youngest brother, five of his nephews, Mustapha
Bassa, and many others. Iouius vita eius.
Ba^azet the second Turk jealous of the valor and greatness of Acmet Bassa
caused him to be slain, Kno^les. Bus^equius. Sands. fol 52. Alexander Gaguinus
Muscouit hist. descript. cap. 5.


Solomon the magnificent murdered his own son Mustapha, and it is an
ordinary thing amongst them to make away their own brothers, or any
competitors: at the first coming to the crown, it is all the solemnity they
use at their fathers funerals. What mad pranckes in his jealous fury did
Herod of old commit in Jury, when he massacred all the children of a year old?
And what made pranckes hathf Io. Basilius that Muscouian tyrant practiced of
late? It is a wonder to read that strange suspicion, which Suetonius relates of
Claudius Caesar, and of Domitian, they were afraid of every man they saw. And
which Herodian of Antoninus and Geta those two jealous brothers, the one could
not endure so much as the other servants, but made away him and all his
followers, and all that belonged to him or were his well wishers. Dr. Fletcher.
^imet omnes ne insidiae essent.
Maximinus perceiving himself to be odious to most men because he was come to
that height of honor out of base beginnings, and suspecting his mean
parentage would be objected to him, caused all the Senators that were nobly
descended, to be slain in a jealous humor, and turned all the servants of
Alexander his predecessor out of d^ores, and slew many of them: because they
lamented their masters death, suspecting them to be traitors. for the love
they bare to him. When Alexander in his fury, had made Clitus his dear friend
to be put to death, and saw now (says Herodia^li P. Maximinus inuis^m se
sentiens quod ex infim^ loco in tantam fortunam venisset moribus ac genere
barbarus, metuens ne natalium obscuri tas obijceretur, omnes Alexandri
praedecessores ministros ex aula eiecit, pluribus interfectis, quod maesti
essent ad morlem Alexandri insidias inde metuens.
Curtius) an alienation in his subjects hearts, none durst talk with him, Lib
8. tanqua^ ferae sol^udine viuehant, terrentes alios, timentes
he began to be jealous of himself least they should attempt as much on him,
and said they lived like so many wild beasts in a wilderness, one afraid of
another. Our modern stories afford us many notable examples. Serres sol. 567.
Henry the third of France, jealous of Henry of Loraine Duke of Guise, Anno.
1588. caused him to be murdered in his own chamber. Jews the eleventh was so
suspicious, he durst not trust his own children, every man about him he
suspected for a traitor. Neapol. belli lib. 5. nulli prorsus homini fidebat,
omnes insi diari sibi pu tabat.
Many strange tricks Comineus tells of him. How jealous was our Henry the
fourth, of king Richard the second so long as he lived, after he was deposed,
and of his own son Henry, in his latter days? which the Prince well
perceiving, came to visit his father in his sickness in a watchet velvet
gown, Camdeus Remains.
full ofilet holes, and with needles sticking in them (as an emblem of
jealousy) and so pacified his suspicious father, after some speeches and
protestations which he had used to that purpose. Perpetual imprisonment, as
that of Robert Duke of Normandy in the days of Henry the first, Mat. paris
forbidding of marriage to some persons and such lik edicts, prohibitions, are
ordinary in all estates. In a word as R.T. notis in blason jealousy.
he said, three things cause jealousy, a mighty state, a rich treasure, a
fair wife, or where there is a crackte title, much tyranny and many exactions.
In our state as being freed from all these fears and miseries, we may be most
secure and happy, under the reign of our fortunate Prince.. Daniel in his
panegyricke to the King.
His fortune has indebted him to none,
But to all his people universally,
And not to them but for their love alone,
Which they account as placed worthily.
He is so set he has no cause to be,
Jealous or dreadful of disloyalty,
The pedistall whereon his greatness stands,
Is held of all our hearts, and all our hands.
But I roue I confess. These Aequiuocations, Iealousies and many such, which
crucify the souls of men, are not here properly meant, or in this distinction
of ours included, but that alone which is for beauty, and tending to love, and
wherein they can brook no corriuall, or endure any participation: and this
jealousy belongs as well to bruit beasts as to men. Some creatures says 3. de
anima cap. de zel. animalia quaedam zelotypia tanguntur, vt olores, columbae,
galli, tauri. etc. ob metum communionis.
Viues, as Swannes, Doves, Cocks, Bulls, etc. are jealous as well as men, and
as much moved for fear of communion. Seneca.
Venere instructi quam magna gerunt,
Grege pro t^to bellae invenci,
Si coniugio timuere suo,
Poscunt timidi praelia cerui,
Et mugitus dant concepti signa furoris.
In Venus cause what mighty battles make,
Your rauing Bulls, and sturres for their herds sake,
And Hearts and Buckes that are so timorous,
Will fight and roar if once they be but jealous.
In Bulls, Horses, Goats, this is most apparently discerned. R. T. in his
blason of jealousy, tells a story of a Swanne about Windsore, that finding a
strange cock with his mate, did swim I know not how many miles after to kill
him, and when he had so done, came back and killed his hen, a certain truth
he says done upon Thames, as many watermen and neighbor gentlemen can tell.
Fidem suam liberet, for my part I do believe it may be true, for Swannes have
ever been branded with that Epithet of jealousy. Chaucer in his assembly of
souls.
The jealous Swan against his death that sings,
And eke the Owl that of death bode brings.
Aldouerandus
Some say as much of Elephants, that they are more jealous then any other
creatures whatsoever, and those old Egyptians, as Lib. 12.
P^erius informs us, expressed in their Hieroglyphickes, the passion of
jealousy by a Camel, Sibi timens circares venereas solitudines amat. quo
solus sol^ s^emina fruatur.
because that fearing the worst still about matters of venery, he loves
solitudes, that he may enjoy his pleasure alone.

But this furious passion is most eminent in men, and is as well amongst
Bachalours, as married men: if it appear amongst Bachalours, we commonly call
them riuals or corriualls, and it breaks out many times into tempestuous
storms, and produces lamentable effects; murder it self with much cruelty,
many single combats. They cannot endure the least injury done to them before
their mistress, and in her defense will bite off another noses, they are most
impatient of any flou^, disgrace, or least emulation or participation in that
kind. Constantine in the eleventh book of his husbandry, cap. 11. has a
pleasant tale of the Pine Tree, Pinus puella quondam fuit, etc.
she was once a fair maid, whom Pineus and Boreas two corriualls dearly
sought, but jealous Boreas broke her neck, etc. And in his eighteenth chapter,
he tells another tale of Mars zel^typus Adonidem interfecit.
Mars, that in his jealousy slew Adonis. Petronius calls this passion,
amantium furiosam aemulationem, a furious emulation, and their symptoms are
well expressed by Sr. Iefferie Chaucer in his first Canterbury tale. It will
make the nearest and dearest friends fall out, they will endure all other
things to be common, goods, lands, moneys, participate of all other pleasures,
and take in good part any disgraces, injuries in another kind, but as
Propertius we^l describes it, in an Elegy of his, in this they will suffer
nothing, have no corriualls. Tu mihi vel ferro pectus vel perde venono,
A domina tantum te modo toll mea,
Te socium uitae te corporis esse licebit,
Te Dominum admitto rebus amice meis.
Lecto te solum lecto te depresor vno,
R.T.
Riualem possum non ego far Iouem.
Stabbe me with sword or poison strong,
Give me to work my bane;
So thou court not my less, so thou
From mistress mine refrain.
Command my self, my body, purse
As thine own goods take all,
And as my nearest dearest friend,
I ever use thee shall.
O spare my love, to have alone
Her to my self I crave,
Swound's Jove himself i will not endure
My Rival for to have.
This jealousy which I am to treat off, is that which belongs to married men,
in respect of their own wives, to whose estate, as no sweetness, pleasure,
happiness can be compared in the world, if they live quietly and lovingly
together, so if they disagree or be jealous, those bitter pills of sorrow and
grief, disasterous mischiefs and mischan^es, tortures, gripings, discontents
are not to be separated from them. A most violent passion it is where it takes
place, an unspeakable torment, an h^llish torture, an infernal plague a
A^^slo^ calls it, A fury, a continual fever, full of susp^tion ^^^re and
sorrow, a martyrdom. The sorrow and grief of heart is one woman jealous of
another, heavier then death. Ecclus. 28.6. as 1. Sam. ^. ^.
Peninnah did Hannah, Vex her and vpbraid her s^re, It Is asore vexation, a
most intolerable burden, a frenzy, a madness it self, as Blas^n ^ealousie.
Beneditto Varchi proves out of that select Sonnet of Giouanni de la Casa, that
reverend Lord as he styles him.

SVBSEC. 2. Causes of Jealousy, who are most apt. Idleness, Melancholy,
Impotency, long Absence, Beauty, Wantonness, bad themselves, Allurements,
from time, place, persons, bad usage.
AStrologers make the stars a cause or sign of this bitter passion, and out
of every man's Horoscope, will give a probable conjecture whether he will be
jealous or no, and at what time: their Aphorisms are to be read in Albumazer,
Pontanus, Scouer, Iunctine etc. Bodine cap. 5. method. hist. ascribes a great
cause to the country or clime, and discourses largely there of this subject,
saying that southern men are more hot lascivious and jealous, then such as
live in the north, they can hardly contain themselves in those hotter climes,
but are most subject to prodigious lusts. Leo Afer tells incredible things
almost of the lust and jealousy of his countrymen of Afric, and especially
such as live about Carthage, and so does every Geographer of them in Asia,
Turkey, Spaniards, Italians. In Germany, Britain, Scandia, Poland, Muscouie,
Mulierum conditio misera nullam honest^ eredunt nisi domo conclusa viuat.
they are not so troubled with this ferall malady, altough Damianus a Goes,
which I do much wonder at in his description of Laplaude and Herbastein of
Russians, against the stream of all other Geographers would fasten it upon
those Northern inhabitants. Altomarus, Podgius, and Munster in his description
of Baden, Nomen zelotypiae apud istos locum non habet.
reports that men and women of all forts go commonly into the Baths together,
without all suspicion, the name of jealousy says Munster is not so much as
once heard of amongst them. Busbequius Sands.
The Greeks on the other side have their private Bathes for men and women,
where they must not come near, not so much as see one another: and as
Praeamore and zolotypia saepius insaniunt.
Bodine observes lib. 5. de repub. the Italians would never endure this or a
Spaniard, the very conceit of it would make him mad: and for that cause they
lock up their women', and will not suffer them to be together, so much as in
the Australes ne sacra quidem publica fi^ri patiuntur nisi vterque sexus
pariete medio diuidatur: and quum in Angliam inquit legationis causa profectus
essem, audiui Mendoz^m legatum Hispaniarum dicentem turpe esse viros and
faem^nas in etc.
Church, but with a partition between. He tells moreover, how that when he
was Embassader in England he heard Mendoza the spanish Legate finding falt with
it, as a filthy custom for men and women to sit promiscuously in Churches
together, but Dr. Dale the master of the Requests told him again, that it was
indeed a filthy custom in Spain, where they could not contain themselves
from lascivious thoughts in their holy places, but not with us. We are far
from any such strange conceits, and will permit our wives and daughters to go
to the Tavern with a friend, as Aubanus says, modo absit lasciuia, and
suspect nothing to kiss coming and going, which as Erasmus writes in one of
his Epistles, they cannot endure. Some make a question whether this headstrong
passion, rage more in women then men, as Montaigne lib. 3. But sure it is more
outrageous in women, as all other Melancholy is, by reason of the weakness of
their sex. Scaliger Poet li. ca. 13. concludes against women, Idea, mulieres
preterquam quod sint infidae suspicaces, inconstantes, insidiosae simulatrices,
superstitiosae, and si potentesintolerabiles amore zelotypae supra modu^. Ovid
2. de art.
Besides their inconstancy, treachery, suspicion, dissimulation, superstition,
and desire of soueraignety, if they be great women, as he gives instance in
Juno, bitterness and jealousy are the most remarkable affections. Sed neque
fuluus aper media tam fuluus in ira est,
Fulmineo rapidos dum rotat ore canes.
Nec Leo, etc. --
Tiger, Boore, Bear, Viper, Lyonnesse,
A woman's fury cannot express.
Bartello.
Some say red-headed women, pale colored, black eyed, and of a shrill voice,
are most subject to jealousy. High color in a woman choler shows, R.T.

Naught are the peevish, proud, malicious,
But worst of all red, shrill and jealous.


Comparisons are odious, I neither parallel them with others, nor debate them
any more: men and women are both badde and too subject to this pernicious
infirmity. It is most part a symptom and cause of melancholy, as Plater and
Valescus teach us: melancholy men are apt to be jealous, and jealous, apt to be
melancholy.

Pale jealousy child of insatiate love,
Of heart-sicke thoughts which melancholy bred,
A hell tormenting fear, no faith can move,
By discontent with deadly poison fed. R.T.

With headless youth and error vainly led.
A mortal plague, a virtue drowning flood,
A hellish fire, not quenched but with blood.
If idleness concur with melancholy, such persons are most apt to be
jealous, and it is Lib. 2. number. 8. mulier otiosa facile praesumitur luxuriosa,
et saepe zelotypa.
Neuisanus note. An idle woman is presumed to be lascivious and often jealous.
And it is not unlikely for they have no other business to trouble their heads
with.

More particular causes be these which follow. Impotentencie first, when a man
is not able of himself, to perform those dewes which he ought unto his wife,
and he perceiues her to be more craving, clamorous, insatiable and prone to
lust then is fit, he begins presently to suspect that wherein he is defective,
she will satisfy her self, she will be pleased by some other means. This
cause is most evident in old men, that are cold and dry by nature, and married
succi plenis, to young wanton wives, with old doting Ianiuere in Chaucer they
begin to mistrust all is not well. And how should it otherwise be? Old age is
a disease of it self, loathsome, fulsome, full of suspicion and fear, when it
is at best, unable, unfit for such matters. Lib. 2. number. 4.
Tam apta nuptijs quam bruma messibus, as welcome to a young woman as snow in
harvest, says Neuisanus. Et si capis inuenculam faciet tib^ cor^^^. Marry a
maid and she will surely grast horns on thy head. Quum omnibus infideles
faeminae sevibus infidelissimae.
All women are slippery, unfaithful to their husbands most part, as Aeneas
Siluius epist, 83. seconds him, but to old men most treacherous of all: they
had rather mortem amplexarier le with a corse then with such a man. On the
other side most men says Hieronymus are suspicious of their wives, Vix aliqua
non impudica, and quam non suspectum merito quis habeat.
if they be lightly given, but old folks above the rest. In so much that she
did not complain without a cause in Lib. 5. de aur. asino. At ego misera patre
meo seniorem, maritum nacta sum dien cucurbita caluiorem, and quovis puero
pumiliorem, cunctam domum seris and cathenis obditam custodientem.
Apuleius of an old, bald, bedridden knave she had to her husband. Poor woman
as I am, what shall do? I have an old grimme sire to my husband as bald as a
gourde, as little and as unable as a child, he keeps all the doors barred and
locked upon me, woe is me, what shall I do? He was jealous, and she made him
cuckold for keeping her up: suspicion without a cause, hard usage is able of it
self to make a woman fly out, that was otherwise honest. Nam quando mulieres
cognoscunt maritum hoc aduertere licentius peccant, as Lib. 4. nu. 80.
Neuisanus holds, when a woman thinks her husband watches her, she will
sooner offend, Ovid 2. de art amandi.
Liberius peccant and pudor omnis abest, rough handling makes them worse, as
the good wife of Bathe in Chaucer bragges.

In his own grease I made him fry,
For anger and for very Jealousy.
Another just cause may be long absence of either party, when they must of
necessity be much from home, as Lawyers, Physicians, Mariners, by their
profe^sions or otherwise make frivolous impertinent iourneyes, and tarry long
abroad to no purpose, upon small occasions, it must needs yield matter of
suspicion; when they use their wives otherwise unkindly and never tarry at
home, it cannot choose but engender some such conceit. Ter. Adelp. Act, 1. so.
1.
Vxor si cessas amare te cogitat,
Aut tete amari aut potare, aut animo obsequi^
Et tibe been esse soli, quum sibi sit male.
If thou be absent long, thy wife then thinks,
Thou Art drunk at ease, or with some pretty minckes,
It Is well with thee, or else beloved of some,
Whilst she poor soul does fare full ill at home.
Hippocrates the Physician had a smacke of this disease, for when he was to go
from home, as far as Abdera, and some other remote cities of Greece, he writ
to his friend Dionysius, (if at least those Fab. Calu^. Rauenate interpret.
Epistles be his) Dum rediero domam meam habitabis, and licet cum parentibus
habitet, hac mea peregrinatione, eam tamen and eius mores obseruabis vti
absentia viri su^ probe degat, nec alios viros cogitet aut quaerat.
to ouersee his wife in his absence, although she lived in the house with her
father and mother, whom he knew would have a care of her, yet that would not
satisfy his jealousy, he would have his especial friend Dionysius to dwell
in his house with her, all the time of his peregrination, and to observe her
behavior, how she carried her self in her husbands absence, and that she did
not lust after other men, Faemina semper custode eget qui se pudicam contineat,
suapte enim natura n^quitias insitas habet, quas nisi in dies comprimat, vt
arbores stolones emittunt etc.
For a woman had need to have an ouerseer to keep her honest, they are bad by
nature and lightly given all, and if they be not curbed in time, as an
vnproyned tree, they will be full of wild branches, and degenerate of a sudden.
Especially in their husbands absence, though one Lucretia were trusty, and one
Penelope, yet Clitomnestra made Agamemnon cuckcolde in his absence, and no
question their be too many of her conditions. If their husbands tarry too long
abroad upon any necessary business, well they may suspect: or if they fly one
way, their wives at home will fly out another, Quid pro quo. Of if present,
and give them not that content which they ought, Hensius.
Primum ingratae, mox inuisae noctes quae per somnum transiguntur, They cannot
endure to lie alone, or to fast long. Vxor cuiusdam nobilis quu^ debitum
maritale sacra passionis hebdomada non obtineret, alterum adijt.
Peter Godefridus in his second book of love and sixth chapter, has a story
out of St. Anthonies life, of a gentleman, that by that good man's advise, would
not meddle with his wife in the passion week, but for his pains she set a
pair of horns on his head. Such another he had out of Abstemius, one
persuaded a new married man, Ne ^ribus prio^^^^^ noctibus remhaberet cum ea vt
ess^t in p^^^^ibus fortunatus, ab vx^^e m^rae impatiente, etc.
to abstain the three first nights and he should all his life time after be
fortunate in cattle, but his impatient wife would not tarry so long: well he
might speed in cattle, but not in children. Such a tale has Hensius of an
impotent and slack scholar, a mere student and a friend of his, that seeing
by chance a fine damsel sing and dance, would needs have her, the match was
soon made for he was rich. Totam noctem been and pudice nemini molestus
dormiendo transegit, mane aute^ quum nullius co^scius facinoris sibi esset, and
inertiae puderet. audisse se aiebat cum dolor calculi solere eam conflictari.
Duo praecepta iuris vna nocte expressit, neminem laeserat and honest vixerat.
sed an suum cuique ^e^didisset quaeri poterat, M^tius opinor and Trebatius hoc
negassent.
The first night, having liberally taken his liquor (as in that country they
do) my fine scholar was so fusled, that he no sooner was laid in bed, but he
fell fast asleep, and never waked till morning, and then much abashed, he made
an excuse, I know not what, out of Hippocrates Cous, etc. and for that time it
went current, but when as afterward he did not play the man as he should do,
she fell in league with a good fellow, and whilst he sat up late at his study
about his Critisismes, mending some hard places in Festus or Pollux, and came
cold to bed, and would tell her still what he had done, she did not much regard
what he said, etc. Alterius loci emendatione^ serio optabat que^ corrvptum esse
ille nou iuvenit.
She would have another matter mended much rather which he did not perceive
was corrupt: thus he continued at his study late, she at her sport, hating all
scholars for his sake, till at length he began to suspect, and turn a little
yellow, as well he might; for it was his own fault, and if men be jealous in
such cases Such anotale is Melander de Iocosarijs his first tale.
as often it falls out, their mends is their own hands, they must thank
themselves.

A third eminent cause of jealousy may be this, when he that is deformed
hirsute and ragged, and very virtuously given, will marry some very fair niec
piece, or some light huswife, he begins to misdoubt (as well he may) she does
not affect him. Ovid. rara est concordia formae atque pudicitiae.
Lis est cum forma magna pudicitiae. Beauty and honesty have ever been at
odds. Abraham was jealous of his wife because she was fair; and it is hard to
find says Francis Philelphus in an Epistle of his to Saxola his friend, a rich
man honest, a proper woman not proud or unchaste. Can she be fair and honest
too? He that marries a wife that is snout fair, alone, let him look, says
Barbarus, De re vxori^ lib. 1.5. cap.
for no better success, then Vulcan had with Venus, or Claudius with
Messalina. And it is impossible almost in such cases thy wife should contain,
or the goodman not be jealous, for when he is so far defective himself, ill
proportioned, unpleasing in those parts which women most effect, and she most
absolutely fair on the other side. If she be not very virtuously given, how can
she love him, and although she be not fair, yet if he admire her and think
her so, in his conceit she is absolute, he holds it impossible for any man
living not to dote as he does, to look on her and not lust, not to covet, and
if he be in company with her, not to lay siege to her stonestly: or else out of
a deep apprehension of his infirmities, deformities, and other men's good
parts, he suspects she cannot affect him, or be not so kind and loving as she
should, she certainly loves some other man better then himself.

Cum steriles sunt, ex mutatione viri se po^se putant concipere^
Neuisanus lib. 4. number. 72. Will have barrenness to be a mean cause of
jealousy. If her husband cannot play the man some other shall, they will leave
no remedies unassayed, and thereupon the good man grows jealous, I could give
an instance, but be it as it is.

I find this reason given by some men, because they have bin formerly naught
themselves, they think they shall be so served by others: they shall have
legem talionis, like for like. Tibullus Eleg. 6.
Ipse miser docui quo posset ludere pacto
Custodes, eheu nunc premor art mea.
Wretch as I was I taught her bad to be,
And now mine own fly tricks are put upon me.
Malamens, malus animus, as the saying is, ill dispositions cause ill
suspicions. Withers S^^.
There is none icalous I durst pawn my life,
But he that has defild another wife,
And for that he himself has gone astray.
He straightway thinks his wife will tread that way.
To these above named causes, I may very well annexe those circumstances of
time, place, persons, by which it ebbes and flows, as 3. De anima crescit ac
decrescit zelotypia ex personis, locis, temporibus neg^tijs.
Viues very well observes, and such like accidents or occasions, proceeding
from the parties themselves or others, which much aggrauate and intend this
suspicious humor. For many men are so lasciuiously given, either out of a
depraved nature, or too much liberty, which they do assume unto themselves,
by reason of their greatness, in that they are noble men, Q^i cum legitimi
iunguntur faedere lecti, virtute egregijs facieque domoque puellis, scorta
tamen faed^sque lupa^ in forna^e querunt, and per adulterium noua c^rpere
gaudia tentant. Marullus.
though their own wives be never so fair, noble, virtuous, honest, wise and
well given, they must have change, tanta est aliena in mess voluptas, or that
stolen waters be more pleasant or as Vitellius the Emperor was wont to say,
Iucundiores amores, quae cum periculo habentur, like stolen Venison that is
still the sweetest, is love which is most difficultly attained; they like
better to hunt by stealth in another man's walk, then to have the fairest
course that may be at game of their own. Aspice vt in coelo modo sol mod^ l^na
ministret,
Sic etiam nobis vna puella parum est.
As Sun and Moon in heavens change their course, Ali^^^s pers^^^ere vxores.

So they change loves, though often to the worse.
Or that some fair object so forcibly moves them, Propert. Eleg. 2
they cannot contain themselves, Cap. 5.8.
but as an horse they neigh says Iemiah after their neighbors wives, and if
they be in company of other women, though in their wives presence, they must be
dallying with them. Juno in Lucian complains of Jupiter, that he was still
kissing Ganymede before her face.

Or that they care little for their own wives, or fear no laws they dare
freely keep whores at their wifes noses. It Is to familiar with great men to be
dishonest, Pietas probitas, fides priuata bona sunt as Seneca.
he said long since, piety, chastity and such like virtues are for private men.
Great personages will familiarly fly out in this kind, and give occcsion of
offense, Lib. 2. cap. 23.
Montagne in his Essays gives instance in Caesar, Mahomet the Turk that
sacked Constantinople, and Ladislaus king of Naples that besieged Florence,
great men and great soldiers are commonly lascivious, Mars and Venus are
equally balanced in their actions. Caesar says Curio in Sueton, was omnium
mulierum vir, he made love to Eunoe Queen of Mauritania, to Cleopatra, to
Postumia wife to Sergius Sulpitius, to Lollia wife to Gabinius, to Tertulla of
Crassus, and to Mutia Pompies wife, and I know not how many besides: Every
private History will yield such variety of instances. Otherwise good wise,
discreet men, virtuous and valiant but too faulty in this. Pontus Heuter vita
eius.
Philippus bonus left 14. bastards, Laurence Medices a good Prince and a wise,
but says, Lib. 8. Flor. hist. dux omni. um optimus and sapientissimus, sed in
re venere^ prodigiosus.
Machiauel prodigiously lascivious. None so valiant as Castruccius Castrucanus,
but as the same Author has it, Vita Castruccij Idem vxores maritis abalienauit.
none so incontinent as he was. And it is no marvel if poor women in such
cases be jealous, when they shall see themselves manifesty neglected, and their
disloyal husbands to entertain others in their rooms, and many times to
court Ladies to their faces, other men's wives to wear their jewels, how shall
a poor woman in such a case moderate her passions?

And how on the other side shall a poor man contain himself from this ferall
malady, when he shall see so manifest signs of his wives inconstancy? when as
like Milo's wife in Apuleius she dotes upon every yuong man she sees. Though
her husband be proper and tall, and fair and lovely to behold, and able to
give contentment to any one woman; yet she will taste of the forbidden fruit,
Iuuenalls Iberina to an hair, she is as well pleased with one eye as one man.
If a young gallant come by chance into her presence, a Fastidius Brisk that
can wear his clothes well, in fashion with a lock, a gingling spur, a
feather, that can cringe and with all complement, court a gentlewoman, she
raues upon him; o what a lovely proper man he was, how sweetly he carried
himself, with how comely a grace, sic vultus sic or a ferebat, how neatly he
did wear his clothes, sing and dance, etc, and then she begins to loath her
husband, to hate him: and his filthy beard, his gotish complexion, how like a
dizard, a fool, an ass he looks, how like a clown he behaues himself.
Aeneas Siluius
So did Lucretia a Lady of Senes, after she had but seen Eurialus, In Eurialum
tota ferebatur, domum reuersa, etc. she would not hold her eyes off him in his
presence, and in his absence could think of none but him, odit virum, she
lothed her husband forthwith, and sought all opportunities to see her sweet
heart again. Now when the good man shall observe his wife so lightly given, to
be so free and familiar with every gallant, her immodesty and wantonness (as
Camerarius notes) it must needs yield matter of suspicion to him, Cont. 2. cap.
38 oper. subcis. muli^ris liberius and familiarius co^municantis cum omnibus
licentia and immodestia, sinistri sormonis and suspitionis materiam viro
praebet.
when she still pranckes up her self beyond her means and fortunes, and so
frequently goes to plays, masks, feasts, and all public meetings, and shall
use such immodest Voces liberae oculorum colloquia, contrectationes parum
veresundae, motus immodici, etc. Hensius.
gestures, free speeches, and withal show some distaste of her own husband,
how can he choose, though he were another Socrates, but be suspicious and
jealous? More especially when he shall take notice of their more secret and
sly tricks, which to comute their husbands they commonly use, they pretend
love, honor, chastity, and seem to respect their husbands before all men
living, Saints in show, so cunningly can they dissemble, they will not so much
as look upon another man in his presence, What is here said is not prejudicial
to honest women
so chaste, so religious, and so devout, they cannot endure the name or sight
of a queen, an harlote, out upon her, and in their outward carriage are most
loving and officious, and will kiss their husbands, and hang about his neck
(dear husband, sweet husband) and with a composed countenance salute him,
especially when he comes home, or if he go from home, weep, sigh, lament,
and take upon them to be sick and swound, (like Iocundos wife in Lib. 28. st.
13.
Ariosto when her husband was to depart) and yet arrant etc. care not for him.
Aye me the thought (quoth she) makes me so fr^^d,
That scant the breath abides in my breast,
Peace my sweet love and wife Iocundo said,
And weeps as fast and comforts her his best, etc.
All this might not assuage the woman's pain,
Needs must I die before you come again,
Nor how to keep my life can I devise,
The doleful days and nights I shall sustain,
From meat my mouth from sleep will keep mine eyes, etc
That very night that went before the morrow,
That he had pointed surely to depart.
Iocundos wife was sick and sounds for sorrow,
Amid his arms so heavy was her heart.


And yet for all these counterfeit tears and protestations, coming back in
all have for a Jewel he had forgot, His chaste and yoke fellow he found
Yokt with a knave all honesty neglected,
The adulterer sleeping very sound,
Yet by his face was easily detected,
A beggars brat bred by him from his cradle,
And now was riding on his masters saddle.
Thus can they cunningly counterfeit, as Dial. Amor. Pendet fallax et blanda
circa osculamariti, que in c^uce si fieri posset, deosculaeri velit. Illius
vi^^m chariorem esse sua iureiurando affirmat. qu^m certe non redimeret anim^
catelli si posset.
Platina describes their customs, and kiss their husbands, whom they had
rather see hanging on the Gallows, and swear they love them dearer then their
own lives, whose soul they would not ransom for their little dogs. Many of
them seem to be precise and holy forsooth, and will go to such a Ade^at
templum vt rem divinam audiant, vt ipse simulant, sed vel vt Monachum fratrem
vel adulterum lingua, oculis ad libidinem prouocent.
Church to hear such a good man by all, means, and excellent man, when it is
for no other intent (as he follows it then) to see and to be seen, to observe
what fashions, to meet some Pander, Bawd, Monk, Friar, or to entise some
goodfellow. For they persuade themselves as Lib. 4. number. 81 Ipsae sibi
persuadent quod adulterium quu^^ principe vel quu^ praesule non est pudor nec
peccatum.
Neuisanus shows. That it is neither sin nor shame to lie with a Lord or a
parish priest, if he be a proper man: Deum rogat non pro salute mariti fi^ij
cognati vota suscipit, sed pro reditu mechi si a^est pro valetudine lenonis si
^egrotet.
and though she kneel often, and seem to pray devoutly, it is (says Platina)
not for her husbands welfare or childrens good, or any friend, but for her
sweethearts return, her Pander's health. If her husband would have her go she
faines her self sick, Tibullus.
and simulat subito condoluisse caput: her head aches and she cannot go, but if
her Paramour ask as much, she is for him at all seasons, at all hours of the
night. Gotardus Artus descript. indie Orient. Linchcosten
In the kingdom of Malabar, and about Goa in the East Indies, the women are so
subtle, that with a certain drink they give them to drive away cares, as
they say, Garcias ab Horto hist. lib. 2 cap. 24. Datura^ herbam vocat and
describit. Tam procliues sunt ad venerem mulieres vt viros inebrient per 24
horas, liquore quodam vt nihil videant, recordentur, at dormiant, and post
lotionem pedum ad serestituunt. etc. Ariosto.


They will make them sleep for 24 hours, or so intoxicate them, that they can
remember naught of that they saw done or heard, and by washing of their feet
restore them to themselves again, and so make them Cuckolds to their faces.
But as he said, Lib. 28. st. 75.
No pen could write, no tongue atttaine to tell,
By force of eloquence or help of art,
Of women's treacheries the hundredth part.
Both, to say truth, are often faulty, Men and Women, and give just occasions
in this humor of discontent, and aggrauate and yield matter of suspicion, but
most part the chief causes proceeds from other aduentitious accidents, and
circumstances, though the parties be free and both well given themselves. The
indiscreet carriage of some lascivious gallant, ( and e contrae of some light
woman,) by his often frequenting of an house, and bold unseemly gestures, may
make a breach, and by his over familiarity, if he be inclined to yellowness,
color him quite out. If he be poor, basely borne, says Benedetto Varchi, and
otherwise unhandsome, he suspects him the less, but if a proper man, well
descended, commendable for his good parts, he takes on the more, and watches
his doings. Now when those other circumstances of time and place, opportunity
and importunity shall concur, what will they not effect? Fair opportunity
can win the coyest she that is,
So wisely he takes time as he will be sure he will not miss,
Then he that rules her gamesome vain, and tempers toys with art
Brings love that swimmeth in her eyes, to diue into her heart.
As at Plays, Maskes, great feasts and banquets, one singles out his wife to
dance, another courts her in his presence, a third tempts her, etc. and then,
as he says, She may un while in chastity abide,
That is assaid on every side.
And after a great feast, Tibullus.
Vino saepe suum nescit amica virum. The most continent may be overcome, or if
otherwise they keep bad company, they that are modest of themselves, and dare
not offend, confirmed Nihil audent primo post ab aliis confirmatae audaces and
confidentes sunt Vbi semel verecundiae limits transierint.
by others, grow impudent and confident, and get an ill habit. Or if they dwell
in suspected places, as in an infamous Inn, near some Stews, near Monks,
Friars, Neuisanus adds, where be many temptors and solicitors, idle persons
that frequent their companies, it may give just cause of suspicion. Cap. 18. de
Virg.
Kornmannus makes a doubting jest in his lascivious country, Virginis illibata
censeaturne castitas ad quam frequenter acc^dant scholares. And Baldus the
Lawyer scoffs on, quum scholaris inquit loquitur cum puella, non presumitur ei
dicere, Pater noster. When a Scholar talks with a maid, or another man's wife
in private, it is presumed he says not a Pater noster. These are the ordinary
causes of Iealosie, which are intended or remitted as the circumstances vary.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 1. Symptoms of Icalosie, fear, sorrow, suspicion, strange actions,
gestures, outrages, locking up, oaths, trialls, Laws, etc.
OF all passions, as I have already proved, Love is most violent, and of all
those bitter potions which this Loue-melancholy affords, Iealosie is the
greatest, as appears by those prodigious Symptoms which it has, and effects
that it produces. For besides that Fear and Sorrow, which is common to all
melancholy, anxiety of mind, restles thoughts palenesse, leanenesse,
meagernesse, neglect of business and the like, these men are farther yet
misaffected, and in an higher strain. It Is a more vehement passion, a more
furious perturbation, a bitter pain, a fire, madness, plague, hell. They are
more then ordinarily disquieted, more then ordinary suspicious, Iealosie, says
3 De anima. Omnes voces, a^ras, omnes susuros captat z^lotipus, and amplificat
apud se cu^ iniquissima de singulis calumnia. Maxim suspitiosi and ad peiora
credendum proclives.


Viues, begets unquietness in the mind night and day: he hunts after every word
he hears, every whisper, and amplifies it to himself, with a most iniust
calumny of others, he misinterprets every thing is said or done, most apt to
mistake and misconster, he pries in every corner, follows close, observes to
an hair: Besides all those strange gestures of staring, frowning, grinning,
rolling of eyes, menacing, ghastly looks, broken pace, interrupt, precipitate,
half turns. He will sometimes sigh, weep, sob for anger, swear and belly,
slander any man, curse, threaten, brawle, rave; and sometimes again flatter
and speak fair, ask forgiveness, and then again impatient as he is, rave,
and lay about him like a mad man, accusing and suspecting not strangers only,
but Brothers and Sisters, Father and Mother, nearest and dearest friends. He
thinks with those Italians, Chi non tocca parentado,
Tocca may e rado.
And through fear conceaues unto himself things almost incredible and
impossible to be effected. As an Hearne when he fishes, still prying of all
sides, gazing, listening, afrighted with every object, as he confessed in the
Poet. Propertius.
Omnia me terrent, timidus sum ignosce timori
Et miser in tunica suspicor esse virum.
Me laedit si multa tibi dabit oscula matter,
Me soror and quum qua dormit amica simul.
Each thing affrights me I do fear,
Ah pardon me my fear,
I doubt a man is hid within.
The clothes that thou do wear.
Ist' not a man in woman's apparel, is not some body in that great chest, or
behind the door, or hangings, or in some of those barrells? May not a man come
in at the window with a ladder of ropes, or come down the chimny, or have a
false key, or come in when he is asleep? If a Mouse do but stir, or the
wind blow, a casement clatter, that is the villan there he is; by his good will
no man shall see her, salute her, speak with her, she shall not go forth of
his sight so much as to do her needs. Aeneas Silu.
Non it a bouem Argus, etc. Argus did not so keep his Cow, that watchful
dragon the golden fleece, or Cerberus the coming in of Hell, as he keeps his
wife. If the necessity of his business be such that he must go from home,
he does either lock her up, or commit her with a deal of injunctions and
protestations, to some trusty friends him and her he sets and bribes to
ouersee; and yet all this will not serve, though his business be very urgent,
he will when he is half way come back again in post have, rise from supper,
or at midnight and be gone, and sometimes leave his business undone. Though
there be no danger at all, no cause of suspicion, she live in such a place, in
such a company where Messalina her self could not be dishonest if she would,
yet he suspects her as much as if she were in a bawdy house, or some Princes
Court, or in a common Inn where all comers might have free access. no
persuasion, no protestation can divert this passion, nothing can ease him, or
give him satisfaction. It is most strange to report what outrageous acts by men
and women have been committed in this kind; by women especially, that will
run after their husbands into all places, all companies, as Ant. dial.
Iouianus Pontanus wife did by him, follow him whether soever he goes, it
matters not, or upon what business, rauing like Juno in the Tragedy, cursing,
swearing, and mistrusting every one she sees. Gomesius in his third book of
the life and deeds of Francis Ximenius sometimes Archbishop of Toledo, has a
strange story of that incredible Iealosie of Ioane Queen of Spain, wife to
King Philip, and mother of Ferdinande and Charles the 5. Emperors; when her
husband Philip either for that he was tired with his wives iealosie, or had
some great business went into the Low countries; she was so impatient and
melancholy upon his departure, that she would scarce eat her meat or converse
with any man, and though she were with child and the season of the year very
bad, the wind against her, In all have she would to sea after him. Neither
Isabella her Queen mother, or the Archbishop, or any other friend could
persuade her to the contrary, but she would after him. When she was now come
into the Low Countries, and kindly entertained by her husband, she could not
contain her self, Rabie concepta caesariem abrasit pu^llaeque miserabiliter
insultans faciem vibicibus faedauit.
but in her rage ran upon a yellow hai'rd wench, with whom she suspected her
husband to be naught, cut of her hair, and did beat her black and blewe, and
so dragged her about. It is an ordinary thing for women in such cases, to scrat
the faces, slit the noses of such as they suspect. Or if it be so they dare not
or cannot execute any such tyrannical injustice, they will rail and revile
them, bear them deadly hate and malice, as Annal. lib. 12. Principis mulieris
zelotypae est in alias mulieres quas su spectas habet, odium inseparabile.
Tacitus observes, The hatred of a jealous woman is inseparable against such as
she suspects. So did Agrippina by Lollia, and Calphurnia in the days of
Claudius. But women are sufficiently curbed in such cases, the rage of men is
more eminent, and more frequently put in practice. See but with what rigor
those jealous husbands tyrannise over their poor wives, In Greece, Spain,
Italy, Turkey, Afric, Asia, and generally over all those hot countries, they
lock them up still and will suffer no body to come at them, or their wives to
come abroad, and if they be great persons they have Eunuchs to keep them, as
the Grand Senior amongst the Turks, the Sophies of Persia, those Tartarian
Mogors, and Kings of China. Infantes masculos castrant innumeros vt regi
seruiant, says Expedit in sinas lib. 3. cap 9.
Riccius, they geld innumerable infants to this purpose, the King of China
December Eunuchorum millia numerantur regia familia qui servant vxores eius.
maintains 10000. Eunuchs in his family, to keep his wives. The Xeriffes of
Barbary keep their wives in such strict manner, that if any man come but in
sight of them he dies for it, and if they chance to see a man and do not
instantly cry out, though out at their windows, they must be put to death. The
vulgar sort of women, if at any time they come abroad, which is very seldom to
visit one another, or to go to their Baths, go so covered that no man can see
them, Semotos a viris servant in interioribus ab eorum conspectu immunes.
Velatae totae incedunt, which Alexander ab Alexandro relates of the Parthians,
lib. 5. cap. 24. which with Andreas Tiraquellus his commentator, I rather
think should be understood of Persians. I have not yet said all, they do not
only lock them up, sed and pudendis seras adhibent: Hear what Bembus
relates, lib. 6. of his Venetian history, of those inhabitants that dwell about
Quiloa in Afric. Lusitani inquit quorundam civitates adierunt, qui natis
statim foeminis naturam consuunt, quoad vrinae exitus ne impediatur, easque
quum adoleuerint sic consutas in matrimonium collocant, vt sponsi prima cura
sit conglutinatas puella oras ferro interscindere. In some parts of Greece at
this day, like those old Jews, they will not believe their wives are honest,
nisi pannum menstruatum prima nocte videant, our countriman Lib. 1. fol. 7.
Sands in his perigrination, says it is severely observed, in Zazinthus, or
Zante, and Leo Afer in his time at Fez in Afric, non, creduat virginem esse
nisi videant sanguineam mappam, si non, ad parents pudore reijcitur. Those
sheets are publicly showed by their parents, and kept as a sign of incorrupt
virginity. Those old Jews examined their maids ex tenui membrana, called
Hymen, which Laurentius in his Anatomy, and Julius Caesar Claudinus, Respons.
40. as that also de Diruptiones hymenis saepe fiunt a propriis di gitis vel ab
alijs instrumentis.
ruptura venaerum vt sanguis fluat: copiously confute, it is no sufficient
trial, he contends, and yet others again defend it, and think they speak
too much in favor of women. Idem Rhasis Arabs cont.
Lodouicus Boncialus lib. 2. cap. 2. muliebr. naturalem illam vteri labiorum
constrictionem in qua virginitatem consistere volunt, astringentibus medicinis
fieri posse vendicat, etsi defloratae sint, astutae mulieres (inquit) nos
fallunt in his. Sed haec extra callem. To what end are all those Astrologicall
questions, an sit virgo, an sit casta, an sit mulier? And those strange absurd
trialls in Baptista Porta, Mag. lib. 2. cap. 21. and Wecker lib. 5. de secret.
by Stones, Perfumes, to make them piss, and confess I know not what in their
sleep, some jealous brain was the first founder of them. And to what passion
may we ascribe those severe laws against Adulterers, Numb. 5. 14. as amongst
the Hebrews, amongst the Egyptians, Qui mulierem violasset virilia execabant,
and mill virgas dabant.
Bohemus l. 1. c. 5. de mor. genesis of the Carthaginians, cap. 6. of Turks, lib.
2. cap. 11. amongst Italians at this day, wherein they are to be severely
punished, or stoned to death. Are not those strange and several expurgations
as so many Symptoms of Incredible iealosie? As for those Vestall Virgins to
fetch water in a ^iffe, to run over hot irons, and the like. We read in
Nicephorus that Chunegunda the wife of Henricus Bavarus Emperor suspected of
adultery, insimulata adulterij per ignitos vomeres illae sa transijt, trod upon
red hot coulters and had no harm, the like we find in Regino lib. 2. In
Aventinus and Sigonius of Charles the third and his wife Richarda A^ 887. that
was so purged with hot irons. Pansanias says that he was once an eye witness
of such a miracle at Diana's Temple, a maid without any harm at all walked
upon burning coals. Pius 2. in his description of Europe cap. 46. makes
mention of the same, that it was commonly used at Diana's Temple, for women to
go barefoot over hot coals, to try their honesties; Plinius, Solinus, and
many writers make mention of Viridi gaudes Feronia luco. Virg.
Feronias Temple, and Dionysius Halicarniseus. lib. 3. of Memnons statue, which
were used to this purpose. Tatius l. 6 of Pan his Cave, wherein they did use to
try maids, whether they were honest, Ismene was so tried by Diana's well, in
which maids did swim, unchaste were drowned Eumathius lib 8.
when Leucippe went in, su^uissimus exaudiri sonus caepit. Austin. de civitat.
Dei lib. 1^. c^p. 16. relates many such examples, all which Lauater de sp^^^^
part. 1. cap. 19. contends to be done by the illusion of Diuelis. Some, says
Contra mend^c. ad confess. 21. cap.
Austin, compel their wives to swear they be honest, as if perjury were a
lesser sin then adultery, Phaerus Aegypti rex captus oculis per decennium
oraculum consuluit de vxoris pudicitia ^^rod. Euterp.
some consult oracles. If all this will not serve, says Alexander Gaguinus,
cap. 5. descript. Muscouiae, the Muscouites, if they suspect their wives, will
beat them till they confess, and if this will not avail, like those wild
Irish, be divorced at their plesures, or else knock them on the heads: Of this
tyranny of Ielosie read more in Parthenius Erot. cap. 10. Camerarius cap. 53.
hor. subcis. and cent. 2. cap. 34. Caelias Epistles, and Th. Claloner de repub.
Ang. lib. 9. Ariosto lib. 31. staff. 1. Faelix Platerus obseruat. lib. 1. etc.

MEMB. 3. Prognostics of Iealosie, Despair, Madness, to make away themselves
and others.
THose which are Jealous most part, Animi dolores and z^^^typia si (...).
if they be not otherwise relieved, proceed from suspicion to hatred, from
hatred to frenzy, madness, injury, murder, and despair. A^^^sto (...) 31.
st^ste 6.
A plague by whose most damnable effect
Diverse in deep despair to die have sought,
By which a man to madness near is brought,
As well with causeless as with just suspect.
In their madness many times, says 3 De anima. cap 3 de (...) ^^^nsit in
^abiem and od^um and sibi and alijs ^^olen^as s^^pe manus inijciunt.
Vives, they make away themselves and others. Which makes Cyprian to call it
Foecundam and multiplicem perniciem, fontem cladium and seminarium delictorum,
a fruitful mischief, the seminary of offenses, and fountain of murders.
Tragical examples are too common in this kind, Both new and old in all ages.
Cephalus and Procris, Phaerus Aegypt^ rex de caecitate oraculum co^sulens,
v^sum ^i redd turum a^^en^. si oculos abluisset (...) mul e^is, quae aliorum
vnorum esset expers, vxoris vrinam expertus nihil profecit and atiarum frustra
eas omnes^ea ex^^^ta per quam curatus fuit) vnum in locum coactas concremauit.
Herod. Euterp.
Phaerus of Egypt, Tereus, A^reus, and Thiestes. Offic. lib. 2.
Alexander Phaereus murdere^ of his wife, ob peliicatus suspitionem, Tully
says. Antoninus Verus so made away by Lucilla, Demetrius the son of
Antigonus, Nicanor by their wives. Hercules poisoned by Deianera. Aurelius
victor.
Cecinna murdered by Vespatian. Iustina a Roman Lady by her husband. Herodot.
lib. 9. in Calliope. Masistae vxorem excarnificat, m^millas praescindit, easque
canibus adijcit. filiae nares praecidit lib a, ^i^gu^m etc.
Amestris, Xerxes wife, because she found her husbands cloak in Masista his
house, cut of Masista his wives paps, and gave them to the dogs, and flead
her besides, and cut of her ears, lips, tongue, and slit the nose of
Artaynta her daughter. Our late stories are full of such outrages. Lib 1. Dum
^o^mae curande intenta, capillum in sole pect^t, a marito per lusum leuiter
percussa furtim superue^^ente virg^.-R^ su suborto mi Landrice dixit fron em
vir fortis pete, etc. Marito conspecto attonita, cum Landri^o mox in eius
mortem conspirat and statim inter venandum effi^it.
Paulus Aemilius in his hist. of France, has a tragical story of Chilpericus
the first his death, made away by Ferdegunde his wife. In a jealous humor he
came from hunting and stole behind his wife as she was a dressing, and combing
her head in the sun, and gave her a familiar touch with his wand, which she
mistaking for her lover said. Ah Landre a good knight should strike before and
not behind; but when she saw her self bewrayed by his presence, she instantly
took order to make him away. Hierome Osorius in the eleauenth book of the
Deeds of Emanuel King of Portugal, to this effect has a tragical narration,
of one Ferdinandus Chalderia that wounded Gotherinus a noble country man of
his, at Goa in the East Indies, Qui Goae vxorem habens, Goterinu^ principem
quendam virum quod vxori suae oculos adiecisset, ingenti vulnere deformauit in
facie, and tibiam abscidit, vnde mutuae caedes.
and cut off one of his legs, for that he looked as he thought too
familiarly upon his wife, which was afterward a cause of many quarrels, and
much blood shed, Guianerius cap. 36. de agritud. matr. speaks of a silly
jealous fellow, that seeing his child newborn included in a kell, thought
sure a Eo quod infans natus inuolutus esset panniculo credebat eum filium
fratris Francisci, etc.
Franciscan that used to come to his house, was the father of it, it was so
like a Friars Cowle, and thereupon threatened the Friar to kill him. Fulgosus of
a woman in Narbone that cut off her husbands priuities in the night, because
she thought he played false with her. The story of Knowles.
Ionuses Bassa and fair Manto his wife, is well known to such as have read the
Turkish history, and that of Ioane of Spain of which I treated of in my former
section. Her iealosie, says Gomesius, was cause of both their deaths; King
Philip died for grief a little after, as Zelotypia reginae regis mortem
accele^^uit paulo post vt Martianus medicus mihi, retulit. Illa autem atra bile
inde exagitata in letebras se subducens prae agritudine animi reliquum tempus
consumpsit.
Martian his Physician gave it out, and she for her part, after a melancholy
discontented life, misspent in lurking in holes and corners made an end of her
miseries, Foelix Plater in the first book of his observations, has many such
instances, of a Physician of his acquaintance, a Zelotypia redactus ad insaniam
and desperationem.
that was first mad through Ieal^sie, and afterward desperate: Vxorem
inter^mit inde desperabundus ex alto se pracipitauit.
of a Merchant that killed his wife in the same humor, and after precipitated
himself: of a Dr. of law that cut off his man's nose; of a Painters wife in
Basil Ao 1600. that had nine children, and had been 27 years married, and
afterward jealous, and so impatient that she became desperate, and would
neither eat nor drink in her own house, for fear her husband should poison
her. Skenkius obseruat. lib. 4. cap. de Vter. has an example of a jealous
woman that by this means had many fits of the Mother: and in his first book
of some that through Iealosie ran mad: of a Baker that gelded himself to
try his wives honesty, etc. Such examples are too common.

MEMB. 4.
SVBSECT. 1. Cure of Iealosie: by avoiding occasions, not to be idle: by good
counsel: to contemn it, not to watch or lock them up: to dissemble it, etc.
AS of all other melancholy, some doubt whether this malady may be cured or no;
they think it is like the T^llere n^d si nes^^t (...) podag^am.
Gout, or Suitzers, whom we commonly call Wallownes, those hired soldiers, if
once they take possession of a Castle, they can never be got out. Qui timet vt
sua sit, ne quis sibi subtrahat illam,
Ille Machaonia vix open salvus erit.
Ariosto lib. 3^ staff. 5.
This is that cruel wound against whose smart,
No liquors force prevails or any plaster,
No skill of stars, no depth of Magic art,
Devised by that great clerk Zoroaster,
A wound that so infects the soul and heart,
As all our sense and reason it does master,
A wound whose pange and torment is so durable,
As it may rightly called be incurable.
Yet what I have formerly said of other Melancholy, I may say again, it may
be cured or mittigated at least by some contrary passion, good counsel and
persuasion, if it be with stood in the beginning, maturely resisted, and as
those ancient holds, Veteres mature suadent vngues amoris esse radendos
priusquam producant se nimis.
the nails of it be pared before they grow too long. No better means to
resist or expel it then by avoiding idleness, to be still seriously busied
about some matters of importance, to drive out those vain, fair, foolish
fantasies, and irksome suspicions out of his head, and then to be persuaded by
his judicious friends, to give ear to their good counsel and advice, and
wisely to consider with himself, how much he discredits himself, his friends,
grieves himself and others, what an argument of weakness it is, how absurd a
thing in it self, how ridiculous, how brutish a passion, how sottish, how
odious, how harebraine, mad and furious: If he will but hear them speak no
doubt he may be cured. Gomesius lib. 3. de rebus gestis Ximeuii.
Ioane Queen of Spain, of whom I have formerly spoken, under pretense of
change of air, was sent to Complutum, or Alcada de las Heneras, where Ximenius
the Archbishop of Toledo then lived that by his good counsel (as for the
present she was) she might be eased. Vrit enim praecordia aegritudo animi
compressa, and in angustias adducta mentem subvertit, nec alio medicamine
facilius erigitur, qua^ cordati hominis sermon.
For a disease of the soul if concealed tortures and ouerturnes it, and by no
physic can sooner be removed then by a discreet man's comfortable speeches.
I will not here insert any consolotary sentences to this purpose, or forestall
any man's invention, but leave it every man to dilate and amplify as he shall
think fit himself: let him advise with Siracides cap. 9.1. and read that
comfortable and pithy speech to this purpose of Ximenius in the author
himself, as it is recorded by Gomesius, or with Chaloner lib. 9. de repub.
Anglor: or Caelia in her Epistles etc. Only this I will add, that if it be
considered aright, this which causes this jealous passion, be it just or
unjust, whether without cause true or false, it ought not so haynously to be
taken; it is no such real or capital matter, that it should make so deep a
wound. It Is a blow that hurts not, an insensible smart, grownded many times
upon false suspicion alone, and so fostered by a sinister conceit. If she be
not dishonest he troubles and macerates himself without a cause, or put case
which is the worst, he be a Cuckold, it cannot be helped, the more he stirs
in it, the more he aggrauates his own miseries. How much better in such a
case to dissemble or contemn it, why should that be feared which cannot be
redressed, multae tandem deposuerunt (says 3. De anima.
Viues) quum flecti maritos non posse vident. Many women when they see there is
no remedy, have been pacified, and shall men be more jealous then women? It Is
some comfort in such a case to have companions, Solamen miseris socios habuisse
doloris. Who can say he is free? Who can assure himself he is not one de
praeterito, or secure himself de futuro? If it were his case alone it were
hard, but being as it is a common calamity, it is not so grievously to be taken.
In some countries they make nothing of it, ne nobilis quidem, says Lib. 3.
Leo Afer, in some parts of Afric, if she be past 14, there is not a Noble man
that marries a maid, or that has a chaste wife, it is so common. And as that
Caledonian Lady Argetocoxi Caledonii reguli vxor Iuliae Augustae cum i^sam
morderet quod inhoneste versaretur respondet nos cum optimis viris
consuetudinem habemus vos Romanas autem occulie passim homines constup^ant.
Argetocoxus, a British Prince his wife, told Iulia Augusta, when she took
her up for dishonesty, We Brittans are naught at least with some few choice
men of the better sort, but you Romans ly with every base knave, you are a
company of common whores. Severus the Emperor in his time made laws for the
restraint of this vice, and as Leges de maech^^ f^^it ex ciuibus plures i^ ius
vocati.
Dion Niceus relates in his life, tria millia maechorum, three thousand Cuckold
makers were summoned into the Court at once. And yet, Non omnem molitor quae
fluit vnda videt, the Miller sees not all the water that goes by his mill, no
doubt but as in our times, these were of the commonalty all, the great ones
were not so much as called in question. And Lib. 3. Epig 26
Martials Epigram might have been generally applied in those licentious times,
Omnia solus habes, etc. thy goods, lands, money, wits are thine own. vxorem sed
habes Candide cum populo, but neighbor Candidus your wife is common. Husband
and Cuckold in that age it seems were reciprocal terms, the Emperors
themselves did not escape how many Caesar's might I reckon up together, and what
a Catalogue of cornuted kings and Princes in every story. Agamemnon, Menelaus,
Philippus of Greece, Ptolomeus of Egypt, etc. the brauest Soldiers and most
heroical spirits could not avoid it. They have been active and passive inthis
business. Asser. Arthuri. parcerem libenter heroinarum laesae maiestati, si
non historiae veritas aurem vellicaret. Leland.
King Arthur whom we call one of the nine Worthies, for all his great valor
was unworthily served by Mordred one of his Round-table Knights, and Guithera,
or Helena Alba his fair wife, as Lelande interprets it, was an arrant honest
woman. I speak not of our times all this while, we have good honest,
virtuous, men and women. whom fame, zeal, fear of God, religion and
superstition contains, and yet for all that we have too many Knights of this
order, so dubbed by their wives, many good women abused by dissolute husbands.
In some places and some persons you may as soon enjoin them to carry water in
a Ciffe, as to keep themselves honest. What shall a man do now in such a
case? What remedy is to be had, how shall he be eased? By suing a divorce, that
is hard to be effected, si non cast tamen caute, they carry the matter so
cunningly, that though it be as common as Simony, and as clear, as manifest as
the nose on a man's face, yet it cannot be evidently proved. Much better put it
up, the more he stirs in it, the more he shall diuulge and publish his own
shame; make a virtue of necessity, and conceal it, there is no remedy but
patience. It may be it is his own default, and he has no reason to complain,
it is qu^d pro quo, she is bad, he is worse, Cogita an sic aliis tu vnquam
feceris an hoc tibi nunc sieri dignum sit; seuerus aliis indulgens tibi cur ab
vxore exigis quod non ips^ praestas. Pl^tarch.
Bethink thy self, have thou not done as much for some of thy neighbors, why
do thou requite that of thy wife, which thou will not perform thy self.
Thou rangest like a town Bull thy self, why art thou so incensed if she tread
awry. Ariosto lib. 28, staff. 80.
Be it that some women break chaste wedlock^ laws,
And leaves her husband and becomes unchaste,
Yet commonly it is not without cause,
She sees her man in sin her goods to wast, Vaga libidine cum ipse quouis
rapiaris cur si vel modicum ab erret ipsa insanis

She feels that he his love from her withdrawes,
And has on some perhaps less worthy placed,
Who strikes with sword, the scabbard them may strike,
And sure love craves love, like asks like.
Ea semper studebit, says Syluae nupt. l.4 number. 72.
Neuisanus, pares reddere vices, she will quit it if she can. I do not excuse
her in accusing thee, but if both be naught, mend thy self first.

Yea but thou reply, it is not the like reason betwixt man and woman, through
her fault my children are bastards, I may not endure it. Lemnius lib. 4 cap.
13. de ocult. not. mir.
Sit amarulenta, sit imperiosa, prodiga etc. Let her scold and brawle and
spend, I care not, modo sit casta, so she be honest, I could easily bear it,
but this I cannot. And why not this? Even this which thou so much abhorrest, it
may be for thy progenies good, Optimum been nasci.
better be any man's sons then thine, thou thy self have peradventure more
diseases the^ an horse, make the worst of it, as it is vulnus insanabile, sic
vulnus insensibile, as it is incurable, so is it insensible. But art thou sure
it is so? It may be thou art over suspicious, and without a cause, as some
are, if it be octimestris partus, borne at eight months, or like such and such
a man, they fondly suspect he got it; if she speak or laugh familiarly with
such or such men, the^ presently she is naught with them, such is their
weakness. Whereas charity, or a well disposed mind would interpret all unto
the best. S. Francis by chance seeing a Friar familiarly kissing another man's
wife, was so far from misconceauing it, that he presently kneeled down and
thanked God there was so much charity left: but they on the other side will
ascribe nothing to natural causes, indulge nothing to familiarity, mutual
society, friendship, but out of a sinister suspicion, presently lock them
close, watch them thinking by that means to prevent all such inconvenience,
that is the way to help it, whereas by that means they do aggravate the
mischief. It Is but in vain to watch that which will away. Ovid. amor lib. 3.
eleg. 4.
Nec custodiri si velit vlla potest,
Nec mentem seruare potes, licet omnia serves,
Omnibus exclusis intus adulter erit.
None can be kept resisting for her part,
Though body be kept close within her heart.
Aduoutry lurkes, to exclude it there is no art.
Argus with an hundredth eyes cannot keep her, and hun^ vnus sape fefellit
amor, as they in Lib. 4. st. 72.
Ariosto. If all our hearts were eyes, yet sure they said
We husbands of our wives should be betrayed.
Hierome says, vxor impudica seruari non potest, pudica non debet, infida
custos castitatis est necessitas, to what end is all your custody. A dishonest
woman cannot be kept, an honest ought not to be kept, necessity is a keeper
not to be trusted. Difficile custoditur, quod plures amant. That which many
covet can hardly be preserved, As Policrat. lib. 8. cap. 11. De amor Eurial.
and Lucret. qui vxores ^ccludunt meo Iudisio minus vtiliter faciunt, sunt enim
eo in genio mulieres vt id potissimum cupiant, quod maxim denegatur siliberas
habent habenas, minus delinquu^t frustra seram adhibes, si non sit spont e
c^sla.
Salisburiensis thinks. I am of Aeneas Syluius mind, that those Jealous
Italians do very ill to lock up their wives, for women are of that
disposition, they will most covet that which is denied most, and offend least
when they have free liberty to trespass. It is in vain to lock her up if she
be dishonest; For when she perceaues her husband observes her and suspects,
liberius peccat, says Quando cognoscunt maritos hoc aduertere.
Neuisanus, Ausonius.
Toxica zelotypo dedit vxor maecha marito, she is exasperated, and seeks by
all means to vendicate her self, and will therefore offend, because she is
iniustly suspected. The best course then is to let them have their own wills,
give them free liberty, without any keeping. If she be honest as Penelope,
Lucretia, she will so continue her honor, good name, credit, the vow she
made unto her husband: love, virtue, religion, zeal, are better keepers then
all those locks, Eunuchs, prisons, she will not be moved. Virg. Aen.
At mihi vel tellus optem prius ima dehiscat,
Aut pater omnipotens adigat me fulmine ad vmbras,
Pallentes vmbras Erebi, noctemque profundam,
Ante pudor, quam te violem, aut tua iura resoluam.
First I desire the earth to swallow me,
Before I violate mine honesty,
Or thunder from above drive me to hell,
With those pale Ghosts, and ugly night to dwell.
She is resolved with Dido to be chaste: Turn her loose to all those Tarquins,
and Saty^es she will not be tempted. O quam formosus lacertus hic quidam inquit
ad aequales conuersus, at illa publicus inquit non est.
When one commended (...) (...) arm to his fellows, she took him up short,
Sir, said she, it is not common, she is wholly reserved for her husband. Bilia
Dinutum virum senem habuit and spiritum faetidum habentem, quem quum quidam
exprobr^sset etc
Bilia had an old man to her good man and his breath stu^ke, so that nobody
could abide it abroad, coming home one day he reprehended his wife, because
she did not tell him of it, she vowed unto him she had told him, but that she
thought every man's breath had been as strong as his. Number quid tibi Armena
Tigranes videbatur esse pulcher? and illum inquit aedipol, etc. Xenoph.
Cy^oped. l.b. 3.
Tigranes and Armena his wife, were invited to supper by king Cyrus, when they
came home, Tigranes asked his wife how she liked Cyrus, and what she did
especially commend in him; she swore she did not observe him; when he replied
again, what then she did observe, whom she looked on? she made answer, her
husband, that said he would die for her sake. Such are the properties and
conditions of good women, and if she be well given, she will so carry her
self; if otherwise she be naught, use all the means thou can, she will be
naught. She has so many lies, excuses, tricks, Panders, Bawds, shifts to
deceive, it is to no purpose to keep her up, or to reclaim her by hard usage.
Fair means peradventure may do somewhat, Ovid.
Obsequio vinces aptius ipse tuo. Men and women are both in a predicament, and
in this behalf sooner won, better pacified. Many patient Read Petrarchs tale
of patient Grizel in Chaucer.
Grysils by their obsequiousness in this kind, have reclaimed their husbands
from their wandering lusts. In Noua Francia, and Turkey (as Leah, Rahel, Sarah
did) they bring their fairest maids to their husbands beds; Liuia seconded
the lust full appetites of Augustus, Strateuica wife to king Deiotarus did not
only bring a fair maid to her husbands bed, but brought up the children begot
on her, as carefully as they had been her own. The best remedy is by fair
means; if that will not take place to dissemble it as I say, or turn it off
with a jest: Minus malum, Sil. nupt. lib. 4. number. 80.
Neuisanus holds, dissimulare, to be Erasmus.
Cunarum emptor, a buyer of Cradles as the proverb is. Quum accepisset vxorem
peperisse secundo a nuptiis me^se, cunas quinas velsenas coemit ne si forte
vxor singulis bimestribus pareret.
A good fellow when his wife was brought to bed before her time, bought half a
dozen Cradles before hand for so many children, as if his wife should continue
to bear children at every two months. Julius Capitol. vita eius quum palam
Citharaedus vxorem deligeret minime curiosus fuit.
Pertinax the Emperor when one brought him word a Fiddler was too familiar with
his wife, made no reckoning of it, sapientes portant cornua in pectore, stulti
in front, says Neuisanus, wise men bear their horns in their hearts, fools
on their foreheads. Iocundo in Ariosto found his wife in bed with a knave, both
asleep, went his ways and would not so much as wake them, much less reprove
them for it. Sr John Harrington notes in 28 book of Arioste.
An honest fellow finding in like sort his wife had played false at tables, and
born a man too many, drew his dagger, and swore if he had not been his very
friend he would have killed him. Another hearing one had done that for him,
which no man desires to be done by a deputy, followed in a rage with his sword
drawn, and having overtaken him, laid adultery to his chardge, the offender
hotly persued, confessed it was true, with whose honest confession he was
satisfied, and so left him, swearing that if he had denied, he would not have
put it up. How much better is it to do thus, then to macerate himself,
impatiently to rave and rage: how much better to contemn in such cases, or to
take no notice of it, Melius sic errare quam zelotypia curis, says Erasmus, se
conficere, better be a witall and put it up, then to trouble himself to no
purpose. And though he do not omnibus dormire, yet to wink at it as many do,
if it be for his commodity, or some great man his Landlord, Patron,
benefactor, or so to let it pass. Howsoever the best way is to contemn it,
which T. Dannel ^^^i^^at. French
Henry the second King of France, advised a Courtier of his, jealous of his
wife, and complaining of her unchasteness, to reject it and comfort himself,
for he that suspects his wives incontinency, and fears the Popes curse, shall
never live merry hour, or sleep quiet night: no remedy but patience, when all
is done according to that counsel of Lib. 4. number. 80.
Neuisanus, si vitium vxoris corrigi non potest, ferendum est. If it may not be
helped, it must be endured. There is no other cure, but time to wear it out;
age will bereave her of it, and dies dolorem minuit, time and patience must end
it, R. T.
The minds affections patience will appease,
It passions kills, and heals each disease.


SVBSEC. 2. By prevention before or after marriage, Platoes community, marry a
Curtesan, Philters, Stews, to marry one equal in years, fortunes, of a good
family, education, good place, to use them well, etc.
OF such remedies as conduce to the cure of this malady, I have sufficiently
treated, there be some good remedies remaining, by way of prevention,
precautions or admonitions, which if right practiced may do much good. Plato
in his commonwealth, to prevent this mischief belike would have all things
common, wives and children, all common, and which Caesar in his Commentaries
observed of old Britains that first inhabited this land, they had ten or
twelve wives allotted to such a family, or promiscuously to be used by so many
men; not one to one as with us, or four five or six to one, as in Turkey. The
Nicholites sect that sprung says Austin from Nicholas the Deacon, would have
women indifferent, and the cause of this filthy sect, was Lib. de here is. quum
de zelo culparetur purgandi se causa permisisse fertur, vt ea qui vellet
vteretur quod eius fac^^m insectam turpissemam versum est, qua placet vsus
indifferens faeminarum. Sleidan.
Nicholas the Deacons jealousy, for which when he was condemned of this fault
to purge himself, he broched this heresy, that it was lawful to lie with one
another wives, and for any man to lie with his; like to those Anabaptists in
Munster, that would consort with other men's wives, as the spirit moved them, or
as Alcoran.
Mohomet that seducing prophet, would needs use women as he lift himself, to
beget Prophets. Amongst the old Carthaginians, as De mor. gent. lib. 1. cap. 6.
nupturae regi deuirginandae exhibentur.
Bohemus relates out of Sabellicus, the king of the country lay with the bride
the first night, some fasten this on those ancient Bohemians and Russians:
Leander Albertus, flagitioso ritu cuncti in aedem conuenientes post imparem
concionem extinctis luminibus in vener^^ ruvnt.
others of those inhabitants of Mambriu^ in the Lucerne valley in Pedemont, and
as I read it was practiced in Scotland amongst Christians themselves, until
king Malcomes time, the king or the lord of the town had their maidenheads. In
some parts of Lod. vertomannus Nauig. li. 6. cap. 8.
India in our times and those Dithmarus Bleskenius. vt Agetas Aristoni.
pulcherimam vxorem habens amico prostituit.
Islanders Herodot. in Erato, mulieres Babylonicae cum hospite permiscentur
obargentum quod post veneri sacrum Bohemus lib. 2. cap. 2.
as the Babylonians of old will prostitute their wives and daughters, to such
travelers or seafaring men as come amongst them by chance, to show how far
they were from this ferall vice of jealousy, and how little they esteemed it:
but those Essai and Montanists two strange sects of old in another extreme,
they would not marry at all, or have any society with women, because of their
intemperance they held them to be all naught. Neuisanus the Lawyer, lib. 4.
number. 33. sil. nupt: would have him that is inclined to this malady, to prevent
the worst marry a Qu^^ne. Capiens meretricem hoc habet saltem boni, quod non
decipitur, quia scit eam sic esse, quod non contingit alijs: Stephanus praesat
Herod. alius e lupanari meretricem Pitho dictam in vxorem duxit. Ptolomeus
Thaidem nobile scortum duxit and ex ea duos filios suscepit etc.
Hierome king of Syracuse in Sicily married himself to Pitho keeper of a
stews, and Ptolomie took Thais a common whore to be his wife, and had two
sons, Leontiscus and Lagus by her, and one daughter Iraene: Bohemus lib. 2
cap. 3. ideo nubere nollent ob mulierum in temperantiam nullam seruare viro
fidem putabant.
it is therefore no such unlikely thing. Podgius Florent.
A citizen of Eugubine gelded himself, to try his wives honesty, and to free
himself from jealousy, and so did a baker in Faelix Plater.
Basil, but of all other presidents in this kind that of Lucian Salmutz Tit. 2.
de porcellanis com. in Paneirol de noua repert. and Stephanus e lib. consor.
Combalus is most memorable: who to prevent his masters suspicion, for he was a
beautiful young man, and sent by Seleucus his lord and king, which Stratonice
his Queen to conduct her into Syria; Fearing the worst, gelded himself before
he went, and left his genitalls behind him in a box sealed up. His mistress
by the way fell in love with him, but he not yeeding to her was accused to
Seleucus of incontinency, and that by her; and at his coming home cast into
prison the day of hearing appointed, he was sufficiently cleared and acquitted
by showing his priuities, which to the admiration of the beholders, he had
formerly cut off. The Lydians used to geld women whom they suspected, says
Leonicus var. hist. lib. 3. cap. 59. as well as men. To this purpose, Lucian
Salmutz Tit. 2. de porcellanis com. in Paneirol de noua repert. ^ Stephanus e
lib. consor.
Saint Francis, because he used to confess women in private, to prevent
suspicion, and prove himself a maid, stripped himself naked before the
Bishop of Assise and others: and Friar Leonarde for the same cause, went
through Viterbium in Italy stark belly naked. Our Pseudocatholickes, to help
these inconveniences which proceed from jealousy, and keep themselves and
their wives honest, make severe laws against adultery, present death, and
withal fornication a venial sin, as a sincke to convey that furious and
swift stream of concupiscence, they appoint and permit stews, the more to
secure their wives in all populous cities, for they hold them as necessary as
Churches, and howsoever unlawful, yet to avoid a greater mischief to be
tolerated in policy, as usury for the hardness of men's hearts, and for this
end they have whole Colleges of Curtesans in all their towns and cities.
For they hold it impossible for idle persons, young, rich and lusty, so many
servants, Monks, Friars, to live honest, too tyrannical a burden to compel
them to be chaste, and most unfit to suffer poor men younger brothers,
soldiers, all to marry; as those diseased persons, votaries, priests,
servants. Therefore as well to help and ease the one as the other, they
tolerate and wink at these kind of brothel-houses and stews. Many probable
arguments they have to prove the lawfulness, the necessity, and a
tolleration of them, as of usury, and without question in policy they are not
to be contradicted; but altogether in religion. Others prescribe philters,
spells, charms, to keep men and women honest. Wecker lib. 5. secret.
Mulier vt alienum virum non admittat praeter suum: Accipe fell hirci and adipem
and exicca, calescat in oleo, etc and non alium praeter to amabit. In Alexi,
Porta, etc. plura his invenies, and multo his absurdiora, vt in Rhasi ne mulier
virum admittat, and maritum solum diligat, etc. But these are most part Pagan,
impious, irreligious, absurd, and ridiculous devices. The best means to avoid
these and like inconveniences, are to take a away the causes and occasions, as
first to make a good choice in marriage; an old man not to marry a young
woman, or an young woman an old man, such matches must needs minister a
perpetual cause of suspicion, and be distastefull to each other. Alciat emb.
116.
Noctua vt in tumulis super atque cadauera bubo,
Talis apud Sophoclem nostra puella sedet.
Night-crowes on tombs, Owls sits on carcass dead,
So lies a wench with Sophocles in bed.
For Sophocles as Dipnosophh. l. 13. cap. 12.
Athenaeus describes him, was a very old man, and doted upon Archippe a young
Curtesan, then which nothing can be more odious. Plutarch in his book contra
Coleten railes down right at such kind of marriages, which are attempted by
such old men, and makes a question whether in some cases it be tolerable at
least for an old man to marry, that is now past those venerious exercises.
Whether he may delight himself as those Priapeian Popes, which in their
decrepit age lie commonly between two young wenches every night, contactu
formosarum and contrectatione number adhuc gaudeat, and as many doting Syres still
do to their own shame, their childrens undoing, and their families confusion:
he abhorres it tanquam ab agresti and furioso domino fugiendum it must be
avoided as a mad bedlame master, and not to be obeyed. Cap. 54 institut ad
optimam vitam, maxima mortalium pars praecipitanter and inconsiderate nubit
idque ea aetate quae minus apta est quum senex adolescentulae, sanus morbidae,
dives pauperi, etc.
Leuinus Lemnius reckons up three things which generally disturb the peace of
marriage, the first is when they marry intempestiue or unseasonably, as many
mortal men marry precipitately and inconsiderately when they are effeate and
old; The second when they marry unequally for fortunes and birth, the third
when a sick impotent person marries one that is sound, noua nuptae spes
frustratur. Many dislikes instantly follow: many doting dizards it may not be
denied, as Plutarch confesses, Absoleto intempestiue turpi remedio fatentur se
vti cum recordatione pristinarum voluptatum se receant, and aduer^a^te natura
pollinctam carnem and enectam excitant.
recreate themselves with such absolete, unreasonable and filthy remedies (so
he calls the^) with a remembrance of their former pleasures, against nature they
stir up their dead flesh: but an old leacher is abominable; mulier tertio
nubens, Lib. 2 nu 35.
Neuisanus holds, praesumitur lubrica and inconstans, a woman that marries a
third time, may be presumed to be no honester then she should. Of them both
thus Ambrose concludes in his Comment upon Luke. Qui vero non procreanda proli-
sed exp. endae libidinis causa sibi inuicem copulantur, non tam coninges quam
fornicarii habentur
they that are coupled together not to get children, but to satisfy them lust,
are not husbands but fornicators, with whom St. Austin consents: matrimony
without hope of children, non matrimonium sed concubium dici debet, is not a
wedding but a iumbling or coupling together. In a word it is most odious, when
an old Acheronticke dizard, that has one foot in his grave, shall flicker
after a young wench, what can be more detestable. Plautus mercator.
Tucano capite amas senex nequissime,
I am plenus aetatis animaque faetida,
Senex hircosus tu osculare mulierem,
Vtine adiens vomitum potius excuties.
Thou old goat, hoary leatcher, naughty man
with stinking breath, art thou in love?
Must thou be slauering, she spewes to see
Thy filthy face it does so move.
And thou old Vetustina bedridden queen that art now skin and bones. Martial
lib. 3. 62. epigr.
Cui tres capelli quatuorque sunt dentes,
Pectus cicadae, crustulamque formicae,
Rugosiorem quae geras stola frontem,
Et aranearum cassibus pares mammas.
That have three hairs, four teeth, a breast
Like grasshopper, an Emmots crest,
A skin more rugged then thy cote,
And dugges like spiders webbes to boot.
Must thou marry an youth again? And yet ducentas ire nuptum post mortes
amant: Lib. 1. miles.
howsoever it is as Apuleius gives out of his Meroe, congressus annosus,
pestilens, abhorrendus, a pestilent match, abominable and not to be endured. In
such c^se how can they otherwise choose but be jealous, how should they agree
one with another?

Another maine caution fit to be observed is this, that though they be equal
in years, birth, fortunes, yet they do not omit virtue and good education,
not prefer beauty before bringing up, and good conditions, Rablais hist.
Pontaraguel. lib. 3. cap. 33.
Coquage God of Cuckolds, as one merrily said, accompanies the goddess
jealousy, and both follow the fairest by Jupiters appointment, and they
sacrifie to both together: beauty and honesty seldom agree. Suspitionis
plena res est and insidiarum, beauty says Hom. 80. qui pulchram habet uxorem
nihil peius habere potest.
Chrysostom, is full of treachery and suspicion, he that has a fair wife,
cannot have a worse mischief, and yet most covet it, as if nothing else in
marriage, but that and wealth were to be respected. Arneseus.
Francis Sforsia Duke of Millan was so curious in this behalf that he would
not marry the Duke of Mantuas daughter, except he might see her naked first;
Which Licurgus appointed in his laws, and Morus in his Vtopian Commonwealth
approues. Itinerar. Ital. Coloniae edit. 1602. Nomine trium Ger. fol. 304
displicuit quod dominae filiabus immulent nomen inditum in Baptismo and pro
Catherina, margareta etc. ne quid desit ad luxuriam appellent ipsas nominibus
Cynthiae, Camenae: etc.
In Italy as a trauellour observes, if a man have three or four daughters or
more, and they prove fair, they are married eftsoons, if deformed, they
change their lovely names of Cynthia, Camana, and call thm Dorothy, Vrsely,
Bridgit, and so put them into Monasteries, as if none were fit for marriage but
such as are eminently fair: but these are erroneous Tenants, a modest virgin
well conditioned, to such a fair snout piece is much to be preferred. If thou will avoid them and take away all causes of suspicion and jealousy, marry a
course piece, fetch her from Cassandras Temple, which was wont^in Italy to be a
Sanctuary for all deformed maids, and so thou shall be sure that no man will
make thee cuckold, but for spite. A citizen of Bizance in Thrace, Leonicus de
var. lib. 3. ca 43. Asylus virginum deformium Cassandrae templum. Plutarch.
had a filthy dowdy, deformed slut to his wife, and finding her in bed with
another man, cried out as one amazed, o miser quae te necessitas huc adegit, O
thou wretch what necessity brought thee hither: as well he might, for who can
affect such a one? but this is warily to be vnstood, most offend in another
extreme, they prefer wealth before beauty, and so she be rich they care not
how she looks, but these are all out as faulty as the rest. Attendenda
semper vxoris forma, as Pelicrat. lib. 8. cap. 11.
Salisburiensis advises, nesi alteram aspexeris mox eam sordere putes, as the
Knight in Chaucer that was married to an old woman. And all day after hid him
as an Owl,
So woe was him his wife looked so foul.
Have a care of thy wives complexion, least while thou see another, thou
lothest her, and she prove jealous. Molestum est possidere quod nemo habere
dignetur, a misery to possess that which no man likes, Difficile custoditur
quod plures amant. Both extremes are naught Pulchra cito adamatur, faeda
facile concupiscit, the one is soon beloved, the other loves, one is hardly
kept, the other not worth keeping, what is to be done in this case? I resolve
with Salisburiensis cateris parikus both rich alike, endowed alike, maiore
miseria deformis habetur quam formosa seruatur, I had rather marry a fair one
and put it to the hazard, then be troubled with a blouze, but do thou as thou will, I speak only for my self.

Howsoever, I would advise thee thus much, be she fair or foul, to choose a
wife out of a good kindred, parentage, well brought up, in a good place. He
that marries a wife out of a suspected Inn or Alehouse, buies a horse in
Smithfield, and hires a servant in Paul's, shall likely have a Jade to his
horse, a knave for his man, an arrant honest woman to his wife. Filia
praesumitur esse matri similis, says Lib. 2. number. 159.
Neuisanus: Such Si genetrix cast, cast quoque filia viuet, si meretrix
matter, filia talis erit.
a mother such a daugher, mali corui malum ouvm, Kat to the kind, If the mother
be dishonest, in all likelihood the daughter will matrizare, take after her in
all good qualities. My last caution is that a woman do not bestow her self
upon a fool, or an apparent melancholy person, jealousy is a symptom of that
disease, and fools have no moderation. Iustina a Roman Lady was much
persecuted, and after made away by her jealous husband, she caused and enjoined
this Epitaph as a caveat to others, to be engraven on her tomb. Camerarius
cent. 2. cap. 54. oper sibcis.
Discite ab exemplo Iustinae discite patres,
Ne nubat fatuo filia vestra viro, etc.
Learn parents all and by Iustinas case,
Your children to no dizards for to place.
After marriage I can give no better admonitions then to use their wives well,
to maintain them to their means, and let them have liberty with discretion,
as time and place requires: many women turn queanes by compulsion, as Lib. 4.
syl. nupt number. 81. non curant de vxoribus nec volunt iis subvenire de victu,
vestitu.
Neuisanus observes, because their husbands are so hard, and keep them so
short in diet and apparel, paupertas cogit eas meretricari: poverty and
hunger, want of means, makes them dishonest, or bad usage; their churlish
behavior makes them fly out, or bad example, they do it to cry quittance.
In the other extreme some are too liberal, as the Proverb is, Turdus malum
sibi cacat, they make a rod for their own tails, whilst they give their wives
too much liberty to gad abroad and bountiful allowance, they are accessory to
their own miseries, their wives as Orat. contra ebr.
Basil notes, Impudenter se exponunt masculorum aspectibus, iactantes tunicas,
and coram tripudiantes, impudently thrust themselves into other men's companies,
and by their indecent wanton carriage, provoke and tempt their spectators.
Virtuous women should keep house, Horol. principum lib. 2. ca. 8. diligenter
cauendum faeminis illustribus ne frequenter exeant.
and as Mr. Aurelius prescribes it as a necessary caution to be observed of all
good women, that love their credits, to come little abroad. It Is good to keep
them private, not in prison. Read more of this subject, Horol. princ. lib. 2.
per totum. Arnifeus polit, Cyprian, Tertullian, Bossus de mulier apparat.
Godefriaus de Amor. lib. 2. cap. 4. Leuinus Lemnius, cap. 54. de institut
Christ. Barbarus de re vxor. lib. 2. cap. 2. etc.

These cautious concern him; and if by these, or his own discretion,
otherwise he cannot moderate himself, his friends must not be wanting by their
wisdom, if it be possible to give the party grieved satisfaction, to prevent
and rem^oue the occasions, objects, if it may be to secure him. If it be one
alone, or many to consider whom he suspects, or at what times, what places he
is most incenced, in what companies. Lib 5. number. 11
Neuisanus makes a question whither a young Physician ought to be admitted in
case of sickness into a new married man's house. The Persians of old would not
admit a young Physician to come amongst women. Ctesias in Percisis, finxit
vuluae morbum esse nec curari posse, nisi cum viro concumberet hac art voti
compos, etc.
Apollonides Chous made Artaxerxes cuckold, and was after buried alive for it.
If such objects were removed, no doubt but the parties might easily be
satisfied, or that they could use them gently and entreat them well, not to
revile them, scoff at them, hate them, as in such cases commonly they do,
it is an humane infirmity, a miserable vexation, and they should not add
grief to grief, nor aggrauate their misery, but seek to please them, and by
all means give them content, by good counsel, removing such offensive
objects, or by mediation of some discreet friends. In old Rome there was a
temple erected by the matrons to that Rosinus lib. 2. 19. Valerius lib. 2. cap.
1.
Viriplaca Dea, whither if any difference happened betwixt man and wife, they did
instantly resort, there they did offer sacrifice, and make their prayers for
conjugal peace, and before some Alexand^r ab Alex^ad (...) ca. 8 (...)
common arbitrators and friends, the matter was heard betwixt man and wife, and
commonly composed. In our times we want no sacred Churches, or good men to end
such controversies, if use were made of them. If none of all these means and
cautions will take place, I know not what remedy to prescribe, or whither such
persons may go for ease, except they can get into that same Str^^zius Cicogna
lib 2. cap. 15 spirit, and lacan, habent ibidem vxores quot volunt cum oculis
clarissimis q^os nunquamin aliquem preter maritum sixuri sunt, etc.
Bredenbachius. Idem Bohemus etc.
Turkey paradise, Where they shall have as many fair wives as they will
themselves, with clear eyes, and such as shall look on none but their own
husbands, no fear, no danger of being cuckoldes. Or else sue for a divorce.
This is the best counsel I can give, which he that has need as occasion
serves may apply unto himself. In the mean time as the proverb is, from
Haeresie, Jealousy, and Frenzy, good lord deliver us.

SECT. 4
MEMB. 1.
SVBSECT. 1. RELIGIOUS MELANCHOLY His object God, What his beauty is! How it
allureth. The part and parties affected.
THat there is such a distinct Species of Love melancholy no man has ever yet
doubted, but whither this subdiuision of Called Religious because it is still
conversant about Religion and such divine objects.
Religious Melancholy be warrantable it may be controuerted. No Physician has
as yet distinctly written of it as of the rest, all acknowledge it a most
famous symptom, some a cause, but few as a Species or kind. Lib. 1 cap. 16.
nonnulli opinionibus addicti sunt and futura se praedicere arbitrantur.
Areteus, Alexander, Rhasis, Auicenna, and most of our late writers, as
Gordonius, Fuchsius, Platter, Bruel, Montaltus, etc. repeat it as a symptom.
Aliis vide^ur quod sunt Prophetae and inspirati a spiritu sancto and incipiunt
prophetare and multa futura praedicunt.
Some seem to be inspired of the Holy Ghost, some take upon them to be
Prophets, some are addicted to new opinions, some foretell strange things, de
statu mundi and Antichristi, says Gordonius. Some will prophecy of the end of
the world to a day almost, and the fall of Antichrist, as they have been
addicted or brought up, so melancholy works with them as Cap 6. de Melan.
Laurentius holds. If they have been precisely given, all their meditations
tend that way, and in conclusion produce strange effects, the humor imprintes
symptoms according to their several inclinations and conditions, which makes
Cap. 5. Tractat. multi ob timorem dei sunt melancholici, and timore^ gebenne.
They are still troubled for their sins.
Guianerius and Foelix Platter put too much devotion, blind zeal, and fear of
eternal punishment and that last judgment, for a cause of those
Enthusiastickes and desperate persons: but some do not obscurely make a
destinct Species of it, dividing love Melancholy into that, whose object is
women; and into the other, whose object is good. As Plato does in his Conuiuio,
make mention of two distinct furies, Plater ca. 13.
and amongst our Neotericks, Hercules de Saxonia lib. 1. pract. med. cap. 16.
cap. de Melan. does expressly treat of it, as a distinct Species. M^^^^choli^
(...) nomen me^^^choliae (...)
Love Melancholy (says he) is twofold, the first of which is that (to which
some per adventure will not vouch safe this name or Species of Melancholy)
affection of those which put God for their object, and are altogether about
prayer, fasting, etc. the other about women. Peter Forestus in his observations
delivers as much, and in the same words: and they have a ground of th^^ they
say forth of Areteus and Plato. A^ia reperitur furoris species a prima vel a
secunda deorum rogantium, vel a^flatu numinu^ suror hic venit.
Arateus an old Author in his third book cap. 6. does so divide Love
Melancholy, and deriues this second from the first, which comes by i^^pir^tion
or otherwise. Qui in Delphis futura praedicunt vates and in Dodona sacerdotes
furent^s quide^ multa iocunda Gra^is deferunt, sani vero exigua (...) nulla.
Plato in his Phaedrus has (...), Apollos priests in Delphos, and at Dodona in
their fury do many pretty feats, and benefit the Greeks, but never in the
right wits. He makes them all mad, as well he might, (...) that shall but
consider that superstition of old, and those prodigious effects of it, as in
his place I will show the several furies of our Sibylls, Enthusiasts, Pseud
prophets, Heretics, and Scismatickes in these our latter ages, shall instantly
confess, that all the world again cannot afford so much matter of madness,
so many stupend symptoms: as superstition, heresy, scisine has brought out,
that this species alone may be paralled to all the former, has a greater
latitude, and more miraculous effects, that it more besotts and infatuates men
then any other above named whatsoever, does more harm, wrought more
disquietnesse to mankind, and has more crucified the soul of mortal men
(such has been the devils craft) then wars, plagues, sicknesses, dearth,
famine, and all the rest.

Give me but a little leave, and I will set before your eyes, in brief a
stupend, vast, infinite ocean of incredible madness and folly: a Sea full of
shelues and rocks, Sands, gulfes, Euripes and contrary tides, full of
fearful monsters, uncouth shapes, roaring waves, tempests, and Siren calmes,
Hal^yonian Seas; unspeakable misery, such Comedies and Tragidies, such absurd
and ridiculous, ferall and lamentable fitts, that I know not whether they are
more to be pitied or derided, or may be believed, but that we daily see the
same still practiced in our days, fresh examples, fresh spectacles, noua
nouitia, fresh objects, of misery and madness in this kind that are still
represented unto us, abroad, at home, in the midst of us, in our bosoms.

But before I can come to treat of these several errors and obliquities, their
causes, symptoms, affections etc. I must say something necessarily of the
object of this love, God himself, what it is, how it allureth, whence it
proceeds, and (which is the cause of all our miseries) how we mistake it, and
wander and swarne from it.

Amongst all those divine attributes that God does vendicate to himself,
Eternity, omnipotency, immutability, wisdom, majesty, justice, mercy, and
his Deus, ^onus, iustus, pulcher iuxta Platonem
beauty is not the least, One thing says David have I desired of the Lord, and
that will I still desire, to behold the beauty of the Lord. Psalm. 27.4. And
out of Sion which is the perfection of beauty has God shined, Psalm. 50.2. All
other creatures are ^^ire I confess, and many other objects do much inamour
us, a fair house, a fair horse, a comely person. Miror and stupeo cum caelum
aspicio and pulchritudinem syderum angelarum etc and, vis digne laudet quod in
nob^s viget corpus tam pulchrum, frontem pulchrum nares genas, oculos,
intellectum omnia pulchra, si sic in creaturis laboramus, quid in ipso deo?
I am amazed says Austin, when I look up to heaven and behold the beauty of
the stars, the beauty of Angels, principallities, powers, who can express
it? who can sufficiently commend or set out this beauty which appears in us?
so fair a body, so fair a face, eyes, nose, cheeks, chinne, brows, all
fair and lovely to behold, besides the beauty of the soul which cannot be
decerned. If we so labor and be so much affected with the comeliness of
creatures, how should we be rau^shed with that admirable luster of God
himself? If ordinary beauty have such a prerogative and power, and what is
amiable and fair, to draw the eyes and ears, hearts and affections of all
spectators unto it, to move, win, entice, allure, how shall this divine
beauty ravish our souls, which is the fountain and quintescence of all
beauty? Caelum pulchrum, sed pulchior caeli fabricator, If heaven be so fair,
the Sun so fair, how much fairer shall he be, that made them fair. This
beauty and Fulgor diuinae maiestati^ Austin.
splendour of this divine God, is it that draws all creatures to it, to seek
it, love and admire it, adore it; and those Heathens, Pagans, Philosophers, out
of these relics they have yet left of Gods Image, are so far forth incensed,
as not only to acknowledge a God, but though after their own inventions, to
stand in admiration of his bounty, goodness, to adore and seek him, the
magnificence and structure of the world it self, and beauty of all his
creatures, his goodness, providence, protection, enforces them to love him,
seek him, fear him, though a wrong way: but for us that are Christians,
regenerate, that his adopted sons, illuminated by his word, and having the
eyes of our hearts and understandings opened, how fairly does he offer and
expose himself? Ambit nos deus (Austin says) donis and forma sua, He wooes by
his beauty, gifts, promises to come unto him, In Psalm. 64. misit ad nos
Epistolas and totam scripturam, quibus nobis faceret amandi desiderium.
the whole Scripture is a message, an exhortation a love letter to this
purpose, to incite us and inuit us. Epist. 48. li. 4. quid est tota scriptura
nisi Epistola omnipotentis dei ad ^ creaturam suam
Gods Epistle as Gregory calls it, to his creatures. He setts out his son and
his Church, in that Epithalamium or mystical song of Solomon, to enamour us
the more, comparing his head, to fine gold, his locks curled and black as a
raven, Cant. 4.5. cap. his eyes like doves, on rivers of waters washed with
milk, his lips as lillies, dropping down pure juice, his hands as ringes of
gold set with crysolite: and his Church to a vineyard a garden enclosed, a
fountain of living waters, an orchard of Pomegranets, with sweet sents of
saffron, spike, calamus and cynamon, and all the trees of incense, as the
chief spices, the fairest amongst women, no spot in her, Cap. 6.8.
his sister, his spouse, undefiled, the only daughter of her mother, dear
unto her, fair as the Moon, pure as the Sun, looking out as the morning.
That by these figures, that glass, these spiritual eyes of contemplation, we
might perceive some resemblance of his beauty, the love betwixt his Church and
him. And so in the 45. Psalm. this beauty of his Church, is compared to a
Queen in a vesture of gold, of Ophir, embroydered raiment of needleworke, that
the king might take pleasure in her beauty. To incense us farther, yet Cap.
27.11.
John in his Apocalypse, makes a description of that heavenly Jerusalem, and
the beauty of it, and in it the maker of it. Likning it to a city of pure
gold, like unto clear glass, shining and garnished with all manner of
precious stones, having no need of Sun or Moon, for the lamb is the light
of it, the glory of God does illuminate it: to give us to understand the
infinite glory, beauty and happiness of it. Nor that it is not fairer, then
these creatures to which it is compared, but that this vision of his, this
luster of his divine Majesty cannot otherwise be expressed to our
apprehensions, no tongue can tell it, no heart conceius it, as Paul says.
Moses himself, Exodus 33.18. When he desired to see God in his glory, was
answered that he might not endure it, no man could see his face and live.
Sensibile forte destruit sensum. A strong object overcomes the sight,
according to that axiom in Philosophy, fulgorem Solis far non potes, multo
magis creatoris, if thou can not endure the Sun beams, ho^ can thou
endure that fulgour and brightness of him that made the Sun? the Sun it
self and all that we can imagine are but shadows of it, it is visio
precellens, as In Psalm. 85. omnes pulchritudines terrenas, auri argenti nemorum
and camp^rum pulchritudinem Solis and Lunae stellarum, and angelorum omnia
pulchra superans.
Austin calls it, the quintescence of beauty this, which far excells the
beauty of heavens, Sun and Moon, Stars, Angels, gold and silver, woods
and fair fields, and whatsoever is pleasant to behold. All those other
beauties fail, varrie, are subject to corruption, to lothing, Immortalis haec
visio immortalis amor, indefessus amor and visio.
But this is an immortal vision, a divine beauty, an immortal love, an
indefatigable love and beauty, with sight of which we shall never be tired,
nor wearied, but still the more we see him the more we shall covet him.
Osorius, vbicunque, visio and pulchritudo diuini aspectus ibi voluptas ex eodem
font omnisque beatitudo nec ab cius aspectu voluptas nec ab illa voluptate
aspectus separari potest.
For as one says, where this vision is, there is absolute beauty, and where
is that beauty, from the same fountain comes all pleasure and happiness,
neither can beauty, pleasure, happiness, be separated from his vision or
sight, or his vision from beauty, pleasure, happiness. In this life we have
but a glimse of this beauty and happiness, we shall hereafter as John says
see him as he is, thine eyes as Isai. promises, 33.17. Shall behold the King
in his glory, then shall we be perfectly inamoured, and have a full fruition of
it, and desire and behold and love him alone, as the most amiable and fairest
object, our summum bonum or chiefest good.

And this likewise should we now have Leon Hebreus Dubitatur an humana
felicitas deo cognoscendo an amando terminetur.
done, had not our will been corrupted, and as we are enjoined to love God
with all our heart, and all our soul: for to that end were we borne, to love
this object as Lib. de anima. Ad hoc obiectum amandum and fruendum nati sumus,
and hunc expetisset vnicu^ hunc amasset humana voluntas, vt summu^ bonu^ and
caeteras res omnes eo ordine.
Melancthon discourses, and to enjoy it. And him our will would have loved and
sought alone, as our summum bonum or principal good, and all other good things
for Gods sake: and nature as she proceeded from it would have sought this
fountain, but in this infirmity of humane nature this order is disturbed, our
love is corrupt: and a man is like to that monster in 9. De repub.
Plato, composed of a Sylla a lion and a man, we are carried away headlong
with the torrent of our affections, the world, and that infinite variety of
pleasing objects in it, do so allure and inamour us, that we cannot so much as
look toward God, seek him or think on him as we should: we cannot contain
ourselves from the^, their sweetness is so pleasing to us. Marriage says Hom.
10. i^ epist Iohannis cap 2. Multos coniugium decepit res alioqui salutaris and
necessaria eo quod c^eco eius amore decepti diuini amoris and gloriae studium
in vniuersum abiecer^nt, pl^rimos cibus and potus perdit.
Gualter, detaines many, a thing in it self laudable and good, and necessary,
but deceived and carried away with the blind love of it, they have quite laid
aside the love of God, and desire of his glory. Meat and drink has overcome
as many, whilst they rather strive to please, satisfy their gutts and belly,
then to serve God and nature. Some are so busied about merchandise to get
money, they loose their own souls, whilst couetously carried, and with an
insatiable desire of gain they forget God, as much we may say of honors,
leagues, friendships, health, wealth, and all other profits or pleasures in
this life whatsoever. ^n mundo splendour opum, gloriae, maiest^s, amicitiarii
praesi^ia, verborum ^landities, voluptatum omnis generis illecebrae, victory,
triumphi and infinita alia ab amore dei nos abstrahunt, etc.
In this world there be so many beautiful objects splendors and brightness
of gold, majesty of glory, assistance of friends, fair promises, smoth words,
victories, triumphs, and such an infinite company of pleasing beauties to
allure us, and draw us from God, that we cannot look after him. And this is
it which Christ himself, those Prophets and Apostles so much thunder against.
Ioh. ^.15. dehortes us from, love not the world nor the things that are in in
the world, If any man love the world, the love of the father is not in him, 16.
For all that is in the world, is lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
pride of life, is not of the father but of the world, and the world passes
away and lusts thereof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God abides for
ever. No man says our Savior, can serve two masters, but he must love the one
and hate the other, etc. and this is that which all the Fathers inculcate. He
cannot ( In Psalm. 32. Dei amicus esse non potest qui mundi studijs delectatur
vt hanc formam videas munda cor serena cor etc.
Austin admonishes) be Gods friend, that is delighted with the pleasures of
the world, make clean thine heart, purify thine heart, if thou will see this
beauty, prepare thy self for it. It is the eye of contemplation by which we
must behold it, the winge of meditation which lifts us up and reares our
souls, with the motion of our hearts, and sweetness of contemplation, so
says Gregory cited by Contemplationis ple^ma nos subleuat, atque inde erigimur
intention cordis dulcedine contemplationis. destract. 6. de 7. Itineribus.
Bonauenture. And as Lib de victimis, amans deum sublimia petit sumptis alis
and in caelum recta volat, relicta terra, cupid^s aberrandi cum sole, luna,
stellarumque sacra militia, ipso deo duce.
Philo Iudeus seconds him, he that loves God will soar aloft and take him
wings, and leaving the earth fly up to heaven, and wander with Sun and
Moon, Stars and that heavenly troop, God himself being his guide. If we
desire to see him, we must lay aside all vain objects, which detain us and
dazell our eyes, and as Ficinus advises us, get us solar eyes, spectacles as
they that look on the sun, to see this divine beauty, lay aside all
material objects, all sense, and then thou shall see him as he is. Thou
covetous wretch, as Auare^ quid inhias his etc. pulchrior est qui te ambit
ipsum visurus ipsum habi^urus.
Austin expostulates, why do thou stand gaping on this dross, muckhills,
filthy excrements, In com. Plat. cap 7. vt Solemn videas oculis fieri debes
so^aris. vt diumam aspicias pulchritudinem, demitte materiam demitt^ sen^um,
and de^m qualis sit videbis.
behold a far fairer object God himself wooes thee, behold him, enjoy him, he
is sick for love of thee. Cant. 5. He inuites thee to his sight, to come into
his fair garden, to eat and drink with him, to be merry with him, to enjoy
his presence for ever. Prou. 8.
Wisdom cries out in the streets, besides the gates, in the top of high
places, before the city, at the entry of the door; and bids them give ear
to her instruction, which is better then gold or precious stones, no pleasures
can be compared to it: leave all them and follow her; vos exhorter o amici and
obsecro, Cap 18. Romans Amorem hunc divinum totis vnibus amplexamini, deum vobis
omni ossi^iorum genere propitium facite.
In Ficinus words I exhort and beseech you, that you would embrace and follow
this divine love with all your hearts and abilities, and by all offices and
endeavors make this so loving God propitious unto you. For whom alone, says
Cap. 7. de pulchritudine. regna imperia totius terrae and maris and caeli
oportet abiicere si ad ipsum conuersus velis inseri.
Plotinus, we must forsake all the kingdoms and Empires of the whole earth,
Sea and Land, and Air, if we desire to be engrafted into him, leave all and
follow him.

And forasmuch as this love of God, is an habit infused of God, as Habitus a
deo infusus per qu^ inclinatur homo ad diligendum deum super omnia
Thomas holds, 2.1. quaest. 23. by which a man is inclined to love God above
all, and his neighbor as himself. We must pray to God that he will open our
eyes, make clear our hearts, that we be capeable of his glorious rays, and to
perform those duties that he requires of us. Deuteronomy. 6. and Ios. 23. To love God
above all and our neighbor as our self, to keep his commandments. In this we
know, says John c. 5.2. We love the children of God, when we love God and
keep his commandments. This is the love of God that we keep his
commandments, he that loves not knows not God, for God is love. cap. 4.8.
and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him, and love
presupposes knowledge, faith, hope, and unites us to God himself, as Dial. 1.
omnia conuertit amor in ipsius pulchri naturam.
Leon Hebreus delivers unto us, and is accompanied with the fear of God,
humility, meekness, patience, and all those virtues, and charity it self. For
if we love God, we shall love our neighbor, and perform all those duties
which are required at our hands, to which we are exhorted. 1. Cor. 15.4.5.
Ephesians. 4. Col^ss. 3. Romans 12. We shall not be envious, or puffed up, or boast,
disdain, think evil, or be provoked to anger, but suffer all things, endure
all things, Endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit, the bond of peace.
Forbear one another, forgive one another, cloth the naked, visit the sick,
and perform all those works of mercy which Stromatum lib. 2.
Clemens Alexandrinas calls amoris and amicitiae impletionem and extensionem,
the extent and complement of love. And that not for fear or worldly respects,
but ordine ad deum, for the love of God himself. This we shall do if we be
truly enamored, but we come short in both, we neither love God, nor our
neighbor as we should. Our love in spiritual things is two Greenham.
defective, in worldly things too excessive, there is a jar in both. We love
the world too much, God too little, and our neighbor not at all, or for our
own ends. Vulgus amicitias vtilitate probat. The chief thing we respect is our
commodity, and what we do is for fear of worldly punishment, for vainglory,
praise of men, or for fashions sake, and such by-respects, not for Gods sake.
We neither know God aright, nor seek or love or worship him as we should. And
for these defects, we inuolue our selves into a multitude of errors, we swerve
from this true love and worship of God, which is a cause unto us of unspeakable
miseries, running into both extremes, we become fools, madmen, without
sense, as now in the next place I will show you.

The parties affected are innumerable almost, and scattered over all the face
of the earth far and near, and so have been in all precedent ages, from the
beginning of the world to these times, of all sorts and conditions. For methods
sake I will reduce them to a twofold division, according to those two extremes
of Excess and Defect. Not that there is any excess of divine worship or love
of God, that cannot be, we cannot love God too much, or do our duties as we
ought, as Papists hold, or have any perfection in this life, much less
supererogate, when we have all done, we are unprofitable servants. But because
we d^^e aliud agere, zealous without knowledge, and too sollicitous about that
which is not necessary, busying our selves about impertinent, needless, I^le
and vain ceremonies, as the Jews did about sacrifices, oblations, offerings,
incense, new moons, feasts, etc. but as ^say taxes them, 1.12. Who required
this at your hands: We have too great an opinion of our own worth, that we
can satisfy the law, and do more then is required at our hands, by performing
those Evangelical counsels, and such works of supererogation, merit for
others, which Bellarmine, Gregory de Valentia, and all their Jesuits, and other
champions defend that if God should deal in rigor with them, some of their
Franciscans, and Dominicans are so pure, that nothing could be objected to
them. Some of us again are too dear as we think, more divine and sanctified
then others, of a better mettle, greater gifts, and with that proud Pharisie
contemn others in respect of our selves, we are better Christians, better
learned, choice spirits, inspired, know more, and have special revelations, and
know Gods secrets, and the ^upon presume and say and do that many times,
which is not befitting to be said or done. Of this sort are all superstitious
Idolaters, Ethnicks, Mahometans, Jews, Heretics, De primo praecepto.
Euthusiasts, Diuinators, Prophets, Sectaries, and Scismaticks. Zanchius
reduces all Infidells to four chief sects, but I will insist and follow mine
own intended method: all which with many other curious persons, Monks,
Hermites, etc. may be ranged in this extreme, and fight under this
superstitious banner, and all those rude Idiots and infinite swarms of people
that are seduced by them. In the other extreme or in defect, march all those
Epicures, Libertines, Atheists, Hypocrites, Infidells, worldly, secure,
impenitent, unthankful, and carnal minded men, that attribute all to natural
causes, that will acknowledge no supreme power, that have cauterised
consciences, or live in a reprobate sense: Or such desperate persons as are too
distrustful of his mercies. Of these there be many subdivisions, and diverse
degrees of madness and folly, some more then others, as shall be showed in the
Symptoms. And yet all miserably out, perplexed, doting, and besides themselves
for religions sake. For as De relig. lib. 1 These. 1.
Zanchy well distinguishes, and all the world knows Religion is twofold, True
or False; False is that vain superstition of Idolaters, such as were of old,
Greeks, Romans, present Mahometans etc. Timore^ deorum inanem, 2 De not. deorum.
Tully could term it, or as Zanchy defines it, Vbi falsi dij, aut falso cultu
colitur deus; When false Gods, or that God is falsely worshipped. And it is a
miserable plague, a torture of the soul, a mere madness, Religiosa insania,
as Hist. Belgic. lib. 8.
Meteran calls it, or insanus error, as Superstitio error insonus est. epist.
123.
Seneca, a mad error, proper to man alone, vm superbia auaritia, superstitio,
says Pliny, li. 7. ca. 1. atque etiam post saeuit de futuro, which rings his
soul for the present, and to come. The greatest misery belongs to mankind, a
perpetual servitude, a slavery. Greg.
Ex timore timor, an heavy voke, an intolerable burden. They that are
suspicious, are still fearing, suspecting, vexing themselves with auguries,
prodigies, false tales, dreams, idle, vain works unprofitable labors, as
Polit, lib. 2. cap. 13.
Boterus observes, cura mentis ancipiti versantur, Enemies to God and to
themselves: in a word as Seneca concludes, Religio Deum colit, superstitio
destruit, superstition destroys, but true religion honors. True religion, vbi
verus Deus vere colitur, where the true God is rightly worshipped, is the way
to heaven, the mother of all virtues, Love, Fear, Devotion, Obedience,
knowledge, etc. It earers the dejected Soul of man, and amidst so many cares,
miseries, persequtions, which this world affords, it is a sole ease, an
unspeakable comfort, a sweet reposall, an anchor, an haven. It adds courage,
boldness, and begets generous spirits, although tyrants rage, and persecute,
and that bloody Lictor or Seriant be ready to martyr them, aut lita aut morere
(as in those persecutions of the Primitive Church, it was put in practice, as
you may read in Eusebius and others) though enemies be now ready to invade, and
all in an vproare. Hor.
Si fractus illabatur orbis, impauidos ferient ruinae, though heaven should
fall on his head, he would not be dismayed. But as a good Christian Prince once
made answer to a menacing Turk, facile scelerata hominum arma contemnit qui
deum praesidio tutus est. Or as Epist. Phalar.
Phalaris writ to Alcander in a wrong cause, He nor no other enemy could
terrify him, for that he trusted in God. Si Deus nobiscum quis contra nos: In
all calamities, persequutions whatsoever, as David did Sam. 2.22. he will sing
with him: The Lord is my rock, my fortress, my strength, my refuge, the tower
and horn of my salvation, etc. In all troubles and adversities, Psalm. 46.1.
God is my hope and help, still ready to be found I will not therefore fear,
etc. it is a fear expelling fear, he has peace of conscience, and is full of
hope, which is, says In Psalm. 3.
Austin, vita vitae mortalis, the life of this our mortal life, hope of
immortality the sole comfort of our misery; otherwise, as Paul says, we of all
others were most wretched, but this makes us happy, counterpoysing our hearts
in all misery. Superstition, torments, and is from the Devil ^he author of
lies, but this is from God himself: as Lucian that Antiochian Priest made his
divine confession in Lib 9. cap. 6.
Eusebius, Author nobis de Deo Deus est, God is the author of our religion
himself, his word is our ru^e, a lantern to us, dictated by the holy Ghost,
he plays upon our hearts as so many harpestrings, and we are his, his
temples, he dwells in us and we in him.

The party affected of superstition is the Brain, heart, will, understanding
Soul it self, and all the faculties of it, totum compositum, All is mad,
dotes. And for the Extent as I say, all the world it self is the Subject of
it, all times have been misaffected, past, present, there is not one that does
good no not one, from the Prophet to the Priest, etc. A lamentable thing it is
to consider how many myriades of men this Idolatry and superstition (for that
comprehends all) has infatuated in all ages, besotted by this Idolatry, which
is religions ape, what tortures, miseries it has procured, what slaughter of
Souls it has made, how it has raged amongst those old Persians, Syrians,
Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Tuskans, Gauls, Germans, Britains, etc.
Britannia eam hodie celebrat tam atto^ite says Lib 3. cap.
Pliny, tantis ceremonijs (speaking of superstition) vt dedisse Persis videri
possit. The Britains are so stupendly superstitious in their ceremonies, that
they go beyond those Persians. In all countries, in all places superstition
has blinded the hearts of men, in all ages, what a small portion has the true
Church ever been? The Patriarchs and their families, the Israelites a h^ndfull
in respect, Christ and his Apostles, and not all of them neither. Into what
straights has it been compinged, a little flock: how has superstition on
the other side dilated her self, error, ignorance, and barbarism, folly,
madness, deceived, triumphed and insulted over the most wise, discreet, and
understanding men, Philosophers, Monarchs, all were inuolued and ouershadowed
in this mist, in more then Cymmerian darkness. At this present, quota pars? How
small a part is truly religious, how little in respect. Divide the world into 6
parts, and 5 are not so much as Christians. Idolaters, and Mahometans possess
almost Asia, Afric, America, Magellanica. The kings of China, great Cham,
Siam and Bornaye, Pegu, Decan, Narsinga, Iapan, etc. are Gentiles, Idolaters
and many other petty Princes in Asia, Monomotapa^, Congo, and I know not how
many Negro Princes in Afric, all Terra incognita, most of America, Pagans,
differing all in their several superstitions, and yet all Idolaters. The
Mahometans extend themselves all over the great Turks dominians in Europe,
Afric, Asia; to the Xeriffes of Barbary and his Territories in Fez, Sus,
Morocco, etc. The Tartar, the great Moger, the Sophy of Persia, with most of
their dominions and subjects, are at this day Mahometans. See how the Devil
rages? Those at odds or differing amongst themselves, some for Purchase
Pilgrim lib. 1. cap. 3
Alli, some for Enbocar, for Aomar, and Ozimen, those four Doctors, Mahomets
successors, and are subdivided into 72. inferior Sects, as Lib. 3.
Leo Afer reports. The Jews as a company of vagabonds are Scattered over all
parts. A fifth part of the world, and scarce that now professes Christ, but so
inlarded and interlaced with several superstitions, that there is scarce a
sound part to be found, or any agreement amongst them. Presbiter John in
Afric, Lord of those Abyssines, or Aethiopians, is by his profession a
Christian, but so different from us, with such new absurdities and ceremonies
such liberty, and such a mixture of Idolatry and Paganism, Titlemannus
Maginus. Bredenbachius. Fr. Aluaresius Itin. de Abissinis berbis solum
vescuntur votarii aquis mento tenus dormiunt, etc.
that they keep little more then a bare title of Christianity. They suffer
Poligamy, Circumcision, stupend fastings, divorce as they will themselves etc.
and as the Papists call on the Virgin Mary, so do they on Thomas Didymus,
before Christ. Bredenbachius Iod.a Meggen.
The Greek or Eastern Church is rent from this of the West, and as they have
four chief Patriarchs, so have they four subdiuisions besides those
Nestorians, Iacobines, Syrians, Armenians, Georgians, etc. scattered over Asia
minor, Syria, Egypt, etc. Greece, Val^chia, Cyrcassia, Bulgary, Bosnia,
Albania, Illyricum, Slauonia, Croatia, Thrace, Seruia, Rascia, and a sprinkling
amongst the Tartars. The Russians, Muscouites, and most of that great Dukes
subjects, are part of the Greek Church, and still Christians, but as See
Posseuinus Herbastein, Magin D. Fletcher. Iouius, Hacluit, Purchase, etc. of
their errors.
one says, temporis successu multas illi addiderunt superstitiones. In
process of time they have added so many superstitions, that they be rather
semi-christians then otherwise. That which remains is the Western Church with
us in Europe, but so eclipsed with several scismes, heresies and
superstitions, that one knows not where to find it. The Papists have Italy,
Spain, part of Germany, France, Poland, and a sprinkling in the rest of
Europe. In America they have all that which Spaniards inhabit, Hispania noua,
Castella Aurea, Peru etc. In the East Indies, the Philippinae, some small holds
about Goa, Malacha, Ormus, etc. which the Portingall got not long since, and
those land-leaping Jesuits have assaid in China, Iapan as appears by their
yearly letters. In Afric they have Melinda, Quiloa, Mombaza, etc. and some
few towns, they drive out one superstition with another. Poland is a
receptacle of al religions, where Samosetans, Arrians, Anabaptists are to be
found, as well as in some German cities. Scandia is Christian, but as Deplorat
gentis Lapp.
Damianus A-goes that Portingall Knight complains, so mixed with Magic, Pagan
rites and ceremonies, they may be as well counted Idolaters. Yet very
superstitious, like our wild Irish: the remnant are Caluinists, Lutherans, In
Germany equally mixed, Sueden, Denmark, France, Britain, more defecate then
the rest, yet at odds amongst themselves, and not free from superstition. As a
damme of water stopped in one place, breaks out in another; so does
superstition. I say nothing of Anabaptists, Brownists, Barrowists, Familists,
etc. There is superstition in our prayers, in our hearing of Sermons, besides
bitter contentions, inuectiues, persecutions, quid quaeso in Dorpi, as Erasmus
concludes to Dorpius, hisce Theologis faciamus, aut quid preceris nisi forte
fidelem medicum, qui cerebro medeatur. What shall we wish them, but a good
Physician? but more of their differences, paradoxes, opinions, mad prankes, in
the Symptoms. I now hasten to the causes.

SVBSEC. 2. Causes of religious Melancholy. From the Devil by miracles,
apparitions, oracles. His instruments or factors, politi^ians Priests,
Impostors, Heretics, blind guides. In them simplicity, fear, blind zeal,
ignorance, solitarines, curiosity, pride, vaineglory, presumption, etc. his
engines, fasting, solitariness, etc.
WE are taught in holy Scripture, that the Devil rangeth abroad like a
roaring Lion, still seeking who^ he may devour, and as in several shapes, so
by several engines and devices he goes about to seduce us; sometimes he
transformes himself into an Angel of light, and is so cunning, that he is
able, if it were possible, to deceive the very elect. He will be worshipped as
Plato in Crit. daemones custodes sunt homi number and eorum domini, vt nos
animalium, nec hominibus sed et regionibus imperant, vaticiniis, arguriis,
somniis oraculis, nos reg^^t.
God himself, and is so adored by the Heathen and esteemed. And in imitation
of that divine power, as De preperat Evangel.
Eusebius observes, Vel in abusum dei vel in aemulatione^. Dandinus com in lib.
2. Arist. de An. Text. 29.
to abuse or emulate Gods glory, as Dandinus adds, he will have all homage,
sacrifices, oblations, and whatsoever else belongs to the worship of God, to be
done likewise unto him, and by this means infatuats the world, deludes,
intrappes, and destroys many a thousand souls. Sometimes by dreams, visions
(as God to Moses by familiar conference) the Devil in several shapes talks
with them, in the Indies it is common, and in China, apparitions, inspirations,
oracles, apparitions by terrifying them with false prodigies; Daemones
consulant and familiares habent demones plerique sacerdotes. Riccius, lib, 1.
cap. 10. expedit. Sinar.
sending storms, tempests, diseases, plagues, raising wars, seditions, by
spectrums, by promises, benefits, and fair means, he raises such an opinion
of his Diety and greatness, that they dare not do otherwise then adore him,
do as he will have them; they dare not offend him, and to compel them the
more to stand in awe of him, Vi^am turbant so^an ^si^quiet^nt, irrep^^te* etiam
in cor^or^ ineates te^^^nt, valerud^^e^^ frang^^^, morbos l^^^scunt, vt ad
c^l^m (...) nec al^ad his^st^^ dium q^^m vt ^ vera religione ad superstitione^
vertant, ^um sint ipsi p^enales, quaerunt sibi ad paenas co^i^es vt habeant,
erroris participes.
he sends and cures diseases, disquiets their spirits, as Cyprian says
torments and terrifies their souls to make them adore him and all his study,
all his endeavor is to divert them from true religion to superstition, and
because he is damned himself and in an error, he would have all the world
participate of his errors and be damned with him. The primum mobile therefore,
and first moouer of all superstition is the Devil, that great enemy of
mankind, the principal agent; who in a thousand several shapes, after
several fashions, with several engines, illusions, and by several names has
deceived the inhabitants of the earth, in several places, and countries, still
rejoicing at their falls. All the world over almost before Christ's time he
freely domineered, and held the souls of men in most slavish subjection, says
Lib. 4. praeparat. Euangel cap tantamque victoriam amentia hominum consequnti
sunt, vt si collig^re in vnu^ vel^^ vniuersum orbem, islis scele^^i^us
spiritibus subiectum, fuisse inaeaies. Vsque ad salvatoris adventum hominum
caede pernitiosissimos daemones placabant etc.
Eusebius, in diverse forms, ceremonies, and sacrifices till Christ's coming.
As if those Devils of the air had shared the earth amongst them, which the
Platonists held, and were our Governors and keepers. In several places they
had several rites, orders, names. Strozius, Cicogna omnis. mag. ib. 3. cap. 7
Ezekiel 8.4. Reg. 11.4. Reg. 3. and 17.24. Ier. 49. Numb. 21.3. Reg. 13.
Adonided amongst the Syrians; Adramilech amongst the Capernaites; Asiniae
amongst the Emathites; Astartes with the Sydonians; Asteroth with the
Palestines; Dagon with the Philistines; Tartari with the Honaei; Melchonis
amongst the Ammonites; Beli the Babylonians, Beelzebub and Baal with the
Samaritans and Moabites. Isis and Osyris amongst the Egyptians; Apollo at
Delphos; Jupiter at Rome; Venus at Cyprus; Diana at Ephesus; Pall^s at Troy,
etc. And even in these our days both in the East and West Indies, in Tartary,
China, Iapan, etc. What strange Idols, in what prodigious forms, with what
absurd ceremonies are they adored? See but what Vertomannus li. 5. ca. 2.
Marcus Polus, Lerius, Benzo, P. Martyr, in his Ocean Decades, and Mat. Riccius
expedit. Christi: in Sinas lib. 1. relate. Lib. 4. cap. 8. praepar.
Eusebius wonders how that wise city of Athens, and florishi ng kingdoms of
Greece should be so besotted, and we in our times, how those witty Chinese so
perspicacious, in all other things, should be so gulled, so tortured with
superstition, so blind as to worship stocks and stones. But it is no
marvel, when as we see al out as great effects, amongst Christians themselves:
how are those Anabaptists, Arrians, and Papists above the rest miserably
besotted. Mars, Jupiter, Apollo, and Aesculapius have resigned their interest
names and offices to St George, St Christopher, and a company of fictitious
Saints, Venus to the Virgin Mary. And as those old Romans had several and
distinct Gods, for all distinct offices, persons, places, so have they Saints,
as Part. 1. cap. 1. and lib. 2. cap. 9.
Lauater well observes out of Lactantius, mutato nomine tantum, it is the same
Devil that deludes them still. The manner how, as I say, is by rewards,
promises, terrors, affrights, punishments. How often has Jupiter and Apollo
sent plagues in Polid. Virg. lib. 1. de p^odigijs
Greece and Italy, because their sacrifices were neglected, to terrify them,
to rouse them up and the like: see but Liuy, Dionysius Halicarnaseus,
Thucidides, Philostratus, etc. What prodigies and miracles, dreams, visions,
apparitions, oracles, have been of old at Delphos, what strange cures performed
by Apollo and Aesculapius? Juno's Image and that of Grata lege me dicastis
mulieres. Dionysius Halicarnaseus.
Fortune spoke, Tully de not. deorum lib. 2. ^ Aequa Venus Te^cris, Pallas
iniqua fuit.
Castor and Pollux fought in person for the Romans against Hanniballs army, as
Pallas, Mars, Juno, Venus, for Greeks and Trojans, etc. Amongst our
Pseudocatholikes, nothing so familiar as such miracles, how many cures done by
our Lady of Lauretta; at Sichem, of old at our S. Thomas Shrine, etc. Io.
Molanus. lib. 3. cap. 59.
S. Sabine was seen fight for Arnulphus Duke of Spoleto, Pet. Oliue^ de
Iohanne primo Portugallie R^ge. strenue pugnans and ad uersae partis ictus
clypeo excipiens.
S. George fought in person for John the bastard of Portingal, against the
Castilians. In the battle of Bannoxburne, where Edward the 2, our English king
was foiled by the Scots, S. Philanus arm was seen to fight (if L. 14. Loculos
sponte aperuisse and pro ijs pugnasse.
Hector Boethius does not tell an arrant lie) that was before shut up in a
silver capcase: Another time in the same Author, S. Magnus fought for them. Now
for visions, revelations, miracles, not only out of the Legend, and out of
Purgatory, but every day news from the Indies, and at home read the Jesuits
letters, Ribadeneira, Thurselmus, Acosta, Lippomanus, Xauerius, Ignatius lives,
etc. and tell me what difference.

His ordinary instruments or factors which he uses, as God himself did good
Kings, lawful Magistrates, Patriarks, Prophets to the establishing of his
Church, Religion as they hold is policy, invented alone to keep men in awe.
are Politicians, Statesmen, Priests, Heretics, blind guids, Impostors,
Pseudoprophets, to propagate his superstition. And first to begin with
Politicians; it has ever been a principal axiom with them, to maintain
religion, or superstition, they make religion policy, nihil aeque valet ad
regendos vulgi animos ac superstitio, as 1. Annal.
Tacitus and Omnes religione mo^entur. 5. inverrem.
Tully hold. It Is Zeleuchus. praesat. legis. qui vrbem aut regionem inhabitant
persuaso^ esse oportet esse Deos.
that Aristotle and Plato inculcate in their Politics, and all our late
Politicians ingeminate. Cromerus lib. 2. pol. hist. Boterus lib. 3. de
incrementis vrbium, Clapmarius, lib. 2. cap. 9. de Arcanis rerump. Arneseus.
cap. 4. lib. 2. polit. Captain Machiauel will have a Prince by all means to
counterfeit religion, to be superstitious in show at least, as Numa, Licurgus,
and such lawmakers were, non vt his fidem habeant, sed vt subditos religionis
metu facilius in officio contineant, to keep the people in obedience. But this
error of his, Innocentius Ientilettus a french Lawyer, Theorem. 9. comment. 1.
de Releg. has copiously confuted. Many Politicians I do not deny maintain
Religion as a true means, and syncerely speak of it without hypocrisy, and
are truly zealous and religious themselves. Justice, Religion, Peace, are the
three chief proppes of a well governed Commonwealth: but most of them are but
Machiauellians, counterfeits only for political ends; as knowing, Lipsius.
lib. 1. cap. 3.
magnum eius in animos imperium, and that as Homo sine religione sicut equus
sine fraeno
Sabellicus delivers, a man without religion, is like an horse without a
bridle. No way better to curb then superstition, to terrify men's consciences,
and to keep them in awe: they make new laws, statuts, invent new Religions,
ceremonies to their own ends. Therefore, says Lib. 10. Ideo Lycurgus, etc.
non quod ipse superstitiosus, sed quod videret mortales paradoxa f^^lius am
plecti, nec res gra^es audere sine periculo deorum.
Polybius of Lycurgus, did he maintain ceremonies, not that he was
superstitious himself, but that he perceived mortal men more apt to embrace
paradoxes, then ought else, and durst attempt no evil thing for fear of the
Gods. This was Numa's plotte, when he said he had conference with the Nymphe
Aegeria, Sertorius an Heart. Caligula in Dion fained himself to be familiar
with Castor and Pollux, and many such, which kept those Romans under, who as
Machiauel proves, lib. 1. disput. cap. 11. and 12. were Religione maxim moti,
and most superstitious; and did curb the people more by this means, then by
force of arms, or seuerit^ of humane laws. To this end the old Poets fained
those De his lege Lucianum de luctu To. 1. Homer Odiss. 11. Virg. Ae^ 6.
Caelium lib 6.
Elysian fields, their Ae^us, Minos, and Rhadamantus, those infernal Judges,
and those Stygian lakes, fiery Phlegetons, Pluto's kingdom, and variety of
torments after death. It Is this which Plato labors for in his Phaedon; the
Turks in their Alcoran, when they set down rewards, and several punishments
for every particular virtue and vice, Boterus.
and persuade men that they that dye in battle shall go directly to heaven,
etc. A Tartar Prince, says Marcus Polus, lib. 1. cap. 28. called Senex de
montibus, the better to establish his government amongst his subjects, and to
keep them in awe, found a convenient place in a pleasant valley, inuiron'd
with hills, in Citra quam virilarium platauit maximum and pulcherrimu^ floribus
odoriferis and suauibus fructibus plenum, etc.
which he made a pleasant park, full of all odoriferous flowers, and fruits,
and a Palace full of all worldly contents, that could possibly be devised,
Music, Pictures, variety of meats, etc. and chose out a certain young man,
who^ with a Potum quendam dedit quo inescatus and graui sopore oppressus, in
viridarum interim ducebatur, etc.
soporiferous potion, he so benumbed, that he perceived nothing: and so fast
asleep as he was, caused him to be convayed into this fair garden. Where
after he had lived a while, in all such pleasures a sensual man could desire,
Atque iterum mem^ratu^ potum hibendum exhibuit and sic ^^tro Parad sum reduxit
vt cum ^vigilare^ sopore soluto, etc.
He cast him into a sleep again, and brought him forth, that when he waked he
might tell others be had been in Paradise: The like he did for Hell, and by
this means brought his people to subjection. Many such tricks and impostures
are acted by Politicians in China especially, but with what effect I will
discourse in the Symptoms.

Next to Politicians, if I may distinguish them, are our Priests, (for they
make Religion Policy) if not far beyond them, for they domineere over Princes
and Statesmen themselves. Carnificinam exercent, one says, they tyrannise over
men's consciences, more then any other tormentors whatsoever. Partly for their
commodity and gain, for sovereignty, credit to maintain their state and
reputation. What have they not made the common people to believe?
Impossibilities in nature, incredible things, what devises, traditions,
ceremonies, have they not invented in all ages to keep men in obedience to
enrich themselves? Quibus quaestui sunt capti superstitione animi, as Liuy
says. Those Egyptian Priests of old got all the sovereignty into their
hands, and knowing, Lib. 4.
as Curtius says, nulla res efficacius multitudinem regit quam, Lib. 4.
superstitio, melius vatibus quam ducibus parent, vana religione capti, etiam
impotentes faeminae, the common people will sooner obey Priests then Captains,
and nothing so forcible as superstition, or better then blind zeal to rule a
multitude; have so terrified and gulled them, that it is incredible to relate.
All nations almost have been besotted in this kind, amongst our Britains
and old Gauls the Druides, Mag^ in Persia; Philosophers in Greece, Chaldeans
amonnst the Babylonians, Barchmani in India, Gymnosophistes in Aethiopia, the
Turditanes in Spain, Augures in Rome, have insulted, Apolloes Priests in
Greece, by their oracles and phantasmes, Amphiaraus and his companions; now
Mahometans. and Pagan priests, what do they not effect? How do they not
infatuate the world? But above all others that high priest of Rome, that
three-headed Cerberus has played his part. Sr. Ed. Saud^
Whose religion at this day is mere policy, a state wholly composed of
superstition and wit, and needs nothing but superstition and wit to maintain
it, that uses Colleges and religious houses, to as good purpose as forts and
castells, and does more at this day by a company of scribilng Parasites, fiery
spirited Friars, zealous anchorites, hypocritical confessors, and those
pretorian soldiers, his Ianisary Jesuits stand now in the forefront of the
battle. Excipiunt soli totius vulnera belli.
Jesuits, then ever he could have done by garrisons and armies. What power of
Prince, or poenall law be it never so strict, could enforce men to do that
which for c^science sake they will voluntarily undergo? As to fast from all
flesh, abstain from marriage, abandon the world, wilful poverty, perform
canonical and blind obedience, to prostrate their goods, fortunes, bodies,
lives, and offer up themselves at their superiors feet, at his command. What so
powerful an engine as superstition? which they right well perceauing, are of no
religion at all themselves! Primum enim (as Calvin rightly suspects, and the
tenor and practice of their life proves) arcanae illius Theologiae, quod apud
eos regnat, caput est, nullum esse deum. They hold there is no God, as Leo 10.
did, Hildebrand the Magitian, Alexander the 6. Julius 2. mere Atheists, and
what is said of Christ, to be fables and impostures, of heaven and hell, day
of judgment, Paradise, Seneca.
Rumores vani, verbaque inania,
Et par sollicito fabula somnio.
Dreams, Vice cotis acutum reddere quae ferrum valet exorsipsa secandi.
toys, and old wives tales. Yet as so many whetstones that makes other tools
cut, but cuts not themselves, though they be of no religion at all, they will
make others most devout and superstitious, and by promises and threats,
compel, enforce from, and lead them by the nose like so many bears in a line.
When as their end is not to propagate the Church, advance Gods kingdom, or
seek his glory or common good, but to enrich themselves, to enlarge their
territories, to domineer and compel them to stand in awe, to live in
subjection to the Sea of Rome. As well may witness their intolerable
covetousness, strange forgeries, fopperies, impostures and illusions, new
doctrines, paradoxes, traditions, false miracles, which they have still
maintained, to enthrall and subiugate them, to maintain their own estates.
Seeking their own says Paul, not Christ's.
One while by Bulls, Pardons, Indulgences, and their doctrine of good works,
that they be meritorious, hope of heaven by that means, they have so flieced
the commonalty, and spurred on this free superstitious horse, that he runs
himself blind, and is as an Ass to carry burdens. They hane so amplified
Peter's Patrimony, that from a poor Bishop, he is become Rex Regum, Dominus
dominautium, a Demi-god, as his Canonists make him, Felinus and the rest, above
God himself. And for his wealth and He has the Duchy of Spoledo in Italy,
the Marquesdome of Ancora, beside Rome and the territories adiace^t, Bologne,
Ferrara, etc. Avinion in France, etc.
temporalties, is not inferior to many kings; Estote fratres mei and principes
huius mundi. words of their creation.
his Cardinals Princes companions, and in every kingdom almost, Abbots,
Priors, Monks, Friars, etc. and his Clergy have engrossed a The Laity suspect
their greatness, witness those statutes of mortmaine.
third part, half, in some places al into their hands. Three prince Electors
in Germany Bishops, besides, Magdeburge, Spire, Saltsburge, Bamberge, etc. How
many towns in every kingdom has superstition enriched? What a deal of money
by musty relics, Images, have their mass Priests engrossed, and what sums
have they scraped by their other tricks. Lauretum in Italy, Walsingham in
England, In those days, Vbi omnia auro nitent, says Erasmus, S. Thomas
Shrine, many witness, etc. If they can get but a relic of some Saint, or the
Virgin Mary's picture, or the like, that city is for ever made, it needs no
other maintenance. And for their authority, what by auricular confession,
satisfaction penance, Peter's keys, thundrings, excommunications, etc. roaring
bulls, this high Priest of Rome, shaking his Gorgons head has so terrified the
soul of many a silly man, and insulted over Majesty it self, and swaggered
generally over all Europe for many ages, and still does to some, holding the^
as yet in slavish subjection, as never tyrannising Spaniards did by their poor
Negroes, or Turks by their Gally-slaues. Pontisex Romanus prorsus iaermis
regibus terrae iura dat, ad regna eve^it ad pacem cogit and peccantes castigat,
etc. quod Imperatores Romani 40 legionibus armati non essecerunt.
The Bishop of Rome (says Stapleton, a parasite of his, de mag. Romans Eccle.
lib. 2. cap. 1.) has done that without arms which those Roman Emperors could
never atchieue with 40 legions of soldiers, deposed Kings and crowned them
again with his foot, made friends, and corrected at his pleasure, etc. Mirum
quanta passus fit H. 2. quomodo se submisit ea se facturum pollicitus, quoram
body ne priuatus quidem partem faceret.
It Is a wonder (says Machiauell Florentinae hist. li. 1.) what slavery King
Henry the second endured for the death of Th.a Becket, what things he was
enjoined by the Pope, and how he submitted himself to do that which in our
times a private man would not endure, and all through superstition. Sigonius 9
hist. Ital.
Henry the fourth deposed of his Empire, stood barefooted with his wife at the
gates of Canossus. Curio lib. 4. Fex Martyrol.
Frederick the Emperor was trodden on by Alexander the third. Another held
Adrians stirruppe: king John kissed the knees of Pandulphus the Popes Legate,
etc. What made so many thousand Christians go from France, Britain, etc.
into the holy land, spend such huge sums of money, go a pilgrimage so
familiarly to Jerusalem, to creep and couch, but superstition? What makes them
so freely venture their lines, to leave their native countries, to go seek
martyrdom in the Indies, but superstition to be asa^^^nats to meet death,
murder Kings, but a false persuasion, of merit, of canonical, or blind
obedience which they instill unto them, and animate them by strange illusions,
hope of being Martyrs and Saints? Such pretty feats can the Devil work by
Priests, and so well for their own advantage can they play their parts. And as
if it were not yet enough, by Priests and Politicians to delude mankind, and
crucify the souls of men, he has more actors in his Tragedy, more yrons in
the fire, another Scene of Heretics, Schismatikes, Impostors, false Prophets,
blind guids, that out of pride, singularity, vainglory, blind zeal, cause much
more madness yet, set all in an vproare, by their new doctrins, paradoxes,
figments, crotchets, make new divisions, subdiuisions, new sects, oppose one
superstion to another; one kingdom to another, brother against brother, father
against son, to the ruin and destruction of a Commonwealth, to the
disturbance of peace, and to make a general confusion. How did those Arrians
rage of old, how many did they circumvent? those Pelagians, Mamchies, etc.
their names alone would make a just Volume. How many silly souls have
Impostors still deluded, Lucians Alexander, Hierocles co^tends Apollonius to
have been as great a Prophet as Christ whom Eusebius confutes
Simon Magus, Apollonius Tianaeus, Cynops, Eumo, of whom Florus lib. 3. cap.
19. makes mention, by counterfeiting some new ceremonies and iugling tricks,
of that Dea Syria, by spitting fire and the like, got an army together of
forty thousand men, and did much harm: and that Eudo de Stellis of whom
Nubrigensis speaks lib. 1. cap. 19. that in king Stephens days, imitated many
of Christ's miracles, fed I know not how many people in the wilderness, and
built castles in the air, etc. to the seducing of many silly souls. How many
such imposters, false prophets, have lived in every kings reign? what
Chronicle will not afford such examples? that as so many Ignes fatui have led
men out of the way, terrified some, deluded others; that are apt to be carried
about with the blast of every wind, a rude inconstant multitude, that follow
all, and are cluttered together like so many pibbles in a tide. What prodigious
follies, madness, vexations, persecutions, absurdities, impossibilities, these
impostors, heretics, etc. have thrust upon the world, what strange effects,
shall be showed in the symptoms.

Now the means by which, or advantages the devil and his infernal ministers,
take so to delude and disquiet the world, with such idle ceremonies, false
doctrines, superstitions, fopperies, are from themselves, innate fear,
ignorance, simplicity, etc. and that same decayed image of God which is yet
remaining in us. Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre iussit, our own
conscience does dictate so much unto us, we know there is a God, and nature
does inform us, Nulla gens tam Barbara, says Tully, Cuinon insideat haec
persuasio deum esse, There is no nation so barbarous, that is not persuaded
there is a God, The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows
his handiworke, Psalm. 19. Every creature will euince it. The Philosophers,
Socrates, Plato, Lib. 1. de u^^ Daeorum.
Plotmus, Trismegistus, Seneca, Epictetus, those Magi, Druides, etc. went as
far as they could by the light of nature, Zanchius
multa praeclara de natura dei scripta reliquerunt, writ many things well of
the nature of God, but they had but a confused light, a glimpse, Quale per
incertam lunam sub luce maligna est iter in siluis, as he that walks by
mooneshine in a wood, they groped in the dark; they had a gross knowledge, as
he in Euripides, odeus quicquid es, sieve caelum, sieve terra, sieve aliquid, and
that of Aristotle, Ens entium miserere mei. So some said this, some that, as
they conceived themselves, which the devil perceiving, led them farther out,
Superstitio ex ignora^tia diuinitatis emersit, ex vitiosa aemulatione and
daemonis illecebris, inconstans, timens, fluctuans, and cui se addicat,
nesciens, quem imploret, cui se committat a daemone facile decepta, Lemnius
lib. 3. cap. 8.
as Lemnius observes, and made them worship stocks and stones, and torture
themselves to their own destruction, as he thought fit himself; inspired his
Priests and Ministers with hes and fictions to prosecute the same, which they
for their own ends were as willing to undergo, taking advantage of their
simplicity, fear and ignorance. For the common people are as a flock of
sheep, a rude illiterate rout, void many times of common sense, a mere beast,
bellua multorum capitum, will go whethersoeuer they are led: as you lead a
ram over a gappe by the horns, and all the rest will follow. Seneca.
Non qua eundum, sed qua itur, they will do as they see others do, and as
their prince will have them, let him be of what religion he will, they are for
him. De rerum varietate li. 7. c. 38. parum vero distat sapientia v^rorum a
puerili multo minus senum and mulicrum, cum metu and superstitione and aliena
stultitia and im probitate simplices agitantur.
And little difference there is betwixt the discretion of men and children in
this case, especially of old folks and women, as Cardan discourses, when as
they are tossed with fear and superstition, and with other men's folly and
dishonestie. So that I may say their own ignorance is a cause of their
superstition, a symptom and madness it self, supplicij causa est
suppliciumque sui, their own fear, folly, stupidity is that which gives
occasion to the other, and pulles these miseries on their own heads. For in
all these false religions and superstitions, amongst all Idolaters, you shall
still find that the parties first affected are silly, rude, ignorant people,
old folks, that are naturally prone to superstition, weak women, or some
poor rude illiterate persons, that are apt to be wrought upon, and gulled in
this kind, prone to believe any thing. And the best means they have to broch
it first, and to maintain it when they have done, is to keep them still in
ignorance. This has been the devils practice, and all his infernal
ministers in all ages, not as our Savior, by a few silly fishermen to
confound the wisdom of the world, to save Publicanes and Sinners, but to make
advantage of their ignorance, to confound them and all their associates: and
that they may better effect what they intend, they begin as I say with poor In
all superstition wise men follow fools. Bacon Essays.
stupid, illiterate person s. So Mahomet did when he published his Alcoron,
which is a piece of work says Bredenbachius, full of nonsense, barbarism,
confusion, Peregrin. Hieros. cap. 5. totum scriptum consusum sine ordine vel
color absque sensu and ratio^e ad rusticissimos idem dedit rudissimos and
prorsus agrestes, qui nullius erant discretionis, vt diiudicare possent.
without rhyme, reason or any good composition, and first published to a company
of rude rustickes, hogge-rubbers, that had no discretion, judgment, art, or
understanding, and so still maintained. For it is a part of their policy to
let no man comment, or dare to dispute or call in question to this day any part
of it, be it never so absurd, incredible, ridiculous, fabulous as it is, it
must be believed implicit, upon pain of death no man must dare to contradict
it: What else do our Papists but by keeping the people in ignorance, vent and
broch all their new ceremonies and traditions, when they conceal the
Scriptures and read it in Latin, and to some few alone, feeding the people in
the mean time with tales out of legends, and such like fabulous narrations?
Whom do they begin with, but collapsed ladies, some few tradesmen, or sooner
circumuent? So do all our schismatickes and heretics. Lib. 1. cap. 9. valent
haeres. 9.
Marcus and Valentinian heretics in Irinaeus seduced first I know not how
many women, and made them believe they were Prophets. Meteranus l. 8. hist.
Belg.
Friar Cornelius of Dort seduced a company of silly women. What are all our
Anabaptists, Brownists, Barrowists, Familists, but a company of rude illiterate
base fellows? What are most of our Papists, but rude and ignorant blind
baiards, how should they otherwise be? when as they are brought up and kept
still in darkness. Si Doctores suum fecissent officium and plebem fidei
commissum recte instituissent de doctrinae Christianae capitib. nec sacris
scripturis interdixissent, de multis proculdubio recte sensissent.
If their Pastors says Lauater had done their duties, and instructed their
flock as they ought in the Principles of Christian Religion, or had not
forbidden them the reading of Scriptures, they had not been as they are. But
being so misled all their lives in superstition, and carried hood-winked like
so many hawks, how can they prove otherwise then blind Idiots, and
superstitious Asses: what shall we expect else at their hands. Neither is it
sufficient to keep them blind, and in Cimmerian darkness, but withal as a
schoolmaster does by his boys, sometimes by promises and encouragements, but
most of all by strict discipline, severity, threats and punishment, to make
them follow their books, do they collogue and south up their silly Auditors,
and so bring them into a fools Paradise. Rex eri^ aiunt si recte facios, do
well thou shall be crowned, but for the most part by threats, terrors and
affrights, they tyrannise and terrify their distressed souls: knowing that
fear alone is the sole and only means to keep men in obedience, according
to that he^^slichium of Petronius. Primus in orb deos fecit timor, they play
upon their consciences; Curtius lib. 4.
which was practiced of old in Egypt, by their Priests, when there was an
Eclipse, they made the people believe God was angry, great miseries to come,
they take all opportunities of natural causes, to delude the peoples senses,
and with fearful tales out of purgatory, samed apparitions, earthquakes in
Iapona and China, tragical examples of devils, possessions, obsessions, etc.
They do so insult over, and restrain them, never Hoby so dared a la^ke, that
they dare not See more in Kemnisius Examen. council. Trident. de Purgatorio.
offend the least tradition, tread or scarce look awry: Deus bone Part. 1.
cap. 16 pars. 3. cap. 18. and 14.
Lanater exclaimes, quot hoc commentum de purgatorio misere affixit^, good God:
how many men have been miserably afflicted by this fiction of purgatory.

To these advantages of fear, ignorance, and simplicity, he has several
engines, traps, devises to batter and enthrall, omitting no opportunities,
according to men's several inclinations, habilities to circumuent and humor
them, to maintain his superstition: sometimes to stupifie, besotte them,
sometime again by oppositions, factions to set all at odds, and in an uproar,
sometimes he infects one man, and makes him a principal agent, sometimes whole
cities, countries. If of meaner sort, by stupidity, blind Canonical
obedience, blind zeal etc. If of better note, by pride, ambition, vaineglory.
If of the Clergy, and more eminent of better parts, then the rest, more
learned, eloquent, he puffs them up with a vain conceit of their own worth,
scientia inflati, they begin to swell and scorn all the world in respect of
themselves, to admire themselves, and thereupon turn heretics,
schismatickes, broch new doctrines, frame new crotchtes and the like, or else
out of too much learning become mad, or out of curiosity, they will search
into Gods secrets, and eat of the forbidden fruit, or out of presumption of
their holiness and good gifts, inspirations, become Prophets, Enthusiasts,
and what not. Or else if they be displeased, discontent, and have not as they
suppose preferment to their worth, have some disgrace, repulse, neglected, or
not esteemed as they fondly value themselves, or out of emulation they begin
presently to rage and rave, caelum terrae miscent, they become so impatient in
an instant, that a whole kingdom cannot contain them. They will set all in a
combustion, all at variance to be revenged of their adversaries. Austi^^.
Donaetus when he saw Cecilianus preferred before him in the Bishoppricke of
Carthage, turned heretic, and so did Arian, because Alexander was preferred:
we have examples at home and too many experiments of such persons. If they be
lay men of better note, the same engines of pride, ambition, emulation and
jealousy take place, they will be Gods themselves. Curtius lib. 8.
Alexander in India after his victories, became so insolent, he would be adored
for a God, and those Roman Emperors came to that height of madness they must
have temples built to them, sacrifices, oblations to their Deities, Diuus
Augustus. D. Claudius, D. Adrianus, Lampridi^s vita eius virgins vestales and
sacrum igne^ Romae extinxit and omnes vbique per orbem terrae religiones, vnum
hoc studens vt solus deus coleretur.
Heliogabalus put out the vestall fire at Rome, expelled the virgins, and
banished all other Religions all over the world, and would be the sole God
himself. Our Turks, China kings, great Chams, and Mogors, do little less,
assuming divine and bumbast titles to themselves, the meaner sort are too
credulous, and led with blind zeal, blind obedience to prosecute and maintain
whatsoever their sottish leaders shall propose, what they in pride or
singularity, revenge, spleen or for gain, shall rashly maintain and broch,
their disciples make a matter of conscience, of hell and damnation if they do
it not, and will rather forsake wives, children, house, and home, lands, goods,
fortunes, life it self, then omit or abjure the least title of it, and to
advance the common cause, undergo any miseries, turn traitors, assassinates,
with full assurance and hope of reward in that other world, that they shall
surely merit by it, win heaven, be canonised for Saints. Now when they are
thoroughly possessed with blind zeal, and nusled with superstition, he has
many other baits to inueagle and infatuate them farther yet, to make them
quite mortified and mad, and that under color of perfection, to merit by
penance, going wolward, whipping, alms, fastings etc. ex opere operato, ex
condigno, for themselves and others, to macerate and consume themselves, specie
virtutis and vmbra, those Evangelical councels, as our pseudocatholickes call
them, of Canonical obedience, wilful poverty, Votum c^libatus monachatus.
vows of chastity and monkery, and a solitary life, which extend almost to
all religions and superstitions, to Turks, Chinese, Gentiles, Abyssines,
Greeks, Latins, and all countries. Amongst the rest fasting, contemplation,
solitariness, are as it were certain Rams, by which he does batter and
work upon the strongest constitutions: Nonnulli says Peter Forestus, ob
longas inedias, stadia and meditationes caelestes, derebus sacris and religione
semper agitant, by fasting overmuch, and divine meditations, are overcome. Not
that fasting is a thing of it self to be discommended, for it is an excellent
means to keep the body in subjection, Matter sanitatis, clauis caelorum: ala
animae quae leaves penuas producat vt in sublime ferat, currus spiritus sancti,
vexillum fidei, porta paradisi, vita angelorum, etc.
a preparatiue to devotion, the Physic of the Soul, by which chaste thoughts
are engendered, true zeal, a divine spirit, whence wholesome counsels do
proceed, concupiscence is restrained, vicious and predominate lusts and humors
are expelled. The Fathers are very much in commendation of it, and as Calvin
notes sometimes immoderate, The mother of health, key of heaven, spiritual
winge to ereare us, the chariot of the holy Ghost, banner of Faith, etc. And
it is true they say of it, if it be moderately and seasonably used, as Moses,
Elias, Daniel, Christ, and his Castigo corpus meum. Paul.
Apostles made use of it, but when by this means they will supererogate, and
as Mor. encem.
Erasmus well taxes. Caelum non sufficere putant suis meritis, heaven is to
small a reward for it. They make choice of times and meats, and buy and sell
their merits, and attribute more unto it then to the ten Commandments, and
count it a greater sin to eat meat in lent, then to kill a man. And as one
says, Plus recipient assum piscem, quam Christum crucifixum, plus salmonem
quam Solomonem quibus in ore Christus, Epicurus in cord, when some
counterfeit, and some attribute more to such works of theirs then to Christ's
death and passion, the devil sets in a foot, and strangely deludes them, and
by that means makes them to overthrow the temperature of their bodies, and
hazard their souls. Never any strange illusion of devils amongst Hermits,
Anachorites, never any visions, phantasmes, apparitions, Enthusiasmes,
Prophets, any revelations, but immoderate fasting, bad diet, sickness,
melancholy, solitariness, or some such things were the precedent causes, the
forerunners or concomitantes of them: The best opportunity and sole occasion
the devil takes to delude them. Marsilius Caguatus lib. 1. cont. cap. 7. has
many stories to this purpose, of such as after long fasting have bin seduced by
devils, and Lib. 8 cap. 10 de rerum varietate. admiratione digna sunt quae per
ieiunium hoc modo co^tingunt, somnia, superstitio, contemptus tormentorum,
mortis desideriu^ solitado futurorum diuinatio, obstinata opinio, insania,
leiuniu^, naturaliter praeparat ad hac omnia.
it is a miraculous thing to relate (as Cardan writes) what strange accidents
proceed from fasting, dreams, superstition, contempt of torments, desire of
death, prophesies, paradoxes, madness; fasting naturally prepares men to these
things. Monks, Anachorites and the like, after much emptiness become
melancholy, vertiginous, they think they hear strange noyses, confer with
Hobgoblines, devils, riuell up their bodies, and dum hostem insequimur, says
Gregory, ciuem quem diligimus trucidamus, they become bare Skeletons, skin
and bones. Carnibus abstinentes proprias carnes deuorant, vt nil praeter cutem
and ossa fit reliquum. Hilarion, as Epist. lib. 3. Ita attenuatus fuit ieiuniis
and vigiliis, intant^ exeso corpore, vt ossibus vix haerebat, vnde nocte
infantum vagitus, balatus pecorum, mugitas boum, voces and ludibria daemonum.
etc.
Hierom reports in his life, was so bare with fasting, that the skin did
scarce stick to the bones, for want of vapors he could not sleep, and for want
of sleep became idle headed, and heard every night infants cry, oxen low,
wolves howl, lions roar (as he thought) clattering of harneis, strange
voices, and illusions of devils. Such symptoms are common to those that fast
long, are solitary, given to contemplation, overmuch solitariness and
meditation. Not that these things (as I said of fasting) are to be discommended
of themselves, but very behouefull in some cases and good: sobriety and
contemplation join our souls to God, as that heathen Lib de abstinentia,
sobrietas and continentia m^ntemem deoconiungunt.
Porphyrie can tell us. Extasis nihil est aliud quam gustus futurae
beatitudinis (Erasmus. epist. ad Dorpium) in qua toti absorbemur in deum.
Extasis is a taste of future happiness, by which we are united into God, a
divine melancholy, a spiritual winge, Bonauenture terms it, to lift us up to
heaven. But as it is abused, a mere dotage, madness, a cause and symptom of
Religious melancholy. If you shall at any time see (says Guatinerius) a
religious person over superstitious, too solitary, or much given to fasting,
that man will certainly be melancholy, thou may boldly say it, he will be
so. P. Forestus has almost the same words, Si religiosum nimis ^eiunia videris
obseruantem, audacter melancholicum pronunciabis Trat. 15. c. 5.
and Solitudo ipsa, men's aegra laeboribus anxijs and ieiuniis, tum temperatura
cibis mutata agrestibus, and humor melancholicus heremitis illusionum caus^e
sunt.
Cardan. subtle. lib. 18. and cap. 40. lib. 8. de rerum varietate*
solitariness, fasting^, and that melancholy humor, are the causes of all
Hermits illusions. Lauater de spect. cap. 19. part. 1. and part. 1, cap. 10.
puts solitariness a maine cause of such spectrums and apparitions, none, says
he, so melancholy as Monks and Hermites, the Devils bath melancholy, Solitudo
est ^^usa apparitionum, nulli visionibus and huic delirio magis abobnoxii sunt,
qua^ qui collegiis and eremo soli viuunt monachi, tales plerumque melancholici
ob victum and solitudinem.
none so subject to visions and dotage in this kind, at such as live solitary
lives, they hear and see strange things in their dotage. Monachise putant
prophetare ex de^, and qui solitariam agunt vitam, quum sit instinctu ^^monu^,
and sic falluntur fatidi^^, a malo genio habent, quae putant a deo, and sic
Euthusiastae
Polidor Virgil. lib. 2. de prodigijs, holds that those prophesies and Monks
revelations, Nuns dreams, which they suppose come from God, to proceed wholly
ab instinctu doemonum, by the Devils means, and so those Enthusiasts,
Anabaptists, Prophets have the same cause. Sibyllae. Pythei and prophetae qui
diuinare sole^t omnes phanatici sunt melancholici.
Fracastorius lib. 2. d^ intellect. will have all your Pythonisses, Sibylles
and Prophets to be mere melancholy, so does Wierus prove lib. 1. cap. 8. and
lib. 3. cap. 7. and Arculanus in 9. Rhasis, that melancholy is a sole cause,
and the Devil together, with fasting and solitarines of all such Sibylline
prophesies, if there were ever any such, which with Exercit and 1.
Causabon and others I justly except at. But whosoever there be no Sibylles, I
am most assured there be other Enthusiasts, Prophets, etc. and ever have been
in all ages, and still proceeding from those causes. Post 15. dierum process and
(...), mirabiles videbat visi^^es.
That which Matthew Paris relates of the Monk of Euesham, that saw heanen and
hell in a vision, of Fol. 84. vita (...) fol. 177 (...) per 9. dies nihil
comede^^ant b^hens.
Sir Owen that went down into Saint Patriarchs Purgatory in king Stephens
days, and saw as much: Walsingham of him that was showed the like by St.
Julian, Beda lib. 5. ca. 13.14.15. and 20. reports of king Sebba lib. 4. cap.
11. eccles hist. that saw strange After contemplation in an Extasis, so Hiero^e
was whipped for reading Tully, see millions of examples in our Annalls, Bedes,
Gregory, Iacobus de Voragi^^, Lippoma (...), Hieronimus John Mayor de vitis
patrum, etc.
visions, and Stumphius Heluet. Cronic. of a cobbler of Basil. 1520. that saw
rare apparitions at Ausborough in Germany, was still after much solitariness,
fasting, or long sickness, when their brains were addle, and their bellies
as empty of meat, as their heads of wit. Florilegus has many such examples,
fol. 191. one of Saint Gultlake of Crowlade that fought with devils, but still
after long fasting, overmuch solitariness^, Fol. 199. pos^ abstinenti^ curas,
miras illusiones daemonum audiuit.
the devils persuade him there to fast, as Moses and Elias did, the better to
delude him. Fol. 255. post seriam (...) diei dominicae visionem habuit de
purgatorio.
In the same Author is recorded Carolus Magnus vision An. 885. or Extasis,
wherein he saw heaven and hell after much fasting and meditation. So did the
devil of old with Apollos Priests, Amphiaraus and his fellows, those
Egyptians, still enjoin long fasting before he would give any oracles, and
Strabo Georg. lib. 14. describes Charons den, in the way betwixt Tralles and
Nissum, whether the Priests led sick and fanatike men. but nothing performed
without Vbi multos dies manent ieiuni consilio facerdotum auxilia invocantes.
long fasting, no good to be done. That scoffing In Necromant: and cibus quidem
nobis glandes erant, potus aqua lectus sub di^, etc.
Lucian conducts his Menippus to hell by the directions of that Chaldean
Mithrobarzanes, but after long fasting, and such like idle preparation. Which
the Jesuits right well perceiving, of what force this fasting and solitary
meditation is, to alter men's minds when they would make a man mad, and ravish
him, and make him go beyond himself, to undertake some great business of
moment, to kill a king or the like, John Everardus Britano Romanus lib. edit.
1611. describes all the manner of it.
they bring him into a melancholy dark chamber, where he shall see no light for
many days together, no company, little meat, ghastly pictures of devils all
about him, and leave him to lie as he will himself, on the bare flower in this
chamber of meditation as they call it, on his back, side, belly, till by this
strange usage they make him quite mad and beside himself. And then after some
10 days, as they find him animated and resolved, they make use of him. The
devil has many such factors, many such engines, which what effect they
produce, you shall hear in these following Symptoms.

SVBSEC. 3. Symptoms general, love to their own sect, hate of all other
religions, obstinacy, peevishness, ready to undergo any danger or cross for
it, martyrs, blind zeal, blind obedience, fastings, vows, belief of
incredibilities, impossibilities: Particular of Gentiles, Mahometans, Jews,
Christians, and in them Heretics old and new, Schismatickes, Schoolmen,
Prophets, Enthusiastes, etc.
FLeat Heraclitus an rideat Democritus, in attempting to speak of these
Symptoms, shall I laugh with Democritus, or weep with Heraclitus, they are so
ridiculous and so absurd on the one side, so lamentable and tragical on the
other, a mixed Scene offers it self, so full of errors, and a promiscuous
variety of objects, that I know not in what strain to represent it. When I
think of that Turkish paradise, those Jewish fables, and pontificiall rites,
those Pagan superstitions, as to make Images of all matter, and adore them when
they have done, to see them kiss the paxe, creep to the cross etc. I cannot
choose but laugh with Democritus, but when I see them whippe and torture
themselves, grind their souls with toys and trifles, I cannot choose but
weep with Heraclitus. When I see a Priest say Mass, with all those apish
gestures, murmurings, etc. or read the customs of the Jews Synagogue, or
Mohammedan Meschites. I must needs Varius mapp^ componere risum, vix poterit.
laugh at their folly, risum teneatis amici? but when I see them make matters
of conscience of such toys and trifles to adore the devil, and to endanger
their souls, to offer their children to their Idols, etc. I must needs
condole their misery: when I see two superstitious orders contend, pro aris
and focis, with such have and hold, de luna caprina, some write such great
Volumes to no purpose, take so much pains to so small effect, their Satyrs,
invectiues, Apologies, dull and gross fictions, me thinks it is pretty sport
and fit Pleno ridet Calpburnius or^ Hor.
for Calphurnius and Democritus to laugh at. But when I see so much blood
spilt, so many murders and massakers, so many cruel battles fought, etc. it is
a fitter subject for Heraclitus to lament. Alanus de Insulis.
As Merlin when he sat by the lakes side with Vortiger, and had seen the
white and red dragon fight, before he began to interpret or to speak, in
sletum prorupit, fell a weeping, and then proceeded to declare to the King,
what it meant: I should first pity and bewail this misery of humane kind, with
some passionate preface, and then to my task. For it is that great torture,
that infernal plague of mortal men, and able of it self alone to stand in
opposition to all other plagues, miseries and calamities whatsoever, and far
more cruel, more pestiferous, more grievous in it self, more general, more
violent, of a greater Extent. Other fears and sorrows, grieuances of body and
mind, are troublesome for the time, but this is for ever, eternal damnation,
hell it self: A plague, a fire, an inundation hurt one Province alone, and the
loss may be recovered, but this superstition inuolues all the world almost,
and can never be remedied. Sickness and sorrows come and go, but a
supestitious soul has no rest, Cicero ^. de finibus.
superstitione imbutus animus nunquam quietus esse potest, no peace, no
quietness. True Religion and Superstition are quite opposite, long diuersa
carnificina and pietas, as Lactantius describes, the one is an ereares, the
other deiects, the one is an easy yoke, the other an intolerable burden, an
absolute tyranny, the one a sure anchor, an haven, the other a tempestuous
Ocean, the one makes, the other marres, the one is wisdom, the other folly,
madness, indiscretion, the one unfeigned, the other a counterfeit, the one a
diligent obseruer, the other an ape; one leads to heaven, the other to hell.
But these differences will more evidently appear by their particular
Symptoms. What Religion is, and of what parts it does consist, etc. every
Catechism will tell you, what Symptoms it has, and and what effects it
produces, but for this superstition no tongue can tell, no pen can express,
they are so many, so diverse, so uncertain, inconstant, and so different from
themselves. Tot mundo superstitiones, quot coelo stellae, one says, there be
as many superstitions in the world, as there be stars in heaven, or devils
themselves that are the first founders of them: With such ridiculous absurd
Symptoms and signs, so many several rites, ceremonies, torments and
vexations accompanying, as may well express and beseem the devil to be the
author and maintainer of them. I will only point at some few of them, ex vngue
leonem, guess at the rest, and those of the chief kinds of superstition,
which beside us Christians, now domineir and crucify the world, Gentiles,
Mahometanes, Jews. etc.

Of these Symptoms some be general, some particular to each private sect:
general to all, are an extraordinary love and affection they bear and show to
such as are of their own sect, and more then Vatinian hate to such as are
opposite in religion as they call it, or disagree from them in their
superstitious rites, blind zeal, which is as much a symptom as a cause, vain
fears, blind obedience, needless works, incredibilities, impossibilities,
monstrous rites and ceremonies, wilfulness, blindness, obstinacy etc. For the
first which is love and hate, as In Michah. comment.
Montanus says, nulla firmior amicitia quam quae contrahitur hinc, nulla
discordia mayor, quam quae a religione fit, no greater concord no greater
discord, then that which proceeds from Religion, we are all brethren in Christ.
servants of one lord, members of one body, and therefore are or should be at the
least dearly beloved, inseparately allied in the greatest band of love and
familiarity, united partakers not only of same cross, but coadiutors,
comforters, helpers, at all times upon all occasion; As they did in the
Primative Church, Acts the 5. sold their patrimonies, and laid them at the
Apostles feet, and many such memorable examples of mutual love, we have had
under the ten general persecutions, many since. Examples on the other side of
discord none like, as our Savior says, he came therefore into the world to
set father against son, Lactanius.
etc. In imitation of whom the devil belike ( nam superstitio irrepsit verae
religionis imitatrix, superstition is still religions ape, as in all other
things, so in this) does so combine and glue together his superstitious
followers in love and affection, that they will live and die together: and what
an innate hatred has he still inspired to any other superstition opposite? How
those old Romans were affected, those ten persecutions may be a witness, and
that cruel executioner in Eusebius, aut lita aut morere, sacrifice or die. No
greater hate, more continuate, bitter faction, wars, persecution in all ages,
then for matters of religion, no such ferall opposition, father against son,
mother against daughter, husband and wife, City against City, Kingdom
against Kingdom: as of old at Tentira and Combos. Iunenalis Sa^. 15.
Immortale odium, and nunquam sanabile vulnios,
Inde furor vulgo, quod numina vicinorum
Odit vterque locus, quum solos credit habendos,
Esse deos quos ipse colat. --
Immortal hate it breeds, a wound past cure,
And fury to the commons still to endure.
Because one City to others Gods as vain,
Deride, and his alone as good maintain.
The Turks at this day count no better of us, then of dogs, so they commonly
call us, Gaures, Infidells, miscreants, and make that their maine quarrel and
cause of Christian persecution. If he will turn Turk he shall be entertained
as a brother, and had in all good esteem, a Muselman or a believer which is a
greater tie to them, then any affinity or consanguinitie. The Jews stick
together like so many burres, but as for the rest whom they call Gentiles, they
do hate and abhor, they cannot endure their Messiah should be a common
Savior to us all, and rather as Comment. in Micha far non possunt vt illorum
Messiah communis seruator sit, nostru^ g^ud^^m, etc. Messiah vel december decies
crucifixuri ess^nt, ^ sumque deum si ^il f^er posset, vna cum Angelis ^
creaturis omnibus, nec absterrentur ab ^ac facto, etsi mill inferna ^^beunda
forent.
Luther writes, then they that now scoff at them, curse them, persecute and
revile them, shall be cohe^res and brethren with them, or have any part or
fellowship with their Messiah, they would crucify their Messiah ten times
over, and God himself his Angels, and all his creatures, if it were possible,
though they did endure a thousand hells for it: Such is their malice toward
us. Now for Papists, what in a common cause, for the advancement of their
Religion they will endure, our traitors and pseudocatholikes will declare unto
us, and how bitter on the other side to their adversaries, how violently bent,
let those Marian times record, the Spanish Inquisition, the Duke of Aluas
Tyranny in the Low Countries, the French Massakers and Civil wars. Not there
only, but all over Europe, we read of Tantum Religio petuit sundere malorum
Lucret.
bloody battles, rackes and wheels, seditions, factions, oppositions, signa
pares aquilas and pila minantia pilis, inuectiues and contentions. They had
rather shake hands with a Jew, Turk, or as the Spaniards do, suffer Moors
to live amongst them, and Jews, then Protestants. My name says Ad Galat.
comment. meum nomen odiosius quam vllus homicula aut ^ur.
Luther is more odious to them, then any thief or murderer. So it is with all
heretics and schismatikes whatsoever: And none so passionate, violent in their
Tenants, opinions, Obstinate, Wilful, Refractory, Peevish, factions, singular
and stiff in defense of them, they do not only persecute and hate, but pity
all other Religions, account them damned, blind, as if they alone were the true
Church, they alone to be saved. The Jews at this day are so incomprehensibly
proud and churlish, says In comment. Michah. adeo incomprehensibilis and
aspera eorum superbia, etc.
Luther, that soli saluari soli domini terrarum salutari volunt. And as
Synagog. Iude^^um ca. 1 inter eorum intelligentissimos Rabbinos nil prater
ignorantiam and in spicaliam grandem iuve^^^s ^orrendam indurationem and
obstinationem, etc.
Buxdorfius adds, so ignorant and selfe-willed withal, that amongst their
most understanding Rabbines, you shall find naught but gross dotage, horrible
hardness of heart, and stupend obstinacy, in all their actions, opinions,
conuersations: and yet so zealous withal, that no man living can be more; and
venditate themselves for the elect people of God. It Is so with all other
superstitious sects, Mahometans, Gentiles in China and Tartarie, and our
Ignorant Papists, Anabaptists, and peculiar Churches of Amsterdam, they alone
and none but they can be saved. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Act. 15
Zealous as Paul, says without knowledge. Romans 10. 2. the will endure any
misery, any troubles, take any pains, vow chastity, wilful poverty, forsake
and follow their Idols, and die a thousand deaths rather then abjure, or
forsake, deny the least particle of that religion which their fathers
profess, and they themselves have been brought up in, be it never so absurd,
ridiculous, they will take much more pains to go to hell, then we shall do
to heaven; single out the most ignorant of them, convince his understanding,
show him his errors, grossness, and absurdities of his sect, Non persuadebis
etiamsi persuaseris, he will not be persuaded. As those still told the Jesuits
in Iapona, Malunt cum illis in^anire, quam cum aliis been sentire.
they would do as their forefathers have done, and with Ratholde that Frisian
Prince go to hell for company, if most of their friends go thither: They will
not be moved, no persuasion, no torture can stir them. So that Papists
cannot brag of their vows, poverty, obedience, orders, merits, martyrdomes,
fastings, alms, good works, pilgrimages, much and more then all this, I shall
show you, is and has bin done by these superstitious Gentiles, Pagans,
Idolaters: their blind zeal and superstition in all kinds is much at one, and
is it hard to say which is the greatest, which is the grossest. In a word, this
is common to all superstition, there is nothing so absurd, so ridiculous,
impossible, incredilble which they will not believe, and willingly perform as
much as in them lies. I know that in true Religion it self many mysteries are
so apprehended alone by faith, as that Trinity, Resurrection of the body at the
last day, etc. many miracles not to be controuerted, or disputed of. But he
that shall but read the As true as Homers Iliads, Ouids Metamorphosis, Aesops
Fables.
Turks Alcoran, the Jews Talmud, and Papists Golden Legend will swear that
such gross fictions, fables, vain traditions, prodigious paradoxes and
ceremonies, could never proceed from any other spirit then that of the devil
himself, which is the author of all confusion and lies, and wonder withal how
such wise men as have bin of the Jews, such learned understanding me^ as
Auerroes, Auicenna, or those Heathen Philosophers could ever be persuaded to
believe, or to subscribe to the least part of them: but I will descend to
particulars, read their several symptoms and then guess.

Of such Symptoms that properly belong to superstitious, Superstitions,
Symptoms in particular.
I may say as of the rest, some are ridiculous, some again fearful to
relate. Of those rediculous, there can be no better testimony then the
multitude of their gods, their ridiculous names, actions, offices they put upon
them, their Feasts, Holli-dayes, Sacrifices, and the like. The Egyptians
worshipped as Diodorus Siculus records, Sun and Moon under the name of Isis
and Osyris, and after such men as were beneficial to them, or any creatures
that did them good. In the City of Bubasti they worshipped a Cat, says
Herodotus, Ibis and Storkes, an ox says Pliny, Leekes and Onyons, Macrobius.
The Syrians, Chaldeans, had as many of their own Inventions, see Seldom de
dijs Syris, Purchase Pilgrimage, and Lilius Giraldus of the Greeks. The
Raesinus Antiquit. Rom lib. 2. cap. 1. and de^aceps.
Romans borrowed from all, beside their own which were maiorum and minorum
gentium as Varro holds, certain and uncertain; some celestial select and
great ones, others Indigites and Semidei, some for Land some for Sea, some for
Heaven, some for Hell; some for passions, diseases, some for birth, some for
weddings, husbandry, woods, waters, gardens, orchards, etc. and all actions and
offices, Pax, Quies, Salus, Libertas, Faelicitas, Strenua, Stimula, Horta, Pan,
Syluanus, Priapus, Flora, Cloacina, Febris, Pallor, Invidia, Risus, Angeronia,
Volupia, Vacuna, Viriplaca, Kings, Emperors, valiant men that had done any
good offices for them, and arrant whores amongst the rest. For all actions
places, creatures, Et domibus, tectis, thermis, and equis soleatis
Assignare solent genios --
says Prudentius. Cuna for Cradles, Diuerra for sweeping houses, Nodina knots.
Prema, Premunda, Hymen Hymeneus, Comus the God of good fellows. Hesiodus
reckons up at least 30000 Gods, Varro 300 Jupiters. as Jeremy told them their
Gods were to the multitude of cities, Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum
miserabile gignit
Id dixere deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas
What ever heavens, Sea and land begat,
Hills, Seas, and rivers. God was this and that.
That which was most absurd they made Gods upon such ridiculous occasions: the
Matrones of Rome, as Dionysius Halicarniseus relates, because at their entreaty
Coriolanus desisted from his wars, consecrated a Church Fortunae muliebri,
and A^th. Verdure Imag. deorum.
Venus Barbata had a temple erected, because somewhat was amiss about hair,
and so the rest. Their holydaies and adorations were all out as ridiculous,
those Lupercalls, of Pan, Anna, Perenna, Saturnalls, etc. Idols, Images of
wood, brass, stone, olim truncus eram, etc. and that which was impious and
absurd they made their Gods whoremasters, and some whine, lament, to be
wounded, vexed, and the like, that it is no maruaill if Jupiter Tragoedus.
Lucian, and Pliny could so scoff at them as they did: If Diagoras took
Hercules Image and put it under his pot to sees his pottage, which was as he
said his 13. labor. But see more of their fopperies in Cypr. 4. tract, de idol
varietate, Chrysostom aduers. Gentil. Arnob. adu. Gentes, Austin de ciu. dei.
Theodoret de curat. Graec. affes. Clemens Alexandrinus, etc. Lamentable,
tragical, and fearful those symptoms are, that they should be so far
forth afrighted with those fictitious Gods, as to spend their goods, lives,
fortunes, precious time, best days in honor of them, to sacrifice unto them
to their inestimable loss so many Sheep, Oxen, Goats, as Superstitiosus
Iulianus innumeras sine parcimo^ia pecudes mactavit, Ammianus. 25.

Boues albi M. Caesari salutem fi tu viceris perimus. lib. 3. Romani
obseruatissimi sunt ceremoniarum bello praesertim.


Marcus, Iulianus, and the rest, usually did with such labor and cost, and men
themselves. As Curtius did to leap into the gulf, to go so far to their
Oracles, to be so gulled by them as they were, both in war and peace, as
Polybius relates, and which, Augures, Priests, v^stall Virgins can witness:
and to be so superstitious, that they will rather loose goods, and lives, then
omit any ceremonies, or offend their heathen Gods. Niceas that generous and
valiant Captain of the Greeks, overthrew that Athenian Navy, by reason of his
too much superstition; Boterus polit. lib. 2. cap. 16.
because the Augures told him it was ominous to set seal from the haven of
Syracuse, whilst the Moon was eclipsed, he tarried so long till his enemies
besieged him, and he and all his army was ouerthrown. It is stupend to relate
what strange effects this Idolatry and superstition has brought forth; of
later years in the Indies, and those bordering parts; In templis immania
Idolorum monstra conspiciuntur, ma^morea lignea lutea, etc. Riccius.
in what fearful shapes the Devil is adored, how he terrifies them, how they
offer men and women sacrifices unto him, an 100 at once, as at Fer. Cortesius.
Mexico, when the Spaniard first overcame the^, M. Polus. Lod. Vertomannus,
nauig lib. 6 cap 9. P. Martyr ocean. dec.
how they bury their wives, best goods, horses, servants, when a great man
dies, Mathias a Michou.
12000 at once amongst the Tartars when a great Cham departs: how they plague
themselves, which abstain from all that has life, as those old Pythagorians,
with immoderate fastings, Epist. Jesuit, A 1549 a Xauerio and ^o^ijs. Idemque
Riccius expedit. as Sinas lib. 1. per totum. Ieiunatores apud eos toto die
carnibus abstinent and piscibus ob religionem nocte and die Idola colentes
nusquam igredientes.
as they of China, that for superstitions sake never eat flesh nor fish al
their lives, never marry, but live in deserts and by places, and some pray to
their Idols 24 hours together, without any intermission. Some again are
brought to that madness by their superstitious priests; (that tell them such
vain stories of immortality, and the joys of heaven in that other life) Ad
immortalitatem morte aspirant summi magistratus etc. Et multi mortales hac
insania and praepostero immortalitatis studio laborant and misere pereunt, rex
ipse clam v^n^num hausisset nisi a seruo fuisset detentus.
that many thousands voluntarily break their own necks, as Theombrotus
Ambrociatus auditors of old, precipitate themselves, that they may participate
of that unspeakable happiness in the other world. One poisons, another
strangles himself, and the King had done as much, deluded with this vain
hope, had he not been detained by his servant. But who can tell of their
several superstitions, vexations, follies, torments? I may conclude with
Cautione in lib Ich. Bodi^i de repub fol. 111
Posseuinus, Religio facit asperos mites, homines e feris superstitio ex
hominibus feras. Religion makes wild beasts civil, superstition makes wise men
beasts and fools; and the discreetest that are, if they give way to it, are no
better then dizards. It Is exitrosus error and maxim periculosus, it is a most
periculous and dangerous error of all others, as Lib. de superst.
Plutarch holds, turbulenta passio hominem co^sterna^s, a troublesome passion
that utterly undoes men. Unhappy superstition; Hominibus vitae finis more non
autem superstitionis. profert haec suos terminos v^tra vitae sinem.
Pliny calls it, morte non finitur, death takes away life, but not
superstition. Impious and ignorant are far more happy then they that are
superstitious, no torture like to it, none so continuate, so general, so
destructive, so violent.

In this superstitious roe, Jews for antiquity may go next to Gentiles, what
of old they have done, and what Idolatries they have committed in their groves
and high places, what their Pharesies, Sadduces, Esset, and such sectaries have
maintained, I will not so much as mention: for the present, I presume no nation
under heaven can be more sottish, ignorant and blind, superstitious, wilful,
obstinate and peevish, tiring themselves, with vain ceremories to no purpose,
he that shall but read their Rabines, ridiculous comments, their strange
interpretations of Scriptures, their absurd ceremonies, fables, ch^ldish tales,
which they steadfastly believe, will think they be scarce rational creatures,
their foolish Buxdorfius Synagog Iud. c. 4 In^er precandu^ nemo pediculos
attingat vel pulicem, aut per guttur inferius ve^tum emittat, etc. Id. cap. 5.
and sequent cap. 36.
ceremonies, when they rise in the morning, and how they prepare themselves to
prayer, to meat, with what superstitious washings, how to their Saboth, how to
their other feasts, their weddings, burials etc. Last of all the expectation of
their Messiah, and those figments, miracles, and vain pomp that shall attend
him, as how he shall terrify the Gentiles, and overcome them by new diseases,
how Michael the Archangell shall sound his Trumpet, how he shall gather all the
scattered Jews into the holy land, and there make them a great banquet, Illic
omnia animalia, pisces, aues quos Deus vnquam creauit mactabuntur and vinum
generosum, etc.
Wherein shall be all the birds, beasts, fishes, that ever God made, and a cup
of wine that grew in Paradise, and that has been ke^t in Adams Cellar ever
since. As the first course shall be served in that great Ox in Job. 4.10. that
every day feeds on a thousand hills, Psalm. 50.10. that great Leuiathaen, and a
great Bird, that laid an Egg so big, Cuius lapsu cedri altissimi 300 deiecti
sunt quumque e lapsu ouum fuerat confractum pa. 160 inde submersi, and
alluuione inundati.
that by chance tumbling out of the neast it brake down 300 tall Ceders, and
breaking as it fell, drowned 300 villages: This bird stood up to the knees in
the sea, and the sea was so deep, that a hatchet would not fall to the bottom
in seven years. Of their Messiah Every King in the world shall send him one of
his daughters to be his wife because it is written Ps. 45.10. kings daughters
shall attend on her, etc.
wives and children; Adam and Eve, etc. and that one stupend fiction amongst
the rest. When a Roman Prince asked of Rabbi Iehosua ben Hanania, why the Jews
God was compared to a Lion; he made answer he compared himself to no
ordinary Lion, but to one in the wood Ela, which when he desired to see, the
Rabbine prayed to God he might, and forthwith the Lion set forward, Quum
quaedringentis adhuc miliaribus ab Imperatore Leo bis abesset tam fortiter
rugiebat vt mulieres Romanae abortierint, omnes murique etc.
But when he was 400 miles from Rome, he so roared that all the great bellied
women in Rome made aborts, the city walls fell down, and when he came an
hundred miles nearer, and roared the second time, their teeth fell out of their
heads, the Emperor himself fell down dead, and so the Lion went back. With
an infinite number of such lies and forgeries, which they verily believe, and
feed themselves with vain hope, and in the mean time, will by no persuasions
be diuerted, but still crucify themselves with a company of idle ceremonies,
and live like slaves and vagabonds, and will not be relieved.

Mahometans are a compound of Gentiles, Jews, and Christians, and so absurd in
their ceremonies, as if they had taken, that which is most sottish out of every
one of the^, full of idle fables in their superstitious law, their Alcoran it
self a gallimafery of lies, tales, ceremonies, traditions, precepts, stolen
from other sects, and confusedly heaped up to delude a company of rude and
barbarous clownes. As how birds, beasts, stones, saluted Mahomet when he came
from Mecha, the Moon came down from heaven to visit him, Strozius Cicogna,
omif. mag. lib. 1 cap. 1 putida multa recenset ex Alcorano de coelo stellis
Angelis. Lonicerus. cap. 21.22. lib. 1.
how God sent for him, spoke to him, etc. with a company of stupende figments
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. Of the day of Judgment, and three
founds to prepare to it, which must last 50000 years, of Paradise, which is so
ridiculous that Virgil, Dantes, Lucian, nor no Poet can be more fabulous.
Their rites and ceremonies are most vain and superstitious, wine and swines
flesh are utterly forbidden by their law, Quinquies in die orare Turco tenentur
ad meridiem. Bredenbachius cap. 5.
they must pray five times a day, and still toward the south, wash before and
after all their bodies over, with many such. For fasting, vows, religious
orders, peregrinations, they go far beyond all Papists, In quolibet anno
mensem integrum ieiunant interdiu nec comedentes nec bibentes, etc
they fast a month together many times, and must not eat a bit till sun be
set. Their Kalan^^rs, Deruises, and Torlachers, etc. are more Nullis vnqua^
multi per totam aetatem carnibus vescuntur. Leo Aser.
abstemious some of them, then Carthusians, Franciscans, Anachorits, forsake
all, live solitary, fare hard, go naked, etc. Lonicerus to. 1 cap. 17.18.
Their pilgrimages are as far as Mecha to Mahomets tomb, miraculous and
meritorious, the ceremonies of slinging stones to stone the Devil, of eating a
Camel at Cairo by the way; their fastings, their running till they sweat, their
long prayers, Mahomets Temple, Tomb, and building of it, would ask a whole
volume to dilate: and for their pains taken in this holy pilgrimage, all their
sins are forgiven, and they reputed for so many Saints. And many of them with
hot bricks when they return, will put out their eyes, Quia nil volant deinceps
v^dere
that they may never after see any profane thing: They look for their Prophet
Mahomet as Jews do for their Messiah: read more of their customs, rites,
ceremonies in Lonicerus Turcic. hist. tom. 1. from the tenth to the 24 chap.
Bredenbachius cap. 4.5.6. Leo Afer lib. 1. Busb^quius, Sabellicus, Purchase lib.
3. cap. 3. and 4.5. etc. Many foolish ceremonies you shall find in them, and
which is most to be lamented, the people generally so curious in observing of
them, that if the least circumstance be omitted, they think they shall be
damned, it is an irremissible offense and can hardly be forgiven. I keept in
mine house amongst my followers (says Busb^quius sometimes the Turks Orator
in Constantinople) a Turkey boy that by chance did eat shel-fish, a meat
forbidden by their law, but the next day when he knew what he had done, he
was not only sick to cast and vomit, but very much troubled in mind, would
weep, and Nullum se conflictandi finem fecit.
grieve many days after, torment himself for this foul offense. Another
Turk being to drink a cup of wine in his Cellar, first made a huge noise and
filthy faces, Vt in alique^ angulum se reciperet ne rea fieret eius delicti,
quod ipse erat admissurus.
to warn his soul, as he said, that it should not be guilty of that foul
fact which he was to commit. With such toys as these are men kept in awe and
so cowed, that they dare not resist, or offend the least circumstance of their
law, for conscience sake misled by superstition, which no humane edict
otherwise, no force of arms could have enforced.

In the last place are Christians, in describing of whose superstitious
symptoms, I may say that which S. Benedict once saw in a vision, one Devil in
the market place, but 10 in a Monastery, because there was more work; in
populous cities, they would swear and forswear, lie, falsify deceive fast
enough of themselves, one Devil could circumuent a 1000, but in their
religious houses 1000 Devils could scarce tempt one silly Monk. All the
principal Devils I think busy themselves in subuerting Christians. Jews,
Gentiles, and Mahometans are extra caulem, out of the fold, and need no such
attendance, they make no resistance, but Christians have that shield of faith,
sword of the spirit to resist, and must have a great deal of battery before
they can be overcome. That the Devil is most busy amongst us, that are of the
true Church, appears by those several oppositions, heresies, schisms, which
in all ages he has raised to subvert it, and in that of Rome especially,
wherein Antichrist himself now fits, and plays his^ prize. This mystery of
iniquity began to work even in the Apostles time, many Antichrists and
Heretics were abroad, many sprung up since, many now present, and will be to
the worlds end, to dementate men's minds, to seduce and captiuate their souls.
Their symptoms I know not how better to express then in that twofold
division of such as lead, and such as are lead. Such as lead are Heretics,
schismatics, false prophets, impostors, and their ministers: they have some
common symptoms, some peculiar. Common, as madness, folly, pride, insolency,
arrogance, singularity, peevishness, obstinacy, impudence, scorn and
contempt; of all other sects; nullius addicti iurare in verba magistri, they
will approve of naught, but what they first invent themselves, no
interpretation good but what their spirit dictates, none shall be in secundis,
no not in tertijs, they are only wise, only learned, in the truth, all damned
but they, caedem scripturarum faciunt ad materiam suam, says Tertullian, they
make a slaughter of Scriptures, and turn it as a nose of wax to their own
ends. So irrefragable in the mean time, that what they have once said, they
must and will maintain, in whole Tomes duplications, triplications, never yield
to death, so self conceited, say what you can, As Epist. 190.
Bernard speaks of P. Aliardus, omnes patres sic, atque ego sic. Though all the
Fathers counsels, and all the world contradict it they care not, they are all
out: and as Gregory well notes, Orat. 8. vt vertigine correptis videntur omnia
moueri omnia ijs falsa sunt, quum error in ipsorum cerebro sit.
of such as are vertiginous, they think all turns round and moves, all err,
when as the error is wholly in their own brains. Magallianus the Jesuit, in
his comment on the 1. of Timothy cap. 16. ver. 20. and Alphonsus de Castro lib.
1. adversus haereses. gives two more eminent notes, or probable conjectures to
know such men by (they might have taken themselves by the noses when they said
it) Res nouas affectant and inutiles, falsa ^eris praeserunt. 2. quod temeritas
effutierit id superbia, post modum tuebitur and contumacia, etc.
First they affect novelties, and toys, and prefer falsehood before truth,
See more in Vincent. Lyrin.
secondly they care not what they say, that which rashness and folly has
brought out, pride afterward peevishness, and contumacy shall maintain to the
last gasp. Peculiar symptoms are prodigious paradoxes, new doctrines, vain
phantasmes, which are as many and as diverse as they themselves. Aust. de
h^res. Vsus mulierum indifferens.
Nicholites of old would have wives in common, Montanists will not marry at
all, nor Tatians, forbidding all flesh, Seuerians wine. Adamians go naked,
Quod ante peccauit Adam nudus erat.
because Adam did so in Paradise, and some Alij nudis pedibus le^per ambulant.
barefoot all their lives. because God Exodus 3. and Joshua 5. bid Moses so to
do, and Isay 20. was bid put off his shoes. Manichies hold that Pythagorian
transmigration of souls from men to beasts. Insana feritate sibi non parcunt,
nam mortes varias praecipitiorum aquarum and ignium, scipsos necant, and in
ist^m furorem alios c^ gunt mortem minantes ni faciant.
The Circumcellions in Afric, with a mad cruelty made away themselves, some
by fire, water, breaking their necks, and seduced others to do the like,
threatening some if they did not, with a thousand such, as you may read in
Austin, Epiphanius, Alphonsus de Castro, Danaeus, Elench. haeret. ab orb
condito.
Gab. Prateolus. etc. Of Prophets and Enthusiasts Impostors, our
Ecclesiastical stories afford many examples, of Elias and Christ's, as our
Nubrigensis lib. 1. cap. 19.
Eudo de stellis, a Britain, in King Stephens time, and many such, nothing so
common as visions, revelations, prophesies. Now what these brain sick
heretics once broach, and impostors set on foot, be it never so absurd, false,
and prodigious, the common people will follow and believe. It will run along
like Murrian in cattle, scabb in sheep. Nulla scabies, as Iouian. Pont. Ant.
dial.
he said, superstitione scabiosior, as he that is bitten with a mad dog bites
others, and all in the end become mad, either out of affectation of nouelty,
simplicity, or blind zeal, the giddy headed multitude will embrace it. Sed
vetera querimur, these are old, haec prius fuere. In our days we have a new
scene of superstitious impostors and heretics, a new company of Actors, of
Antichrists, that great Antichrist himself. A rope of Popes, who from that
time they proclaimed themselves universal Bishops, to establish their own
kingdom, sovereignty, greatness, and to enrich themselves, brought in such a
company of humane traditions, Purgatory, Mass, adoration of Saints, alms,
fastings, bulls, Indulgences, orders, Friars, Images, Shrines, musty relics,
excommunications, confessions, satisfactions, blind obedience, vows, that the
light of the Gospel was quite eclipsed, darkness over all, the Scriptures
concealed, legends brought in, religion banished, superstition exalted, and the
Church it self Cum per Paganos nomen eius persequi non poterat, sub specie
religionis fraudulenter subuertere dispo^ebat.
more obscured, persecuted. Christ and his members crucified, more, says
Benzo, by a few Necromanticall^, Atheistical Popes, then ever it was by those
heathen Emperors, Hunnes, Goths, and Vandals. What each of them did by what
means, at what times, quibus, auxilijs, superstition came to this height,
traditions increased, and Antichrist himself came to this estate, let
Magdeburgenses, Kemnisius, Osiander, Bale, Mornay, and many others relate. In
the mean time, he that shall but see their profane rites and foolish
customs, and how superstitiously kept, how strictly observed, their multitude
of Saints, Images, for trades, professions, diseases, persons, offices,
countries, places, St George for England, S Denis for France, Patricke Ireland,
Andrew Scotland; Iago Spain; etc. Gregory for Students, Luke for Painters,
Cosmus and Damian for Philosophers, Crispine Shoomakers, Katherine Spinners,
etc. Anthony for Pigs Gallus Geese, Wendeslaus Sheep, Pelagius Oxen, Sebastian
the plague, Valentine falling sickness, Apollonia teethach, Petronella for
Agues, and the Virgin Mary for Sea and land for all parties, offices; he that
shall observe these things, their Shrines, Images, Oblations, Pendants,
Adorations, Pilgrimages, they make to them, what creeping to Crosses, our Lady
of Laurettas rich One Image, one Gown worth 400. thousand crowns and more.
gowns, her donaries, the cost bestowed on Images, and number of suitors; S^
Nicholas Burge in France, our S. Thomas Shrine of old at Canterbury, those
relics at Rome, Jerusalem, Genua, Lions, Pratum, S. Denis; and how many
thousands come yearly to offer to them, with what cost, trouble, anxiety,
superstition, how they spend themselves, times, goods, lives, fortunes, in such
ridiculous observations, their tales and figments, false miracles, buying and
selling of pardons, Indulgences for 40000 years to come, their Processions on
set days, their strict fastings, Monks, Anachorits, Friar Mendicants,
Franciscans, Carthusians, etc. Their vigils and feasts, their ceremonies at
Christmas, Shrouetide, Candlemas, Palme-Sunday, Blase, S. Martin, S. Nicholas
day, their adorations, exorcismes, etc. would think all those Grecian, Pagan,
Mohammedan superstitions, Gods, Idols and Ceremonies, the name, time, and place,
habit only altered, to have degenerated into Christians. Whilst they prefer
traditions before Scriptures, and keeping those Evangelical cou^sells,
poverty, obedience, vows, alms, fasting, supererogations, before Gods
commandments, and their own ordinances before his precepts, and keep them in
ignorance, blindness, they have brought the common people into such a case
that upon pain of damnation, they dare not break the least ceremony,
tradition, edict: hold it a greater sin to eat a bit of meat in Lent, then
kill a man, their consciences are so terrified, that they are ready to despair
if a small ceremony be omitted, what mulct, what penance soever is enjoined,
they dare not but do it, tumble with S. Francis in the mire amongst Hoggs, if
they be appointed, go woolward, whippe themselves, build Hospitals, Abbeys,
etc. go to East or West Indies, kill a King, or run upon sword point; They
perform all, do all, believe all. Lucilius lib. 1 cap. 22. de falsa relig.
Vt pueri infantes credunt signa omnia ahena
Viuere, and esse hommes, and sic isti omnia ficta
Vera putant, credunt signis cor inesse ahenis.
As children think their babies live to be,
Do they these brazen Images they see.


And whilst the ruder sort are so carried headlong with blind zeal, and are so
gulled and tortured by their superstitions, their own too credulous simplicity
and ignorance, their Epicurean Popes, and Hypocritical Cardinals laugh in
their sleeves, and are merry in their chambers with their Punckes, they do
Indulgere genio, and make much of themselves. The middle sort some for gain,
hope of preferment, and for fear are content to subscribe, and do all that in
them lies, to maintain and defend their present government, as Schoolmen,
Canonists, and Jesuits, Friars, Orators, Sophisters, who either for that they
had nothing else to do, luxuriant wits knew not how to busy themselves, or
better to defend their lies, miracles, transubstantions, and Popes pardons,
purgatories, masses, impossibilities have coined a thousand idle questions nice
distinctions, Obs and Sols, such tropologicall, allegorical expositions, to
salve all apparances, objects, such quirkes and quiddities, Quodlibetaries, as
Bale says of Ferribrigge and Strode, instances, ampliations, decrees, glosses,
canons, instead of so^^^ ^ommentaries, good preachers, came a company of man
^rs, primo secundo secundarij, sectaries, Canonists, Sor^onists, Minorites,
with a rabble of idle contro^ersies and questions, Hospinian Osiander. An haec
propositio Deus sit cucurbita vel scarabeus sit. aeque possibilis ac deus est
homo.

An possit respectum producere fine fundamento and termino.

An leuius sit hominem iugulare quam die dominico calceum co^suere.


an Papa sit Deus au quasi Deus? An participet vtramque Christi naturam?
Whether it be as possible for God to be a Humblebee, or a gourd as a man?
Whether he can produce a respect without a foundation or term, make a whore a
Virgin? Fetch Traians soul from Hell and how? with a rabble of questions about
hell fire, whether it be a greater sin to kill a man, or to clout shoes upon
a Sunday? Whether God can make another God like unto himself? Such, says
Kemnisius, are most of your Schoolmen, 200 commentators on Peter Lombaerd,
Scotists, Thomists, Reals, Nominals, etc.

T^^^ (...) ^^^tinued in such error, blindness, decrees, sophismes, and
supe^stitions, idle ceremonies and traditions were the sum of their religion,
and the true Church, as wine and water mixed, lay hid and obscure to speak of,
till Luthers time, who began upon a sudden to defecate, and as another Sun to
drive away those foggy mists of superstition, to restore it to that purity of
the Primitive Church. And after him many good and godly men, divine spirits
have done their endeauours, and still do. But see the Devil! that will never
suffer the Church to be quiet or at rest. No Garden so well tilled, but some
noxious weeds grow up in it, no wheat but it has some tares, we have a mad
giddy company of Priests, Schismatics, and some Heretics even in our own
bosoms in another extreme, Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt. That
out of too much ^eale, in opposition to Antichrist and humane traditions, and
those Romish ceremonies and superstitions, will quite demolish all, they will
admit of no ceremonies at all, no fasting days, no cross in Baptism,
kneeling at Communion, no Church music, etc. no Bishops Courts, and Church
government, rail at all our Church discipline, and will not hold their
tongues, and all for the peace of thee O Sy^^, no not so much as degrees some
of them or Universities, all humane learning, hoods, habits, cap and surplesse,
and such as are things indifferent in themselves, and wholly for ornament and
decency, or for distinction sake, they abhor and hate, and snuff at, as a
stone horse when he meets a Bear: They make matters of conscience of them,
and will rather forsake their livings then subscribe to them. They will admit
of no holydaies, or honest recreations, no Churches, no Bells some of them,
because Papists use them. No discipline, no ceremonies, but what they invent
themselves. No interpretations of Scriptures, no comments of Fathers, no
Counsels, but such as their own fantastical spirits dictate, by which
spirit misled many times they broach as prodigious paradoxes as Papists
themselves. Some of them turn Prophets, and have secret revelations, and will
be of privy council with God himself, and know all his secrets. Agrippa ep.
26
Per capillos spiritum sanctum tenent, and omnia sciunt cum sint asini omnium
obstinatissimi. A company of blockheads will take upon them to define how many
shall be saved, and who damned in a parish, where they shall sit in heaven,
interpret Apocalypses, and those hidden mysteries to private persons, times,
places, as their own spirit informs them, and precisely set down when the
world shall come to an end, what year, what month, what day. Some of them
again have such strong faith, so presumptious, they will go into infected
houses, expel Devils, and fast 40 days, as Christ himself did; some call God
and his attributs into question, as Vorstius, some Princes, civil magistrates,
and their authorities, as Anabaptists, and will do all their own private spirit
dictats, and nothing else. Brownists, Barrowists, Familists, and all those
Amsterdamian sects and sectaries, are led all by so many private spirits. It is
a wonder to relate what passages Sleiden relates in his commentaries, of
Cretinke and Knipperdoling and their associats, those mad men of Munster in
Germany, what strange Enthusiasmes sottish revelations, how absurdly they
carried themselves, deluded others; that as profane Machiauel in his
political disputations, holds of Christian religion, in general it does
euer^ate, debilitate and take away men's spirits, and courage from them, and
breeds nothing so courageous soldiers as that Roman, we may say of these
peculiar sects, their religion takes away not spirits only, but wit and
judgment, and depriues them of all understanding: for some of them are so
far gone with their private Enthusiasmes, and revelations, that they are
quite mad, out of their wits. What greater madness can there be, then for a
man to take upon him to be God, as some do? To be the holy Ghost, Elias and
what not? Alex. Gaguin. 12. Discipulis ascitis mirum in modum populum decepit.
In Poland 1548. in the reign of king Sigismund, one said he was Christ and
got him 12 Apostles, come to judge the world and strangely deluded the commons.
Guicciard. discip. Belg. complures habuit asseclas ab iisdem honoratus.
One David George, an illiterate painter, not many years since, did as much in
Holland, took upon him to be the Messiah and had many followers. Benedictus
victorius Fauentinus, consil. 15. writes of one Honorius that thought he was
not only inspired as a Prophet, but that he was a God himself, and had Henry
Nicholas at Leiden, 1580. such a one.
familiar conference with God and his Angels. Lauater de spect. cap. 2. part.
1. has a story of one John Sartorius, that thought he was the Prophet Elias,
and cap. 7. of diverse others, that had conference with Angels, were Saints,
Prophets, Wierus lib. 3. de Lamijs cap. 7. makes mention of a Prophet of
Groaning, that said he was God the Father, of an Italian and Spanish Prophet
that held as much. We need not roue so far abroad, we have familiar examples at
home, Coppinger that said he was Christ, Hacket and Arthington his Disciples;
See Camdens Annals, fol. 242, and 285.
Burchet, Houatus burned at Norwich. We are never likely seven years together
without some such new Prophets, that have several inspirations, some to
convert the Jews, some fast forty days, some foretell strange things, some
for one thing, some another. Great precisians most part by a preposterous
zeal, fasting, meditations, melancholy, are brought into those gross errors
and inconveniences. Of these men I may conclude generally, that howsoever they
may seem to be discreet and men of understanding in other matters, discourse
well, laesam habent Imaginationem, they are like Comets, round in all places
but only where they blaze, caetera sani, they have impregnable wits, and
discreet otherwise, but in this their madness and folly breaks out, in
infinitum erumpit stultitia. They are certainly far gone with melancholy, if
not quite mad, and have more need of physic then many a man that keeps his
bed, more need of Hellebor, then those that are in Bedlam.

SVBSECT. 4. Prognostics of Religious Melancholy.
YOu may guess at the Prognostics by these Symptoms what can these signs
foretell otherwise then folly, dotage, madness, gross ignorance, despair,
obstinacy, a reprobate sense, Arrius his bowels burst, Montanus hanged
himself, etc.

Eudo de stellis his disciples ardere potius qua^ ad vitam cor^igi maluerunt,
tanta vis infixi semel erroris, they died blaspheaming.

Nubrigensis cap. 19. lib. 1.

Ier. 7. ver. 23. Amos. 5.5.


a bad end? What else can superstition, heresy produce, but wars, tumults,
vproares, torture of souls, and despair, a desolate land, as Jeremy treats,
cap. 7.34. when they commit Idolatry and walk after their own ways: how
should it be otherwise with them? What can they expect but blasting, famine,
dearth, and all the plagues of Egypt, as Amos denounces, cap. 4. ver. 9.10.
to be led into captivity? If our hopes be frustrate, we sow much and bring in
little, eat and have not enough, drink and are not filled, cloth and be not
warm, etc. Haggei, 1.6 we look for much and it comes to little. And why? his
house was wast, they came to their own houses, ver. 9. therefore the heaven
staid his dew, the earth his fruit. because we are superstitious, irreligious,
we do not serve God as we ought, all these plagues and miseries come upon us,
what can we look for else, but mutual wars, slaughters, fearful ends in
this life, and in the life to come eternal damnation. What is it that has
caused so many ferall battles to be fought, so much Christian blood shed, but
superstition? That Spanish Inquisition, Rackes, Wheels, tortures, torments
whence do they proceed? from superstition. Bodine the French man in his 5. Cap.
method hist. accounts English men Barbarians, for their civil wars: but let
him but read those Pharsalian fields Poplinerius. Lerius praes^ hist.
sought in France of late, for religion their Massacres, wherein by their own
relations, in 24 years, I know not how many millions have bin consumed, whole
families and cities, and he shall find ours to have been but velitatious to
theirs. But it has ever been the custom of al heretics, Idolaters, when
they are plagued for their sins, and Gods just judgment come upon them, not
to acknowledge any fault in themselves, but still impute it unto others. In
Cyprians time it was much controuerted betwixt him and Demetrius an Idolater.
Who should be the cause of those present calamities. Demetrius laid all the
fault on Christians, Quod nec ^yeme nec aestare ^anta im^^^um copia, nec
frugibus tor^end^^ so lit^ fragranti^, nec vernali teperie sata tam ^^tasint,
nec ^rboriis faetibus autumni saegundi, minus de ^^tibus ^n armor eruatur min^^
auru^ etc.
that there were not such ordinary showers in winter, the ripening heat in
summer, so seasonable springs, fruitful autumnes, no marble mines in the
mountains, less gold and silver then of old, that husbandmen, seamen,
soldiers, all were scanted, justice, friendship, skill in arts, all was
decayed, and that through Christians default, and all their other miseries from
them, quod dij nostri a vobis non colantur, Because they did not worship
their Gods. But Cyprian retorts all upon him again, as appears by his tract
against him. It Is true the world is miserably tormented and shaken, with
wars, dearth, famine, fire, inundations, plagues, and many ferall diseases
rage amongst us, sednon vt tu quereris ista accidunt quod dij vestri a nobis
non colantur, sed quod a vobis non colatur Deus, a quibus nec quaeritur, nec
timetur, not as thou complainest that we do not worship your Gods, but
because you are Idolaters and do not serve the true God, nether seek him nor
fear him as you ought. Our Papists object as much to us, and account us
heretics, we them; the Turks esteem of both as Infidels, and we them as a
company of Pagans, Jews, against all. When as indeed there is a general fault
in us all, and something in the very best, which may justly deserve Gods wrath,
and put these miseries upon our heads. I will say nothing here of those vain
cares, torments, needless works, pseudomartyrdome, etc. We heap upon our
selves unnecessary troubles, observations, we punish our bodies as in Turkey,
says Solitus erat oblectarese fidibus and voce musica canentium sed hoc omne
sublatum Sibyllae euiusdam interuentu, etc. Inde quicquid erat instrumentorum
Sympho^iacorum auro gemmisque egregio opere distinctorum comminuit and in i^nem
iniecit, etc.
Busbequius leg. Turcic. epist. 3. one did that was much affected with Music,
and to hear boys sing, but very superstitious; an old Sibyl coming to his
house, or an holy woman (as that place yields many) took him down for it, and
told him that in that other world he should suffer for it, thereupon he flung
all his rich and costly instruments which he had, bedect with Jewels and
precious stones, all at once into the fire. He was served in silver Plate and
had goodly household stuff: a little after another religious man reprehended
him in like sort, and from thence he was served in earthen vessels. Last of
all a decree came forth because Turks might not drink wine themselves, that
nether Jew nor Christian then living in Constantinople might drink any wine
at all. In like sort amongst Papists, fasting at first was generally proposed
as a good thing, after from such meats at such times, and then last of all so
rigorously proposed to bind the conscience upon pain of damnation, First
friday, says Erasmus, and then saturday, and nunc periclitatur dies Mercurij,
and wendesday now is in danger of a fast. Obid genus obseruatiunculas videmus
homines misere affligi, and denique mori and sibi ipsi Christianos videri, quum
revera sint Iudaei.
and for some such toies some so miserably afflict themselves, to despair, and
death it self rather then offend, and think themselves good Christians in it,
when as indeed they are superstitious Jews. So says Leonardus Fuchsius, a
great Physician in his time, Ita in corpora nostra fortunasque decretis suis
saeuit vt parum abfuerit nisi deus Lutherum virum perpetua memoria dignissimum
excitasset quin nobis faeno mox communi cum iumentis cibo vtendum fuisset.
we are so tortured in Germany with these popish edicts, our bodies so taken
down, our goods so diminished, that if God had not sent Luther a worthy man in
time, to redress these mischiefs, we should have eaten hay with our horses
before this. The Gentiles in India will eat no sensible creatures, or ought
that has blood init.
As in fasting, so in all other superstitious edicts, we crucify one another
without a cause, barring our selves of many good and lawful things, honest
disports, pleasures and recreations, and whilst we make a conscience of every
toy, we tyrannise over our brothers souls, loose the right use of many good
things, Nuda ac tremebunda cruentis erepet genibus sicandida iusserit Ino
Iuvenalis. Sat. 6.
punish our selves without a cause, loose our liberties, and sometimes our
lives. De benefit. 7.2.
Intolerabilem perturbationem, Seneca calls it, as well he might, an
intolerable perturbation that causes such dire events, folly, madness,
sickness, despair, death of body and soul, and Hell it self.

SVBSEC. 5. Cure of Religious Melancholy.
TO purge the world of Idolatry and superstition, will require some monster
taming Hercules, or a divine Aesculapius, or Christ himself to come in his
own person. They are all generally so refractory, selfe-conceited, obstinate,
so firmly addicted to that Religion, in which they have been bred and brought
up, that no persuasion, no terror, no persecution can divert them. The
consideration of which has induced many Commonwealths, to fuffer them to
enjoy their consciences as they will themselves, A toleration of Jews is in
most Provinces of Europe, In Asia they have their Synagogues, Spaniards permit
Moors to live amongst them, the Mogullians Gentiles, the Turks all Religions.
In Europe, Poland, and Amsterdam, are the common Sanctuaries. Some are of
opinion, that no man ought to be compelled for conscience sake, but let him be
of what Religion he will, he may be saved, Jew, Turk, Anabaptist, etc. If he be
an honest man, live soberly and ciuilly in his profession, and serve his own
god, with that fear and reverence as he ought. Plinius Secund. as appears by
his Epistle to Traian, would not have the Christians so persecuted, and in some
time of the reign of Maximinus, as we find it regestred in Eusebius lib. 9.
cap. 9. there was a decree made to this purpose, Sed habeant pro arbitrio suo
quo ritu velit, deum coli.
Nullus cogatur inuitus ad hunc vel i llum deoru^ cultum etc. The like edict
came forth in the reigns of Arcadius and Honorius. In Epist. Sym.
Symmachus the Orator in his time, to procure a general toleration used this
argument. Quia deus immensum quidd^^ est and infinitu^, cuius natura perfect
cognosci non potest, aequu^ ergo esse vt diuersa ratione colatur, provt quisque
aliquid de deo percipit aut intelligit.
Because God is immense and infinite, and his nature cannot perfectly be
known, it is convenient he should be as diversely worshipped, as every man
shall conceive or understand. This Tenent was stiffely mainetained in Turkey
not long since, as you may read in the third Epistle of Busbequius, Aeternae
beatitudinis consortes fore, qui sancte innocenterque hancvitam traduxerint,
quamcunque illi religionem sequti sunt.
that all those should participate of eternal happiness that lived an holy
and innocent life what Religion soever they professed; Rustan Bassa was a great
Pation of it. Some again will approve of this for Jews, Gentiles, Infidels,
that are ought of the fold, they can be content to give them all respect and
favor, but by no means to such as are within the precincts of our own
Church, and called Christians, to no Heretics, Shismatickes, or the like. Let
the Spanish Inquisition that fourth fury speak for some of them, the civil
wars and Massakers in France, our Marian times. Comment. in C. Tim. 6. ver.
20. and 21. seueritate cum haereticis agendum and non aliter.
Magallianus the Jesuit will not admit of conference with an heretic, but
severity and rigor to be used, and Theodosius is commended in Nicephorus lib.
12. ca. 15. Quod silentium hereticis indixerit.
That he put all Heretics to silence. Bernard epist. 190. will have club law,
fire and sword for Heretics compel them, stop their mouths not with
disputations, or refute them with reasons, but with fists, and this is their
ordinary practice. Another company are as mild on the other side, Igne and
fusie potius agendum cum hereticis quam cum disputationibus os alia logiscus etc
to avoid all heartburning; and contentious wars and vprores, they would
have a general toleration in every kingdom, no mulct at all, no man for
Religion or Conscience to be put to death. Martin Bellius and his companions
maintained this opinion not long since in France, whose error is confuted by
Beza in a just Volume. The medium is best, and that which Paul prescribes Gal.
6.1. If any man fall by occasion, to restore such a one with the spirit of
meekness, by all fair means, gentle admonitions, but if that will not take
place, Post vnam and alteram admonitione^ haereticu^ de vita, he must be
excommunicate as Paul did by Hyminaeus, deliver him over to Satan. Immedicabile
vulniu ense recidendum est. As Hippocrates said in Physic, I may well say in
Divinity, Qua ferro non curantur ignis curat. For the vulgar, restrain them by
laws, mulcts, burn their books, forbid their conuenticles, for when the
cause is taken away, 'the effect will soon cease. Now for Prophets, dreamers
and such rude silly fellows that through fasting too much, meditation,
preciseness, or by Melancholy it self are distempered, the best means to
induce them Ad sanam mentem, is to alter their course of life, and with
conference, threats, promises, persuasions to intermixe Physic. Hercules de
Saxonia had such a Prophet committed to his charge in Venice, that thought he
was Elias, and would fast as he did, he dressed a fellow in Angels attire, that
said he came from heaven that brought him divine food, and by that means he
stayed his fast, and administered his Physic, and by the mediation of this
forged Angel he was cured. Quidam conquestus est mihi de hoc morbo, and
deprecatus est vt illum curarem, ego quaesini ab eo quid sentiret, respondit,
semper imaginor and cogito de deo and angelis etc. and ita demersus sum hac
imaginationes, vt nec edam nec dormiam nec negotijs etc Egocuraui medicina and
persuasione, and sic plures ^l^os.
Rhasis an Arabian Cont. lib. 1. cap. 9. speaks of a fellow that in like case
complained to him, and desired his help, I asked him (says he) what the
matter was, he replied, I am continually meditating of heaven and hell, and me
thinks I see and talk with fiery spirits, smell brimstone, etc. and am so
carried away with these conceits, that I can neither eat, nor sleep, nor go
about my business, I cured him says Rhasis, partly by persuasion, partly by
Physic, and so have I done by many others. We have many such Prophets and
dreamers still amongst us, whom we persecute with fire and faggot, I think
the most compendious cure had been in Bedlam. Sed de his satis.

MEMB. 2.
SVBSECT. 1. Religious Melancholy in defect, parties affected, Epicures,
Atheists, Hypocrites, worldly secure, Carnalists, Impenitent sinners, etc.
IN that other extreme, or defect of this love of God knowledge, faith, fear,
hope etc. are all manner of Atheists, Epicures, Infidells, that are secure in a
reprobate sense and fear not God at all, and such as are too distrustful and
timorous, as desperate persons are. De anima cap de humoribus.
That grand sin of Atheism as Melancthon calls it, monstrosam melancholiam,
monstrous melancholy, or venenatam melancholiam, poisoned melancholy. A
company of Cyclopes or Giants, that war with the gods, as the Poet fained,
that scoff at all Religion, at God himself, deny him and all his attributes,
his wisdom, power, providence, his mercy and judgment.

Iuvenal.
Esse aliquos manes and subterranea regna,
Et contum and Stygio ranas in gurgite nigras,
Atque una transire vadum tot millia cymba,
Nec pueri credunt, nisi qui nondum aere lauantur.
That there is either heaven or hell, or any such peace or happiness, things
to come, credat Iudaeus Apella, for their parts they esteem them as so many
Poets tales. They fear neither God nor Devil. But with that Cyclops in
Euripides..

Haud vlla numina expauescunt caelitum,
Sed victimas vni deorum maximo,
Ventri offerunt, deos ignorant caeteros.
They fear no God but one,
They sacrifice to none;
But Belly, and him adore,
For gods They know no more.
Their God is their belly, as Paul says, Sancta matter saturitas, and all their
endeauours are to satisfy their lust and appetite, how to please their Genius,
and to be merry for the present, Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas;
Wisd. 2.2.
Our life is short and tedious, and in the death of a man there is no recovery,
neither was any man known that has returned from the grave, for we are borne
at all adventure, and we shall be hereafter as though we had never been, for
the breath is as smoke in our nostrils, etc. and the spirit vanishes as the
soft air. Ver. 6.7.8.
Come let us enjoy the pleasures that are present, let us cheerfully use the
creatures as in youth, let us fill our selves with costly wine and ointments,
let not the flower of our life pass by us, let us crown our selves with rose
buddes before they are withered, etc for this is our portion, this is our
lotte. For the rest of heaven and hell, let children and superstitious fools
believe it, for their parts, they are so far from trembling at the dreadful
day of Judgment, that they wish with Nero, Me viuo, fiat, let it come in their
times, so secure, so desperate, so immoderate in lust and pleasure, so prone to
revenge, that as Paterculus said of some Catiffes in his time in Rome, Quod
nequiter ausi, fortiter executi, it shall not be so wickedly attempted, as
desperately performed, what ere they take in hand: were it not for Gods
restraining grace, fear and shame, disgrace and temporal punishment, and
their own infamy, they would Lycaon like exenterate, or as so many Caniballs
eat up, or Cadmus soldiers consume one another. These are commonly professed
Atheists, that never use the name of God but to swear by it, that express
naught else but Epicurisme in their carriage, that love, fear, obey, Or
Bressela^ Vsque adeo insanus vt nec inferos nec supcros esse dicat, animasque
cum corporibus interire credat, etc.
and perform all civil duties, as they shall find them expedient or
behoouefull to their own ends. Bulco Opiliensis sometimes Duke of Silesia was
such an one to a hair, he lived says Europe descript. cap. 24.
Aeneas Siluius at Vratislauia, and was so mad to satsfie his lust, that he
believed neither heaven nor hell, or that the soul was immortal, but married
wives, and turned them up as he thought fit, did murder and mischief, and what
he list himself: This Duke has too many followers in our days: say what you
can, dehort, exhort persuade to the contrary, heaven and hell; it is to no
purpose, laterem lanas, they answer as Ataliba that Indian Prince did to Friar
Vincent, Fratres a Bry. Amer. part, 6. librum a Vincentio monacho datum abiecit
nihil se videre ibi huiusmodi dicens, rogansque vnde haec sciret quum de caelo
and Tartaro couteneri ibi diceret.
when he brought him a book, and told him all the mysteries of salvation,
heaven and hell were contained in it, he looked upon it, and said, he saw no
such matter, and asked withal how he knew it: they will but scoff at it. Let
them take heaven, paradise and that future happiness that will, bonum est esse
hic, It is good being here: there is no talking to such men, no hope of their
conversion, they are in a reprobate sense, mere carnalists, worldly minded
men, that howsoever they may be applauded in this world by some few parasites,
and held for worldly wise men, Non minus hi furent quam Hercules qui coniugem,
liberos interfecit, habet hec aetas plura huiusmodi portintosa monstra.
They seem to me says Melancthon, to be as mad as Hercules was when he
raued and killed his wife and children. Cousin Germans to these men, are many
of our great Philosophers, howsoever they may be more temperate in this life,
give many good moral precepts, and sober in their conversation, yet in effect
they are the same, nimis altum sapiunt, too much learning makes them mad.
Whilst they attribute all to natural causes, or make Omnia contingenter fieri
voluit. Melancthon in praeceptum primum.
contingency of all things as Melancthon calls them, Pertinax hominum gens, a
peevish generation of men, that misled by Philosophy and the devils suggestion,
their own innate blindness, deny God as much as the rest. In spiritual
things God must demonstrate all to sense, or leave a pawn with them, or else
seek some other creditor. They will acknowledge Nature, but not God, but as
Non intelligis te quum haec dicis, mutare te ipsum nomen dei? quid enim est
aliud natura quam deus etc. tot habet appellationes quot munera.
Seneca well discourses with them lib. 4. de Benificijs, ca. 5.6.7. they do
not understand what they say, what is nature but God? call him what thou will,
Nature, Jupiter, he has as many names as Offices: it comes all to one pass,
God is the fountain of all, the first giver and preserver from whom all things
depend, Austin.
a quo and per quem omnia Nam quodcunque vides deus est quocunque moueris.

God is all in all, God is every where, in every place. And yet this Seneca
that could confute and blame them, is all out as much to be blamed and confuted
himself, as mad himself, for he holds fatum Stoicum, that inevitable
necessity in the other extreme, as those Chaldean Astrologers of old did,
against whom the Prophet Jeremy so often thunders, and those heathen
Mathematicions, Nigidius Figulus, Magicians, and Priscilianists, whom Saint
Austin so eagerly confutes, those Arabian questionaries, nouem Iudices,
Albumasar, Dorotheus, etc. and our Countrymen Estuidus, that take upon them to
define out of those great conjunctions of stars, the periods of kingdoms, of
religions, of all future accidents, wars, plagues, schisms, heresies, and what
not, all from stars, and such things says Maginus, Quae sibi and
intelligentijs suis reseruauit deus, Principio Ephemer.
which God has reserved to himself and his Angels, they will take upon them
to foretell, as if stars were immediate, inevitable causes of all future
accidents. In Rome says Dionysius Halicarnassaus, lib. 7. when those meteors
and prodigies appeared in the air, after the banishment of Cori^^^nus, Vary
homines affecti alii dei iudicium ad tam pii exilium alii ad naturam referebant
non ab indignatione dei sed humanis causis etc.
Men were diversely affected, some said they were Gods just judgments for the
execution of that good man, some referred all to natural causes, some to
stars, some thought they came by chance, some by necessity decreed ab
initio, and could not be altered; This last was Senecas Tene^t, that god was
alligatus causis secundis, so tied to second causes, to that inexorable
necessity, that he could alter nothing of that which was once decreed, sic
erat in fatis, it cannot be altered, 2. Natural. quaest 33.36. quaest.
semel iussit, semper paret deus. nulla vis rumpit, nullae preces, nec ipsum
fulmen. God has once said it and it must for ever stand good, no prayers, nor
threats, nor power, nor thunder it self can alter it. Zeno, Chrysippus and
those other Stoics, as you may read in Tully 2. de diuinatione, Gellius lib.
6. cap. 2. etc. maintained as much. In all ages there have been such, that
either deny God in all, or in part, some that deride him, blasphem^ him,
derogate at their pleasure from him. De I^a 16.34 Iratus caelo quod obstr^peret
ad pugnam vocauit, Iouem quanta dem^ntia, putauit, sibi noceri ne posse, and se
nocetamen Ioui posse.
Claudius the emperor was angry with heaven because it thundered, and
challenged Jupiter into the field? with what madness says Seneca: he thought
Jupiter could not hurt him, but he could hurt Jupiter. Diagoras, Demonax,
Epicurus, Pliny, Lucian, Lucretius, professed Atheists, all in their times.
Gilbertus Cognatus labors much, and so does Erasmus, to vindicate Lucian from
scandal, and there be those that Apologize for Epicurus, but all in vain:
Lucian scoffs at all, Epicurus he denies all, and Lucretius his Scholar
defends him in it.

Lib. ^.^.
Humana ante oculos faede cum vita iaceret,
In terris oppressa graui sub religione,
Quae caput a caeli regionibus ostendebat,
Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans etc.
When humane kind was drencht' in superstition,
With ghastly looks, aloft which frighted mortal men etc
He alone as another Hercules, did vindicate the world from that monster. Uncle
Pliny lib. 2. cap. 7. not. hist. and lib. cap. 5. in express words denies the
immortality of the Soul. Aristotle is hardly censured of some, Pomponatius and
Scaliger acknowledge as much. Auerroes oppugnes all spirits, and supreme
powers, of late Brunus, infoelix Brunus, Dissert, cum (...) syder.
Kepler calls him, has publicly maintained such Atheistical paradoxes.

To these we may well add that carnall' crew of worldly minded men, impenitent
sinners, who though they be professed Christians, yet they do, Nulla
pallescere culpa, make a conscience of nothing they do, they have cauterised
consciences, and are indeed in a reprobate sense, they do know there is a God,
a day of Judgment to come, and yet for all as Hugo says, Ita comedunt ac
dormiunt, ac si diem Iudicij ^uasissent, ita ludunt ac rident ac si in calis
cum deo regnarent, they are as merry for all the sorrow, as if they had escaped
all dangers, and were in heaven already. All those rude idiots and ignorant
persons, that neglect and contemn the means of their salvation may march on
with these, but above all others, those temporising statesmen, politic
Machauellians and Hypocrites, that make a show of Religion, but in their hearts
laugh at it, simulata sanctitas duplex iniquitas; They are in a double Fault,
that fashion themselves to this world, which Romans 12.2.
Paul forbiddes, and like Mercury the Planet are good with good, bad with bad.
When they are at Rome, they do there as they see done, Puritans with Puritans,
Papists with Papists; omnium horarum homines, ambodexters, Omnis Aristippum
decuit color and status and res.
All their study is to please, and their God is their commodity, all their
labor for to satisfy their own lusts, and their endeauours to their own
ends. Whatsoever they pretend in public, they seem to do, Psalm 13.1.
with the fool in their hearts they say there is no God. Their words are as
soft as oil, but bitterness is in their hearts, like Pope Guiccardine.
Alexander the 6 so cunning dissemblers, that what they think they never
speak, Many of them are so close, you can hardly discern it, or take any just
exceptions at them, they are not factious, oppressors as others are, no
bribers, no simoniacall contractors, no such ambitious, lascivious persons as
some others are, no drunkards, Sobrij solemn vident orientem, sobrij vident
occidentem. They rise sober, and go sober to bed, plain dealing, upright
honest men, they do wrong to no man, and are so reputed in the worlds esteem
at least, very zealous in Religion, very charitable, meek, humble,
peacemakers, keep all duties, very devout, honest, well spoken of, beloved of
all men, but he that knows better how to judge, he that examines the heart, he
says they are Hypocrites, Cor ^olo plenum; sonant vitium percussa malign,
they are not found within. As it is with writers Erasmus.
often times, Plus sanctimoniae in libello, quam libelli authore, more
holiness is in the book then in the Author of it. Many come to Church with
great Bibles, whom Cardan said he could not choose but laugh at, and will now
and then dare operam Augustino, read Austen, frequent Sermons, and yet
professed Usurers, mere gripes, tota vitae ratjo Epicurea est; all their life
is Epicurisme and Atheism, come to Church all day, and lie with a Curtesan at
night. Qui Curios simulant and Bacchanalia vivant.

Yea and many of those holy Friars, sanctified men, Cappans says Hierom, and
cilicium induvnt, sed intus latronem tegunt. They are wolves in sheep
clothing, Introrsum turpes speciosi pelle decora fair without, and most foul
within. Hierome.
Latet plerumque sub tristi amictu lasciuia, and deformis horror vili vest
tegitur. Oftentimes under a mourning weed, lies lust it self, and horrible
vices under a poor coat. But who can examine all those kinds of Hypocrites, or
diue into their hearts? If we may guess at the tree by the fruit, never so
many as in these days, show me a plain dealing true honest man? and pudor and
probitas and timor omnis abest. He that shall but look into their lives, and
see such enormous vices, men so immoderate in lust, unspeakable in malice,
furious in their rage, flattering and dissembling, (all for their own ends)
will surely think they are not truly religious, but of an obdurate heart,
most part in a reprobate sense, as in this age. But let them carry it as they
will for the present, dissemble as they can, a time will come when they shall
be called to account, their melancholy is at hand, and Hell it self is ready
to receive them.

SVBSEC. 2. Despaires, Aequinocations, Definitions, parties and parts affected.
THere be many kinds of desperation, whereof some be holy, some unholy, as
Abernethy cap. 24 of his Physic of the soul.
one distinguishes, that unholy he defines out of Tully, to be Aegritudinem
animi sieve vlla rerum expectatione meliore, a sickness of the soul without
any hope or expectation of amendment: Thomas sec. sec. distinct. 40. art. 4.
Recessus a re desiderata propter impossibilitatem existimatam, a restraint from
the thing desired, for some impossibility supposed. Because they cannot obtain
what they would, they become desperate, and many times either yield to the
passion by death it self, or else attempt impossibilities, not to be performed
by men. In some cases this desperate humor is not much to be discommended, as
in wars it is a cause many times of extraordinary valor; it makes them
improve their worth beyond it self, and of a forlorn impotent company become
conquerers in a moment. Vna salus victis nullam sperare salutem. In such cases
when they see no remedy, but that they must either kill or be killed, they take
courage and oftentimes, praeter spem, beyond all hope vindicate themselves
William the Conqueror when he first landed in England, sent back his ships,
that his soldiers might have no hope of retyring back. Method hist. cap. 5.
Bodine excuses his countrimens overthrow, at that famous battle of
Agencourt, in Henry the 5. time ( cui simile says Frossard tota historia
producere non possit, which no history can parrallel almost, wherein one handful
of Englishmen, overthrew a Royal army of Frenchime^) With this refuge of
despair pauci desperati, a few desperate fellows being compassed in by their
enemies, past all hope of life, fought like so many Devils, and gives a
caution, that no soldiers hereafter set upon desperate persons. Many such
kinds there are of desperation, when men are past hope of obtaining any suite.
Desperatio facit Monachum as the saying is, but these are equivocal, improper,
When I speak of Despair, says Super praecep um primum de Rellig and partibus
cius. N^n loquor de omni desperatione sed tantum de ea qua desperare solent
homines de deo ^^ponitur (...) est peccatur grauissim^^ etc.
Zanch^, I speak not of every kind, but of that alone which concerns God. It
is opposite to hope, and it is a most pernicious sin, wherewith the Devil
seeks to intrappe men. Musculus makes four kinds of Desperation of God, our
selves, our neighbor, or any thing to be done, but this division of his may be
reduced easily to the former: all kinds are opposite to hope. Hope ^reares, and
in the midst of miseries it gives content: spes alit agricolas, and were it
not for hope, we of all others were most miserable, as Paul says, in his life,
were it not for hope the heart would break: yet does it not so rear, as
despair does deiect, this violent and sower passion of Despair, and of all
perturbations most grievous as ^. 5. (...). 21. de regis instuut.
Patritius holds. Some divide it into final and temporal, Reprobi^sque ad
finem pertinaciter persistunt Zanchius.
final is incureable which befalls reprobates, temporal is a reiection of
hope and comfort for a time, which may befall the best of Gods children, and it
commonly proceeds Vitium ab infidelitate prof^ciscens.
from weakness of faith, as in David when he was oppressed, he cried out, O
Lord thou have forsaken me, but this was for a time. This ebbes and flows
with hope, it is a grievous sin howsoever: although some kind of Despair be
not amiss, when says Zanchius we Despair of our own means, and rely
wholly upon God: but that kind is not here meant. This pernicious kind of
Desperation is the subject of our discourse, homicida animae, the murderer of
the soul as Austin terms it, a fearful passion, wherein the party oppressed
thinks he can get no ease but by death, and is fully resolved to offer
violence unto himself; so sensible of his burden, and impatient of his cross,
that he hopes by death alone to be freed of his calamity, (though it prove
otherwise) and choseth with Job 6.8.9.17.5. Rather to be strangled and die,
then to be in his bones. Abernethie.
The part affected is the whole soul, and all the faculties of it, there is a
privation of joy, hope, trust, confidence, of present and future good, and in
their place succeed fear, sorrow, etc, as in the Symptoms shall be showed: The
heart is grieved, the conscience wounded, the mind Eclipsed with black fumes,
arising from those perpetual terrors.

MEMB. 3. Causes of Despair, The Devil, Melancholy, Meditation, Distrust,
Weakness of Faith, Rigid Ministers, Misunderstanding Scriptures, Guilty
Conscience, etc.
THe principal agent and procurer of this mischief is the Devil, those whom
God forsakes the Devil by his permission lays hold on. Sometimes he
persecutes them with that worm of conscience as he did Judas 1. Sam. 2.16.
Saul and others. The Poets call it Nemesis, but it is indeed Gods just
judgment, sero sed serio, he strikes home at last, and sets upon them as a
thief in the night. 1. These. 2. Psalm. 38.
This temporary passion made David cry out. Lord rebuke me not in thine anger,
neither chaesten me in thine heavy displeasure, for thine arrows have light
upon me, etc. there is nothing sound in my flesh, Ver. 9.
because of thine anger. And again I rore for the very grief of mine heart,
and Psalm. 22. My God my God why have thou forsaken me, and art so far from my
health, and the words of my crying, I am like to water powered out, my bones are
out of joint, mine heart is like wax, that is molten in the midst of my
bowels. Ver. 14.
And so Psalm ^8.15. and 16. ver. and Psalm. 102. I am in misery at the point of
death, from my youth I suffer thy terrors doubting for my life, thine
indignations have gone over me, and thy fear has cut me off. Job does often
complain in this kind, and those God not still assists, the Devil is ready to
try and to torment, still seeking whom he may devour. If he find them merry
says Gregory, he tempts them forthwith to some dissolute Act, if pensive and
sad to a desperate end, aut suadendo blanditur aut minando terret. Sometimes by
fair means, sometime again by foul, as he perceiues men severally inclined.
His ordinary engine by which he produces this effects, is the melancholy
humor it self, which is Balneum Diaboli, the Devils bath; and as in Saul
these evil spirits get in I^niscent se mali gen^j. L^^^n li^ 1. c. 16
as it were and take possess on of us. Black color is a shooing horn, a
bait to allure them, insomuch that many writers make melancholy an ordinary
cause, and a Symptom of Despair. The body works upon the mind, by obfuscating
the spirits, and corrupted instruments, which Cas^s of conscience, lib. 1, 16.
Perkins illustrates by that simile of an Artificer, that has a bad tool, his
skill is good, abillitie correspondent, by reason of bad tools, his work must
needs be lame, and imperfect. But Melancholy and Despair though often, do not
concur: much Melancholy is without affliction of conscience, as Bright and
Perkins illustrate by four reasons; and yet Melancholy alone again may be
sometimes a sufficient cause of this terror of conscience. Cap. 3. de (...)
a^ion: deo minus se cu^e esse^nce ad sa utem praedesti^atos esse.
Foelix Plater so found it in his observations, e melancholicis alij damnatos
seputant, etc. They think they are not predestinate, God has forsaken them;
and yet otherwise very zealous and Religious, and it is common to be seen, Ad
Desperaonem saepe ducit haec mela^cholia and est frequen^issima ob supplicii
(...) mae^or and metus in desparationem (...) desinunt.
Melancholy for ^eare of Gods judgments and hell fire, drives men to
desperation, fear and sorrow if they be immoderate and often with it. Loss of
goods, loss of friends, and those lesser grieses do sometimes effect it, or
such dismal accidents: Foelix Platter has a memorable example in this kind,
of a painters wife in Basil that was melancholy for her sons death, and from
melancholy became desperate, she thought God would not pardon her sins,
Damnatam se putauit and per quatuor menses gehenn^ paenam sentire.
and for four months still raued, that she was in hell fire, already damned.
When the humor is stirred up, every small object aggrauates and incenseth it,
as the parties are addicted. 1566. ob triticum diutius seruatum conscientiae
simulis agitatur, etc.
The same Author has an example of a merchant man, that for the loss of a
little wheat, which he had ouerlong kept, was troubled in conscience, for that
he had not sold it sooner, or given it to the poor, and yet a good Scholar,
and a great Divine, no persuasion would serve to the contrary; but that for
this fact he was damned, he ran about the streets crying he was damned, in
other matters very iuditious and discreet. Solitariness, much fasting, divine
meditations and contemplations of Gods judgments, most part accompany this
Melancholy. Nonnulli ob long as inedias studia and meditationes coelestes de
rebus sacris and religione semper agitant, etc. Many says Pet. Forestus
through long fasting, serious meditations of heavenly things, fall into such
fittes, and as Lemmuis adds, Solitarios and superstitio^^^ plerumque exagitat
conscientia, non mercatores, le^ones, caupones saeneratores etc. largiorem hi
nacti sunt conscientiam Invenes plerumque conscientiamnegligunt s^n^s autem etc.
lib. 4. c. 21. If they be solitary given, superstitious, precise or very
devout: seldom shall you find a Merchant, a Soldier, an Inn keeper, a Baud,
an Host, an Vserer so troubled in mind, they have Chiuerill consciences that
will stretch, they are seldom moved in this kind or molested: young men and
middle age are more wild, and less apprehensiue, but old folks most part and
such as are timorous and are religiously given. Peter Forestus obseruat, lib.
10. cap. 12. de morbis cerebri, Has a fearful example of a Minister, that
through precise fasting in Lent, and overmuch meditation contracted this
mischief, and in the end became Desperate, thought he saw Devils in his
chamber, and that he could not be saved, he smelled nothing as he said but fire
and brimstone, and was already in hell, and would ask them still, if they did
not Annon sentis sulphur inquit etc.
smell as much. I told him he was Melancholy, but he laughed me to scorn, and
replied, that he saw Devils, talked with them in good earnest, and would spitte
in my face, and ask me if I did not smell brimstone, and at last he was by him
cured. Such another story I find in Plater, obserat. lib. 1. a poor fellow had
done some soul offense, and for fourteen days would eat no meat, in the end
became Desperate, the Divines about him could not ease him, Desperabundus misere
periit.
but so he died. Continual meditation of Gods judgments trouble many, Multi
ob timorem futuri Iudicij, says Guatinerius cap. 5. tract. 15. and suspicionem
desperabundi sunt; David himself complains that Gods judgments terrified his
soul. Psalm. 119. part. 16. ver. 8. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I
am afraid of thy Judgments. Quoties diem illum cogito, says Hierome, t^to
corpora contremisco, I tremble as often as I think of it. Especially if their
bodies be predisposed by Melancholy, and they religiously given, and have
tender consciences, every small object affrights them, the very reading of
Scriptures it self, and misinterpretation of some places of it, as many are
called few are chosen. Not every one that says Lord. Fear not l^^tel flock.
He that stands, let him take heed lest he fall, work out your salvation with
fear and trembling etc. These and the like places terrify the souls of many,
predestination reprobation, offends many; They doubt of their Election, how
they shall know it, by what signs? and so far forth says In 17. ^o^u^nis.
(...) sed serucint and ^^arniplicant in t^^tian vt non pary^malysint ab insa^^l
neque tamen aliad hac mentis anxietate efficient quam vt duria^lo potestanten
facinunt ipsos per ^esperationem ad infe^nos producendi.
Luther, with such nice points, torture and crucify themselves, that they are
almost mad, and all they get by it is this, they lay open a gappe to the devil
by Desperation to carry them to hell. But the greatest harm of all proceeds
from those thundering Ministers, a most frequent cause they are of this malady:
and do more harm in the Church says Ecclesiast li. 1 Haud sci^ an ma^us
disertime^ ab his qui bla^diuntur an ^ bis qui territant ingens utiumque
periculum, ali^ ad seeu^itatem d^cunt, alii afflictionum magnitudine meme^
obsorbent and in desperationem trahunt.
Erasmus then they that flatter; great danger on both sides, the one lulles
them asleep in carnal security, the other drives them to Desperation.
Whereas Saint Bern super 6. Cant. alterum sine altero proserre non expedit
recordatio solius indicii in desperationem praecipitat and misericordiae fallax
ostentatio pessimam general securitatem.
Bernard well advises, We should not meddle with the one without the other,
nor speak of judgment without mercy, the one alone brings Desperation, the
other security. But these men are wholly for judgment, of a rigid disposition
themselves, that can speak of nothing but hell, fire and damnation, as they
did, Luke 11.46. lade men with burdens grievous to be borne, which they
themselves touch not with a finger. It Is familiar with our Papists to terrify
men's souls with Purgatory tales, visions, apparitions, to daunt even the most
generous spirits, to require Charity, as Brentius odserues, of others, bounty
meekness, love, patience, when they themselves breath naught but lust, envy
covetousness. They teach others to fast, give alms, do penance, and crucify
their mind with superstitious observations, bread and water, hair clothes,
whippes and the like, when they themselves have all the dainties the world can
afford, lie on Down beds, with a curtisan in their arms. hen quantum patimur
pro Christo as Leo Decimus.
he said, what a cruel tyranny is this, so to insult over and terrify men's
souls. Our indiscreet pastors many of them come not far behind, whilst in
their ordinary sermons they still aggrauate sin, thunder out Gods Judgments
without respect, rail at and pronounce them damned, for giving so much to
sports and recreations, making every small fault and a thing indifferent an
irremissible offense they so wound men's consciences, that they are almost at
their wits ends.

Those bitter potions says De suturo indicio de damnatione horendum crepunt
and amaras ill^^ potiones in ore semper habent vt multos inde in desperationem
cogant.
Erasmus are still in their mouths nothing but gall and horror, and a mad noise,
they make all their auditors desperate many are wounded by this means, and
they commonly that are most devout and precise, that follow sermons, that have
least cause, they are most apt to mistake, and fall into these miseries; I
have heard some complain of Persons resolution and other books of like
nature, (good otherwise) they are too tragical, too much deiecting men,
aggravating offenses, great care and choice, much discretion is required in
this kind.

The last and the greatest cause of this malady, is our own conscience, a
guilty conscience for some foul offense formerly committed. A good conscience
is a continual feast, but a gauled conscience is a great torment as can
possibly happen, another hell. Our conscience, which is a great Ledgier book
wherein are written all our offenses, a register to lay them up (which those
Ple^ius.
Egyptians in their Hierogliphicks, expressed by a mill, as well for the
continuance, as for the torture of it) grindes our souls with the remembrance
of some precedent sins, and makes us reflect upon our selves, accuse and
condemn our own selves. Genesis 4.
Sin lies at door, etc. I know there be many other causes assigned by
Zanchius 9. causes Musculus makes.
Musculus and others, as Incredulity, infidelity, presumption, ignorance,
blindness, ingratitude, discontent, etc. But this of conscience is the
greatest, Plutarch.
Instar vlceris corpora iugiter percellens: This scrupulous conscience, as
Al^os misere affligit plena scrupul^ conscientia nodum in scirpo quaerunt, and
vbi n^lla causa subest, miserecordiae divinae diffidentes se orco destinant
Peter Forestus calls it, which tortures so many, that either out of a deep
apprehension of their own unworthiness, and consideration of their own
dissolute life, accuse themselves, and aggrau at every small offense, when
there is no such cause, misdoubt in the mean time Gods mercies they fall into
th^se inconveniences. The Poets call them Coelius. lib. 6,
Furies, Dire, but it is this conscience alone which is a thousand witnesses to
accuse us. After many-pleasant days, and fortunate adventures, merry tides,
this conscience at last does arrest us. Well he may escape temporal
punishment, Prima haec est vltio quod se Iudice nemo nocens absoluitur, improba
qua^uis gratia fallacis praetoris vicerit vrnam. Iuuenal.
bribe a corrupt Judge, avoid the censure of the law, and flourish for a time.
Quis vnquam vidit auarum ringi dum lucru^ adest, adulterum dum potitur voto,
lugere in perpetrando scelere, voluptate sumus e^rij, proinde no^ sentimus, etc.
Who ever saw, says Chrysostom, a covetous man troubled in mind when he is
telling of his money, an adulterer morn with his mistress in his arms, we are
then druncke with pleasure, and ^erceaue nothing, but as the prodigal son
had dainty fare, sweet music at first, merry company, Iouial entertainment,
but a cruel reckoning in the end, as bitter as wormwood, a fearful
visitation commonly follows. And that Devil that then told thee that it was a
light sin or no sin at all, now aggrauates on the other side, and tells
thee that it is a most irremissible offense, as he did Cain and Judas, to
bring them to despair. Tragical examples in this kind are too familiar and
common, Adrian, Galba, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Caracalla, were in such horror of
conscience for their offenses committed, murders, rapes, extorsions, injuries,
that they were weary of their lives, and could get no body to kill them. It is
strange to read what De bello Neapol.
Comineus has written of Lews the II that French King, of Charles the 8. and
of Alphonsus King of Naeples, In the fury of this passion how he came into
Sicily, and what prankes he played. Guicciardine, a man most unapt to believe
lies, relates how that Ferdinande his fathers ghost, who before had died for
grief, came and told him that he could not resist the French King, he thought
every man cried France, France, the reason of it, says Comineus, was because
he was a vile tyrant, a murderer, an oppressor of his subjects, he bought up
all commodities, and sold them at his own price, sold Abbeys to Jews, and
Falconers, both Ferdinande his father, and he himself never made conscience of
any committed sin, and to conclude, says he, it was impossible to do worse
then they did. Why was Pausaenias that Spartan Tyrant, Nero, Otho, Galba, so
persecuted with spirits in every house they came, but for their murders which
they had committed? Thyreus de locis infestis, par. 1 cap. 2.
Why does the Devil haunt many men's houses after their deaths, and take
possession, as it were, of their palaces, but because of their several
villainies? Why had Richard the 3 such fearful dreams, says Polidor, but for
his frequent murders? Why was Theodoricus that king of the Goths, so
suspicious, and so afrighted with a fish head alone, but because he had
murdered Symmachus and Boethius his son in law, those worthy Romans? Caelius
lib. 27. cap. 2^. See more in Plutarch in his tract de his qui sero a numine
puniuntur, and in his book de tranquillitate animi, etc. Yea and sometimes God
himself has a hand in it, to punish them for their sins, God the auenger,
as Ps. 44.1.
David calls him, vltor a tergo deus* which the Poets expressed by Adrastia, or
Nemesis, Assequitur Nemesisque virum vestigia seruat, ne male quid facias. And
she is as Regina causa rum and arbitra rerum nunc erectas ceruices opprimit,
etc.
Ammianus l. 14. describes her, the Queen of causes, and moderator of things,
now she pulls down the proud, now she reares and encourages those that are
good, he gives instance in his Eusebius, Nicephorus, lib. 10. cap. 35. Eccles.
hist. in Maximinus and Julian. Fearful examples of Gods just judgment and
vengeance are to be found in all histories, of some that have been eaten to
death with Rats and Mice, as Alex. Gaguinus. catal. reg. Pol.
Popelius the second king of Poland Ano 830, his wife and children; the like
story of a Bishop is in Cosmog.
Munster, and in Giraldus Cambrensis, Itin. Came. lib. 2. cap. 2. and where not?

SVBSEC. 4. Symptoms of Despair. Fear, Sorrow, Suspicion, anxiety, horror of
conscience, fearful dreams, and visions.
AS Shoomakers do when they bring home shoes, still cry leather is dearer and
dearer, may I justly say of these melancholy Symptoms; these of despair, are
most violent, tragical and grievous, far beyond the rest: all that is
singular in other Melancholy, Horribile, dirum, pestilens, atrox, ferum, is
extended in this, concur all in this: Melancholy in the highest degree, a
burning fever of the soul, so made, says Cap. 15. in 9. Rhasis.
Iacchinus by this misery; fear, sorrow, and despair, he puts for common
Symptoms of Melancholy. They are in great pain and horror of mind,
distraction of soul, restless, full of continual fears, cares, torments,
anxieties, they can neither eat, drink, nor sleep, for them, take no rest
Iuuenal. Sat. 13.
Perpetua anxietas nec mensae tempore cessat
Exagitat vesana quies, somnique furentes.
Neither at bed, nor yet at board,
Will any rest D^spaire afford.
Fear takes away their content, and alters their countenance, even in their
greatest delights, singing, dancing, dalliance, they are still, says Mentem
eripit timor hic vul tum totumque corporis hab^tum immutat, etiam in delitijs
in tripudijs, in symposiis in amplexu coniugis carnisicinam exercet. lib. 4
cap. 21.
Lemnius, tortured in their souls. It consumes them to naught. I am like a
Pelican in the wilderness, says David of himself, temporally afflicted, an
Owl because of thine indignation. Ps. 102. ver. 8, 10. and Psalm. 55.4. My
heart trembles within me, and the terrors of death have come upon me, fear
and trembling are come upon me etc. at deaths door, Psalm. 107.18. Their soul
abhorres all manner of meat. Their Non sinit conscientia tales homines recta
verba proferre aut rectis quenquam oculis aspicere, ab omni hominu^ caetu
eosdem exterminat and dormientes perterrefacit, Philost. lib. 7. de vit.
Apollonij.
sleep is, if it be any, unquiet, subject to fearful dreams, and terrors.
Peter in his bands slept secure, for he knew God protected him, and Tully makes
it an argument of Roscius Amerinus innocence, that he killed not his father,
because he so securely slept. Those Martyrs in the Primative Church were most
Eusebius Nicephorus eccles. hist. lib. ^. c. 17.
cheerful and merry in the midst of their persecutions, but it is far
otherwise with these men, tossed as a Sea, and that continually without rest or
intermission, they can think of naught, Seneca lib. 18. Epist. 106.
conscientia aliud agere non patitur, perturbatam vitam agunt nunquam vacant,
etc.
their conscience will not let them be quiet, in perpetual fear, anxiety,
that they be not yet apprehended, they are in doubt still they shall be ready
to betray themselves, as Cain did, he thinks every man will kill him: And
roares for the very grief of heart, Ps. 38.8. as David did, as Job did,
3.20.21.22. etc. Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to
them that have heavy hearts? Which long for death, and if it come not, search
it more then treasures, and rejoice when they can find the grave. They are
generally weary of their lives, a trembling heart they have, a sorrowful mind,
and have no rest. Deuteronomy. 28.65.66. In the morning they wish for evening, and for
morning in the evening, for the sight of their eyes which they see and fear of
hearts. And so for the most part it is with them all, they think they hear
and see visions confer with Devils, that they are tormented, and in hell fire
already damned quite, and not be revoked. Some thing talks within the^, they
spit fire and brimstone, they cannot but blaspheame, they cannot repent, or
think a good thought, so far carried, vt cogantur ad impia cogitandum etiam
contra voluntatem, says Lib. 1. obser.
Faelix Plater. They think evil against t^eir wills, that which they abhor
themselves, they must needs think and speak. He gives instance in a patient
of his, that when he would pray, had such evil thoughts still suggested to
him, and wicked Ad maledice^dum Deo.
meditations. Another instance he has of a woman that was often tempted to
curse God, to blaspheame, and kill her self. Sometimes the Devil, as they
say, stands without and talks with them, sometimes he is within them, as they
think, and there speaks and talks as to such that are possessed; As
Apollidorus in Plutarch, thought his heart spoke within him. There is a most
memorable example of Goulart.
Francis Spira an Advocate of Padua. Ao 1545. that being desperate, by no
counsel of learned men could be comforted, he felt as he said, the pains of
hell in his soul, in all other things he discoursed a right, but in this most
mad. Frisemelica, Bellouat and some other excellent Physicians, coud neither
make him eat, drink, or sleep, no persuasion could ease him. Never pleaded
any man so well for himself, as this man did against himself, and so he
desperately died: Springer a Lawyer has written his life. Cardinal Crescence
died so likewise desperate at Verona, still he thought a black dog followed him
to his death bed, no man could drive the dog away, Sleidan com. 23. cap. lib.
3. Whilst I was a writing this Treatise, says Montaltus, cap. 2. de
melancholia Dum haec scribo implorat open meam monacha in reliquis sana and
iudicio recta per 5. annos melancholica damnatam se dicit conscientiae stimuls
oppressa, etc.
A Nun came to me for help, well for all other matters, but troubled in
conscience for 5 years last past she is almost mad, and not able to resist,
thinks she has offended God and is certainly damned. Foelix Plater has
store of instances of such as thought themselves damned, Alios conquerentes
audiuise esse ex damnatorum numero Deo non esse curae al aque infinita, quae
proferre non audebant vel abhorrebant.
forsaken of God, etc. One amongst the rest, that durst not go to Church, or
come near the Rhine, for fear to make away himself, because then he was most
especially tempted. These and such like Symptoms, are intended and remitted,
as the m^lady it self is more or less, some will hear good counsel, some
will not, some desire help, some reject all, and will not be eased.

SVBSECT. 5. Prognostics of Despair, Blasphemy, violent death, etc.
MOst Musculus. Patritius. ad vim sibi infere^dam cogi^ homines.
part these kind of persons make away themselves some are mad, but most offer
violence to their own persons. A wounded spirit who can bear, Prou. 18.14. As
Cain, Saul, Achitophel, Judas, blaspheamed and dyed. Bid says Pilot died
desperate eight years after Christ, 3. De mentis alienat. obseruat lib 1.
Faelix Plater has collected many examples, Vxor Mercatoris diu vexationibus
te^tata and^.
A Merchants wife that was long troubled with such temptations, in the night
rose out of her bed, and out of the window broke her neck into the street,
another drowned himself desperate as he was in the Rhene, some cut their
throats, many hang themselves. But this needs no illustration. It is
controuerted by some whether a man so offering violence to himself dying
desperate may be saved I or no? If they die so obstinately and suddenly, that
they cannot so much as wish for mercy, the worst is to be suspected, because
they die impenitent. Abernethy.
If their death have been a little more ling^ing, wherein they might have some
leisure in their hearts to cry for mercy, charity may judge the best, diverse
have been recovered out of the very act of hanging and drowning themselves,
and so brought ad sanam mentem, they have been very penitent, and much
abhorred their former fact, and have confessed that they repented in an
instant, and cried for mercy in their hearts. If a man put desperate hands upon
himself by occasion of madness or melancholy, if he have given testimony
before of his regeneration, in regard he do this not so much out of his will,
as ex vi morbi, we must make the best construction of it, as Busbequius.
Turks do, that think all fools and madmen go directly to Heaven.

SVBSECT. 6. Cure of Despair by Physic, good counsel, comforts, etc.
EXperience teaches us, John Mayor vitis patrum quidam negauit Christum per
Chirographum^ p^st restitutus.
that though many die obstinate, and wilful in this malady, yet many again are
able to resist and overcome, seek for help and find comfort, are taken e
faucibus Erebi, from the chops of hell and out of the Devils paws, though
they have by obligation given themselves to him. Some out of their own
strength and Gods assistance. Though he kill me, says Job, yet will I trust in
him, out of good counsel, advice; and physic. Trincaueli^s lib. 3. consil.
46.
Bellonacus cured a Monk by altering of his habit and course of life: Plater
many by Physic alone. But for the most part they must concur, and they take
a wrong course that think to overcome this feral passion by physic alone,
and they are as much out, that think to work this effect by good advice
alone, though both be forcible in themselves, yet vis vnita fortior, they must
go hand in hand in this disease: -- alterius sic altera poscit opem. For
Physic the same course is to be taken with this as in other melancholy, diet,
air, exercise, all those passions and perturbations of the mind, etc. are to
be rectified by the same means. They must by no means be left solitary, or to
themselves, never idle, never out of company. Counsel, good comfort is to be
applied as they shall see the parties inclined, or to the causes; whether it be
loss, fear, grief, discontent, or some such ferall accident, a guilty
conscience, or otherwise by frequent meditation, or too grievous an
apprehension, and consideration of his former life, by hearing, reading of
Scriptures, good Divines, good advice and conference it must be corrected and
counterpoysed. Many excellent exhortations, pa^^neticall discourses are extant
to this purpose, for such as are any way troubled in mind Perkins, Grenham,
Hayward, Bright, Hemingius, etc. are copious in this subject. Consult with them
and such others.

SPERATE MISERI, CAVETE FOELICES.
FINIS.
AVGVSTIN. Quicquid feceris, quantumcunque peccaueris, adhuc in vita es: vnde
te omnino, si sanare nollet, Deus auferret: qui enim clamando tibi persuasit,
ne recederes, parcendo clamat, vt redeas.

Omnipotenti medico nullus languor insanabilis occurrit: tantum tu curari te
sinas, manus eius ne repellas: nouit quid agat: non tantum delecteris, cum
fouet, sedtoleres, cum secat.

Vis a dubio liberari: Vis, quod incertum est, euadere: age paenitentiam, dum
sanus es: si sic agis, dico tibi, quod securus es, quia paenitentiam egisti eo
tempore, quo peccare potuisti.


The Conclusion of the Author to the Reader.
THe last Section shall be mine, to cut the strings of Democritus visor, to
unmask and show him as he is. Hor.
-- Amphora coepit
Institui, currente rota cur vrceus exit?
Democritus began as a Prologue in this Trage-comedie, but why does the Author
end, and act the Epilogue in his own name? I intended at first to have
concealed my self, but secundae cogitationes etc. for some reasons I have
altered mine intent, and am willing to subscribe. Me me adsum qui feci, in me
conuertite ocellos
Lectores, meus hic labor est. --
If ought be otherwise then it should be, since I have now put my self upon
the stage, I must undergo and abide the censure of it, iacta est alea, and I
may not escape it. It is most true, stylus virum arguit, our style bewrayes us,
Vt venatores feram e vestigio impresso ex script^u^cula virum Lipsius.
and as hunters find their game by the trace, so is a man descried by his
writings. I have laid my self open (I know it) in this Treatise, and shall be
censured I doubt not, yet this is some comfort, vt palata sic iudicia, out
censures are as various as our palates: If I be taxed, exploded by some, I
shall happily be as much approved and commended by others. It was Democritus
fortune, Idem irrisioni and admirationi habitus, and it is the common doom of
all writers: I seek not to be commended; non sum adeo informis, I would not be
vilified. I fear good men's censures, Iuuenal Sat. 9
and linguas mancipiorum contemn, as the barking of a dog, I securely
contemn the malicious and scurrile obloquies, flouts, calumnies of those
railers and detracters, I scorn the rest. Primus vest^um non sum nec imus. I
am none of the best of you, I am none of the meanest; Howsoever, I am now come
to retract some part of that which I have writ Ovid de pont. Eleg. 1.6.
Cum relego, scripsisse pudet quia plurimae cerno,
Me quoque qui scripsi Iudice digna lini:
When I peruse this tract which I have writ,
I am abash't, and much I hold unfit.
I could wish it otherwise, expunged, and to this end I have annexed this
Apologetical Appendix, to crave pardon for that which is amiss. I do suspect
some precedent passages have bin distasteful, as too Satyricall and bitter;
some again as too Comicall, homely, broad, or lightly spoken. For the first, I
grant that of Annal. 15.
Tacitus to be true, Asperae facetiae vbi nimis ex vero traxere, a^rem sui
memoriam relinquunt, a bitter jest leaves a sting behind it; And as Sr Fr.
Bacon in his Essays, now L. high Chauncellor of England.
an honorable and worthy man observes, They fear a Satyrists wit, he their
memories. I might therefore suspect, but I hope I have wronged no man. And
though for this Prefat. Democ.
I have Apologized already. Seneca Med. Act. 3.
Yet in Medeas words. -- Illud iam voce extrema pet^
Ne si qua noster dubious effudit d^lor.
Maneant in animo verba, sed melior tibi
Memoria nostri subeat, haec irae data -- Obliterentur.
And in my last words this I do desire,
That what in passion I have said or ire;
May be forgotten and a better mind,
Be had of us hereafter as you find.
To the other of lightness, I make answer, Omnia munda mundis, and as Augusta
Liuia sometimes said, viros nudos castae foeminae nihil a statuis distare, A
naked man to a modest woman, is no otherwise then a picture. Mala men's, malus
animus, Honey Soit qui mal y' pense. If in thy censure it be to light, I advise
thee, as Lipsius did his reader for some places of Plautus, Istos quasi Sirenum
scopulos praeteruchare, if they like thee not, let them pass; or oppose that
which is good to that which is bad, reject not therefore all: but to inuert
that verse of Martial and apply it to my present use, which Praefat. Suid.
Hierome Wolfius did to his Translation of Suidas;

Sunt mala, sunt quadam mediocria, sunt bona plura, leuicula quaedam and
ridicula adscribere non sun^ grauatus, quae pro suo candore quisque
interpretetur; some is bad, some indifferent, some good; I have inserted some
things more homely or light, which I would request every man to interpret to
the best, and conclude in Scaligers words to Cardan, Sime cognitum haberes, non
solum donares nobis has facetias nostras, sed ^tiam indignum duceres tam
humanum animum, lene ingenium vel minima^ suspitionem deprecari oportere. But
this likewise I have formerly excused withal those harsh compositions,
Tautologicall repetitions, perturbation of tences and numbers etc. I should
indeed (had I wisely done) observed that precept of the Poet. -- Hor.
Nonumque prematur in annum. And have taken more care: or as Alexander, the
Physician would have done by Lapis Lazuli 50. times washed before it be used;
I should have perused, corrected and amended this Tract, but I had not that
happy leisure, no amanuenses, assistants; and was enforced as a Bear does her
whelps, to Canis festi^ans caecos parit caetulos.
bring forth this confused lump, and had not space to lick it into form, as
she does her young ones; but even so to publish it, as it was written at first,
once for all, in an extemporanean style, quicquid in buccam venit, as I do
commonly all other exercises, stans pede in vno, as he made verses, out of a
confused company of notes; effudi quicquid dictanit Genius meus, and writ with
as small deliberation, as I do ordinarily speak. So that as a river runs
precipitate and swift, and sometimes dull and slow; now direct, now per ambages
about; now deep then shallow; now muddy, then clear; now broad, then narrow
does my style flow, now more serious, then light, now more elaborate or
remiss. Comicall, Satyricall, as the present subject required, or as at that
time I was affected. And if thou vouchsafe to read this Treatise, it shall
seem no otherwise to thee, then the way to an ordinary traveler; sometimes
fair, sometimes foul, here Champion, there enclosed; barren in one place,
better soil in another; by woods, groves, hills, dales, plains, etc. I shall
lead thee per ardua montium and lubrica val lium and roscidae cespitum, and
glebosae camporum, through variety of objects, that which thou shall like and
dislike.

For the matter it self or method, if it be faulty, consider I pray you that
of Columella, nihil perfectum aut a singulari consummatum industria, no man can
observe all, much is defective, and may be justly taxed, altered in Galen
Aristotle, and the very best. Boni venatoris, ( Pet. Nannius notis in Hor.
one observes) plures fer as capere non omnes, he is a good huntsman ca^ catch
some, not all, Non hic colonus domicilium habeo sed topiarij in morem hinc inde
florem vellic^.
I have done mine endeavor. Besides, I dwell not in these humane studies, or
Physic, they are no part of my profession, non hic sulcos ducimus, non hoc
puluere de sudamus, I am but a stranger, a smatterer in them, here and there I
pull a flower. And I do easily grant, if a rigid censurer should criticize on
this which I have writ, he should not find three faults as Scaliger in Terence,
but 300. even as many as he has done in Cardans subtilties, or Borocius on
Sacro-Boscus. If ought be amiss, I require a friendly admonition, no bitter
inuectiue, otherwise as in ordinary controversies, funem contentionis nectamus.
sed cui bono? we may contend, and likely misuse one another, but to what
purpose? we are both scholars, say, -- Arcades ambo,
Et cantare pares and respondere parati.
If we do wrangle, what shall we get by it? trouble and wrong our selves,
make sport for others.

When all is done, it may be, that which thou so much reprehendest, and in thy
judgment do so much condemn, is not faulty, not to be condemned: Quot
homines tot sententiae, I like it, so does he, thou do not, is it therefore
vnfit^, absurd and ridiculous? Vnusquisque abundat sensu suo, Fieri non potest
vt quod quisque cogitat dicat vnus.
and one man cannot express what every man thinks, or please all. It is the
common humor, Muretus.
Si quid forsan omissum, quod is animo conceperit, si quae dictio etc. to
discommend that which they dislike themselves, if ought be omitted, added, if
he say not point blanke, as they would have it, he is an idiot, an afse, nullus
est. An easy matter it is to find fault, to censure, vilify, detract from
others, Lipsius.
facilia putant omnes quae iam facta, nec de salebris cogitant vbi via strata,
a thing of nothing when it is done, and who could not have done as much?

As for the end and use of this precedent Discourse, Prefat. Democ.
I refer you to that which has been formerly said. In the mean time, if
any man shall say, Medice cura teipsum, or as Wisdom. 17.8. it was objected to
those wisards, They that promised to drive away fear and trouble from the
sick person, were sick for fear, and worthy to be laughed at. I reply with
Tullij epist. fam. lib. 3.
Sulpitius; Medici qui in alienis morbis profitentur se tenere medicinae
scientiam ipsi se curare non possunt, they that cure others, cannot well
prescribe Physic to themselves.

It now remains, that I make a thankful remembrance of such friends, to whom
I have been beholden for their approbation, or troubled in perusing several
parts, or all of this Treatise. For I did impart it to some of our worthiest
Physicians, whose approbations I had for matters of Physic, and to some
Divines, and others of better note in our University, as well as to my more
private Collegiate friends: whose censures when I had passed, and that with
good encouragement to proceed, I was the bolder to hasten it. permissu
superiorum, to the Press. I will name no man, or prefixe as the custom is any
Encomiasticke verses, which I thank my friends have been offered, least if
either whole or part should be misliked, I should prejudice their judgment, I
ackowledge my self much beholding and bound to them: If ought be amiss, I
take it wholly to my self, and say again. Me me adsum qui feci, in me
conuertite linguas
O Momi, meus hic error, nihil iste probauit,
Nec voluit. --
But I am ouertroublesome, I will conclude, if first I may request a favorable
censure of such faults as are omitted in the Press. The Copy (as I have said)
was once written and in have, I could not always be there my self; or had I
been still present, Non omnem molitor quae fluit vnda videt. The Miller sees
not all the water goes by his Mill. Besides many letters mistaken, misplaced,
added, omitted as i for y, or a for e, or o, false points, etc. which are in
some copies only, not throughout: (To point at each particular of which were
to pick out the seeds of a foul bushel of corn) some of the chiefest, as
thou shall find them corrected, I desire thee to take notice of. My
translations are sometimes rather Paraphrases, and that only taken which was
to my purpose; quotations are often inserted in the Text, which make the Style
more ha^sh, or in the Margin as it happened. Greek Authors, Plato, Plutarch,
Athenaeus, etc. I have cited out of their interpretors, because the Original
was not so ready etc. I have indeed mingled Sacra prophanis, but I hope not
profaned; and in repetition of Authors names, not according to Chronology,
rancked them per accidens; sometimes Neoterickes, before Ancients, as my memory
suggested.

These are the things which I thought good to mention in this Epilogue, the
consideration of which I leave to thy favorable censure, and withal
submissiunesse, as I ought, my self and these my labors to a friendly Reader.

Vale and Faue. From my Study in Christ-Church Oxon. December 5. 1620. ROBERT
BVRTON.

Errata.
PA^gin 6 linea 1. read 300000. die of etc. p. 98. l. 22. r. so did Alcibiades,
p. 100. l. 3. r. Camels milk p. 108. l. 34 r. Braga. p. 116. l. 16. r.
subrusticus p. 109. l. 10. r. 13. p. 148. l. 16. r. reserve. p. 154. l. 26. r.
Naboths p. 169. mar. ^tuae non sunt imitanda Dianae. p. 186. l. 20. r.
venditarint. p. 187. l. 36. parasiti p. 206. l. 10. r. stercus p. 207. l. 7.
puluenari p. 231. l. 20. r. palpitantes p. 134. l. 12. r. Lues the 11. p. 241.
l. 14. r. Pierius p. 252. l. 1. r. by that etc. p. 269. l. 10. r. things
signified to come. p. 165. l. 16. r. patient. p. 224. l. 11. it ought.

Page 283. l. vlt. dele. p. ^83. for. read. p. 295. l. 2^. r. justify p. 302.
l. 12. r. be. 324. marg. r. birds that live, p. 219. l. 10. toward and from.
p. 335. l. 18. and 19. ((...) etc. to days) add parenthesis. p. 367. l. 19.
dele to p 390 mar. r. illa^^ p. 409. l. 12. r. infelicitie. p. 411. l. 16. r.
Columbus p. 414. l. 29. r. Crito p. 463. l. 13. r. or be^no^. etc.

Page 503. l. 35. r. titles p. 599. mar. r. subolfeceram p. 612. l. 22. r.
Hippolytus p. 623. l. 36. r. depopulate p. 635. l. 6. r. out of p. 651. l. 6.
cervicali l. 11. r. captam p. 6^3. l. ^5. r. C^ytem ^^tra p. 731. l. 16. r.
valentine p. 735. mar. r. haereret. p. 744. l. 24. d. ^^ p^ 748 m^r. pagi. p.
764. l. 8. transire p. 767. mar. r. nocere p. 773. mar. r. immiscent.


