THE SCHOLE OF GODLY FEAR. A Sermon preached at the Assizes holden in Exeter,
March 20. 1614.

PSALM. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; a good
understanding have all they that do thereafter. PSALM. 34.11. Come, ye
children, harken unto me; I will teach you the fear of the Lord. MAL. 1.6. If
I be a Father, where is mine honor? If I be a Lord, where is my fear? LONDON,
Printed by William Stansby for Henry Fetherstone. 1615.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR HENRY HOBART Knight, LORD Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, and Sir LAVRENCE TANFIELD Knight, Lord chief Baron of his Majesty's
Exchequer, continuance and multiplication of all heavenly Graces and earthly
blessings.
THis Sermon, being at first exacted by reverend authority, and since pulled
forth by violent importunity, and even pressed to the Press, inioyeth this
only freedom, that it runs cheerfully to your Lordships hands, presenting
it self a true (howsoever slender) testimony of the Authors thankful and
dutiful respect, of your honorable favors, not only in particular toward
himself, whom you have been pleased to grace far beyond desert; but also in
general to Gods Ministers, whom with a just and zealous care, you as Gods upon
earth protect from oppression. Who sees not, how resolute witnesses having
armed themselves to seduce a tractable Jury, with as formal a tale, as the two
Elders had devised against Susanna; your Lordship full of the spirit of Daniel,
that is, the judgment of God (for so his name signifies) by prudent sifting,
and unexpected interrogatories, have bunted out, and dissolved their plotted
falsehood? Who sees not, how unaccustomed customs incroching upon the Lords
portion, allotted and allowed to his Laborers, have showed as fair pretenses
of remote Antiquity, as were the old sackes, old bottles, old clothes, and
mouled bread of the Gibeonites, when your discreet inquiry before the Inquest
has espied and descried their near bordering neighborhood? In a word, your
Christian care to maintain the hedge of Justice for a fence to the Lords vine
(that every one which passes by, may not pluck of her grapes) puts into
our mouths a joyful gratulation, that your Honors are none of them that seek
honor, by muzzeling the mouth of the Ox, that treads out the Corn. And this
leads us to a farther duty, viz. to look up toward Heaven unto him, that
looks down from heaven upon us, to behold and visit his vine, which he has
planted with his own right hand, and made strong for himself: and as he has
given us such nursing Fathers, so we to return unto him praise for your good
beginnings, and prayer for your good continuance, to the glory of his Name,
the upholding of his Church, the encouragement of his Ministers, and your own
eternal reward, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Your Honors to be commanded in all duty, JOHN BERY.

THE SCHOLE OF GODLY FEAR.
1. PET. 1.17. And if ye call him Father, who without respect of persons,
judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your dwelling here in
fear.


THis verse consists of a Doctrine and his Use. The Doctrine teaches us how
to look upon God, Ye call him Father, etc. The Use warns us how to look to
our selves: Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear.

The Doctrine proposes God to our view (like Ianus Bifrons) as having two
faces.

First, the cheerful countenance of a Father, Ye call him Father. Secondly,
the severe countenance of a Judge, who without respect of persons, judges
according to every man's work.
If ye call him Father] We need not curiously discuss the seeming difference
of Translations. (...).
The Greek phrase here used, being compared with other like places of
Scripture (as James 2.7. Genes. 48.5.16. Esaias 4.1.) yields unto us this
plain sense: If ye call him Father, that is, if ye will pass for his
children, and profess him to be your Father: which we may done three ways.

1. By pretending to the eyes of others in show. 2. By presuming in our own
hearts by persuasion. 3. By contesting unto his own face in prayer; that he is
our Father, and we his children.
But quo iure? God is our Father.
by what claim? Father is a royal prerogative, originally and primarily due
unto God alone, (Matthew. 23.9. Call no man father upon the earth, for one is
your Father which is in heaven) but due to others secondarily, and under him:
and to him it is due both by Creation and Generation.

Creation invested him with an Universal Fatherhood over all creatures: 1. By
Creation
but among all, principally of Adam, who alone resembled his Father, being made
to the Image of his Maker (Genes. 1.27.) and styled, Adam the son of God,
Luke 3.38.

Nor is he Father of Adam alone, but of us also, and of both parts of us, our
bodies and our souls: of our bodies mediately and virtually created in Adams
loins; and of our souls actually and immediately infused by himself. For our
bodies indeed, we are bound to thank Patres carnis, who^ the Lord has
substituted to be our fathers according to the flesh: but for our souls, our
souls must be lifted up unto Patrem spirituu^ (Heb. 12.9.) the Father of
spirits, qui infundendo creat, and creando infundit, who at one, and the same
instant, both creates and infuseth them into these earthly mansions of their
fleshly tabernacle.

But what comfort is it, thus to salute him by the name of father, in this
peculiar language before other creatures, seeing the unhappiest of all his
creatures, the damned reprobates, that shall never come near him, or his
patrimony, are yet as near as we to this paternitie? and may take up the
Prophets words, Malach. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God made
us?

Wherefore seeing this is too low, 2. By Generation.
mount we higher from Creation to Generation: and here we find one Son
begotten of his Nature, and others begotten of his Grace. I say, one of his
nature, that is, one with him in nature, a Son as old, and as good as his
Father, coeternall, and coequall.

But as the former was too low, Not of nature,
so this is too high a strain, unto which, neither men, nor yet Angels can
reach: for unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee? Heb. 1.5.

In medio virtus nostra: But of Grace.
the sinews of our comfort lie in the midst, viz. in the sonneship of grace:
by which a remnant of mankind, through the election of grace (Romans 11.5.) are
separated in the name, and for the sake of the natural beloved Son, to be
sons, and heirs, and coheires with him of everlasting glory, Romans 8.17. for
which purpose, he granted forth a Dedimus potestate^, and as many as received
him (potestatem dedit) to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name, Ioh. 1.12.

For this inheritance, The covenant of grace.
a Covenant of grace is drawn up between us, 1. Cor. 6.18. consisting of two
parts: 1. what is performed on Gods behalf, by his free Adoption; I will be a
Father unto you. 2. What is to be performed on our parts by our bounden
Renouation: Ye shall be my sons and daughters.

Upon this covenant a pair of Indentures are engrossed, Assured by indenture.
and interchangeably sealed by both parties. The former part (containing our
Sonneship by adoption) lies in record in Gods eternal prescience, The
original.
having two seals appendent, 2. Tim. 2.19. viz. on the behalf of God, his
Seal of everlasting Decree: the Lord knows who are his. Us, our Seal of
assent, that every one, which calls (him Father) upon the name of the Lord,
depart from iniquity.


The counterpane (containing our Sonneship by regeneration) is a patent
delivered from God to every son whom he recieiueth, The counterpane.
which likewise has two Seals affixed: viz. 1. His Seal of the Spirit. 2.
Our Seal of Faith.


God sets to it the Seal of his Spirit; for (Ephesians. 1.13) We are sealed with
the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. The print
of which Seal is the New man (Coloss. 3.10) which is renewed in knowledge
after the Image of him that created him.

The Seal of Faith, although it be made by Gods own workmanship (this is the
work of God, that ye believe in him, whom he has sent, John 6.29.) and given
by his bounty (not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.)
although, I say, in these respects it is Gods, yet it is our Scale in
application; for he that believes, sets to his seal, that God is true,
John 3.33.

The patent thus sealed, The Patents force.
has a double force and virtue: 1. It makes a man to be the son and heir
of the living God. 2. It assures a man to be the son and heir of the
living God.


It makes him so to be, by installing him in regeneration: for as many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God, Romans 8.14. and it
assures him so to be, by giving evidence of his adoption, verse. 16. the same
Spirit bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

It is then a preposterous course of many (who are more forward to call Father,
Father, We may not begin with Predestination.
then to do the will of this Father, which is in heaven) that they bend their
wits how to break open the closet of divine Predestination, and to search the
record of eternal adoption, yet take no heed to seek out, or look in the
patent of regeneration, which is, or should be about them. But with
Regeneration.
Whereas it stands for an infallible maxim, that whatsoever son God
adopteth beforetime, he begets also in time (1. Pet. 1.3.) so that he is not
only chosen of God, (Ephesians. 1.4.) but borne of God (1. Ioh. 3.9) not of his
nature indeed, but of his grace: and so borne of grace, that he is made
partaker of the godly nature, (2. Pet. 1.4.) although not of the nature of
divine Essence, yet of the nature of godly qualities, holiness,
righteousness, knowledge, etc. whereby a godly son resembles God his
Father; howbeit, in most unequal proportion, as little Astyanax did his great
Father Hector: Sic oculos, sicille manus, sic or a ferebat.

In this generation, or rather regeneration, God is our Father begetting us, (
verse. 3. of this chapter) the Church his Spouse is our Mother conceiving us,
(Gal. 4.26.) the means is the immortal seed of the Word (infra, verse. 23.)
and the vital spirit that gives life to this seed is the holy spirit of God.
Spiritus intus alit: It is the spirit that gives life, Ioh. 6.63.

Being thus begotten, we are borne of God in mercy, nursed of God in
knowledge, nurtured of God in grace, and have inheritance with God in glory.

Whosoever now will be sure, How to be assured of our assurance.
that his evidence for this inheritance is firm and indefeazible, and that he
is none of that great number, who are wont to be both artificial in forging
within their brains a seal of faith, in show much counterfaiting that of Gods
handyworke; and having forged it, are prompt and liberal to scale to their
credulous hearts, some probable security of the land of promise, without any
approueable security for the promise of that Land: let him see, whether with
his own seal of faith, there be joined the seal of Gods Spirit; which he
shall discern from all counterfaits, by the print thereof, viz. the New man,
totally renewed, in respect of his parts, albeit in regard of degrees, he have
but an imperfect perfection. For if he can see in himself the Image of God in
a waxie heart (though blemished and bruised by sinful corruption) and the
superscription of the holy Ghost, in a holy (though not wholly complete)
renouation, in unfeigned (howbeit not unstained) sanctification; he has hence
authentical proof for his sonneship by regeneration, and thereby for his
sonneship by adoption, which clasping fast, he can boldly ascend in prayer to
heaven, and pressing home to the Throne of grace, cry, Abba Father.

And thus we call, and only thus may we rightly call him Father, who without
respect of persons, judges according to every man's work; which is the second
branch of the doctrine, proposing God with the countenance of a Judge.

Which judges, (...)] And does he now judge? there are two sorts of Gods
judgment: The time of Gods Judgment.


1. Present, by his disposing justice in ordering of the world. 2. Future, by
his rewarding justice at the ending of the world.
His present judgments are always righteous, (Psalm 119.75.) yet not always
seen to be right according to every man's works, seeing that here good men
often suffer evil, while the evil enjoy good: but that last judgment shall
not only it self be manifestly just, but also manifest the justice of all his
former proceedings; whence it is called the declaration of the just judgment
of God, Romans 2.5.

This future judgment is here timed as present, according to the use of
Scripture, to signify, 1. A certainty that it shall be, as surely as if it
were present, Ezechiel. 7.6. The end is come, the end is come, etc. 2. In this
certainty an uncertainty when it shall be, that for any thing we know, it may
be presently, The day of the Lord comes as a thief in the night. 3. The
manner.
In this uncertainty, a certainty that it will not be long, but must be
expected presently. Behold, I come quickly (Revel. 22.12) and my reward is with
me, to give every man according to his work.


Without respect, etc.] His throne of judgment is here kept upright by two
Supporters, 1. Impartial.
1. An impartial eye, without respect of persons. 2. A proportioning hand,
according to every man's work.


Respect of persons issues commonly, either from affection, or opinion:
affection being partial, willingly peruerteth; opinion being preiudicate,
unwittingly seduceth. Now who can suspect partiality in Gods affection, that
hears so often inculcated in the divine Oracles, that Rich or Poor, Priest
or People, Jew or Gentile, not their persons, but their doings shall be
regarded and rewarded? Tros Tyriusque mihi nullo discrimine agetur. Tribulation
and anguish upon every soul that does evil, the Jew first, and also the
Grecian; but to every man that does good, glory, honor, and peace, to the Jew
first, and also to the Grecian; for there is no respect of persons with God,
Romans 2.9.10.11.

On the other side, who can imagine, that a preiudicate opinion can blind those
eyes of fire (Reu. 1.14.) that stay not upon the vizour and outside of formal
profession, but pierce through the inside and heart of every prisoner at his
Bar? All the world before his throne is a sea of glass, like unto Crystal
(Reu. 4.6.) transparent and perspicuous to the supreme Judge, who will
inlighten the hidden darkness (1. Cor. 4.5.) and make the counsels of the
heart manifest; and is not only an eye witness of all outward passages, but
also searches the heart and tries the reins (Iere. 17.10.) even to give
every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his works;
which is the other supporter of Gods tribunal, viz. a proportioning hand.

According to every man's work.] 2. Proportionable to works.
This word according implies a double regard of works in the final
judgment: 1. According to their quality, whether they be straight or crooked,
good or bad. 2. According to their quantity, whether they be great or small,
many or few.


The quality of every man's works shall be tried, 1. According to their
quality.
whether they be straight or crooked, by laying them to that rule of
righteousness which God has given him, viz. The Law of Nature to the
Gentiles, the Law written for the Jews, and the Gospel for us Christians: all
which appears, Romans 2.12.15.16. The two Laws, being indeed one (for the
natural Law is the moral infolded, and the moral Law is the natural
unfolded) they have both one iniunction, Do this, and live; the Gospel
another, Believe, and live. The Law exacteth the perfect righteousnees of
works: the Gospel accepts for perfect the righteousnees of faith, To.
3.20.21. and 4.13.

But here lies a great block in the way: For works are regarded.
for if we be saved by faith, and not by works, as that, and other places of
Scripture do teach us, how then is this true, that Every man shall be judged
according to his works? at this block both Papists and Libertines have so
stumbled, that they have tumbled into error, the one upon the right hand, of
Merit, the other on the left hand, of Licentiousness.

For the clearing of the way between them, and the whole doctrine of faith and
works, let us conceive of two Courts wherein God proceeds in judging us. Of
1. Justification in this life. 2. Remuneration after death.


For the opening hereof, Although not in Justification.
we may imagine how the penitent sinner comes into the Court of
Justification, desiring to be approved of God, and accepted in his fight: but
seeing exact righteousness to be there exacted, and that none are received,
but such as are pure and perfect, he shrinketh back, and lamenteth his own
wretched plight, that dares not appear in judgment, being all ouergrowne with
a sinful leprousie, and can but cry, Opera non praecedunt iustificandum:
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, O Lord. But anon perceiving, that
Christ, the Lord Judge his Son, has plenary righteousness, not for himself
(for being the natural Son, he needs not to buy his Fathers acceptance)
but for his retainers; and hearing him call (Revel. 3.18.) I counsel thee to
buy of me white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy
nakedness do not appear; he prostrateth himself at the feet of this
heavenly Clothier, and having no money, nor merits, to buy, he falls to
begging in the humble supplicat of a lively faith, Lord, if thou will, thou
can make me clean. This suit being effectual, has an answer as
comfortable, I will, be thou clean. Then washing away the leprous spots of
his sins with the blood which he shed, and clothing his nakedness with the
merits which he wrought for us, he thus presents him to his Father, and
the Father accepts him for righteous, and registreth him among his Saints.
And this is the sum of our Justification.

But before this blessed Savior, Sed sequuntur iustificatum.
dismiss this healed sinner,

-- Cynthius aurem
vellit, and admonuit, --
He roundeth him in the ear, and scholeth him for keeping a diet: Behold,
thou art made whole, sin no more, lest worse betide thee: but go, and offer
for thy clensing, those things which Moses commanded (Mark. 1.44.) Although I
have freed thee from the curse of the Law, yet thou in thankfulness art still
obliged to the duty of the Law, that being thus delivered, thou may serve God
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of thy
life.

Thou can not indeed do so well as thou should; but be careful to do so
well as thou can. What thou can not do so well as thou should, the
white raiment of righteousness, which I have given thee, shall cover, and it
shall not be punished: and what thou do so well as thou can, the same
white garment shall make to show more white, and it shall be rewarded.

Thus we see, The dispensation granted to the believer
how faith having procured a qualification of grace, a dispensation is granted
for works: that 1. Our evil deeds, though perfectly evil, shall be excepted,
as washed and drowned in the blood of Christ. 2. Our good deeds, though
imperfectly good, shall be accepted as decked and beautified with the
righteousness of Christ.


And coming unto God henceforth in the fragrant raiment of our elder brother
(as Jacob in Esau, Genesis 27.) he smells a sweet savor from us, is pleased to
feed upon, and to relish that which we bring him, and so blesses us, and we
shall be blessed. And as lame Mephibosheth was entertained at King David's
Table, for his father Ionathans sake, 2. Sam. 9.7. so God admits our halting
obedience for his Sons sake, to make us partakers of his heavenly Table.

Now as the Court of justification regards only faith, Yet in remuneration
works are respected.
in making him righteous, that is not such; so the Court of remuneration will
respect works, in declaring him righteous, which has been made such. For it
stands for a principle, that whosoever truly believes well, endeavors
duly to live well; and every one that is graced of God by justification, does
strive to glorify God by santification, and with the healed Cripple, Act. 3.8.
follows walking, and leaping, and praising God: it is taken for a manifest
conclusion in judgment, that the faith, which is fruitless, is also
faithless, like a painted fire, that is indeed no fire, having Colorem, and
not calorem, some color of persuasion, but no heat of devotion.

And seeing the last judgment will be upon the open Theater of the world, in
view of all men, who use not to diue into the heart of man, to see his faith,
but only look in through the lettice of his behavior; nor can judge of the
tree by the inward sap, but by the outward fruit, the Lord will manifest the
integrity of that judgment, not by invisible faith, but by visible works; that
all souls may assent and acknowledge, how they are most justly distinguished
in their recompense, that were so different in their lives, when Every one
receives the things he has done in his body, whether they be good or evil,
2. Corinthians. 5.10.

To conclude this point then: all men being judged by rule, according to the
quality of their works, shall be separated with one general division, right
from crooked, good from bad, sheep from goats: and their reward will be
divided accordingly (as Esa. 3.) It shall be well with the just, for they shall
eat the fruit of their works; and Woe to the wicked, it shall be evil with
him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him. For the one sort a
gracious call, Come ye blessed; and for the other a doleful mittimus, Go ye
cursed.

The quantity of works is to be scanned two ways. 2. According to their
quantity.
By 1. Tale for their number. 2. Scale for their weight.


For number, Evil workers.
the evil works (wherein are comprehended the words and thoughts) of the
wicked, shall be cast up by expedite Arithmatike, and the transgressions, For
number.
which now they daily augment, by Addition, Multiplication, and continual
Progression in sin, without any Substraction by repentance, shall then be
summed up into a total, and a proportionable number of numberless pains
apportioned unto them altogether. As much as she lived in pleasure, so much
give you to her torment and sorrow, Reu. 18.7.

For weight; in the balance of Justice, For weight.
will he poize the grieuousnesse of their sins: which as they carry several
weight in their different natures (some being grauiora, more heavy then others)
so also are they aggrauated by circumstances, as occasions of information
neglected, or prouocations to reformation rejected: all which being put
together (substance and circumstance) in one scale, the other shall have
punishments to counterpoize them all. The servant, that knew not his masters
will, shall be excused a tanto, though not a toto; his ignorance must be
beaten, but being not wilful, with fewer stripes: but he that knew it, and did
it not, or would not know to do it, he shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke
12.47.48. Hard, alas, will it be with the Heathen, that walked to hell in
darkness, while their starre-light of reason could not discover the way to
heaven: but it will be harder with carnal professors, who in the Sunshine of
the Gospel, being showed the narrow way that leads to bliss, yet gallop
along the broad way to destruction. Woe, and double woe unto such; for if many
of the Infidels had been partakers of the same good means and motives, they
would a great while agone have repented, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Therefore it shall be easier for Infidels at the judgment, then for such,
Luke 10.13.14.

In like manner, Good works. By tale.
the good deeds of good men are to be surueighed both by tale, and by scale.
By tale; for God does keep an Inventory of them: he has a Bottle for our
tears, ( Psalm. 56.) a Bag for our alms ( Luke 12.) and a Book for our good
works, ( Reu. 20.) God is not unrighteous, that he should forget any of our
good works, Heb. 6.10. Every godly deed is a flower sent up to heaven, of
which our Judge does plot us a neuer-fading Garland of glory; and the more
flowers, the greater garland, for He that sows plenteously, shall reap
plenteously. 2. Cor. 9.6.

By scale; By scale.
a weightier good done, has a weightier reward given. Thou shall rest and
stand up in thy lot, at the end of the days, said the Angel to Daniel, Chap.
12.13. Happy and thrice happy is every one that has any lot in heaven: the
least of all Saints may sing in the Quire of all Saints, My lot is fallen in a
pleasant ground, I have a goodly heritage ( Psalm. 16.6) and yet herein may be
disparity: there is ( Dan. 12.3.) one general lot, for them that be wise, to
shine as the brightness of the firmament; but they that turn many to
righteousness, have a special lot, to shine as the stars for ever and ever. Now
as all stars are brighter then the firmament, so also one star differs from
another in glory, and so is the resurrection of the dead, 1. Cor. 15. Every
workman of God, though his work be not worth his meat and drink, being an
unprofitable servant ( Luke 17.10.) shall yet have the penny of eternal life
given him for wages. Every one his penny, that is, fullness of joy, so that he
which has least, neither repineth for himself, as having too little, nor
enuieth at all others, as having too much. Yet with this fullness there stand
several degrees according to the several degrees of present grace, by which
they are diversely capable of future glory. Some like Gomers, some like Ephahs,
some as pintes, some as pottles; all shall be full according to their measure,
with as much happiness as each can wish. Al like in satiety, but not alike in
parity of bliss; for, every one shall receive his reward according to his
labor, 1. Cor. 3.8.

Nor does this any way uphold the doctrine of merit, Yet no merit.
which arrogating too much to our own goodness in deserving, does derogate as
much from Gods goodness in free giving. Far be it from us to imagine, that
our Lord and Master deals with us in commutatiue Justice, as giving us, (
Matthew. 20.8.9.) a penny for a pennie-worth of work; as if the wages were not
counted by favor, but by debt, Romans 4.4. It is indeed given as wages; but as
wages given, not earned; it is a reward, but Coloss. 3.24. the reward of the
inheritance, to them that serve the Lord Christ: dispensed as unto servants, a
reward of serving the Lord, but conferred as unto Sons, for our portion of
inheritance. Every one has his reward, not for his labor (for we cannot
deserve it) yet according to his labor, by a due and equal inequality: due,
only by promise, as a portion of grace ( Ephesians. 2.8.) yet duly performed by
proportion of Justice.

Pass the time] The Use whereto this doctrine leuelleth, is to breed fear:
for the better impression whereof, the Apostle touches by the way two motives,
giving us an inkling of the gliding, and slippery state of our life, as being
1. Transitory, but a time, whose being is in fluxu, nothing else but a
fleeting and passing. 2. Fickle, being (...) not (...), a commoration, but no
habitation; a soiourning, (as the new Translation) rather then a dwelling; or
at least such a dwelling, as of Tenants at will, that stands upon most
uncertain terms: Pass the time of your dwelling here in fear. But only
glauncing at these, fear is the mark whereunto this Text aims.


Among many sorts whereof, Fear threefold.
we may take notice of these three: 1. Infernal, in horror of punishment. 2.
Criminal, under the burden of guiltines. 3. Filial, in duty of grace.


The infernal is a desperate fear, when hell gnawing upon the damned soul,
she lies trembling, like unto a Partridge, while the Hawke plumeth her; or a
Sheep, while the Wolf deuoureth her, which dies fearing, and fears dying.
The Criminal is a perplexed fear, the shaking Palsy of a guilty conscience,
fearing to suffer evil for doing evil. The Filial is a reverent fear,
keeping the heart in awe from doing evil against God, that has done so much
good for us.

This last is peculiar to the Elect, and is absolutely good; the first is
proper to the Damned, and is always naught: the middle is middle between
both, sometimes good, and sometimes evil, according to the subject in which,
and the end to which it works. In the Reprobate, a criminal fear is the
portall of hell, the threshold of infernal fear, and is merely servile: in
the chosen, it is the entry to repentance, an introduction to filial fear. In
the wicked, it is the first biting of the worm of conscience, which in hell
will ever gnaw, and never die: as in Cain, Genes. 4. In the godly, it is a
biting also of conscience worm, remorsus; but by this biting, his biting is
prevented: remorse brings forth amendment, and the daughter eats up the
mother: it causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of (2. Cor.
7.10) like a sudden affright, which cures an Ague, as in David, 2. Sam. 24.10.

This fear is a good Usher to enter, Initiall fear.
but no good Tutour to perfect a Christian: for when the Law, our Schoolmaster
( Galat. 3.24.25.) has played his part with the rod of terror, to whippe us to
Christ, being come into his high and Free-schole, we must learn to learn,
more for love of learning, then for fear of beating. This pricking fear does
very good service, as a sharp needle to make way for the thread of love to
follow; whereby God and man being sowed together, the thread holds, the needle
is taken away. Thus fear having drawn in love, love being grown perfect,
casts out fear, 1. John 4.18.

But as it casts out one fear, Filial fear.
so it brings in another. Serve the Lord without fear, says Zachary, Luke 1
74. yet serve the Lord in fear, says David, Psalm. 2.11. serve him without
that servile fear, that abhors the punishment, more then the offense; but
serve him with that filial fear, which detesteth the offense more then the
punishment.

I say [the offense more then the punishment] because a good Christian may in
due order cast an eye on both. Compounded.
And if we follow the stream of fear in this Text back to his springs, we see
it arises from two heads: 1. God is our Father; there springs up the fear
of his mercies, There is mercy with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm.
130.4. Secondly, God is a Judge; and thence rises the fear of his judgments:
for it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb.
10.31. the fear of his mercies, is the maine spring and predominant, whereby
we principally abhor the fault: the fear of his judgments is the lesser
spring and subordinate, whereby in a second place, we shun the punishment.
Looking upon God, as our most gracious Father, we be, or at least should be,
both studious of weldoing, because it pleases him, though there were no heaven
to reward us; and timorous of ill-doing, because it offends him, though there
were no hell to terrify us: but, for that dullness and security are so ready
to overtake us, he presents himself on the other side as a Judge, holding
out in his right hand, reward, in his left hand, punishment, that with these
two spurs, he might both stir up him that stands still, and drive him
faster, that is already on his way.

The first place in our hearts must be taken up for the fear of God as a
Father, 1. Of Reverence.
arising from the sense of his mercy: and this fear is not the mother of
distrust, but the daughter of faith, Psalm. 5.7. In the multitude of thy
mercies, I will go into thy house, (there Faith the mother leads the way)
and will worship in fear, etc. there the daughter follows. This fear is not
the daughter of painful anxiety, but the mother of joyful alacrity, Psalm. 2
11. Rejoice before him in fear. This fear is not a rival, but a sister of
love, going so lovingly hand in hand, that none love God better then they that
fear him most, none fear him more, then they which love him best.

The fear of God as a Judge, 2. Of Caution.
arising from the meditation of his judgments, may, and must have his place
too: and when the former fear is made Steward of the heart, this latter may
take his place, as an excellent Porter, to examine every thought, before it
give passage. This is not a fear of diffidence, for it leads in confidence,
Psalm. 41. Many shall see it, and fear, and shall put their trust in the Lord.
First fear, then trust. It is not a fear of perplexity, but of caution, Pro.
14.27. The fear of the Lord is a welspring of life, to avoid the snares of
death. This Porters office is to keep out security, licentiousnes, and such
other vagrants, as Psalm. 4.4. Tremble and sin not: against these it stands in
the door of the heart, like the Cherub in the gate of Paradise, brandishing the
flaming sword of Gods heavy judgments, in threatening death, hell, torments,
etc. It makes of these, armor of proof against sin; quenches the fire of
lust in the flame of everlasting fire, and makes the furnace of hell, a cooler
of his passions. That it may fly from it, it flies unto it; and when he most
flies from it, then he finds it the safest refuge, and the more he thus
fears it, the less cause there is to fear it.

These several fears thus rising from several heads, Their union.
father and judge, meet together here in the stream of one compound, and
wel-tempered fear both of mercy and judgment: a fear mixed of that honor
due to a father, and that fear due to our Lord, Malach. 1.6. a fear, that is
both loving and wary. We may call it an awful love, or a loving awe: and in
this fear, we must pass the time of our dwelling here. Which, how it issues
from the premises, as the Use from the Doctrine, we must now consider, and so
descend from explication to application, from lightening our minds, to heat
our affections.

And that we might be thoroughly heated with godly fear, the Apostle here
places us between the Sun and the fire: For Gods fatherly love.
on the one side, God a Father, a comfortable Sunshine of mercy; on the
other side, God a Judge, a scalding Fire of justice. In the Sunshine of his
mercy we may observe a twofold brightness, 1. In him, in his direct beams,
proceeding of his own goodness. 2. From him, in their incidence on us,
reflecting to our happiness.


The immanent splendor of his divine goodness, 1. In being our Father.
if we shall compare it with the candle of humane kindness, what incomparable
difference shall we find! It is worthily esteemed to be a singular favor, when
a rich man that has no son of his own, adopteth some near kinsman or
friend, whom he most affects for his good behavior. But not any one of these
motives have any place with God. Did he lack sons and heirs of his
happiness? No: besides his natural Son, many millions of Angels stand like
Olive branches round about his table: yet such is his love, he would adopt us.
Were we any kin unto him? No: we came all of another stock, and might say to
corruption, Thou are my father, and to the worms, Thou art my mother, Job
17.14. and yet such was his goodness, he would adopt us. If not his Kinsmen,
were we then his friends? No: aliants and strangers, but enemies, even from the
womb; Thy father was an Ammorite, and thy mother a Hittite, Ezech. 16.3. and
yet such was his goodness, he would be our Father. demeanor? No, no: for
until he made us his sons by new birth, we ran the sinful prodigals race;
and if with him, in the confidence of Gods goodness we could dare to say,
Father, yet in conscience of our own naughtines, we must needs add, I have
sinned against heaven, and against thee; I am no more worthy to be called thy
son: and yet, yet notwithstanding all this, such is his goodness still, still
be would be our Father. O Lord, what did thou see in man, that thou so
regardest him, or the son of man, that thou should make him thy son! the
brightness of this bounty is so glittering and glorious, that it beats back
our weak sight from beholding it; so that returning our dazzled cies down to
our selves, we can but cry out with the Apostle; O the depth!

But although we cannot, like soaring Eagles, 2. In showing himself our Father.
dare the shining Sun in the face, yet may we observe his incidence upon our
selves. Observe it indeed we may: but as the beams of the Sun, so Gods
favors upon his children, are not to be comprised either in number or measure.
They extend in infinitum, and if we attempt to measure them, they grow in
measuring: they may be divided in semper diuisibilia, and if we assay to
number them, they increase in numbering. Only this in general: so far as
our heavenly Father transcendeth our earthly parents in excellence (which is a
comparison, there being no proportion between finite and infinite) so far
he surmounteth also in the exact performance of all fatherly offices, as
namely (to give a taste of some amongst all, and of all by those some) in
fatherly affection, instruction, correction, protection, and provision. In
fatherly affection, Esa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her child, and not have
compassion on the son of her womb? though they should forget, yet will not I
forget thee. instruction, who so diligent? Ier. 31.31. I will put my Law in
their inward parts, and will write it in their hearts, and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. In fatherly correction, Heb. 12.10. The fathers of
our bodies chasten us after their own pleasure, but the Father of spirits
chasteneth us for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
protection, who so careful? Deuteronomy. 32.16.11. The Lord kept Jacob as the apple
of his eye: as an Eagle steareth up her nest, flootereth over her birds,
stretches out her wings, takes them, and bears them on her wings: so the
Lord alone led him. In fatherly provision, maintenance, and future inheritance?
he gives for this life sufficient maintenance, Luke 12.31. Your heavenly
Father knows, that ye have need of these things: but seek ye after the
Kingdom of God, and all these things shall be ministered unto you. And for the
life to come, a royal inheritance, verse. 32. Fear not, little flock, it is
your Fathers pleasure to give you the Kingdom.

And now (beloved in the Lord) should all this light be without heat? A
reverent fear due.
are not our hearts more insensible then the stones, if they warm not? more
frozen then ice, if they melt not, in so clear, so fervent a Sunshine? who
that has the feeling of a child of God, can choose but prostrate his soul in
awful obsequiousness, at the feet of him, whom thus we call Father?

Yet alas, if every one should examine one, But ill paid.
how many of us here present, are bold to call him Father, and in the same
breath as bold to displease him! yea, and eo nomine, so much the bolder, making
his fatherly indulgence, a boulster for our vnsonlike insolence: and whereas
there is mercy with him, that he may be feared, we on the contrary (untoward
children as we are) because we hope to find mercy with him, we fear him not,
but presuming on impunity, make the less conscience of impiety. Do ye so
(says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.6.) Do ye so reward the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise? is not he thy Father, that has bought thee, he that made and
proportioned thee? With what face can we call him Father, with what heart can
we think our selves to be his sons, feeling in us no more feeling of devout
reverence?

The Sunbeames collected in a burning glass, The reason,
kindle a fire upon certain conditions, viz. that the object be combustible,
and apt to take fire, that it be held still and steady, and that it be in a
just distance, neither too far off, nor yet too near, but as the beams may
best unite their force: we are not without a burning glass. I am come (says
Christ, Lu. 12.46.) to put fire on the earth; and what is my desire, but that
it be kindled? Through him Gods fatherly love shines upon us: he stands as
mediator between God and us, receiving the beams of favor, as his natural son,
and transfusing them altogether upon us, his adopted brethren. Being the^ in so
clear a Sunshine, and having so perfect a burning glass, how comes it to
pass that so many of us continue so cold, so keycold? surely there is some
defect, and failing in the conditions. Some hold the glass too far off, and
think of the mercies of God in Christ, but slightly and confusedly: some hold
it too near, and being all upon mercy, mercy, make remission of sins a
plaster for presumption in sinning: some hold it not still by steady and fixed
meditations, but superficially glaunce upon it, by spurts and flashes: and some
others are not of combustible matter; not so fit to be fired with the fear of
his mercies, as to be feared with the fire of his judgments.

But we (beloved) as we desire with solid comfort of soul to call him Father,
that not only our heads may imagine, or our tongues discourse, but also our
consciences may feel, that we are his children: Let the confluence of all his
gracious beams of love, heat our chill hearts, and our benumbed hands with a
devout fear of his name: Let every naming of this sweet word Father, be as
the sun in his strength to warm and revive our filial obedience: so that as
often as we call him Father, so often we remember, to pass the time of our
dwelling here in fear.

Here is good being; here I could build tabernacles, and pass my time and
dwelling on Gods fatherly goodness; for this is none other but the house of God,
and gate of heaven. God is also a Judge.
But me thinks, with Saint, John Revel. 4 1.2. a Trumpet calls me away, Come
up hither, and see things which must be done hereafter: a Throne is set, out of
which proceed lightnings, and thundrings, and voices, and a Judge upon the
Throne, which without respect of persons judges according to every man's work.

What a sudden change is here, Yet no change
in the same verse and line! but now a gracious Father, clothed all in the
white robes of mercy, and presently a severe Judge, attired in the searlet
robes of justice? and is there indeed such change in the immutable God? none at
all: with him is no variablenes, In himself.
nor shadow of change, Iam. 1.17 A piece of taffata, that is equally wrought
of cross threads green and red, seems and is called changeable, yet is not
changed; but one way as you look on it, it bears upon the red, another way it
chiefly expresses the green: even so in God there is an equal temper of
mercy and justice, whose threads do seem to cross each other: But in the
Object.
and if you stand on the right hand among his sons, the green verdure of his
goodness carries away the sight of his judgments; but if you cast your eye
on the left side, as one of his prisoners, the red fiery hiew of his Justice,
seems to drown the sight of mercy: Yea, the same day of Judgment, Malac
4.1.2. proves both a consuming furnace, and a cheerful sunshine: the object
makes the difference: It shall burn like an Oven, and all that do wickedly,
shall be stubble to burn therein: but verse 2. unto you that fear my name,
shall the Sun of righteousness arise, and salvation shall be under his
wings, etc. Wherefore as we before turned our faces to the Sun to warm us,
[ye call him Father] so let us now turn about to the fire to heat us; he
[iudgeth without respect of persons, etc.]

The Thebans had among them the image of a Judge sitting without eyes or hands;
The integrity of his judgment.
no eyes that he might not diguish persons, friend from foe; no hands, that he
might not receive gifts to corrupt Justice. But the iustest Judge of all the
World is deciphered open-eyed and open-handed; his eyes open, not to procure,
but to prevent respect of persons; his hands open, not to take undue bribes,
but to give due reward, Ier. 32.19. His eyes are open upon all the ways of the
sons of men, to give to every one according to the fruit of his works.

Propose we then to our serious meditation, The circumstances.
the worlds general Assizes, which will begin and end in one day (for the
Lord will make a short count in the Earth) the Judge of this universal
Circuit, is the Judge of all Judges, the Lord chief Justice, the Son of
God, but visible in body, as the Son of man ( Luke 21.27) clothed as in
scarlet robes, with the power and majesty of his Father, ( Matthew. 16.27.) his
Bench a tribunal or throne of State, ( Romans 14.10.) the Justices of the Bench
his Assessours, the twelve Peers of Christendom, his twelve Apostles, (Matthew.
19.28.) his Crier, an Archangell with the sound of a shrill Trumpe, that shall
echo over all the world, and waken the bodies, that are dead and rotten, (1.
These. 4.16.) the Prisoners, all mankind (2. Cor. 5.10.) our Cause, to answer
upon Life and Death. The Devil comes forth for the Accuser, that would also
feign be the Executioner; the Conscience is produced for an untainted Witness,
and the allegations are proved by pregnant Records, ( Reu. 20.12.) The Books
are opened, and the dead are judged of those things, which are written in the
Books, according to their works.

Two Books are to be opened, The evidence most evident.
Libriscientiae Dei, and conscientiaenostrae; the Lieger Book of Gods
knowledge, and the Count Book of our own conscience, which shall then be
enlarged by a new Edition. For in this present and former Edition of our
consciences Book, some things we cannot read, some we do not read, some
we will not read, and some we will not suffer others to read. half printed
in our conscience, so that our dull eyes cannot read them (whence David, Psa.
19.12. Who knows how often he offends? Oh cleanse thou me from my secret
sins:) but then the print will be clearer, our secret sins legible, and the
scales of mortal ignorance being fallen off, We shall know our selves, even as
we are known of God, who is greater then our heart, 1. John 3.20. In this
Edition are many things of a small print, which because we will not trouble our
selves to put on the spectacles of Care and consideration, we pass over and
do not read them: but then they shall be set out in a larger print, and the
sins, that now seem too small to be regarded, loath any other should read with
us, and therefore we show them only a fair outside gilded with hypocritical
show. But then the Book shall be laid open, and lying open, the fair covering
shall lie covered; and all that we have done, spoken, yea or thought, shall be
obuious to every eye, and as looking- glasses set in a round, do each
represent to other their several objects, so that every one in particular,
contains all the shows they have in general: So in the Judgment day, our
conscience which now is our private, shall then be a common glass; each shall
see in other, and every one shall see in all, whatsoever lies now conceiled in
the secret bosom, There is nothing hid, that shall not be reueiled. Matthew.
10.26. The effects hereof. 1. With the godly.


O, what exultation will then crown the heads of such, as can say with
faithful Paul, Act. 23.1. I have in all good conscience served God until this
day! when they shall see their good deeds, whereof some themselves concealed
from vainglorious applause. Some were drowned by wayward unthankfulness, and
some misconstrued by sinister conceits, to see them all notified in their fresh
and lively colors. And oh, what confusion will cover the face of those foolish
wizards, 2. With the wicked.
that care more to cloak, then to cure their ulcers! when they shall see that
wickedness, which they now hide curiously, from their nearest kinsman, and
dearest friend (but can never be hid from the all-seeing God, and his
intelligencer, their inward conscience) to be exposed in that day to the full
sight of Angels, and men, and devils, and all.

The evidence being thus given in, The sentence.
and the deeds being apparent, both that they are, and what they are, their
number and weight is taken: and as they that have done good, shall all go into
everlasting life, so of them, they that have done best, shall sit highest in
glory; not one of their good works, (no, not a cup of cold water (Mat.
10.42.) shall slip unrewarded. And as they that have done evil, shall be
cast into everlasting fire, so they that have done worst, shall be plunged into
deepest torments, not one of their villainies but shall have his scourge.

And shall I need to add the conclusion? This should breed a wary fear.
does not the use make inference of it self, therefore pass the time of your
dwelling herein fear? Can we stand by this glowing, this flaming, this
scorching, this co^suming fire of judgment, and not be warmed? not heat? not
sweat? yea, and not fry with fear? are we not more like Salamanders then
men, if we can live untouched in so furious a fire? What? Generally at all
times.
does God our Judge see all our works? and shall we not fear to sin, while
he looks full upon us? shall every action be displaied in the view of all the
world? and shall we yet offend boldly, in hope of secrecy? will every offense
call for his several plague? and shall we not fear to heap up wrath against
the day of wrath? Yea this, me thinks, should be a bridle in the nostrils of
the most desperate Caitife; that although he care not to do good, as having no
hope of reward in heaven, yet he should fear to multiply offenses, lest
thereby he multiply his torments, and make his hell more hellish to himself.

A matter that would crave to be amplified, if the time craved not the
contrary. For in this aduenterous age of ours, wherein so many are like flies,
that cease not to play about the candle, til they burn in the flame, nothing
is more to be feared, then that we fear too little. They are indeed the better
sort, which are directed by love, but they are the greater sort, who are
corrected by fear.

Aristotle writes, that the Almond tree being grown old and barren, must have
nails driven into the root, whereby the superfluous gummy humor being let
out, it becomes fruitful anew. How happy should I think my labor, if I
could drive this nail of fear into the root of your hearts; not only you
ancients, who have the Almond tree flourishing in your heads ( Ecclesias.
12.5.) but you youngers also, that have need of pricking phlebotomy, to
euacuate that luxuriant, and superabundant humor of presumptuous boldness?
that so becoming fruitful in all good works, the pricking of this nail of
fear, may prevent the felling of that axe of fury, which is laid to the root
of the tree, whereby every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is to be
hewne down, and cast into endless fire, Matthew. 3.

The time thus pressing me, I cannot stand to press this unto the present
occasion: Specially in the present business.
only I must desire, as all in general, so in special you that act any part
in this weeks solemn business, that the Law may be used lawfully, not for the
wronging of right, but the righting of wrong; that in all your pleadings, or
whatsoever other proceeding, your retain God for your Counselor, and his
fear for your Sollicitour. Let the view of these Assizes whisper to your
conscience a Memorandum of those universal Assizes: remember in all your
proiects and courses, that the Lord Judge, and your Conscience the Witness,
do now stand watching what you do, and will then discover all, when you shall
stand to your trial for life or death. Do but remember this, and apply it
close to your heart, with good Iehosaphats Caveat, 2. Chronicles, 19.7.
Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed, and do it.
This is little enough, and yet this little may be enough; Let the fear of the
Lord be upon you, take heed, and look to it. Let me give but one stroke
more, to drive this nail to the head with the hammer of Gods Word, even that
aphorism of Solomon, Proverbs 28.14, Blessed is the man that fears always;
but he that hardens his heart, shall fall into evil. And now come we
briefly to sum up all together.

We have seen the two feet, Both fears united.
whereon God walks before us, and the two feet, on which we must both
follow him, and walk before him. His two feet are the mercy of a Father, and
the justice of a Judge: our two feet are the fear of his mercies, and the
fear of his judgments. If the body of our fear be not supported with both
these legs, it cannot go upright, but will fall lame, aut nimium sperando,
aut desperando. If our thoughts should hop all upon his mercies, without his
judgments, we should fall upon the right side in a presuming confidence; if
all upon his judgment without his mercy, we should tumble upon the left side
in despairing diffidence: both these supporters will make our walking steady
and upright. If thou find thy self drowzie in goodness, step forth with
the right leg, the fear of his mercies: a good motive to virtue: if tempted
to sin, step back with the left leg, the fear of his judgments: a good
retentiue from vice. God is a gracious Father: harken to this, O thou that have
sinned, and art repenting. And God is a severe Judge; harken to this, O thou,
that have repented, and art upon sinning. Let the meditation of God as a
Father, be as the blessed Angels, that carried Lot out of sinful Sodom; but
timor addidit alas; if the soul will be lusting, and cast an eye back again,
let the apprehension of his judgment, be as the sight of fire and brimstone
behind us, to put wings unto our feet. Let both together breed and keep in
us a care and conscience of all our doings, that he which is fallen, make
haste to rise, and he that stands, take heed lest he fall: and that all of
us in awful, and yet cheerful obedience, work out our salvation with fear
and trembling, Philippians 2. verse. 12.

Then as that concordia discors, Produce happy effects.
or rather discordia concors, in David's ditty ( Psalm. 101.1. I will sing mercy
and judgment) the discordant notes of mercy and judgment, do make a blessed
symphony in Gods proceedings upon earth; so his Spouse in singing her Loue-song
of mercy, and relishing her notes with the quauering of religious fear, will
make acceptable, and harmonicall music in the ears of heaven. Finally, if we
thus pass the time of our dwelling here in this loving fear, we shall pass
from it in his loving favor, and dwell with him for time, that shall never
pass in love without fear. To the which dwelling, O thou that dwell in the
Heavens, bring us, etc.

PSALM. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, that I may walk in thy truth: unite
my heart to fear thy name.


FINIS.

