RELIGIONS PEACE Or A reconciliation, between princes and Peoples, and Nations
(by Leonard Busher: of the County of Gloucester, of the town of Wotton, and a
Cittieen, of the famous and most honorable City London, and of the second
right worshipful Company)

Supplicated (unto the high and mighty King of great Brittayne etc: And to the
Princely and right Honorable Parliament) with all loyalty, humility and
careful Fidelity.

Esaias. 60. 1. 3. 10. 12. 16. ARise, O Sion, be bright for thy light is com, and
the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, and the Gentiles shall walk in thy
light, and Kings at the brightness of thy riseing up.

And the sons of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their Kings shall
minister unto thee: For in my wrath I smought thee, but in my mercy I had
compassion on thee* Therefore thy gates shall be open contynually; neither day
nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring unto thee, the riches of the
Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought unto thee.

For the Nation and that kingdom that will not serve thee, shall perish: and
those nations shall utterly be destroyed.

The sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come and bow unto thee: and
al they that despised thee, shall fall down at the soales of thy feet: and
they shall call thee, the City of the Lord, Zion of the holy one of Israel.

Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the breasts of
kings and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior, and thy redeemer, the
mighty one of Iaacob.

Proverbs 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, for his throne shall be
established with mercy. Eccle. 10. 22. The fear of the Lord causes that the
Kingdom fails not, but the Kingdom is lost by cruelty and pride. Printed in
Amsterdam: 1614.

To the high and mighty King James, by the grace of God, King of great
brittayne, France and Yrland: And to the princely and right Honorable
Parliament, Leonard Busher wishes, the wisdom of Solomon, the Zeal of
Josias, and the mercy of Christ: 1. Cor. 5. 5.
with the salvation of your Spirits in the day of the Lord Jesus.
FOr as much, as your Majesty and Parliament, do stand for the maintenance of
the Religion wherein you are borne, and for the same, do most zealously
persequte, with fire and sword: I have thought it good, and also my dewty (most
Royal sovereign) to inform your Majesty and Parliament thereof. In all
humility therefore, I give you to understand, that no Prince or People, ca^
possible attain that one true Religion of the Gospel, which is acceptable to
God by Jesus Christ, merely by birth Ioh. 3. 3
for Christ says Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
God. Also the Apo: James says. jam. 1. 1^
Of his own will he begat us by the word of truth. And the Apo: Peter says. 1.
Petr. 1. 3. 23.
Being borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God,
who lives and endures for ever. Matthew. 28.
Therefore Christ commanded this word to be preached to al nations, that thereby
they may attain the new birth. Marc. 16.
By which your Majesty and Parliament may perceive, that the one true Religion
of the Gospel, is not attained by natural birth: for the all Princes and
peoples, in all nations, should have that one true Religion of the Gospel, the
which you see and grant, they all have not, yet many of them also will defend
their Religion (wherein they are borne) by fire and sword, as if it were their
natural and earthly inheritances: or had with fire and sword been gotten, and
therefore will with fire and sword maynteyne and defend it: But your Majesty and
Parliament, may please to understand, that the Scriptures do teach, 2. Cor.
10. 4.
that the one true religion is gotten by a new birth, then by the word and
spirit of God, and therewith also, it is only maynteyned and defended. Ephe.
6. 17
For the word of God is lively, and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
and enters through, even unto the deviding asunder of the soul and the
spirit, and of the joints and of the marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts, and the intents of the heart. Seeing then the one true Religion of
the Gospel, is thus gotten: and thus defended and mainteyned, namely, by the
word preached only, let it please your Majesty and Parliament, to be
entreated, to revoke and repeal, those Antychristian, Romish and cruel laws,
that force al in our la^d, both Prince and people, to receive that Religion,
wherein the King or Queen were borne, or that which is stablished by the law of
man: Mat. 28. 19
and in steed thereof, enact and publish, that Apostolic. Christian, Mar. 16.
16*
Gentle and merciful law of Christ, viz: Go teach al nations, preach the
Gospel to every creature, Act. 8. 12.
that is, Christ will have his ministers to preach and teach the people of al
nations, luc. 24. 4. 7.
the things that concern the Kingdom of God, act. 8. 12. 37. and 2. 4.
and the name of Jesus Mesiah, repentance and remision of sins, and to baptize
in his name, such as do believe. And for as much also that the false and
Antychristian religion did come by the spirit of error and doctrine of Devils,
(...)
and not by fire and sword: Rev. 16. 14
therefore by the spirit of Christ, and doctrine of the word of God, must it be
driven out of the hearts and consciences, both of Prince and People, and not by
fire and sword, as the false Bishops and ministers have and do still persuade.
Therefore may it please your Majesty and Parliament, to understand that (by fire
and sword) to co^straine Princes and peoples, Marc. 9. 38 39.
to receive that one true Religion of the Gospel, is wholly against the mind
and merciful Law of Christ, dangerous both to king and State, a means to
decreace the Kingdom of Christ: and a means to increace the Kingdom of
Antychrist, as these reasones following do manifest: The which I humbly
beseech your Majesty and Parliament, carefully to consider, and that according
to the word of god, which shall judge every man according to his deeds: Mat. 16.
27
and perseqution, is a work well pleasing to al false Prophets, Rev. 16. 14
and Bishops, but it is contrary to the mind of Christ, Luce 9. 55. 56.
who came not to judge and destroy men's lives, but to save them: And though some
men and women believe not at the first hour, Ioh. 12. 47.
yet may they at the Matt. 20. 6. 7.
eleventh hour if they be not persequted to death before: And no King nor
Bishops can, or is able to command faith, Ephesians. 2. 8.
That is the gift of God, who works in us both the will and the deed of his
own good pleasure, set him not a day therefore, in which, if his creature
hear not and believe not, 1. tim. 1. 13
you will imprison and burn him: Paul was a blasphemer, Act. 26. (...).
and also a persequter / and could not be converted by the Apostles and
ministers of Christ, yet at last was received to mercy, and co^verted
extraordinarily by Christ himself, Iam. 5. 11.
who is very pitiful and mercyful, and would have no man to perish, 2. Pet. 3.
9.
but would that al men come to repentance, but not by perseqution, 2. cor. 5. 19
but by the word of reconciliation which he has committed to his ministers.
And as kings and Bishops, cannot command the wind, so they cannot command
faith, John. 3.
and as the wind blows where it lists, so is every man that is borne of
the spirit. You may forcemen to Church against their consciences, but they will
believe as they did before, when they com there, for God gives a blessing only
to his own ordinance, 1. Sam. 15. 15. 24.
and abhors Antychrists: And kings are to thinck that they are men, as well
as Kings and that Christ has ordained the same means of faith for Kings which
he has for subjects, Act. 9. 15.
and that subjects are Christ's freemen, 1 timothy 2. 1. 2
as well as Kings subjects, 1. Cor. 7. 22. 23.
and Kings that believe are Christ's Servants, even as subjects are Kings
servants, and both are bought with a price, therefore both ought not to be the
servants of men, in matter of faith and religion: but Kings shall give a greater
account at the day of judgment, then their subjects: And to judge me^ now for
religion, is to judge before the time, and also to sit in the judgment seat of
Christ, Romans 2. 16
to whom only it belongs, yet not before the day appointed, Act. 10. 42
how much less to Kings and Bishops. I read that Constantyne the Emperor
(called the great) wrought to the Bishop of Rome, that he would not force and
constrayne any man to the faith, but only admonish and commit the judgment to
God. Ioh. 18. 36
Christ's Kingdom is not of this world therefore may it not be purchased, nor
defended with the weapons of this world, Ephe. 6. 1^ 17.
but by his word and spirit: no other weapons has he given to his Church which
is his spiritual kingdom. Therefore Christ says: He that will not hear the
church, Mat. 18. 17
let him be to thee as a hethen and a publicane: he says not bur: ban: hang:
or inpriso: him, that is Antichrists ordinance. And though a man be an
heretic, Tyt. 3. 10
yet ought he not to be bur: but to be rejected, after once or twice
admonition, that is cast out of the Church: but as in the chur: of Rome people
of al sorts are by perseqution forced thereinto by the Bishops and ministers
thereof: so it is in the Church of England also, which shows that the Bs: and
min: of Rome and Eng: are of one spirit, in gathering peopel to their faith and
church, which is the spirit of Satan, who knows well that his kingdom (the
false Church) would greatly decay, if perseqution were laid down: seeing himself
cannot stand before the word and spirit of God, much less his Bs: and mi:
therefore he will have them, for a name and show, to use the word of God, but
indeed, if the false interpretation and alleging of the scriptures will not
help, then (says he constrayne them by fire and sword: or else (if people have
liberty of conscience) they will try the spirits, which of them is of god, as
the Apostle joh: teaches: and then says he: 1. John 4. 1
the Prince as well as people will try all things, and keep that which is good,
and will also prove themselves (as the Apostle Paul teaches) whether they are
in the Apostoliq faith or not: 2. cor. 13.
And as the Church of Rome provokes the Magestrats to peesequte to death, such
as are excommunicated out of her, so does the Church of England provoke the
Magistrates to persequte to death such as she excomunicate: And as the Bs. and
min: of To: will persuade the prince and people, to hear and read none but
themselves, so do the Bs: and min: of Eng: also: But the Bs: and min: of the
Apostoliq Church do persuade al men, to prove and try the Spirits whether
they are of God, which they cannot do, except they hear and read other men's
doctrines, as well as the Bs: and their min: neither can they if they would, so
long as the Bishops have power from the King and state to silence and imprison
etc: al preachers, and to burn al books, which teach not their doctines. Your
Majesty and Parliament shall understand that al those that confess freely
without compulsion, that Jesus is the Messiah the Lord, 1. John. 5. and 1. Io.
4.
and that he came in Flesh, are to be esteemed the Children of God and true
Christians, seeing such are borne of God, and no man can say that. Jesus is the
Lord, 1 co. 12. ^
but by the holy Ghost, therefore not to be persequted.

And as Abel killed not Cayne, but was killed himself, and as Isaac and Jacob
did not persequte Ismael and Esau, but was persequted of Ismael and Esau (who
and Caine were figuers of al persequters) so the believing do not persequte
the unbelieving, Gala. 4. 29
nor the true chur: the false, but the believing and true chur: are (as they
have been) most often persequted the^ selves, of whom Abel, Isaac and Jacob
were figures, whose children are al believers and free me^: Galat. 5.
that stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made the^ free, and will
not be tangled with the yoke of bondage, no not with cir-cumcision, much less
with the discipline and doctrijne of the Church of Rome, whose Bs: are able
ministers of the fire and sword, both to Prince and people, as many Historyes
do lamentably witness, to their utter infamy and overthrow. Also, if the
beleving should persequte the vnbeleving to death who should remain alive? then
none but the beleeveing should live in the world, and the vnbeleeveing should dye
in their vnbeleeif, and so perish for ever: the Lord will not that the
beleeveing should live, to the destruction of the vnbeleeveing, but unto their
conversion, edificatio^ and salvation: And by persequting of Prince and people
to death, because they will not hear and believe, is no gayning of souls unto
God, but unto the devil: And whereas ignorant and wicked Bs. may thinck to
wijn souls by killing Prince and people for religion, they are deceaved
greatly, for thereby, they loose many souls, viz: their own and the
unbelieving, their own they loose, ^e. 18. 20
because they wilfully break the Lords Commandment, that says: Thou shall
not kill, meaneing such as are corporal malefactors: and the others which dye
in their vnbeleeif, they confess themselves are eternaly lost, except they (as
some of their minist:) hold a redemption after this life. And the Bs. should know
that error and heresy cannot be killed by the fire and sword, but by the word
and spirit of God / that is the only weapons of Christ's Bs. and Ministers, and
such only Christ's Ministers do use, whose lives and conversations are so
harmless, holy and gentle, that thereby / and by their deaths and sufferings,
they win many souls unto god: whereby, they are known fro al false Bs. and
ministers, who like wolves and bears (not like sheep and lambs) make pray, and
devour both Prince and People, that are not of their kind, if they be able to
Master them.

Besides, may it please your Majesty and Parlia: to understand, that the
beleeveing man that has an dnbeleeveing wife, and the beleeveing woman that
has an vnbeleeveing husband, Co. 7. 16
cannot live together as the scripture teachet, for the salvation of the
vnbeleeveing, if they be persequted to death: Indeed some thereby are forced to
comfesse with the mouth, that which they believe not in heart, and so are made
true dissemblers in steed of true Christians, whereby many men and women are
deceaved with dissembling husbands and wyves, as well as the King and State are
deceaved with dissembling servants and subjects: but the word of God (if
permission of conscience might be granted) would procure upright, puer, and
unfeigned husbands and wyves, servants and subjects, so that thereby neither
Prince nor people should be deceaved, for all good shepherds will devide and
separate, and not force, slay, and persequte, for if men and women be found
heretics, they shall be separated from the Church: but if they be unbelievers,
they shall not be joined unto it, until they be converted by the word of God,
much less forced: Which conversion for ought we know, may be at their death,
if not before, seeing the Lord caleth some at the elevent hour, ^att. 20. 6.
so well as at the first, and not at the King and Bs. pleasures. Kings and
Magistrates are to rule temporal affayers, by the swords of their temporal
Kingdoms. And Bs: and Ministers are to rule spiritual affayers by the word and
spirit of God, the sword of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, and not to intermedle
one with another authority, office, and function: And it is a great shame for
the Bs. and Ministers not to be able to rule in their Church, without the
assistance of the King and Magistrate, yea it is a great sign they are none of
Christ's Bishops and ministers of they were, they would not be afraid nor
ashamed of their faith nor yet would they persuade Princes and people to
persequte and force one another to believe them, but would use only the
assistance of Gods word and spirit, and therewith suffer their faith and
doctrine, to be examined, proved, and disputed, both by word and writing.

And he is a true Bishop who is vnreproveable, Tyt. 1. 7. 9. 11.
and that is able to stop the mouths of his adversaries, by Gods word and
Spirit only, and whose faith and discipline agrees with the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles, and makes no contracictio^, but al those Bishops that force
Princes and peoples to receive their faith and discipline by perseqution, do
(with Judas) go against Christ in his members, with swords, slaves and
halberos, who seeing Gods word will not help them, betake themselves with all have
and hazard, unto the authority of the King and Magistrate.

I read that a Bishop of Rome would have constrained a Turkish Emperor to the
Christian faith, unto whom the Emperor answered: I believe that Christ was an
excellent Prophet, but he did never (so far as I understand) command that men
should with the power of weapons be constrained to believe his law: and verily
I also, do force no man to believe Mahomets Law. Also I read that Jews,
Christians and Turks are tolerated in Constantinople, and yet are peaceable,
though so contrary the one to the other. If this be so how much more ought
Christians, not to force one another to religion: and how much more ought
Christians to tolerate Christians, when as the Turks do tolerate them shall
we be less merciful the^ the Turks? or shall we learn the Turks to persequte
Christians? It is not only un merciful but unnatural and abominable, yea
monstrous for one Christian to vex and destroy another for difference and
questions of Religion, and though tares have ouergrowen the wheat, Mat. 13. 29
30. 38.
yet Christ will have them let alone til harvest, least while you go about to
pluck up the tares, you pluck up also the wheat with them, as your predecessors
have done, who thought they had gathered up the tares and burned them, but you
see now that they have burned the weate in steed of tares. Wherefore in all
humility and Christian modesty I do affirm, that through the unlawful
weedhooke of persecution (which your predecessors have used, and by your
majesty and Parliament is still continued) there is such a quantity of wheat
plucked up, and such a multitude of tares least behind, that the wheat which
remain, cannot yet appear, in any right vissible congregation.

And now beloved sovereign and Parliament, Act. 3. 17.
I know that through ignorance you do persequte, as did also your
predecessor^s, Amend your lives therefore, and turn, that your sins may be
put away, when the time of refreshing shall come, from the presence of the Lord:
who before has showed by the mouth of his holy servant John, that the woman
(meaning the church) should fleye into the wilderness for a time, Re. 12. 14.
times and half a time, from the presence and persecution of the Serpent: And
that the wynepresse should be trodden without the City, Re. 14. 20.
until ^loud came out of the wynepresse, unto the horse brydels, by the space
of a thousand and six hundred furlongs: and thus he has fulfilled it.

Now therefore I humbly beseeth you, suffer not your Bishops and ministers, any
longer to persuade, to force your subjects or any others, to their faith and
Church by perseqution, neither suffer them therewith to defend their faith and
Church, against their adversaries: if they have not any thing from Gods word
against us, let them yield and submit themselves: if they thinck they have any
thing against us, let them betake themselves only to Gods word, both in word
and wryteing, for the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, 2. tim.
3. 16.
to that purpose, and is profitable to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to
instruct, in righteousness, that the Man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto al good works. With which Scripture (and not with fire and sword)
your Majestyes Bishops and ministers ought to be armed and weaponed: Mat. 10.
14. 15.
And whosoever shall not hear the words of such Bishops and ministers: then
such Bishops and ministers are commanded by Christ (not to to imprison: Marc.
6. 11
burn: ban: and hang them but to shake the dust of their feet against them,
for a witness when they depart from them, affirming that at the day of judgment
it shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha, act. 13. 51.
then for such persons: And this com: of Christ, did his Bishops and ministers
obey as you may read. By which and by that which follow, your gracious may: and
Princely, and honorable Parliament may perceave, the will and mind of our Lord
and Savior Christ unto whose mercy I commend you, and to the word and wisdom
of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctified Amen.

Your faithful and loveing subject Leonard Busher.
there is one Furbusher a preacher in this la^d.
Not Furbusher.
Certain reasons against perseqution.
FIrst, because Christ has not commanded any King, Bishop, or Minister to
persequte the people, for difference and judgment in matter of Religion.

Secondly, because Christ has commanded his Bishops and ministers to persuade
Prince and people to hear and believe the gospel, by his^ word and spirit,
and (as Ambassadors for him) to beseech both Prince and people, 2. Cor. 5. 20
to be reconciled unto God, and not (as Tyrants) to force and co^strayne them
by perseqution.

Thirdly, many thousand Ambassadors and martyr^ of Christ has Bbs^ caused to
be slain since Ch^ ascended.
because through perseqution it will come to pass that the Ambassadors of the
only spiritual Lord and King Jesus, may be persequted and inprisoned, burned,
haged or ba^nished, for delivering the message of their gracious Lord,
sentearly and often, both to Prince and people: which to do, is a more heinous
fact then to persequte the Ambassadors of the greatest King and Prince in the
World: for instead of heretics, they shall (as they have already) burn,
bannish, and hang the Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus Christ: who does choose out
whom he pleases, to bear his name before Kings and Rulers, for a Testimonial
to them.

Fourthly, Marc. 13. 9*
because then we cannot say, we have the liberty of the Gospel in our Land,
Persequtio^ destroy Christians, but not errors
seeing where that is, there is no perseqution for any difference in Religion,
nor force^ing of the conscience to believe the gospel, except by the word and
spirit of God only, the which do wound and kill the ^rrors of men and not
their persons.

Fifthly, 2. cor. 10. 4
because Christ came into the world to fave sinners, and not to destroy them,
1. Tym. 1. 13. 15.
though they be blasphemers, seeing the Lord may convert them as he did Saul
(after caled Paul) and though they have difference in Religion, Luc. 9. 53. 55.
or will not hear nor believe in Christ, that they may be converted, yet ought
you not to persequte them, seeing Christ rebukes such and his Father sent him
not into the world, Persequtors rebuked of Christ.
to condemn the world, but to save it be ye followers therefore of Christ, and
not of Antychrist, in gathering people to the Faith.

Sixthly, 1. Cor. 10. 32.
because then you shall not walk wisely toward the^ that are without as the
Scripture teaches but shall offend also the Jews* and al other strangers who
account it Tyranny, Col. 4. 5.
to have their consciences forced to religion by perseqution.

Seaventhly, because if perseqution be not laid down, and liberty of
conscience set up, then cannot the Jews, nor any strangers, nor others
contrary minded be ever converted in our Land: for so long as they know a
forehand, that they shall be forced to believe against their consciences, they
will never seek to inhabit there: by which means you keep them from the
Apostoliq says, if the Apostoliq faith be only taught where perseqution is.

Eighthly, because if freedom of conscience be not set up, and perseqution laid
down, then all the Kings subjects, and al strangers inhabiting the Land (that
shall believe the Apostoliq faith) must depart the land to some free contry,
Persequtio^ ^lo make ^any stra^^ers.
or else abide the danger of burning, bannishing, hanging and imprisoning: the
first, will be a great impoverishing and weakening of our land, besides a loss
of the faithfullest subjects and friends: the second will provoke the lord to
wrath, by spilling the blood of his faithful servants, Ambassadors and
witnesses, and also open the mouths of al strangers, to speak yet more
lamentably, of the cruel and bloody perseqution of our Land.

Ninthly, because if perseqution continue, then the King and State shall have
(against their wills) many dissemblers in Authority and office, both in court
City and contrye, yea no man of any degree shall know whether they are al
faithful and true Christians, that are about him, and with who^ he has to do,
seeing most men will conform themselves, for fear of perseqution, although in
their hearts, they hate and detest the religion whereto they are forced by law,
the which is very dangerous and hartful, both to King and State in time of
temtation, from bejond the seas, and in rebellion at home: for they that are
not faithful to God, in their Religion will never be faithful to the King and
State in their alegiance, specialy being tried by a great reward, or by a
mighty rebel: but will (to encrase their honors and reverennues) conform
themselves, and foam to save their honors, Lands, goods and lives) will yield
and submit, though against their wills, even as they have done in case of
Religion: for through forceing men to Church by perseqution, the true hearted
subjects, are forced out of the Land, and out of the World, some bannished,
others burned, hanged, and imprisoned to death.

Tenthly, ^ersequtio^ ^^usemani ^^ligions. (...) the church.
because then, if there be many religions in the land (as it is well known
there are) it will com to pass (through the continance of perseqution) that
many religions will be continued in the Church, seeing al are forced to Church,
who bring their religions with them, as well as their bodies, whereby al their
devotion is against their consciences, and all the Church is a confused Babel,
full of every unclean and hateful bird, even a hold of soul Spirits, ^ v. 18.
2. 4
as the Scripture speaks: out of which the people of God are Commanded to
flee, least (as of their sins) they be also pertakers of their plague. ^^eter
were to have ^any reli^o^s in the and, the^ in ^^le Churc:
And the Bishops (the Authors of perseqution) are very ignorant to think that
when they have gotten people to their Church, by perseqution, that then they
have gotten them to their says and religion, the which is nothing so, for most
people (though contrary minded) to save life and goods will dissemble their
religion, as for example the Jews in Spain and Portugale, and the Papists,
Reformists, and others in England, but when they com hither, or to some other
free City or Country (where praised be God is liberty of the gospel) then they
show, that before they dissembled to avoid the cruel perseqution of our land.

Moreover, the Bishops bewray great ignorance, when they persuade the King and
Parliament, to force Prince and people to Church by perseqution: for if that
be the means to com to the Church of Christ, then Christ has taught us to
fle the means of salvation, seeing he has taugt us to flee perseqution: Mat.
10. 23*
the which the Bishops and their Ministers persuade to be a great means to
bring men to the Church: Christ teaches to flee persequtio^ ergo it cannot
possible be good.
Indeed I confess, it is the only means to bring Prince and people to the
false Chur: and therefore Christ teaches us to flee that means, least through
perseqution (which is a great temtation) we be constrained to go the broad way
(which is the false Church) that leads to destruction; and many go in
thereat: and no maxvaile, for there m^^may be any thing, except good Christians:
for (besides Demas the worldlying, and Hymeneus the blasphemer and many other
sorts of indifferent Christians, Mat. 7. 13
excommunicants covetous and profane persons) there are notale rebels and
Traitors, Note. see 2. tim. 3. 3 4.
yea most cruel and desperate Traitors and Rebels, as Digby, Catesby, Percy,
etc: whose buread and unheard treathery will never be forgotten, which persons,
if they had not been forced to Church against their consciences, had never
enterprised, such horribel and hateful treason.

And the Bbs: should understand that it is preaching and not persequting, that
gets people to the church of Christ, for the scripture says Faith is by
heareing, Ro^. 10. 17.
and heareing by the word of God, and not by the sword of Princes and
Magistrates, as they persuade and practice: And therefore the Bbs: of our land
are truly caled Antychrists for by their beastly and bloody perseqution, as well
as by their blasphemous titles, erroneous doctrines, and popish government, may
they justly be termed Antichrists.

Eleventhly, Mat. 24.
because Christ forethou^, that many false Christ's, and false Prophets should
arise, 2. these. 2. ^
and deceave many, yea if it were possible the very elect: And the Apostle Paul
did prophecy a departure from the faith: 1. Tym. 4.
And Peter said, 2. Peter. 2.
There should be false teachers now among the people: and John said, the Kings
should give their power and Authority unto the beast, until the words of God be
fulfilled, rev. 57. 13 17.
therefore if perseqution be not laid down, and liberty of the gospel set by,
you may persequte the true Christians in steed of the false, as your
predecessors have done: for they are now (like as they were then) the smalest
number: and the false Christians are now (like as they were then) the greatest
number: and perseqution is a notable mark of the false Church and her Bbs:
Gal. 2. 3. and 5. 11. ^ 6. 12.
and Ministers: and therefore Christ would have us flee from it, who overcame
the devil and his Ministers by the word of God, and by a good meek and gentle
life, whose steps his Bishops and Ministers ought to follow.

Twelvthly, because perseqution of such as do preach and teach Christ is a
great hinderance to the liberty of the Gospel: for thereby, are the Jews,
Turks, and Pagans occasioned and encouraged to persequte likewise* all -- such
as preach and Teach CHRIST in their dominions: Note False Bbs: teach Turks and
Pagans to persequte Christians
For if Christian Kings and Magistrates will not suffer Christians to preach and
preach the gospel of Christ freely and peaceably in their dominions, how should
you expect it of the infidels? unto whom Bs: and Christian Kings and
Magistrates ought to give a good example and not an evil, as to burn, bannish,
hangh and imprison peaceable and godly Christians, that are no traitors, nor
thieves, nor fighters, nor ma^slayers, nor perswearers, nor drunckards, nor
whoremasters, nor such like. And the King and Parliament may please to permit
al sorts of Christians, yea Jews, Turks and Pagans, so long as they are
peaceable and no malefactors, as is above mentioned: which, if they be found to
be under 2. or. 3. witnesses, let them be punished according to Gods word: also
if any be found to be willing liars, false accusers, false ale^^dgers and
quoters of the Scriptures, or other men's wrytings (as some me^ willingly do)
let them be punished according right and Justice, it is due desert and no
perseqution, but let Gods word have his full and free passage amongh them al,
even to the end of their lives, in all bountifulnes, long sufferance and
patience, knowing that it is ordained of Gods rich mercy, to lead the infidels
and such as err unto repentance, Romans 2. 4.
and amendeme^t, out of the snare of the devil, (...). 2. 25.
of whom they are taken and deceaved.

Thirteenthly, because perseqution for Religion is to force the conscience and
to force and constrayne men and women's conciences to a religion against their
wills, is to Tyra^nisse over the soul, as well as over the body and herein the
Bishops commit a greater sin then if they force the bodies of women and maids
against their wills: ^. cor. 11. 2
yea herein they are more cruel and greater Tyrans then the Turks, False Bbs:
worse then Turks and pagans.
who though they force the bodies of strangers, to slavery and bondage yet they
let the conscience go free, yea to Christians, that are so contrary to them in
Religion: but these Idol Bishops will force the consciences of Christians, their
own natural contrymen, even unto spiritual slavery and bondage, and herein
they commit fornication both with Prince and people, Note Falss Bbs: spiritual
^ornicatio^. ^. these. 2. 4.
and have made al both small and great, to receave a mark in their right hand,
or in their foreheads, so that no man may bye or sell, save he that will go to
Church, and submit to the Bishops ordinances, and name and mark of their
beastly and bloody perseqution, through which as God they sit in, and reygne
over the Consciences both of Prince and people, 1. Cor. 6. 19. 20. and 1. cor.
6. 16 17. with ^ev. 18. 4 and.
which is the spiritual seat and Temple of God bought at a dear price, even
with the precious bleud of their only spiritual Lord Jesus Messiah, the true
Shepherd and Bishop of their fowls.

And the Bishops in forceingmen and women's consciences, do there in play the
Antychrist so well as the Popes: ^. Pet. 2. 1.
and indeed there is never a Bishop in the land, ^. Pet. 1. 19
but is a Pope, for Pope in Lattine is Papa, and Papa signifies Father in
English, all the Bishops in our Land are called reverend Fathers, therefore all the Bishops in our land* are caled reverend Popes, so many Lord Bishops, so
many reverend Fathers, so many reverend Popes: If Idolaters ought to be slain
then ought al those that submit and yield spiritual obedience and revere^ce unto
these Bbs) to be slain, who then should remain in land alive? Rev. 17. 13.
and these are all so many Antychrists, so many Idols, and so many false Gods
o^ England, how many are thy Gods, whom thou do serve? For whose spiritual
adoration the knee of evry man and woman must bow, or else they shall be
persequted: unto whom the King ought not any longer to give his authority and
pouwer, least he fulfill the scripture which says, that Kings should give their
power and authority unto the beast.

Fourteenthly, because the burning, bannishing, hanging and imprisoning of men
and women, by protestants, for difference of Religion, do justifye the
burning, bannishing and imprisoning of men and women, by the papists, for
difference of Religion, even as the Papists do justify the Turks and Pagans in
such like cruelty and tyranny, wherein ^o^ is the protestants more merciful
then the Papists, or the Papists the^ the Turks Therefore, as the Papists (when
they complain of the Turks and Pagans, for their bloody perseqution) do
therein condemn themsewes, because they are found to do the same, yea worse,
for it is greater Tyranny for one Christian to forse and kill one another, then
for Turks and pagans to kill a Christian, for that is no such great wonder,
seeing it is a paganish part, who have no better knowledge, but Christians
should have better knowledge and more merci then to play the Paga^s against
Christians: Note.
So also the protestants, when they complain of the papists for their bloody
and beastly perseqution, do therein condemn themselves, seeing they do the
same, for which they blame others, and so are rebuked of the scripture, Ro^. 2.
1. 3.
which says. Therefore thou are inexcusable, o thou man, whosoever thou art
that blamest another, for in that thou judge another, thou condemnest thy
self, for thou that judge do the same things: and think thou this o
thou man (that judge them which do such things, and thou do the same)
that thou shall escape the judment of God?

Fifteenthly, because his Majesty and parliament would not willingly themselves
be forcet against their consciences, by the perseqution of the Bishop of Rome
and his Princes, so I beseech them (according to the law, Luc. 6. 31.
Christ has enjoined Christians) not by perseqution to force other men's
consciences, Or provocation.
against their wills by the irritation of the Bishops of our Land.

Sixteenthly, because perseqution do cause men and women to make shipwreck of
faith and good consciences, by forceing a religion upon the^, even against
their minds and consciences, and also do send them quike to the devil in
their errors, if that be heresy for which they are hanged and burned, King
Edward was an enemy to persequtio^
which to do, is a most Unchristian, unnatural, cruel and tyrannous deed,
and I am suer you would not be content to be so dealt with all your selves:
but indeed the popish and Idol Bishops are the authors hereof against the
people, as well as of other persequtio^ against the princes. For Antychristia^
Bbs: Acts and mon: page 1484.
do draw Kings and Princes hereto, against their minds, as may appear by
Edward the sixth, that Godly King of famous memory, who being urged by his
bloody Bbs:, to subscribe to the burning of a woman caled Ioane Butcher, The
Christian answer of King Edward.
he answered. will you have me to send her quick to the devil in her error? but
when his blood thirsty Bs: wouls have no nay, he said again to Bishop Cranmer,
I lay all the chaledg thereof on you before God, and Cranmer said, he had never
so much to do in all his life as to procure it, rev. 16. 14.
whereby I do perceave that godly Kings are drawn to battle against the
Saints, by Antychristian Bbs: and false Prophets, who otherwise would rule and
reign, more agreeable to the mind of Christ.

Also, herby may al men perceave that the counsel and Bbs: could not satisfy
the Kings conscience by their persuasion, if they could have showed him the
word of God, (...)
for burning that Christian, it would have prevailed with that godly King, and
he might then of faith have consented, but his answer shows that he was not
of their mind, for all that they had said, and therefore now, if it please you
to require of your Bishops warrant from the word of God for the persequting of
Christians, or for forceing Prince and people to church, you shall find not one
Bishop, yea not all of them together, though assisted with their Ministers,
will be able to show warrant from Gods word, whereby to persuade your consciences
thereunto: and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and whatsoever is not from
Gods word, cannot be of faith.

Seaventeenthly, Ro^. 14. 23.
because perseqution of Christians by Christians do not only justifye
papists, and teach the Jews and Paga^s to persequte Christians, but also do
teach the papists and others (that know not the mind of Christ, and once get
the vpperha^d) to persequte those that persequted them: By Digby, Cates by etc:
yea it is a means, (as we have had lamentable experience) to set (such as are
forced to Church against their consciences) at deadly hatred against the King
and State, and urges al them to treason and rebellion, man. 11. 29.
that have not truly learned Christ, who himself was persequted to death, Luc.
14. 27
whose harmles cross, al true Christians must take up, and whose gentle and
humble steps they must follow and walk in, or else they cannot be his
disciples, nor sheep of his pasture. And nether can the papists be persuaded
that perseqution is a sin, so long as they and other Christians are also
persequted by the protestants: seeing the papists do build their perseqution on
the same ground with the protestants: but both sorts of Bbs: do err grossly,
as shall be showed (Godwilling) when they make their defense except heerewith
their consciences be convinced to yield, as I wish they may for the salvation of
their own fowls, the peace both of Prince and people, and the saftye of the
King and State: In the mean while it is to be observed, that those Bbs: and
Ministers which persuade the King and Parliament, to burn, bannish, hang and
imprison, for difference of religion are bloud-suckers and manslayers, and such
(it cannot be denied) caused Kings and Magistrates, to be their excicutioners
and tormentors, in burning the Martyrs in former times, even in the days of
King Henry the eight. and Queen Mary, as the books of Acts and Momuments will
witness, if they be not burned and I ask the Bbs: and their Mini: if the
martyrs should have obeyed the King and Queen, rather the^ have suffered death?

And now I must humbly and with all reverence do beseech his Maje: Act. 4. 19
and parliament, The Bbs: as the high priests, force men to obey man rather
the^ God.
advisedly to consider among themselves, whether the Prince or Princess
(differing with the Church now in matter of conscience and religion, stablished
by law in our land (as the right noble Princess Elizabeth did, in Queen
Maryes days) do not incur the danger ad cruelty of the law now, as that
worthy Princess did then, seeing that popish and cruel law stands still in
force, in most points of religion? and who dare trust the Bbs: and there
adhere^ts, in such a case, the matter lyeing in their hands. Note well.


Let it be supposed that the Princes heart should be moved by the lord to
embrace the Apostoliq faith and discipline, shall he be forced to believe as the
Bishops do, against his conscience? shall he be constrained to submit to their
government and discipline against his conscience? shall he live in vexation and
perseqution, and in danger of his life, by the Bishops and law stablished as
the Princess Elizabeth did? yea it must be thus with our right noble Prince,
except there be partiality, yea it will be thus with his Princely person,
except those popish and cruel laws be repealed and extinguished.

Wherefore I meekly entreat seeing death is most certain, though most
uncertain when, that those Antychristian and Popish Laws may be dissimulled
and made void in time, Then ^ary til to morrow.
least we all lament, and bewail it, when it wilbee to late: And I pray your
Majesty and honors to consider, that Kings and Princes hearts are in the hands
of the Lord (as the Ryvers of waters) to turn as he will. And the scripture
says. The ten horns (by which I understand ten Kings) shall hate the whore
and make her desolate and naked. Rev. 17. 16
Likewise the Scripture says to Abraham the Father of believing Princes, Genesis
17 ^6.
as well as believing people) Also I will make thee exceeding fruitful, Romans 4.
17.
and will make Nations of thee, Yea Kings shall proceed of thee. Which
Scripture do also overthrow the judgment of those men, that hold a Christian
may not be a King nor Magistrate. Let such consider that the Lord here
speaks of Abraham's Spiritual seed, and not of his natural seed: Because if
it be understood of his Natural seed, then cannot Abraham be o Father of many
nations, seeing all Abraham's natural seed, are caled Jews, and are but one
nation of the Jews, so that the covenant of God could not be performed, that
said: I will make nations of the, yea Kings ^^al proceed of thee. Therefore it
must be understood of his spiritual seed, of which may be Kings and Princes,
that are not naturaly descended of him, as well as people that are not naturaly
descended of him / therefore beleving Kings may safly walk in the steps of
their Father Abraham, and with their swords defend their subjects against their
adversaries, and redeem their brethren out of the jaws of al devouring
beasts and bloody persequtors, for they bear not the sword for naught.

And now also I desire those subjects (of what degree soever / that would destroy
their Kings and Governors for difference in Religion) to consider that therein
they justifye their Kings and Governors, which destroy their subjects for
difference of Religion. For as it is sin for Kings and Governors to destroy
their subjects, for difference of religion, at the persuasion of their Bishops.
So is it sin (but in a higer degree) for subjects to destroy their King and
Governors for difference of religion, at the persuasion of their Bishops and
Ministers. Romans 13. 4


Therefore perseqution for difference in religion is a monstrous and cruel
beast, that destroys both Prince and people, hinders the gospel of Christ,
and scatters his Disciples that profess and witness his name.

But permission of conscience in difference of Religion saves both Prince and
people, for it is a meek and gentle lamb, which not only furthereth and
advances the gospel, but also fostereth and cheris heth these that profess
it, as may be seen by the permission of the Princess Elizabeth: and others
that were permitted and fostered in Dutchland at that time. Permissio^ of
conscience a furthera^ce to the gospel and a safly both to prsnce and people
Also permission of conscience is a great and suerband, and benefit to the
King and State, as may likewise be seen in the same Princess Eliza: who if
she had not been permitted, but had suffered death, as the bloody Bishops
earnestly desired: then had not the Kingdom been so suerly not yet so purely
kept and preserved for his Mayesty ad his Royal issue, as now it is, the Lord
be praised therefore.

Further I beseech his right excellent Majesty and parliament to obser that
perseqution, was the occasion that the Apostoliq Church was at first scattered
and driven into the wildernis, that is desert places of the world, Rev. 12. 6.
14 and 13. 5. 7.
whether she fled to save herself from the rage and Tyranny of Antichrist and
his Apostles and Ministers, the first Authors of perseqution under the Gospel.
Therefore his Majesty and Parliament may please to consider, 2. Cor. 11. 13.
that so long as perseqution continue, so long will the Apostoliq Church
continue scattered and persequted into the secret places of this world: and no
mervayle, for her faith and discipline is as offensive as odyous and as
vnwelcom unto Antychrist and his Bishops and Ministers now: as it was then, as
their burning, banishin, hanging and imprisoning, do withnes even unto this
day. And it is to be noted, that as the Apostoliq faith and discipline (in the
Apostles days, when through them true signs and wonders were wrought by the
extraordinary gift and power of the Holy Ghost) did let and hinder the mystery
of iniquity, 2. these. 2. 6. 7.
wrought by Antychrist his Apostles and Ministers, by who^ the lyeing signs
and wonders were done, through the extraordinary spirit of Satan. So now the
Catholiq or Antichristian faith and discipline (having gotten the vpperhand by
her lyeing signs and wonders, 2. Tes. 2. 9.
and by perseqution) do by the same, 1. tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. tim. 3. 1. 4. 5.
and 2. pe. ^. 1. 3
let and hinder the mystery of Godliness, wrought by Christ, his Apostles and
Ministers, by whom the true signs and wonders were done, without perseqution.

And it is well worthy to be observed, 1. john. ^. 1
both of King, Prince, and people, 2. john. 7
that the Bishops Ministers of Antychrist cannot abide, nor endure the faith
and discipline of the Apostoliq Church, Iud. 4. 11 16. 18.
because it willbee the overthrow of their blasphemous and spiritual Lord
ships, and of their Antichristian and bloody Kingdom. Note well.
And therefore are they so fyery hot and zealous, 1. john. 4. 3
for the Catholiq or Antichristian faith and disciplyne. for by their faith
they show plainly, that they are succeeded and descended from Antychrist, Who
confessed not that the Messiah came in flesh: and by their discipline or
government, they plainly show, they are Antichrists Bishops and Ministers, who
persequte with fire and sword, al degrees both King, Prince, and people, that
will not confess their faith, and obey their discipline. And it is very plain
and easy both for King, Prince and people (if they will not take up religion
oncredit, and content them with the religion they were borne and brought up in
(as do the papists) to discern who they be that teach the Apostoliq faith and
discipline, and who they be that teach Antychrists faith and disciplyne, for
the holy Apostle shows it to al men, that will give heed thereto, for he says:
Dearly beloved, believe not evry spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are
of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world, The Siriah says
came in flesh.
which confess not that Jesus Messiah came in flesh. Hereby shall you know the
spirit of God, evry spirit that confesses, that Jesus Messiah came in flesh,
is of God, and evry spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Messiah came in
flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antychrist, whom ye have heard,
how that he should come, and now already is he in the world. The same is the
Antychrist that denies the Father and the Son, whosoever denies the son, 1.
john. 2. 22. 23.
the same has not the Father. The Apost: means such as deny Jesus to be
Messiah, the Lord that came down from Heaven, as Christ and they have taught,
john. 17. 3. 5. 8.
such have not the Father, but do deny hem also, as they have taught him, and
therefore Christ says: The time shall come, that whosoever kills you, 1. co.
15. 47
will think that he does God good service, but these things they will do unto
you, John. 6. 38 42. 62. and 7. 26. 27*
because they have not known the Father nor me, the Father loves such as
believe that I came out from God, thus faith Christ: But Antychrist and his
Ministers believe not this doctrine, neither do they thus teach Christ Jesus
the Messiah. John. 16. 2. 3. 27. 21.


And you may please to understand that of this Antichrist (or rather (as the
^^riack) of this false Christ came the Church of Rome: whose bishops and
Ministers teach not this doctrine, and as the Mother so the daughter also,
teaches not this doctrine: but will likewise persequte both Prince and people,
that shall confess that Jesus Messiah came in flesh as John teaches: 1. joh.
4. 2.
or that the Son of Man ascended up, where he was before, Ioh. 6. 62. and 3. 13.
or that he was glorified with his Father before the world was, as himself
says: or that he was the second man the lord from heaven, or that he had and
has a heavenly body, John. 17. 5.
as Paul teaches: for these and such like doctrynes do the Church of Rome
and her daughters persequte with fire and sword being endued with the spirit of
Antychrist: 1. Cor. 15. 47. 49.
By which Antychrist his Apostles and Ministers, 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
the Apostoliq Church was scattered and driven into the wilderness, 2. cor. 11.
12. 15.
that is desert and secret places of this world, eve^ by their bloody
perseqution. The which still they continue and raise against the members and
witnesses thereof, Rev. 12. ^. (...).
who w^ere and are the Martyrs, which in all ages have and do suffer death,
imprisonment, and bannishment, since the first perseqution: and we never read,
nor ever shall read that the Apostoliq Church or such as have derived their
faith and discipline of her, did ever persequte.

Therefore I humbly desire his Majesty and Parliament, with all godly carefulnes
to consider, that it is not possible that the Church of Rome (caled Catholiq)
or those that are descended of her, and have decived their faith and discipline
from ^her, ever was, or could be the Apostoliq Church (caled primitive Church)
or she that is descended from her: seeing the scripture says the Apostoliq
church (caled in scripture the woman) has a place prepared of God in the
wilderness, a thousand twe ho^dred and sixty days from the presence of such as
did persequte her. Rev. 12. 6. 13. 14.
Now then, I beseech you consider, may it be possible that the church of Rome
(caled in scripture a mystery, great Babylon, the Mother of whoredoms, and
abominations of the Earth, the woman that sits upon a scarlot coulered
beast, full of names of Blasphemy, the woman arrayed in purple and scarlet, and
gilded with gold and precious stones and pearls, having a cup of gold in her
hand, full of abominations and filtines or her fornication, the woman that is
drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs or
witnesses of Jesus, by her beastly perseqution) was or could be ever the
Apostoliq Church, or are those that are descended from her, seeing the
scripture says she has a Place in the wilderness, prepared of God, where she
should be fed a thousand two hundred and sixty days, Rev. 12. 6. 13. 14.
from the presence of her persequtors?

If so be, you will have the Church of Rome, and those that are descended from
her, Note.
to be the true Apostoliq Church: then it will follow that the Church (caled the
woman, and did fly into the wilderness, from her persequtors) was, and is the
false Antichristian Church: and also it will follow that those (which we
account to be the Martyrs and witnesses of Jesus) were not of the true
Apostoliq church, 2. The. 2. 3 6. 8.
but were obstinate persons and heretics, even as their adversaries (in Rome,
Spain, England and else where) did persequte, 1. Tim. 4. 1 2. 3.
adjudge and execute them far.

But if you will have the Prophecy of the Apostles to be true, a^^ (...) believe
their holy writings, Rev. 12. 6. 11. 14. and 17. 2. 6. 17
and also will have the Martyrs (that have been burned, ban: hanged and
imprisoned) to be of the true Apostoliq Chur: then it will follow and that
justly according and agreeable to the scriptures, that the Church of Rome and
those that did and do persequte, 2. Tim. 3. 1 9. and 4. 3. 4
are descended from the false Antichristian Church, caled a mystery, great
Babilo^ the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the Eearth, 2. pe. 2. 1. 3
etc: which was and is drunken with the blood of Saints and martyrs of Jesus:
1. joh. 2. 18 19. and 4. ^.
seeing they have her Antichristian faith and lordly discipipline, and for the
defense and maintenance thereof, 2. John. 7.
will also burn, bannish, hang and imprison / so hot and fiery zealous that
thereby they show plainly, Jude 4. 11 16.
that they walk so just and even in the steps and paths of the Mystical woman
great Babylon, their bloody parent and mother: Like mother, like Daughter.
so even I say, as if they studied her lyeing and Hypocritical doctrine, her
deep and divelish devinity, her blasphemous, princely and dangerous dignity,
and her beastly, bloody and deadly discipline. Through the continuance whereof,
1. Tim. 4. 2
not only the Apostoliq Church, is continued still in the wilderness and desert
of this world, Rev. 2. 24*
but also the jews and others, both in great Brittayne, and al over the world,
are kept back from the knowledge of Gods holy word, the only order and
ordinance Christ has appointed, for the gathering of his Church together, out
of al places of the world. And so long as perseqution continue, you cannot try
the spirits of the many false prophets, 1. joh. 4. 1.
that are gone out into the world, as the holy Apostle does loveingly advise
and admonish you. But (like the Pastists) must be tied only to the spirits of
your loedly Bishops and their Ministers, Fire and sword, n^ equal we^pons to
the spirit and word.
who will have alboth King, Prince and people to receave their spirits, and
therefore will not have any others to preach and print with in the Land, least
their lyeing doctrine and Lordly discipline, be discovered and disclaimed. And
in steed of disputing and writing by the word and spirit of Christ (against
their adversaries) they will cruelly persequte and fight against them, by fire
and sword, and Spirit of Antichrist, from whom they are descended and
succeeded, Mistically
both lynealy and of great antiquite.

Wherefore I humbly beseech the King and parliament, that you will betymes
listen unto the holy spirit in the mouth of the prophet, which faith bewyse now
therefore ye Kings, psalm. 2. 1^
be learned (or instructed) ye judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear,
and rejoice in trembling, kiss the son of God least he be angry, and ye perish
in the way of perseqution, when his wrath shall sudde^ly burn. Let not therefore
the Kings of the earth band themselves with the Bs: and ministers of
Antichrist, Psalm. 2. 2. ^
nor Princes assemble themselves together against the lord and against his
anointed. 1. joh. 2. 2^
That is against Christ and his church: seeing both he and she break your bands
and cast your coardes from them. Rev. 17. 1^
Yea her seed overcomes you, by the blood of the lamb, and by the word of
their testimoni, for they love not their lives unto death. Rev. 12. 1.


Beware then in time least you offend any more of these little ones that believe
in Christ, seeing Christ says it were better to have a millstone hanged about
the neck, Mat. 18. 6 10.
and drowned in the depth of the Sea, then so to do. He means that it were
better for you to loose your lives, then any way to consent to the offense of
such little ones that believe in Christ. See then I pray that they be not
despised, burned, bannished, hanged and imprisoned. For their Angels always
behold the face of Christ's Father in Heaven. And remember he says: Mat. (...).
38* 39.
the tree is known by his fruit, but persequting of Christians, is an evil
fruit. And that a good man out of the good treasure of his heart, brings
forth good things: Mat. 11. 35* 36.
but persequting of Christians is no good thing. And that for every idle word
men shall speak, they shall give accounts at the day of judgment: How much more
for every wicked and cruel deed of perseqution, as burning, bannishing, hanging
and imprisoning of those that confess with the mouth, Romans 10. 9*
and believe with the heart the Lord Jesus, and that God raised him from the
dead: whose laws and ordinances they are careful to keep and obey! Christ
says that such shall be saved, and yet you fear not to burn, bannish, hang
and imprison such. But if you believe that God will avendge his elect, Luc. 18.
7.
beware of persequting his servants, that call on his name, specialy such as
witness his truth against the abominations of Antychrist. Suffer not your
Bishops to destroy those men and women, that strive to serve God according to
his will in his word. Be not your Bishops executioners, in burning, bannishing,
hanging, and imprisoning of harmless and peaceable Christians: but let them
enjoy fredom of the gospel and liberty of conscience: that so the Apostoliq
Church (which is scattered and driven into the wilderness and desert of this
world) may be again gathered togather, both of Jews and gentiles, into visible
and stablished congregations. 2. Txs. 2. 8*
And that the Catholiq and universal Church of Antychrist may be consumed and
abolished by his word and spirit, I pray the Lord to give such grace, the Sea
of Rome may (...) apace.
as the holy Apostle has foretold, even the uttermost of his arival, which is
the Emperial and triple crown, through the triple sea of Rome.

And again I humbly entreat the King and parliament, to vouchsafe to hear me
with patience yet a little further: If freedom of the gospel and permission of
conscience might be granted, then would not Papis^ nor any others dissemble
their souls, and to the great danger, both (...) King and State, seeing they
are forced to Church against their consciences: And may not Popish Priests and
Jesuits (unawares to the Bishops) become the Bishops Ministers, seeing the
change of their Religion, and religions habit differ so little, and so by
degrees infect the people with more popish doctrine, Nota From popes submission
there is great suspi^ion.
as occasion shall be? And such men will readely embrace the Bishops orders, and
so they shall readely have the Bishops favors: by which means, they may more
easily and speedly, ha^ access unto the court, and presence of the King and
Prince, which indeed is very dangerous, howsoever not regarded. Therefore I do
(according to my dewty) humbly advise his Majesty, not to bewtifie his cou^^
and presence, with any popish stones, not with one, though it be of
All^^blastor.

But permission of Conscience and freedom, and liberty of the gospe^ will no
^ay be dangerous to the King or State, if such like rules ^ these be observed.

First, that no people tainted with Treason, do bear any office.

That al sorts of people tainted with Treason, do (at al times from home)
wear ab lack hat with two whire signs, the one before the other behind in
open sight.

That no people, tainted with treason approach within ten miles of the Court,
without license.

That no people tainted with treason do inhabit the City of London, nor yet
within ten miles thereof.

That none tained with treason, do make any assembly or congregation.

That no person or persons (in whatsoever difference, by reasoning or
disputing) do draw any weapon, nor give any blow, stroke, or pushe, in pain
and penalty, as his Majesty and Parliament thinck meet.

That (for the more peace and quietness, and for the satisfyeing of the weak
and simple, among so many persons, differing in Religion) it be lawful for
every person or persons, yea Jews and Papists, to write, dispute, comfer and
reason, print en publish any matter touching religion, either for or against
whomsoever, always provided they aledge no fathers, 2. Tim. ^. 24. 25.
for proffe of any point of religion, but only the holy scriptures neither yet
to reproach or (...) one another, nor any other person or persons, james. 3. 1*
but with all love, gentleness, and peaceablenes, inform one another to the
glory of God, honor of the King and State, and to their own good and credit,
Note
by which means, both few errors and few books will be written and printed,
A true sign of false Bishops an Ministers.
seeing al false Ministers, and most people, have little or nothing else (besides
the Fathers) to build their religion and doctrine upon: (or if it be once
stablished by law that none shall confirm their Religion and doctrine, by the
Fathers, and by prisons, burning and bannishing etc: but by the holy
Scriptures, then error will not be written nor disputed, except by obstinate
persons, and (...) consciences seeing the word of God will be no shelter for
any error. Yea I know by experience, among the people caled Brownists, that a
Man shall not draw them to write, though they be desired, for one of their
preachers caled Mast: Rob: has had a writing of mine in his hards, above six
Months, and as yet I can get no answer it seems he knows not how better to
hide his errors, then by silence, and this willbee the case of all false
Bishops and Ministers, John. 3. 2.
who had rather be mute and dumb, John. 3. 10*
then be drawn into the light with their errors.

Therefore permission of conscience, and liberty of the gospel in our la^d of
great Britain, will mightily further the advancement of the Apostoliq faith.
And chiefly their books, whereout sufficient matter willbee drawn, for the
convinceing of every particular religion, which is against the religion,
stablished by Christ and his Apostles, who by all means Lawful, sought the
conversion and salvation, both of Jews and Gentiles. 1. Cor. 9. 20* 22.
And they are unconstant and faithles men, or at least very ignorant, that
thinck error will overcome and prevayle against the truth. Act. 16. 3.


For the Abolishing of such thoughts, I desper such men to consider the mighty
victory and prevailing of the truth, in the time of Christ and his Apostles,
which (notwithstanding resisted and disputed against: by the most part of the
Priests and learned men, both of Jews and Gentiles) yet overcame and prevayled
against all the errors of the high priests and great learned Men, both of the
Jews and gentiles, and the Apostle says we cannot do any thing against the
truth, 2. Cor. 13. 8*
but for the truth: and seeing it is the same truth, which al good men would
embrace, why should we not hope the same victory by it! Did not King Darius and
all the people both jews and gentiles cry out and say, 2. Esd. 4. 38. 41.
that truth is great and strongest? Why then should those that have the truth,
and those that would have the truth, be afraid of errore seeing truth
discovers dark and dangerous ways of error, though abroad in open books,
even as light discovers dark and dangerous places, though abroad in open
high ways: And as the more dark and dangerous the ways be, the more
necessary and needful will light be found of all that travail: So the more
dark and dangerous the errors be, the more needful and profitable will truth be
found, of all that would travil to heaven. But some may say objection let all this be granted, yet it is no wisdom we think, to bring dangerous errors into
the light, that so many men may stumble at them. Which being not brought to
light, would not be so much as known to some.

I answer, Answer.
no more, then a Rock that lies hid under water, which (for want of bringing
into the light) many Men may make shipwreck thereon and so stumble or fall
nevertheless, though it be not so much as known to them before. Therefore as a
stock in the Seas (though not so much as known to some) yet (for want of being
made known) many men stumble and fall thereon / and so perish both men and
goods. So an error (though not so much as known to some) yet (for wan^ of being
made known) many men may stumble and fall thereon / and so perish both bodies an^
souls the which is more lamentable* and as Roks in the seas / the more they
manifest the^self^ the more furtherance in the way to the Heaven. So errors in
the world the more they manifest themselves, the more furtherance in the way to
heaven. And you shall understand that errors being brought to the light of the
word of god, will vanish as darkness before the light of a torch: eve^ as the
chafe before the wind cannot stand, so error before truth cannot abide:
therefore it is no hinderance, but a great furtherance to have al erroneous
Rocks in the haven to heaven, made known and published.

And a great and suer argument it is, Another true sign of false Bishops and
ministers.
that those Bishops and Ministers have not the truth, that publikly dare not
dispute or write against error, as may be seen in the Bishops and Ministers in
Queen Maryes days, which could not abide to have books written and printed, of
that which they caled error and heresy, but caused, that if any such were
written, both them and the Authors to be burned, if they could com by them.
Therefore if permission of conscience and liberty of the gospel be not granted,
and burning laws repealed, then the Bishops and Ministers now may persuade and
cause to be burned, both the books and the Authors, that have the truth in
steed of heresy and heretics, even as their prede^ssors have done already, The
word of God the only defender of the faith of Christ.
and so shed more innocent blood, and also provoke the Lord to further wrath
against the King and State. It is not the gallosse, nor the prisons, nor
burning, nor bannishing, that can defend (...) Apostoliq faith: indeed the King
and State may defend Relio^s peace (...) their sword and civil power, but not
the faith, otherwise, then by the lord and spirit of God. The dutch Princes and
peers say, that force, word, and gallosse, in matter of Religion: is a good
means to spil blood, and make (...) vprere in the land, but not to bring any
man from one faith to another. The ^agans will not persequte one another for
religion, though (as I read) (...) be above three thousand sorts among them.
And you know both ^ing Henry and Queen Mary, thought themselves defenders of
the ^^ith, and thaught they burned herericks and heresy, when they burned (...)
and their books, Idol Bbs: and false ministers authors of persequtio^ Rev. 16.
14*
but now you see and must acknowledge, that they ^ere persequtors of the faith,
instead of defenders thereof, and also that (...) (through the instigation of
their bloody Bishops) burned the word (...) God, and those that professed and
wrought it, instead of heresy and ^^reticks. And thus it will be now if the
Bishops and their Ministers ^ay have their wills: and therein they (as their
predecessors) fulfill the lord of God, in gathering Kings of the earth to the
battle of the great day of ^od Almighty. For they persuade Kings to force
their subjects, to re^^ave the faith, and to be of the Church, whereas the
Word of God tea^eth otherwise, Romans 10. 14. 17.
saying, Faith comes by heareing, and hearein by the word (...) God, and not
by the Kings sword. And Christ says: Teach al nations and (...) force al
nations: and this teaching is to be understood by the word and ^^iting of the
Prophets and Apostles of our Lord and Savior Christ which is the Word of God.
For they that wilbee of the true faith and church, must be caled thereunto, out
of the World: by the Word of God, ^^every nation, and not forced and
constrained in every nation, as the ^^shop of Rome, and al other false Bishops
and Ministers have and (...) persuade Kings, Emperors and Magistrates.

And his Majesty and Parliament may please to understand, that so ^doe, Mar.
16. ^6.
is to quench the Spirit of God, in Christ Bishops and ministers, and al^^^
furstrate the precept of Christ, 1. tes. 5. 19.
which says: Preach the Gospel to evry (...), besides, it makes their own
office and function void, they ought to preach and instruct, ^. tim. 2. 24, 25.
with all meeknes, them that are contrary minded, proveing if God at any time
will give them repentance, that they may know the truth for the ministers of the
Lord must not strive, but be apt to teach, gentle toward all men, suffering
evil men patiently, telling Kings and Princes, that the weapons of Christ's
Bishops and Ministers, are not carnal (as the weapons of all false and
Antichristian Bishops and Ministers are) but Spiritual, and mighty through God,
to cast down holds, casting down evry high thing, that is exalted against the
knowledge of God, 2. Cor. 10. 3. 5.
and bringing into captivity, evry thought, to the obedience of Christ.

Also, if all within the land be forced to be of the church, as the Bishops and
their ministers would still have it, the^ there would be no world in the land,
Rev. 11. 2.
but all the land would be the Church, which is absurd, and contray to the
scriptures, Act. 2. 41. 47.
and great ignorance do the Bishops and their ministers show, when they thinck
the whole nation of people, is the Church of Christ, Note
for there it cannot be said, out of great Brittayne, the Lord added to the
Church from day to day, Act. 2. 47.
such as should be saved: seeing within the land there would be none without to
be added: Also within that land, then would be no perseqution, A true Church
will not persequte.
seeing the Church of Christ does not persequte at al, much less it self, but
the Ministers and members of that Church do persequte one another, and
therefore it cannot be the spiritual Kingdom and Church of Christ, but of
Antichrist, seeing it is divided against it self, Mat. 12. 25 rev. 18. 2. 8
and persequteth one another, and will with her mother great Babylon, be
consumed and condemned, seeing (as she) they burn, bannish, hang, and imprison
one another which is no Christian, 1. Cor. 8. 11. 12.
but Antychrist, an, monstrous, cruel, woulvish, and a tyranous part ano
practice: for Christ sent hi^ Ministers as lambs among wolves, Luc. 10. 3*
and not as wolves among lambs.

Again, Genesis 32. 28
I humbly and withal reverence do beseech his right excellent Majesty, Romans
13. 4
to give me leave, to put him in mind, of those things that do^ concern the
glory of God, the assurance of his own salvation, the stablishment of his
throne, and the benefit both of the Church of Christ, and the common wealth of
al his dominions. And though as Josias, he find^ (by reading in the book of
the new Testament) a great alteration of the Apostoliq faith, and change of the
laws and ordinances of Christ, within his dominions. Yet not to be dismayed,
as Henry le grand, but be encouraged a^ Josiah, to labor and endevor the
redress thereof, according to the myn^ of Christ, in his new Testament. And I
doubt not, but as Iaacob the Patriarch prevayled with God and Men: So shall
Iaacob the King prevayle both wit^ God and men, especially being his chief
stuard, by his new Testament.

Through the zealous reading whereof will be found, that Antychrist the king of
the Catholiq faith and discipline (caled the mystery of iniquity) does sit in
the Temple of God, 2. Tym. 2.
even as the scripture has foretold. 1. tym. 4.
(...) it is to be noted that the scripture has also foretold, Rev. 17. 15
of the consumatio^. (...) abolition, 2. the 2. 8.
of this Antychrist, the man of sin, and his mystery of iniquity, with the^
most of his arival, Rev. 17. 16 (...).
or highest top of dignity, he is come unto* and this shall be done by the spirit
of the Lord in the mouth of his servants. For when (...) words of God be
fulfilled, then shall the servants of the lord prevail (by his word and spirit)
with ten kings that shall hate, Caled the Temple of God.
and make the whore desolate, which sits in the hearts and consciences of
peoples, multitudes and nations, and this whore is the woman caled the great
City which reigns over the Kings of the earth, 2. Thesa.
meaning the chur: of Rtome, by her false faith and discipline, which is so fast
setleds in the hearts and consciences of the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17. 1 15.
18.
that they think they do God good service, in killing and burning his servants
that do speak against her faith and disciplyne, John. 16. 2
and that will not bay any of her wares, that is her Antychristian doctrines and
ordinances. But as she has had her exaltation and arival to the heyght and
dignity of the (...) Empire of Rome, Re. 17. 13 14.
by the love of kings, who have given their power and authority unto her, and
who have fought for her against the Saints and servants of Jesus. So she shall
have her consumation and abolition (from that height and dignity) by the hatred
of kings, who again shall take their power and authority from her, and therewith
defend the peace and persons of the Saints and servants of Jesus: and no^ for
religions peace, will use their power and authority against the bloody
perseqution of Antychrist and al his bloody Bishops and Ministers, and so become
nursing fathers unto the church of Christ. And as it has pleased God, to give
his Majesty peace round about, as he did unto King Cyrus, in whose days the
material Temple began to be repared (which was a figuer of the spiritual
temple) So I pray it may please him also (in the peaceable days of king James)
to begin to repair the spiritual Temple) the Apostoliq church scattered and
dryven abroad into the wilderness of this world, Esaias. 2. 4.
whose ca^ing and gathering together, Ezra. 4. 7.
must be by the preaching of the word of God, Ha. 2. 4. 10.
both to jews and gentiles, and not by the sword of the kings of the earth, as
Antychrist and his Ministers have now along time persuaded and prevailed,
whereby not only the jews and infidels, but also papists and other false
Christians, are hindered and deprived from the knowledge of the Apostoliq faith.
And it is be noted that David might not build Gods temple, because he had spilt
much blood, which shows, no blood ought to be spilt, for the building of the
spiritual temple. 1. Cro. 28. 3. ergo peace in religion is a good means to
make a unity of religion among so many Christian sects

And it is well worthy consideration, Exodus 25. ^ and 35. 5*
that as in the time of the old Testament, the Lord would not have his offerings
by constraint, but of every man whose heart gave it freely: Act. 2. 40. 41.
mat. 28
so now in time of the gospel, he will not have the people constrained, but as
many as receave the word gladly, they are to be added to the Church by
baptism: Mar. 16. 16*
and therefore Christ commanded his disciples to teach al nations, Mat. 10. 11
14.
and baptize them, that is to preach the word of salvation to evry creature, of
al sorts of nations, that are worthy and willing to receave it. And such as
shall willing and gladly receave it, he has commanded to be baptized in the
water, that is dipped for dead in the water, and therefore the apostle says,
Else what shall they do, which are baptized for dead, if the dead be not raised
why are they baptized for dead? 1. Co. 1^. 29
And therefore also he says: we are buried the^ with him by baptism etc: and
it is to be well observed, that when Christ would have preached the word of
salvation to the gadere^s, Luc. 8. 37.
he did not compel them when they refused, but finding them unwilling to
receave him and his word, he turned from them without hurting the^: also when
James and John saw that some of the Samaritane^ refused Christ* Luc. 9. 54. 55.
they would have commanded fire from heaven to consume them, as Elias did. But
Christ rebuked the^ and said: ye know not of what spirit ye are: For the son of
man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. By all which, it may
please his Majesty and Parliament, to take knowledge that Christ will have none
consumed with fire and sword, for not heareing and not receaveing his word: And
that (howsoever it has been the mind of Antychrist, to destroy men's lives for
religion, and therein have not spared neither prince nor people) yet it is not
the mind of Christ, that princes should destroy their subjects, nor yet that
subjects should destroy their Princes for difference in religion.

And therefore why should Bishops persuade Princes and people, and why should
king, prince and people be persuaded by their Bishops and Ministers, to be
contrary minded to Christ? verily it is a notorious and plain token of a false
faith and discipline, that is defended by fire and sword, the power and
authority of Princes: And they cannot be Christ's Bs: and preachers that
persuade princes and peoples to such Antychristian tyranny and cruelty. Christ's
Bs: will not be lords over the consciences.
And it is very evident that those Bs: and Mm: which give over men and women to
the Magistrate, to be persuaded by perseqution, do show clearly that their
doctrine is not good, and that they want the word and spirit of God, and
therefore flee to the Magist: sword for the forceing of them to their faith and
disciplyne, and as the wine is not good which we are forced to drink, so those
doctrynes are not good which we are forced to believe. But it may be by this
time, al those Bishops (who unfeignedly fear God and truly love the king) will
haste and make speed to come unto his Majesty for pardon, acknowledging the
truth of this book, confesseing their ignoraace and arrogance, in the
knowledge of Gods word, and in compelling the people to hear the word
preached, and for impri: burn: bannis: and hang: for religion: contrary to the
mind of Christ, and also for stopping the mouths of me^ and burning their
books, that preach and write contrary to their minds and wills, yea it may be
they will also confess and say: Oh most gracious king, we beseech your Majesty
to show us mercy and to forgive us our spiritual pride and ambition, in that
we have thus long usurped the blasphemous titles of spirituallords and lords
graces, ^he Bs: do ^now in their consciences that this (...) true.
the which Tytles we now to the glory of God, and honor of the King do with
Vntained hearts confess, to be due and belong only to Christ himself: and
that the name and Title of spiritual lord cannot belong to any earthly
Creature, no not to the King or Emperor, because it is an heavenly name and
title, how much less can it belong or be due unto us, your Maiestys unworthy
subjects and scholars. And for so much as we now understand (the Lord be
praised therefore) that the holy and heavenly name and devine title of spiritual
lord is as much, ^ob. 32. 22
yea as high and great, Phi. 2. 9. 11
as the name and title of a spiritual God, and also that it is a name above
evry name, which God the Father has given unto Christ only to the end, that
evry knee should bow unto that only and heavenly name, and that evry tongue
should confess that Jesus is the Messiah, the Lord, unto the glory of God the
Father, Col. 1. 18.
that in all things Christ might have the pre-eminence, for he alone is the head
of the Chuach, which is his body: The which cannot be so long as we, or any
other Bishops, do hold and retain that devine, high and super excellent name
and title of spiritual lord: Because then it cannot be said that God has so
highly exalted him, as to give him a name above evry name, seeing our names and
tytles are also spiritual, and are caled spiritual lords so well as the son of
God, The Bs: in Tytles equal to the Son of God.
Jesus the Messiah. The remembrance hereof most gracious sovereign do make us
to tremble before God and the king. And therefore we most earnstly desire your
sacred Majesty, and the whole Parliament, to dischardge and release us of these
fearful names and tytles* that do only belong to the Son of God, Jesus the
only spiritual lord, that God has given unto his Church.

Moreover, we do (according to the truth) acknowledge, that if we should any
longer retain these devine and high names of spiritual lords and lords graces,
we should therein be intiteled, not only with a name equal to our lord Jesus,
the only begotten Son of God, Note Gods blessings il expected, unless these
Idols be rejected, who are exalted above al earthly Gods.
but also we should be intytled with a name and title above your right excellent
Majesty, yea above al Emperors, Kings and Princes of the earth The which alone
we do acknowledge to be a sufficient cause to put us down, and to depri^ue us
of these vsu^ped names, and blas^hemous tytles. Also we do confess, that our
pomp and state wherein we now live, is more like the Bishops of the Catholiq
Church of Antychrist: then any way like unto the Bishops of the Apostoliq
Church of Christ; unto whom we acknowledge, we ought to be made like, and also
to be qualified with the like gifts and graces of the spirit, or else in no ^ase
we can be meet Bishops for the Church of Christ, as the Apostle plainly
teaches both to Tymothy and Tytus etc: And we must further acknowledge and
confess, that our howses, howsholds and revenues are more fit and meet for
princes, Dukes and Earls, then for the Bishops of Christ. Wherefore (being
moved and stirred up hereto by the fear of God) we earnestly beseech your
Majesty and parliament, 1. Tym. 3.
also to disburden us of this great pomp and state, and of our great and
Princelyke howses, Tit. 1. 6. 9.
howshols and revenues; that so we may be made equal and conformable to the
Ministers of Christ, and then we shall have both hope and comfort of the world
to come, although but little in this, except your Majesty and Parliament do
grant free liberty of conscience, the which we now do also with the poor
distressed Christians, most humbly entreat and desire: and that for these 4.
reasons: First, because thereby the gospel of Christ wilbee set free and at
liberty, whereby al people both Jews and Gentiles will be gathered to the
Apostoliq faith, Church and discipline. Secondly, because many of your Maj:
subjects, both Men and women (who now are forced to disse^ble their religion,
for fear of our perseqution) will be released and set free from their spiritual
bondage and slavery, wherein we now do hold the^ against their consciences, and
so they will become more faith full Christians to God, and more loyal subjects to
your Maj: then ever they were before, to the salvation of their souls and the
saefty of the Crown and State.

Thirdly, because the poor distressed Christians (now bannished and dispersed
out of their Fatherland, over the face of the earth) will be redeemed from great
misery and bondage, wherein now (no doubt) they live and abide, because they will
not be in bondage to any other spiritual lord or head, then the lord Jesus
Messiah alone, whose faith and disciplyne they desire only to learn and obey.
Fourthy, because thereby great benefit and comodity will redound, both to your
Majesty and to all your subjects, within your highness dominions by the great
commerce, in trade and trafiq both of Jews and al people, which now for^ant of
liberty of conscience, are forced and dryven else where: and also from the
revennues and liveings, which we and our glergie do possess, and from the
courts and offiices we hold and keep great profit and commodity will redound,
both to your highness, and to al your kingdoms, we say more profit and commodity
then we or any man is able to express. And therefore, we also desire al his
maiestyes subjects, both greath and small in all love ad fear of God, not to be
offended, or any way moved or grieved, when they shall see such a reformation of
us, as that famous King Henry the eight, did make of our lordly brethren the
Abbots and their Clergy: For indeed such a reformation ought to come among us
and our glergy, To great (...) the ods, (...) use the word, against gods word.
seeing we are no way agreeable to the new Testament, of the only spiritual
lord Jesus Messiah, but are limbs and fellow members of that Antychristian and
Romish church, which in the scriptures is Prophesied to be abolished and
destroyed. Now therefore we pray you all let not King David say, the Sons of
Seruiah are to strong for him, for that will be unprofitable for you al. And
for conclusion, we entreat his Ma: and Parlia: to enact (that as our
adversaries com against us, only with the word of God, so we go against them
only with the word of God, and not as we have done by civil authority, for so
our selves may be forced to dissemble Thus it may be, the lord will persuade and
work in the hearts of some of the Bishops, who will willingly resign their
Antychristian tytles and Popish pomp and State, with their princelike howses
and lyveings into the hands of the King, without any compulsion or constraint.
But if they do not, yet if it please God to open the kings heart, to see their
Antichristian and Idol estate, and the danger and damage they cause both to the
King Prince and People, they will be compelled thereto, eve^ as their lordly
brethren the Abbots in King Henry days were. And howsoever it be not regarded,
or perhaps not descerned, yet in the sight of God and his people they are
greater Idols, then their lordly brethren the Abbots: yea greater Idols then
the Images of wood and stoone (which that famous and Godly King Edward, The Bs:
greater Idols then the Abbots ^mages or golden calfe*
did pull down and destroy) for they did not imprison, nor burn, nor hang: nor
yet caused to be bannished any of the kings subjects, that would not worship
them, as these Idol Bishops do. And out of doubt: these Bishops are greater
Idols then the golden calfe, Aaron made and offered unto: for the calfe did not
persequte nor ver, such as did not acknowledge it for their Lord as the Bishops
do: neither did the Calfe reygne and rule by force over the consciences of the
people as these Idol Bishops do.

Besides, the Calfe was set up in steed of Moses, who brought the people out of
Egypt, Ex. 32. 1*
and showed them the will of God, but these Bbs: are set up in steed of Christ,
who have brought us out of the bondage of hell, and who shows us his Fathers
will in his new Testament, the which these jdol Bs: will not suffer us to obey
but in steed thereof will force us to faldown worship and obey there Father
Antychrists will and old testament, what greater idolatri the^ to obai other
spiritual lords, then the lord Jesus.
which stinks in the nostrels of al reformed strangers that hear thereof, as
well as in ours that have taken our flight from it. Therefore these spiritual
lords and Idol Bishops ought to be pulled down and suppressed, like the Abbots
their lordly brethren, though not sacrificed unto the Lord in Smithfeild as the
Godly king Josias sacrificed the Idol Priests of the high places on the Altars
thereof. And I do verily believe, that if free liberty of conscience be
granted, 2. king. 23. 17. 20.
that the spiritual kingdom of these Idol Bs: will in time fall to the ground of
it self, as the jdol Dagon fall before the Arc for throug the knowledge of Gods
word, 1. sam. 5. 3.
will al godly people, with draw themselves in all peceable and godly wise, from
the spiritual obedience of these spiritual lords and Idol Bbs: and quietly
betake themselves unto the obedience of the only spiritual lord Jesus Messiah.
But howsoever it be I shall be contented therewith, and so I wish al others, for
we al ought to be content, if we obtain freedom of conscience, and therefore
to give god praise co^tinualy, that has wroght so blessed a work in the
hearts of the King and Parliament, for who^ as the scripture teaches we ought
to make supplications, 1. ty. 2. 1. 2*
prayers and intercessions, that they may com to the knowledge of the truth,
and that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. And
unto who^ we ought to give (by the law of God) al earthly honor fear and
reverence, Ro^. 13. 1. 7*
and willingly to paytribute and custo^, tax and tol, so much and so often as
it shall please his Majesty and parliam: to appoint and gather, by any officer
or officers whatsoever. For whom also, and for the whole common wealth of al
his Kingdoms, we ought to be diligent and ready to hazard and lay down, not
only our goods, but also our lives at al times and occasions. For Christ has
only set us free from al ecclesiastical laws and ordinances, which himself
has not commanded in his last will and Testament. Yea from the ecclesiastical
laws and commandments of the old Testament, Col. 2. 14.
how much more has he set us free from the ecclesiastical laws and ordinances
of Antichrist, Heb. 8. 13.
but he has not set us free from the Moral and Judicial law of God, for that
the king is bound to execute, and we are bound to obey: and for want of the
execution thereof, Deuteronomy. 17* 18. 20.
there are in our land many whores and whorekeepers, and many children murdered
besides the death and vndoeing of many persons about whores. Wherefore I humbly
desire that the Moral and and Judicial low of God may be practiced and
executed, of al degrees both high and low without respect of persons, according
the mind of Christ. For the Lord will have that evry man shall love him above al,
and his neyghbor as himself, and Christ says, as ye would that men should do to
you, Luc. 6. 3^*
so do ye to them likewise.

Therefore as the king would not have his subjects, to take away his life because
he is contrary to them in religion. So let not the king take away his subjects
lives, because they are contrary to the king in religion: and as you would not
men should force you to a religion against your consciences, so do not you
force men to a religion against their consciences. And as it is the duty of
subjects to seek the conversion of their king and State, by the word of God,
and not his and their destruction by fire and sword. So it is the duty of the
king and state, to seek the conversion of of their subjects by the word of God,
Note
and not their destruction by fire and sword, as the Pope and his Prelates do
teach: whose vassals therein both Emperors and Kings (as well as people) have
been a long time: both to the destruction of the^selfs and their subjects. For
who knows not that prelates and priests have persuaded subjects, to destroy
their kings and princes, as well as kings and princes to destroy their subjects:
but (...) pray the^ both to take notice that the scrip: 1. Cor. 3. 17 and 6.
19. 20*
says he that destroys the Temple of God, him will God destroy. Let not
therefore kings, princes nor subjects be any longer persuaded to destroy one
another through the suttelty of Bs: and their mi: who (most of the^) only
seek the security of their own po^p and glory, and the stablishme^t of their
spiritual thrones therein: for so long as they may confirm that, they pass not
who perish, whether king, prince or people. Again therefore I humbly pray his
Ma: and par: to repeal and make void al popish laws and canons, and to see
the moral and Iucial law of god, Frederich and John Palsgraves said that under
pretext of the holy ghosts office of correction little else was sougt the^ to
reygne over the co^scie^ces of the Magistrates and subjects like as in the
accursed popedom is co^ to pass etc.
both firmly enacted, ad carefully practiced after the mind of Chr: and then
shall Christ's spiritual throne be stablished in the hearts and consciences both
of king, prince and people, so as the Chu: Christ's spiritual kingdom shall
increace in the knowledge of faith, and obedience thereof, with all love, peace
and charity, one toward another. And the commonwealth of his Ma: King: will
flourish and prosper, and also his throne be consta^tly stablished both to him
and his heirs through out al his dominions, in a suer land of peace and love,
those with and toward another, to the glory of God and the comfort of his Maj:
and of al his subjects, and also to a famous and excellent glorious pattern of
government, to al kingdo^s, nations and contries round about, as in the days of
Salomo^ king of Israel. For if the holy laws of Gods word be practiced and
executed after Christ's will, the^, shall neither king, prince nor people be
destroyed for difference in religion: then Treason and Rebellion, as well as
burn: ban: han: and impri: for difference in religion will cease and be laid
down, then shall not me^, women and youth be hanged for theft: then shall not
the poor lame, sik and weak ones, be stocked and whipped, neither shall the
poor, stranger, fatherless and widows, be driven to beg from place to place,
neither shall the lame, sik and weak persons suffer such misery and be forsaken
of their kindred, as now they be, the^ shall not murder, whoredo^ and adultry be
bought out for money: then shall not the great defraude and wrong the small,
neither the rich oppress the poor by usury and little wages: then shall not
men bring up and i^herit others children in steed of their own, neither shall
an honest man be forced to live with a whore in steed of an honest wife, nor
yet an honest women with a whorekeeper in steed of an honest husband (...) shall
not serva^t^ be forced from marriage by bonds, nor yet be (...) servitude,
longer then six years, neither shall they be brought up contrary to covenant,
nor posted from one quarter or one year to another for their fredom and in
thend be forced to buy it of their Masters, or else to go without it two Then
shall neither Prince nor people be disinherited, for not being of the church:
Note well.
neither shall they be held lawless persons, though excomunicated neither shall
any man dare kill them as now they may, and be quit by law neither shall any man
fear to have his mouth stopped for preaching the truth, then shall no man need to
flee out of his native contry and Fatherland, for persequtions sake: then shall
al me^ live in peace under his own vine, lauding and praising God honoring and
obeying the King. Then also will no blood be eaten among Christians, whereby the
Jews should have just cause to stumble or be offended, neither should any
reliqs of the ceremonial law, (as Tithes and offerings etc:) be any longer in
use, where by the jews should be hardened, in their unbelief and kept from the
faith of the Messiah. Jews keep back from the faith by perseqution.
Then shall the Jews inhabit and dwell under his Maiestys dominion, to the great
profit of his Realms, and to their furtherance in the faith: the which we are
bound to seek in all love and peace, so well as others, to our uttermost
endevor, for Christ has commanded to ^each al nations etc: and they are the
first. Lastly, then shall not so many me^ and Women be deceaved by false
Ministers, neither by their sermons, nor yet by their books, which are full
fraighted with false doctrines, and confirmed and countena^ced not only by the
Kings authority and power but also by wresting and false interpreting of the
scriptures, and by aledging of popish Fathers, which through the great
ignorance of the people do greatly prevayle: but then shall be abolished through
the word and spirit of God (his two witnesses) in the mouth of his servants,
Rev. 11. 3 and 19. 10.
who by lord and writing shall breed such knowledge, that none of wisdoms
children shall be deceaved, Another reason, why so many good people are now
deceaved, is, because we that have most truth, are most persequted. and
therefore most poor, whereby we are unable to write and print as ^e, would,
against the adversaries of the truth. It is hard to get our dai^y food, with
the labors of our weak bodies and feeble hands, how the^ should we have to
def^ay other chardges, and to write and print? I have through the help of God
out of his word, 2. Pet. 2. ^.
made a scourge of small coar^^s, wherewith Antychrist and his Ministers might
be dryven out of the ^emple of God. Also a declaration of certain false
translations in the new Testament: It is the Kings honor to search out a thing.
but j want wherewith (...) print and publish it, therefore it must rest til the
lord seeith good to sup^ly it: In mean while, I humbly entreat his Ma: and
Par: to give me ^ave to prove the Bs. with one question, by which you may
perceave the ^^orance of your Bs: it is this, how they will be able to prove a
resurrection from these Words, Pro. 25.
I am the God of Abraham, Exodus 3. 6.
the God of (...) prison. Kings and Magistrates are Gods ministers and not the
bishops, therefore I humbly beseech you to with ^and the bloody minds of your
Bs: that there be no more innocent Christians persequted to death for religion.
I read that in the Netherlands above a hundred thousand persons have been put
to death for religion, A cryeing sin.
but now praised be God, we have no such wooful tidings preached among us, the
lord work as much in our land I beseech him, that so you may no longer burn
and bannish the servants of Christ: John. 16. 3
For he says they that do these things have not known the Father nor me:
Yet I confess you have the zeal of God, for you think you do God good
service, in burning Christians that differ from your religion. But I also
confess your zeal is not according to knowledge: for your Bs: and Min: being
endued with university and high school learning, (...). 10. 2. 3.
devinity and doctrine, but being ignorant of the lowly learning heavenly
divinity and doctrine of Christ, have and do still go about to stablish their
own, and have not yet submitted themselves, to the lowly learning devinity and
doctrine of Christ: and therefore like their predecessors, will persuade you to
burn: ban: etc: such Christians as they hold to be in error about doctrines ano
questions of faith and religion: right as if they had the power to rule,
govern, and dispose the hearts and spirits of kings, princes, and people, even
as they list, and also to make them good and righteous when they will, and to
cause them to understand and believe the gospel, even by a day and ho^er
appointed, which to do, belongs to God alone: and therefore Christ says no man
ca^ come to me except the Father draw him. John. 6. 44
And Christ will have his ministers to preach to such as are worthy and wiling,
and not as your Min: who com to them, who^ they hold un worthy and find
unwilling, Mat. 10. 11 14.
and say, will ye not com to chur: and hear, and will ye not believe our
doctrine? but we will make you, or else we will burn you for heretycks. Thus will
they taunt meek and holy Christians who are torn like sheep among the wolves.
But Christ's ministers will with meeknes, instruct such as are contrary minded,
tollerating the evil men patiently, proveing if God at any time will give them
repentance, 2. ^y. 2. 25.
that they may know the truth: where by they show plainly, Ioh. 13. 35
that they are Christ's disciples, and have that true faith, which works by
love, even as the Apostle says, the which I pray you to consider, that so you
may both know and obey the will of Christ. Now (says he) abides faith, 1. Cor.
13
hope and love, but the cheyfest of these, is love, for where love is there is no
disdain, it seeks not her own things, it is not provoked to anger, it
suffers al things, it hops al things, it indureth al things. Yea the love of
Christ so loves, that it will not ver nor persequte any that call on his name.
Heb. 13. 3.
Therefore I humbly pray you to remember them that are in bonds, as though ye
were bound with them, and them that are in affliction, as if ye were also
afflicted in the body. Iam. 2. 13.
And to show them mercy, for mercy rejoices against judgment, but judgment
mercyles, shall be to them that show no mercy. If ye be friendly to your
brethren only what singular thing do you, do not the sinners the same? (...).
6. 32. ^7.
be not like unto them, but unto your heavenly father, whose wisdom, love and
mercy, I beseech him to grant you, that so you may come to the knowledge of the
truth and be saved: And that we (your Majestis faithful subjects) may lead a
peaceable and quiet life (even in our own nation) in all Godlynes and honesty.
1. Tym. 2
Amen.

Now, Pet. 4. 12
them that are persequted, I exhort with the words of the Apostle Peter.
dearly beloved thinck it not strange concerning the fiery trial that is among
you to prove you, as though some strange thing were com unto you: but rejoice in
as much as ye are pertakers of Christ's sufferings that when his glory shall
appear ye may ^e glad and rejoice. If ye be rayled upon for the name of
Christ, blessed are ye for the spirit of glory and of God rests upon you, 2.
Pet. 2. 2.
which on their part is evil spoken of, but on your part is glorified. but let
no man suffer as an evil doer, or as a murderer or as a busy body in others
matters: but i^ one suffer as a Christian, let him not be a shamed, Act. 24. 14*
but let him glorifye God in that behalf. For all the Mar^rs of the Apostoliq
Church have suffered as evil doers, and as heretics. For the time is that
judgment must begin at the house of God: If it first begin at us (says the
apostle) what shall the end be of them, that obey not the gospel of God. And if
the righteous scarsly be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinner appear?
wherefore let them that suffer according to the (...) of God, commit their
souls unto him in weldoeing, as unto a faithful Creator.

Read Esaias. 2. 2. 4. 11. 16. He shall judge among the nations, Antychrist and
his persequtio^ shall be made low.
and rebuke many people, they shall break their sword into mattocks and their
spears into sithes: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither
shall they learn to fight any more. The high looks of man shall be humbled, and
the loftynes of man shall be abased, and the lord only shall be exalted in that
day: for the day of the lord of hosts is upon all the proud and hauty and upon
all that is exalted, 2. these. 2. 4
and it shall be made low. Little David overcame great Goliath, yet not brought up
in war. Unlearned Peter confuted the learned priests, Gal. 6. 6
yet by caling a fisher man. Attend, and help, 1. Cor. 9. 7.
and you shall see the wonderful works of God. For the foolishnes of God, is
wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men. And God has
chosen the foolish things of the world, to confound the wise, and things tha^
are despised, has God chosen, to bring to naught things that are. 1. Cor. 1.
25. 28.

FINIS.
Leonard Busher.


