DYETS DRY DINNER: Consisting of eight several Courses: 1. Fruits 2. Herbs.
3. Flesh. 4. Fish. 5. whitmeats. 6. Spice. 7. Sauce. 8. Tobacco.
All served in after the order of Time universal. By Henry Buttes, Master of
Arts, and Fellow of C. C. C. in C.

Qui miscuit vtile Dulci. Cicero. Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed Ortus nostri
sibi vendicant Printed in London by Tho. Creed, for William Wood, and are to
be sold at the West end of Powles, at the sign of Time. 1599.

Partem Parents TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Lady, the Lady Anne
Bacon, sole heir to the Worship. Edward Buttes Esquire, her Father, as also to
her Uncles, the right worthy Sir William Buttes Knight, and Thomas Buttes
Esquire, deceased.
The Name of this Book.
A Painter (Right worshipful) fain would make a speech to great Alexander,
and (for that being a mean man, and unknown to the King, small notice and
less respect would be had of him) he procured Alexanders own cloak or
princely robe, and therein presented himself before the King. The same devise
my self am forced to put in practice, for being unworthy, or at least not
known worthy to be known unto your Ladyship, I do partly cloak me with the
large Mantle of common Homage: partly cloth me with the proper coat of my
Ancestors: who as they were a little nearer then my self unto your blood, so
were they much nearer to your thoughts, and better known unto you. Thus having
put on my cloak with the Painter, I begin my speech.

Madame, as the admired perfection of all excellent indowments, wherewith God
has enriched you, necessarily plucketh from the hearts of all that know you,
due reverence; so the natural league of mutual love and friudship between
your and my Ancestors, (while they all lived together in Norffolke) more nearly
urges me particularly to deuote my self unto you. And yet not only your
Ladyships proper name (now cancelled and concealed in you, by participation of
another) is thus powerful to command my thoughts; but infinite cause (me
thinks) I have, highly to respect and honor you, even in, and by that name,
which (but for my fathers progeny still continuing in Norffolk) had put our name
to silence. Yea, who most gladly honors not the glorious name of that thrice
worthy and renowned wight of famous memory, Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of
the great seal of England, while he lived: whose magnificent bounty to our
University, and especially to Corpus Christi College (whereof himself
sometime was, as I am now) has purchased him a perpetuity of glory, to be
celebrated for ever a principal Benefactor. The chief Offspring from this so
excellent a root (into whom the whole acoomplishment of all that worth is
transfused and derived) is your Ladyships rightly right Worshipful Knight, of
the same name, now living. Who is well known to be the undoubted heir, not
only of his fathers wealth, but of his virtues and glory also. All these
premised words (excellent Lady) infer thus much: I most willingly
acknowledge, either of you both may justly claim interest in the Fee-simple
(or rather simple fee) of my best endeavors, studies and prayers, for the
preservation of your health, and continuance of your life. The which least I
should seem only idly to wish, I have not only been Votary to Aesculapius,
Phisickes great Grandfather, but Servant also to Diet, healths kindest Nourse.
To whose frugall Table, I inuit your Ladyship.

But before you come, I think it my best course to tell you what kind a feast
you shall find. In three words I describe it thus: Dyets dry Dinner. That is,
variety of Fare: provided, prepared and ordered, at Dyets own prescription:
whose servant and Attendant at this feast I profess my self. Thus far
(perhaps) not disliked of any. A Dry Dinner, not only Camnum Prandium, without
Wine, but Accipitrinum, without all drink except Tobacco, (which also is but
Dry Drink): herein not like to be liked of many. What ere it be (as he says
in the Comedy) Habeas vt Nacta, take it as you find it, and welcome. More
then which I cannot perform. And therefore most humbly I kiss your hand.

Your Ladyships most devoted. Henry Buttes.

Partem Amici TO MY Worshipful and especial friends, Richard Thekeston
Esquire, and Elynor his Wife.
The cotall Mehod.
IT is a dignity in active Nature, (Right worshipful) that Agens agit, vt
assimulet sibi Patie^s: that is, to make the passive likewise active. It were
an easy (though a tedious) task, to note in every one of Natures actions,
Re-action. But that great labor may be greatly lessened by arguing A Minoie:
by instance of the less active Eliments. For who sees not (but he that does
not see) that he sees his own face in the water, no otherwise, then by
reference of the offered shape or species of his object countenance? Nay the
most (if not merely) passive Earth returns notwithstanding, even to the
middle air, those splendent beams which formerly the Sun conferred on it.
If the senseless and lifelesse Eliments can thus react it, then reasonable
man, has much more reason to be conformable unto those that work his good. We
to whom your Worships exhibit your bounty, are those same waters on which the
wise Solomon bids you cast your bread; in whom you see your faces, the shape
and Image of your selves: for we are also men as ye be. Then (according to
your worships wonted affability) graciously embrace that conformable reaction,
which your own most hounteous favors have begotten in me. I have been passing
desirous some way to intimate unto your worships, that I am not senseles or
unmindful, though unworthy of your kindnesses. And therefore finding my self
unable to requite your greater favors. Quod quimui quando quod volumus, non.
In Item of that great good cheer I have often bad with you, both at London and
in Yorke-shire, I do semblably inuit you both to a Scholars Dinner. But
where, or whither, I may not (for I cannot) tell you. Your Worship Sir, well
remembers that solemn inuitation at Cambridge, in Vesperijs Comitiorum; and
therefore will easily let pass this fallacian without Elench or reprehension.
Neither can I hope for, at either of your hands, any ungentle or discourteous
censure. It is an other kind of guest, an unkind guest, vnbiaden, and as bold
as welcome, whom my mind presageth, some Gentleman, Sewer to some certain
Gentlewoman Semster, who more nice then wise, picketh a quarrel with the order,
or disorder rather (as he weeneth) of my Dinner; stoutly auerring him that
scrued in the courses, to be both ignorant of fashions, and void of all good
customs. What? (quoth he) Fruit in the first course? Then Flesh, Fish,
White-meates, and at last come in salt and spoones, spice and sauce, when all
the meat is eaten? Nay more? Tobacco after all, upon a full stomach. Fie, fie:
Dyets Dinner? a most gross absurd, and preposterous banquet. May it please
your Worships, this challenge must of force be answered. Therefore in vshering
these my services, I profess my self a very preuaricatour of this Ages
fashion: and do follow the order of universal time, by consequence and
succession.

Fruits
Thus much all we know, our grand parents at first sed on the fruits of Ede^.
and some merrily say, Adam robbed Gods Orch-yard.

Herbs.
(...) after their exitement, they fell to Herbs and Roots, and (as seculer
(...) witnesieth) we lived a long time (like H^g^es) with Mast or Accornes,
till age taught Tillage.

Flesh.
But all either could not or would not be husbandmen, therefore some went forth
on hu^ting, some at home kept sheep and cattle: so came we to find savor in
Flesh Which (probably) we did long before we tasted Fish, Fish.
since of the two, Flesh is more obuious and easy to be had. As also Fish by
good reason prevented white-meates, for the simple is before the Compound, and
the Natural before the Artificial.

White-meates.
Therefore after Fish follow White-meates, requiring the help of art, and
bumane invention in tract of time.

Spice.
Neither did our infinite appetite here consist contented with things necessary,
but something yet was wanting to add voluptuous delight. Wherefore wanton
appetite growing weary of Natures bare and simple Ordinary, began glycurously to
banquet with all sorts of Spices and Aromatique delicates.

S^use.
But eating Honny with a Ladle, it was soon cloyed with the excess of
sweetness: so that tart Condiments and sauces, seemed requisite to provoke and
revoke loathing and lost appetite.

Tobacco.
Thus proceeded we by degrees, from simplicity and necessity, to variety and
plenty, ending in luxury and superfluity. So that at last our bodies by
surfeeding, being overflowed and drowned (as it were) in a surplurisie or
deluge of a superfluous raw humor, (commonly called Rheum) we were to be
anheled (like new dampish Ouens, or old dwelling houses that have stood long
desolate). Hence is it that we perfume and air our bodies with Tobacco smoke
(by drying) preserving them from putrifation.

May your Worships be fully satisfied with this reason of my extraordinary Dry
Dinner (to whom both it and my self are purposely devoted) the first dish of it
(I mean a Fig) for the rest.

Until I have in readiness some other matter more worthy your countenance and
Patronage, I most humbly take my leave.

Your Worships Scholar, H. Buttes.

Partem Patria. To my Countrymen Readers.
The partial Method.
WElcome courteous Contrymen. I mean especially Norfolkme^. For they are
true Catholics in matter of Diet: no Recusants of any thing that is man's
meat. I bid all in general, excepting only such as are affrayed of roasted
Pigge, a breast or leg of Mutton, a Ducke etc. To conclude, I forbid no man,
but him only that has married a wife and cannot come. No man shall loose his
labor. Here are Lettuses for every man's lips. For the Northeren-man,
White-meates, Beef, Mutton, Venison: for the Southern man, Fruits, Herbs,
Foul, Fish, Spice, and Sauce. As for the Middle-sex or Londoner, I smell his
Diet. Vescitur aura aetheria. Here is a Pipe of right Trinidado for him. The
Yorkers they will be content with bald Tabacodocko. What should I say? here is
good Veale for the Essex-man: passing Leekes and excellent Cheese for the
Welsh-man. Denique quid non? Mary, here are neither Eg-pies for the
Lancashire-man, nor Wag-tayles for the Kentish-man. But that is all one here is
other good cheer enough. And what is wanting in meat, shall be supplied in
kind welcome and officious attendance.

Least any thing should be amiss, or missing to thee, I have my self (for
fault of a better) taken upon me all such Offices as any way concern this
Dinner.

1 Choice.
First, I am Cator: and have provided the very choice of such daynties as
Natures Market affoordeth.

2 Use.
Secondly, I am Taster: commending each dish to thy Palate, according to his
right use and virtue. 3 Hurt.
And (since nothing is so perfectly good, as it partaketh no evil property) I
have put into a by-dish (like Egshelles in an Saucer) what worthily may breed
offense. Herein imitating a merry Greek, who espying an hair in a dish of
Butter, called for another dish and dished it by it self.

4 Preparati^on, or Correction.
Thirdly, I play the Cook: so preparing, seasoning, and saucing the harmefull
disposition of every meat, as it shall be either in whole abolished, or in part
qualified.

Lastly, I assume the Caruers Office: and having noted the nature and operation
of each particular dispense to every of my Guests according to the Season,
Degree. Season. Age. Constitution.
his Age, and Constitution.

Thus very rudely, I obtrude unto thee not a banquet, but a byt rather of each
dish Scholler-likely, that is, badly carved. For Scholars are bad Caruers. Do
thou, by thy kindly feeding on Dyets dry Dinner, but cause thy self to thirst
for Dyets Drinking: and I shall with like alacrity, act thy Cup Bearer.
Wherefore until thou be Dry drunk, Farewell.

Thy Countryman, H. Buttes.

The Authors Method comprise^ in Verse, by Samuel VVallsall.
COme welcome Guest: s' deigne not, whateuer Wi^^
Thou be, this shot-free entertainment:
This Board with Fruit, Herbs, Flesh, Fish, Whit^^
Spice, Sauce, Tobacco, and fair furniment.
Fruit, suites thy Fish: Herbs relish Flesh aright
Sauce sharpens both: Spice sweetens White-meat^
Fruit, Herbs, Flesh, Fish, Whit-meats, Spice,
Concoct are by Tabaccos cordial.
First is here Friut (the Authors first fruits) dispred.
Our Grand-sire Adam base earthes baser stime,
In Paradise earths heaven enthronized,
Slakd hungers rage on Fruit-full Orchards prime.
But soon as Man fro Man degendered,
Tainted with blemishment of Ugly crime:
Aimightie this a veng-full doom areeds,
That beastly Man shall beast like graze on Weedi^
Whose nicer appetite being olut of yore
With nigard earths so bloodlesse caterie,
Began murdrous hand embrew in g^^iltlesse gore,
And raunge amid the Forests far, and nigh,
And chase with winged foot the tuskie Bore,
^d blood with bloods expense full dear abye.
^or rests his thirsting soul aslackt with blood,
^ut must be drenched in the fomy Flood.
^rets out whateuer Fishes wonn
^the Maine, or in the Crystal Brook:
^sated yet, must Whit-meates feeden on,
(...)-meats addressed by Art Natures Cook.
^lis Arabie, still Lands outgon
(...) or Esting Suns, or ^estings look;
(...) Phenix-like t'embalme with Spice^y.
^d to perfume Arts queinter Cookery.
^st thou keen thy blunted appetenes,
^d with Spices loathsome surfiture?
^omacks whet-stones, tongue-tart Condimenes.
(...) thy lunges have taken discomfiture
^assault of Rume, lo surest fence
(...) Rumes incursion; power-full to recure
^efeebled, and revive the deaded spright,
^eraine Nepenthes, which Tobacco hight.
^co not to antique Sages known,
^rizardi that Tobacco knewen not?
^le agreeu'd with care? is head o'reflowns
^rinie de luge of defluxes hot,
^ by stealth the neighbor parts adowne?
^hiffe, and smoke Tabaccos antidot
Fom out thy kindly traunced Chimny-head,
With I^dish air, like to Chameleon, fed.
The same man in praise of this learnedly witty Book.
^Ome, stead of Dieting, wont Eating die,
Paunched with gormandise, and Surquedry:
Lo Buttes aright thy Legend aims I ween.
^gend, where Natures art, Arts nature sheene:
^here man. kinds meat, meats Diet, Diets Inn
^here some Physic, yea sum of Physic bin.
^^inst common ills these writtes came well me se*
that Well is come, Well may be Welcome deemd.
These with Cates, Delices, Tobacco, Mell:
^ew to Fare well: bring Welfare: thus Fare-we^^
Eiusdem ad Libri nomen allusio.
^S noctu convina? negant hoc Prandia. Vini^es
^gurges? Sicca negant. Lurco? Diaeta negat.
Prandia vis? Prandebis apud me. abstemia (...)
^andia? Sicca dabo. sana? Diaeta dabit.
^^ndit olus Cyuicus patiens: qui hac Prandia te^n^
^n'erit Cynicus? non, erit ille Canis.
Grace before Diets dry Dinner served in by Time.
Puer stans ad mensam.
FIRST Give ye thanks unto the giver,
And careful Cator of this Dinner:
The sooner he will on you think,
^d to your Dinner send you drink.
Then loose no time: you see you^ fare,
Eat: I beshrew you, if you spare.
^soft and fair: oregreedy jaws
^ not their meat with decent pause.
^ke on your right hand: there stands Time
^ixt your Dinner and this ^ime:
^eate, Drink, and Leisure, take together,
^se (says old Cronus) come not hither.
^annerd Time thou art over rude,
^ixt Grace and Dinner to intrude.
^at does old Ribax Cronus here,
^ere is not Wine, nor Ale, not Beer?
Though here for Cronus be no Merum
^et Time (you know) is Edax rerum.
^is will not suffice your mind,
^pther reason you shall find:
(...) Time brought all these courses in,
(...) they in order served bin.
(...) then think not much my gentle Guest,
(...)
OCCVLTA VERITAS TEMPORE PATET

R S

depiction of Time discovering Truth from her cave

DYETS DRY Dinner.
Fruits.
Figs.
Choice. WHite, best: red, second: black, basest: full ripe, tender-skinned.

Use. Nourish very well, and much more then other fruits: take away the stone
in the reins: resist venims: quench thirst: cleanse the breast.

Hurt. Immoderately used, engender flatiue humors and crudities: therefore
greatly annoy such as are subject to the Collicque.

Preparation and correction. Mundified and pared: then eaten with Orenges,
Pomgranats, tart meats, or condite with Vinegar.

Degree. Hot in the first degree, moist in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. Always in season, chiefiy in Autumn: convenient for
all ages and constitutions: least for old folks.

Ficus.
Story for Table-talke.
A Jove principium.
SOme good Scholastique Divines, think the fruit forbidden to be bitten, Genesis
2. 17.
was not an Apple but a Fig: then surely as our first parents wilfully
discovered their ambitious minds by eating of the fruit; so very witlesly
thought and sought they to cover their shame with an apren of the leaves, this
was (as the latin proverb speaks) Ficulneum Auxilium, A Figs worth of help:
therefore whenever we fall to Figs, we have occasion to remember our fall
from God. This plant in it self very bitter, yields passing sweet fruit:
transfusing indeed all his sweet juice into his fruit, leaves it self exhaust
of sweetness, and so by consequence bitter.

Grapes.
Choice. RIpe: white, sweet: thin-skinned.

Use, Pass quickly: breed less wind, nourish very well: make fat (with an R.
some say) cool inflammation of the Liver: provoke urine and Venus.

Hurt. Cause thirst and wind: trouble the belly: immoderatly used, breed
Collicke passions: puff the spleen and make it sick: increase defluxions in
old folks.

Correction. Eat them moderatly, and after them salt meats, Pomegranates, and
such sharp things, or condit^ with Vinegar.

Degree. Hot in the first, moist in the second, yet without excess.

Season. Age. Constitution. In Autumn and the spring, for all but old folks.

Vuae.
Story for Table-talke.
THat Grapes are very nourishing, it is well seen by the Grape-gatherers in
the time of Vintage, for they eat little or nothing else, yet grow they
passing fat and corpulent.

The superexcellency of this plant and fruit is inestimable, yet by the way to
be noted, in that God calls his, Church a Vine; the fruit or Vuae whereof,
are good works: therefore in many places of the scripture, every vine is
cursed with a Vae, whereon there are found no Vuae. Aue blesses a, Vae curses.

Mulberries.
Choice. Black: fulsome: best ripe: not corrupt by touch of any thing:
gathered before sun.

Use. Remedy hoarsenesse: quench thirst: supple the body: asswaye choler:
cause appetite.

Hurt. Breed wind: disturb the stomach, especially fraught with ba^ humors.

Correction. Kinse them first in Wine, and eat tart things after them.

Degree. Ripe, are hot and moist in the second: unripe, cold and dry.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather, for youth, cho^lerists, and
sanguines.

Mora.
Story for Table-talke.
MOros, is Greek for Fool: yet the Poets call this plant Prudents Morus, the
wise Mulberry: because it springs last of Trees, not till the cold biting
frosts and nipping blasts of black mouthed winter are al over

All contradiction is reconciled, and the matter moderated by rutning Prudents
Morus, Morosophus.
a wise Fool. For this is the height and depth of Fools wisdom: they have
the wit to keep themselves out of the rain: Id est, Out of apparent danger.
Which notwithstanding if one most wise Morus (minime moros) had been so wise as
to have done the winter storms of angry Jove had not nipt him on the head, or
naped him rather in the neck, for speaking against the head.

This fruit was at first white, til it was dyed red with the blood of P^^^mus
and This be,

Strawberries.
Choice. REd: ripe: fair: fragrant: Garden: set.

Use. Assuage the boiling heat and acrimony of blood and choler. cool the
liver: quench thirst: provoke urine and appetite: are passing grateful to the
palate.

Hurt. Naught for the Paisey, diseased sinows, and weak stomachs: those that
grow of themselves or in woods, offend their stomachs with their sharpness.

Correction. Rinse and mundify them with the best wine, then eat them with a
good deal of sugar.

Degree. Season. Age. Constition. Cold and dry in the first: the riper the
temperater.

For hot weather, youth, chollericke, and sanguine.

Fraga.
Story for Table-talke.
THey were utterly unknown to Antique leeches, and are indeed yet more
beholding to Poets then Physicians. They named them Fraga: neither have they
any other name, as far as I know. The English name imports their manner of
setting in beds, not cast on heaps, but (as it were) strawed here and there
with manifest distance.

Conradus Gesner reports, he knew a woman that was cured of the pimples on
her face, only by washing it with Strawberrie-water: and yet it was very
homely and rudely distilled, betwixt two platters, and not in a limbeck.

Cheryes.
Choice. RIpe: sharp: new-gashered: whose pulpe is hard, and juice steyneth
blood-red.

Use. Eaten fasting, or before dinner, make soluble: pass quickly, slake
thirst, cool moderately, provoke appetite, moysten the body.

Hurt. Soon corrupt: much eaten inflate the stomach, hurt the aged or very
phlegmatic: do the body little good.

Correction. Eat presently after them meats of good juice, salt or tart.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first, moist in the second.

For hot weather, youth, chollericke.

Cerasa.
Story for Table-talke.
CHerryes take their name of the Latin Cerasa, and Cerasa of Cerasunte, a
Town in Pontus: whence Lucullus first brought them to Rome, after he had
conquered Mithridate, in the six hundredth and eightieth year of the City.

Cantabrigian Achademicks, may very fitly interpret Cerasunte Cherry-Hinto^
their neighbor Cherry-Towne. Where many Athenian Squires are so overcome by
cherryes, that they can very hardly convey them cleanly home to Athens: and
afterward are constrained to implore the aid of Mithridate and his Cousin
Triacle, in regaining to them the Castle of health.

Plums.
Choice. Kindly and thoroughly ripe: tender skinned: sweet and toothsome:
gathered before sun.

Use. Purge choler: abate heat: refresh and moisten the body: slake thirst:
excite appetite: superexcellent in burning agues.

Hurt. Losen and weaken the stomach: engender watery humors in cold and weak
stomachs: yield little or no nourishment: hurt the aged, stuffed with fleame, or
such as have the collicque.

Correction. Eat them before meat, and eat after them Saccarum Rosatum
aromaticum, or salt meats.

Degree. Cold in the beginning of the second, moist in the end of the third.

Season. Age. Constitution. For hot weather, youth, cholleticke, and sanguine.

Pruna.
Story for Table-talke.
DAmascena or Damaske-prunes, are so called of Damascus in Syria, which
yields your best and most commended Prune. Next in Galens judgment, is the
Spanish, sweeter then the Damask, and not so astringent. The French with us is
of much request, for special use.

Damascens of all other Plums are thought most wholesome, in so much as many
are of the mind, that a good stomach can very hardly surfeit of them.

Apples.
Choice. OLd, sweet, fair, ripe in any case.

Use. Comfort the heart: quench thirst: enlarge the breast: dispatch
distillations of rume: cause to spit: quiet the cough.

Hurt. Annoy weak stomachs, and diseased sinowes: especially eaten raw, or
many.

Preparation. Correction. Roast, baked, stewed, powdered with sugar and aniseed
comfits; or else eat Saccarum Rosatum upon them.

Degree. Sweet, are hot in the first, temperately moist: sower, are cold and
dry.

Season. Age. Constitution. In Autumn and spring, for youth, chollericke and
good stomachs.

Mala.
Story for Table-talke.
AN Apples is of evil report, or at leastwise has but an evil name amongst
the Romans: for the very name ( Malum) signifies evil. Hence some forbid
both cheese an apples with this fallacian. Caseus est nequam, et mala sunt
mala. Howbeit not origination but fortune made the^ Sophisters. For Malum (an
apple) deriueth his line of Ancestry from the Greek Melon, of great
antiquity, not unknown to Homer. Yet the obuious Notation passing plausible
and more passable: because an apple was the cause or occasion of all evil: but
whether it were an apple or no, fides sit penes Authors.

Pears.
Choice. Thoroughly ripe: sweet. Please the taste;

Use. cause appetite: comfort a weak stomach: by forcing the jaws to raise
and spit out fleame, proucke to the stool.

Hurt. Breed cold and flatulent blood: naught for the collicke.

Correction. After meat, powdered with much sugar, drink old wine of good
savor upon them: or indeed, prepare them thus.

Preparation. First part them in halfes and cut out the Cores.

Then pare, salt, and cast them so out of doors.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first, dry in the second.

In Autumn and winter, for all but the aged and rumaticke.

Pyra.
Story for Table-talke.
Our English name Pear, comes of the Latin Pyrum or Pyrus, and Pyrus of
Pyramid, because both the Peare-tree and the Pear it self also, somewhat
resemble that figure or proportion: yet inversim, if they be compared. For the
Peare-tree aspireth and rises with a kind of Conus in the top: the Pear (
Contra) points toward the stalk; and his broad crown reprefenteth the basis.

The Italians call their chief or best Pear Bergmot. Mot is a Pear, and
Berkg signifies Lord or Master in the Turkish tongue, whence they borrowed it.
As we say a Pome-roy from the French.

Aprecocks.
Choice. THe greatest: best colored: ripe: whose inward kernels are passing
sweet, and comes easily from the shell: pleasant in taste.

Use. Quench thirst: wh^t the stomach: the kernel kills worms.

Hurt. Instale the stomach: soon corrupt: possess the blood with much water,
and make it soon putrify.

Correction. Eat after them Anyse-seedes, meats well salted or spiced, and
old chee^e: drink old wine of good savor upon them.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

About the end of May, or beginning of June, for youth, such as abound with
choler or blood, and have strong stomachs.

Mala Armeniaca.
Story for Table-talke.
SO called in Latin of Armenia: whence they were first transplanted; in Greek
Bericoccia, in Latin Praecocia, or Praematura. Id est. Soon ripe, or first
ripe: for they offer themselves about the end of the spring. Hence we call a
ripe-headed young boy, a princock. Horace says; Non amo puerum praecocis
ingeni. Id est. I love no Aprecocks. And so on the contrary, a Cockni is
inuerted, being as much, as Incoct, unripe. Other derive Apricock of Apricum,
because it ripeneth best in Aprico.

Now as Aprecocks be soon ripe, so (according to the old rule) soon rotten.
And though Galen says, Aprecocks be not so obnoxious to corruption as the
Peach, yet experience gives him the lie.

Peaches.
Choice. OF a good color; fragrant smell, and pleasant taste; ripe: such as
come easily from their stone.

Use. Mend the evil savor of the breath arising from the stomach: their
smell is wondrous good in cordiaque passions.

Hurt. Being soft, moist, and flatulent, they engender humors very subject to
corruption: evil for old, flegmaticke and weak stomachs.

Correction. Eat them always fasting, and drink a cup of the best wine, most
fragrant, and well aromatized.

Degree. Cold in the first, moist in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. For youth, chollerists, and sanguines.

Mala persica.
Story for Table-talke.
Called Persica of Persia. Persiques. Therefore have we notoriously impeached
their name, as we do all other deriuatiues indeed. For in stead of Persiques,
we say Peaches. But no great matter for the name: that will never feed or fill
our mawes. As he said, Voca panem lapidem et da mihi lapidem.

Those Peaches, whose meat cleaves fast to the stone, are commended of some,
as also, such as seem friezed over with a thin down, like a Quince. But
questionless both these, are of last and least request.

Orenges.
Choice. Weight: full ripe: sad colored: twixt sweet and sower.

Use. The sweet open obstructions; are good for melancholists, and such as be
subject to distillations: the middle sort are good in Agues, and recall
appetite.

Hurt. The exquisitly sweet are too hot; the sower cool, and offend the
stomach: stuff the belly: constrain the breast, and arteries.

Correction. Therefore eat but little of them: after them Orange pills condite,
which are good for the stomach.

Degree. The sower are cold in the first, moist in the second; the sweet
temperately hot: the middle cold and temperately dry.

Season. Age. Constitution. The sweet are good even for old folks: the sower
in hot weather, for youth, chollerists and sanguine.

Mala Aurantia.
Story for Table-talke.
THe flowers of this plant are siluer-coloured; and from them is distilled a
water surpassing all other in fragrancy and sweet smell. The leaves are in
color like an Emeraud: The fruit like Gold. Whence they are called Aurantia
of Aurum, gold in Latin; and in Greek Chrysomela, golden apples. In English
properly and truly Aurange, but we have both them and their name by tradition
from the French. So we both speak and write it Orange.

Limons.
Choice. SMelling like a Citron: best ripe of good color: a day or two
gathered.

Use. The juice is good sauce to provoke appetite: stays casting: breaks
gross humors: re^^steth pestilenticall fevers: good for the stone: nourishes
not at all.

Hurt. Excessiuely cools the stomach: causes collicque-passions, leanenesse,
and melancholious humors: hurts the aged, phlegmatic, and cold stomachs.

Correction. Used moderately and seldom without the rind: laid in water:
condite with sugar.

Degree. Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. Cold and dry in the second.

Only for hot weather, youth, and chollericke.

Malum Limonium.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Citron, Limon, and Orange, grow especially on the seacoasts of Italy:
and in the Adriatique and Tyrrhene Islands. They were brought first out of
Media into these parts, and thence are they called, Mala Medica.

They bear fruit all the year long, some at the same time ripe and falling
off, other but now budding and sprouting forth.

All say a Limon in Wine is good: some think a Leman and Wine better.

Quinces.
Choice. RIght Quinces: small: dimpled or dawked: mosie: most sweetly fragrant:
best ripe.

Use. Recreate the heart: comfort, strengthen, and close the mouth of the
stomach: stay ^luxes.

Hurt. Eaten raw, or ouergreedily before meat, hurt the sinowes: procure to
many collicke passions, but being exquisitly ripe.

Correction. Boiled very well with honey: boiled, and then powdered with store
of sugar, or a grain of musk: or made in Marmalat, and eaten in the last
course.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first, dry in the beginning of
the second.

In harvest, and winter, for any.

Malum Cydonium.
Story for Table-talke.
Called in Latin Cydonium of Cydone, a Castle in Crete. Also Cotoneum, because
clad in a suit of white thin Cotton. As for our English name, I find as little
savor in it, as in an unripe raw Quince. In Galens time, Quince was brought
out of Syria to Rome.

Simeon Sethi, counsels women with child to eat many quinces, if they desire
to have wise children.

Pomegranats.
Choice. Sweet: ripe: big: with great kernels: whose rind comes easily off:
the sharp full of iuyc^

Use. The sweet, excite Venus: go^^ for the stomach, breast, cough: the
sharp, for hot livers and agues.

Hurt. The sweet breed wind and heat, naught in fevers: the sharp offe^^ the
teeth and gummes; constrain^ the breast; naught for old folks.

Correction. Eat the kernelles of both together.

Degree. The sweet are temperatly hot and moist: the sower cold, and somewhat
binding.

Season. Age. Constitution. The sweet in winter, for all: she sharp in summer
for youth, and chollerists.

Malum punicu^ se granatu^.
Story for Table-talke.
CAlled Punicu^, because brought out of Affricke, from Carthage. ^t may now be
called Malu^ Tu^itu^, for that which was Carthage, (...) now Tunis, Granatum,
or Pome^ranate, of his multitude of grains ^r kernels, not of Granata or
Gra^ado in Spain, as some fondly co^^eit it: but rather Malum Grana^um was
godfather to the realm of Grando: for they bear a Pomegrant in their
Eschutcheon.

If one eat three small Pomegranate flowers, (they say) for an whole year he
shall be safe from all manner of eyesore.

Citron.
Choice. FVll ripe, a great fair one, th^^ grew in an hot Country: so^^ time
gathered.

Use. Best preserves against poyso^^ the rind mendes concoction, (...)
commends the breath.

Hurt. Slow of concoction: annoye^^ hot brains: eaten at night, causes
dizinesse.

Correction. Condite with sugar, and eaten not before meat, or with meat, but
alone, and fragrant violents, or new Saccarum Rosatum, presently after.

Degree. The rind and seed are hot and dry in the second, the pulpe or meat
cold and moist: she sower is cold and dry in the third.

Season. Age. Constitution. Condite with sugar, for all, at al times: raw, for
none, at no time.

Malum Citrium.
Story for Table-talke.
THe bigger Citrons, though they be fairer to see too, yet those that grow in
Italy about the Laque Benacus, surpass in taste.

The decoction of Citron, held in the mouth, commends the breath.

The rind laid amongst clothes, keeps them from moth-eating: and smelt on,
preserves in time of pestilence, or corrupt air.

The Citron is the Emblem of Love, and Loves delightful pains or painful
delights. A bitter sweet, an Oxymel or Glycypicron.

Citrull Cucumbers
Choice. LOng: thick: best ripe: yellow, like a ripe Orange.

Use. Exceedingly cools an hot stomach: quenches thirst: appeaseth choler.

Hurt. Is hard of digestion: engenders flearue and clammy humors, which soon
after prove virulent, but in a stomach hot above measure: p^^son to a cold
stomach.

Correction. Eat it with Onions, Oraggon wort, Mint, Rewe, Pepper, and such
other very hot things.

Degree. Cold in the end of the second; moist in the end of the third.

Season. Age. Constitution. Bad nourishment, for any season, age, or
constitution.

Cucumis citrulus.
Story for Table-talke.
THe best use of Citrull Cucumber is this. Pare off the rind, and cut the
Cucumer into thi^ broad sliees, and lay them in wa^^r. Then apply them to the
tongue of one sick of a burning ague: it shall do him great case. If you sees
them first with sugar, all the better; for by this means they quench his
thirst, mitiga^e the scalding heat of the feau^r: and in place of siccitie or
(...) continually instilla very grateful liquor, with which the tongue,
palate, throat, and dry soul of the patient, is wondrously suppled and
refreshed.

Medlars.
Choice. GReat: full and plumpe: with little kernels: rightly ripened or
mellowed.

Use. Good against drinkenesse, (...), casting, pleasing to the stomach,
especially to women with child.

Hurt. Slowly concocted: hinder the concoction of other meats: ou^^ much used
ouetlay the stomach.

Correction. Eat P^nid^^e, Sacra^um Volarum, Sugar Candid, ^iey^^s, or such
other pectorals after them.

Degree. Cold and dry in the first.

Season. Age. Constitution. For winter, youth, thollerists, and strong
stomachs.

Mespila.
Story for Table-talke.
Meddle not with Medlers.
THis Fruit ripeneth very slowly: the flowers and leaves are of a binding
nature.

Such hurt as comes by eating Medlars, the like also ensues by dealing and
meddling with medlers or common smatterers: they are hard and dry meat, hardly
digested: not soon brought to any reasonable order: besides, they hinder,
disturb, and interrupt the course, and orderly proceeding of other men's
matters: and if you deal much with them, they will extremely irck, and loath
you.

Services.
Choice. PLump: best ripe: not corrupt: hung up, or kept a while in straw^.

Use. Taken before meat, stay fluxes and immoderate casting: taken after meat,
strengthen the stomach, mend the breath.

Hurt. Much hinder concoction: immoderatly used, burden the stomach: breed
little, cold, gross, and melancholious juice.

Correction. Eaten after meat, moderately, and after them, an hony-combe.

Degree. Cold in the first, dry in the second, very astringent.

Season. Age. Constitution. An Autumn and Winter, (...) youth, and hot
constitutions.

Sorba.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Soruice and Medlar, are much alike in nature, taste, and operation.

Pliny, li. 15. cap. 21. notes four differences of them, arising from their
form and fashion. None of them all fructify, until they be three years old.

Cato wills us to condite them in the decoction of new Wine.

A Lotion of their decoction, straiteneth the matrice.

Galen utterly forbids them as meat, commendes them for good astringent
physic.

Hasil Nuts.
Choice. GReat ones: little covered with their husk: full of juice: not worm
eaten: nor any way contaminate.

Use. Nourish more then Walnuts: increase brain: sodden with honey, cure an
old cough: tou^ed and eaten with pepper, ripen the distillations of reume.

Hurt. Annoy the stomach: hard of concoction: windy: engender much choler:
cause headache, it much eaten.

Correction. Eat them new, macerated a while in water: moderately, and after
them, meats condite with sugar.

Degree. The green or new, are temperate in the first quality: the old or
dry, are hot and dry in the end of the first.

Season. Age. Constiution. In winter for young, strong, and laborious persons.

Avellanae.
Story for Table-talke.
AVellanae of Avellanu^, a town in Campania: or else a Vellendo, because any
may have them for the plucking or gathering. The Greeks call them Ponticae,
for that (as says Pliny) they were first brought out of Pontus.

Nut in English, of Nux the Latin: and Nux a Nocendo, because it annoyeth all
other plants or herbs that are subject and obnoxious to his leaues-dropping.

All hard or shell-fruite, are called Nuces: all soft or pulp-fruite, Poma.

Melons, commonly called Pompions.
Choice. OF most exquisit savor: pleasant to the palate: new: ripe.

Use. Quench thirst: cause appetite: cool sensibly: cleanse the body: provoke
urine: daily use of them, preserves from the stone in the bladder and reins.

Hurt. Breed wind and belly-ache: naught for colic, splenticke, aged,
phlegmatic, melancholicke.

Correction. Eaten with old Cheese, falt or tart meats, and a cup of brisk
Wine.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the beginning of the second, moist
in the third.

For young and hot bloods.

Melones seu Melopepones.
Story for Table-talke.
ANguria, which Galen calls Melopepon, of Melon and Pepon: because it is not
distinguished with stemmes, as the single Melon or Pumpion is; but round and
smooth like an Apple. Also its eaten together with the inwards of it, which the
Pumpion is not: yet retains it the smell and savor of the Pumpion.

This fruit is the greatest or biggest of all Herbs or Trees. That it has a
scouring and clensing properly, its evident in that if you rub any part of the
body with it, it becomes much the brighter and cleaner.

VValnuts.
Choice. BIg: long: ripe: easily shaled: especially new, not rotten.

Use. Repair decayed teeth: eaten with Figs and rewe, save from mortal
venims, and kill worms in the belly.

Hurt. Immoderately used, hurt the throat, palate, and tongue, stuff the
breast; cause the cough and headache, especially if they be dry.

Correction. Eat them new; steeped in wine, and then pilled: a small
quantity, and with a little garlic: old, with raysons, or after fish, in
stead of cheese.

Degree. The dried are hot in the third, dry in the beginning of the second:
the green are exceedingly moist, and partake little heat.

Season. Age. Constitution. In winter for phlegmatic, melancolicque, and old,
not straight brested.

Nuces Iuglandes.
Story for Table-talke.
IVglandes, quasi Iouis glandes. Jove's Acornes. For when our grand-forefathers
had a long time lived with Acornes, at last finding Nuts, they called them
Jove's Acornes, for their excellency. Therein apppeared their thankful hearts
for any benifit received at Gods hands, by acknowledging God the author and
bestower of it. Contrary to the base humor of many muck-borne Scarab-flyes,
and earth-rooting hogs of this age; who are content to eat of Jove's Acornes,
but like swine as they are, never lift up their eyes to the tree whence they
fall.

Pine-Nuts or pine Apples.
Choice. OF Orchard pines; femall: of best savor, very new.

Use. Nourish much: fat: cleanse the breast, lights, reins, and bladden sodden
with honey, provoke vri^^, restore the weak, consume all corrupt humors: good
for the sho^t winded, and paraliticke.

Hurt. Concoct somewhat slowly: (...) but gross juice: much eaten, grow the
stomach and belly.

Correction. Macerated hot the space of (...) hour, give them with sugar to
(...) and phlegmatic, with honey to youth and chollericke.

Degree. Hot in the beginning of the second: moist in the first.

Season. Age. Constitution. In cold we ather, for the foresaid, as aforesaid.

Pineae.
Story for Table-talke
IF the tops of the pinetree be once lopped off, it never bears fruit, nor
prospers after. Whence it was that Croesus threatened the Citizens of
Lampsacum, that he would destroy them like a Pine Tree: meaning he would cut
off all their heads, or else slay all their heads, Id est, their governors and
magistrates, which done, the city like a lopped Pine should pine away and come
to naught. Pine Nuts much augment seed, especially if three or four drops of
their oil be put into a soft egg and so sooped off.

Pistake Nuts.
Choice. GReat: Smelling like Turpe^tine: of old trees: of a sad green
color: most new.

Use. Purge the breast: strengthen the reins and stomach: open obstructions of
the liver: stay disposition to vemit: heal the biting of serpents: preuoke
Venus wondrously.

Hurt. Though they fat, yet nourish little: unwholesome for boys, and hot
constitutions: for they extenuate, inflame the blood, and bring dizinesse.

Correction. Eat them immediately before meat, with Orenges, or Saccarum
Rosatum.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the second order of the
second degree.

In cold weather, for flegmatists.

Pistacia.
Story for Table-talke.
MAthiolus holds this plant to be a kind of Terebinth, or Turpentine: it
grows in Egypt and Syria. Thence brought to Venice: a few year since they
have fructified in Sicily. The Husbandmen say, it grows of an Almond-tree Imp,
inserted to a Mastick stock.

Lucius Vitellius Censor, first brought Pistakes into Italy, in the beginning
of Tiberius Caesar's reign, when he was Ambassador into Syria.

Dates.
Choice. Sweet: ripe within: some and vncorrupt.

Use. Make sat: good for the ^^er: cure the cough: loose the belly.

Hurt. Hurt the teeth and mouth: cause gripings in the stomach, and scalles to
break out: gnaw the bottom of the belly: plague the head with ache: obstruct
the li^^, spleen and veins.

Correction. Eaten sodden or condite w^^ sugar: or raw with sewer and taxt in
meats after them.

Degree. Season. Age. Constiution. Hot in the second, moist in the first.

For no season, age, or constitution, but well sugard.

Dactyli.
Story for Table-talke.
Palm or Date-trees are most rife in AEgyt and Judea. In Italy the fruit
never ripeneth thoroughly: in the coasts of Spain they are sower and unsavory.
There are 49. sundry kinds of Palme-trees numbered and noted by writers, so
different, that they may scarce seem to be al Palms.

This tree is of a most asspiring nature: it will bear no coals. It resists
all burden, bearing it upward with his arms and boughs: Therefore is it an
Hieroglyphick or Emblem of victory and conquest.

Almonds.
Choice. SWeet: new: not corrupt by unseasonable weather: that grew in an hot
soil.

Use. Yield store of nourishment: fat: help the sight: increase seed, and
brain: fetch up fleame: purge the breast: cause sleep: open ^bstructions of
the liver.

Hurt. Ouer-dry, they are hard of c^ncoction; stick long in the stomach: cause
headache.

Correction. Wholesome, being tender and full of milk, blaunched; with a good
deal of sugar.

Degree. The sweet are temperately hot and moist almost in the first: the
bitter are dry in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. For all seasons, ages, constitutions.

Amygdalae.
Story for Table-talke.
AMygdala the Greek name, signifies as much as the long Nut: some call it
Nu^lica.

It prospers best in hot countries, and therefore better in Apulia and Sicily,
then in Italy, Spain or France.

The tree and fruit both much resemble the Peach: yet somewhat bigger.

Phillis was turned into an Almond-tree, for telling tales out of school: ever
sithence, it has been a byword: an Almond for the Parrat: which least it be
applied to me, I will leave my prating.

Chestnuts.
Choice. Big: which by being kept, are grown more toothsome, and less
unwholesome.

Use. Being flatulent incite Ve^^^ yield strong and very good no^rishment, step
flures taken with sugar, abate choler, with honey, fleame, wrought with honey
and sugar, cure the biting of mad dogs.

Hurt. Eaten much cause headache and wind: bind: and raw are heart of
digestion.

Correction. Loast or roast them, then e^ti them moderately with a good deal
of sugar.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the beginning of the second, dry in
the second.

In cold weather, for any.

Castaneae.
Story for Table-talke.
CAstanea quast casta nux. Chestnut, Chastnut: say some. I know not upon what
ground. I am sure not by a metonimie of the cause. For being flatulent, it
prouokes lust: yea further. this nut in his husk much resembles Testes, the
instruments of lust. So that some divide this Nut not as other Nuts. In Nuce^
et ^ucleuns. But In Testam et Testes. The enucleating of it, they call
castrating or gelding. So then by this reason, it is not Casta nux, till (...)
be Nux castrata. Id est. Testa si^e testibus, I Will be his witness, ^he is
chaste with a witness.

Olives:
Choice. Green: best condite: such (...) grew in sunshine: gre^^ ones: as are
at Bonom^ which being naught to make o^^ of, are condite, becoming mo^^
sauoury and toothsome.

Use. Cleanse the stomach of flea^^ provoke appetite: stay casting.

Hurt. Cause watchfulness and he^^ ach: or much eaten, stuff the hea^^
especially the salted.

Correction. Eat them well condite, w^^ vinegar, at the second course, w^^
other meats.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. The salt are hot in the second the rest
temperate, somewhat (...) stringent and strengthening.

In cold weather, for any.

Oliuae.
Story for Table-talke.
OLea is the tree. Oliua the fruit: Oleum the juice or oil. The Olive was an
Emblem of peace, ever since the Dove brought an Olive leaf in her mouth into
Noah's Arc.

The Spanish Olives are bigger then the Italian. Yet the Italians, especially
they of Bonony, condite them far better then the Spaniards. Besides that, the
Spanish have an od unsavory smell, and look yellow, unpleasant to the eye.

Wash the mouth with their pickle; it closes the gums, and fastneth the loose
teeth.

Cappars.
Choice. COndite in vinegar, which art not so hot as the salted.

Use. Very good for the short winded and splenaticke: provoke Venus, and
monthly flure: cure the Haemorhoids: kill worms: passing good for a moist and
phlegmatic stomach.

Hurt. Cause thirst, especially the salted, which also inflame the entralls.

Correction. Use the salted rather for physic then meat, rinse them well in
water first: the condite in Vinigar are to be eaten before other meals like
sallets, with oil, raisons of the sun, or Opymell.

Degree. Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. The salted are hot in the second, dry in
the third: the other hot in the first, dry in the second.

For cold season, age, constitution.

Cappares.
Story for Table-talke.
THe plant it self is a prickly shrub, the branches falling to the ground,
somewhat like a Bramble or Briar.

Cappars are (to say the truth) rather sauce or medicine, then nourishment or
meat, especially the salted: or if they yield any nourishment, it is passing
little, not passing good.

The best Cappars are thought to be brought from Geneua. Cappars in diet, and
Capers in dancing, serve both for relish.

Gourde.
Choice. NEw: tender: green: light: sweet.

Use. Helps the chollericke, by quenching thirst: sodden with veriuyce,
cools the liver.

Hurt. Hurts the cold and flegmaticke: breeds wind, and wheyish humors:
weakeneth the stomach: yields bad juice.

Correction. Eat it with pepper, mustard, vinegar, or hot herbs, as onions,
and parsley.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

For hot weather, youth, and hot temperatures.

Cucurbita.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Poet (as his chief pride rests in hitting the nail on the head with a
quainte Epithitae) called the Onion, Sapientissima cepa. That is, most wise.
The Gourd, Voracissima Cucurbita: that is, most ravenous. His reason was, the
Onion is all head, and the Gourd all belly. The Radish hearing this, steppeth
in, and tells the Poet he was deceived.

For (says he) the Onion wants wit, and the Gourd wants teeth.

Pease
Choice. CReene: new: tender: not corrupt.

Use. Please the taste: mundifie the breast: cure the cough: yield singular good
nourishment.

Hurt. Hurt evil teeth, and whom soever wind annoyeth.

Preparation. Dress them well with salt, oil, pepper, and the juice of sower
herbs. Oil of Almonds is good condiment for them.

Degree. Cold in the first, temperately moist.

Season. Age. Constitution. For hot seasons, youth, chollerists.

Pisa.
Story for Table-talke.
PEase are either wild or tame. The wild do differ in kind; but one kind of
them is called everlasting pease, because their root never dies: but being
once sown or planted, so continues for ever, yielding fruit in due season.

Pease are much of the nature and operation of Beans, but less windy, as
says Hippocrates: And our common proverb accords, speaking somewhat homely:
Every pease will have a fease: but every bean, fifteen.

Beans.
Choice. GReat: pure: bright: without spots: not worme-eaten: young and tender.

Use. Cause sleep: restrain the Migram, fat the body.

Hurt. Breed much wind: dull the senses: cause terrible dreams.

Preparation. Husk them with salt and Maioram: and sees them asunder.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first, dry in the second.

Best in cold weather, for gross and homely feeders.

Fabae.
Story for Table-talke.
TOng-tying Pytagor, bids us tie up our chaps also from eating of Beans. A
Fabis abstineto. Wherein Judicious Antiquaries say, there is much mystery, and
therefore diversely interpret it. Simeon in his Diet Book says Pythagor,
forbad them, for that they cause turbulent and fearful dreams. Other refer
it to their flatulencie, whereby they provoke to lechery. Other expound it
mystically, and not according to the grammaticke sense: therein showing much
reading, if not wit. But to gather together their gatherings, were to send my
wit a wooll-gathering, and indeed to contend de lana caprina.

Rize.
Choice. BRight and clear kernels, like Pearls Margarite: such as swell in
seething.

Use. Wonderfully assuage the b^rning heat of the stomach: increases seed:
stops fluxes.

Hurt. Bad for the Collicke: for being of a clammy and glewish nature, it
sticks too long in the guts: and breeds some wind.

Preparation. Sees it in Cowes milk, or in the cream or oil of sweet
Almonds.

Degree. Hot in the first, dry in the second: temperatly says Auicens and
Rhasis.

Season. Age. Constitution. In winter, for youth and laborers.

Oriza.
Story for Table-talke.
RIze is sown in a moist and low ground.

Frumentie made of Barley, is moister then Rice, and yields singular good
nourishment to the body, very wholesome for the sick. You may much meliorate
your Rice, both for nourishment and toothsomenesse, by seething it in fat
flesh-broath, or in passing good Cowes morning milk. Sodden with Oil or
Butter, it relinquisheth his astringent quality.

The Painters Proverb.
Manum de Tabula.
THat is, (as present occasion interprets) no more Table-talke. The reason
hereof (as I guess) may be these.

First and principally, except I speak wiselyer.

Secondly, the consequent is like to prove barren, for Certs fruitles; for all
the fruit is antecedent.

Thirdly and lastly, it is Dinnertime, so that if more time be spent in
prating, my Dry Dinner will not be ready in due time. Quod omnium rerum est
primum.

These reasons would bind any man, any reasonable man to the peace. Yet for
all this, presuming upon your favorable estimates, who are wise, Et nostis os
adolescentiae quam sit impudens, I am purposed to proceed in my perpetual
parallel of paraphrase. The which I desire, it may be served in amongst the
rest of the dishes, and be tasted also, but yet of such only as are of eager
appetite. If any be desirous to know what a man may call it, surely I can
think of no fitter name then an hasty pudding. For I protest, in so great
haste I composed it, that when a friend of mine came into my chamber, and
suddenly surprising me, asked what I was making, I as not minding what he
ask't, or what I answered, told him in my haste, that I made haste.

Herbs
Sage.
Choice. GArden, or set, the lesser sort: the little leaves of it.

Use. Good against the paulsie and quiuering of the joints, proceeding of a
cold cause: comforts the head, brain, senses, and memory.

Hurt. Annoyeth melancholicke persons by ouer-drying them: also the hot and
chollericke, by ouer-heating and burning them.

Correction. Eat it in sallets with other cold and moist herbs: as Lettuse:
or with moist meats.

Degree. Hot and dry in the beginning of the third, or in the very end of the
second: somewhat astringent.

Season. Age. Constitution. In winter and the spring, for old, cold, and
phlegmatic.

Saluia.
Story for Table-talke.
MAny do much extol Sage, calling it an holy Herb, auerring that it
preuenteth all abortument in women. They counsel a woman the fourth day of her
going abroad after childebirth, to drink nine ounces of Sage juice with a
little salt, and forthwith to use the company of her husbant.

The holesomenesse of Sage-ale is notoriously famous.

Heywoods merry wit noted two kinds of Sage, not named in our Herbals: Sages
wise: Sage fool.

Foenill or Finckle.
Choice. GArden: young (if you eat it green): full ripe (if you keep it)
sodden with the roots and tender stalks.

Use. Does make store of milk: provoke urine and monthly flur, open
obstructions, purge ye reins wondronsly, help the sight.

Hurt. Attenuate and inflame the blood, neither sodden nor raw, is easy of
digestion, especially eaten much.

Correction. A little: young: laid a while in cold water.

Degree. Season Age. Constitution. Hot in the second (many say in the third)
dry in the first: very opening.

For any time, age, or constitution, least for youth and chollerists.

Foeniculus.
Story for Table-talke.
SNakes and Serpents by eating of Foenill renew their age, and repair their
decayed sight by rubbing their eyes with it. Wherefore it is used of us to the
like purposes. There is a bad property in the seed, to breed poisonous
worms, whose poison is curable by no Antidot. Therefore before they be eaten,
they must be opened and carefully purged.

Sparage.
Choice. HOme: lately sown: the ^ep now bowing to the groundward.

Use. Does open obstructions of the reins and liver: make soluble: provoke
urine and Venus.

Hurt. Eaten cold, disposes to domit: and through his bitterness, greatly
increases choler in collerick^ stomachs.

Correction. Is boiled, and (the first decoction cast out) condite with Oil,
Vinegar, Pepper, and salt.

Degree. Hot in the first: temperately moist.

Season. Age. Constitution. For any age, or temperature: chiefly for old and
cold.

Asparagi.
Story for Table-taske.
DIoscorides says, that Sparage causes barrenness: but it is not probable,
sithence it nourishes very much, and manifestly provoke Venus.

It is very soon sodden: and therefore Caesar speaking of any thing, that was
soon done, had this proverb usually in his mouth. Citius quam Asparagi
coquantur; Id est; Sooner then Sparage can be sodden. As much in effect, as,
while you ca^ say, what is this? in the turn of an hand: in the twinkling of
an eye.

Spinache.
Choice. VEry young: growing in a well manured and fat soil, watered from above.

Use. Does enlarge the breast: cure the cough: moderately cool the lungs: make
the belly soluble, and the weasand smooth.

Hurt. Is very windy: annoyeth the stomach: engenders watery humors in a
cold stomach.

Correction. Fried with it own juice, without water: then condite with Oil,
Sorrel-iuyce, and Raysons of the sun.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the first.

For any age or constitution: especially youth and chollerists.

Spinachia.
Story for Table-talke.
SOme will needs have this herb, a bred and native Spaniard: and therefore
miscall it, Spagnaeci. But they much abuse it, for the Arabians called it
Sphinache: the reason of the name is obuious: because the seed thereof is
Spinosum. That is, prickly. The juice of Spinache drunk, cures any wound
received of a Scorpion. Therefore it is of much request in Italy.

Artichokes.
Choice. THiffle or prickly. Artichokes, coming of Artichoke: tender.

Use. Please the taste: provoke urine and Venus: remove flatiue humors: open
obstructions: heat the entralls.

Hurt. The Thistle is somewhat flatulent; annoyeth the head: burdneth the
stomach: Artichoke is not so hurtful.

Correction. The Thistle sodden, or raw, is eaten in the last course, with salt
and pepper: Artichokes are boiled in Pottage, and eaten as the Thistle.

Degree. Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. Hot in the second, dry in the first.

The sodden are preferred before the raw: for cold season, age, constitution.

Cardui seu Cinarae.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Thistle or prickly Artichoke, differs from the plain or common
Artichoke, only by certain prickles upon the stalk. The Italian most
esteems of the Thistle.

In former times they were to be had no where but in Sicily; now every where.

Theophrastus calls them Pinei, because they somewhat resemble Pine-apples,
consisting of many skales, co^pacted Globewise.

Lettuse.
Choice. THick, commonly called Cabbage Lettuse: growing in a fat soil: before
it swell with milk: not washed in water.

Use. C^^s^^ of digestion: the best of pot-hea^^^s, increases milk: procures
sleep: states the running of the reins: all wageth heat in the stomach,
especially eaten with vineg^^.

Hurt. Dimmeth the sight: quenches natural heat: corrupts the seed: caus^^
barr^nnesse: mortifieth venus: makes the body sluggish: we^keneth the stomach.

Correction. Eaten with Mint, Rewe, and (...) hea^bes: sodden, rather th^^
raw: unwashed: good Wine drunk upon it.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

In h^t weather, for youth, very cho^^^ricke, and hot stomachs.

Lactuca.
Story for Table-talke.
GAlen commends Lettuse thus: in a young man, it abateth the burning heat of
his stomach: unto an old man it causes sleep. In old time they ate Lettuse
after supper, to repress vapors arising from the stomach to the brain, and to
dispose them selves to sleep. For they used to dine very spa^ingly, but supped
largely.

Aristoxenes Cyraenaeus, watered his Lettuses with Mead, to make them bigger and
sweeter.

Lactuca a lacte quasi Lactoca, because it breeds milk in women, says Martial.

Endive.
Choice. GArden: tender: not yet milky sauouring most sweetly.

Use. Asswageth inflammation and thirst: prouokes urine and appetite;
especially in hot weather.

Hurt. Bad for the Palsy; quiuering of the joints, and cold stomachs: somewhat
sloweth concoction.

Correction. Eaten with Nip, the stalks of Mint, Rue, and such hot herbs.

Degree. Cold in the beginning of the second: moist in the end of the first.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather for youth, chollericke, sanguine,
and very hot stomachs.

Intubus.
Story for Table-talke.
Endive is much of the nature and operation of Lettuse.

The wild Endife is not so cold or moist as the Garden or homegrowing, and
has a more sharp and vigorous taste.

The wild Endife is curled and crisped somewhat like to Cabbage Lettuse, but
much bigger.

Borage.
Choice. COmmonly used, is that veri^ Buglosse of old. This therefore taken with
the leaves,

Use. Wondrously cleanses the blood: recreateth and exhilerateth the heart and
spirits, especially put in wine: strengthens all the entrals: very good for
such as are in recovery.

Hurt. Correction. Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Somewhat hard of
digestion: greatly annoyeth sore mouths.

Sees it in very good flesh broth.

Cold and moist in the first.

For any season, age, or temperature.

Borago.
Story for Table-talke.
APuleius writes, that they of Lucania calls this Buglosse Courage, because
it has an apparent sympathy and notable affinity with the affects of the
heart. Whence in tract of time the name is depraved: and B. put for C. Surely
it is a most excellent herb, and of special use. It has this peculier
virtue, that laid in Wine it strengthens and cheareth the heart, putting
merry conceits into the mind.

Succory.
Choice. With blew flowers: following the sun: therefore called
Heliotropium: tender: the tops of it.

Use. Very much helps an inflamed stomach: without all measure opens the
obstructions of the liver.

Hurt. Hurts a weak and cold stomach: makes little and bad no^rishment.

Correction. Eaten boiled, in sallets, with (...) and vinegar: or raw, with Nip
and such hot herbs.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first; dry in the second.

Conuement always, (best in summer for youth and hot constitutions.

Cichorium.
Story for Table-talke.
IT has been, and yet is, a thing which superstition has believed; that the
body anointed with the juice of Cichory, is very available to obtain the
favor of great persons: howsoever, it is of a most opening nature, and makes
way or free passage in the body by taking away al obstructions and opilations.

The leaves of Succory bruised, are very good against inflammation of the eyes,
being outwardly app^ied.

Hoppe.
Choice. THe first buds, or young branches shooting from the root, not yet
least, of a tender and slender stalk.

Use. Not only engenders singular good humors, but also reduces them into an
equal and due temper: strengthens all the entrals: makes pure and refined
blood.

Hurt. Somewhat flatulent: stuffeth the bead.

Correction. Boiled and eaten with Vinegar and Oil.

Degree. Tempertately hot, moist in the first.

Season. Age. Constitution. For any season, age, constitution.

Lupulus.
Story for Table-talke.
Our forefathers knew not Hoppe: howbeit it is a most excellent herb, and
exceeds all other for good juice: for cleansing the blood, and scouring all
the entrals. Besides the necessity hereof in brewing of Beer, is sufficiently
known to Germany and England, and all these Northern parts of the world: yet
I know not how it happened (as he merrily says) that herisie and beer came
hopping into England both in a year.

Mint.
Choice. SMall: garden-spear-mint: the tops only.

Use. Very exceedingly comfort the stomach: especially cold and weak:
consumes fleame, and provoke appetite.

Hurt. Annoyeth an hot stomach, or liver; for it in a manner scaldeth and
burns the blood.

Correction. Eat it sparingly, with cold Herbs.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the end of the second, or
beginning of the third.

In cold weather, for old men, flegmaticke, and melancholicke.

Mentha.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Poets faigne, that Mentha Proserpines Nymph, was metamorphosed into this
herb, being taken at her lechery with Pluto the black Prince.

The Graecians liked the savor of it so well, that they called it Hedyosmus,
that is sweete-smell. Perhaps their mint was of better savor then ours, for we
have many other herbs which deserve that name rather then Mint: although it
sauoureth very well.

Sorrel.
Choice. GArden: of a deep green color: the leaves no whit red.

Use. Restrains choler: quenches thirst: exciteth appetite: cures fluxes:
is very wholesome in burning and pestilentiall fevers.

Hurt. Exasperateth the stomach: binds the belly: hurts melancholists.

Correction. Eat it in Sallets with other herbs, as Lettuse which is moist,
and Mint which is hot.

Degree. Cold in the first, moist in the beginning of the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather for youths, chollerists, and
sanguines.

Oxalis seu Acetosa.
Story for Table-talke.
BY reason of the tart taste, it is called in Latin Acetosa. That is, Vinegar
herb. And in Lombardie they call it the sour herb. It was wholly unknown
to the Antique.

There be two sorts of it, the greater sown in Gardens which is the better:
the less growing in the fields having less leaves, and the stalk like a
spear, the leaves very red and shining.

Burnet.
Choice. LOw: set in gardens for sallets, with little leaves, notcht like a Saw,
and indented round about the Verge: the stalk red.

Use. Does purge the reins and bladder: very much provoke urine: void the
stone and gravel: very good against the plague: put in wine, greatly comforts
the heart.

Hurt. Hard of digestion: stuffeth the belly: and in many, inflameth the liver
and blood.

Correction. Eaten raw in sallets, with other cold herbs.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the second.

Pimpinella.
Story for Table-talke.
IT is an Herb that the ancient were very little acqu^^nted with. Yet the
Nomenclators have referred it unto that sort of herbs which are good against
the stone.

The decoction of it made in pottage, is a present remedy against the plague.
Also the water distilled, is p^ssing good for that purpose. It is vulgarly
thought to be put in wine as a cooler: but it hea^eth in the second degree, and
joins with wine in his operation for the strengthening of the heart.

Persley.
Choice. THe branches, before either they flower or seed: the roots at half
their growth.

Use. Very much provoke urine and women's flux: cleanses the liver and matrice:
opens the obstructions of those parts: is very pleasing to theistomacke: the
decoction of it resists poison.

Hurt. Is of no very good juice: enflameth the blood: s^uffeth the head: is
slowly digested.

Correction. Eat it little, raw, with cold herbs: sodden, in flesh
pottage: the root boiled thoroughly:

Degree. Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. Hot in the second, dry in the end of the
first.

Good sodden, for any season, age, or constitution.

Petroselinum.
Story for Table-talke.
THe excellency of this herb, accords with the frequent use thereof. For
there is almost no meat or sauce which may not have Persley either in it or
about it. Our English word Persly, is a manifest contract of the Latin
Petroselinum.

The chiefest virtue lies in the root: second in the seed: last and least in
the leaves: and yet these are of most use in the kitching.

Taragon or biting Dragon.
Choice. GArden: in a fat and moist soil: the tender branches and leaves not
spread upon the ground.

Use. Chief of herbs for ac^^ony and sauourmes: Card^all: exciting appetite
and Venus: comforting the stomach.

Hurt. Atte^uateth the blood, and burns (...) liver: naught for hot
constitutions.

Correction Eat it sparingly, with Borage flowers, or Endive, Lettule, and
such cooling herbs.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot almost in the beginning of the third:
dry in the second.

For cold, old, phlegmatic.

Dracunculus Hortensis.
Story for Table-talke.
THis is an Artificial herb: for it comes of a Lineseede put into an Onyon,
or Leek, and so buried in the ground. Husbandmen have a strong conceit of it
(and not without some cause) that it is a preservative against the plague, and
all manner of poyso^ inward or outward: experience and proof is no detracter of
the credit and estimation thereof.

Radish.
Choice. TEnder: biting the tongue: most while.

Use. Helps vrin: voydeth grauel and sand from the reins and bladder:
heals the stomack^: clarifieth the voice.

Hurt. Causes l^annesse, belechings, headache, and lice: b^^nes the blood:
hurseth the teeth and eyes: is slowly conce^ed.

Correction. Therefore is best eaten after meat.

Degree. Hot in the second: dry in the first.

Season. Age. Constitution, In cold weather, for youth, laborers, and hot
stomachs.

Raphanus.
Story for Table-talke.
WE English have greatly honored this root, by calling it a Radish, that is,
Radix, a root: as if this root were the only root, and all other roots no
roots in comparison of this root: or at leastwise that the Radish is Radix
radicum, the root of roots, a root indeed, a root Cath' Hexochen (as the
Rhetoricians speak, a most excellent root. But I fear me, I have ouercloy'd
you with roots, may it please you to fall to somewhat else.

Carot, or red Parsnip.
Choice. Use. REd: great: sweet.

Provoke vrin, Venus, and monthly slure: engenders milk: ope^^th
obstructions: is preferred before the Parsnip.

Hurt. Of (...) and bad nourishment: slowly digested: very windy.

Preparation. Boil it th^oughly: then eat le with (...), oil, mustard, and
coriander.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the second, moist in the first.

In cold weather, for all but old, and phlegmatique.

Carota seu pastinaca rubens.
Story for Table-talke.
CArot, that is, read root: as some Antiquaries guess. Athenaeus, quoting
Diphilus, says the Grecians called the Carot Philtrum, for that it is thought
to be agreat furtherer of Venus her pleasure, and of loves delights: but
although generally it furdereth Venus, yet it is especially to be understood
of the wild Carot.

Onyons.
Choice. THat grow in a moist soil: great: full of juice: round, as the
Flemish.

Use. Excite Venus: increase seed, and milk: restore appetitie: preserve in
change of water.

Hurt. Eaten raw, or much, cause headache: burn the blood: dull the
understanding: hurtes the eyes.

Correction. Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Lay it sliced a while in cold
water; then seethe it thoroughly.

Hot in the third, dry in the second.

For old and cold only.

Cepa.
Story for Table-talke.
THe word Onyon, comes of the old Latin name Vnio. For so the old Latin
Rusticks termed that which the latter call Cepa. And the reason why they
called it Vnio, was, because one herb or branche (as it were) grows upon one
root. Whereto accords that, that Columella says in his 12. Book and 10.
cha. of Husbandry: Cepa simplex quam Vnionem Rustici vocant.

Garlic.
Story for Table-talke.
Choice. THat comes up about March: put in sallets, or used dry: full of sprigs
and knots.

Use. Green, qualifieth the coldness and moystnes of sallets: dry, it resists
poisons, cleares the voice, kills worms, provoke vrin, and Venus: consumes
the salt rume in the stomach.

Hurt. Hurtes the voyding faculty: brain: sight: head: very bad for women
with child, youth and hot constitutions: reuiueth old diseas^s: (...) the
blood.

Correction. Bo^ls (...) thoroughly, then eat it with oil, vineg^r or other
meats.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the fourth, dry in the third.

In cold weather, for the aged, and phlegmatique.

Allium.
Story for Table-talke.
Garlic is of most special use for Seafaring men: a most excellent
preserua^iue against all infection proceeding from the nastie savor of the pump
or sincke, and of tainted meats which Mariners are feign to eat for fault of
better. It also pacifieth the disposition to vomit, crused by the roughness of
the sea, and greatly strengthens the rowers: therefore they eat it by break
of day. It may be rightly termed the poor man's physic.

Scallion or little Onyon.
Choice. SMall: like a Daffodill Root: red: hard: sweet.

Use. Helps a sa^nt stomach, languishing through overmuch heat: causes
appetite: furthereth concoction.

Hurt. Causes wind, gross humors, headache, thirst, dreams.

Correction. Prepared as the Onyon: condite with strong Vi^ eger, Oil, and
Salt: eaten with bruised Sage and Parsley, moderately.

Degree. Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. Hot in the fourth, dry in the third.

Unwholesome for hot season, age, com^tution.

Cepa Ascalonia.
Story for Table-talke.
A Scalion, is so called of Ascalon, a Town in Iudaea, where it is very
plentiful, and was first found. Thence transplanted to Greece and Italy, and
so to these paits.

The Latins call the Scalion, Onyon, Lecke, and Garlic, by one common name
Bu^bus.

The Scalion infinitely furthereth Venus, as some say, that have used it to
that purpose.

Leekes.
Choice. GArden: sown: in a moist soil, or often watered; v^rie small and
tender:

Provoke urine, Venus, and monthly flux: break^ wind: (...) with honey,
^^^difie the lungs and lights: applied in a plaster, cure the Hemorhoids.

Hurt. Breed melancholious humors: annoy the head: dim the sight: procure
fearful dreams: ouerlay the stomach: make ulcers in the bladder.

Correction. Sodden twi^^: then dressed with Oil of sweet Almonds, and eaten
with Lettuse, Endive, Purslane.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the third, dry in the second.

Unfit nourishment for any but rusticke swains.

Porrum.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Emperor Nero took great pleasure in this root: and therefore was
nicknamed P^rrophagu^: which to English, is as much as Welchman.

Garlic, Onion, and Leekes, are very wholesome, but their savor is passing
loathsome and offensive. Wherefore some have thought of a medicament to take
away the sent of them. But none like Sir Thomas Mores. To take away the smell
of Onions, eat Leekes: and to convince your Leekes, eat a clowe or two of
Garlic: and if then Garlic breath be strong. choke him with a piece of a T.
with a u. with an r. with a d.

Colewort.
Choice. ONly the tender buddes, and long sprowtes, cropped off the herb, whose
leaves are wide open and ^et c^mpacted.

Use. Half sod^^n, make soluble; thoroughly boyl^d, (...).

Hurt. Anns^ (...) lists: especially in som^^^, (...) it is harder then at
other times.

Preparation. Seethe them (...) in water, then (that dec^ction (...) in fat
flesh broth, with (...) and Pepper.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and (...) in the fist.

In the pri^^^ of the spring.

Brassica.
Story for Table-talke.
Master Gerard, in his new H^rbal, reckons 18 sorts of Colewo^ts, differing
either in color or form.

It is called by the Graecians Amethystus, because it repelleth drunkenness:
or because it resembles the precious stone called the Amethyst. The
Apothicaries and common Herbarists, call it Caul^s, because it has so goodly a
stalk: so the right name is Cawle, not Cole.

Flesh.
Veale.
Choice. Of a sucking Calfe, let run abroad two or three days before: from
the Dame; fed in ch^^^^ pasture.

Use. Nourishes excellently: makes (...) good blood: wholesome for them that
exercise much.

Hurt. Though young and tender, yet being of gr^sse substance, naturally hurts
the weak or in recovery.

Correction. Boiled with young Pullets, or fat Capons, and Parsley.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Temperate in all qualities.

For all seasons, ages, constitutions.

Vitulina.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Italians should be calfes by their name; for Italos in Greek is the same
that Vitulus in Latin, and calfe in English. Therefore they collaude it by
tearming it Vitella, id est, vitam illia dans: signifying the holesomnesse
thereof to a good stomach. It is good for sound and ableconstitutions, not so
good for the weak, sick, or languishing stomachs, for it is of a lash and
yet gross substance, not very digestible. Essex calfes the proverb praises,
and some are of the mind that Waltome calfe was also that country man.

Beef.
Choice. MOst young and tender: fat: wrought at plowe, or other strong labor.

Use. Nourishes exceedingly: engenders very much blood: stoppes chollerous
fluxes.

Hurt. Is of bad nourishment: slow of digestion: makes gross blood: yea
clodders of blood in the veins, and other melanchollicke diseases.

Correction. Is powdered with much sall, 24 hours, and sodden exquisitly.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold in the first, dry in the second.

The tenderest, in cold weather, for youth, laborers, and great exercisers.

Vaccina seu Bubula.
Story for Table-talke.
Beef, ( quasi) Boue of Bos, an Ox, Cow, or Steer.

Sir Thomas More in his Vtopia Li. 2. commends the Ox far above the Horse.

Oxen, yield to horses in fiercenes, but excel them in patience; neither are
they subject to so many diseases, are kept with less charge, and lastly, worn
out at plowe and cart, yet are man's meat in fine.

The Ox is the Country-mans fellow laborer, and one of Ceres (...) household
servants. Prometheus, first slew an Ox.

Wethers Mutton.
Choice. NOt yet of the first Shere: ^ sheep Wether, not Goat.

Use. Makes very much and very good nourishment: for the weak.

Hurt. Old, is vnholesou^e being corrupted with age, and overmuch dried, for
want of his stones.

Degree. The younger, boiled, is eaten with opening and cardiall herbs.

Season. Age. Constitution. Temperately hot, and moist.

For any time, age, constitution, or region.

Veruex.
Story for Table-talke
THose things which are most necessary unto us, by Gods great goodness are also
most common: what more necessary to life then air, and what more obuious?
insomuch as that only is the Eliment, elmeno Tyrant can deprive the meanest
Vassal off, not taking away his life. Aqua and igni interdici potest, so the
most wholesome and convenient meat for sustenante of our bodies, is mutton, and
beef: of all other flesh most common. I dare say there are no four other
sundry meats wherewith we may continue longer full fed, with less loathing.

Goate-flesh.
Choice. REd and black kiddes: scarce half year, lately caned, not yet
weaned.

Use. Is easily and soon digested: of best nourishment: good especially for
such as are weak, or in recovery.

Hurt. Unwholesome for the aged, cold, and moist stomachs, and such as
exercise much.

Preparation. Holesommer roast then sodde: the hinder quarters, then the fore:
because they less abound with excrementitious moisture.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist temperately ^ the first.

For young and hot stomachs: not old, nor flegmaticke.

Caprilla.
Story for Table-talke.
CApra a Carpendo, because it carpeth and biteth off the young buddes and
sprowtes of plants and shrubbes.

That which we call a Kidde, the Italians call Capretto, till it be half year
old, and then they alter the name.

An heard of Goats finding Eringium, gather together to it, and depart not
thence, until they have eaten it all up quite and clean. They can best render
the reason, who are goatish and love to eat Eringoes.

Lamb.
Choice. MAle, a year old, fit for seasoning: not in winter.

Use. It is of exceeding good and plentiful nourishment: resisting
melancholy; best for an hot constitution.

Hurt. Sucking Lamb, is exceeding moist, therefore naught for phlegmatique
stomachs.

Preparation. A yeerling, roasted, and eaten with Rosemary, Garlic, Sage,
cloves, and such hot things.

Degree. Hot in the first, moist in the second, (the sucking is moist in the
third order.

Season. Age. Constitution. For hot weather, youth, and chollerists.

Agnus.
Story for Table-talke.
IF the Southwinde blow in seasoning time, the Sheepheardes may look for store
of Ewe lambs; if the North wind, then for Males.

So soon as the Lamb is eaned, it knows his damme, and presently gins to
play and dally with her.

All femall mutton, or under a year old, breeds b^d iu^ce, for it is
ouermoyst, making thick and clammy humors.

It is no meat for cold seasons.

Swines Flesh.
Choice. NOr old, nor thin; but of a full grows, and middle age; male: fed
in the fields.

Use. Does yield very much and very good nourishment, for laborers especially:
keep the paunch slipperie: provoke urine.

Hurt. Hurt old folk, and those that live delicately or at ease: hasten the
Gowte and Sciatica.

Correction. The lean of a young fat Hog eaten moderately: with spices and such
hot things.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the first, moist in the end of the
second.

In cold weather, for youth, hot stomachs and laborers.

Porcus.
Story for Table-talke.
IN old time they detested Swines flesh, accounting it over moist; especially
sucking pigges; or young shotes: and surely they were wiser then we: our
appetite, captiuates our reason in this matter.

The most tolerable, is such as is at his full growth and natural perfection.
Which flesh questionles comes nearest to man's in taste and savor: especially
being a little powdered. Baco^ may be eaten with other flesh to provoke appetite,
and to cut asunder fleame cloddered in the stomach.

wild Boar.
Choice. Young: fat: tender: much chased: in winter.

Use. Of much nourishment: is fit meat for great excercisers: easy of
digestion.

Hurt. Naught for old and idle folks, in making store of excr^mentitions and
superfluous homours.

Preparation. Carved into steakes, and spiced: or as the Italians make their
Brolardieri; or else baked with store of spice.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist in the first, temperatly.

In cold weather, for hot and laborious.

Aper seu Apcugna.
Story for Table-talke.
IN the beginning of winter the wild saine gender; and about the prime of the
spring they pigge, in desert, streyte, craggie and deuious places.

If they be at any time sick, their physic is Iuie. They are so so loade^
with the weight of their vrin, that Hunters surprise them at such time as it
urges them, not giving them leisure to void it, and so not being able to
escape by flight, take thm.

P. Seruillius Rullus, first served in Wild Boar to the table, among the
Romans.

Red Dear.
Choice. Young; and (if it may be) such as yet sucketh: gelt so soon as it is
calfed.

Use. Is of exceeding good nourishment.

Hurt. Old, breeds evil humors: hard of digestion: causes a quartane
fever.

Preparation. Roast, or baked in pasties, larded with the fat of other beasts.

Degree. Hot somewhat remisty in the first: dry in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. Neither for hot weather, nor for old folks, very
bad for melancholists.

Ceruus
Story for Table-talke.
Hearts flesh yields but gross and melancholious nourishment. Eaten at
breakfast, it is said to prolong ones life: at supper to abridge the same.

The Hind goes 8. months with her young, which so soon as she has calued,
she exercises them to the race: carries them to steep down-fals, and
teaches them to leap.

It is a most simple and innocent Animal, howsoever nature in a mockery has
armed it most magnificently. It is the very Emblem of a Gull, girded to a
sword, being as hartlesse as the Hartis.

Fallow Dear.
Choice. Young: fat: very well chased, hanged until it be tender.

Use. Nourishes better then any other Venison: especially resists the
collicke, and palsy: good for such as abound with humors.

Hurt. Hurts the lean and thin: for making dry blood, it annoyes the
sinews, especially being old.

Correction. In roasting, basted thoroughly with oil, or larded very much.

Degree. Season. Age Constitution. Hot and dry in the second.

Bad for youth, and chollerists: good for them that have the palsy, and store
of rume.

Dama.
Story for Table-talke.
IT is a rare thing to see a tame Do: and yet it may hardly be termed wild:
howsoever the Latins call it, Fera in special, and the flesh thereof Forina.
For there are many brutes which are Neuters, neither wild nor tame, but in a
mean: as the Swallow amongst Fowls: amongst Flies the Be: among Fishes the
Dolphin.

Martial has penned the Does lamentable women-tation in two verses: thus.

The Bore is feared for his tosh,
His horns defend the Heart:
But we poor harmles hartles Does
Are naked on every part.
Hare.
Choice. Young: well coursed.

Use. It makes slender: causes good fresh color in the face.

Hurt. Slowly digested: engenders melancolike blood: much eaten, makes sleepie
and drowsy.

Preparation. Farsed with suet, or gobbets of Larde, and spices.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the second.

In winter, for youth and sanguine: not for melancholists or students.

Lepus.
Story for Table-talke.
HAres flesh is good for those that would be lean and fair. It is a received
opinion, that use of Hares flesh procures beauty, fresh color, and
cheerful countenance, for a seuenight space: in so much as the Italians have a
byword, which speaks thus of a fair man, He has eaten an Hare.

And Martial mockes a foul sow, telling her that she htah not eaten any
Hares flesh of a week. It runs most swiftly, especially up the hill:
because the fore feet be shorter then the hinder legs.

Conny.
Choice. Young, fat, in winter, hanged a night in the cool.

Use. Affords store of very good nourishment: consumes all corrupt humors,
and fleame in the stomach.

Hurt. Hurts melancholists, and old folks.

Preparation. Parboyled: then roasted, with sweet herbs, cloves, and other
spices.

Degree. Cold in the beginning of the first: dry in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather, somewhat unwholesome for the
foresaid.

Cuniculus.
Story for Table-talke
BEcause the Conny is somewhat like the Hare, it is called ( Paruus Lepus) the
less Hare.

It taught the soldier to undermine his enemy, by earthing: which the Latins
term Cuniculum agere) to play the Conny. And yet (alas) of it self it is
very Conny, a most simple Animal: whence are derived our usual phrases of
Conny, and Conny-catching.

There is so great store of Connies in the Baleares Insulae, usually called
Maiorica, and Minorica, that often they waste their whole crop of corn, and
cause extreme dearth in those Islands.

Capon.
Choice. Young: fat: well crammed: set up a fatting in a wide Co^pe.

Use. Yields to man's body better nourishment then any other meat: principally
good for the brain: procures an equal temperature of all the humors.

Hurt. Gives such as take their ease, overmuch nourishment.

Correction. Used moderatly, and with extraordinary exercise.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Possesses an equal temperatur^ of all
qualities.

For any time, age, constitution.

Capo.
Story for Table-talke.
SO named, for his excellency, and chief worth amongst all fowls of that
kind. It makes perfect blood. The Italians denue the name of two Hetrurian
words, Qua pone: that is, huc appone: set it before us: as much as our byword:
It says, Come eat me. So these two words, Eat it, are the unlettered man's
latin for any good meat.

The eleventh year before the third Punique war, Caius Fannius Consul, made
a decree, that no foul should be served to the table, but the Capon or Hen
fatted abroad.

Turky-Cocke, or Ginny-Cocke.
Choice. Young; fatted abroad; in winter; hanged all night.

Use. Of very plentiful and very good nourishment: restores bodily forces:
passing good for such as are in recovery: makes store of seed: enflameth
Venus.

Hurt. Bad for those that line at ease: disposes to the gout, and such like
defluxions.

Preparation. Eaten little and seldom; spiced thoroughly in roasting.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist in the second.

At any time, for any but decrepit age.

Gallus Indicus.
Story for Table-talke.
IT may be, the vulgar for Indy Cock, miscall it Ginny-Cock, The Cock, Hen,
and Chickens, are all of one nature: the Chicken is preferred for tender flesh.

The Ginny-Cocke was first brought out of Numidia, into Italy, and not from
India.

The Graecians call these fowls Meleagrides: induced thereunto, by Poetical
fiction. For (they say) Meleagers Sisters were transformed into Ginny-hens,
while they mourned for their brothers death

Peacocke.
Choice. Young: sed in a most clear and open place: tender.

Use. Nourishes exceedingly: fit for hot stomachs.

Hurt. Hard of digestion: breeds melancholious blood; unfit for idle folks.

Correction. The throat cut, and hanged with a wait tied at the heels, in
some cold place, fifteen days.

Drink good wine upon it.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the second, dry in the first.

For cold weather, hot stomachs, and great exercisers.

Pauo.
Story for Table-talke.
PEacocke, is very hard meat, of bad temperature, and as evil juice.
Wonderously increases melancholy, and casts (as it were) a clowd upon the
mind. It lays at the third year, and lives five and twenty. It is so
spiteful and envious, that it eats his own dung, least any body should make
any use of it.

Great Alexander, imposed a great penalty on him that killed a Peacocke.

Quintus Hortensius, the Roman Orator, first set it upon the table, being
himself a perfect glutton.

Pigeons.
Choice. THat first assay to go, and get their own meat: plump and fat.

Use. Cure the palsy, proceeding of a cold cause: excite Venus: increase heat
in the weak: purge the reins: are easily digested.

Hurt. Inflame the blood: annoy hot co^stitutions, and their heads which which
delight to eat Pigeo^s heds: therefore we always behead them.

Correction. Boiled in fat flesh broth, with Veriuyce, Plums, sower Cheries,
or with Vinegar and Coriander.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist in the second.

In cold weather, for old folks, and stomachs full of fleame.

Pipio.
Story for Table-talke.
VVIlde or wood Doves, are but dry meat. They live 30. years.

They are mute all winter long, in the spring they begin to mouth it. Some of
them are called Viuariae, Stockdoues: other Torquatae, Ringdoues. The house or
tame Pigeon is much the better: yet a ^tle too moist. Their flesh is very
preservative in time of pestilence ^^ising of corruption. It is the Emblem of
sincere and simple meaning, also of pure love, void of all malice. It was good
Angel to Noah.

Gosling.
Choice. Young: fat: bred in the chempion, and free air.

Use. Yeeldes very good nourishment: fatteth the macilent.

Hurt. Fills the body with superfluous humors: is slowly concocted: (the flesh
of an old Goose, causes a fever.)

Correction. Stifled with borage-smoake set in at the throat; then far^ed with
sweet herbs, and spices, and for roast.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the first, moist in the second.

In cold weather, for hot stomachs, and great exercisers.

Pullus Anserinus.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Jews are great Goose-eaters: therefore their complexion is passing
melancholious, their color swort, and their diseases very perilous.

The liver and wings are best, especially of fat Geese.

Sessius, first commended the goodness and pleasant taste of the Goose-liuer:
some ascribe it to Metellus: other to Scipio.

A guard of Geese kept the Capitol at Rome, in times past.

A Goose, is the Emblem of mere modesty.

Duck or Mallard.
Choice. Young: fat: tender.

Use. D^oth nourish exceeding much: fat: cause very good color: clear the
voice: increase seed: dispearle wind.

Hurt. Get them an heat that are cold, and them a fever that are hot: digest
hardly: yeeldes but bad nourishment.

Correction. Is perfumed at the mouth with Borage, and so forth, as it is said
of the Gosling.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist in the second.

In cold weather only, for hot stomachs, and such as use great exercise.

Anas.
Story for Table-talke.
OF all fowls that use to flock, the Duck is the hottest and moistest. The
liver and wings are most commended. Martial wills the whole Duck to be set
before him; but he chooses only the neck and the breast, and sends the relics
back to the Cook.

They hatch their young near unto Lakes, and Fennes; but so soon as they are
out of the shell, they take the water, and afterward mount up into the air.

Pheasant.
Choice. FAt, gotten in hawking in winter.

Use. Good in hecticks fevers: ^^storeth their strength that are in recovery:
of singular good nourishment: helps a weak stomach.

Hurt. It only makes the Swain, short winded.

Therefore good Peasant,
Touch not the Pheasant,
But save thy weasant:
You Are somewhat pleasant.
Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Temperate in all qualities.

In Autumn, and winter, for any.

Pheasianus.
Story for Table-talke.
PHeasant, in digestion and nourishing is very like Hen: yet more toothesome:
in a mean betwixt Capon, and Partritch. Passing restoratiue for the thin and
macilent.

It takes his name of Phasis, a river in Choichis. The Italian vulgars, call
it Fasan, quasi faciens sanum: because it is so exceeding wholesome.

It is much molested with lice, which it riddeth it self off, by tumbling in
the dust.

Pertritch.
Choice. Young: female: like Chickens: fed in the house, if it may be.

Use. Yields excellent nourishment: soon digests: fats: dries up superfluous
humors in the stomach: very healthsome for such as are in recovery:

Hurt. Young, hurts none but the rusticks, the old be tougher and of bad savor.

Correction. Eat the young, hang the old all night in the cool.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the first, dry in the second.

For all, in cold weather, especially the young ones.

Perdix.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Parti^ch never lives longer then 16. years.

It is not good, if not young.

The Hen is better then the Cock.

They are so venerious, that the Cock opposed to the Hen on the windy fide,
she conceiueth through the wind that blows from him.

Cardan thinks the Hen is partly Cockish.

If they feel themselves sick, they purge themselves with Laurel.

In Paphlagonia they have two hearts.

The Partritch is consecrated to Jupiter and Latona.

Turtle
Choice. Young: fatted in the house a while, before it be eaten.

Use. It pleases the taste: affords very good nourishment: digesteth eastly:
comfort the stomach: sharpeneth ye wit: exciteth Venus.

Hurt. Being exceeding dry, hurts chollerists, and melancholists.

Correction. Fed in the house with moist meats, then kill and hang it two
nights in the cool.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the second.

In cold weather, for old folks, and phlegmatike.

Turtur.
Story for Table-talke.
AT the beginning of the Spring they hide themselves, because they then ^ast
their feathers, and are in a manner naked.

It is a thing noted in the Turtle, that while it drinks, it lifts not up
her head, as all other birds do.

The time of her life, is eight years.

It purges it self with an herb that grows upon walls.

Quail.
Choice. NOt fed with Hellebore or Beare-foote: taken with the Quaile-pipe^ fat
and tender.

Use. Does help melancholists only, by moistning their dry constitution.

Hurt. Easily corrupts in the stomach: inuiteth the Ague, Palsy, Cramp.

Correction. Eaten with Vinegar and Corander.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the end of the first: moist in the
end of the second.

In cold weather: hurts old folks, paralytick, and phlegmatic.

Coturnix.
Story for Table-talke.
I Am much in doubt whether Coturnix be our Quail. Cardan also doubts: and
his manner of doubting, makes me dout more: for setting down six degrees of
delicates that please the taste, he makes Quail the first dish of the first
cour^e. His words are these: Aues videntur primum locu^ vendicare, atque inter
eas qualea: seu sit Coturnix, seu non, hand refert. I am sure all other writers
give Coturnix their evil word, affirming that it is a breeder of the Crampe,
Palsy, and Falling sickness: and in a word, passes for badnesse.

Thrush, Mauis, or Blacke-bird.
Choice. IN cold weather, fat: fed with holly, Juniper, and Mertle berryes.

Use. Is of very good juice: easily digested: very wholesome for such as are in
recovery.

Hurt. Naught for those that are subject to the migram, or frenzy.

Preparation. Sod in good flesh broth, with parsley, and other opening herbs.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the very end of the first.

In cold weather, for any, but old folks.

Turdus.
Story for Table-talke.
THis Lataine name, sounds to English ears somewhat unsavory: but much
worse as I have heard it joined with other like Consonants. As for example. Edo
Fartum, and Turdum pistum. But there is nothing evil spoken, but being evil
taken.

Now because it signifies diversely, a Thrush, a Black-birde, a Manis: some may
be desirous to know if all these be much of a nature, yet Virum horum, which
is best and holesomest. Therefore to his Virum horu^. I answer, Mauis accipe.
Pliny reports, Agrippa Claudius Caesar's wife, had a M^uis, that did speak
very plainly.

Eggs.
Choice. OF young and fat Hens: Cock. trodden: new laid.

Use. Nourish soon, and much: excite Venus: supplying matter for it: very much
help them that are in a consumption: open the breast: stay spitting of blood:
clarify the voice.

Hurt. Hinder the concoction of meats eaten presently after them: make the
face freckled.

Correction. Eat them boiled: she yolke only: and pawse betwixt Eggs and
other meats.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Temperately hot and moist.

New, for all seasons, ages, constitutions and diseases.

Ovum.
Story for Table-talke.
Eggs (some think) because the^ egg on backward husbands.

Eggs have the possibility of being living creatures. The white is cold, the
yolke hot. They nourish soon and much, by reason of the pliable softness of
their substance and temperature: very proportionable to our flesh and nature.

Not only Hens Eggs, but Partritch, Phesant, and Turkies, be very wholesome.

Fish.
Carpe.
Choice. Whensoever you can get it, great or little.

Use. Nourishith best: tastes most excellently, and erquisirely: in all men's
judgments a fish of chief note.

Hurt. Only it is soonetainted, therefore dresie it presently.

Preparation. Lay it sealed and gutted sire hours in salt: then fry it in
oil, and besprinkle it with vinegar in which Spaces and Saff^on have boiled.

Degree. Temperately hot and moist, in the (...) either first.

Season. Age. Constitution. For any season, age, or constitution.

Cyprinus qui and Carpio.
Story for Table-talke
NOne of the Greek or Latin writers, ever knew this fish.

In Italy it is somewhat rare, and thought to be only in the lake Benacus,
and the lake commonly called Della posta.

It spawneth about the beginning of the summer.

Many are of the mind, that it eats gold, because in the guites are found no
other excrementes, but a bright san^ glittering like gold: and besides, it
liue^h always at the bottom of the lake.

Trout.
Choice. THick: caught in May: in a (...) running River, full of deep
down-fals and Rocks: and not out of standing pooles.

Use. Nourishes well: soon digested: yields cool juice for an over hott^
Liver and blood: therefore good in hot Agues.

Hurt. It soon putrifieth: scarce fit for old men, and weak stomachs.

Correction. Seethe it in just so much Vinegar as water: ease it with sower
sance as soon as you can.

Degree. Cold in the beginning of the first, moist in the end.

Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. In hot weather for all ages, but decrepit: every
temperature but phlegmatic.

Trocta seu Turtur.
Story for Table-talke.
IT is very much commended for good nourishment. Insomuch as it is permitted
unto one sick of an hot ague. That it is passing wholesome, our vulgar proverb
accords: As sound as a Trout. And another phrase, Fish-whole, I think is most
meant of the Trout.

It is a fish that loves to be flattered and clawed in the water: by which
means it is often taken.

Sturgion.
Choice. River: for it is fatter, and therefore more grateful to the palate,
then sea Sturgion: in summer: the belly of it.

Use. A friendly dish on the table: very dainty, and of chief account:
nourishes very well: inciteth Venus: cools the blood moderately.

Hurt. Naught for the sick, or in recovery: for it is somewhat too fat:
makes thick and clammy juice: slowly digested.

Correction. Sees it in water and vinegar: let the sauce be white vinegar,
with a little Cynamon or Fennel in it.

Degree. Hot in the beginning of the first, moist in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution In hot weather: for all, but those that are plagued
with distillations and diseased joints.

Sturio seu Acipenser.
Story for Table-talke
PLiny in his 9. book of Natural story, and 17. Chapter, writes thus. In
former times Sturgion was counted a most noble Fish: now it is of no reckoning:
the which I much marvel at, since it is so rare. We may now a days use
Plinies words, with an inuersio^ of the sense. For what fish is there almost
now of greater esteem?

It has his skales turning toward his mouth, and swimmeth against the stream.

Lamprey.
Choice. River: in March or April, for then it is notably fat, and the back
bone marrow tenderest.

Use. It has a most excellent fine relish: nourishes passing well: increases
seed: a Lordly dish.

Hurt. Somewhat slow of digestion: especially not boiled inogh: naught for the
Gout and feeble sinowes.

Correction. Choke it with white Wine, stop the mouth with a Nut-meg, and the
other holes with Cloves: then fry it with Nuttes, Bread, Oil, Spices, and
white Wine.

Degree. Temperately hot, moist in the first.

Season. Age. Constitution. For any season, age, constitution, but decrepit,
gowtie, and diseased sinowes.

Lampreta.
Story for Table-talke.
Termed so, a Lambendis Petris: a Suck-stone.

About the beginning of the Spring, it enters the fresh waters, and in Summer
departs again into the sea. Whereas all other fishes have finnes to swim
withal, some more some less; the Lamprey has none at all: but moves in the
waters, as Snakes and Serpents creep and glide upon the earth.

Many in England have surfetted of Lampry pies, as our Chronicles will tell us
if we look into them.

Mullet or Barbell.
Choice. OF the lesser size: not taken in muddie places, or standing lakes, but
grauelly and clear.

Use. Pleasing to the palate: the flesh applied, cures the biting of venomous
things: or any harm done by women's menstruous flure.

Hurt. The wine wherein a Mullet is stifled drunk, depriueth men of all
genital virtue: makes women barren: the meat is hard and slow of digestion.

Correction. Roast upon a gridiron, sprinkled with Oil, and the juice of
Orenges: or boiled and condite with Vinegar, sweet herbs, and Saffron.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the first, dry in the beginning of
the second.

In hot weather, for youth, chollericke, strong stomachs.

Mullus seu Barbo.
Story for Table-talke.
BArbo, because it has a double beard upon the nether lip.

And therefore Tully in his Paradox, calls those that are well barbed, Mulli.
Fenestella thinks they were called Mulli, because they are in color like the
shoes of the Almane Kings, and the Patricij amongst the Romans: which Shoes
were termed Mullei, of Millo, an obsolet word, signifying the same that suo,
to sow as Sowters do.

The Romans prized this fish at a wonderful high rate. It is incredible to
tell what Asinius Celer and Crispinus, gave for a Mullet.

Tench.
Choice. FEmall: River: in Autumn or Winter.

Use. It little benefiteth the body: but only as some think, cut length-wayes
in halfes, and applied to the soles of the feet, stancheth the heat of Agues.

Hurt. Is sllowly digested: heavy on the stomach: bad nourishment, especially
in the Dog days.

Correction. Bake it with Garlic, sweet herbs, and spices: or boil it
with Oil, Onyons, and Raysons: farsed with Garlic, Parsley, and Vinegar.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

In Autumn and Winter, for youth, collericke, and very laborious.

Tinca.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Anticke make no mention of this fish: not respecting it in deed, because
it was so common, and the poor man's prouin.

Only Tully, in his Book de claris Oratoribus, mentions one Placentinus an
Orator, who was called Tinca, for his merry conceited wit.

It is only to be found in fresh waters, rivers, lakes, and ponds: and is
fittest meat for laboring men.

Pike or Pickerell.
Choice. River, rather then Pond, and Pond not muddy: great: fresh: new, and
fat.

Use. It nourishes much, the iawebones burnt to power, and given the weight of
French crown in wine, will break the stone.

Hurt. Hard of concoction: badde nutriment: burdeneth the belly: increases
fleame: naught for the sick.

Correction. Sees it with sweet herbs, and oil, eat it with white
vinegar: or broyled, with wild marioram and vinegar.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

Being hard meat, it is fittest for winter, youth, and chollericke.

Lucius.
Story for Table-talke.
NOr yet of the pickerill have old writters recorded any thing, which is
companion and an associate of the Tench: by rubbing upon whom, the Pickerill
cures himself of any wound or hurt received.

It is a very ravenous Fish, deuoring any thing be it fish or flesh that lies
in his way.

It is no meat for those that be sick or weak, whatsoever triuiall Leeches
prate.

Eele.
Choice. TAken in a sandy sea, not muddy: in March: dressed presently.

Use. Tastes very pleasantly: nourishes marvelous well: may be kept long
salt: good for the stomach against fleame.

Hurt. Somewhat windy, especially the back of it: also over moist.

Preparation. Roast in a leaf of paper, with oil, parsley, coriander: or keep
it condite a day or two with salt and origan.

Degree. Cold in the beginning, moist in the end of the first.

Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. In the spring, for any age, or temperature, taken
moderately.

Anguilla.
Story for Table-talke.
THe generation of Eeles is in nature very easy: but to our understanding
passing difficult. For they breed even in dried lakes, presently after a sudden
rain, of the very corruption and slime of the soil.

Athenaeus says, he himself saw in Arethusa of Eubaea, Eeles with silver
and golden earings, so tame that they would eat meat out of ones hands.

The I Will of Ely, may be called the I Will of Eeles: for the abundance of Eeles
which it yields.

Rotchet.
Choice. NEw sodden: and eaten cold.

Use. Tender meat, and grateful to the palate: easlie digested: nourishes
very well: exceedingly wholesome, if continually used.

Hurt. Whatsoever fault if has, prepare it as follows.

Preparation. Fry and condite it with Orange juice, and peper: or eat it hot
with veneger.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Temperate in the active qualities, moist in
the first.

Best in winter, for any age, or temperature: moderately taken.

Erythrinos.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Graecians so term it because it is red of color. The Venetians call it
Arbor: the Latins in imitation of the Graekes, Rubellus.

It is a Sea fish, neither comes at any time into the f^esh waters: It
harbowreth some time about the shore.

So soon as they are spawned, they are presently full of eggs. And therefore
(it is thought) they be all faemall.

They use to rout together, and roue about the sea in troops.

Oyster.
Choice. THat that grows upon great ships bottomes, or in places not muddy;

Use. in those Months that have the letter R. in their names.

Hurt. It has a kind of salt juice in it, that affects the palate more then
other shell fishes: exciteth appetite, and Venus: nourishes little.

Preparation. Somewhat hard of degistion: greatly increases fleame in a cold
stomach: causes obstructions.

Degree. Dress it with pepper, oil, the juice of sour Orenges: after it be
roasted on the imbers.

Season. Hot in the first, moist in the second.

Age. Constitution. For cold weather, youth, chollerists, and hot stomachs.

Ostreum.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Oyster is an headless fish, yet passing toothesome: it is engendered of
mere mire, or mudde inclining to corruption: or of the sea froth and spume,
which cleaves upon ships. It lives not out of the water, yet breaths not
air, nor takes in any external moisture. It has not local motion: and
plucked from his proper place is deuoyd of sense, increasing and decreasing
with the Moon.

It is unseasonable and unwholesome in all months, that have not the letter R.
in their name, because it is then venerious.

Crab or Cra-fish.
Choice. River, or fresh water, rather then sea Crab: at the prime of the
spring, or in harvest: when the Moon is at the full.

Use. Good for the corsumption, and biting of a mad dog: provoke ^rine, and
Venus: purges the reins: nourishes very much.

Hurt. The meat is hard of conection, breeds gross and phlegmatic humors.

Preparation. Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Roast it quick, on the
^^bers: eat it with vinegar and pepper.

Cold in the second, moist in the first.

Cancer.
Story for Table-talke.
THe Crab also wants a head, and therefore has all the Organs of sense placed
in his breast.

It engenders at the mouth: goes as readily backewarde: It turns red in
seething.

In the Coasts and river bancks of Phaenicia, there be Crabbes so swift in
running, that it is a great masterie to overtake them on foot.

whitemeates
Milk.
Choice. OF young beasts ^edde in the choice pasture: 1. Woman's, 2. Cowes, 3.
Sheep, 4. Goats.

Use. Milk increases brain, fattes the body: good for hecticke, asswageth
scalding heat of the vrin: nourishes plentefully: procures good color:
furthereth Venus.

Hurt. Naught for fevers, headaches, sore eyes, distillations of rume, diseased
reins, obstructions, the teeth, the gummes, old folks.

Correction. A little before you take it, put into it some salt, sugar, or honey,
least it curdle in the stomach: drink it fasting.

Degree. Moist in the second, temperately hot.

Season. Age. Constitution. For hot weather, youth, chollerists, and strong
stomachs.

Lac.
Story for Table-talke.
Milk consists of a threefold substance. The first is whitish, cold, and
moist: Nitrous and powerful to make the belly soluble. The second fat and
oily, of temperate quality, of which butter is made. The third is gross,
clammy, and flegmaticke, whereof cheese is made.

Eat no more Milk, then you can well digest: though it seems to be soft and
easy meat, fit for children and milkesops, yet it is not so. Use no vilolence
after it, nor drink wine, before you feel it thoroughly decocted.

Butter.
Choice. THe newest and sweetest, sheeps. Cleanses and mightily fetches up
fleame cloddered about the breast and longs, especially proceeding of a cold
cause: quieteth the cough.

Use. Too often used, makes the stomach loose and weak: and causes loathing.

Hurt. Eat strengthening and astringent meats upon it, or old Saccarum
Rosatum.

Correction. Hot and moist in the beginning of the second.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. At any time, for old folks rather then
youth: because it much purges distillations.

Butyrum.
Story for Table-talke.
NEw Butter and new Oil are of like nature and operation. The benefit and
use of salt Butter is very notable. For only that way it may be preserved,
neither thereby does it lose his proper virtue, to open and enlarge the
breast: the older it is the hotter also it waxes.

The Flemming or Hollander, is thought to live so long as he does, only for
his excessive eating of Butter.

Some eat it first, and last.

Cream.
Choice. NEw: boiled with a soft fire, so soon as it is flette of the milk.

Use. As good as butter for the diseases of the breast: pleasant to the taste:
cures the sharpness and drowth of the stomach.

Hurt. Slowly concocted: swimmeth above other meats: of gross juice: easily
turns to fumes.

Preparation. Use it sparingly, put store of sugar, and honey into it.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and moist in the first.

Fitter for youth, chollericke and strong stomachs, then the old and rumaticke.

Flos lactis.
Story for Table-talke.
RIghtly so termed by the Latins, for it is the very flower of milk, as also
butter is the flower of Cream.

Although it be not altogether so fat and oily as butter: yet shall one be
glutted and even loathed with it, far sooner then with butter: neither is it so
lasting as butter, but changes in a moment many times, as Dairy maids can
better inform you.

Curdes.
Choice. MAde of the most choice morning milk: fire-newe: for these be most
digestable.

Use. Wholesome for hot constitutions, and such as are troubled with the
distillations of chollerous humors: quench thirst: and restrain choler.

Hurt. Annoy cold stomakes and the smowes, make drowsy, slowly digested.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and dry in the first.

At any time, for youth, chollerists, and such as exercise much.

Lac coagulatum Recocta vulgo.
Story for Table-talke.
PLatina missed his cushion, where he says that Curds are hot of temperature:
for experience thereof, we may note the use of them. For let a sound, hot and
strong stomach eat them, and they do him more good then hurt: but if a cold
stomach eat them, they will never be concocted enough.

The reason is plain: their cold and gross temprature.

Cheese.
Choice. NEw made: of well tempered milk, of beasts fed in choice pasture.

Use. Mollifieth: fatteth: grateful to the palate.

Hurt. Too often use of it, breeds obstructions, especially in a weak
stomach.

Correction. Eat it with Nuts, Almondes, Pears, and Apples, and never but
when you have need.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Cold and moist in the second.

For youth, and great exercisers, for it requires a strong stomach.

Caseus.
Story for Table-talke.
Green or new cheese, newly made, nourishes and moysteneth more the^ salt and
old. That which is neither new nor old but in a mean, best agrees with the
stomach: especially eaten moderately.

They that have best leisure and love cheese best, I would wish them to write
an Apology in defense of the common dislike thereof, why so many love it not.

Spice.
Pepper.
Choice. THe corns new: full; not full of withered wrinckles.

Use. Helps concoction: recals appetite: breaks wind: strengthens the
stomach: very much heateth the sinews, and muskles: prouokes urine: wastes
fleame.

Hurt. Hurtful to hot constitutions, especially in hot weather, and hot
countries: consumes seed: immoderately used burns the blood.

Correction Used moderately in cold weather and in moist meats: not overmuch
beaten.

Degree. Hot and dry in the third, and almost in the beginning of the fourth.

Season. Age. Co^stitutio^. For cold weather, old folks, rumaticke, and such
as are subject to distillations.

Piper.
Story for Table-tacke.
IN India, Pepper is gathered in October, and dried in the Sun: the Corns
strewed in beds of palme-leaues, until they be wrinckled.

Isidorus tells a mad tale of Pepper: that it grows in certain woods on
the South side of Caucase mount, which woods are full of serpents: therefore
the inhabitants of those parts set the woods on fire to scarre away the
serpents, and so the Pepper comes to be black.

Cinnamon.
Choice. THe finest or thinnest: of an exquisite sweet smell, biting taste,
and color red: new.

Use. Prouokes urine, resists poisons: strengthens the brain, and all the
entralles: comfort the sight: preserues from putrefaction.

Hurt. Hurtes the colle^^ke, in hots weather and hot countries: also hot
constitutions, by inflaming the inward parts, and blood.

Correction. Used moderately, with cold or moist meats, not beaten over much.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Very hot in the third.

In cold weather, for old, and cold, and weak stomakes.

Cinnamomum.
Story for Table-talke:
Our usually received Cinnamon is not the right and true Spice, but this is
passing rare, and scarce: very little or none of it is brought to us.

The use thereof, is great and manifold to the body, and all the parts of it.

Only we must moderate our selves, least overmuch inflame us. The more
substantial and gross in quantity it seems, the less virtue and power it
possesses.

Clowes.
Choice. Plain, or smooth, which nipt with the nail, yield some moisture: of
a most absolute fine smell: new.

Use. Strengththe^ the principal parts of the body: and principally the
stomach: stay fluxes: and casting: ameud stinking breath.

Hurt. Annoy, chollerists: especially in summer: much put in meats, cause an
unpleasant and bitter taste in them.

Correction. Taken moderately, when the stomach is full of fleame, in cold
weather, and with moist meats.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the third.

In winter, for old men, phlegmatic, and such are troubled with
distillations.

Garyophylli.
Story for Table-talke.
CLowes quasi Glowes, because thorough their vehement and ardent heat, they
cause a glowing in the mouth.

Thy grow in certain Islands of the Oriental Indian sea. And thence we have
them transported to us, for their fragrancy and sweet virtue: whereof they
whose breath is tainted, make very good use.

For they most excellently relish the mouth, mend and commend the breath.

Ginger.
Choice. NEw: not rotten: of the best smell: which biteth the tongne most: cut
in pieces, turns not to dust.

Use. Breaks wind, yet heateth slowlier then pepper: good for cold stomachs:
provoke sluggish husbands: wosteth fleame: sharpeneth the sight.

Hurt. Enflameth hot constitutions, in hot weather, or in hot countries.

Correction. Green Ginger, condite with honey, warmes old men's bellyes, or
dry, moderately used.

Degree. The green is hot in the third, moist in the first: the dry, dries in
she second.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather, for old, phlegmatic, or troubled
with wind.

Zinziber.
Story for Table-talke.
GInger new or green, is passing moist: which may be gathered, in that it
most soon rotteth and corrupts. Hence also, it heateth slowlier then pepper
unto which notwithstanding in all other qualities it is very like.

It is first fetched from Calecut, the most famous Indian Mart: where being
condite green with sugar or honey, it is very restoratiue.

Nutmegges.
Choice. NEw: not rotten: weighty. Full of juice and oil: the colonr
inclining to red.

Use. Mendeth a strong breath: takes away pimpels: comfort the sight:
stomach: spleen, and belly: prouokes urine.

Hurt. Binds: and therefore hurts such as have the Haemorhoids, are
costiue, or melancholicke.

Correction. Use it sildome, moderately, and with a little Ginger.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry, in the end of second.

In winter, for very old folks full of ^leame.

Nux Myristica.
Story for Table-talke.
SO called in Greek, for his most sweet and pleasant savor. As therefore the
common Essay, As weak as water, is very badly applied to Aqua fortis: so
contrariwise, that other Adage, As sweet, as a Nutte, may most properly and
kindly be understood, of the Nut Myricstick, or sweet Nut. Even as he that
says, he is Dog-sicke, as sick as a Dog: means a sick Dog, doubtless.

Saffron.
Choice. NEw: well colored: the tops of it a little white in the very end:
long: tough: not soon brayed: of most fragrant smell: which moistened, dies
the hand.

Use. Preserves all the entrals: causes good color: wonderfully recreateth
the heart: prouokes vrin, and Venus: drunk, hasteneth childbirth: drives away
drunkenness.

Hurt. Stuffeth and paineth the head: makes drowste: takes away appetite.

Correction. Use it moderately, and in cold weather.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in the second, dry in the first.

In winter, for the old, phlegmatic, and melanchollicke.

Crocus.
Story for Table-talke.
SAffron (as it grows in the ground) much resembles the Onyon, as Aristotle
notes: but they differ, in that the Saffro^ head is continuous and solid, not
divided into tunicles or skins, as the Onyonis, neither yields seed as does
the Onyon. But the Sementiue virtue of Saffron, rests in the head or root.

It is so good a preparatiue, that Pliny says, he that drinks Saffron in some
liquor, shall neither surfeit nor be drunk.

Sugar.
Choice. CAndid: heavy: solid: hard: not going soon to powder.

Use. It keeps the body clean and neat: wholesome for the reins: nourishes
more then honny: cleanses the breast.

Hurt. Causes thirst: soon turns to choler: naught for hot constitutions.

Correction. Eat it with Pome-Granates and sower Orenges.

Degree. Hot and moist in the first, or as some think, possessing an equal
temperature of all qualities.

Season. Age. Constitution. In winter, for old, cold, and such as be troubled
with distillations.

Saccarum.
Story for Table-talke.
SVgar by some writers is termed Cane or Reede-Honny: because it is excocted
forth a Cane or Reed.

No kind of meat refuses Sugar for his condiment, but only the inwards of
beasts, as tripes: which if you condite with it, they grow most vnsauourly. If
I were not very reverently sparing of your reverent modesty, especially at the
table, I would tell you it makes them smell and stincke like new Oxe-dung.

Honny.
Choice. PVre: clear: most splendent: whitest: curdled and thick.

Use. It heateth the stomach: therefore wholesome for old folks: disposes to
the stool: resists putrefaction: makes good blood.

Hurt. Worst for hot stomachs, enflaming the blood, and through his accrimony,
increases choler.

Correction. Eat it with fruit, sower meats: or with Saccarum Rosatum.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot and dry in the second.

In winter, for old, cold, and reumaticke.

Mel.
Story for Table-talke.
ALl Honny is made of Dew. For out of flowers the Bees gather that of which
they make their Combs: of the gum which droppeth from trees, they make Wax:
of Dew they make Honny. So that Dew is congealed together or crassified,
either by living creatures, and is made Honny: or of it own accord, which also
is Honny, usually termed Dry Manna: or is not thickened at all, which they call
liquid Manna: Whereof there is great store about Hormus, a City in Arabia
Faelix.

Sauce.
Salt.
Choice. White: dry and hard for preserving, but moist for every bit.

Use. The first thing that is set on the Table, and the last taken away: used
almost in all meats, to season or preserve: by drying, resists poison:
consumes al corrupt humors.

Hurt. Makes soon look old: dries the body: wastes seed: engenders sharp
and biting humors: causes itch and scabbes.

Correction. Eat little of it, and that in or with moist meats.

Degree. Season. Age. Constitution. Hot in dry.

In cold weather for flegmaticke and cold stomachs: bad for chollericke.

Sal.
Story for Table-talke.
WE have only added a letter to the latin name: which takes his original as
Salt it self does, a Sole, Salo, and Solo. For the Sun naturally often times
makes Salt, of the foam which the sea waves leave upon the shore. Howbeit, art
is a much perfecter Salt-maker.

There is Salt of diverse colors. In Egypt it is red: in Sicilia purple: in
Pathmos, it is most bright and splendent. In Cappadocia, it is of a Saffron
color. The Devil loves no Salt with his meat says Bodinus.

Vinegar.
Choice. MAde of the best wine, a year^ old: bettered by putting Roses in it.

Use. Best temperateth choler: quenches thirst: closes and strengthens
weak gummes: breaks fleame: wholesome in time of Pestilence.

Hurt. Taken fasting hurts the sinows, old, lean, and melancholicke folks:
gnaweth the stomach and entrals: bad for the diseases of the belly.

Correction. Allay it with a good deal of water, or take it with Raisons of
the Sun.

Degree. Cold in the first, moist in the second.

Season. Age. Constitution. For hot weather, youth, chollerists.

Acetum.
Story for Table-talke.
THere be four principal co^tingates to Wine. 1. To be kept vncorrupt: 2. To
be kept sweet: 3. Being corrupt, to be restored: 4. To be changed into
Vinegar. This last is effected many ways: most of which are commonly known.
The reason and effect of them all, is only this: to bereave wine of his proper
fatness. Whence it follows, that vinegar nourishes nothing at all: and that
it best quenches fire: for it is utterly void of that same Pingue Humidum, and
by his exceeding Acrimony and rartnesse, eats and consumes.

Mustard.
Choice. Which taken, pearceth the brain and provoke neesing.

Use. Good sauce for sundry meats, both flesh and fish: besides medicinable
to purge the brain.

Hurt. Not so good for the sight, hot folks, or in hot weather.

Degree. Much hotter then salt, therefore called in Latin Mustarda (quasi)
Mustum ardens: In English Mustard: that is, much tart.

Season. Age. Constitution. In cold weather, for old, cold, and rumaticke.

Sinapi.
Story for Table-talke.
PLiny highly commends the herb that yields this condiment. But (says he)
the seed is (as it were) a Compendium of the herb. And that, sine vllo
dispendio vertutis. Yea the seed is all vigor; and though least in quantity,
yet most in power and virtue.

It is the most perfect Emblem of Ex minimis initijs, Omnia ex nihilo, that
is, creation: to see of little or nothing, what a most ample and large Herb
arises.

Green Sauce.
Choice. MAde of sweet herbs, as Betony, Mint, Basil: also Rose vinegar, a
Clowe or two, and a little Garlic.

Use. Eaten with flesh (as mustard) exciteth appetite: commends meats to the
Palate: helps concoction: breaks fleame in the stomach.

Hurt. Naught for Fevers and hot stomachs, especially eaten largely.

Correction. Mingle it with the juice of Sower Oranges, and eat very good
meats upon it.

Degree. According to the temperature of the herbs it is made of, now more, now
less hot.

Season. Age. Constitution. In hot weather, for any, especially for youth.

Condimentum viride.
Story for Table-talke.
THis kind of Sauce, I never tasted my self: yet am bold to communicate and
commend it to my friends, as I find it described by the Italian Freitagio.
The Italian (as all the world knows) is most exquisite in the composition of
all sorts of Condiments, they being indeed the better part of his Diet. All
kind of Greene-sauce, is questionless best in season, while herbs retain
their full strength and perfect vigor.

A Satyricall Epigram, upon the wanton, and excessive use of Tobacco.
IT chaunc'd me gazing at the Theater,
To spy a Lock-Tabacco-Chevalier,
Clowding the loathing air with foggie fume
Of Dock-Tabacco, friendly foe to rume.
I wished the Roman laws severity: Alex. seu. Edict.
Who smoke felleth, with smoke be donto die
Being well nigh smouldred with this smokie stir,
I began this wize bespeak my gallant Sir:
Certes, me thinks (Sir.) it ill beseems,
Thus hereto vapor out these reeking steams:
Like or to Maroes steeds, whose nosthrils flamed;
Or Plinies Nosemen (mouthles men) surnamed,
Whose breathing nose supplied Mouths absency.
He me regreets with this profane reply:
Nay; I resemble (Sir) Jehovah dread,
From out whose nosthrils a smoke issued:
Or the mid-ayrs tongealed region,
Whose stomach with crude humors frozenon
Sucks up Tabacco-like the vpmost air,
Enkindled by Fires neighbor candle fair:
And hence it spits out watery reums amain,
As phleamy snow, and hail, and sheerer rain:
Anon it smoakes beneath, it flames anon.
Sooth then, quoth I, it is safest we be gone,
Lest there arise some Ignis Fatuus
From out this smoking flame, and choken us.
On English fool: wanton Italianly;
Go Frenchly: Duchly drink: breath Indiauly.
Tobacco.
Choice. TRanslated out of India in the seed or root; Native or satun in our
own fruitfullest soiles: Dried in the shade, and compiled very close: of a
tawny color, somewhat inclining to red: most perspicuous and clear: which the
Nose soonest takes in snuff.

Use. It cures any grief, dolor, opilation, impostume, or obstruction,
proceeding of cold or wind: especially in the head or breast: the leaves are
good against the Migram, cold stomachs, sick kidnits, toothache, fits of the
moother, naughty breath, scaldings or burnings: 4. ounces of the juice drunk,
purges up and down: cleanses the eyes, being outwardly applied. The water
distilled and taken before the fits, cures an Ague.

The sum taken in a Pipe, is good against Rumes, Catarrhs, hoarsenesse, ache
in the head, stomach, lungs, breast: also in want of meat, drink, sleep, or
rest.

Hurt. Mortifieth and benummeth: causes drowsinesse: troubles and dulleth the
senses: makes (as it were) drunk: dangerous in meal time.

Correction. The leaves be-ashed or warmed in imbers and ashes: taken once a
day at most, in ye morning, fasting.

Degree. Hot and dry in the second: of a stiffening and soddering nature. Also
disensing and dissoluing filthy humors, consisting of contrary qualities.

Season. Age. Constitution. In Winter and the Spring, for hot, strong, youthful
and fat bodies only, as some think.

Tabacus Pilciet.
Story for Table-talke.
THis Herb is of great antiquity and high respect among the Indians, and
especially tho^^ of America or new Spain. Of who^ the Spaniards took it, after
they had subdued those Countrie^ first upon a liking of the heard ve^^e fair
and glorious to the eye; afterward upon trial of his virtues worthy
admiration.

The Name in India is Pilciet, surnamed Tobacco by the Spaniards, of the I Will
Tabaco. By their means it spread far and near: but yet we are not beholden
to their tradition. Our English Ulysses, renomed Sir Walter Rawleigh, a man
admirably excellent in Navigations, of Natures privy counsel, and infinitely
read in the wide book of the world, has both far fetched it, and dear
bought it: the estimate of the treasure I leave to other: yet this all know,
since it came in request, there has been Magnus fumi questue, and
Fumi-vendulus is the best Epithet for an Apothecary.

Thus much late Histories tell us: among the Indians it is so highly honored,
that when the Priests are consulting in matter of importance, they presently
cast Tobacco into the fire, and receive at their nose and mouth, the smoke
through a Cane, till they fall down dead-drunke. Afterward reviving again,
they give answers according to the phantasmes and visions, which appeared to
them in their sleep.

FINIS.
Epiposion.
Grace after Diets dry Dinner, wherein Diets Drinking is promised.
NOw that your barking stomachs mouth is shut,
And hungers rage apppeas'd with choycer fare,
And murmuring bowels be to silence put,
Now that the boordes with voyder purged are:
Both thank you God, and thank Simposiarch's pains,
That for your thanks, he may thank you again.
For if you hunger yet, or if you thirst.
Both which (I weet) may Diets Dryness make,
A second course may hap to swage the first,
And Diets Drinking shall the latter slake:
Accept mean while, these Cates of D. D. D.
Dressed by Arts Cooker^, in C. C. C.
Proficiat. Proface. Mytchgoodditchye.
IOa: VVeeueri Epicrisis ad Henricum Butsum.
DIETS dry Diner? change thy Dinners name,
For (witty Buttes) thou do thy Dinner wro
^f fish, fruit, flesh, and white-meat do thou fra^
(...) diet with Tobacco leaves among:
and can thou say thy Dinner then is dry
^hen both of Spices and of Sauces store
and of Tabaccos moisture fresh supply
^hy Dinner is replenish't evermore?
With salt of wit so sweet thy Dinner seasond,
and relisht with the sharpness of thine Art:
^he History of this thy Diet reasond.
^he table furnished rich in every part.
Change, change, thy name: I see no reason why
^Buttes) thou should call thy Dyets Dinner dry
Eiusdem ad eundem de eodem Palinodoia.
CHange not the Name: for Dinners should be dry.
It Is now the fashion: on a Cupboord by
The drink must pauling stand: For once I sat
Pontus Table, and withal forgate,
^r else it was my blushing modesty,
^amde to shoute for drink so openly)
(...) call for beer. From Diuner I rose up,
(...) never touched of Pontus fomy Cup:
(...) With Pontus then ere any more I dine,
^tes (by thy leave) I Will be a Guest of thine.
FINIS.

