THE Christians heavenly Treasure.

BY WILLIAM BVRTON of Reading in Barkeshire.

MATTHEW 16. 26. What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and loose
his own soul.

PHILIP. 3. 7. The things that were vantage unto me, the same I counted loss
for Christ's sake.

8 And do judge all things to be dunge that I might win Christ.

LONDON: Printed by T. E. for Thomas Man senior, and Jonas Man, dwelling in
Paternoster-Row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1608.

TO the right Worshipful, and religious Knight, Sir Drue Drurie, increase of
Grace and Peace in this life, and fullness of heavenly treasure in the life to
come.
RIght Worshipful Maecenas, in regard of the manifold favors, and
encouragements, which I have received from you, ever since I first entered into
the sacred work of the Ministry, first in Norfolk at your house by Norwich,
where then you remained, and many times since, I do here (as duty binds
me) offer unto your Worshipful Patronage, this short Treatise, of the
Christians heavenly Treasure, which shows in some sort, the difference
between false goods and true goods, between Heaven and Earth, the riches of
the one and the riches (or penury rather) of the other, and the way how to
enjoy the one without loss of the other. Which is not to teach you any thing
that yet you know not, for God be praised you knew these things long ago, but
(as S. Peter wrighteth) to confirm and strengthen your godly mind, and to
uphold your holy Faith, which long since through the mercy of God shined in
you, accompanied with true love, the handmaid of Faith, to the great glory of
God, the joy of the godly, and the comfort of the Saints hearts. This Argument
does of right belong unto your Worship, because the Lord has plentifully
replenished your heart with the love of heavenly things and true zeal unto his
glory, for heavenly matters, only in heavenly minds and sanctified hearts
receive kind entertainment, like the Angels in Lots house, rejoicing each in
others company and conference, like Mary and Elizabeth, but they shun the
company of the wicked, like the Wise men, which balked Herod's house and
returned another way, when they understood what a Fox he was.

The God of all Mercy and Consolation, who has made your old age glorious by
crowning the same with a most constant love and sincere profession of his
blessed Truth, so prosper your holy proceedings and religious endeavors; that
at the end of this your earthly pilgrimage, you may with holy Simeon depart in
peace, and receive with all Saints, that crown of immortal glory, and
endless rest, which God has prepared for you, and for all those that love and
desire the glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. From my friends house
in London, this 21. of January 1607.

Your Worships in all Christian affection, William Burton.

THE Christians Heavenly Treasure.
MATTHEW. 6. 19. Lay not up Treasures for your selves in earth, where the Moth
and Canker corrupt, and where Thieves dig through and steal.

20 But lay up for your selves Treasures in Heaven, where neither the Moth, nor
Canker corrupts, and where Thieves neither dig through nor steal.

21 For, where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also.


Our Savior Christ has in the former part of this chapter condemned the fond
affectation of Vainglory as the only bane and poison of all good actions,
whereof he gives three instances: The one in giving of Alms: The other in
Fasting: The last in Prayer* He now for bids worldliness, and greedy desire
of earthly things, as dangerous an enemy to our Salvation, and no less a
stain unto our Christian profession, as the former. Vainglory and Hypocrisy
as a burning poison that infecteth and inflameth the inward parts, is to be
avoided, yea, as a Thief that robs the Almighty of his glory is to be
pursued. Greedy Covetousness or worldliness as Thrones that choke the graces
of Gods Spirit, is to be plucked up by the roots. As a spiritual Fever that
relisheth no goodness, but distasteth all H^^uenly and Spiritual things, is
to be purged and taken heed of, yea, the desire of riches is to be avoided as
a stream both deep and swift, that will both drown men's souls and carry
them quite away from God. To that end Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 6. 9
they that will be rich, (meaning whether God will or no, or before the time
that God has appointed) fall into many noisome and foolish lusts, which drown
men in perdition and destruction, to show in what a miserable case a worldling
is: for speak to a drowned man, smite him, teach him, and cry out unto him, or
sound a Trumpet in his Ear, and he hears not, he feels not: and so is it
with a man whose heart is drowned in the cares of this World, and love of
riches. And yet those are in greatest admiration, for the world does not only
desire to be having more still, but does admire those that have worldly
Treasures. Therefore our Savior Christ does warn us of that gnawing Worm,
and tells us, that if we be so greedy of the world as to set our hearts upon
it, we loose heaven for our labo^^. And therefore we must take heed how we
use this world: for Christ would teach us how to use the world, that we be
not cousened by it. The scop and summ^ of this Text.
A little thing certain is better then much uncertain, as a poor man with a
little Coppyhold, is better to pass in that respect than he that has much,
and no assurance in it: The World is uncertain, for it is in danger of Thieves
which will rob, or of Mothes which will f^e^, or of Rust which will consume, or
of Death which will end all, but Heaven is not subject to any of these nor the
like. Again, he that will be saved must send Treasure before hand to Heaven,
and not drive of till death come, for none shall find Treasure there, but they
that lay it up before they dye.

As a man that remooueth to another place to abide there, sends his stuff
and provision before him: so they that mean to remove hence and to abide in
Heaven, must send their Treasure thither before hand, by relieuing the poor,
and helping forward other holy and cha^^table works. And whereas some allege
for themselves, that they have had great losses, etc. and therefore cannot give
any thing to the poor, or other holy and charitable uses, they must know that
they have the more need to give, and to be liberal, and to do good with that
they have, and so to lay up in Heaven, when the World goes from them, or else
they will be poor both here and there too. Now if any man be desirous to
know whether he has any treasure in heaven or no, let him take this course:
First, let him see what it is that does command his heart: and next what does
most move him, and touch him: and lastly, what he takes most delight in, and
what he beats his brain about most: and if the matters of Heaven and Gods
Kingdom do most command his heart, and occupy his head, and delight his
mind, then his Treasure is there, his stuff is sent before hand to the place
whether he intends to remove when God calls him, or else not: and this is
the sum of Christ's words and holy counsel in this place.

This Text has 2. parts. The parts of the Text.
1. A Commandment. 2. A reason of the same.


The Commandment has likewise two parts. The first is Negative in Verse 19.
Lay not up Treasure for your selves in* earth, etc. The second is Affirmative
in verse 20. But lay up for your selves Treasure in Heaven, where neither the
Moth, etc.

The Reason is in Verse. 21. For where your Treasure is, there will your heart
be also. As touching the Negative part of our Savior his Precept, we are to
understand that his manner of speaking is here no otherwise then in other
places, and other cases also of the like kind: Ioh. 6. 27.
as, Labor not for the meat that perishes, but labor for the meat that
endures to Eternal Life. And in another place, Luke 12. 33
Sell that you have, and give to the poor. Mat. 10. 9
And in another place, Possess not gold nor silver. And in another place, Be
not careful what to eat and drinck, Mat. 6. 25.
or what raiment to put on. All which places being literally taken, and not
according to the mind and meaning of our Savior Christ, may breed error, as
they have done: for from hence the Anabaptists fetch their community of goods;
the Monks and Friars their wilful poverty; and the Jesuits hereupon persuade
others to impouerish themselves to enrich them: And lastly, under the shadow of
these words: the slothful sluggard, and idle person would shroud themselves,
to be thereby discharged of all honest labor and diligent following of their
vocations. Therefore first the true meaning of the words is to be sought for,
and then we shall the better understand what do^trines from thence may be
gathered, for our further instruction and consolation in the Lord. Treasure
This word Treasure, is taken in the Scripture sometime for gold and silver. 1.
King. 7. 51. 1. King. 5
And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated: the
Silver, and the Gold, and the Vessels, and laid them among the Treasures of the
house of the Lord. So Prou. 2* 4. Pro. 2. 4.
If thou seek for wisdom as for silver, and searchest for her as for
treasure. And Mat. 13. 44. Mat. 13.
The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Treasure hid in the field, etc. Sometime
it is put for abandance of riches or any other thing. As, Mat. 13. 52. Mat 13. ^
Every Scribe which is taught unto the kingdom of Heaven, is like unto a
House-holder, which bingeth forth out of his Treasure things both new and old.
And Mat. 12. 34. Mat. 12. ^
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Verse 35. A good man out
of the good Treasure of his heart, or abundance of good things, br^ngeth forth
good* things. So Romans 2. 5. Thou after thine hardness, and heart that cannot
repent, treasurest unto thy self Wrath against the day of Wrath, that is,
causest unto thy self abundance of Wrath, etc. And sometime it is put for
whatsoever a man takes delight in, as here in this place, Where your Treasure
is, there will be your heart also, that is, where the thing is that you delight
in, there will be your heart, your mind and affection. Again, all Treasure is
either temporal or eternal. 2. Cor. 4. 18. The things that are seen are
temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal. Eternal or heavenly
Treasure is from heaven, and consists in the grace and favor o^ God, and is
the only true Riches. Esaias. 33. 6. ^sa. 33. 6
The. fear of the Lord shall be his Treasure. And a good man out of the good
Treasure of his heart brings forth good things. ^uk. 6. 45.
These are called: ^uk 12. 33
Bags that wax not old. Cor. 4. 7
And Light of glory brought in earthen vessels. The renewing of the inward man.
Ver. 16. An excellent and eternal weight of glory. 17. And things not seen,
yet looked upon. Cor. 2. 9
Verse. 18. Such as no Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard* nor have entered
into the heart of man. And here in our Text such as Moths cannot eat, nor Rust
consume, nor Thieves steal, that is, they are not subject to any kind of
casualtie or mischance: all which places do rather show what it is not, then
what it is, for indeed it is God himself in Christ Jesus, which cannot be
expressed, because he is infinite and incomprehensible.

Of this latter it is not that he speaks, when he says Lay not up for your
selves Treasures in earth, then he must needs mean the former. But what?
does the Lord Jesus mean that it is in no wise lawful for a Christian man to
get, or enjoy the riches of this world? not so, for in Pro. 2. 4. Pro. 2. 4.
it is said that we must seek for Wisdom as for gold: to show that gold
also may be sought for. 1 King. 10 22
And King Solomon made a navy of ships, which once in three years returned
with gold and silver, Iuory, etc. And in Genesis 37. 28. Genesis 37. 28
it is said there was traffic between the Midianites and the Ismalites
Merchants, Chap. 39. 1
and between the Ismalites and the Egiptians, that one country might by that
means be benefited by the commodities of another. What then? does he mean
that it is unlawful to keep any thing in store for hereafter? Not so neither,
for Joseph is commended for laying up against the time of famine, Genesis 41. 35
yea, it is Joseph's counsel that Pharaohs officers shall gather all the food
of seven plenteous years, and lay up Corn for food in the cities to be
kept against the seven years of famine. What then? does he mean that a man
must take of earthly goods only so much as will serve his turn, and cast away
that which is left? Not so neither, for in John. 6. Ioh. 6. 12.
He commands his Disciples to gather up in baskets that which was left, when
the people had been miraculously fed, and let nothing be lost (says the
Lord.) What then? does he mean that we must not provide for those that we
leave behind us? Not so neither, for the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12. 14
The Children ought not to lay up for their Fathers, but Fathers for their
Children. And he tells Timothy, that he which provides not for his family
Tim. 5. 8.
is (meaning in that respect) worse than an Infidel, and has denied the faith
What then? does he mean that all must be common? Not so neither, for then
there could be no breach of the eight Commandment if any man did steal; and
all exhortations and precepts of distributing to the poor were in vain, if
the poor might be their own caruers of rich men's goods: yea, what should
then become of buying and selling? Buy the Truth but sell it not, Proverbs.
says Sa^omon: And defraud not one another (says the Apostle) in barganing,
Thessalo.
and buying, and selling.

What then? does he mean that we must sell away all that we have and beg
for our selves, as Popish Friars, and Monkish Papists would have us to do? Not
so neither, for in Luke 12. 33. Luke 12. 33
It is not said sell that you have, but (...), Sell that you have overplus, and
may well spare, and give to the poor, otherwise we should love our neighbors
not as our selves, but above our selves, which God never required. And better
it is for a man to keep his goods for himself, than to bestow them upon idle
Monks, and a wicked rabble of Fryerly locusts, which be as necessary in a
christian Commonwealth, as Snakes in a man's bosom, or Mice in a barn full of
Corn.

What then? does he mean that a man may live idly, and then look to be
maintained by others? Not so neither, for the Apostle being ruled himself by
the spirit of Christ, has set down a Rule for such irregular persons, that if
any can work and will not, ^ Thessalonians. 3. 10
such should not eat, to show that idle persons are inordinate, and so
burdensome to a Commonwealth, that they are not worthy to live, but to be
punished by the most cruel death that ^an be, and that is to be starued and
pined to death. And in Pro. 6. 6. the sluggard is sent by the holy Ghost to the
Pismire, that in beholding her ways he might learn to be wise, for she
having no guide, governor nor ruler gathers her meat in Summer, and
prepares her food in Harvest, to show that even by honest and painful
travail men should provide in Summer against the hard time of Winter, and in
health for sickness. And albeit the Lord Jesus says in Ioh. 6 Labor not for
the meat that perishes, Ioh. 6. 27.
yet his meaning is not to discharge men of their honest labor, and following
(even with diligence) their callings, but that we must not labor so much for
the bread that perishes, as for that which abides to Eternal life, or that
our temporal commodities should not be the only end of our labor, or that we
must not mingle our labor with distrust and vexing care, Psalm. 90. 10
for that even our strength is but labor and sorrow, and when Solomon by his
Wisdom had waded through all matters, and had made trial of the world, he
upon his approved experience, set down his verdict, that all is but vanit^e
and vexation of spirit, as if he should say, moyle not, vex not, wear not
out your selves so much as you have done about the world, to the loosing of
your heavenly treasure. Well then, if Christ does allow men to get and enjoy
riches as the Merchants of Tirus: and King Solomon, if he does allow us to
provide and lay up before hand as Joseph did, and to save that which is
remaining, as himself and his Disciples did, and to lay up for our families as
the very Infidels do. If the Lord Jesus will not allow men to have all things
common as Anabaptists do, nor to pro^esse wilful poverty as beggarly Friars
do, nor to feed Idle-packs which will not labor for their living, as
preposterous pity does, what then should be his meaning when he says, Lay
not up for your selves Treasures in earth?

That we may the better find out the Lords meaning we, are to know that
Treasure here, is put not only for money, riches, and provision for the time
to come, but also for any thing else (as was said before) wherein a man takes
most delight, and whereupon he depends most, or which he makes his
felicity; yea, and does so lavish out his love upon it, and torment himself
with careful thoughts for the same, as if without it he should be utterly
undone, and could not possibly live. In which manner Worlldings gather riches,
and Atheists seeks after pleasure, the Ambitious man hunts after Honor, even
with all their hearts, with all their mind, with all their might, strength and
soul, as if it were their God that did make them, and it should preserve and
save them, which is a manifest breach of the first commandment.

Now all is made the Treasure that the heart is set upon, as for Example.

Some men take more to heart the loss of a Child, than the loss of all their
goods besides, and do so much set their affection upon it, that they will say,
if God should take this Child away, then all our joy is gone, Mat. 2 28.
like Rachel that mourned for her children and would not be comforted.

Some are so jealous over their Honor, that if they have not all manner of
outward complements afforded unto them* Hes. 3. 5. 6
they are as male-contented as Haman, who was full of Wrath, and studied
nothing but monstrous and mischeuous revenge, because Mordecai did not bow the
knee unto him, as others had done.

Some again dote upon their Credit. that if their wicked counsel be crossed
at any time, they are ready with Achitophell (that treacherous counselor) to
go hang themselves. Sam.


Others are so mad upon their present pleasure, that with the beastly
Epicures they cry, 1. Cor. 15
let us eat and drink, though we dye for it to morrow.

Some are so enamored of their wealth, that when their goods are increased and
their barnes enlarged, then with the worldling they dream of a quietus est:
And cry soul be now at rest, Luk 12. 19
for thou have goods enough for many years.

Of all these it may be said they have laid up Treasure in Earth but not in
Heaven, because in these things they have reposed all their joy, their
delight, their trust. And therefore being invited to the heavenly banquet of
the Gospel, they `answere like earth-wormes, making light of the matter, Mat.
22. 5.
I must look to my farm says one, Luke 14. 18
and I to my Oxen, says another, and I must ask my wife first, says another:
which is no more in effect but thus much, we must follow that we delight in,
and that we trust in, these are the things that our heart delight in, and
trust in, these are our treasure* If we saw more goodness in that Feast then
in these our commodities, we would go to it, but we cannot relish them as
we do these worldly matters, and therefore thank your Master for his good
will, and pray him to hold us excused: for the ^^^th is, we must follow that
which our heart affects, our worldly Treasure, we cannot come. To all such it
is said here. Lay not up your Treasures on earth, etc.

And these words may be expounded two ways. Lay not up, etc. Thou that art a
Christian and have given thy Faith to the Lord Jesus Christ in thy Baptism,
thou that art a Citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem, and have the holy One of
Isr^ell, even the Lord of Hoasts, and the mighty God of Heaven and Earth for
thy father: his son, yea, his only beloved Son for thy Redeemer, and the
holy Ghost which proceeds from them both for thy sanctified guide and
Comforter, and thou that have the Angels to guarde thee, and the Saints to pray
for thee, and all the Creatures to serve thee, and therefore art of all the
Creatures the most noble and excellent, thou must needs have somewhat to
delight in, to occupy thy mind upon, and to set thy heart upon. Take heed it
be not upon earthly things, for all the earth cannot yield thee a fit match,
thou being called to so high and heavenly ^ calling, but heaven can. In earth
is nothing that can make thee happy, but in heaven there is happiness it
self. In earth there is no commodity without a discommoditie, but in heaven
there is. In earth is no perpetuity, but in heaven there is. In earth there is
no security or safety, but in heaven there is both: therefore Lay not up thy
Treasure in earth where the Moth and Canker corrupts, and where Thieves dig
through and steal, but in heaven where is no such matter. Or it may thus be
expounded. Thou which art a Christian do not so greedely seek after earthly
substance, as thereby to neglect thy heavenly substance, as the manner of all
men is to do by nature, like Esau who was so hungry for a mess of his brothers
pottage, that for love thereof, and for fear of ^taruing (except he had it)
lost his birthright, Gen, 25. 32
for which profane part of his, he^ could not find any place to repencance,
Heb. 12. 16
although he sought the blessing with tears. Verily a thing this is, that may
make our hearts to ache, for we are at Esaucs pass: So we may get the world,
keep our customers and win the pottage, we are safe: but mark thou, that art
of Esaues humor, well may thou weep for the loss of thy temporal
benefits, but for this damnable profaneness of thine in preferring of Earth
before Heaven, except Gods grace be the more abounding toward thee, thou will
hardly repent. Therefore if thou be wise indeed (as thou would seem to be)
forsake Esaues diet in time, and lay not up Treasure in Earth where Moth and
Canker do corrupt, and Thieves break through and steal, etc.

Hear Christ's reason Where Moths do fret, Christ's Reason.
Canker corrupts, and Thieves dig through and steal. The sum of his reason
is this, that whatsouer this world affords, is subject to consumption, or
corruption, or both: if it be in use, it is consumed with the use, if it be
not used, then it corrupts for want of use. The consuming and spending of
these worldly goods, is either by the owners of them, or by Thieves that
oftentimes are pertakers of them to the hurt of the owner. They are also
consumed ^yther by sensible and living Creatures, as by Mothes, Flies, Mice,
and Rats, and such like: or else by insensible and dead things, as Rust, and
Mould, and Fire, and Water, and Air, and Age, etc. Now consider the matter,
consult and give sentence. What madness is it to provide for thieves and
Robbers? What inhumanitie to give that to Mothes and Mice, etc. which is better
bestowed upon thy self, upon thy family, or upon the poor? What vanity,
yea, what misery is this to be a slave to such things as thieves and robbers,
Vermin, and rottenness shall do. minier over, and in a short time must perish
either in the use, or for want of use? This do not worldlings consider, they
lock up, and lay up, and put out their Treasures to be kept for them, yet can
they not keep their garments from Moths, nor their gold and silver from Rust,
nor any thing they have, from one casualtie or another long. When they have
gotten goods together, they cannot promise unto themselves either perpetuity
of them or security: And what a misery is that? but either their goods or
themselves must wear away, and their goods are in danger for their properties
sake, and the owners are in danger for their goods sake.

Neither are these all the discommodities that thy Treasure is subject unto,
who knows not that the Fire may consume them, as it has done thousands? or
the Water may drown them, as it has done thousands? or the Plague may infect
them as it has done thousands? or Time may wear them, as it has done
millions of thousands? or Death may fetch thee away, as it has done infinite
millions of thousands? Besides all this, The misery of a worldling
consider how many have been undone by unconscionable Debtors, by crafty
headed Lawyers, by vnthrif^re Children, by untrusty Servants. Yet this is not
all, for what restles care does tear thee in getting them? what tormenting
fear does abate thy comfort in keeping them? and what heart breaking sorrow
does vex thee in loosing of them? Yet this is not all neither, for here thou
art praised, there thou art dispraysed, now thou art loved, by and by thou art
envied, of some thou art admired, of many thou art scorned, and all for thy
wealths sake.

The worldling is like a Mill, driven violently by a maine stream, and great
provision is made to feed in one place, and to cool in another, the Sack is
brought to feed the Mill, and the Mill grindeth and wears it self to fill
the Sack again, and still the Wheel is where it was, for all his whirling
about, and as you find it so you leave it: so is it with a worldly man and his
goods, but this similitude applies it self, I will therefore follow it no
further.

This we all know, but how often, or rather how seldom do we think upon
it, or remember it, or make use of it, to stay us from greedy coveting and egar
pursuing of the World, with the hazard of our Salvation? The Devil he cries,
follow the World, compass the worlds goods, oh thou shall profit thy self,
Mat. 16.
but Christ says, What shall it profit a man to win the World, yea, the
whole World, and to loose his own Soul? that the Devil concealeth; yea, he
deals with us as he did with Christ himself, he showed Christ the glory
and majesty of worldly kingdoms, but not the troubles and tumults, not the
dangers and enemies of the same: So he deludeth the fools of this world, he
shows them the bravery of the Court, but not the vanity that is in the
Court: he shows them the glory of honor, but not the danger of honor: he
shows the flowers of Beauty, but not the deceiptfulnesse of Beauty: he
shows the commodities of Offices, but not the discommodities of Offices: he
shows the wealth of such a Country, but not the envy and misery of the same
country. And thus are the Fools of this world (as God himself calls them)
deluded and abused, Luke. 12.
yea, and destroyed many times by the Devils shows, like the miserable Troyans
who doted so much upon the Grecians counterfaite and monstrous horse, that they
would never leave until they had pulled* down the walls of their City to get
it in, never dreaming of the hidden mischiefs and armed Soldiers that lay in
the belly thereof, prepare^d for their present destruction. But they see what a
show this makes, and what a show that makes, and marvelous it is in their
eyes, then their heart is on fire till they have it, and their head still is
deui^ing how to compass it, to which end all means are attempted, there is
flattering, and glosing, and fore-stalling, borrowing here, and pawning there,
and selling one thing to buy another: and when he has gotten his hearts
desire, then he thinks of nothing but his gettings, Dan. 4.
as Nabuchadnezzar that proud King of Confusion, thought of nothing but of his
glorious buildings, Oh (said he) Is not this great Babell, which I have built
for the honor of my Macestie? strouting up and down in his Galleries, and
admiring himself for his Building, as a fool admireth himself in a glass,
so do the fools of the world, oh (says one) how rich shall I be? how
worshipful says another? how much admired for my wealth, for my bravery, for
my strength, says a third? etc. Within a while comes the Moth, the Mouse,
and the Rat for their fees, the one takes up his lodging in his brave
apparel, and gnaweth holes in his lodging, the other in his Barnes and
granieries, and takes as deep toule as the Miller, the Rust falls and
feeds upon his gilded and glittering Armor, and the Canker seazeth upon his
Gold and Silver. After these comes the legal Thief, that is, the Usurer,
and he must have for the lone of his money, then comes the Mercer and Draper
with their Bills, wherewith they give many astonishing blows on the head (as it
were with clubs) for wearing out their brave Apparel before it be paid for.
Then the fashion alters, or the Air is not wholesome, and both must be
changed, or the Flatterer licketh his Dishes, or the Beggar pulls him by the
sleeue, and then the property is altered, Oh quantum mutatus ab ille? He is
not the man he was taken to be, neither is it all gold that glistred in his
eyes.

Now, speak to these Earth-wormes of Heavenly things, and amidst their joys
or dumps, ask them if they will go to a Sermon, or join with the
congregation in Prayer, or the like, what is their answer? Is it not
Nabal-like? who when his kindness was requested toward David and his
Soldiers, answered like a foolish Churl, even like himself. Who is David?
and what is the Son of Ishai that I should send of my vittailes unto him? So
say they, the Sermon, what good shall we get by going to a Sermon? who worse
then these Preachers themselves? Oh they can talk well, and tell a trim tale
in the Pulpit, but their lives are not thereafter. And thus they play the
currish Dog, barking and bawling at them that bring them meat. Oh, we shall
have a Puritaine of you, how holy you are? Tell not me of the Sermon, I have
other matters to think upon, I must follow my suites in Law, or I must go and
bear such and such company at the Tavern, or at Bowls, or at Tables, etc. I
have not sleptinough, (says another:) And others have not their ruff^s, and
their cuttes, and their hoopes, and their knackes fine enough: I cannot abide
to sit so long says one: I must go serve my customers: I like not this kind
of teaching (faith another) And thus do they answer, when they are moved to
meet the Lord, in the means of their salvation and sanctification, which lay
up Treasures on earth, and not in heaven: And therefore Lay not up your
Treasures on earth, but in heaven.

Again, how do worldlings deal in bargaining, in buying and selling? Do
they not assault one another with lies? Do they not undermine one with another
with deep dissembling? Do they not swear fasly, to deceive one another? Do
they not promise largely, deny impudently, and falsify unjustly their
promises? Do they not work upon the advantage, and take the extrenitie of Law
one against another? Do they not thus deal which are only devoted and
altogether addicted to the Treasures and pleasures of this World?

Again, how are they accounted of? how are they accounted of? how are they
accursed? Are they not (for the most part) accounted as Iudasses and tray-Gods?
as Machiuels and Tirants, as Cutthroats and Cousoners, unconscionable and
cruel, hard-harted and merciless, and that even of their friends? They are
cursed of the rich, which pay for their kindness, and of the poor they are
cursed, because they can get not kindness of them: Of whole Countries, trades
and Commonwealths they are accursed, for they will have a cast at all. We
cannot buy but of him faith one: We cannot sell but we must agree with him
faith another: We cannot utter our commodities because of him, faith a third.
The country curses him: where were wont to be so many Ploughes kept for
Tillage (faith the country) is there now nothing but a Shepherd and his dog.
Vbi Troia iam seges: nay I would it were so well, but now vbi seges iam
segnities: Weeds.
all is little enough for a stinking Weed, that has in most places, put down
both Tillage and Pasture, to set up the pride of life, and lust of the eye, as
if the Commonwealth might live rather by color, than by cloth, and by
accidents, rather than by substances. And as the country curses the worldling,
so the poor servants do justly cry out upon them for detayning of their
wages, and do truly apply those words in the Gospel against such, they reap
where they sowed not, and take up where they laid not down. And thus are they
accounted of, which follow only earthly Treasure, and therefore Lay not up
Treasure on earth.

How they live we have heard, but how do they dye? commonly Qualis vita,
finis ita: Do not many of them prove Bankroupts and spend-thrifts? Do they
not dye deep in debt, plunged in despair, void of comfort, and without
confidence in God? Is not their wedge of Gold their confidence? and do they
not say to their bags of gold, these are the Angels that shall keep us? Oh
most fearful, and what more miserable? As they loved not the word of God in
their health time, so do they wholly distaste it in their sickness, and their
light goes out in obscure darkness, leaving a filthy smell behind it, like a
snuff in a socket, when the candle is burnt out.

How many of them do take their leave of the World (after their long doting
upon it) most he^^eshly blaspheming of God, most cruelly cursing of men, most
monstrously execrating of themselves, and most brutishly roaring like beasts
knocked on the head, or lying most sencelesly like blocks and stocks. And if
any make a better end, that may be reckoned amongst the miracles of Gods
superabounding mercy. But thus commonly do they dye, that have had their
thoughts, and their cares, wholly drenched in the love and delight of earthly
things, to verify the saying of the Apostle: ^hil. 3. 18.
Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, they are
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose God is their belly, whose glory is their
shame, which mind earthly things, and therefore their end is dam^ation. And
thus we see how the profane Irreligiousnesse, the deceiptfull dealing, the
wicked living, and the cursed ending of worldlings do all cry out with one
consent, and bid us beware, that we lay not up Treasure on earth only, where
Moths do gnaw, and Rust does consume, and Thieves break through and steal.

When the men of Lystra would have worshipped Paul and Barnabas, those blessed
Apostles cried out, Act. 14. 15. 18.
O men why do you such things? we are even men as you be, and subject to the
same passions that ye be, yet scarce refrained they the people, that they had
not sacrificed unto them. So when worldlings would sacrifice their hearts to
earthly Treasure, does not the earth cry out and say. O vain man what do
thou mean? I am as thy self, and as base as thy self, I was another man's,
and am for every man's turn, I am environed with thorns and Briars, and
inhabited with Toads, Vipers, and noisome Vermin, and all my commodities are
haunted with moths, and cankers, with Thieves and Devils, yet scarce do they
refrain from offering sacrifice unto them. I know not whereunto the earthly
Treasure may be better resembled then unto the huge horse that the Greeks had
prepared for the destruction of Troy (if that story be true) which made a great
and goodly show, but vterum armato milite complent, Virg. Aen. lib. 1.
it was within full of armed Soldiers, who when they saw their fittest
opportunity, issued out of his panch, to the utter ruin of all those that
doted so much upon it, and took so much pains to bring it into the City.
But most pithy was the counsel of Lacoon that valiant and prudent Citizen,
concerning that monstrous mountain of hidden mischiefs, and happy had it
been for that City if his counsel had been followed, and surely, Simeus
non leua fuisset (as the Poet speaks) if they had not been too light of
belief, and too much enchaunted with a false persuasion thereof, they had done
well enough, for he spoke plainly enough, when he told them that Aut
hocinclusi ligno occultantur Achiui, aut hoec in ^ostros fabricata est machina
muros: Either (says he) our enemies lie lurking in this wooden horse, or
else it is some Engine erected for the battering of our walls. Nay more Aut
aliquis latet error, Equo ne credi^^ Teucri, There is more mischief in it then
we are aware of O Troyans, be wise and take heed you trust not a Horse. Yea,
but it is a gift that the Greeks have left for Pallas. Well, says he,
Quicquid id est, ti meo Danaos and dona ferentes: Make what you can of it
(says he) there is, no trusting to the Greeks, though they come with gifts
in their hands: So he that has a spiritual eye indeed, that can pearce
further then to the outside of worldly shows, can truly say it, and may
safely justify it, that the golden shows of profits and pleasures, which are
often in this world presented unto his view, have either some secret mischiefs
lurking in them, or are like some strange engine erected to batter his estate,
or to cut his throat, or to ouerwhelme his head with cares and fears, or to
provoke him to some desperate attempt: but let the best be made of it that can
be made, yet the world is not to be trusted, though it comes sawning and
flattering, creeping and crouching to a man with gifts and presents in the
hand, for in a kiss was treason, and Ioabs kind embracings prove but deadly
stabbings, and the wisest that ever was amongst the sons of men, having made
trial of all, and taken not a taste, but his fill of all the treasures and
pleasures that this world could possibly invent for the delight and strength of
a king, could at the casting up of his accounts, give no better verdict of it
but this: Eccles. 1.
Vanity of Vanities, and all is but Vanity and vexation of spirit. And here
again one wiser and greater then Solomon tells us (if we have grace to believe
him) that both the rust, and the Moth, and the Canker, and the Thief, and all
cry out unto us, and bid us take heed how we dote upon worldly Treasure.

Of this discourse we may make good use, Use. 1.
when we are tempted to the breaking of Gods Commandments for the gayning of
the worlds goods. When any is tempted, let him but reason thus with his soul:
My Soul what thou would have thou see, but what thou shall have thou
see not, thou see the horse, but not what he has in his belly: thou see
the Be, but not her sting: thou see sweet meat, but not the sower sauce:
thou see the bait, but not the hook: the cheer, but not the reckoning: a
fawning face, but not the hand at the back: In a word, thou beholdest the
profit that thou art like to get by profaning of the Sabbath with working and
drudging, the gain of Usury and Bribery, the commodity of lying and cogging,
and the gain of deceit and falsehood, and the like: but what stings and wounds,
thou shall get in thy Conscience by following of those spiritual Couseners,
thou do not consider, and therefore stay, and proceed no further unless
thou will be so mad as to loose Heaven for Hell.

Agane when thou art in prayer or hearing of Gods word, Use 2.
or about any other of thy godly devotions, and feel thy heart stepping
aside to have conference with earthly cogitations, do but say thus to thy
self with Solomon, for whom is it that I now care? is it not for the world,
that will cosen me of the word? is it not earthly treasure that calls my mind
away, that I might loose this Heavenly treasure? return then O my soul unto
thy rest, and keep thy standing, beware least thou be cousened of the heavenly
verity, with a show of earthly vanity.

And in like manner when thou hapnest to loose any worldly commodity, Use 3.
never lay it to heart, but even say this to thy self, now the world has
showed it self like it self; God has taken that from me, which otherwise
would have pulled me from him. As a loving father he has but taken from me
that knife wherewith I might like a child have hurt my self: And as a most wise
captain he has rid me of my luggage, that I might pursue my enemies more
swiftly, and make more expedition toward my heavenly country, where are better
things provided for me, even such as no fire can consume, no Moth can freet, no
Thief can steal, no time can wear, and so with patience let it go, and give
God thanks, that has better provided for thee, then thou were aware of.

But lay up for your selves treasure in heaven, where etc.

Our Savior Christ having forbidden the gredy seeking of earthly things, The
Affirmative part.
and brought men out of conceit with the bewitching vanities of this life, he
presently offers unto us better things, and commands us to lay them up in
heaven, to our own use when time shall serve, as if he should say, I do not
absolutely forbid you to gather, and to lay up in store, but I would have you
so gather, and so to lay up, that you may find store of treasure in Heaven,
Heavenly Treasures are to be preferred in three respects, viz.
your heavenly country, whereunto you are borne again, and where you must
abide for ever. And these treasures thus to be laid up, he commends unto
us, for their Excellency, for their Security, and for their Perpetuity; 1.
Excellency.
things which all desire, 2. Securit^
and which are able to free a man's mind from all care. 3. Perpetuity.
Of which it will not be amiss for us to take a little view.

What are those treasures then that are commended unto us for their
excellency? In a word they are heavenly, Of the excellency of the Christians
Treasure.
now look how far heaven is more excellent then the earth, and the spirit
then flesh, and God then man, so much does the Christians heavenly treasure
excel all the treasures of this world.

This is true indeed: Object.
but in heaven (thou will say) there is neither buying nor selling, trading nor
traffic, building nor planting, letting nor hiring, hungring nor thirsting,
no cold nor heat, no working nor laboring, no iourneying, nor traveling. And
therefore we need not care for any provision for any such uses, what then are
those treasures, or what is in them more then in others that we are so charged
to lay them up? here we know (says the Atheist) what we have, but what we
shall have there we know not. Answer.
But hear thou earthly minded man, and harken O thou whose mind and heart lie
buried under a loaf of bread. There are indeed no such commodities in heaven
as the earth affords, yet heaven is a rich country, and the commodities
thereof are far above the fine gold of Ophir. First there is the Lord Jesus
who is the Lord high treasurer of heaven and earth, Col. 2. 3.
In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. In whom God has
blessed us, Ephesians. 1. 3.
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things: John. 1. 16.
Of whose fulness we receive all grace for grace, In whom and by whom we live,
Act. 17. 28.
and move, and have our being, of whom the church enquired and was sick of
love until she found him. Cant. 5. 8.
Worldlings make a wonder at this gear until they know what it is, but then
they are as desirous of it as others, as plainly appears by the conference
that passed between the regenerate Spouse of Christ, and the unregenerate
members of the visible Church, about the excellency of Christ's person and love,
and the effect of the said conference most lively and pathetically deciphered
by Solomon in his spiritual song. Cant. 5. 8.
And first the regenerate and Godly Spouse of Christ begins in this manner.
I Charge you O Daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my wel-beloued, that you
tell him that I am sick of love. Now mark the answer that is made to this
charge by those which yet knew not the excellency of Christ. Verse. 9.
O the fairest a mong women, what is thy well-beloved more then other welboued?
what is thy well-beloved more then an other lover, that thou do so charge us?
Now mark the description of Christ, set forth by the true church, as glorying
and delighting to speak of the beauty and riches of their heavenly
Bridegroom, to the shame of those that bear the title of Christians, and yet
are never so much daunted and silenced at any thing, as when speech is offered
them of Christ and Christian Religion, as if it were possible that an honest
woman should be ashamed to hear good spoken, or to speak good things of her
Husband, Verse. 10.
My belouod (says the Spouse of Christ) is white and ruddy, the chiefest of
ten thousand. 11
His head is as fine gold, his locks curled, and black as a Raven. His eyes are
as Doves upon the Rivers of waters, 12
which are washed with milk, and remain by the full vessels. 13
His cheeks are as a bed of Spices, and sweet Flowers, and his lips like
Lillies dropping down pure Mirrhe. His hands like rings of Gold, 14
se^ with the Chrisolite, his belly like white Y^ory, covered with Saphirs. 15
His legs as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold, his countenance
as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars. His mouth is as sweet things, and he is
wholly delectable, 16
that is my Beloved, and this is my Lover, O Daughters of Jerusalem. What say
you to him now? Hear now what effect this sweet description of Christ has
wrought with the Daughters of Jerusalem, that is, with the members of the
Church, yet such as hitherto were ignorant of these things. O the fairest
amongst women, whither is thy Well-beloved gone? whither is thy Well-beloved turned
aside, that we may seek him with thee? And would you seek him indeed? then
hear more. This heavenly and lovely Bridegroom has for his Spouse a whole
City, and A holy City called new Jerusalem (whose Daughters you are) come
down from God our of heaven, Apo. 21. 2
prepared as a Bride trimmed for her husband, having the glory of God, and her
shining is like unto a stone most precious, and as a Jasper stone clear as
Crystal. Verse. 11.
The Wall of it is great and high, 12
and has twelve Gates, and at the Gates twelve Angels (for Porters) And the
Wall of the City has twelve Foundations, 14
and in them the names of the Lambs twelve Apostles. 16
It is every way twelve thousand furlongs, as broad as long, and extending
as well to one part of the world as to another. 18
The building of the wall is of Jasper, and the City pure Gold like clear
Glass. 19
The foundations of the Wall were ga^nished with all manner of precious stones.
20
And the twelve Gates wore twelve Pearls, and every Gate is of one Pearl, 21
and the Street of the City is of pure Gold. 22
There is no Temple there, for the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb are the
Temple of it, 23
There is no need of Sunn^ or Moon, for the glory of God* does light it, and
the Lamb is the light of it. And the people which are saved shall walk in the
light of it, 24
and the Kings of the earth shall bring their glory and honor unto it. 25
And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shall be no might
there. 26
And the glory and honor of the Gentiles shall be brought unto it. 27
And into it shall enter no unclean thing, neither whatsoever works
Abomination or Lies: but they which are written in the: Lambs book of Life.
Now if the Gates, Walls and Streets of this City be so^ beautiful, and
sumptuous, then how glorious and rich are the inward parts? nay who can
express the riches and pleasures that are there laid up for the Citizens and
Spouse of Christ? are they not (think you) like those things which Saint Paul
saw when he was rapt up into the third heaven, which the tongue of man cannot
utter? And must^ they not needs be those joys which the same Apostle says,
1. Cor. 2.
are such as no Eye has seen, no Ear has heard, no Tongue can expresse^ nor
Heart conceive? Now do but consider with thy self (if thou can) what some
Eyes have seen, what some men's Ears have heard, and what some travelers
Tongues have reported in these days, and what the heart of some man is able to
conceive, and then do but imagine what those joys of heaven are if thou
can. But what are the commodities and Riches of that Heavenly Jerusalem, and
the Citizens thereof, that cannot be valued? If the report thereof will move
thee to seek after them* then hear, for even in this life the true Christian
is put in possession of them in part, by which as by a taste, he is certified,
and as by an earnest p^nny he is assured of the rest that is kept for him,
until he be ready for them. Apo. 3. 18.
Saint John says, that (as if some rich merchant were come from a far Country)
the Lord Jesus inuiteth us, and sets up as it were his bills in every Church,
offering to all that will use the means to make themselves sure of his
merchandise (which is meant by buying) no worse wares then fine* Gold tried in
the fire, to make us rich, white raiment to cover our filthy nakedness withal,
and eye salve to heal us of Spiritual blindness, that is, himself, his
Word, and his Spirit. And the like offer in most kind mann^r again he makes
by Solomon, willing us (if we be wise to God ward) to receive instruction and
not Silver, Pro. 8. 10.
and knowledge rather then fine Gold. Pro. 16. 16
Whereof Solomon himself gives this testimony (after his long experience of
both) that to get wisdom is much better then gold, but how much better he
cannot tell, it so far excels, and therefore he sets it down with an
Interrogation: How much better is it, Pro. 3. 13.
etc. and to get Understanding (says he) is more to be desired then Silver,
Yea, Blessed is that man (says he) that finds Wisdom, and that man that
gets Understanding. Now mark his reasons. For the merchandise thereof is
better then the merchandise of Silver, 14
and the gain thereof is better then gold. 15
It is more precious then Pearls, and all things that thou can desire, are
not to be compared unto her. 16
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory. 17
Her ways are the ways of pleasure, and all her paths posperitie. 18
She is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold on her, and blessed is he that
receives her.

There is also a spiritual traffic and intercourse between Christ and the
faithful Christian. Phi. 3. 20.
For Our conversation is in beauen says S. Paul, very troublesome and
dangerous (I confess) for a time, for this world is the sea, Apo. 4.
tempestuous and tumultuous enough. Christ's ship described.
The Church militant is the ship of Christ that is tossed in the same. The
tackling of this ship may be the communion of Saints. The Pilate that guides
the course, the spirit of God. The Card or Compass, the Word of God. The
Purser of this ship, is love. The Baliffe is humane frailties, noisome fears,
and troublesome doubts, The munition of this ship, is the armor of God, that
is, the Helmet of Hope, the Shield of Faith, the Sword of the Spirit, the
Breast Plate of Righteousness, etc. as the Apostle describes it in the 6. to
the Ephesians. Ephesians. 6.
The winds which drive this Bark are prosperity and adversity. The waves
which toss this ship are presumption and despair. The enemies to this ship,
are the world, the flesh, and the Devil. The Factours are the faithful
Ministers of Christ. The Commodities, are the Treasures of Heaven, the Riches
of Christ, or Fruits of the Spirit. Our Messenger is Peace, a speedy Post.
The Haven is the Kingdom of Heaven. The landing place is Golgotha. The Land is
the land of the living. The Customer is Death, who sets all men at liberty,
and yet is bound himself. Peter was once one of these heavenly Factours for
the Lord Jesus: a Creeple came unto him for an Alms, but what was his
answer? Act. 3. 6.
Silver and Gold have I none, but such as I have, I give thee, in the name of
Jesus of Nazaret arise and walk: A better Alms a great deal then he
expected. So we may say: If you ask us what commodities our vessel has
brought, we may make Peter's answer, Silver and Gold we have none; new wine
have we none; pleasant tales have we none; and Popish trash have we none; but
we have the hidden treasures of the Gospel, The cornmodities of the Gospel.
the purity of true Religion, the rich Jewels of the holy Ghost: as Faith to
overcome the world, repentance to make men new, remission of sins, and
Reconsiliation with God, by the death of Christ, peace of Conscience which
passes all understanding, and is a continual Feast, joy of the holy Ghost,
and gladness of heart, which the world cannot take from him that has them, we
offer love to God, and Charity to men, zeal for the truth, patience in
affliction, moderation of affections, lowliness of Spirit to grace all our
actions, and assurance of everlasting life after this life, the great gain of
godliness, with sweet contentation to all estates.

Behold, these are the Riches, and these are the Treasures that the Lord Jesus
sends from heaven to enrich and glad his servants withal, while they live
here dispersed and despised upon the face of the earth. And yet here be not
all, for even all outward blessings also do attend upon these inward graces, so
that if any man can find these, and heartily affect them, Earthly Treasure.
the other shall follow measurably and proportionably according to every man's
place and want. does follow the heavenly.
And therefore our blessed Savior (not knowing how to envy, or deny unto his
Church the smaller things, having frankly bestowed himself, and the greater
things of his Kingdom) set us in the way, and directs us a right course for
the obtaining both of heavenly Treasures, as also of earthly Commodities. Seek
first (says he) the kingdom of God, Mat. 6. 33.
and his righteousness, and all these things shall be cast unto you, but Gods
Kingdom must be first sought. 1 King 3 12. 13
When Solomon preferred (in his request unto God) a wise and understanding
heart, for the well governing of his people, God gave him that, and also Riches
and Honor, things that he asked not: So, if our chiefest desire and endeavor
be to lay up treasure in heaven, and to be rich in the graces of the holy
Ghost, the Lord will give us those Graces, and earthly Blessings besides. But
alas, it fares with most men as it did with Boaz his kinseman, Ruth. 4. 4. 5
who was well content to redeem the field of Naomie, but when he heard that
he that should have the field, must also marry Ruth, he would none. So, many
hearing of earthly commodities, and worldly blessings, are content to strain
themselves for the obtaining of them, but when they hear that they must take
them as Religious dowry, and upon condition that they live virtuously, and
liberally amongst their Brethren, they will none, for the one they will deal,
but not for the other: but he that has the one, must have the other also, and
whosoever will strain himself for the best part, shall be sure to have his
share in the other: as he that married Ruth with her mean portion, lost
nothing thereby, because she was a virtuous woman, and what was wanting in
goods, she had it supplied in goodness: so he that has godliness can be no
looser, for Godliness is profitable unto all things (says the Apostle) and
has the promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8
and of the life to come.

Godliness will make thy self, and thy seed, thy ground and thy cattle, thy
wealth and thy credit to be blessed. It is like the Tree that bearet^ fruit
every month, and bears twelve manner of fruits, and the leaves thereof are
good to heal the nations withal. Apoc. 22. 2
And as for them that think that godliness is not fit for all things, for all
times, and for all places, but count it a dead world when unchaste daunces,
ribald songs, and other scurrilitie are restrained at feasts, and marriages,
and other merry meetings, nor can relish any mirth or joy, that is seasoned
with words of grace, it seems they are better acquainted with the sacrifices
of the Indians, than with the sacrifices of Christians: But let them speak
that have made trial. Mal. 3. 10.
Have any done as Malachie wills them, that is, brought their Tithes and
offerings, liberally and freely unto Gods house, for the maintenance of the
Lords servants and service, and has not the Lord (according to his promise)
opened the windows of heaven, and powered out a blessing upon them? Have any
suffered hunger and thirst for righteousness sake (which hunger only is sa^ra
fames, Mat. 5.
holy hunger indeed) and not been filled with good things? Has any faithful
person decayed in his outward man, 2 Cor. 4.
and has not his inward man been renewed daily? Have any seen Christ in some
part of his glory, Mat. 17.
and not been ravished with a desire to dwell there still? Nay more, has any
followed him in this r^generation (as he says himself) that does not now, and
shall at^ the last day sit on seats to judge the nations of the world? Has any
with the poor Widow of Sa^^pta^ shew^d kindness, and been at cost with the
Lords Prophets, and not found it again with increase? Have any for the love of
Christ's gospel left all, and followed him in time of persecution, and not been
provided for sufficiently? Has any with the woman of Samaria, left scoffing at
Christ's words, and has not her heart been so enflamed with the Truth, that
she has run in to call forth her neighbors, to take part of her
happiness? Have any with Paul and Silas been imprisoned for preaching of
Christ Jesus, and have they not found that in prison, which has made them to
sing Psalms for joy? Has any gone to the Lords wars, at his own cost? or
planted the Lords vineyard, and not drink of the wine? Has any labored in
the Lords husbandry, and gone away without his reward? Have any at any time
believed God, and ben deceived? Has any trusted God with his estate, that has
not been compassed about with the mercies of the Lord? Psalm. 32. 10.
Has any loved the Lord, and not been loved again? Has any craved day and
not been borne withal? repented and not been forgiven? In a word; did ever
any employ his talent to the Lords advantage, and not more to his own
advantage? for have they not (besides the receipt of commendations for their
faithfulness) been put in possession of their masters joy? Mat. 25. 20
And on the contrary, has any neglected the gifts of God bestowed upon him,
and has it not been to his own loss, as he that hid his Talent in the
ground? Has any Esau sold his birthright, and not lost the blessing? Has
any Judas sold his Master, and betrayed the truth, and not been the first that
repented the bargain, by that time that he and the gallows, or the Devil, or
both have reckoned together? Have any with Demas forsaken gods servants, to
follow this present world, and not with Hymeneu^ and Alexander made shipwreck
of faith and a good conscience? 1 Timothy 1. 19.
Believe me (good brethren) it will stand us in hand to look less to our
earthly Treasure, and more after the heavenly, least in the end we loose both.

To conclude therefore this point: seeing as the Christians heavenly Treasure,
which is both Christ himself and all the riches of his Gospel be so
excellent, rare, and precious that nothing may be compared therewith; and
seeing the treasures of this his kingdom of Grace (though they be inestimable
and unspeakable) are but a taste and earnest of those treasures, which be
reserved for the Saints in his kingdom of glory. And lastly, seeing as they
which seek after the heavenly Treasure, shall also have earthly blessings to
accompany the same, as far forth as God shall see good for his children, let
every Christian heart be hereby moved and persuaded to lay up from henceforth
Treasure in heaven, rather than on earth, since every man desires the best
things.

As the Christians heavenly Treasure is so be preferred before all things, for
the Excellency thereof, so also is it here commended unto us by our blessed
Savior, for the Perpetuity, and the Security of the same. For their
Perpetuity, he says that neither Moth can eat it, nor Rust consume it. And
for their security the safe keeping, he tells thee that they are where no Thief
can dig through and steal them, meaning that no enemy whether terrestiall or
infernal, whether man or Devil can possibly deceive thee or deprive thee of
them.

Now as touching the Perpetuity of the Christians heavenly Treasure, Of their
Perpetuity
it is such and of so long continuance, that even in that respect it is to be
preferred before all earthly and transitory Commodities: for all earthly
commodities and treasures they are ey^ther used or not used, if they be put to
any use or employment, they consume and wear: if they be put to no use, but
lie by, then they are corrupted, which corruption also abateth not a little
both of their substance and glory: But as for the Heavenly Treasures of Gods
grace and spirit, they are neither consumed, nor corrupted. There is more use
of them then of any earthly thing whatsoever, yet are they not, neither can
they be subject to any consumption: Nay, they are no whit the worse, but much
the better for the using. Tell me, is there not a daily yse of Prayer, of
Preaching, of Faith, of Charity, of Repentance, of Patience, of Hope, of
Humility, etc. And are they not through continual use increased,
strengthened, and made easy? like the five tallents, which being put forth to
advantage, gained five more. And as Milo that Tullie speaks of, Milo.
by using his strength day by day, in carrying of a Calfe did so increase his
strength, that he was able to bear it on his shoulders when it was an Ox: so
does the Christian Soul by inuring his patience and faith to bear smaller
crosses, that in time he is able through daily exercise of the spirit, to
bear greater crosses, and to put up mighty wrongs: Through negligent
slothfulness, cursed ingratitude, and profane abusing of Gods heavenly
Graces, they may dye and decay in thee, but the more they are used, the more
they are increased.

The glorious Garment, and royal Robe of Christ that Son of Righteousness,
Mal. 4. 2.
wherewith Saint John saw the Church clothed, is never worn out, nor shall
ever be put off, until faith and Hope be abolished; their pure Gold that they
buy of him is never spent, and their Sun is never set, though sometime
perhaps it may be under a cloud. The Oil of gladness wherewith they are
anointed is like the widows Oil of Sarepta, wherewith she paid her debts,
maintained her self and her house, and yet her Cruse was still full. Ioh. 2.
Nay, Christ turns the water of his servants (that love to enuite him unto
their feasts) into wine, and the oftener it is powered forth the sweeter it is.
One Helmet of Hope, one Shield of Faith, one Sword of the Spirit, etc. shall
last all thy life, and save thee in a thousand battles of temptations and
spiritual conflicts, and never be worn: for whom the Lord loves, he loves
^to the end, and his mercies endure for ever. There is but one Faith, one God,
one Lord, one Baptism, one Word, one Spirit, and one Hope, though there be
many misbeliefes, many Devils, many falsehoods, many doubts; there is but one
supreme goodness, though many evils, and that one shall overcome all, and
remain always the same, that we may still sing with the Psalmist, The mercies
of the Lord endure for ever.

And as the Christians heavenly treasure does excel for Perpetuity, Of their
Security.
so also for Security: for it is laid up in heaven, where the Lord himself
dwells, and from whence he laugheth all Thieves both infernal and
terrestiall to scorn.

Many lay up their treasure in the bottom of a ship, and the sea swalloweth it
up; but what sea can devour those Treasures that are laid up in heaven? Many
put their treasure into other men's hands, who spend it vainly, or run away
secretly; but who can spend, or run away with that which is laid up in
heaven? Many bestow their Treasure upon their back, belly, and building, three
such Bees as will sting the land to death, 3 Bees.
if they be not taken heed of, and all perish in the use, by fire, or by age,
or by sickness, or by death; but no such thing can happen to those treasures
which are laid up in heaven. Many have houses, and lands, and riches, and
friends, to day in very good security as the world thinks, and by to morrow
they are gone, or sold, or wasted, or stolen, or dead, or turned to another
mind, but they that have once laid up the Treasures of a good life, and a good
Conscience in heaven, shall be sure to find them there, and to enjoy them for
ever: for they are so kept to his use, that no Thief can ever steal them from
him.

And howsoever some vain and presumptuous Persons will not stick through
greediness of gain, to undertake (for a quantity of money) to secure a man's
goods at sea, or at land, yet considering the miserable unquietness that man's
life is exposed unto, and the universal disagreement and war that is
between man and all the Creatures in the world, yea, between the Creatures
themselves, nay more, between man and man in all estates and degrees: nay more
than that, between every man in himself. I see no reason, why any man should
be so unwise, as to promise unto himself any secure enjoying of any worldly
commodity, or why another should so confidently (or desperately rather)
undertake to secure any man's goods or estate, when as he cannot secure
himself one minute of an hour to an end. And first, for the miserable and
unquiet estate of this life, I see not what can be said more to discover the
same, then has been already said by Petrach that learned Italian Orator,
Fran. Petrach. de remedijs vtriusque fert.
the substance of whose discourse, concerning this point, I think will not be
lost labor to lay before thee, which briefly is this: that considering the
uncertain and sudden chances and changes, whereunto the affairs and estates
of men are subject, Nothing more frail or unquiet than the life of Man.
nothing can be more frail, nothing more unquiet then the life of man. In
other living creatures (says he) it is not so, and why? because nature has
provided for them a wonderful kind of remedy: but what is that remedy? might
not we enjoy it with them? Oh no, for it is a certain ignorance of
themselves, by reason whereof they enjoy their life and being, in less misery,
and more quiet then man does, for in us only that have degenerated, Memory,
Understanding and providence perverted unto our own toil etc.
both our memory, and understanding, our providence, and all the divine gifts
of our mind are converted (or perverted rather) unto our own toil and
destruction: for, are we not haunted always with vain and superfluous, yea,
with noisome and pestiferous Cares: Cares.
which cause us to be grieved with the present time, Grieved.
to be vexed with the time past, and to be afraid of the time to come? Vexed.
If our life were well governed, Afraid.
it were the most happy and pleasant thing that we possess, but now so many
causes of miseries and nourishments of sorrows do we daily heap together,
that we make our life a wretched and woeful toil, Entrance blindness.
whose Entrance is blindness, Progress labor.
whose Progress is labor, whose End is sorrow, End sorrow.
and the whole Course error. What Day do we pass oue^ in rest and quietness?
Course error.
or rather that we find not more painful and troublesome then other? Day.
What Morning have we ever passed so merry and pleasant, Morning.
that has not been overtaken with some sorrow and heaviness before night?
What perpetual war is it that we make against Fortune War with Fortune.
(as some speak which know not the divine providence to be the governor of all
things) We only being weakelings and unarmed, take upon us to encounter a
most fierce foe, in unequal fight; and be again (as lightly as things of
naught) tosseth us up, Better overcome then be had in continual scorn.
and throws us down, and turns us round about, and plays with us, so
that it were better for us to be quite o^ercome, then continually to be had in
scorn. And the cause hereof, is nothing else but our own lightness and
daintiness: for we seem to be good for nothing else, but to be tossed
het^er and thither like a tennis-ball, The cause, our ^owne lightness.
being creatures of a very short life, of infinite carefulnes, and ignorant
unto what shore to fall with our ship, or unto what resolution to apply our
minds.

And besides the present evil, we have always somewhat to grieve us behind
our backs, and before our eyes to make us afraid: which thing hapn^th to no
other Creature besides man, for unto all others it is most perfect Security,
to have escaped that which is present. But we in respect of our Wit and
Understanding of our mind, are in a continual wrestling and strife with an
enemy. Which being so, what safety or security can we look for with our
earthly pelf (notwithstanding all the bonds, and Bills, Evidences and
Conu^aiances, and whatsoever devise else by crafty heads can be contrived)
when we can by no means secure our selves of our selves in rest and quietness
one hour to an end.

Now as touching the universal disagreement and war, Universal discord
between man and the Creatures.
that is between man and the Creatures, and between the Creatures themselves,
and between man and man, yea, and in every man in himself, it is more then
evident, for do not the Stars move against the Firmament? Do not the Elements
which be of contrary qualities strive one against another? Are not the Winds
at continual conflicts among themselves? Does not one time contend against
another time, and one thing against another thing, and all things against us?
The Spring is moist, the Summer is dry, the Harvest is pleasant, and the Winter
sharp: And this which is called change and alteration, is in very deed strife
and disagreement, although by the divine providence of almighty, they are made
to agree together, against their own nature, to serve man's turn, that man
might serve him.

These things upon which we dwell, Of the Elements.
by which we live and are nourished, which flatter us with so many enticements,
how terrible are they when once they begin to be angry? the earthquakes,
shipwrackes, whirlewindes, raging fires, and mighty floods, do sufficiently
declare. With what violence does the Hail fall? What force have storms and
tempests? What rattling of Thunder? What rage of lightning? What fury of the
waves? What blowing of the Sea? What roaring of floods? what excursions of
Rivers? What recourse and concourse of clouds? Our meats and drinks which we
take to nourish us, if they be immoderately and excessiuely taken of us, what
seazures and forfaitures do they make of Reason, Sense and Strength, yea,
oftentimes of health and life it self?

There is no living Creature without war. No Creature without war.
Fishes, Fowls, wild Beasts, Serpents, Men, one kind of these persecuteth
another, none are at quiet. The Lion follows the Wolf, the Wolf the Dog,
the Dog the Hare, and the Hare the green Corn; with what cra^t does the ^oxe
pursue our Lambs, and our Poultry? What watching is there of Crows and Kites
about our Pigeon houses, and Broodes* of Chickens? And what assaults of Thieves
is there against the privy Chambers, and Closets of rich men? What watching
and warding is there in every several kind, how great and diligent contention?

But though these cease, yet disagreement cease not: Of Love and Marriage.
for what hart-burning is there even in Love? What disagreement in Marriage?
How many complaints, what suspicions are there amongst Lovers? Masters and
Servants.
What sighs, what pains, what contention between Masters and Servants?
Parents and Children.
Yea, what bitter contention do we see between Parents and Children, and
between Brother and Brother? And as touching the love of Parents, who are most
tenderly affected toward their Children, yet how great their indignation is,
it is evident, whiles they love them that are good, and lament their case that
are evil, and thus in a manner they hate while they love heartily. Friends.
Now among Friends although there be agreement in the words and ends, yet in
the way, and in their actions what disagreement and contrari^tie of opinions
and counsels is there? What then shall a man hope for in hatred? for there is
Hatred in Love, and War in Peace, and Dissension in agreement. If we
consider the orders of Bees in their Hiues, Bees.
what thronging together, what noise, what wars, not only with their
neighbors, but amongst themselves, what domestical conflicts, and dissentions
is there amongst them? If we look upon the Dove, Doves.
that innocent and simple bird, and which (as some write) has no gall, with
what battles and disquietnesse, with what clamours and outcryes (I pray you)
do they pass forth their life? And now (to meet with Christ's instance again)
How does the Moth gnaw the cloth? Moth.
the Rot the post, and little Worms by day and night fret through the bowels
of Beams and huge Timber? Rot.
Again, Worms
what an enemy is the Grassehopper to Herbs, the Caterpiller to Fruits
before they be ripe, and the Fowls of the Air to ripe f^uites and grain?
Sparrow.
what an enemy is the Mildew to the Vintage, Mildew.
the blasting to the Herbs, the Canker to the Leaves, and the Moule to the
roots? Moule.
What should I speak of the hurtful plenty of branches and leaves of Trees,
against which the wakefull Husbandman gives diligent attendaunce? And what
does the continual return of Briars and weeds, but minister perpetual matter
of toil and strife? I let pass the furious rage of showers of Rain, and
heaps of Snow, and biting of Frosts, and violence of Ise, and force of Floods,
which many times shake whole Regions and Countries.

But thou live amongst the Richer and more delicate sort perhaps, The toiles
of the richer sort.
yet art not thou nor any of them without their discommodities and toils, for
how is their quiet silence, and sweet sleep interrupted and troubled either
with the cryings and screiches of Owls, or the continual barking of Dogs all
night against the Moon, or with the horrible outcryes and hellish clamor of
Cats, meeting upon the tiles and tops of houses? And on the day time they are
annoyed with the common clamor and laughter of Fools, then which nothing is
more ridiculous, and the merriments of Drunkards, then the which nothing is
more grievous? Then come the complaints of such as be at variance, and the
Iangling and scoulding of old wives. Ad hereunto the thronging and noise of
Iudgement^ Hals upon court days, the Altercations of Merchants, and such as
buy and sell, together with the vain Oaths and Protestations both on the one
side and the other. Adioyne hereunto the sorrowful singing of workmen to
assuage their painful travail. Finally, examine whatsoever there is, run
through in thy mind all the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, there is like
contention in the top of the Sky, and the bottom of the Sea, and there is
strife in the deep rifts of the earth, as well as in the woods and Fields, and
as well is there perpetual disagreement in the Deserts of sands, as in the
streets of Cities.

At the very beginning of the world there was a battle fought in the first
Heaven, and those vanquished Angels (now Devils) whilst they endeavor to be
revenged upon us mortal men, that inhabit the earth, they procure unto us
immortal war of sundry temptations, with most hard and doubtful business.
And to gather all into a short sum, all things whatsoever having sense, or
without sense, from the uppermost top of heaven, unto the lowest center of the
earth, and from the chiefest Angel, to the basest worm, there is continual
and everlasting strife between them, what security then can be looked for of
any thing in this world.

As for man himself, the Lord and governor of all things, Of Man against Man.
who only by the rule of Reason, should be able to guide in Tranquillity,
this swelling and troublesome sea, with what continual strife is he tossed,
both externally with other things, as also internally with himself. As for the
things that are outward, whereby man is tossed and turmoilde, they are
innumerable and unspeakable, even from one man to another, and practiced by one
man against another: Homo homini Lupus, one man is become a Wolf toward
another. What mischief is there, that one man works not against another? and
all other harms, by what means soever they happen, yet being compared with
these, do seem but light discommodities. Who can number the disagreement of
opinions, the variety of sects, the contentions of the learned, and the wars
of Kings and Nations? Who then can be assured of the Truth? Who can assure his
peace long, if he seek no further for Peace and Truth then unto this world?

But if thou or thy estate be called into question, as whose is not sometime?
thou will repair to s^kilfull Grammarians, who can tell what Construction to
make of every things; or to eloquent Rhetoricians, that can tell how to
persuade much; or to witty Logitians, who can dispute thy cause well; or to
learned Lawyers, who can plead thy cause effectually, but then remember again,
what contentions are amongst Grammaians, not yet decided? what conflicts among
Rhetoricians? what Quirks and quidities amongst Logitians? what brabble and
clamor amongst Lawyers? who how well they agree the continuance of their
Cliants causes does evidently declare. Lawyer^ for thy Wealth*
And if thou say thou will have Law for thy money* then remember first, that
they will also have thy money for Law, and by that time the Law has tried thy
cause, it may be, half thy estate and wealth must be sharde amongst the
Lawyers and their Clerks, who having eaten the Oyster which made the strife,
will return thee the shell for recompense.

Well then, Physicians for health.
thou will say, if thy wealth stand upon so tickle a pin, thou will look to
thy Health, and to that end thou will make much of the Physician; but then
hear again, make thou as much of him, as thou can, be sure of one thing,
that he will make as much of thee as he can. And as for the agreement of
Physicians about diseases, their causes and their cures, let their Patients be
judge, for that life which they have pronounced to be short, by their
contentions they have made most short. But if thy wealth and Health be so
uncertain, thou will then look to thy Religion, and be assured that that
shall be right and sound: thou do well in so doing, but then thou must take
heed thou hang not thy Faith or Religion upon men, but upon God, and his word,
for else what deformity and disagreement of opinions is there in the holy
rites and religion of the Church, where Gods heavenly direction in his Word is
neglected, Strife for Religion.
and that not so much in the words of the learned, as in the weapons of the
armed, and oftener tried in the field then in the schools? But it may be for
more security of thy self and thy estate, thou will look to the common life
and affairs of men, and conform thy self to the fashions of the most in
house keeping, To do n^ the most do.
in building, in apparel, in recreation, etc. But then remember again, that
if thou have not light and Wisdom from Heaven, thou may soon slip into the
broad way that leads to Hell. And again even then thou will be to seek, so
many windings and turnings thou shall meet withal, for there are scarce two
in a city that do agree, both many things else, but especially the great
diversity of their houses and Apparel, does declare, for who ever succeeded
any man in an house, were he never so rich and good an Husband, that has not
(for all that) changed many things in it? so that look what one man had a
desire to build, another has a pleasure to pull down: witness hereof may be
the often changing of Windows, damming up of Doors, and the skarres and new
reparations that are done in old Walls. Nay more, is not every man's opinion and
Judgment contrary to himself? whilst (according to the saying of the Poet) He
pulls down, Horace.
and builds up, and changes that which was square into round. Diruit,
^dificat, mutat quadrata rotundis.
By which it may appear that almost no man can agree with another man, nor yet
with himself.

To these may be added the contention that is oftentimes without an Adversary,
Contention without an adversary.
as of Sriueners with Parchment, with Ink, with Pens, with Paper, before they
can make them serve their turn, Scriueners.
and many the like? What a coile have Soldiers Soldiers.
(not with their enemies only) but with their own Horses and Armor, when as
the horse waxes obstinate, and their Armor wayeth them down? Speakers and
writers.
What business have they that speak, and those that write at the mouth of
another, whilst the one through earnest intention speaks many things
imperfect, and the other through ignorance, or unskillfulness, or a flitting and
unconstant wit misconstrueth those things that are perfect? Again, what
Conflicts have Infants Infants.
with falls, Children Children.
with their Books, and Young men Young men
with pleasures and unruly affections? Young men are indeed to be pitied, for
there are no kind of men that would seem to be more merry, and none indeed
are more miserable and sorrowful. And again, in what danger are Women Women.
in Childebearing? what wrestling have men continually with Poverty and
Ambition? What great carking and caring for more then is needful for living?
And finally, what everlasting war have old men Old men^
with old age and sicknesses? and all other persons with death also, and (that
which is more grievous then death it self) with the continual fear of death?

But to omit this external strife (which is one while with Adversaries, Of the
internal strife in a man's self.
and another while without an Adversary) how great is the internal
Contention, not only against another, but even against our self, every one
enduring a continual war even in the secret closet of his mind? With how
diverse and contrary Affections does the mind strive against it self? with how
variable and uncertain motion of mind is every man drawn, sometime one way,
sometime another? he is never whole, nor never one man, but always dissenting
and divided in himself. Now he wills, by and by he will not that which he
would before: now he likes, by and by he misliketh: now he loves, by and
by he hates: now he flattereth, presently he threatens: now he iesteth, and
presently is in good earnest: here he begins, there he leaves off: now
he admireth, by and by he disdaineth: one while he goes forward, and
straight way he turns back again, and such like, then the which there can be
nothing imagined more uncertain, and with which the life of man ebbeth and
f^oweth more turbulently, from the beginning to the ending without
intermission. And what tempests and madness is there not in these four
passions, to hope or desire, and to rejoice, to fear, and to be sorry, which
trouble the poor and miserable mind by driving it with sudden winds and
gales, far from the Haven, into the midst of most dangerous Rocks? And
therefore say not as some do, that thou will trust no body but thy self, or
what thou have once resolved upon, no man shall alter thee from it, for they
self are most variable, and thine own false heart will be the first that
shall betray thee. And therefore to conclude and return where we began, since
the life of man is so full of misery and unquietness, since there is so little
agreement, nay, so much strife and contention between all things created,
sensible and insensible, and all against man, and since there is so much discord
and iarring in all estates and degrees of men, and lastly, in every particular
man, with himself, how can thou now that art a Christian (and induced with
any spark of Heavenly light) set thy heart upon the world, or any thing that
is in the World, to make it the study of thy brain, the care of thy mind, or
the joy of thy heart, since in this world as there is nothing of any Excellency,
or Perpetuity, so likewise is there nothing of any Security or safety, but
all exposed to peril, danger and loss?

But in heaven it is otherwise, look what Treasures thou sendest thither
before thy* dying day, thou shall be sure to have them secured unto thy use
for ever, and why? surely because they are with thy GOD and most loving Father,
where no Thief can break through and steal.

As this Doctrine should cause us to leave our doting upon this World, Use.
so it seru eth to stay the troubled Conscience from drooping under his sins,^
and from despairing of Gods mercy, for though thy Si^nes be many and great,
yet thy Treasure is sure in heaven, and there is thy Comfort. Had thou ever
any Peace of Conscience, any Comfort in Christ, any Joy in the holy Ghost, that
same abides still in heaven for thee: and that which thou had here, was
but an earnest of that which is laid up for thee there.

But thou can not see it, Object.
nor feel it, thou can not pray so effectually as thou were wont to do, etc.

What then? Answ.
yet it is in Heaven and nothing can take it from thee. God does not keep our
Treasure from Mothes and Thieves, to let the Devils deceive us of it, no, no,
it is sure for ever. When the Child abuses such things as his Father
bestows upon him, they are taken from him and laid up till another time; and
though the foolish Child would have them still in his sight, yet that may not
be, the wisdom of the father will not suffer it: so God deals with his
Children, as touching the gifts and graces of his Spirit, and the use of them.
The similitude applies it self: It suffices Jacob to hear that his son
Joseph was a live, though he saw him not: so it should much comfort us, to
know that our Savior Christ lives in us, though we always feel him not
alike.

I once loved the word of God (thou will say) and was zealous for the glory of
God, Object.
and did believe his promises, and did rejoice in the exercises of Religion,
and prayed continually, and grieved heartely for my sins; Oh then I had
Treasure in heaven, now all is gone, my Spirit is dull and heavy, I cannot
pray, nor meditate with that feeling and comfort, that I was wont to feel.

But do the Lord no injury: Answer.
do not measure his grace by thy feeling: while Satan's messenger did buff^t
Paul, 2. Cor* 12.
that blessed Apostle could not so sensibly feel Gods grace as before, but
cried out, Romans 7.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me? So whiles temptations do
buffet us, we are benumbed and know not well, how it is with us in respect of
Grace, but yet Gods grace does uphold us for all that Whiles Satan sifted
Peter, Luke 22. 32
Christ prayed for him that his Faith might not fail, but it was more then
Peter felt, and so it is with the rest of Gods Children at some times. These
buffetings and siftings are tokens of Gods favor, yet secret in us for the
time, for whom does Satan most desire to sift of all the Apostles? surely none
so much as him that before had made the best confession of Christ. And none are
more buffeted then they that have received the greatest Graces. Ye shall sorrow
(says our Savior Christ) in the World, Ioh. 16. 20
but in me ye shall have joy, and your joy shall no man take from you, no nor
Devil, nor Angel, nor God himself, 1. Tim. 2
for if we believe not, 13
yet God is faithful (says Saint Paul) and not deny himself. Verse. 19.
And again, The foundation of God abides sure, and has this seal. The Lord
knows who are his, and let every one that calls on the name of the Lord
les^is depart from iniqui^^e, to show that if we depart from iniquity, we
shall our selves also know that we are the Lords, yea, and to that end we
ought to call on the name of the Lord Jesus, that by his grace we may depart
from iniquity. And in so doing we may say as the Apostle says, 2. Tim 1. 12
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed Unto him against the day of Christ.

And whereas thou complainest that thou can not pray, know that yet for all
that the Spirit of God may be in thee, Romans 8. 26
For the Spirit (says Paul) helps our infirmities for we know not how to
pray as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us with ^ighes,
which cannot be expressed, to show that when the hearts of Gods Children are
oppressed with burdensome Temptations, which stop the course and passage of our
Prayers, that then the Spirit of God makes a supply by sighs and groans.

But if Gods spirit were in thee (thou say) thou should feel it working
in thee some heavenly and spiritual work. Object.


True it is, and so he does, for even the sighs and groans of a troubled
spirit, Answer.
are the works of Gods spirit, and even the hungring after righteousness, is
no less the work of Grace, then the having of righteousness. And the work of
Gods Spirit is oftentimes more secret in thee then thou art aware of: for could
God take a Rib out of Adams side while he slept, and never felt it, and cannot
God put his Spirit into thy hungry and heavy Soul, and keep it there as a
Liger, while thy Faith sleeps, and thou not feel it? God deals with his
Children as Joseph dealt with his Brethren, who knew them well enough, but for
a time would not be known of them, yea, and put their money into their sacks
more then they knew of, and at last made himself known unto them. Gods spirit
is called the Comforter, and his words are the words of Comfort. Son be of
good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, He has thy pardon with him in
thee, and when thou have most need, he will deliver it thee, and thou shall
see it, with joy and great gladness.

In thee mean time, that he is in thee know by this, that thou do not hate
the Lord, but love him and have an holy desire, Heb. 13.
with some earnest endeavor to serve him, to live honestly, and to keep a
good Conscience in all things, and art afraid of falling away. And surely all
good desires are of the Lord. Wait the Lords leisure with Patience, seek for
Peace, which though thou can not find awhile, yet by Prayer thou must wait
on the Lord, and say, Lord because there is mercy with thee that thou may be
feared, I will wait on thee, even as the eye of a Maid servant waits on the
hand of her Mistress, I will condemn my self of folly, and say, O my Soul,
why art thou cast down, wait on God, for he is thy present help and thy God.
And thus shall thou be restored to the joy of thy Salvation. And as Job after
his manifold trials, had both of Gods goodness, of Satan's malice, his friends
incharitableness, and his own weakness, had all seven fold restored unto
him again: So thou after thy supposed loss of heavenly Treasure, shall find
heavenly treasure plentifully restored unto thee again. When Christ stepped
aside from his earthly father and Mother, to do the business of his heavenly
Father, he meant to come again, but in the mean time they sought him with
heavy hearts, and at the last, they found him in the Temple, disputing with the
Doctors, to their great joy and astonishment: So Christ sometimes does as it
were step aside from us, to the end we may seek after him, and we may
perhaps seek him with heavy hearts, but yet at the last, we shall find him
with great joy, for they that sow in tears, shall surely reap in joy.

Thou have heard what high commendations are given of the Christians heavenly
Treasure; do thou believe it? then lay up thy treasure in heaven, say not as
the buyer does, it is naught, it is naught, for if thou could obtain it,
with the loss of all the world, thou might and would brag of thy bargain.
But alas, how few regard this? The poorer sort care not, but for back and
belly, and never repair with good will to the house of God, How mos^men go to
Gods house.
but when they think to receive an alms, like the criple at the gate of the
Temple, or like the people that followed Christ, to have their bellies filled
of free cost. Others come to the sermons and prayers of the Church, but laden
with their sins, and their minds cumbred with pleasures and cares of this
world, to whom the house of God is as a house of correction, and they sit there
to be whipped, and every sentence of the Preacher, that crosses their
delights, or beloved sins, is as so many lashes and ierkes tormenting and
tearing their guilty Consciences. Others again, make the Lords house as it
were a market place, repairing thither only to muze and study of the prizes
of their commodities, or to make some bargains, or to do some business with
some whom they have appointed to meet there. Others again, make the house of
God their play house, and the Pulpit the Theater, the Preachers are their
fools, and Scripture phrases are their Jests, to make themselves merry
withal. And others go to the Lords house as children go to school, the one
for fear of the rod, and the other for fear of Laws and Presentiments,
whereupon the Proverb is grown, as willingly as ever I went from school, but
these may say, as willingly as ever I went for Church, but alas poor souls,
long it will be before any of these kind of hearers, get any heavenly
Treasure, except they seek after it, with better minds and affections.

But now, as we have heard these Treasures commended for their Excellency,
Four circumstances. 1 Place. 2 Time. 3 Manner how. 4 Why.

for their Perpetui^y, and Security, so it will not be amiss, to consider of
the Place where we must seek for them, of the Time when, of the Manner how to
lay them up, and lastly of the Reason why: All which are questions necessary,
for the Serpent commended knowledge, but withal showed a wrong way thereunto:
so all commend the heavenly Treasure, but all take not a right course to
obtain it, therefore says the Apostle, Sorunne that ye may obtain. 1. Cor.
9. 24
Christ is the Treasure and Treasurer. And this Treasure is in the ship of
Christ, that is his Church, and no where else. The Ministers of the Church or
Masters of the Assembly (as Solomon calls them) are the factours. Now in what
room to search, or in what Vessel, is the question? In Jerusalem there were
many chests, yet but one Ark, that had the holy things and sacred Monuments in
it. Though there were many Waters, yet was there but one Poole of Siloam, in
which Lepers were cleansed. In Christ's Ship be many places, but the place of
the treasure is but one. 2. Cor. 4.
Saint Paul says it is in earthen Vessels, so say we too, meaning the
Ministers of the Gospel, because we are in show contemp^ible and in substance
brittle.

These vessels have a book that will show all, if any man can open it, and
understand it, and it is the Word of God, containing the holy Scriptures of the
old and new Testament, which Christ would have us to search, because they bear
witness of him, Ioh. 5. 39.
and contain in them eternal life. Like a Merchants bill they are, which
shows what commodities are in the ship. This book has been by gods
providence mightily and miraculously preserved from time to time from burning,
drowning, and loosing, and this privilege it has, that it endures for ever,
and when heaven and earth shall fail, yet not one jot or title thereof shall
fall to the ground.

The places then that we must frequent if we will find this Heavenly
Treasure, are the holy Assemblies of Gods people, where God is called upon by
the public Prayers of the Saints, the Word is truly taught, and the
Sacraments sincerely ministered, for the working and increasing of faith, and
not the conuenticles of Schismatikes, who have separated themselves from the
public assemblies of Gods Church, and are at open defiance with their mother
the true Church of Jesus Christ, who first brought them to that knowledge and
Faith that they have, if in truth and soundness they have any at all. That
which must discover unto us this heavenly Treasure, is the holy Bible, and
sacred Scriptures of God, and not the revelations of Anabaptists, nor the
Dreams of the Family of Love, nor the Jews Ta^mud, nor the Turks Alcaron,
nor the Popes Portuise, nor the Tridentine Counsels, nor the Traditions or
decrees of the Church of Rome, all which will lead us to trash, but not to
Treasure; to hell, but not to heaven; to the flesh, but not to the spirit, and
so from God to the Devil.

And being come now to the place, and having found the Book that will rcueale
this Heavenly Treasure, what must we do? Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, says our Savior Christ, to show that there is some
hidden Trasure in it more then is seen outwardly, or more then they make show
of, and so there is. And therefore the Word is preferred before Gold, Psa. 19.
10
albeit most men had rather have Gold then the Word: but Da^id could say that
of Gods Word, which he could not do of Gold, nor all the world besides, Ps.
119. 92
and that was this, Except thy word had been my comfort in my Affliction, I
had perished. Pro. 3. 13.
And Solomon avouches that man to be blessed that finds wisdom, and him
happy that gets Understanding, and doubts not to yield this for his
reason, 14
That the merchandise thereof is better then the Merchandise of Silver, and the
gain thereof is better then Gold. 15
It is more precious (says he) then Pearls, and all things that thou can
desire, are not to be compared unto her. 16
Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand riches and glory.
Her paths are the paths of pleasure, and all her ways prosperity. 17
She is a Tree of Life to them that lay hold on her, and therefore blessed are
they that receive her. But to see these are required very heavenly and
spiritual eyes, even the eyes of a lively ^aith; for carnal sense cannot
comprehend them, and worldly wisdom cannot conceive them, The cross of
Christ an offense to some.
yea, many laugh at us, because we seek for life in the death of Christ, grace
in his curse, righteousness in his condemnation, and comfort in his holy
Gospel. Verily (say they) so flows cold water out of a burning Furnace, and
so springs light out of darkness, and hereupon they conclude, that none are
more foolish then we, which hope for Life at a dead man's hand, which ask
forgiveness at a condemned person, which fetch the grace of God out of one
that was accursed, and fly for refuge to the Cross, as to the only author of
everlasting Salvation, which are all the Treasures that the word of God does
offer us, and therewithal laughing at our simplicity, they think themselves
very sharp-witted, but alas they want the chiefest thing in true wisdom,
namely, the feeling of Conscience, and the ^eare of God-Let us but enter deeply
into our selves, and so soon as we acknowledge our own wretchedness, the
way for us unto Christ, and for Christ unto us, will be by and by paued and
made l^uell, for as to the attaining of humane Sciences, is requisite a fine
and well furnished wit, so to this Heavenly Philosophy is required a subdued
mind, for what taste can there be where is lothing?

As many then as will not willingly be deceived and perish, How to avoid the
former offense.
let them learn to begin with this l^sson, to know that they have to do with
God, to whom they must give account, let them set before their eyes, that
judgment seat, that makes even the Angels to tremble, let them hearken to
their own conscience, bearing witness against them, let them not harden their
hearts against the pricks of sin, and then they shall find nothing in the
death of Christ to be ashamed of. And let not their astonishment be a
stumbling block to us, but rather let us be carried from the humane nature of
Christ, to the glory of his Godhead, which may turn all curious questions into
admiration: And let us go from the death of Christ, to his glorious
resurrection, which may wipe away all slander of his Cross: Let us pass from
the weakness of the flesh, to the power of the Spirit, which may swallow up
all foolish thoughts: And let us still pray with holy Da^id, that the Lord
would open the eyes of our Understanding, that we may see the wondrous things
of his word; for not every one that reads the book of God, does come to the
Treasure, for it is like a Nut with a double shell, both which must be broken
before the kernel can be found; or like a Chest with many locks, and every
one must be opened before the Treasure can be met withal.

To which end the Lord has appointed Preaching and Preachers, and endued them
with the tongues of the learned, and all to open the hidden Treasures of the
Gospel of Christ. To which must be joined a diligent ear, a mind to
meditate, and a sober tongue, to confer with thy Pastor and family, and an
humble Spirit, to be informed and reformed by the counsel of God. These
means are called digging, and searching, laborious exercises indeed, to show
what pains and diligence must be used in searching after the heavenly
Treasure. Prou. 2, 1^
My Son (says Solomon) if thou will receive my words, and hide my
commandment within thee, and cause thine ears to hearken unto Wisdom, 2
and incline thine heart unto Understanding, 3
if thou call after Knowledge, and cryest for Understanding, 4
if thou seek for her as for Silver, and searchest for her as for Treasures,
5
then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord and find the knowledge of
God. But if we be negligent, backward, and indifferent or lukewarm, then
will it fare with us, as with Laodicea, Reu. 3. 18.
we shall think we are rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing, when indeed we are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked.

And alas so it is with too too many and therefore when you come into their
houses, if the book of God be there, you shall find it covered over with
much rubbill, and dross, as Cards and Tables, merry Tales with sorry or
sorrowful tails, profane and scurrilous discourses, and paultry pamphlets,
and such like stuff, which domineere over the book of God, as the Jews did
over Christ's in Pilates hall; all which should be swept out of doors, or
sacrificed in the fire: and as for such humorists as do nothing but feed men's
humors with idleness, and ply them with the pleasures of sin, to the loss
of their precious time, which should be spent in seeking of the heavenly
Treasure, say unto them as Christ did unto Peter, when he solicited him
against the will of God, unto carnal courses, Turn thee behind me Satan,
thou art an offense unto me, and sauourest not the things of God.

The next thing to be considered is, Of the time when to lay up. etc. E^cles. 9
the time of gathering and laying up this heavenly Treasure, for there is a
time for all things, says the holy Ghost. All in time, says the World,
hereafter when old age comes, or when sickness comes, or at the hour of
death. It is not good to be too forward in Religion, or to meddle too soon
with matters of God and Godliness, for a young man may prove an old Devil.
But hear what God says, Eccle. 12. ^
thou foolish man. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the
evil days come upon thee, and the days whereof thou shall say I have no
pleasure. And Esai cries out unto thee, saying: Esa. 55. 6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nigh at
hand, to show us that the Lord will not always be found, much less when we
think good, neither will the days of old age and sickness be like the
days of youth and health, for then shall we feel our selves unfit and
untoward to seek after these things, in two regards: first, in regard of
natural infirmities and bodily pains which will hold thy mind occupied about
means of ease, as Physic and such like. Secondly, in regard of that strong
hand which sin through long custom will bear over thy soul, even to the
hardening of thy heart, for custom of sin, breeds hardness of heart, and
hardness of heart begets impenitencie, Romans ^. 1.
as the Apostle shows in the second to the Romans.

But the special time of gathering and laying up this heavenly Treasure, is
the holy Sabbath, and other times of holy assemblies, and generally whenever
thou art called forth, to hear the Word preached unto thee, or have any
occasion to exercise thy Faith, in the works of Charity and piety. Then
comes the Angel to stir the Poole, John. 5^
step in then, if thou will do thy self good, for afterward will be too
late, Whosoever carelessely neglects the Sabbath of the Lord, and
presumptiously gives God the slip in the holy Assemblies, as many car^all
Christians do, who mistrusting God with their estate, think it no sin to
spend the Sabbath day in their worldly affairs, or vain exercises, well may
they with Esau get a sup of pottage to stay their hungry mawes withal if God
do not cross their enterprises, and curse their labors (as oftentimes he
does) but surely their heavenly Birthright is for^aite by the bargain, and but
bankroupts they prove in the heavenly Treasure of a Christian. They heap up,
but it is nothing but wrath against the day of wrath.

The Sabbath day is especially appointed for gathering of heavenly treasures,
Remember therefore that thou keep it holy as the Lord comminandeth, p^etend
not a necessity of breaking the (...) rest, where (...) is apparent, as the
manner of some is when (...) a fair Sabbath day, they must work, for fear of
Rain, but consider thou whose heart is buried under thy loaf, and wilt needs
be rich by deceiving the Lord of his right, consider I say, has not the Lord
provided for thee when it has rained? and dare thou not trust him when it is
fair? did he ever deceive any that trusted him with their estate, while they
walked reverently in his fear, and carefully kept his commandments? what
indignity then and dishonor is this that thou offrest unto the most high, in
that thou dare not trust him with thy body, whiles thou seek for the good
of thy Soul? And how do thou think to answer this gear, when thy
conscience shall be summoned to answer thereunto, before that Judgment Seat,
which makes the very Angels and Celestial Powers to tremble? Oh consider of
these things betimes, and the Lord (...) thy drowsy soul. Evil company how
dangerous
And above all, beware of sorting thy self with profane company, which will
cause thee to loose thy time, and dull the edge of the Spirit, decay thy
graces, and make thee to treasure up sin against the day of vengeance, Eecle.
9. 18
for one sin admitted with love and liking, lets out many graces and
makes hauock of all thy virtues.

Now the manner how to lay up this heavenly Treasure, How to lay up heavenly
treasure.
comes next to be remembered, and that is done three ways. First, by
relieuing of the Lord Jesus Christ in his members, which stand in need of
help, Sell that you have overplus (says Christ) or that you can sp^are (...),
and give to the poor. Make you bags which wax not old. Luke 12. 33. Luke 12.
33
to show that when a man gives alms to the poor, he does but take it out of
one purse and put it into another, out of bags that wax old, and put it into
bags that wax not old, and in so doing says Christ, thou shall find treasure
in heaven, in so doing I say, but not for so doing, Mar 19. 21
as Papists teach, If thou will be perfect (says Christ to the rich young man)
go and sell that thou have and give to the poor, and what you do to them, I
take it as done unto my self, for says our Savior Christ, Mat 25. 34
when they my poor members were in prison, I was in prison; when they were
hungry, naked, and cold, etc. I was hungry, naked and cold, and therefore what
you did to them, you did to me. To the like effect speaks the Prophet Esai,
Esa 58. 7.
If (says he) thou deal thy bread to the hungry, and bring the poor that
wandreth into thy house, and cover the naked when thou see him, then shall
thy light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall grow speedely,
thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall
embrace thee. Necessary encouragements, and why,
These be sweet encouragements and necessary, because poor people are unable
to recompense the kindness of those that bestow any thing upon them; and as
they are unable, so for the most part, they are very ungrateful, and their
unthankfulness does not a little discourage many, who would otherwise be more
beneficial then they are. And in these respects, men had rather venture their
goods upon any other thing, then upon the poor. For (say they) quod ingrato
feceris perijt: It is cast away which is given to unthankful persons: but
howsoever it be that many of the poorer sort, be both wretchedly unthankful,
and miserably unable to repay thee, yet if thou give them for Christ his
sake, in whose name commonly they ask it, thou shall find it again in heaven.

But it may be, thou will be content to give part of thy overplus to the
poor, so thou may reserve the other part to bestow on thy pleasure, but
beware thou deceive not thy self, for all thy overplus is for the poor,
Overplus for the poor.
when thy family is provided for, thy debts paid, and all Duties that thou
owe to the Church and Commonwealth, thy Prince and Country are de^^ayed,
that which remains is for the poor, to play for that is to cast lots upon
the Garment of Christ, Call. Har.
Ne fundis parcendum est, (says Cal^sin, Even of a man's ground and
Inheritance a Christian man must divide, some to poor Scholars, some to
schools of learning, some to the Ministry of the Gospel, some to maimed
soldiers, some to poor hospitals, and in all to Christ, and he that gives
but a cup of cold water to the poor members of christ, Man 10. 42
having no more to give, shall not loose his reward.

The second way to lay up Treasure in heaven, The 2 way to lay up, etc.
is by suffering constantly and patiently for Christ, when thou art thereunto
lawfully called and required, and that two ways: First, thou must suffer the
word of Christ which is the sword of the Spirit, to hew and cut thy sins, and
be content with patience, to endure the sifting and fanning of the Gospel,
Ioh. 15.
for except the dead and superfluous branches be cut off, we can never bring
forth fruit in Christ. Secondly, we must resolve to endure all outward crosses
and losses, for the everlasting Truth of Christ, for he that will saise his
life (says Christ) shall loose it, Mat. 10.
and he that will loose it for my sake and the Gospel, 39
shall save it. And if we suffer with him (says S. Paul) we shall also
reign with him. Romans 8. 17
If we belong to Christ, we must look for tribulation, and anguish, 35
and persecution, and famine, and nakedness, and peril, and sword, all which
will try their force, to see if they can separate us from the love of Christ.
Yea, we must look for his sake, 36
to be killed all the day long, and to be counted as sheep for the
slaughter. 37
But in all these things (says the holy Apostle) we are more then
conquerours, through him that loved us. 2 Cor. 4.
And therefore we faint not, but though our o^tward man perish, 16
yet the inward man is renewed daily. 17
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent weight of glory. 18
While we look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are
not seen. This point will be scarce welcomed, or well liked, of nice and
dainty professors of the Gospel, which must never go to Gods house, but
when the Sun shines, the ways are fair, and no Wind is stirring, to blow
upon them; and when they are there, they must hear nothing but pleasing
things, their sins must not be touched, much less can they endure to have
the cutting knife of Gods law, laid to the throat of their sin. And if all
the world does not applaud and commend their zeal, and good deeds, they soon
are discouraged, and stand stone still, like the wind mill that goes no longer
then the wind blows, no scoff or reproach, no persecution or trouble can
they endure for the Truths sake, what Treasure can these lay up by their
daintiness in heaven?

The third way to lay up Treasure in heaven, The third way to lay up, etc.
is while thou live here upon earth, to grow in the powerful and lively
knowledge of Christ crucified, and by a lively apprehensiue faith to make thy
self sure of all his benefits, in comparison of whom, thou oughtst with the
blessed Apostle, Phil. 3. 10.
to esteem all the world but dross and dung. Now to effect this, we must
consider the merit of Christ, the virtue of Christ, and the example of Christ,
and what benefit we have by every one of them; as that worthy man of God M.
Perkins, has both learnedly and heavenly declared, the sum whereof, I will
breefly recall into thy mind.

Christ is to be considered, as the common Treasury and storehouse of Gods
Church, for God has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in Christ. Ephesians.
1. 4. Ephe. 1. 4.
And in him are all the Treasures of Knowledge and Wisdom hidden. Col. 2. 3.
Col. 2. 3.
And of his fulnesse^wee all recei^e grace for grace. John. 1.
John. 1. So that all the blessings of God without exception are conuayed unto
us from the Father by Christ, and so must they be received and no otherwise.
But concerning the benefits of Christ we are to learn further two things:
first, what they are: Secondly, how or in what manner to use them. His benefits
are three: Merit, Virtue, and Example.

The Merit of Christ is the value of his death and passion, whereby he has
obtained to us Reconciliation And this Reconciliation has two parts: first,
Remission of sins, Secondly, acceptance to eternal life, and both for the
merit of Christ imputed. This benefit must be known not by conceit, nor
carnal presumption, but by the inward testimony of gods Spirit. To attain to
the infallible assurance of this benefit we must call to mind the promises of
the Gospel touching remission of sins, and the gift of eternal life to the
Faithful. Secondly, we must endeavor by the assurance of Faith to apply them
to our own hearts. And thirdly, we must use often exercises of Invocation and
repentance, for by our crying to God for reconciliation comes the assurance
thereof. And if it so fall out that a man in temptation, feel nothing but the
furious wrath of God, yet even then against all reason and feeling, he must
hold to the merit of Christ, and know that God is a most loving father to them
that have a care to serve him, even at that instant when he shows himself a
most fierce and terrible enemy, which Job knew right well when he said, Job.
13. 15
If the Lord should kill me, yet I will trust in him.

From the benefit of Reconciliation proceed four benefits. First, that
excellent peace of God, which passes all Understanding* Phil. 4. And that has
six parts: first, peace with the Trinity, for being Justified by Faith, we
have peace with God. Romans 5. 1. Secondly, Peace with Angles, who do ascend and
descend upon the Son of man. John. 1. 51. and all for the good of Gods
Church. For the Angels do incampe about those that fear the Lord. Psalm. 34.
And like Nurses do bear them in their arms. Psalm. 90. 12. that they hurt not
their foot against a stone. All this service which the Angels perform unto the
faithful, proceeds of this, that the faithful being in Christ, are pertakers
of his merit. Thirdly, peace with the Faithful, for, the Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, Esa. 11. 6.
and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid, and the Calfe and the Lion, and the
fat beasts together, and a little child shall lead them. Esaias. 11. 6. Fourthly,
peace with a man's self, and that is: first, when the Conscience washed in the
blood of Christ, cease to accuse a man: secondly, when the will and
affections are obedient to the mind, enlightened by the Word and Spirit of
God, and this is that which the Apostle means, when he says, Let the peace
of God rule in your hearts. Col. 3. 15. Fifthly, Peace with our enemies, and
that two ways: first, in seeking Peace with all, hurting none, but doing good
to all: Dan. 1. 9.
secondly, in that God restrains their malice and inclines their hearts to
peace. Sixthly, Peace with the Creatures. Psalm. 91. 13. Psalm 91. 13
Thou shall walk upon the Lion and the Dragon, etc. And in that day (says the
Lord) I will make a co^enant for them, with the wild Beasts, and with the
fowls of the heaven, and with that that creeps upon the earth, etc. Hos. 2.
18 Hos. 2. 18.
If therefore we see God against us, our own Conscience against us, the
Angels against us, the Faithful against us, the wicked against us, the
Creatures against us, let us examine this point, of Reconciliation, and if all
be with us, let us know that it is the benefit of Christ's merit.

The second benefit of Christ's merit, The second benefit.
is recovery of that right, which man has to all the Creatures, the which Adam
lost to himself and all his posterity. 1. Cor. 3. 22. Whether it be the
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours,
and you Christ's. The right way of knowing this benefit is this, when God gives
meat and drinck, etc. we must not barely consider them, as blessings of God,
for that very Heathen men can do, which know not Christ, but as proceeding
from the love of God in Christ. And so often as we use the Creatures, this
point must come to mind, for blessings conceived a part from Christ, are
misconceiued. Whatsoever they are in themselves, they are no blessings to us,
but in and by Christ's Merits: for this cause it is not sufficient generally to
know Christ to be our Redeemer, but we must learn to see him and acknowledge
him in every particular gift and blessing of God. If men when they behold their
meats and drincks, could by faith behold in them the merit of Christ's passion,
there would not be so much gluttony and drunkenness as there is. If the like in
their houses and lands, their would not be so much fraud and deceit,
in^ustice and oppression. Also noble birth, without new birth is but vanity.
The like is to be said of physic, sleep, health, liberty, recreations,
and very breathing it self. Therefore it is meet, that with our earthly
recreation we join spiritual medi^ation of the death of Christ, then would
there not be so many unlawful sports and delights, and so much abuse of
lawful Recreations as there is, and this we ought to do, for, Christ is all
in all things. Col. 3. 11.

The third benefit The third benefice.
of Reconciliation, is that all crosses, and afflictions cease to be curses
and punishments to them that are in Christ, and are only corrections and
trials, because Christ's death has taken away all, and every part of the curse
of the law. In all crosses Christ is to be known on this manner, judge of
them as chastisements or trials, proceeding not from a revenging Judge, but
from the hand of a loving father, and therefore they must be taken in and with
the merit of Christ, as means sent of God, to keep us from being dampened with
the wicked world, if otherwise, we take them as curses, and punishments. And
hence it follows, that Subjection to the cross, or hand of God in all
crosses, is a mark of the true church of Christ.

The fourth benefit The 4 benefit,
of Reconciliation, is, that Death is properly no death, but a rest, or sleep.
Death therefore is to be considered not as it is set forth in the Law, but as
it is altered by the death of Christ, and when death comes, we must look
upon it through Christ's death as through a glass, and thus it will appear to
be but a passing from this life to everlasting life.

The second benefit of Christ, Of Christ's Virtue.
is the benefit of his Virtue. The Virtue of Christ, is the power of his
Godhead, whereby he creates new ha^ts in all that believe in him. This Ve^tue
is double: First, the power of his death. Secondly, the power of his
resurrection: by the first, he freed himself from the punishment and
imputation of our sins. By the second, he raised himself from Death to Life.
The benefit of Christ's divine power is great to all the faithful: for, the
same power which freed him from the punishment and imputation of our sins,
setueth also to mortify and crucify the corruptions of our wills, minds and
affections. And the same which raised him from death to life, serves also to
raise those that belong to Christ, first from their sins in this life,
secondly, from the grave, in the day of judgment. The knowledge of this double
Virtue, must not be only in the brain, (...) experimental in the heart,
that is, to feel the power of Christ's death killing sin in them, that we
might be able to say with Paul, We li^e not, but Christ lives in us. This
was one of the most excellent things which pau^ sought for. Ph^. 3. 10. I have
counted al things but dung, that I may know him, and the virtue of his
resurrection. The way to know it, is to cast off the old man, which is corrupt,
through deceiu^able* lusts. Ephe. 4. 22.

The third benefit of Christ, Of Christ's example.
is the benefit of his example, for Christ is to be known, not only as a
redeemer, but also as a pattern of all good ^ueties, to which we ought to
conform our lives. Christ is to be followed of us, in the practice of every
good duty, that may concern us, without exception (...) Our conformity with
Christ is, first in the framing of our inward life: secondly, in the practice
of outward and morrall duties. Conformity in spiritual life, is not by doing
that which Christ did upon the cross, and afterward, but a doing of the like
by a certain kind of imitation, and it has four parts. First, a spiritual
Oblation, for as he by prayer resigned himself up to be a sacrifice to the
justice of his father. So we in prayer must resign our selves wholly to the
Service of God. Secondly, a spiritual crucifying of our selves, for as he
bare his own Cross, so must we deny our selves, and take up all crosses
that come every day. Again, as he crucified his flesh, so must we crucify
the body of sin. Gal. 5. 24. They which are Christ's, have crucified the flesh
with the lusts and affections. He with a spear was wounded, we with the sword
of the spirit must wound sin to death, and labor by experience to feel the
very death of it, and bury it. Thirdly, a spiritual Resurrection: for as he
came out of his grave, so we must come out of our sins, as out of a most
loathsome grave, to live to God. This work cannot be done at once but by
degrees, as God shall give grace. Fourthly, a spiritual ascension, by a
continual elevation of the heart and mind to Christ, sitting at the right
hand of God. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above.
Col. 2.

Conformity in moral Duties is generally, Consormitie in moral duties.
to be holy as he is: specially to be like unto him in four Virtues, that
is, in Faith, Love, Meekness, and Humility.

Faith.
for as he when he apprehended the wrath of God, wholly stayed himself upon the
aid, and good pleasure of his father, even to the last: so must we depend
wholly on Gods mercy in Christ, as with both hands, in peace, and trouble, in
life and pang of death. And not let go our hold, no though we feel our
selves, as it were, descend to Hell.

Love.
for he loved his enemies more then himself. Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in Love, even
as Christ loved us, and has given himself for us, etc. The like Love ought
we to show, by doing service to all men, in the compass of our callings, and
by being all unto all, that we might do them all the good we can both for body
and soul. 1. Cor. 9. 19.

Meeknes.
Mat. 11. 28. Learn of me, etc. His Meekness appeared in bearing Patiently
all In^uries and abuses, and suffering the curse of the Law without grudging,
submitting himself to his fathers will in all things: So must we, and the
more we follow him herein, the more we are like him in his Death and
Refurrection.

Fourthly, in his Humility, Humility.
for being Phil. 2. 5. Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ, who
being equal with God, took upon him the shape of a Servant, and humbled
himself even to the death of the Cross.

Here is to be observed, that the example of Christ has something more in it
then any other has, or can have, for it does not only show us what we ought
to do, but it is both a remedy against many vices, as also a motive to many
good Duties: as for example, the serious consideration that the very Son of
God himself suffered all the wrath of God, and curse of the Law for our sins,
is the most effectual means to stir up our hearts to a godly sorrow for them,
to which end, every man must be persuaded that he was the man that crucified
Christ, that he is to be blamed as well as Herod, Pilate, and the Jews, and
that his sins were the nails and spears that pierced Christ. Again, if
Christ for our sins shed his blood, and if our sins made him sweat drops
of blood, why should not we shed bitter tears for our sins? He that
finds himself so dull and hardened, that the passion of Christ does not
humble him, is in a lamentable case. Again, when thou art sick and in pain,
think how light these are, being compared to the Agony and bloody Sweat, the
Thorn^ and Nails which Christ endured: when thou art wronged and abused, turn
thy eye to the cross, consider how meekly Christ bare it, and prayed for them
that put him to death: When thou art tempted with Pride and Vainglory,
consider how for thy sins, Christ was mocked, despised and condemned: when
thou art moved with anger and desire of revenge, think how Christ gave himself
to death to save his enemies, when they most cruelly set themselves against
him, and these meditations being mingled with faith, will ease thy mind.

And hence arises (says M. Perk.) a threefold knowledge: first, of God:
secondly, of our neighbor: thirdly, of our selves. Of God, for if we would
know him to our Salvation, we must know him in Christ crucified, for God of
his own nature is invisible, and is revealed to us only in Christ, in whom
he sets forth his Justice, Wisdom, Goodness, and Providence. Heb. 1. 3.
Col. 1. 3. whatsoever out of Christ comes to us in the name of God, is a flat
Idol of man's brain.

The second knowledge that arises from the former meditations, is of our
neighbors, that is, those that are of gods Church. They are to be known of
us in this manner. When we are to do any Duty to them, we are not barely to
respect their persons, but Christ crucified in them, Acts. 9.
and them in Christ, Saul, Saul why, etc. when the poor come for relief, it
is Christ, that comes to our doors, and says I am hungry, therefore let our
compassion be toward them as toward Christ.

The third knowledge is of our selves, and the right knowledge of our selves,
arises of Christ crucified, in whom and by whom we come to the knowledge of
five special things: First, the grieuousnesse of our sins, and our misery
in regard of them, for if we consider our offenses in our selves, we may be
deceived, because our conscience being corrupt often erreth in giving
testimony, and so it seems but little, but if sin be considered in the
death and passion of Christ, whereof it was the cause, and the vileness
thereof measured by the unspeakable torments endured by him, the least sin
will appear to be a most grievous sin indeed. Secondly, by this we know
that men believing in Christ, are not their own, but wholly both body and
soul belong to Christ. Thirdly, that every true believer has this being from
Christ, not as he is a man, but as he is a new man. Fourthly, that all good
works done of us, proceed from the virtue, and merit of Christ crucified. Ioh.
15. 2. Fifthly, that we owe unto Christ an endless debt, for he was crucified
only as our suertie and pledge, and in the spectacle of his passion, we must
consider our selves as the chief debtors, we owe him all our selves for the
pains that he endured, to set us most miserable bankroupts at liberty, from
Hell, Death, and the Devil, but (...) when do we begin to pay it?

Thus we see what benefits we have by Christ crucified, and in what manner we
ought to use them, but alas, but few have treasured up this knowledge of
Christ, as they ought, for herein fail both the Papist, and the common
Protestant. The Popish Churches though in word they confess him, yet do they
not know him as they ought, for in their Sermons they use the passion, as a
means only to stir up pity and compassion toward Christ, and hatred of
Pilate, the Jews, and Judas, etc. But the service of God which in that Church,
stands now in force, by the Cannons of the Counsel of Trent, defaceth Christ
crucified, in that first the Passions of Martires are made meritorious;
secondly, the very word and sign of the Cross, is their only refuge and
help; thirdly, the Virgin Mary is made the Queen of heaven, and a mother of
Mercy, who may command her Son; fourthly, they give religious adoration to
dumb stocks, and Crucifixes made by the hands of men. The common Protestant
also comes short, for three causes, for first though in Word they confess
him to be a Savior, that has redeemed them, yet indeed they make him a
patron of their sins: Secondly, they take knowledge of his merit, but little
regard the virtue of his death, and resurrection, in mortifying of their
sinful lusts and affections: thirdly, they usually content themselves
generally and confusedly to know Christ to be their redeemer, never once
seeking in every particular estate of life, and blessing of God, to feel the
benefit of his passion. What is the cause of all the security in the world,
and that men are not touched for their sins? surely because they did never yet
seriously consider that Christ in the Garden, lay groueling upon the earth,
sweating of blood, etc. for their offenses. Again oppressors of the poor,
never knew that their sins drew out the heart blood of Christ. Again proud
persons puffed up with strange atire, never consider that Christ was not
crucified in gay atire, but naked, that he might bear the whole shame and
curse of the Law for us. These and such like, whatsoever they say in word, if
we respect the tenor of their lives, are flat enemies of the cross of Christ,
and tread his precious blood under their feet. So far Perkins.

But if thou will have the Treasures of Christ in heaven, thus thou must learn
to know and feel Christ crucified, and the benefits of his Merit, Virtue and
Example, and thus must thou come to the knowledge of God, of thy neighbor, and
of thy self, in Christ crucified, even whiles thou art here upon earth; which
feeling knowledge is a saving knowledge, even an excellent portion of heavenly
Treasure, imparted to the true Christian in this life, and is a pledge of
endless and infinite treasure provided for him in the life to come, and so
much for the ways and means of laying up treasute in heaven, which are by
giving to the poor Members of Christ, by suffering patiently for the truth of
Christ, and by growing in the saving knowledge of Christ crucified.

In laying up Treasure after this sort, we shall prove good Alcumists. An
Alcumist they say can turn lead into gold, or out of Lead or other metals
extract Gold, which many have practiced to their utter undoing. The Pope is
the cunningest Alcumist it is thought that the world has, for he can of a
pound of Lead, make an hundred pound of Gold, for all his Bulls and Pardons are
sealed with lead, but what fools are they that turn their Gold into Lead, or
what calves rather that buy his Bulls so dear? But lay up Treasure as has
been showed thee before, A true Christian a good Alcumist.
and thou shall turn earth into heaven, corruption into incorruption, Gold
into godliness which is great gain, labor into rest, sorrow into joy,
poverty into riches, and thy cottage into a kingdom, even the kingdom of
heaven.

Now follows the reasons of Christ's Commandment, Verse. 21. The second part
containing the reason of the Commandment.
For where your Treasure is there will your heart be also. A Reason of great
force as if he should say, for this cause chiefly you ought to lay up your
treasure in heaven, that God may have your heart, which cannot be unless you
lay up your Treasure in heaven, for our hearts will be where wholly their
Treasure is. Here we are taught, that no man can love the Lord with his heart,
that seeks and places his happiness in earthly things, but only those
whose joy and felicity is in heaven, and the heavenly graces of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Worldlings make no doubt but that they may, and do serve God, and love
God with their heart, yea, and have as good ^ heart to God as any whatsoever,
though they follow the world, and hear not sermons, although they keep not
the Sabbath so precisely as others do, which will not work or play then,
though they never meddle with the Scriptures, but be utterly ignorant of the
ways and will of God. But Christ here shows that they are al deceived, by a
general principle that never fails. Where the treasure is there will be the
heart, and where the heart is, there is the Treasure of the heart, whereupon it
follows that they do wholly renounce heaven, that do seek for happiness
here below, and if they set their hearts upon heavenly things, it cannot be that
they should esteem of them no better, or frequent them no oftener, then they
do. The Philosophers have most exactly (so much as the Starlight of nature
would give them leave) disputed of the happiness or chief welfare of man.
Summu^ Bonum.
And no marvel, for who does not desire to be happy, and to win that hold,
are all men's Senses, and Wits mustred and marshalled, because it is the only
true treasure, For where the Treasure is, there will the heart be, but most men
do mistake the matter, while they seek for happiness in the flesh, which is
not to be found but in the spirit, and while they confess that it is in God,
yet run after the Devil for it. When some seek for it in Honor, Ambition
is made general of the field, and does command the mind: while others seek
it in worldly profit, Covetousness does invade the soul, taking up every
room for worldly desires, and noisome lusts, which do eat out the heart with
cares, and drown men in perdition: others seeking for it in carnal pleasure
and sensuality, cry one to another, come let us eat and drinck, and be
merry, for to morrow we shall dye: and in the mean time the brute beast in
that regard is more happy then such Epicures, for that more freely, without any
shame or fear he enjoys the pleasure of carnal sensuality, then they do.

But if we were once soundly persuaded of our happiness in heaven, it would be
an easy matter to tread the World under foot, and to have our minds mounted
up to heaven. If the love of God be our Treasure, and through the spectacles
of a lively faith, we can read our names regestred in the book of life, and
descry our happiness to be hidden in Christ; if the spirit of Adoption does
certify our spirits that God is our Father, and we are his children, and with
the same certificate shall deliver us a discharge against sin, death and
hell, then will our hearts feed upon heavenly meditations, and our souls
hunger and thirst after righteousness, we will then account all but dung,
that we might win the Lord Jesus Christ. And then as the Heart brayeth for
the rivers of water, so will our souls long for the presence of the Lord: And
then the Word of God will be the joy of our hearts, and we will desire to be
dissolved; and to be with Christ, for where the Treasure is, there will the
heart be also: And until then we shall savor nothing but earthly vanities.
Therefore when S. Paul would draw the faithful to the study of a heavenly
life, he does propound Christ unto them, in whom only all true felicity is to
be sought, If ye be risen with Christ (says he) set your minds on things
above, Col. 3. 1. 2.
and not on things which are below, as if he should have said, it is an absurd
and base thing for christians to have their minds grubling on the earth, whose
Treasure is hid in heaven, and that is his reason, for ye are dead (says he)
and your life is hid with Christ in God. Verse. 3.


Hence we may further learn, in what a miserable case they are, whose hearts
are set upon earthly things, which are subject to Mothes, and Thieves, Rust*
and other such manifold mischiefs. A cousening match it is of the devils own
making, he is subtle, and shows men the world and the glory of it, the
Court and the bravery of it, Honor and the fame of it, iniquity and the
profit of it, sin and the pleasure of it, as it were his daughters with their
dowry. On the other side, we are simple and believe him, presently our heart
is a match, for them, and happy he thincks himself that can get one of them,
and to break it off is a hard matter. Their affections are fixed upon a
liking, they have taken, and although God himself forbid the banes, yet it is
to no purpose, for they have made a vow, they have spoken the word, and their
hearts are settled, and there is no removing of them. And thus men do run
despe^ately upon their own ruin, like the fool^ that goes laughing to the
stocks, and all for want of due consideration, for if we did but consider:
Four things to be considered in this match
first the baseness: secondly, the wretchedness: thirdly, the vanity: and
lastly, the danger of this foolish match, we would not set our hearts upon
any thing that is in this world.

How base a Worldling is.
HOw base and vile a thing for a christian heart to be wedded to worldly
things, ^. Baseness
may appear by this, that man at the first, was created in innocence and
holiness, and in Christ is restored to the same again, of all creatures he is
now the most noble, crowned with glory and honor, but a little inferior to
the Angels, having all things subject unto him, and all things are to do him
service, as the Angels to guard him, the Son of God to ransom him, the word
of God to instruct him, the spirit of God to guide him, the children of God to
visit him, the graces of God to adorn him, and ^he Kingdom of God to enrich
him. And this is the estate of a Christian. Now for him that is so honorably
descended, so highly advanced, so dearly redeemed, and so mightily enriched,
to have his heart closed up in some old wall, or locked up in an iron Chest, or
diging in the ground, like a Swine or Mole, or hunting after Vainglory, as
after a feather, or wedded to vain delights, or bathing in filthy pleasure,
cannot be judged but for a very base thing, and matter of great indignity.

It is not for a Noble man's son to addict himself to the conditions of the
vulgar sort, nor for a heroical spirit, or man of great place, to besot
himself in Alehouse pastimes: nor for honest persons, to joy in the company
of filthy packs: neither is it for a Christian mind, who is truly noble, and
altogether heavenly, to set his heart upon earthly things, which at the best are
but vanity and vexation of spirit. Therefore let Christians say as the Apostle
says: 1. Cor. 13. 11
When I was ^ child I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought
as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things: so when I was
an earthly worldling* I spoke as a worldling, I understood as a worldling, I
studied as a worldling, worldly things only, but when I became a right
Christian indeed, I put away worldliness, and set my heart upon Treasure that
is in heaven.

And therefore as Nehemiah (when he considered the place of Magistracy and
rule wherein he was) said, Should, should, Nehe. 6. 11.
a man as I fly? so thou will say that art a true Christian, and considerest
thy excellent calling, and what thou are borne again unto by grace, should
such a man as I, be an earth-worme? and thus we see how the dignity of a
Christian, shows how base a thing it is, to set the heart upon earthly
vanities, where Moths fret, Rust eat, and Thieves dig through and steal.

How miserable a Worldling is.
AS nothing is more base and sordid, so nothing is more miserable then to set
the heart upon earthly things, for that is to subject the Prince to the
Subject, the Master to the Servant, or a Tyrant rather, who commands both
all the senses of the body, and all the powers of the soul without any rest at
all. Proverbs.
Solomon says, it is intolerable for a servant to bear rule, if intolerable
then miserable and much to be pitied. Paul says: They that will be rich
fall into temptations and snares, 1. Tim. 6. ^
and into many noisome and foolish lusts, which drown men in perdition and
destruction. Money is not unfitly resembled in an Emblem by some to a Queen
advanced on a Chariot, which is drawn by a couple that represent the golden
fools of the world, Periculum and Pauor, Peril and Fear: the first draws
the Chariot in a collar stickt full o^ Daggers with the points inward, and
going bare footed upon sharp thorns: the other draws with a sad
countenance, and a gnawing conscience, still casting his eye backward to see
who is near, the attendants of this Golden Queen are bloody Murder, spoiling
Theft, frantic Folly, and heart gnawing Envy, all covered with her veil. The
speech that she is received with is this following.

Te bijugi inuectam curru exitiale periclum
Sollicitusque pauor Regina pecunia ducunt.
At quia stultitiam, furtum, caedesque cruent as
Velas, cunctorum hinc in te spes firma recumbit.
In English thus: Both danger deep and ghastly fear are yokt
to draw thy Chariot O golden Queen:
For fools, and thieves, and bloody murdring mates,
thou with thy veil do hide from being seen,
For which sole cause the hearts and hopes of all
In thee reposde have always firmly been.


This is true, yet of greater authority is that of the Apostle, to the same
effect, The desire of money is the root of all evil, ^. Tim. 6. 10.
which while some have lusted after, they erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many sorrows, to show that a man cannot set his heart
upon transitory things, except he will be a murderer of his own soul, and
live in continual sorrow, for earthly treasures and pleasures are lined and
stuffed with sorrows, not a few but many, not easy but sharp and pearcing,
not a little way, but quite through to the very heart. Lo, thus is the worldling
tormented on every side, like one rolled in a barrel of nails. Satan shows
only the glory of the world, but Paul the sorrows of the world; Satan the
honey, but Paul the sting; Satan the honor, Paul the dishonor, to teach us
what course we must take to avoid, or to make void this miserable match. What
greater misery then to have, and be never satisfied? Crescit amor nummi, etc.
The desire of money increases, as the heap increases. Here is no end of
gathering, as in the Dropsy there is no end of drinking, because by continual
drinking the thirst is more kindled, but no whit quench^d.

How vain a worldling is.
AS the worldling is most base and miserable, so nothing is more vain, for
what greater vanity then to be addict^d or devoted to those things which
cannot perform that which is expected from them? which are of so short
continuance, which are so little while possessed, and are no man's less then
his that gathers them: such are all earthly things, and he that lusts
after them, to set his heart upon them, is like those vain fools that lust to
eat of painted grapes; or rather like the rich fool in the Gospel, who
having enlarged his Barnes, cries out, like one in a dream, and bids his
soul now take rest (for indeed he had found but little rest before) and his
reason is, because he has now goods enough for many years, but as he was thus
dreaming of many years goods and rest, a voice comes and awakes him and tells
him plainly that he does utterly mistake the matter, Luke 12.
Thou fool (says he) this night shall they fetch away thy Soul, and then
whose goods shall those be that thou have gathered? So is it (says Christ)
with him that gathers riches to himself, and is not rich in God. This
vanity is well set out by the holy Ghost, when Solomon says, Eccle. 5. 12
there is an evil sickness, namely, ^iches reserved to the hurt of their
owners, and these riches perish by evil travail. And this is also an evil
sickness (says the man of experience) that in all points as he came, 15
so shall he go, and what profit has he that he has travailed for the
wind? Cap. 6. 1.
I have also seen a man (says he) to whom God has given riches, and
treasures, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul of all that he
desires, but God gives not power to eat thereof, this is vanity and
vexation of spirit.

As this vanity is a vexation to the spirit of man, so is it no less grievous
to the spirit of God, for that contrary to the mind of our heavenly father, we
bestow our love so fondly, A dishonor to God.
upon that which cannot help us. The commandment says, we must honor our
parents; now amongst other things tending to the honor of our earthly parents,
this is not the least, for a child to require the consent of his parents in
bestowing of himself in marriage; and to marry against their minds,
especially when there is reason to the contrary, cannot be but a great
dishonor offered to our parents. But what earthly parents have so great
interest in their children, as God has in us? what child owes such duty to
his earthly parents, as we owe to God? If I be your father (says the Lord)
where is my honor? ^al* 1. 6.
as if he had said, if you depend upon me for your provision, and look for my
blessing, how is it that you set your hearts upon my creatures, and not upon
me, knowing that my mind is so much against such foolish bestowing of your
selves? as though I could not or would not fill your hearts with as much joy and
gladness, as my creatures can do, and more too. Therefore says Paul to
Timothy, Charge them that are rich in this world, ^. Tim. 6.
that they be not high minded, 17
and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living God.

How dangerous worldliness is to the Soul.
THere is no truer Nobility, then to be a citizen of the heavenly Jerusalem,
son and heir to the most high, all which is defaced and abolished, if the
heart lie buried in earthly things. There is no sounder joy, then the joy of the
holy ghost, which is a fruit of Faith, and is grounded on the love of God, but
this cannot be relished or tasted by him, whose heart does cleave to this
miserable bondage of worldly cares. There are no such goods as the sanctifying
graces of the holy ghost, which only make a man truly happy, as to cleave
unto God by faith, to love the Lord from the heart, to worship him in spirit and
truth, and to be wholly united unto him. But far is he from these things,
whose heart is set upon earthly goods: Eze. 33. 31
At the Sermon, his mind runs after his covetousness, and with his mouth
he makes jests, both of the doctrine and Doctor, because he likes neither
the one nor the other; like the Pharisees which mocked Christ when he spoke
against covetousness, Luke 16. 14
because themselves were covetous. When the Sermon is done, they forget al,
because their hearts were choked with the thorny cares of the world: if they fall
to reporting of the Sermon, it is with additions and detractions, mistakings
and falsify cations, most strange to hear, as if the Preacher had been mad, or
drunk, or in some dream, when he spoke. Thus the word of life and grace,
which is a sweet savor of life, unto life eternal, to the regenerate and
spiritual mind, yields a most fearful savor of death, unto death
everlasting, to the carnal and worldly minded man. Seeing therefore to bestow
the heart and affection upon earthly things, is proved to be a match so base,
and unbeseeming the dignity of a Christian, so wretched and miserable, so
vain and deceiptfull, so dishonorable to God, and prejudicial to our own
salvation, let us labor by earnest prayer and holy meditation, to have our
minds purged from this evil sickness of worldly love, and never give the
Lord any rest, until by zealous prayer we have obtained of his divine
Majesty the wings of a lively Faith, whereby our heavy hearts, and dull
spirits may be mounted up aloft, to seek for our Treasure in heaven, and then
indeed shall we be heavenly minded, for where the Treasure is, there will the
heart be also*

How to judge by the heart whether ^ man's Treasure be in heaven or no.
THere be certain signs in the heart, whereby a man may judge of his estate to
come, as there be in the sky, to know what weather shall happen: Mat. 16. 3
when the sky is red in the Evening, men say, fair weather: when it is red
and lowering in the morning, it is a sign of foul weather: Luk 12. 5^
when a cloud rises out of the West, they say, a shower is coming: when the
South-winde blows, a sign of heat. By observing how Jonathan shot his
arrows, David knew how Saul stood affected toward him: by the holding out of
the golden Scepter, Hester knew she was in the Kings favor: by the budding of
the Trees we know that Summer is come: by the sound of the Vessel the
emptiness or fulness thereof is perceived: by the beating of the pulses, the
distemperature of the body is discerned. And by the affections of the heart,
which are the pulses of the soul, the hearts Treasure is discovered, and where
it lies, for God that has given men signs to know the state of the body, the
alteration of weather, and the minds of other men, has also given certain
notes and signs to discern the state of the Soul by. Yea, Christ does
condemn them for Hypocrites, which will not judge of themselves, as well as of
other things. Hipocrites (says he) Ye can discern the face of the Earth,
Luke. 12. 56. 57.
and of the Sky, but why discern ye not this time? yea, and why judge ye
not of your selves what is right?

But how may that be (will some say) or how may a man know by the affections of
the heart, where the hearts treasure is? Then mark the way of wisdom, and
learn to be wise, when the Lord Jesus heard one answer discreetely, he said
unto him, Mar 12. 34
Thou art not far from the kingdom of God, to show that discreet answers in
matters of religion are signs of grace. When Zacheus did with heart obey
Christ, and with reverence receive Christ, and in charity releive Christ, and
in conscience of his wrongs done, was ready to restore where he had wrongfully
received, the Lord Jesus said unto him, Luke 19.
This day Salvation is come into thy house: to show that true conversion is a
certain sign of Life and Salvation. Psa. 41. 11
By this I know (says David) that thou love me O Lord, because my enemies
do not triumph over me: to show that even enemies are for signs and tokens
of gods favor. Ioh. 13. 34
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples (says our savior
Christ) ^f ye love one another: to show that christian love is for a sign of
gods love, but not a cause thereof as Papists teach. And by the heart a man may
know whether his part be in the book of life, and whether his soul shall be
bound up in the bundell of the righteous or no: For where the treasure is,
there will the heart be also: that is, there will be the joy and delight of
the heart, the love and desire of the heart, the care and longing of the heart,
for the heart in this place is put for the affections of the heart or soul.

If then thou would know whether thy Treasure be in heaven or hell: see
where thy heart does most ^aunt, and whereabout it is most employed. If Christ
be the man and the matter whom thy soul loves, ^omfortable (...).
if his Gospel be the joy of thy soul, and his commandments thy hearts
delight; if for love of his name, and zeal to his glory, thou fear more to
offend him then all the world besides, and art for his sake, content to endure
with patience all the Tribulations and crosses that the hands of wicked men can
load upon thy back; if thou can find thy heart resolved to drink of his
cup, and to be baptized with his Baptism; and if thou be bent to stand more
zealously for his glory, then for thy own life; and if thy heart be refreshed,
when thou think on his death, and art heartily desirous of his coming to
Judgment: then happy and blessed art thou, the king of kings has put forth
his golden Scepter unto thee, thou art in his favor, the fruitful Tree of
Grace has budded in thy heart, the Summer time of thy refreshing is approaching,
and the Lord delights in the fruit of thy faith: thy treasure is in heaven,
thy provision is gone before, and thou shall follow after, yea more, if thy
heart does mourn and grieve for thy own untowardness, and the sins of
other men, thou art marked by Gods own Secretary, his saving Angel has set
thee apart, Ez^ch. 9* 4
that the destoyers ^ may not meddle with thee, if they meet thee in their
way. And as Christ said to Nathaniel: Ioh. 1. 50.
Do thou believe because I said I saw thee under the fig Tree? thou shall
see greater things then these: So do you believe because I say, by the heart
you shall know whether your treasure be in heaven? you shall see greater things
then yet you do, for now we see but in part, and we know but in part; but
hereafter we shall know as we are known: in the mean time take these things
as the first fruits of the spirit, which are but the least part of the
harvest, or as an earnest penny in assurance of millions not to be numbered,
for certainly, where the heart is, there is the treasure, but how great a
treasure, 1. Cor. 2. 9
no eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor tongue can express, nor heart can
conceiu^.

On the other side, if thy heart has no joy in the gospel of Christ, nor
delight in the commandments of God, if thou have no zeal for the glory of
God, no desire to pray, nor longing for the coming of Christ, then fear, for
where thy treasure is, there will thy heart be also. If thou have more
felicity in worldly vanities, then in heavenly virtues, if vain company be
more welcome unto thee, then such as fear the Lord, if thy study be only how
to live here, and thy cares and communications be altogether ^arthly and
profane, then suspect thy estate not to be good, and know that thy hollow
sound bewrays an empty vessel, thy fig tree has nothing but leaves, all
thy Terms are but vacations, and as for treasure in heaven thou have none, for
they that are occupiers there, have their hearts wholly employed there, and as
they look for great abundance when they come thither, so they find an
earnest thereof in their hearts here, al^ is holy, and heavenly, comfortable
and happy, for righteousness and truth has looked down from heaven upon
them, and mercy and peace have embraced each other in their souls, and heaven
holding their treasure does also hale and draw their hearts thither likewise.

Now then let us see how our hearts stand affected, for there is a sure witness
and pledge either of Hell or of Heaven.

But how shall we know whether our hearts be in heaven, and Gods holy spirit
be in our hearts? Surely a needful question; for every one will say as the young
man in the Gospel, Mat 1^
all these things I have observed from my youth, and that he loves God above
all, yea he would be sorry else, but the Prophet Jeremy says, Ier. 17. 9.
that the heart is deceiptfull and wicked above all things, who can know it?
and therefore to be suspected and examined as David advised: Psalm. 4.
Examine your hearts upon your beds, even secretly before God, and free from
all lets and encombrances: Would thou then know thy heart, examine all her
attendants, and under officers wherabout they are chiefly employed, as thy
Tongue, thy Ears, thy Eyes, thy hands and feet; Mat. 12. 35
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, that is, the tongue
will show how the heart is affected, Psalm. 45. 1
my heart is enditing of a good matter (says the Psalmist) and presently
follows, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. Again in another place,
^sal. 39. 2.
My heart was hot within me and I spoke with my tongue. A good man (says our
Savior Christ) out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth good
things. lat* 12. 35
If there be abundance of love to God, the tongue will still be speaking in
commendation of his praises, and setting forth his greatness, his goodness, his
justice, his holiness, his wisdom and mercy, etc. Can. 1. 1.
as the Church in the Canticles, Oh let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, for thy love is better then wine, that is, better then all pleasant and
profitable things. If there be abundance of joy and delight in the
commandments of God, Ps. 119. 13
thy lips will declare the Judgments of his mouth; If there be abundance of
fear to offend against God, or the Godly, thou will set a watch before thy
mouth, and thy feet shall carry thee speedely from evil company; If there be
abundance of zeal in thy heart; then will thy tongue be enflamed with a holy
fire for the truth; If thy heart does abound with desire and longing for the
presence of the Lord, then thou will still be wishing, Psalm. 42. 1.
and striving to visit his house here, and to meet him in the clouds. In a
word, the whole course of a man's life, his speech, his countenance, his
company, his exercises, his watchfulness, his habit, his diet, his building,
his purchasing, his children, his servants, his buying and ^elling, his trading
and sporting all will bewray of what country he is, and whither his heart is
travailing, as Iehu was known by his marching. Well may he use the world for
necessities sake, but it shall be as though he used it not, like an In to bait
in* but not to abide in: he may see therein, and salute those that pass by, but
the heart still holds on his course to his heavenly country, and says as
Christ said in the gospel, when he knew that his enemies were not far off,
Arise, let us go hence, here is no abiding for us, On the contrary, if
covetousness; ambition, unclean lusts, pride, en^ie, malice, profanenes, or
the like, do abound in thy heart, thy tongue, thy countenance, thy company, and
all will bewray it. Out of the mouth will fly unsavory Jests, thy mind will
run like a wild horse up and down in the world. When Christ is dividing of
heavenly doctrine, then comes the worldling and interrupteth him, Luke 12. 13
with Master divide the inheritance between me and my brother. And as Christ
himself by scribbling on the ground, oh. 8. 6.
showed that he did not regard what the malicious Jews said, when they came
to accuse the adultresse woman: so at the table, when grace is in saying, or at
the temple in the holy exercises of religion; the worldlings mind being not on
those things, will bewray the same even by the very motions of their fingers, or
by their looking about upon some other thing

But hipocrits will make as great a show as any, Object.
and spin a very fine thread, saying also as that young bragger in the Gospel,
willing to justify himself, all this have we done. Answer.
And so they will, and may in policy, but not in true piety; from the brain
perhaps, but not from the heart; of the abundance of brain, that is, witty
and cunning invention: the tongue of the hipocrit speaks good things, and
keeps good company, and frequenteth the word and Sacraments, not of love, nor
zeal, nor desire to glorify God, for that is the store of a good heart, which
he wants, but only like a crafty Fox, and cunning pollitician, ^asteth in
his brain which way to bring his purpose to pass, and so serves the time
that the time may serve his turn. And therefore as occasion serves, he is a
right temporizer, commending with his tongue that which he condemns in his
heart, like the devil who confessed Jesus Christ to be the son of God, whom he
loved not: but his heart in the mean time frames mischief and deceit, a
de^^ it is for infernal furies, and a cage of unclean birds; it delights in
vain exercises, and vain company, and is fraught like a ship with vile
thoughts, he is a man of Beliall that has lewd things in his heart, and when
time, company, and occasion serve, will of this abundance, both speak anddo
lewdly. Two notable examples of such ware, does the scripture afford us, the
one is in the harlo^ pleading before king Solomon: the other is in Herod. 1.
King. 3*
The holy story says, two har^ots pleaded hard, as well to clear themselves of
the death of that child, that was ouerlaid, as to justify the claim that was
made by each of them to the suruiuing child: well to decide the controversy
about the living child, the king calls for a sword, and commands it to be
cut in peece^, and divided between them, knowing right well by the wisdom
which God had given him, how nature would work in the true mother. The
dissembling monster thinking that the King had meant as he said, said as he
said, and yet no otherwise then as she would have had it: the other from the
abundance of natural affection was content rather to loose her interest in
her own child, then that the poor infant should innocently be deprived of
his life: So hipocrites, and true professors make both one show and plead both
for the truth, as they would make the world believe, but upon occasions offered
in time and place, the difference will easily appear.

The other example is of Herod's dealing toward the Wise men* which came from
the East they came in simplicity of heart, showing plainly the end of their
coming and confessing boldly that they had seen Christ's star in the East* but
Herod like a Fox very polliti^ely bears a part in their song, but harboring
at the same instant a bloody Tragedy in his heart, which he meant to have acted
so soon as he should learn where Christ was borne. The like dissembling is to
be found in another Herod, and Herodias, in Mat. 14. 2. Mat. 14
John the Baptist was great with the multitude, therefore Herod will seem to
hear him gladly, yea to reu^rence and commend his doctrine, this was in Herod's
head, but let John tell him of his particular sin, (as he did) and then it
will appear what is in his heart, not John but Herodias, not holiness but
whoredom, and that shall this busy controller (as the world speaks of
Preachers) well know to, for to prison he must go, and were it not for fear
of the multitude he should dye too. Herodias is as cunning as Herod, for so
long as the King does reverence John Baptist, she will not seem to mislike him
greatly, especially before the King, yet she has a quarrel against him, and
in her heart she wishes his head off, only she watches a fit time, which fell
out just upon his birthday, solemnized with all riot and excess, she sends in
a wanton Damsel, instructed and prepared before with a harlots impudent face,
to dance before the King and his company; the profane hipocrite is so far
pleased with her sport, that he (forgetting himself, his honor, and the
vnstinted appetite of a shameless woman (whose heart is subtle, and her ways so
moveable and intricate that they cannot be known) bids her ask but what she
will, and it shall be given her, as the manner of all hipocrites is, for though
Herod heard John gladly, and showed some kind countenance to him for the time,
yet the wicked and lascivious works of the flesh, do please him better then all
the holy doctrines and Se^mons that John taught, as appears by his large
offer. For though he heard John baptist, yet was he never ^o f^ee ha^ted
toward him, as he was now to a tripping Minion, but after the manner of
courting gallants, and Protestants at large, who will perhaps sometime inuit
the Preacher to a dinner, and tell him that he is a good man, and does well to
tell men of their faults, and if we do not follow your sayings, and the good
counsel^ (say they) it is worse for us* and so with a cap and a gentle congie
they bid him farewell. But Herodias his sweet heart, shall have his heart* and the
golden Misers, and pleasant companions shall please them so, that nothing shall
be thought too dear for them. Well now is the time, to know both their hearts,
for these pleasing placeboes, with their tripping trulles, care not a straw for
any preaching, but in their hearts wish all (except their mealy mouthd Prophets
which never go without a slickstone in their pocket) hanged out of the way. And
till sit time serves, they can dance after times pipe, but if time change his
note, they will also change their copy, and will make better Christians then
ever. Herod was to dance after their pipe (if Gods grace be not the more
abounding) even to the bitter perfecuting and disgracing of Gods poor
Ministers and servants, yea they have the skill to watch the time at a feast,
at a dancing revel, or a gossips meeting, to win their hearts desire, and
make better then Herod, to do that they will be sorry for afterward. Therefore
let men take heed, that they be not deceived by such hipocrites, and that they
deceive not themselves, whiles they profess religion from the head, and not
from the heart.

But some will say, Object.
a man may be religious in heart, and yet fall away from grace, and so come to
no assurance of treasure in heaven, because it is said in the Gospel, that
some received the word with joy, Mat. 13. 20
and yet fell away: now joy is an affection of the heart; and joy in the word is
a fruit of the spirit. Gal. 5. 22.
Gal. 5. therefore it seems y^ though a man has a religious heart, yet he
may fall away, and consequently one cannot tell by his heart whether he has
any treasure in heaven or no.

But that joy that S. Matthew speaks of, Answer.
is rather a liking or wondering at the heavenly doctrine, as at some strange
and excellent thing, then any sound or settled rejoicing in God who speaks in
his word And joy is to be distinguished, for it is either carnal and
temporary, or spiritual and permanent. A carnal man rejoices many times at a
Sermon, for the preachers rare invention, or his variety of phrases, or the
sharpnes of his wit, or the artificial conuaiance of the matter, or his
excellent gift of utterance and boldness, or because he heard some touched that
he was not friends withal, but not for the simplicity and evidence of the
truth; nor for any reformation that he felt wrought in himself; nor for any
hatred of sin; or love of righteusnes, that the word wrought in him; for
commonly such kind of reioycers or admirers of men, go presently from the
Sermon with the dog to eat up their vomit, and Swine-like to tumble in their
mire again. Such were many of John's auditors, such were many of Christ's
auditors, such were most of Ezechiels auditors: and such are too many of our
auditors, which flock at the first to a man for novelties sake, to see whether
they shall be clawed with a curry-combe* or smoothed with a slik-stone. Such
are they that have the word of God in respect of persons: and such are those
fantasticks, that will buy a book only for the merry conceits, that are in
it, and not for the matter* like children which joy in a book with a fair
cover, and rejoice more at the gaies or gaudy letters, then any thing else in
the book* be it never so good. The spiritual man rejoices, for that God has
found out his sin, and feels the hand of God reforming his heart; he
rejoices for that he perceives Satan dispossessed and his life amended, his
soul he finds humbled, and his affections bridled, himself won to God and
his family with him, and for this he rejoices like the converted Iaylor,
Act. 16. 34
who rejoiced for that he and all his household believed in God.

But now the afflicted soul is to be satisfied who complains with the Spouse
of Christ in the Canticles, Object. Conscience afflicted.
that she has sought him whom her soul loves, Cant. 5. 1.
even by night in her bed she has sought him, but she cannot find him, that
is, the conscience afflicted with the wounds of sin, cannot find in her heart
any assurance of Gods favor, in the remission of her sins.

But for answer we say, Answer.
that there is an earnest penny and pawn of Gods love in that heart, though as
it were, sealed up in a bag, and in time it shall be opened, and perceived: for
first, the very seeking after the love of God is a special favor of God, and
an evident token that the spirit of God is there, for that proceeds not of
flesh and blood, Psalm. 27. 8.
Seek ye my face (says the Lord) my heart answered (says David) thy fa^e
will I seek, he does not say, thy face will I find, but seek, to show that
seeking of gods favor is a grace of God, as well as finding of God^ favor,
Seek and ye shall find (says Christ) to show that Matthew. 5.
finding comes after seeking. Seek the Lord (says Esaias) while he may be fouud,
Esa. 55.
and call upon him while he is nigh at hand: to show that God is sought for by
invocation or calling upon his name, long before he is found, or felt gracious
unto us, but even then he is nigh at hand, or else we could not call upon him:
for it is even his spirit that sends forth our prayers, and helps them with
sighs and groans, and if he did not help and heave up our dull and drowsy
spirits, we should never once flutter toward heaven, but even lie like dead
blocks, sencelessely groueling upon the ground. Again, 2
Christ is in the heart of the troubled spirit, for as much as the love of Christ
is there, for the says, whom my soul loves, which very love that thou
bear to Christ, is a note of the sanctifying spirit of God. 3
Again, thou desire to feel the assurance of Gods love, which desire is
also a pledge of the spirit of grace. A man may fear God in some sort, and joy
in the things of God for a time, in some carnal respect, and desire with the
sluggard, Balam^ like to dye the death of the righteous, and yet not love the
Lord, but the love of God, and desire of his favor makes all sure. Fourthly, 4
if thou feel it not yet as thou would, then use the means of Preaching,
Reading, Prayer, Conference, Meditation, and patiently wait the Lords leisure,
Psalm. 43.
as David says to his Soul, Wait on God and be not so cast down, for he is
thy present help, ^imile.
and thy God. As a sick man takes meat and drink, and physic, though it
goes against the stomach, and his stomach so weak that it casts up all
again, yet he has a desire to brook it, and does strive to keep it, and at
last it works strength: so is it with the sick and distempred Soul. There is
a defect in the stomach, or in the pallat, or in some other part of the body,
which hinders the working of corporal physic; so in the inward man, there
may be a defect in the understanding which may be darkish and cloudy, or in
the utterance which may be slow, or in the memory which may be obliuious, or in
the Faith which may be weak, or in the repentance which may be dull, or in the
will which may be waiward, or in the Love which may be cold, yet in all these
remain a double comfort: first, these graces are in truth in thee, for thou
understand aright, and remembrest the best things, and beleeuest the word,
and repentest in truth, with hatred of sin, and love God and his word even
for themselves: and secondly, so much as thou understand, know,
remembrest, beleeuest and love, thou affectest and embracest in heart
unfeignedly, and desire to grow in them, and to practice them, all which are
blessed signs of the grace of God.

And lastly, if thou did once feel the forgiveness of thy sins, and God
favorable unto thee in his son Christ, and now want that feeling, know
that for some just cause, it is taken from thee, either to humble thee, or to
make thee more thankful when thou feel so great grace bestowed upon thee,
or to make it come again unto thee, after thy humiliation, and trial of thy
patience, with greater joy and sweetness, for joy restored is sweeter then joy
continued. That God that has vouchsafed of his great goodness to show us in
some measure, the difference between the treasures of the earth, and the
riches of his kingdom, and by giving us the one does allure us to love and
accept of the other, give us grace so to seek and use the one, that in the end
of our race we may obtain the other, and that for his infinite mercies sake
in Jesus Christ our Lord and all sufficient Savior, to whom with the Father
and the holy Ghost, be given all honor and glory, with power and dominion, for
ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
Fol. 1. b. line 13. read thorns. fol. 23. b. l. 8. read ballist. l. 24. r.
Prayer. fol. 25. l. 24. r religions dowry. fol. 32. b. l. 5. r. the almighty.
l. 20. r. bellowing. fol* 65. b. l. 12. r. such a man.


