CERTAIN QVESTIONS AND Answers, concerning the knowledge of God.

Whereunto are adjoined some Questions and Answers, concerning the right use
of the law of God.

Taught publicly by way of Catechizing.

By William Burton, Minister and Preacher of the word of God in the City of
Bristoll.

Ioh. 17.13. And this is eternal life, that they know thee to be the only very
God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.

AT LONDON Printed by John Windet for Tobie Cook. 1591.

Faults escaped.
FOlio 9. a. line 27. read the everlasting son, etc.

Fol. 11. b. l. 33. for speaying, read speaking. f. 12. a. l. 12 for name,
read naming, f. 16. a. l. 2. left out, and of the son speaking in the new
testament. f. 19. a. l. 16. for criptures, read scriptures. f. 21. b. l. 23.
that, read that is. f. 24. a. l. 13. for his good pleasure, read the good
pleasure l. 18. b. for or sufferings, read and sufferings. f. 32. a. l. 26. for
all thing, read all things. f. 33. b. l. 22. for Alethios, read Alethinos. f.
36. b. l. 6. read by delivering him to, etc. f. 38. b. l. 12. for therein, read
them f. 43. a. l. 17. the co^ma which is after will, set is after properly. f.
49. a. l. vlt. for boldly, read bodily. f. 51. a. l. 32. for thing, read
things. in the same line for second, read secondly. f. 55. b. l. 27. put out
for. f. 57. a. l. 26. for die, read by. f. 58. a. l. vlt. read. of how many
sorts, etc. f. 62. b. l. 9. for, as father, read, as a father. f. ^9. b. l. 19.
for was, read we.

TO THE RIGHT reverend Father in God, Richard, by Gods permission Bishop of
Bristoll, W. B. wishes the continuance of the grace of God, with the increase
of all heavenly felicity.
NOt in vain does our Savior Christ call his father an husbandman: John 15.1
For when he perceives, that his trees do not bear fruit kindly in one
place; he translateth the^ to see if they may be more fruitful in another,
Verse 2.
as a husbandman does. Some he purges, says Christ, (although they bear
fruit) that they may bring forth more fruit, as a husbandman does: And some
he supplanteth also, as does the husbandman: some for ever, some for a while;
for what causes, it is best known to his unspeakable Majesty: sometime for
their own unfruitfulness, Mat. 3.7. Mat. 21.43.
sometime for the barrenness, and for the unworthiness of the ground where
they grew: and sometime for neither, but for some other secret cause, best
known to himself in his infinite wisdom. As the man in the Gospel was made
blind, John 9.3.
neither for his own sins, nor for the sins of his Parents, but that the
works of God might be showed upon him.

The truth whereof does sufficiently appear by the late, and yet daily
experience, both of my self, and some others of my brethren. But to speak
only of my self (of all the most unprofitable) when as the lord might
utterly, and yet justly have supplanted me, he has in mercy only removed
me, that I might hereafter labor, which have as yet but loytered in his
harvest. The Lord in mercy lay not my negligence to my charge.

Now, when as by your Lordships means and appointment, I was placed where I
am, for the building up of the Church of God in this City: I thought it most
convenient, first, to lay this foundation of the knowledge of God, that so the
rest of the building might go the better forward. The which (as my first
fruits) I have presumed to present unto your Lordship, for two especial
causes: First, that hereby I might witness my thankful mind to your L. for the
exercise of my ministry, and the ministry of my brethren in our places, which
we enjoy under your L. government. And besides that (which I may in no wise
forget) that favor which you showed me: which, as it was altogether
undeserved, and unlooked for, so it was not (as some have untruly reported)
conditional; but only, with desire that I might employe my endeavor to the
Lords greatest advantage in feeding his people, committed to your care and over
sight, with doctrine most necessary for that people.

Secondly, that your Lo. might rest satisfied concerning some complaints which
have been offered (by certain underminers) touching the confirmation of some
points herein contained.

And thus leaving my present endeavors to your Lordships due consideration, I
humbly take my leave. The Lord almighty grant increase and continuance of
your godly care over that people, which Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of
the flock, has bought with his blood, and committed to your charge: so that in
the great day of account, you may be free from all their bloods, and receive
that crown of righteousness, and immortal joy, which shall then be given to
all that have fought a good fight, and have kept the faith in a good conscience
unto the end. Amen.

Your Lordships always to command in the Lord: William Burton.

To his beloved, and Christian Auditors, and all other in the city of
Bristoll, which desire the true knowledge of God. W. Burton wishes the
increase of all true godliness in this life, and eternal felicity in the
life to come.
IF you do well consider (beloved Christians) that the ignorance of God, (the
mother of Popish devotion) is the fountain of all impiety, and the author of
eternal confusion. Then I hope you will easily confess, that the publishing
of these few questions and answers, concerning the knowledge of God, is no
needles thing. By the ignorance of God, I mean either not to know that there
is a God at all, or else not to know what is the nature of this God whom we
ought to serve. Most men will confess that there is a God, but what manner of
God he is, they cannot tell. And therefore while they frame unto themselves a
God after their own blind affections: they make an idol of the true God, and
according to that conceit which they have of him, they lead al their whole
life. That the ignorance of God and his nature; is the principal cause of all
ungodliness in this life, and of everlasting condemnation after this life: it
does manifestly appear, not only by the testimony of the holy scriptures,
but also by the light of nature it self.

The scriptures are plain in this case. First, Psalm. 10.4.
the Prophet David, painting out a notorious wicked man, says this of him. The
wicked is so proud that he seeks not for God: he thinks always, there is
no God: now mark his life, in the seventh verse. His mouth is full of cursing,
deceit and fraud, under his tongue is mischief and iniquity. 8. He lies in
the villages: in the secret places does he murder the innocent: his eyes are
bent against the poor, etc. Read the 11.12.13. and 14. verses to show the
fruits of such as think there is no God. Again in the 50. Psalm, from the 16.
verse to the end of the 20. noting the hypocrisy, the obstinacy, the
impudency, the theftes, the whoredoms, the filthy mouths, and unnatural
affections of the wicked, in the 21. verse he sets down the cause of al, to be
this. Thou thoughtest (says God) that I was like thy self: to let us see, the
fruits of such as know not the nature of God, but make an idol of him, and
think him to be as a man and a good fellow like unto themselves. When the
Prophet Esai would show the cause of the Jews idolatry, Esai. 40.18.19.20,
21.22.
he says, that the ignorance of God is the cause thereof: and therefore
laboring to draw them from their idolatry, he does it by describing unto them
the true God. Read from the 18. verse to the end of the chapter. When the lord
showed Ezechiel the abominations of the ancients of Israel, he used these
words: Son of man, have thou seen what the auncientes of the house of Israel
do in the dark, every one in the chamber of his imagerie, for they say, The
The Lord sees us not, The Lord has forsaken the earth: to show that the cause
of their iniquity, was their false persuasion, and ignorance of God, for
although they knew that there was a God, yet they took him to be but as a
man, that could not see them in the dark, and that he was in heaven idly not
meddling with the things upon earth. Thus you hear how the Prophets with one
consent do cry out and tell us if the ignorance of God is the cause of all
impiety, and ungodliness. And that it brings eternal damnation in the end,
is plainly testified by the Apostle S. Paul: who says in 2. These. 1.7.8. That
the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know God, and obey not
the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. Where the Apostle shows that
disobedience to the gospel, flows from the ignorance of God, because we
cannot obey him whom we know not, and the reward of both is the just vengeance
of God.

As this is plainly proved by the scriptures, so it is no less evident by the
light of natural reason. For when such a conceit shall once come into our
minds, that God is as man, and has no more power then a man, no more wisdom
then a man, no more justice, no more mercy, no more truth, no more goodness
then a man has, we are far enough of from the true fear and service of God.
For then we fear him as a man, and we serve him as a man, then the which
nothing can be more blasphemous, nor intolerable. For as an idle scholar
looks on his book only when his masters eye is upon him, so the wicked
only fear God (and that with a slauishe fear) when they perceive sensibly
by some plague that gods hand is upon them. Whereas the godly (who know what
manner of God they serve) they fear to offend him at all times, and in all
places, because they know him to be everlasting and every where* etc.

The Papists have thought and do think God to be like a man, and so they
picture him, and so they serve him, so they fear him, and so they love him.
And therefore in their temples they provide for his eyes goodly sights, and
glorious shows of guilding and painting. etc. To delight his ears withal
they have curious piping and singing: for his smelling, they have their
censings and perfumes, and so is al their whole service of God in outward
shows only, as if god were a man in deed: which filthy doctrine of theirs,
arises of their gross understanding of the Scriptures, and word of God.

Then by this time (beloved Christians) I hope you see how needful it was for
me, and how necessary it shall be for you, to labor that we may be
instructed and builded up in the true knowldge of God, that so we may be the
better able to make straight steps unto Godliness. Otherwise, if we be not
instructed in the ways of God, when we shall be exhorted to serve him, we will be
ready to answer with the wicked, of whom Job speaks, Job. 21.15. Who is the
almighty that we should serve him? and what profit should we have, if we
should pray unto him?

Throughout my book for the most part, I have only quoted the places of
scripture, which I have added for the proof of every point, and not expressed
the words of the places themselves: partly for the avoiding of tediousnes, but
specially because I would have you take occasion by searching for them, to be
better acquainted with the scriptures, then you have been hitherto.

And seeing as for your benefit (beloved brethren in the Lord Jesus) and at
the request of some of you which heard me, I have adue^tured to make these my
poor labors public to the view of all, and subject to the censures of all:
I beseech you, that as at the first hearing of them, you were generally
desirous of them, so now you would vouchsafe the reading of them, to your
further profit and increase in the true saving knowledge of god. The lord
almighty make our love abou^d in all knowledge and judgment, and the same God
sanctify our knowledge, and make our affections holy, that we may discern
things that differ, and that we may be sincere and without offense unto the
coming of the Lord Jesus, Phil. 1.9.10.
that we may be filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the praise and glory of GOD. Amen.

Your servant for Christ his sake. W. Burton.

That there is a God.
Question. WHereof does all divinity consist?

Answer. All Divinity consists of knowledge and practice.

Q. Whereof is all knowledge?

A. All knowledge is either of the Creator or Creature.

Q. How may the Creator be known?

A. That we may know the Creator, it is requisite that we consider. First
whether there be a God or no.

Q. Why is this question first?

A. Because the scripture says, Heb. 11.6.
he that comes to God must believe that God is.

Q. Have any called this into question at any time?

A. Yea, so says the Prophet David, Psalm. 10.4.
but he shows also that it was, Psalm. 14.1.
by wicked, proud, and foolish men, whose lives were nothing else but
abomination and corruption.

Q. But what say [you] to it? whether do [you] think that there is a God or no?

A. Yea I am out of doubt thereof, and that there is a God it may be proved
many ways.

1 First by his work of creation, Romans 1.19.20.
for who could make the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and all that is in
them, but God?

2. By the preserving of things created, as for example, man is preserved by
bread, etc. which is no better in it self then earth, and yet if he eat
earth he dies, the reason hereof is, because God blesses the one giving it
foison and power to nourish more then the other, and this makes me think that
there is a God.

Psalm, 104.24.
3 If we shall observe in Gods works an infinite multitude, a wonderful
variety, as amongst so many millions of men, never a one like another in the
compass of the face, a most constant order, a seemly agreement, and an
endless continuance or pleasant intercourse of things coming and going, and
what exceeding majesty is in them, we must needs attribute these things unto
a God.

4 The opinion that man has of God proves it: for man by nature does desire
to be exalted, and in respect of him self despises all other creatures, as
wood and stone: but when a piece of wood is framed out like a man and set in
the temple, and man conceauing an opinion that it is a God, he falls down
and worshippeth it. Esa. 44.15.17.


5 The terror of conscience stricken into the minds of the wicked after sin
comes upon them from a Judge who detesteth dishonest things, and exercises
judgment upon the mind: Romans 2.15.
But in all the wicked is this torment, therefore there is some Judge, Esa.
57.20.21.
who is God, because this punishment can not come but from God. Esa 66.24.


6 The punishment of the wicked (besides the terror of their conscience) with
the rewards of the godly, do prove that there is a God: and this argument is
used by the Prophet David, when he says, The righteous shall rejoice when he
sees the vengeance, Psalm. 58.10.1
he shall wash his footsteps in the blood of the ungodly, so that a man shall
say verily there is a reward for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that
judges the earth.

Q. What is God?

A. There is but one definition of God in all the scriptures, Ioh. 4.24.
and that is this. God is a Spirit.

Q. A spirit is limited and compassed with time and place, therefore if God be
a spirit, he is so too, is he not?

A. In deed certain heretics called Gnostici, have abused that place of John
to that effect: but when it is said that God is a spirit, the meaning is this:
God is spiritual, that is, not to be seen of carnal eyes, but is invisible:
not otherwise.

Q. How is God to be considered?

A. Two ways. Either as he is in himself, or as he is unto us.

Q. Can God be known of us as he is in him self?

A. No: All nature is not able to teach us what God is, neither can man in
nature comprehend him.

Q. How prove you that? Job. 36.26.


A. I prove it two ways: 1. Tim. 6.16.
first by plain testimony of scripture.

Secondly by common reason.

Q. How does common reason prove it?

A. 1. That all nature is not able to teach us what God is, I prove it thus. No
work is able perfectly to express the worker thereof: but all nature is a
thing wrought by God: therefore it can not perfectly teach us what God is.

That man cannot co^prehe^d him; I prove it thus.

2 The less can not comprehend the greater: but every man is less then God,
therefore no man can comprehend God.

3 We can not know the things created, much less can we know the Creator, as
for example: we know that every man has a soul* but who knows what manner
of thing it is?

Again we know that there be Angels, and that they be amongst us, but what
manner of things they be we know not.

4 The scripture says, the judgments of God are past finding out, therefore
much more is God himself past finding out. Rom 11.33.


^. Cor. 2.9.
And again the ioies of heaven which God has prepared for the godly, are
unspeakable, much more therefore is God himself unspeakable.

Q. Is there no knowledge to be had of God?

Romans 1.21.
A. Yes, for Paul says, the Gentiles knew God, but did not honor him as God,
but even as princes have their secrets whereunto all their subjects are not
made privy, Simile.
neither is it lawful for them to search into them, and yet do they so far
forth publish their commandments as is profitable for them to know. So the
prince of all princes has his secrets, unto which we are not privy, and
into which we may not search, yet he has so far revealed himself unto us as
is profitable for us to know. Therefore he said to Moses, Exodus 33.18.
My face thou can not see, that is the glory of my majesty (he does not say
thou may not, or thou shall not, but thou can not) but thou shall see my
back parts, that is some small measure of my glory, so far as thou art able
to apprehend it.

Q. Where is this knowledge of God to be had?

A. In the scriptures: Psalm. 119.14.
for they bear witness of God. Ioh. 5.39. And therefore they are called his
testimonies, because they testify of God what he is, and how he will be served
of us.

Q. May we not learn more of God then the scriptures do teach?

A. No: 1. Cor. 4.6. Romans 15.4.
for Paul says, that no man must presume above that which is written: but so
much as is written in the word of God is written for our learning, and
therefore we (being prepared by true prayer, sanctified with faith, and
seasoned with the spirit of sobriety and humility) we may I say, safely
learn so much as is revealed in the scriptures for our profiting in the
knowledge of God: Deuteronomy. 29.29.
for Moses says, Secret things belong to God, but things revealed belong to us
and to our children.

Q. Which call you the scriptures?

A. The books of the old Testament which begin with Genesis and end with the
Prophets: and the books of the new Testament, which begin at Matthew, and end
with Revelation of John.

Q. These were written by men which were subject to errors, and had their
infirmities, and therefore why should we believe them?

A. Though they were men, 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21.
yet they were holy men set apart by God for that work, and spoke as they
were moved by the holy Ghost.

Q. When Jeremy brought the word of God to the Jews, Iere. 43.2.3.
they said it was not the ward of the Lord, but he spoke as Baruch the son
of Neriah provoked him, and so some perhaps in our days are so ungodly as to
take the Jews part against Jeremy, and all his fellows, let me hear
therefore some reasons to prove and make it manifest that they spoke and wrote
the very word of God?

A. That the books of the old and new Testament contain the word of God, and
were written by the direction of the holy Ghost, it may appear by these twelve
reasons following.

1 Their antiquity proves it. 2 Their faithfulness without partiality which
appears by Jacobs dealing with Simeon and Leui his own posterity, Genesis
49.5. Number. 12.1.
and by the dealing of Moses against Aaraon and Miriam his brother and sister.
3 The miracles which did so often follow their doctrine. 4 A continuance of
wonderful prophesies uttered long before, come to pass just in their times,
^ide Calu. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 8.
marked with their circumstances, not doubtful like Marlins prophesies, but
such as expressed the things and persons by their names, and therefore unto
what may we attribute them but to the inspiration of God? 5 The heavenly
doctrine in every place and nothing sauouring of earthlinesse, does prove
them to be of God. 6 The sweet agreement and consent of the scriptures does
prove it, for one of them do not confute another as men's writings do, Luke
24.44.
and our Savior Christ confirms them all. 7 By their laws which are for the
thoughts, and pearce the heart of man, it is evident that they are of God, for
they require sacrifice, but they prefer obedience, they enjoin fasting, but it
is also from sin. They command circumcision but it is of the heart. They
forbid lusting, coveting, etc. which is not to be found in any laws but in his
that searches the heart. 8 The doctrine of the scripture is such as could
never breed in the brains of men: as three persons in one God: God to become
man: Mary's conception without the seed of man, the making of all things of
nothing, the resurrection and such like. 9 The little love that most men do
bear unto them, do prove them to be of God, for if they were of flesh and
blood, then flesh and blood would love them, read them, practice them, and
every way regard them more then it does, for the world loves his own, Ioh.
15.19.
as our Savior Christ says: but we (being but carnal and earthly) savor not
the things that are of God, as the Apostle Saint Paul says: 1. Cor. 2.14.
And until the Lord open our hearts we have no regard of them. So likewise
until we be borne again of Gods spirit, 1. Pet. 2.2,
and become as newborn babes* we have no desire unto them. 10 The argument of
the scriptures proves them to be of God for they entreat either of the noble
acts of God or of Christ, or the salvation of mankind. 11 The sincerity of
those men which spoke them, and wrote them, does prove them to be of God, for
they always came in the name of the Lord, and spent their blood in testimony
thereof. 12 If the author of the scriptures were not God, it must be some
creature, If he were a creature, he was either good or bad. If a bad creature,
why forbids he evil so rigorously, and commands good so expressly, and makes his
mark to aim at nothing but Gods glory and our good. If he were a good
creature, why does he challenge to himself that which is proper to God only,
as to make laws for the heart, and to punish and reward eternally, etc? If it
be no creature good nor bad, it must needs be God.
Q. Are not the works of God sufficient to teach us what God is?

A. No: they may teach us that there is a God and leave us without any excuse,
but to know God rightly to our salvation, we cannot without the scriptures.
Therefore David having showed how the heavens declare the glory of God, etc.
He presently makes mention of his word, saying: The law of the Lord is
undefiled converting souls, Psalm. 19.7.8.
etc.

Q. What does the scripture teach us concerning God?

A. That there is but one God. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Esaias 44. Psalm. 18.31. Esaias 46.9. ^.
Cor. 8.4.


Q. How else may it be proved that God is but one?

A. By the light of our nature and of common reason.

Q. What be your reasons drawn from the light of reason?

Psalm. 144.15.
A. There can be but one chief good, and God is the same chief good, therefore
there is but one God.

Act. 17.28.
2 There can be but one first cause of all things which is God: therefore there
is but one God.

3 The whole course of the world tends to one end, and to one unity, which
is God.

Q. How can that be when there be so many sundry things of diverse kinds
and conditions, and one contrary to another?

A. That is true in deed, but yet they altogether serve one God.

Q. Is that possible? can you give an instance hereof in some familiar
resemblance?

A. Yea very well: In a field there are many battles, diverse standerds, sundry
liueries, and yet all turn head with one sway at once: by which we know that
there is one general of the field which commands them all.

Q. What is this to confirm your assertion, that there is but one God over so
many diverse and contrary things in the world?

A. Yes: for even so in the world we see diverse things, not one like another:
for some are noble, some base; some hot, some cold; some wild, some tame;
yet all serve to the glory of the maker, and the benefit of man, and the
accomplishment of the whole world.

Q. And what gather you by all this?

A. That there is but one God, which commands them all, like the General of
a field.

Q. If one God be the author of all, why are there so many poisons, and noisome
beasts?

A. To this I answer three ways.

1 They were not created noisome and hurtful at the first, Genesis 3.17.18.
but the sin of Adam brought the curse upon the creatures. 2 Although God
has cursed the creatures for man's sin, yet in his mercy he does so dispose
and order them, that they are profitable for us; for poisons, we use them for
physic; and the skins of wild beasts serve against the cold, etc 3 The
most hurtful things that are, might benefit us, if we knew how to use them.
And whereas they annoy us, it is not of their own nature, so much as of our
ignorance.
Q. And what do you conclude by all this?

A. That they have not two beginninges, one good, and another bad, as some
would imagine: but one author thereof, which is God himself, always most good
and gracious.

Objection. Many are called Gods in the Scriptures: as when Moses is called
Pharoes god: Exodus 7.1. Psalm. 82.6.
and magistrates are called gods, therefore there be mo gods then one.

Answer. There is a double signification in this word god: for sometime it
signifies him, who is by nature God, and has his being not from any thing but
himself, and all other things are from him: such a God is but one only.

Q. Why then are Magistrates called gods?

A. For four causes.

1 First, to teach us that such must be chosen to bear rule which excel
others in godliness, like gods amongst men. 2 To encourage them in their
offices, and to teach them that they should not fear the faces of men, like
gods, which fear nothing. 3 To show how God does honor them, and how they
must honor God again: for when they remember how GOD has invested them with
his own name, it should make them ashamed to serve the devil, or the world,
or their own affections; but to execute judgment justly, as if God himself
were there. 4 To teach us to obey them, as we would obey God him self; for he
which contemns them, contemns God himself: Romans 13.2.
and we must not dishonor those whom God does honor.
Q. If there be but one only God, 2. Cor. 4.4.
why is the devil called the God of this world?

A. Because of the great power and soueraintie which is given him over the
wicked whom God has not chosen out of this world.

Q. Why is the belly called a God? Philip. 3.9


A. Because some make more thereof, then of God, and his worship: for all
that they can do and get, is little enough for their bellies: and when they
should serve God, they serve their bellies and beastly appetites.

Q. Why are Idols called gods?

A. Not because they are so indeed, but because Idolaters have such an opinion
of them.

Q. What other thing do the Scriptures teach us of God?

A. That in this one God are three persons, or beings: for Matthew says; that
John Baptists saw the holy Ghost descending like a Dove upon Christ, Mat.
3.16.17.
there is one person: he heard a voice from heaven, saying; this is my beloved
son, there is another person: and he saw Christ going out of the water,
there is a third person.

And Paul says thus; God saved us by the washing of the new birth, Tit. 3.5.
and renewing of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly thorough
Jesus Christ our Savior: Here be three authors of our salvation.

Q. How prove you that these three are but one God?

A. I prove it by the words of Saint John; there are three that bear witness
in heaven, 1. John 5.7.
the Father, the word, and the holy Ghost: And these three are one.

Q. What resemblances can you show me of the Trinity, in some things which
be commonly known amongst us?

Resemblances of the Trinity in the sun.
A. The sun begets his own beams, and from thence proceed both light and
heat: and yet is not one of them before another, otherwise then in
consideration of order and relation, that is to say, in respect that the sun
beams are begotten, and the light proceeding, which is an apparent image and
resemblance of the three persons in one God.

Again, in waters, there is the well head, the spring boiling out of it,
Waters.
and the stream flowing from them both, and all these are but one water: and
so there are three persons in one Godhead, and yet but one God.

Again, from one flame of fire proceed both light and heat, Fire.
and yet but one fire: So in God be three persons or beings, and yet but one
God.

Q. How do these three persons differ one from another?

A. Two ways. First according to their names: Secondly, according to their
actions.

Q. What is the name of the first person?

Mat. 11.^7.
A. The first person is called the Father, and that in two respects. First, in
respect of his natural Son Jesus Christ, begotten of his own nature and
substance.

Ephesians. 3.14.
Secondly, in respect of us, his adopted sons.

Q. Adopted sons! What mean you by that?

A. I mean those whom he has chosen to be heirs of heaven, John 1.12. Romans
8.14.
through the mediation of his natural son Jesus Christ.

Q. What is the second person called?

A. The second person is called the son of god, because he is begotten of his
fathers nature and substance, Note.
not because he was begotten of the substance of God, for so in respect of
substance they be all one, but in respect of the father, he is called the son.

Q. Where find you that he is called the son?

A. In Pro. 30.4. What is his name, and what is his sons name?

Q. What is the third person called?

A. The third person is called the holy spirit.

Q. Why is he called a spirit?

A. For two causes. First, because he is spiritual, without body, Luke 24.39.
flesh, blood or bones: for a spirit has no such matter, as our Savior
Christ says.

Secondly, because he is, as it were, the breath of grace, which the father and
the son breaths out upon the Saints. John 20.22.


Q. Why is he called holy spirit?

A. For two causes. First, because he is holy by nature. Secondly, because he
is the sanctifier of the Saints.

Q. Now show me how they differ according to their actions.

A. The father begets. Psalm. 2.7. 1. John 5.1. John 15.26.


The son is begotten.

The holy Ghost proceeds.

Q. How was the son of God begotten of his Father?

A. For the better understanding of this point, we must consider that there are
two manners of begetting. One is carnal and outward, and this is subject to
corruption, alteration and time.

The other is spiritual and inward, as was the begetting of the son of God,
in whose generation there is neither corruption, alteration, nor time.

Q. Declare then after what manner this spiritual generation of she son of
God was, and yet in sobriety, according to the scriptures.

A. For the better finding out of this mystery, we must consider in God two
things: First that in God there is an understanding. Psalm. 139.2. Secondly, we
must consider how this understanding is occupied in God.

Q. Declare after what manner it is in God.

A. This understanding is his very being, and is everlastingly, and most
perfectly occupied in God.

Q Whereupon does Gods understanding work?

A. Upon nothing but it self, and that I prove by reason, for God being
infinite and all in all, it cannot meet with any thing but himself.

Q. What work does this understanding in God effect?

A. It does understand and conceive it self, for as in a glass a man does
conceive, and beget a perfect image of his own face, so God in beholding and
minding of himself, does in himself beget a most perfect and a most lively
image of himself, which is that in the Trinity which we call the son of
God.

Q. Where do you find that the son is called the perfect image of God?

A. Yes, he is called the brightness of his glory, and the engraven form of
his person, which is all one. Heb. 1.3*


Q. What mean you by ingraued form?

A. That as wax upon a seal has the ingraued form of the seal, so the
son of God which his father has begotten of his own understanding, is the
very form of his fathers understanding, so that when the one is seen, the
other is seen also.

Q. Why then he is understanding it self: for so is his father?

A. Yea, he is so, and he says so of himself. I have counsel and wisdom,
Prou. 8.14.
I am understanding.

Q. But where find you that he was begotten?

A. He says so himself in the name of wisdom in these words: When there was
no depthes, then was I begotten. Prou. 8.24.25.
Before the mountains and hills were settled, was I begotten.

Q. Yea, he was made the son of God, when he was borne of the virgin Marie,
was he not?

A. He was in deed then the son of God, but he was not then made the son of
God.

Q. When was he made the son of God?

A. He was never made in time, for he was begotten of the substance of his
Father, from all eternity, without beginning or ending.

Q. How prove you that the son of God was not made, but begotten eternally of
the substance of his father?

A. I prove it first by scripture: for he says no less himself. Prou. 8.23.
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, and before the earth. And
therefore he prayed that he might be glorified of his father, John. 17.5.
with the glory which he had with his father before the world.

Secondly, I prove it by reason, for Gods understanding is everlasting,
therefore the second person which it begets is so too: for the father in his
understanding did not conceive any thing less then himself nor greater then
him self, but equal to him self.

Q. Although the Son of God be everlasting, yet he is not all one with the
Father, is he?

A. Yes, that he is: and yet not joined with his Father in heaven as two judges
that sit together on a bench, or as the seal and the wax, as some do grossly
imagine, but they are both John. 10.30.
one without parting or mingling, whereupon I conclude that whatsoever the
Father is, the Son is the same, and so consequently that they be coeternall,
coequall, and coessentiall.

Q. What mean you, when you say that they be coeternall, coequall, and
coessentiall?

A. By being coeternall, I mean that they be of one self same everlasting
continuance. By coequal I mean that they be of one state, condition and
degree. By coessential I mean that they be of one self same substance or
being.

Q. What difference then is there between the three persons?

A. Truly none but by way of relation and order: that is, the Father is called
the Father, in respect of the Son, and the Son in respect of the Father,
and the holy Ghost in respect that he proceeds from the Father and the Son,
but the one is not the other as the fountain is not the stream, nor the
stream the fountain, but are so called one in respect of another, and yet al
but one water.

Q. Men by reason do conceive, and beget reason: what difference is there
between the co^ceiuing of understanding in men, and the conceiving of
understanding in God?

A. There is great difference, for first this conceiving in men, proceeds of
sense, or outward imagination, which is an outward thing for reason to work
upon, as wood is to fire. But God the Father of him self begets and
conceiueth him self, John. 1.18.
and still in him self. As John says: That only begotten Son which is in
the bosom of the Father.

Secondly, in men the thing which is understood and the understanding it
self is not all one, but in God it is all one.

Q. What reason have you for this?

A. The reason is, because only God is altogether life, and his life is
altogether vndertanding, and his understanding is the highest degree of life:
And therefore he has his conceiving, and begetting most inward of all.

Q. What mean you when you say most inward of al?

A. I mean that the Father conceiueth in him self, and of himself, and his
conceiving is a begetting, and his begetting abides still in him self,
because his understanding can no where meet with any thing but that which he
him self is: And that is the second being in the Trinity, The holy Ghost^
which we call everlasting Son of God.

Q. Now let me hear what the holy Ghost is, and how he proceeds from the
Father and the Son.

A. For the understanding of this matter we must consider two things. First
that in the essence of God besides his understanding there is a Esa. 46.10.
will: secondly, what be the properties of this will in God.

Q. What are the properties of gods will?

A. First, it applies his power when, where, and how he thinks good
according to his own mind. Secondly, it works everlastingly upon it self,
as his understanding does.

Q. What do you gather by this?

A. That because it has no other thing to work upon but it self, it does
delight it self in the infinite good which it knows in it self, for the
action of the will is delight and liking.

Q. And what of that?

A. That delight which God or his will has in his own infinite goodness, does
bring forth a third person or being in God, which we call the holy Ghost.

Q. What is that same third being in God?

A. The mutual kindness and louingnes of the Father and the Son.

Q. What mean you by this mutual louingnesse and kindness?

A. The Father takes joy and delight in the Son, Prou. 8.3.
or his own image conceived by his understanding, and the Son likewise
rejoices in his Father, as he says himself, and the reason hereof is this,
the action of the will (when it is fulfilled) is love and liking.

Q. What resemblance can you show hereof in some thing that is commonly used
amongst us?

A. When a man looks in a glass, if he smile, his image smileth too, and if
he takes delight in it, it takes the same delight in him, for they are both
one.

Q. If they be all one, then there are not three beings?

A. The face is one being, the image of the face in the glass is another
being, and the smiling of them both together is a third being, and yet all are
in one face, and all are of one face, and all are but one face.

Q. And is it so in God?

A. Yea, for even so the understanding which is in God, is one being, the
reflection, or And yet the image of the face in the glass, is but a
resembla^ce only, and not the face in deed: but the image of Gods
understanding, is more then abare image or resemblance, for the Son of God
which is called the image of his Fathers nature, substance, and glory, is also
of the same nature, substance, and glory with the Father, and is that
understanding it self whereof it is also an image or perfect resemblance.
image of his understanding which he beholds in him self, as in a glass,
is a second being: And the love and liking of them both together by reason of
the will fulfiled, is a third being in God, and yet al are but of one God, all
are in one God, and all are but one God.

Which of these three beings is fast?

A. There is neither first nor last, going before nor coming after in the
essence of God, but all these, as they are everlasting, so they are all at
once, and at one instant, even as in a glass, the face and the image of the
face when they smile, they smile together, and not one before nor after an
other.

Q. What is the conclusion of all?

A. As we have the Son of the Father, by the everlasting inworking of his
understanding, so also we have the holy Ghost of the love of them both by the
joint working of the understanding, and will together: whereupon we conclude
three distinct persons, or inbeings (which we call the Father, the Son, and
the holy Ghost) in one spiritual, yet unspeakable substance, which is very
God him self.

Q. But what if some will be yet more curious to know how the son of God
should be begotten, and how the holy Ghost should proceed from the Father and
the Son, how may we satisfy them?

A. Well enough, for if any will be too curious about this point, we may
answer them thus; Let them show us how themselves are bred and begotten: and
then let the^ ask us how the son of God is begotten: and let them tell us the
nature of the spirit that beats in their pulses, and then let them be
inquisitiue at our hands for the proceeding of the holy Ghost.

Q. And what if they can not give us a reason for the manner of their own
being, may they not be inquisitiue for the manner of Gods being?

A. No: for if they must be constrained to be ignorant in so common matters
which they daily see and feel in them selves, let them give us leave to be
ignorant not only in this, but in many things more, which are such as no eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor wit of man can conceive.

How the 3. persons agree together.
Q. How do the three persons of the Trinity agree one with another?

A. They agree five ways.

1 In deity. 2 In dignity. 3 In time or eternity. 4 In operation. 5 In will.
Q. What mean you by agreeing in Deity?

A. Their substance is the same, and all are one God.

Q. How prove you that the Father is God?

Ephesians. 1.3.
A. S. Paul says, Blessed be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. How prove you that the Son is God?

A. Three ways. First, by plain testimonies of scriptures. 2. By the works
which he did and does. 3. By comparing the old Testament and the new together.


Q. By what testimonies of scripture do you prove it?

A. In 1. Ioh. 5.20. Heb. 1.8. Romans 9.5. Esai. 9.6.

Q. How do you prove it by his work?

A. His works were such as none could do but God: for, 1 He made the world
which none could do but God. Heb. 1.2.
2 He forgave sins which none could do but God. Math. 9.2.
3 He gives the holy Ghost, Ioh. 15.26.
which none can do but God. 4 He maintains his Church which he could not
do if he were not God. Ephe. 4.11.12.



Q. How do you prove the Son to be God by comparing the old Testament and
the new?

A. Look what the old Testament speaks of Jehovah which is God, that the new
Testament applies to Christ, Ergo. he is God.

Q. What proves can you show of this?

A. 1 David says: Psalm. 68.18. Ephe. 4.8. Psalm, 95.^. 1. Cor. 10.9. Esai.
41.4. Apoc. 21.6.
Jehovah went up on high, and led captivity captive. Paul applies it to
Christ.

2 Again, the Psalmist says, Jehovah was tempted, which Paul applies to
Christ.

3 Again* Esai says* Jehovah is the first and the last: this is also applied
to Christ.

4 Again: Esaias says, Jehovah will not give his glory to any other then to
himself, Esa. 42, 8. Heb. 1.6.
but it is given to Christ, therefore Christ is Jehovah.

Q. How prove you the holy ghost to be God?

1. Cor. 3, 17. 2. Cor. 6.16.
A. Paul calls us Gods temples, because the holy ghost dwells in us,
therefore he is God* and this reason is also used by S. Augustine in his 66.
Epistle to Maximinus.

Q. How does he use it?

A. He says it is a clear argument of his Godhead, if we were commanded to
make him a Temple but of timber and stone, because that woorship is due to God
only: Therefore now we must much more think that he is God, because we are not
commanded to make him a Temple, but to be a temple for him our selves.

Q. What other reason have you out of the Scripture?

A. Peter reproving Ananias for lying to the holy ghost, Act. 5.3.4.
said that the lied not to men, but to God.

Q. Have you any more reasons from the Scriptures?

A. Yea two more, one from Paul, and another. from S. Paul and Esaias together.

Q. What is your reason from S. Paul?

1. Cor. 12.11.
A. When he shows how many sundry gifts are given to men, he says, that one
and the selfsame spirit is the distributer of them all, therefore he is God, for
none can distribute those gifts which Paul speaks of, but God.

Q. What is your reason from Esaias and S. Paul together?

Act. 28.25.
A. Esaias says in chap. 6.9. I heard the lord speaying, which place Paul
expounds of the holy ghost.

Q. Which is the second way, that they are all one?

A. They agree not only in deity, but also in dignity.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that the one has as great excellency and majesty every way as the
other. Ioh. 5.23. Apo. 5.12.13.
And therefore their honor and worship is equal and a like, and one of them
has not more honor then an other.

Q. If the honor of the Father and the Son be equal, then what say you to
them that give external honor to the name of Jesus, more then the name of
Christ, and of Jehovah, and of God, and of the holy ghost?

A. I see not what reason they have so to do.

Of the bowing to the name of Jesus.
Q. Why? Philip. 2.10.
is it not said that at the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, etc.

A. It is true, if it be rightly understood* for as a learned man says, the
bowing of the knee at the sound of the name of Jesus (as it is used in popery)
is not commanded nor prophiced in that place, but it means that all
creatures shall be subject to the judgment of Christ, when not only Turks and
Jews, which now yield no honor to Jesus, but even the Devils themselves shall be
constrained to acknowledge that he is their Judge.

Q. What hurt is there in bowing or worshipping at the name of Jesus.?

A. To this question I answer with that reverend man, that capping and
kneeling at the name of Jesus, is of it self an indifferent thing, and
therefore may be abused superstitiouslie, as in Poperye, where the people stoop
at the sound of the name of Jesus when it is read, not understanding what it
means, or what is said concerning him: Also in bowing only at the name of
Jesus, and not at the names of Christ, Emanuel, God the father, the son and
the holy Ghost, there is superstition committed; it may be used well also
when the mind is free from superstition in sign of remembrance of his
majesty, and as in a matter, in which Christian liberty ought to have place,
for due reverence may be yielded to our Savior without any such outward
ceremony of kneeling or capping. D. Fulke annota. in The. Test. in Philip
2.10. Concerning (...) or divine worship it is not due to the sillables and
letters of the bare name of Jesus or of Christ, but to Jesus Christ himself,
and to his laws and statutes prescribed in his holy word, and that according
to his word.

Q. Have any committed such idolatry?

A. Yea the Papists who thought and do think that the very letters of the
name of Jesus is able to save them from the devil and from ill; As also
ignorant people amongst us, which stands scraping and capping at the bare name
of Jesus, and that only when the Gospel is read, not knowing what they do.

Q. Is not the devil afraid of the name of Jesus, and will not the sound and
sight thereof make him fly from us?

Luke 4.41. Act. 19.15.
A. No: for then they would never have named, and confessed him themselves, as
it appears they did, besides that, if the devil were afraid at the name of
Jesus, why durst he so boldly come to tempt Christ himself in the
wilderness? Therefore the devil is no more afraid of the name of Jesus,
Matthew. 4.
then he was to see the Cross, when he did help the Jews to make it, and to
set it up, and to hang Christ upon it, much less is he afraid of the sign of
the cross.

Q. But we read that Paul drove an evil spirit out of a Maid, by the name of
Jesus.

A. Act. 1^.18.
That was by the virtue and power of Christ's spirit, which Paul had given
unto him, and not by the name only of Jesus, Act. 3.16.
as the cripple was healed by faith in the name of Jesus.

Q. Can you show me example of any that could not prevail as Paul did, by the
bare sound of the name of Jesus.

A. Yea, In Act. 19.13.14.15.16. We read of certain men, which took upon them
to drive out Devils by naming of Jesus, but they got nothing by it, as the
story shows.

Of joining Christ and the Mass together.
Q If the Father and the Son be of equal honor, what say you to the joining
of Christ and the mass together in one word, to keep his birth and
incarnation in remembrance.

A. The Scripture forbids us not only to keep the idols, and worship of
idolaters, but also to keep any of their names in remembrance, or to make
mention of their names with our lips, Exo. 23.13. Psa. 16.4*
and this we are forbidden both in the precept of God, and the practice of his
servant David.

Q. If the Son of God must be honored, as his Father is honored, then how
must the nativity of the Son of God be kept, and celebrated?

A. With such solemnity and rejoicing as beseems the majesty, dignity, and
nature of the son of God, even as we keep the day of our Princes Coronation,
with such solemnity as beseems the majesty and state of a Prince.

Q. What solemnity must that be?

A. Divine, heavenly, and spiritual, because he is such to whose honor we do
it.

Q. What then must be our exercises at that time?

A, Hearing the word of God read and preached, to know Christ Jesus, giving
of thanks to God for our redemption by Christ Jesus, rejoicing with spiritual
songs and Psalms to the praise of God for Christ Jesus, and bewayling our
sins, Phil. 2.6.7.8.
which caused the son of God so to abase himself for our sakes, and to pray
for grace that we may walk worthy so great a benefit.

Q. What say you then to vain pastimes, as Lord of misrule, stage players,
carding and dicing and such like, which tend to lewd and unchaste behavior,
with surfeiting, and rioting, etc. In which and such like exercises commonly
the time is spent.

A. They are not beseeming the dignity and majesty of the son of God, nor
the profession of Christians, but they are rather for such as know not GOD,
nor his Son Christ, and are such as walk altogether in the vanities of their
minds, but as the Apostle says) we have not so learned Christ, if we have
learned him in deed and in truth. Ephesians. 4.17. etc.
See Ephesians. 4. from the 17, verse, to the end of the Chapter.

Q. Although they be unlawful at other times, yet at this time they are
lawful: for wherefore was this time appointed else, but to laugh and be merry in?

A. Not honest recreation, but excess of riot, is at all times unlawful, but
especially at this time: for this time is appointed to the Church, to have the
birth and nativity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, kept in a holy,
joyful and thankful remembrance: and not to be spent as though hell were
broken loose in all manner of licentiousnes.

Q. What? is it not lawful to rejoice then, and to eat and drink, and to be
merry one with another?

A. Yes: if it be done in the fear of God, to the mainteining of holy love, to
the releeuing of the poor and needy, and to the glory and praise of the
son of God, Jesus Christ: in whom, by whom, and for whose sake, we enjoy
all the blessings that we have.

Q. Wherein else do the three persons agree?

A. In time or eternity.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that one of them has been of as long continuance as another, and
all of them have been and shall be for ever.

Q. How prove you this?

A. By the Scriptures. Heb. 13.8. Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ yesterday, to day, and the same for ever. John 1.1. Ioh. 1.1.
Genesis 1.26. Genesis 1.26.
Let us etc. which was spoken to the iij. persons in the trinity. viz. Father
etc.

Q. How else are they all one?

1 Ioh. 5.17. ^ Genesis 1.26.
A. In operation: that is, they all work one and the same thing together, as
appears by these places.

To this doctrine do the learned also give testimony: for one says, Opera
trinitatis sunt inseperabilia: idest, the works of the trinity be
inseparable: which he explaneth by this similitude. Quum dicimus solemn nutrire,
and illuminare terram, non excipimus eius ardorem, Musc. com. pla. page 21.
neque splendorem, sine quibus non nutri^, nec illuminat: that is, when we say
that sun does nourish, and lighten the earth, we do not except his heat, nor
his brightness: even so of the works of the trinity.

Another says thus: Quia Deus est essentia vnus, hypostasi vero trinus,
^anaeus phys. page 100.
sic intelligitur, vt opus hoc creationis sit illius trinitatis commune,
quanquam in eodem opere sit* distincta cuiusque personae operatio. that is:
Because God is one in essence, but three in substance we must understand that
this work of our creation is a common work of the trinity, although in the
same work there is a distinct and diverse operation of each person.

Q. How else are they all one?

A. In will: that is they will all one and the same thing without any crossing,
contradiction, or varying in themselves: as the Son himself says. I do
always those things that please him. Ioh. 8.29.
viz: the father.

Q. These places before alleged, do prove the Father and the Son to be all
one in deity, dignity, eternity, etc. but What say you for the holy Ghost?

A. The holy ghost is sometime called the spirit of the father, as the Lord
God and his spirit has sent me, Esa. 48.16.
sometime the spirit of the son, as: If any has not the spirit of Christ
etc. Romans 8.9.
Now if the spirit of a man in whom there is no perfection be all one with
man, much more the spirit of the father is all one with the father, and the
spirit of the son is all one with the son, and so the holy ghost with the
father, and the son* is the same in deity, dignity, eternity, operation
and will.

The names of the 1. person.
Q. What names are given in the Scripture to the first person?

A. The father spoke most commonly in the old Testament (for in these last
times he has spoken by his son) and he is called by these names.

1 Jehovah* that is, I am that I am: without beginning or ending. Esa. 42.8.
2 Elohim: that is mighty and strong. 3 Adonay: that is judge, or in whose
judgment we rest. 4 Lord of hosts: 1. King. 19.14.
because he has both Angels, and men, and all creatures at command to fight
for him. 5 The God of Jacob, Act. 3.13.
or of Israel, because he made a promise to Abraham that he would be his God,
and the God of his seed, and the Israelits were the seed of Abraham. 6 The
father of our Lord Jesus Christ: the reason why, Ephesians. 1.3.
is declared before.
The names of the 2. person.
Q. What names are given to the second person?

A. He has some names as he is the son of God. He has some names as he is man.

And he has some names as he is both God and man in one person.

Q. What names has he as he is the son of God.

Ioh. 1.14.
A. First, only begotten Son of God: because he is only begotten of the
nature, and substance of the Father.

Romans 8.29. Hebr. 1.6. Hebr. 1.3.
Secondly, first begotten: not as though he begat any after, but because he
begat none before.

Thirdlye, the image, and brightness of the Fathers glory, because the glory
of God which we cannot see in him, is by his effects expressed in his son.

John. 1.1. Hebr. 1.1.
Fourthly, the word: because, even as a man reuealeth the meaning of his heart
by the word of his mouth, so God reuealeth his will by his son.

Q. What names has he as he is man?

Math. 26.24.
A. 1. Son of man: because* he was of the nature of man according to the flesh.

Math. 9.27.
2. Son of David, because he sprange of the lineage and stock of David.

Q. What names are given him as he is both God and man in one person?

Math. 1.21.
A. 1. Jesus, that is a Savior: because he came to save the people from their
sins.

Math. 16.16.
2. Christ, that is anointed: For he was anointed of God to be a Prince, to
rule his Church, a Prophet to teach his church, and a Priest to offer sacrifice
for his Church.

3. Mediator and advocate: because he prays, for us to the Father* and
pleads our cause before his judgment seat. 1. Tim. 2.5.


Q. What names are given to the holy ghost, the 3. person.

A. The holy ghost (who is the spirit of the Father) speaking in the old
Testament, has these names and properties.

1. The good spirit, Psalm. 143.10.
because, he is the fountain of goodness. 2. The spirit of God, 1. Sam. 11.6.
because he is good, and proceeds from God. 3. The finger of God, Luke 11.23.
because God works by him, as a man by his hand. 4. The comforter, John.
10.26.
because he strengthens the weak hearts of his Saints. 5. The spirit of
Adoption, Romans 8.15.
because he assures our hearts that we be adopted the Saints of God. 6. The
spirit of love, 2 Timothy 1.7.6. Esa. 11.2.
power, sobriety, wisdom, etc. because it works all these things in us.
God is incomprehensible.
Q. Of what nature is God?

A. First, by nature God is incomprehensible.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that God cannot be contained in any compass of place as is a man,
or Angel, or any other creature, but he is in all places, and fills all
places at once, 1. Kings. 8.27. Psalm. 145 3.
and is beyond all compass of place that we can imagine, as appears by the
testimony of the Scriptures.

Q. Though the substance of God be incomprehensible, yet his power and wisdom
are not so, are they?

A. Yes, Ioh. 11.7.8.9. Romans 11.33.
and whatsoever is in God is incomprehensible, as may be proved by the
Scriptures.

Q. To what purpose and use serves this doctrine?

A. It serves to drive all gross and idolatrous conceits of God out of our
minds. 2. It detecteth and bewraieth the impiety and blasphemy of the popish
Church, or any other persons whersoeuer, who either by making of pictures (as
they thought) of God, or by maintaining of them being made, or by suffering of
them to stand still (especially after it be known) have thereby denied God to
be incomprehensible. For those pictures and resemblances of God which ignorant
men have forged in their own brain, do tell us and say, that God may be
comprehended and contained within a place, yea in a small place, or in any
place as a man or other creatures, which is most high blasphemy against the
majesty of almighty God.

God is invisible.
Q. What else is God by nature?

A. Invisible, that is, he has not been seen with any mortal eye, neither
can any man possibly see God.

Q. How prove you that?

A. Two ways, First by Scripture. 2. By reason. That no man has seen God, It
is plain set down in 1. John 4.12.

That no man can see God, It is as plainly proved in Exodus 33.20. 1. Tim. 6.16.

By reason, it is manifest, First we can not see our own souls which are ten
thousand times a more gross substance then God, much less can we see God,
which is a most pure and spiritual substance.

Q. We read in Genesis 18.1. that God appeared to Abraham. And in Deuteronomy. 5.24.
that he showed himself to the Israelites, therefore he is not invisible, how
answer you this?

A. God gave them in deed some outward sights, whereby they might be certain
of his presence, and therefore it is said that the Lord appeared unto them,
but his substance or essence they saw not: John. 6.46.
For to know God perfectly is proper to God only.

Q. We read in Genesis 1.26. that man was made according to the image of God,
therefore God is visible, for man is visible, How answer you this?

A. The image of God consists not in the shape and figure of the body, but
in the mind and integrity of nature, Coloss. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24.
or (as the scripture says) in wisdom, righteousness, and holiness.

Q. To what use serves this doctrine?

A. For many uses, but especially to drive away all gross conceits of God
out of our hearts, and all pictures and similitudes of God out of our sight; for
seeing that God was never seen, whereunto shall he be resembled? Deuteronomy.
4.12.15.16.17.18.19.
Moses urged this point hard and often to the Israelites, saying, Ye hard the
voice, but saw no similitude: Take therefore good heed unto your selves, mark
how he says not take heed, but take good heed. And therefore take good heed.
For (says he again) ye saw no image in the day that the Lord spoke unto
you in Horeb, etc.

Now he comes to the thing that they must therefore take heed of. That ye
corrupt not your selves, and make you a graven image, or representation of any
figure, whether it be of male or female, etc.

Q. What else is the nature of God?

A. By his nature he is every where, that is in all places of heaven, Psalm.
139.7. Iere. 23.24.
and earth, and the sea, and hell and all at one time, and this is witnessed by
the Scriptures as well as the rest.

Q. Is God every where bodily?

A. No, for he has no body.

Q Is God every where in speculation only?

A. No. For he works in every thing which he beholds.

Q. How then is he every where?

A. He is every were essentially: For his essence is not contained in any
place, because he is incomprehensible.

Q. Is he not half in one half of the world, and half in the other half of
the world?

A. No. But as the whole soul is wholly in every part of the body: so God is
whole and wholly in every part of the world.

1 Objection. If God be every where essentially, then he is in the most
filthy sink and puddle.

Answer. To this objection I answer three ways. First, it is no abasing of
the glory of his majesty, to say that he is there, no more then it is to the
Sun, whose beams and light are there, or to a Physician to be amongst those
that be sick.

Secondly, all the creatures of God in themselves are exceeding good, and when
he is in the most filthy sink in the world, he is not in a more filthy
place then our selves, whether we be sick or sound.

Thirdly, they are his workmanship. And it is no abasement of the workemaister,
to be amongst his works.

2 Objection. If God be every where: Psalm. 2.4.
why is it said he dwells in the heavens?

Answer. Because his glory and majesty which is every where alike, shines
most prosperous and visible in heaven.

3 Objection. It is said in Number. 14.42. He is not amongst the wicked.

Answer. That is true. For he is not amongst them with his grace and favor,
to protect and defend them: But otherwise by his power and providence he is
amongst them, to bridle their raging affections, to plague their furious
obstinacy, and to dispose of their desperate attempts to his own glory, and
the good of his people.

4 Objection. If God be every where at the same instante of time, how is he
said to be sometimes nearer, Esai. 56.6.
sometimes further of?

Answer. God is said to be near unto us, when by his word or any other means
he offers us grace and favor. And when he hears and grants our prayers,
as Moses says, What nation is so great unto whom the Gods come so near unto
them, as the Lord our God is near unto us, Deuteronomy, 4.7.
in all that we call unto him for.

5 Objection. If God be in hell, the^ al goodness is there for he is al goodness,
and so co^seque^tly there is no want of joy in the damned.

Answer. The damned in hell feel no part of his goodness, that is, of his
mercy and loving favor, but of his power and justice, so that God is in hell,
by his power, and in his wrath.

God is a living God.
Q. What else is God by nature?

A. A living God. For so is he called Heb. 10.31.
in the Scriptures. Ier. 10.10. Hereof is that speech in the scripture so often
used. The Lord lives Number. 14.21.
. And hereof is that form of taking an oath so common in the Scripture. As the
Lord lives. Both Romans 14 11.
God and 1. Sam. 19.6.
man used it. And may be used Ier* 4.2.
when we may lawfully swear, and not else.

Q. Why is God called a living God?

John 5.26.
A. For four causes. 1 Because he only has life in himself, and of himself,
and all other creatures have life from him.

Acts 17.28.
2 Because he is the only giver of life unto man. Genesis 2.7.

Matt 22.32.
3 Because he is the God especially, not of the dead, but of the living.

Psalm. 115.56.
4 To distinguish him thereby from all the false Gods of heathen, which have no
life in them.

God is eternal.
Q What else is God by nature?

Psalm. 90.2. Esaias 40.8.
A. Eternal, that is he has neither beginning, nor end of being, as the
Scriptures testify.

Q. Why is God called eternal in the Scriptures?

A: First in respect of us his children, because he has promised to give us
of his eternal goodness, and to have a continual care of us through all
eternity, and will have a kingdom in Angels and men, whereof shall be no end.

Q. Is it necessary that we should know this?

A. Yea, that we may here stay our selves with the certain hope of eternal
life, grounded upon his eternity.

Q. How may that hope be grounded upon his eternity?

A. Very well: Psalm. 48.13. Psalm. 103.17.
For God being eternal, he can for ever preserve us. And seeing he has
promised, he will for ever preserve us.

Q. Why else is God said to be eternal?

A. That so he might be discerned from all other things created, Esai* 40.18.
Psalm. 113.45.
for nothing is like unto God, if the scriptures speak truth.

Q. Is it necessary we hold God to be eternal, that so he may be discerned
from all things created?

A. Yea, and we hold it in that respect for two causes.

1. Because certain heretics have thought either all the creatures, or some
of the creatures at least, Vrsinus*
to be derived from the very nature and essence of God by propagation, as
children from their mothers womb. 2 That all idolatrous cogitation of God may
be excluded out of our minds.
God is unchangeable.
Q. What else is the nature of God?

A. He is unchangeable.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. That is, he will be always such as he has been from all eternity.

Q. Declare in particular how that is?

A. First his essence or substance cannot be augmented, nor deminished.
Secondly, his nature and will cannot be changed. Thirdly, he has no need to
transporte himself from place to place. This is witnessed by the Scriptures,
and also confirmed by the light of reason.

Q. By what Scripture do you prove that God is unchangeable?

A: It is proved in Number. 23.19. James. 1.17. Psalm. 33.11. Esa. 46.10.

Q. What light does reason give to this matter?

A. Whatsoever is changed, must needs be changed either to the worse, or to
the better: or into a state equal with the former. But God cannot be changed
from the better to the worse, for so he should become of perfect, imperfect.

And to exchange from the worse to the better it is impossible also: for then
he should have been imperfect before, which to affirm is high blasphemye.

Q. But how prove you that God does not remove himself from place to place?

A. Because he Psa. 139.
fills heaven and earth, and al places, therefore he can neither depart from
any place, nor be absent from any place,

1 Objection. If God cannot change his mind, why is it said he repented that
he had made man?

Answer. The Scripture speaks after our manner, in that, that we may better
understand what is the nature of God against sin.

Q. Declare how that is.

A. When we are grieved with any thing, we do then repent us that ever we did
that thing with which we are grieved: and so God is said to repent him that
ever he made man, with whom he was angry to show that he was unfeignedly and
highlye displeased with the evil ways of mankind.

2 Objection. It is said, Exodus 32.14.
the Lord changed his mind from the evil which he threatened to do to his
people.

Answer. That is still after the manner of men. For man because he is but man,
cannot speak to God but as a man. And therefore God speaks again to man like
a man, because else man should not understand what God is, nor what is his will.

Q Show me one example hereof in the Scripture.

A. When Moses prayed for the Israelites, he used many reasons to persuade the
Lord (but especially to confirm his own hope) At the last he said thus. Turn
from thy fierce wrath, and change thy mind from this evil toward thy people:
Thus did Moses speak to God, and if he had spoken to a mortal man* he could
have said no more nor no less: Vltra posse non est esse.
For man's speech is according to his capacity, and both are limited, and
beyond himself he cannot go. Therefore when he shows what the Lord did, he
says, he changed his mind, which was as much as he could conceive of God for
that matter. Thus we speak so well as we can, yet in a broken and imperfect
speech to God, as little children speak to their nurses. And almighty God
speaks in a broken and imperfect langguage again to us, for our weakness and
understandings sake, as the nurse does to the child, for if the nurse should
speak so perfectly to the child as she could to one of greater capacity,
Simile.
the child would not understand her; So if God should speak unto us as he
could and according to his own nature, we were never able to understand him,
nor conceive his meaning.

Q. Did not God change his mind, when he drowned the world?

A. No, but he did then execute that, which from everlasting he had decreed.

3. Objection.

The promises and threatings of God, are not always fulfilled, ergo, etc.

Answer.

His promises are made with a condition of faith and obedience, Deuteronomy. 28.12.
and his threatninges with an exception of conversion and repentance. Psalm.
7.12.


Q. What use may we make of this doctrine?

A. First it may make us fear to offend him, because all his threatninges are
unchangeable, except we repent.

Secondly, it is the foundation of our hope and comfort in this life, for he
does not now love and now hare: but whom he loves, to the end he loves them.
Joh. 13.1.


How God is omnipotent.
Q. Has God any more attributes given him in the Scriptures?

A. Yea, Job. 8.3. Job. 11.7.
the Scriptures do call him omnipotent or almighty.

Q. What mean you when you say, that God is almighty?

A. I mean this, Psalm. 135.6. Esaias. 40.28.
First, whatsoever he will he is able to perform.

2. Secondly, Psalm. 33.9. Psa. 148.5.
he can perform it without any labor or means.

3. I mean that all power is so in God only, Act. 17.28.
that no creature is able to do any thing, but as he does continuallye
receive power from God to do it. Esaias. 40.29.

Q. What mean you when you say, all power is in God: It should seem by that
speech, that there are more powers in God then one.

A. That we may rightly understand what power is in God, it were very requisite
that we did first consider how many ways this word Power is taken in the
Scriptures,

Q. Declare then how or in what sense it is taken in the Scriptures.

A. In the Scriptures this word Power is taken two ways, or in two senses,
sometime for authority, which is grounded upon law, by which authority one
may do this or that, if he be able to do it.

Sometime it is taken for might and strength, or ability to do a thing, if
one has authority to do it, and these are distinguished by two words amongst
the Grecians and the Latins. For when the Grecians speak of power, as it
signifies authority and right, Math. 28.18. Ph. 17.2.
then it is called Exousia. When they take power for strength, then it is
termed by them Dunamis: among the Latins being taken the first way, it is
called potestas: being taken the second way, that is, for might or strength, it
is called potentia, and in English we call them both Power.

Q. It seems by your speech, that they are not only distinguished, but that
they may be also separated the-one from the other.

A. It is true, for so they are, as for example. A King may have great force
and strength, and by his great power he may be able to overthrow and destroy a
whole Country or kingdom, over which he has no authority: Again, some king
has power, that is, authority over his rebels, and yet has not power, that
is strength enough to subdue them: So some perhaps have might and strength
enough to govern and rule another man's wife, another man's Children, or another
man's servants: over which he has no power, that is authority. And again,
Fathers have authority over their own Children, all Husbands over their own
wives, and all masters over their own servants: and yet all have not power,
that strength and ability to rule them.

Q I perceive by this which you have said, that in Creatures these two may be
separated one from the other, and many times are: but what are they in God?

A. In God they are not divided, but distinguished: for he has all power, that
is, all authority over all things: and he has all power, that is, all
strength, force, might, and ability, to do all things with all things, at
his good pleasure. And this power is not given him, but he has it in himself,
and of himself most perfectly, absolutely, and eternally.

Q. But of what power do we speak, when we say that God is almighty,
whether do you mean his right and authority, or his strength and ability,
or both?

A. Both are in God essentially: but when the scripture speaks of Gods
omnipotency, it means (and so do we,) his strength and ability, whereby he
is able to do whatsoever he will, not excluding his right.

Gods power many ways considered.
Q. If all power or might be in God, tell me how manifold is this power, which
is attributed to God in the scriptures?

A. To speak simply, the power of God, is but only one and a most simple and
single thing, which is his essence and substance, yet for diverse respects it is
said to be manifold, and it may be considered two ways. First, as it works
always, and can work in God himself, for God in himself does always
understand, will, love, etc.

Seondly, as it works out of God himself, in the creatures, as when he
created all things, and does now work in governing all things, and can work
if it please him infinite things. And of this working of Gods power, do the
scriptures properly speak when they call God Almighty.

Q. How many ways may Gods power be considered as it works in himself?

A. 1 Two ways. First, as it is common to all the 3. persons in Trinity, that
is a power whereby God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost does
understand himself, love himself, and work in himself, And these actions
do not differ from the essence of God, for that in God there is nothing which
is not his substance.

2 The other working in God himself, is that by which the Father does beget
eternally a Son of his own nature and substance, equal to himself. And this
power of begetting the Son of God, is proper only to the Father, and not to
the Son, and holy Ghost.

Q How many ways do you consider the power of God working out of himself?

A. That power which has relation or respect to things created, is two fold.
The first is a power absolute, Absolute.
whereby he is able to do whatsoever he will. The other is a power actual,
Actual.
whereby he does indeed whatsoever he will.

Q. Where does the scripture speak of the absolute power of God, by which he
can do more then he does if he would?

A. Yes. Of such a power speaks our Savior Christ, when he says, I could
pray to my father, and he could give me more then twelve legions of Angels,
Matthew. 26.53.
but he would not ask it, and his father would not give it.

Q. How does the scripture speak of Gods actual power?

A. Of this power the Prophets and Apostles make mention, when they join his
power and his promises together, that is when they say, he is not only able
to perform, but does and will perform indeed whatsoever he has promised.

And of this power Paul does speak, when he says, That God will have mercy
upon whom he will. And every where in the scriptures, we read that God has
done what he would, given to whom he would, and all as he would, whereby we
may see, that God could and can do more then he would or will.

Gods power is infinite.
Q. How great is this working or mighty power of God*

A. It must needs be huge and very great, for it is infinite and has no end.

Q. Declare how it is infinite?

A. It is infinite two ways: or in two respects. First in it self, and of it
self it is infinite. Secondly as it is extended to the creatures (which may be
called the object of Gods power) it is also infinite,

Q. Why do you say it is infinite in it self, or of the own nature?

A. Because the power of God is nothing else but his divine essence, and the
essence of God is of his own nature, by it self, and of it self infinite.

Q. Show how Gods power is infinite, as it is extended to the creatures?

A. Because the power of God does extend it self to infinite things,
therefore we say also that it is infinite.

Q. Declare how that is.

A. I mean the things which God can perform or bring to pass by his Power
are infinite, and therefore his power is infinite: for God never made so many,
nor so great things, but he could have made more and greater if he would. As
for example, he adorned the firmament with an innumerable company of stars,
and yet he could have decked it with more, and to speak in a word: God can
always perform infinite things more then he does, if he will: and therefore
both in it self, and out of it self it is infinite.

Q. Whether can this Omnipotency of God be communicated to any creature?

A. No, it cannot. For to be truly and essentially omnipotent, is proper to
God only, and omnipotency is Gods essence. And therefore whosoever is God, is
omnipotent, and whosoever is omnipotent, must needs be God, whose power is a
chief power and infinite. And the power of any creature is not infinite, but
finite, and so consequently no creature can be omnipote^t, except we would say
that a creature or a thing created, can be both a creature and a God, or a
Creator too: which is both absurd and blasphemous.

What God cannot do.
Objection. If God can do all things, whether can he sin or no, as to lie or to
be unfaithful in his promises, etc.

What God cannot do.
A. God cannot sin, and yet for all that, he is still omnipotent. For to sin is
no part or point of Omnipotency, but of impotencie. For to sin is nothing else,
but to leave the right and perfect way, or to fall from a right and perfect
action, which shows want of power to uphold himself that does so, which
power is not wanting in God, for he is omnipotent, and being omnipotent he
cannot go from strength to weakness, and from perfection to imperfection,
etc. And therefore he cannot sin.

Q. By what scripture can you prove this that you say?

A. The Apostle Paul is of that mind, that God cannot do all things, 2. Tim.
2.13.
his words be these. If we believe not, yet abides he faithful, he cannot
deny himself: he does not say, He will not deny himself, but, he cannot deny
himself. And his reason is because (as he says himself) God is faithful,
not only in his will, but also by his nature. And therefore since God is
faithful by nature, he cannot but stand to his promises, which he made
according to his good pleasure of his will. And by nature he is omnipotent,
therefore he cannot be impotent. By nature he is good, and the chief good
therefore he cannot become evil, nor do evil.

Q. But whether can God be moved, or be subject to passions or sufferings, or
no?

A. He cannot. For the power whereof we speak (when we say that God is
omipotent) is altogether active and not passive, neither can any passive power
be in God. And to this effect speaks S. Augustine when he says, August. de
ciuit. dei, lib. 5. cap. 10.
Dicitur deus omnipotens faciendo quod vult, no^ patiendo quod non vult: that
is, God is called Omnipotent, in doing what he will, not in suffering what he
will not.

Q. Some say that God can sin but he will not, and that he can be subject to
passions, but he will not. And that he can do whatsoever can be imagined or
thought, but he will not, what say you to those?

A. Of them I say nothing, but their opinion is both foolish and ungodly. For
God cannot do any thing, which disagreeth from his nature, and therefore he
can not sin, etc. not because his will is against it, 1. Ioh. 1.5. Deuteronomy.
32.4. Heb. 1.13. Romans 9.14. Aug. de spiritu and litera.
but because it is against his nature and natural goodness, therefore do the
Scriptures deny any iniquity to be in God, and Saint Augustine says to that
effect, Deus iniusta facere non potest, quia ipse est summa iustitia, that is,
God cannot be unjust, because he is most just, and righteousness it self.

Objection.

But yet for all this, God does in some sort will sins for he does not permit
it against his will. And besides that he commanded some things which were
sins, Genesis 22.2. 2. Sam. 15.5.
as Abraham to kill his innocent son, and Shimei to curse David, did he not?

Answer. To far forth as God does command, or will, or work any thing,
that thing is not sin in God. For he both wills and works in great
wisdom* and according to his most holy will. And therefore no action can be
sin in God, but every action of God is most holy and good, and so says the
Scripture. Psalm. 145.17.


The use of Gods omnipotency.
Q. To what use serves the doctrine of Gods omnipotency?

A. The uses of this doctrine are many. It serves, 1 To sustain and
strengthen our faith in Gods promises, that we should not doubt of our
salvation, because God can do and he will do what he has promised. And he
has promised eternal life to the faithful. This did strengthen Abraham his
faith greatly. For Paul says thus of him, he did not doubt of the promise of
God, through unbelief, but was strengthened in the faith, and gave glory to
God. Romans 4.20.21.
Being fully assured that he which had promised was also able to do it. 2 To
stir us up to pray, and to call for those things which God has promised
without any doubting. For in our prayers we ought always to have before our
eyes the promises of God, and the almightinesse of God. Matt. 8.2.
The leper was persuaded only of Christ's power, he knew not his will; and
therefore he said: Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean, and he was
made clean: how much more shall we obtain those things which we ask if we be
persuaded of his power, and doubt not of his promises. 3 To make us undergo the
cross with patience and cheerfulnes, and to hope for help in the midst of
death, because he which has promised to hear and help us, Psalm. 50. John
10.29.
is able also to do it, though we see not how: For he is omnipotent. 4 To
keep us from dispairing of any man's salvation, although he seem to be
rejected of God, and to make us walk in faith and fear, because god is able
to raise him up that is down, and to cast us down that stand. Romans 11.23.25.
And so Paul does reason from Gods omnipotency about the reiection and
election of the Jews and Gentiles. 5 It serves to confirm all the articles
of our Christian faith, the sum whereof are contained in the Apostles Creed.


Of God his wisdom or knowledge.
Q What is the next thing that is attributed to God after his omnipotency.

A. That is knowledge or wisdom.

Q. Why is this next?

A. In very good order it follows. For if God can do all things, then he
must needs know all things most perfecty, whereupon it comes that such
knowledge is called wisdom.

Q. What is that knowledge which is in God?

A. For the better understanding of this attribute, we must consider that the
wisdom of God is two fold. Heb. 4.13. Psalm. 94.11.
First it is absolute, and we do so term it, because by it God can and does
simply and absolutely know all things from all eternity.

Secondly, it is special, whereby he does not only know his elect children, as
he knows al things else, 2. Tim. 2.19. Romans 11.2. Matt. 7.23.
but also does acknowledge them for his own, and does discern them from
others, and love them before others.

Q. Of which do the Scriptures properly speak, when they attribute wisdom to
God?

A. They speak then of his absolute knowledge, whereby he does not only
know always and most perfectly himself, and the whole order of his mind: but
also understands and knows all his works, and the works of all his
creatures, past, present, and to come, with all the causes and circumstances of
all.

Q. How do the Scriptures speak of this absolute knowledge?

A. The Scriptures speak of it two ways, either of the knowledge it self, or
else of the things known. And so they show 1 What, and what manner of thing
it is: and 2 What things are known of God.

Q. Now tell me what knowledge is in God, and what wisdom does best agree to
his divine nature?

A. The best way to find out that is first to consider what wisdom and
knowledge does not agree with his nature and essence: for his knowledge and
wisdom are infinitely greater then any we can affirm to be in God.

Q. How shall we find what knowledge is not agreeing with his divine nature?

A. This is the best way, we must consider and set before us all the kinds of
knowledge, and all the ways and means whereby any knowledge is to be attained
unto amongst men and angels. Then shall we see that the wisdom and knowledge
of God are far more excellent every way, then the most excellent that can
be found or thought upon, amongst men and angels.

Q. Declare then by what ways and means [wee] know a thing?

A. By two ways or means, we do know all that we do know. One way is,
by our senses, videlicet, by hearing, seeing, feeling, smelling, and tasting.
An other way is by our understanding.

Gods knowledge is not like man's knowledge.
Q. Whether does God know any thing by senses, or no?

A. No. He can not, because he is not as a man, but is a spirit, and
bodilesse, and therefore has no senses.

Q. Why then do the Scriptures speak of the eyes and ears, etc. of God.

A. Although the Scriptures do attribute eyes to God, whereby he beholds all
things, and ears whereby he hears all things, etc. yet indeed he has none
of all these, but these be figurative speeches used for our capacity, and
understanding, signifying that nothing is hidden from the Lord.

Q. Whether then does God know things by understanding, or no?

A. Yea, but not as we do.

Q. Why? what manner of knowledge is that which we have by our understanding?

A. It is either an opinion, ora belief: or a skill and learning.

Q. What is an opinion?

A. An opinion is no certain and evident knowledge of a thing, but is still
doubtful what to affirm or deny, and therefore such a knowledge is not in
God: for he knows certainly.

Q. What manner of thing is belief or faith?

A. It is a certain, but not an evident knowledge; for look what we believe
only, that we do not see nor know by the light of natural understanding,
therefore it is no evident knowledge, but it is a certain and true knowledge,
because he is most true which revealed it unto us. For faith or belief is a
most certain knowledge grounded upon the report of another.

Q. Whether does this kind of knowing things, agree with the nature of God, or
no?

A. No. For God knows all things in himself, and of himself, but not by the
report of an other.

Q What say you to skill and learning, that is both a certain and an evident
knowledge of things, does not that agree with the nature of God?

A. Such knowledge does not agree with his nature.

Q. Why so?

A. Because it comes by knowledge that went before, and it is gotten by
reasoning and debating of things, by defining and dividing and searching out
the causes of things. But in God is neither before nor after, first nor last,
and God has no knowledge after such a sort.

Man's knowledge is imperfect.
Again our knowledge which way soever it be considered, whether it be a habit
in us, or an action in us, 1. Cor. 8.2. 1. Cor. 13.9.
is imperfect. For we know not al things, and those things which we do know,
we know not all at once, but one thing after another, and yet still but in
part.

How God knows all things.
Q. Declare then in a word how God does know all things?

A. God does most perfectly know and understand all things at one instant,
without any conceit of mind, altering this way or that way.

Q. Al our knowledge is a thing distinguished from our mind and understanding,
is it so in God?

A. No: For the knowledge or wisdom of God is a most simple and perfect
essence* yea it is his very essence and substance, and God is all knowledge,
all wisdom, and al understanding, infinitely more then all men and Angels can
conceive.

Q. Does God know and understand every thing particularly?

A. Yea, he knows the natures and properties of every particular thing.

Q. How prove you that?

A. By the Scripture and by reason, for the scripture says, Genesis 1.
that God saw every thing that he made, that it was good: this is not spoken
generally of all, but specially of every one creature. Again, reason makes it
manifest by three examples in the Scriptures.

Genesis 2.20.
First, Adam gave to every living thing a proper name, according to his proper
nature, whereby it appears that Adam had a distinct and a particular knowledge
of every thing. How much more then had God this especial knowledge of every
particular thing, who gave to Adam whatsoever wisdom and knowledge he had!

Secondly, Salomons wisdom was so great, that he was able to dispute, and did
thereby dispute of the nature of all trees, plants, fishes, fowls, Kings. 4.33.
worms, beasts, and all natural things, as one that was most skillful in
them. How much more then does God know all things and their natures
particularly, who gave such wisdom to Solomon.

Thirdly, our Savior Christ says of the Father, that all our hairs be
numbered by by him, and that a Sparrow falls not upon the ground without the
will of our heavenly Father, Mat. 10.29.30.
if not without his will, then not without his knowledge.

Q. Whether does God know all the motions of our wills, and our thoughts?

A. Yea, God does certainly know the motions of the will, and the thoughts of
the heart in all men and the issue of them all, which is manifest by these
places of Scripture following. Genesis 6.5. Psa. 94.11. Pro. 21.1. Ier. 17.9.10.
Hereof it is that we cite him to be a witness of our hearts, when we swear by
him.

Q. Whether has God the knowledge of all evils or no?

A. God knows all evils and sins, which lie lurking in all men's hearts, and
this is manifest by these places of Scripture following. Genesis 6.5. Psa. 69.6.
Job. 11.11. Psa. 90.8.9.

Q. What if he did not know all these evils?

A. It is not possible but he must know them, for two causes.

1 First, if he did not, his knowledge were imperfect. 2 Secondly, if he did
not know them, he could not be a just judge, neither could he reward every one
according to his works and thoughts: which two to affirm were ungodly and
blasphemous.
Objection.

That which is nothing, cannot be known: but sin and evil is nothing (for
it is nothing else, but a taking away or failing of the good, and it is a mere
corruption) therefore sin and evil cannot be known of God.

Answer.

We know what is evil, and we know evil things, and we do discern them
from good things, but we know evil only by his contrary that is, good: as
we know nothing by some thing, darkness by light, death by life, sickness by
health, vice by virtue. Thus by the knowledge of good, evil is known even to
us: and therefore seeing as God (who is the chief good) does by himself know
all good things, he must of necessity, also know and understand all the evil
that is in all good things.

God knows those things which are not.
Q. Whether may God know those things which are not?

Romans 4.17. ^er. 1.5.
A. God knows the things which are not, and he does also truly know the
things which shall never come to pass.

Q. What reason can you yield for this?

A. The reason is, because he knows al things by his essence, therefore he
knows all things which are subject to his divine essence and power, and
therefore also are possible, but shall never come to pass.

Q. But does he know them eternallye, or in time?

A. He knows them all eternally, that is, for ever and for ever he knew them,
and does know them, Ephesians. 1.4.
as the Scripture does testify.

2. Tim. 2.19.
Q. Can you make this manifest by any earthly comparison?

A. Yea, a builder by virtue of his art does conceive in his mind the form
of a house, which house he will never build: how much more can God do the
same? for God can make more worlds, and he knows that he can, and yet he
does it not.

Again, although there were never an Eagle in the City, yet we can conceive
in our minds what an Eagle is, much more does God know all things which are
not in act, and which never shall be.

Objection.

This is something which you say, but your last similitude of the Eagle does
not hold: for therefore we keep the knowledge of an Eagle in our minds,
though all be gone, because the similitude of the Eagle, which was sometime in
the City, does remain still in our minds and understandings. But what
similitude can there be in the mind of God of those things which are not,
which never were, and which never shall be.

Answer.

Yes, the very essence and being of God, is a similitude of all those things
which may be, if he will: which he must needs know, for he does most
perfectlye know him self. And thus if we consider his power or almighty
essence, al things should be done which he can do, and does know.

Q. Then whether is his knowledge and power the cause of all things which are,
which have been, and which shall be?

A. The only foreknowledge of God alone, which the Grecians call Theoretica
Scientia, that is a knowledge beholding all things, is not the cause of things:
But his foreknowledge with his will, which the Grecians call Practica Scientia,
that is a working knowledge, that is the cause of things.

Q. Whether may the knowledge or wisdom of God fail or be deceived at any
time, or no?

A. The knowledge of God is most certain, and cannot any way be deceived, for
all things are known of God as they are, and all things are as they are
known of God: Heb. 4.13.
and therefore his knowledge cannot any way be deceived.

Objection.

But things do often change and alter, and therefore they are not always as
they are known.

Answer.

A. Although things be changed and altered, yet God does know thereof, and
although they change and alter, yet his knowledge does never alter nor change,
neither is it uncertain.

The knowledge of God is always the same.
Q. Whether may the knowledge which God has, be increased, diminished or
altered?

A. No, it cannot, it is always the same, firm and constant, and can by no
means be increased, deminished nor altered, for he neither forgets any
thing, Heb. 4.13.
nor is ignorant of any thing, neither is any thing new unto him: for the
Scripture says, that all things are always manifest in his sight. Saint
James says, Iam. 1.17.
With God is no change nor shadow of change, therefore his knowledge is always
one and the same. Pro. 19.12.
And Solomon says, Many devises are in a man's heart, but the counsel of the
Lord shall stand.

Q. But if his knowledge be always one and the same, why does the scripture
say that the Lord will forget our sins, and blot them out of his remembrance,
and remember them no more?

A. These and such like phrases of speech are not to be understood of the
simple knowledge of God, as though he should know them no more, but of his
judicial knowledge unto punishment. For although he does know and remember our
sins always most perfectly, yet he will not know them nor remember them to
bring them into judgment, and so to punish us for them, when we do truly
repent: that is, they shall be no more judged or punished, or laid to our
charge, if we be in Christ, then if he had quite and clean forgotten them, and
never did remember them. And these speeches serve to arm us against despair
and doubting of our salvation, being truly in christ.

Q. Where is the wisdom of God specially of us to be considered?

A. The wisdom of God shines unto us most clearly in his works of creation
and preservation in the world, Eccles. 3.11. Psalm. 104.24.
and not only in his works, but also in his Gospel, whereby he calls and
gathers his Church out of the world, to be saved by his Son our mediator,
1. Cor. 1.21.
Jesus Christ.

Q. Was this saving wisdom of God known to the philosophers and natural
wise men of the world?

A. No it was not, but only to the elect children of God.

Q. Is the wisdom of God to be perfectly conceived of us? Matthew. 11.2^.


A. No. Neither is it communicated to any creature, neither can be. For it is
vnco^ceiuable as the very essence of God himself is vnco^ceiuable, and
unspeakable as it is: and his wisdom (as we have heard before) is his very
essence, that is his very Godhead or God himself, Psalm. 14.7.5. Romans 11.33.
and that it is inconceivable, the scriptures do testify.

The use of Gods wisdom.
Q. What use may we make of this doctrine?

A. First, by this doctrine of Gods unspeakable knowledge and wisdom, the
true God is discerned from all false gods, and from all things made. For that
is no God which has not this divine knowledge and wisdom, which the
scriptures do attribute to God.

2 Secondly, seeing our God is such a God as knows all things that are done,
said, or thought, and sees into the most hidden corners and thoughts of our
hearts: We must study and learn hereby to drive all hypocrisy and
dissembling from us, and to open our hearts to God of our own accord, and to
beseech him in his sons name to cleanse us from our secret faults.

3 Thirdly, it must make us to walk always before the Lord according to his
will revealed in his word, with great fear and reverence, as men always in
his sight and knowledge.

4 Fourthly, It serves to co^firm our faith and trust in the providence of
God. For although we know not what to do, nor how to do, nor what shift to make
in dangers and necessities* yet God does, and he has knowledge enough for us
though we be ignorant, and his wisdom shall succor our foolishness, Psalm.
103.13.14.
if we do truly and faithfully serve him.

5 Fifthly, this should be our consolation against the fear of hell and
despair, and should uphold in us the certainty of our salvation, because this
knowledge and wisdom of God, joined with his will to save us, is firm and
constant, and he knowing all his elect, 2. Tim. 2.19. Ioh. 10.27.28..29.
will not loose one of them that are in Christ his son. Ioh. 17.12.

God is Truth.
Q. What is attributed to God after his wisdom?

A. As God is wisdom, and knowledge, So is he true, and Truth it self.

Q. What is the Truth of God?

A. For the better finding out of this matter, we must first consider the
diverse significations of this word, Truth.

Q. Declare then what you mean by Truth?

A. It cannot better appear then by his contraries. For 1 True is contrary to
false, and truth is contrary to a lie. 2 It is put for sincerity and
simplicity, the contrary whereof is counterfeiting and dissembling. 3 It is
used sometime for just and equal dealing, and is contrary to wrongful and
unjust dealing, as in Deuteronomy. 32.4. 4 Truth is taken for faithfulness and
constancy in keeping promises, and then it is opposed to wavering and double
dealing.


Q. But how is it taken when we speak of it as it is in God?

A Which way so ever it be taken, and whatsoever it signifies it does most
properly agree with the nature of God. For 1 In God is no falsehood nor lying. 2
In God is no counterfeiting nor dissembling, so pure is he. Deuteronomy. 32.4.
3 In God is no iniust dealing, for he is most just and righteous. 4 In God is
no inconstancy, for he is most faithful in his promises.


And yet these are not virtues which differ from his essence and nature, but
they are his very essence and nature, and therefore he is rightly called not
only true, but Truth it self.

Truth diversely considered.
Q. Well: you have satisfied me for the diverse meanings of the word, now show
me how many ways the thing it self (that is truth it self) may be
considered.

A. Truth it self is two fold, or may be confidered two ways.

The first kind of truth is that, which is set down by the moral
Philosophers, and is reckoned by them amongst moral virtues.

The second kind of truth is that, which is described by the natural
philosophers and deuines.

Q. Declare first what virtue Truth is, as it is considered by the moral
philosophers?

A. It is a virtue, which is a mean between arrogancy and dissembling.

Q. Show what difference there is amongst them all three?

A. Arrogancy does boast of more and challenge more to himself then he has
indeed, dissimulation or faining does make men believe that he has less of
every thing, or any thing, then he knows that he has: but truth does not
feign more nor less then he knows in himself. So that this moral truth is
a virtue which makes men ready to hear and speak true things, and will not
suffer men to speak either more or less (when they do speak) of themselves or
of others then they know.

Q. And is God such a Truth?

A. Yea, such a kind of truth does most properly agree with the nature of God.
For he never reported more of himself then he has in himself, and he never
promised more then he is able to perform.

Q. What way, or after what sort do the natural philosophers and deuines
consider of truth?

A. Three ways. First, as it is in the mind or understanding, whether it be
of God, or men, or Angels. 2. As it is in things themselves. 3. As it is in
words, whether divine or humane, whether they be spoken or written.

Q. What call you Truth as it is in the mind of God?

A. It is nothing else, but a perfect and an eternal knowledge, which God has
of all thing, according to which all things are made and done, and in God it
does not proceed from things, but is the cause of things.

Q. What is that truth which is in things?

A. All things are called true things so far forth as they agree with the form
and pattern set down in the mind, which form and pattern in God is nothing
else, but his divine foreknowledge and eternal decree.

Q. Make it plain by some familiar example.

A. The Carpenter which builds a house, first conceiueth the plot and form
thereof in his mind, and he calls that a true house which is built according
to the form first conceived in his mind: So, those things are true things,
which agree with the mind and will of God.

Q. What is truth as it is in words spoken or written?

A. We say that words are true, or there is truth in words, so far forth as
they are conformable or agreeable to the knowledge which went before in the
mind: that is when we speak as we know and think, or when the mind and
the tongue agree together. For to speak otherwise then we think, is to lie.
Whereupon Saint Augustine says: Mentiri, est contra mentem ire: that is, to
lie, is to go against our own knowledge, as Ananias did. Acts 5.3.


How many ways God is called truth.
Q. You have declared how many significations there are of the word Truth,
and how many kinds of truth there are. Now show how God is called Truth?

A. God is Truth in himself, in his works, and in his words.

Q. What mean you when you say that he is Truth in himself?

A. I mean that he is most truly that, which he sees and knows himself to
be, that is a most perfect, pure and eternal essence, from whence all other
things have their being.

Q. Declare this by a contrary?

A. That which seems to be, and is not that indeed which it seems to be, is
not a true thing, nor a truth, but a false thing: as a face in a glass is a
false face, and those Idols which were called Gods, were false Gods, because
they were not that, which they seemed to be: therefore God is truth it self,
because he is by himself, and has his being of himself, and is his own
essence.

And therefore because God is truth, whatsoever he does say, concerning
himself, that he does truly speak of himself: and he is indeed such a God,
as the Scriptures do show him to be: that is to say, he is truly God, he is
truly omnipotent, he is truly wise, and truly just, and truly merciful.
etc.

Q. How is God truth in his works.

A. God is truth in all his works, as well in his ordinary works of creating
and governing the world; as in his extraordinary works of miracles, etc. For
first all his works are true works, wherein is no coloring nor
counterfeiting.

Q. As how for example?

A. For example sake, the firmament, with the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars
are indeed a true Firmament, a true Sun, etc. Gold is truly Gold, men are
men indeed: Again, being justified by Christ, we are truly just before God:
being adopted to be his Sons, we have more then the names of Sons, we are
the true sons of God: faith being given of the holy Ghost, is true faith
indeed, and so are all the rest of Gods works and gifts.

Q. Can you make this more manifest by the contrary?

A. Yea, for on the contrary, the works of Satan have a show of faith, but
have not truth in them: as for example, he seems sometimes to be an Angel of
light, but is not: and all his miracles which he wrought in popery by the
Monks and Friars, and in Turkey by Mahomet, were not true miracles, but
illusions and counterfeite things, wherewith their Legendes, which set forth the
lives of their Saints, are fraught full: and therefore Paul calls them lying
wonders, 2. These. 2.9. Apoc. 2.24.
etc. John calls their doctrine and learning the deepnes of Satan, but he
adds (as they say) not as it is indeed, but as it seemed to be.

Q. How else is God truth in his works?

A. Whatsoever he works in us, or performs for us, it is in truth and not in
hypocrisy, and he never repents him of these works.

Q. How is God truth in all his words?

H. Two ways, First in the word incarnate, for he is indeed the true son of
God, and the true God, 1. John. 5.20. Ioh. 14.6.
a true Prophet, a true Priest, and a true King: whereupon he is called Aletheos
Theos: that is, that very and true God: and therefore Christ does worthily
call himself, the truth, not only because he was the accomplishment of all
the promises, but also because he was the true God, and the true Savior.

Q. How else is God truth in his words?

A. God is also true and truth in his words, spoken and written by his
Prophets and Apostles: Therefore Paul says, that God is truth and justified in
all his sayings: Romans 3.4. Psa. 19.7.
and David says, that the testimony of the Lord is sure or faithful: that is,
true and certain, and full of credit.

Q. What is the sum of all?

A. Therefore I conclude, that God is not only true, but truth it self in
himself, in all his works, and in all his words.

Why God is called a God of truth.
Q. Declare breefely why God is called a God of truth?

A. He is called a God of truth in 5. respects.

1 Because he has a true and certain knowledge of all things. Heb, 4.13.
2 Because he faineth nothing, Romans 3.4.
but it is indeed his truth and his will which he opens unto us. 3 Because he
never changes his mind. Psa. 89.34.
4 Because that does ever come to pass which he speaks. Mat, 24.35.
5 Because he is the author and preserver of truth, Pro. 12, 1^^
and an enemy to all lies and dissembling.
Truth is but one, and yet many.
Q. Whether is there any more truth then one, or no?

A. To this question I answer, that there is but one truth, and yet there are
many truths, but in diverse respects, and in diverse considerations.

Q. Show how there is but one, and yet many.

A. For the better understanding of this point, we are to consider that there
is truth in Gods understanding, truth in man's understanding, and truth in the
things themselves which are understood and known.

In Gods understanding is truth most properlye first of all and cheefelye, as
the cause of all things.

In man's understanding truth is also properly, but at the second hand, id est,
it is conceived by other things.

In the things themselves, truth is said to be, but yet improperlye: that is,
as they are agreeable with the knowledge and understanding which is in God, or
as they are referred to the understanding which man has of them.

Q. What do you gather of all this?

A. If therefore your question be of truth as it is in God and is God himself;
then there is but one only: but if your question be of truth as it is in man's
understanding, then there be many truths, as there be many things which be
understood, and many ways and means, whereby we do come to the understanding
of them: but if you consider truth as it is in the things themselves, then look
how many things there be, so many truths there be.

Q. But yet all these truths are derived from Gods truth, are they not?

A. Yes, all truths are derived from the first truth which is God: and do
depend upon it even as one face looking in many glasses at once, do cause
many faces, or similitudes of faces to appear: all which are derived from that
one first face, Simile.
for take away that face and take away all the rest which did appear before,
although the glasses remain still in their places.

Q. I would gladlye see the truth of this point made manifest by an other
propertye, which is in God.

A. That may easilye be done by that goodness which is in God, for there is but
one cheef and first goodness which is God himself, and of this one are al other
goodnesses whatsoever. And yet when we consider the things created, we cannot
say there is one goodness common to all, and of all alike: but there is one
goodness of one man, another has his goodness which is better then the first.
There is one goodness of bread, and another of wine, one of fire, and another of
water, for all things have not alike goodness, neither are all things good for
one thing. And yet that goodness which is in every one of the^, is derived from
Gods goodness, which is the first, the cheifest, the highest, and one only. And
so we say of the truth which is in God, and God himself, and of the truth*
which is in things created, and is derived from Gods truth, or from God
himself.

Truth is eternal and not eternal.
Question.

Whether is truth eternal, or no?

Answer.

A. That truth which is in God, and which is God, is eternal: but truth (as
it is in men) is not eternal.

Q. What reason have you for that?

A. That truth, as it is in man's understanding, is not eternal, I prove it by
many reasons.

First, the things (whereof knowledge and truth is bredde in man's mind) are
created in time. 2 The mind it self (wherein truth has his proper place) is
created in time. 3 Truth it self is created and begotten in time. 4 Lastly,
the mind of man does not perceive all things, or the truth of all things at
one time: Therefore truth which is in the mind and understanding of man (as it
is in the mind of man) cannot be eternal.
Q. Why do you say (as it is in the mind of man) it cannot be eternal?

A. Because the same truth which is now in the understanding of man, was from
all eternity in the understanding of God. As for example, that God is good,
just, almighty, etc, is a truth, which is now in the mind and understanding
of a godly man, but it was not always in his mind: but in the knowledge and
understanding of God, it has been always, and for ever.

Ephesians. 3.5.
Hereupon Paul writing of the calling of the Gentiles, says; that it was a
mystery, or a secret hidden in God: but afterward in time was reveled to men
by his spirit: therefore truth is in God eternal, but in men it is
temporal, because it is revealed in time.

Truth spoken by contraries.
Q. And has not God a time for to come by the truth of things?

A. No. For God does know all things in one simple or single knowledge, in one
act, and in eternity it self, but so do not we: and besides that, one and
the self same thing may be diversely understood of us, and in respect of times
and seasons, either past, present, or to come, may be both true and false.

Q. Declare how that can be by one example*

A. I put for example the coming of Christ, after this sort: To say that
Christ shall come and take flesh upon him, was a true saying in the time of our
fathers, before the coming of Christ: but to say so now, is not a truth, but
a lie.

On the contrary, to say that Christ is come in the flesh, is now a truth,
which before his coming, had been false.

Q. But what conclude you by this example.

A. By this we may see, that as men have the truth of things in time, and but
for a time: So this truth of things amongst men, does alter according to
circumstances of times: But in God these differences of times cannot be: for
he has the true and certain knowledge of all things at one instant, and
from everlasting.

Objection.

If God be an enemy to all falshoode and dissembling, Ezec. 14.9. 1. Kings 22.
why does he say, if a Prophet be deceived, I have deceived him. And that he
put a lying spirit into the mouth of Achabs Prophets.

Answer.

God did not deceive them by putting lies into them: but in his just judgment
he gave the over to be seduced by the devil.

Q. But his will was that they should tell a false tale.

A. Yea. But he willed it to diverse ends, and not to deceive.

Q. Show us how.

A. God fortold victory to Achab by the contrary, thereby to punish him for
not obeying the Lord, by delivering to be seduced by the devil. The false
Prophets foretold victory to Achab to flatter him: the devil to destroy him.

Q. Yet God spoke by contraries, and is that truth?

A. Every contrary speech is not sin. For sometime there is a figure used
therein, which is called amongst the learned Ironia, and as Zanchius says;
Omnis Ironia non est vitiosa: that is, every ironicall, or contrary speech,
is not unlawful.

Q. When is it lawful and good?

A. If it tend to instruction, and not to seduce and deceive men, then it is
good and may be used. Examples whereof we have in Genesis 3.22
God himself, and in Elias 1. King. 18.27
mocking the Priests of Baal, and in the Apostle 1. Cor. 4.10. 2. Cor. 12.6.
Paul, who when he would reprove the folly of such as did boast of such
things as they had not, he did greatly abase himself, and advance the
Corinthians by such a kind of speaking.

Of Gods will.
Q. After God his truth, what do you consider next in God?

A. As there is truth in God, so he has a will, which is also his very essence
and being.

Q. Is there any profit in the knowledge of God his will.

A. Yea, great profit. For to know what God will have us to do, and what he
will do with us, and for us, is a thing wherein stands our salvation.
Therefore we are willed by the Apostle, Romans 12.2.
to enquire diligently after the same.

Q. But the same Apostle in the Chapter before, says; Who has known the
mind of the Lord? or who was his counselor? That is to say, none. Therefore it
seems that the will of God cannot be known, and consequently, that it may
not be sought after.

A. Indeed by that we learn not to search into the secret counsels of God,
which he never revealed in his word, neither has promised to reveal in this
world: but after the revealed will of God, Deu. 29.29
which he has vouchsafed to make known in his word, we may and ought to
enquire of God. Romans 11.33 Psalm. 36.7
As for the will and council which he has kept to himself, we may admire
and adore it with Paul and David: but that we may not search after it, is
manifestly proved by these places following. Acts 1.7. Exo. 33.18.19. Job.
21.23

Q. Whether can Gods secret will be known, or no?

A. If he does reveal it, it may.

Q. How does God reveal his secret will?

A. Two ways. Sometimes by his Spirit: as when he showed his prophets many of
his judgments that were to come.

Sometime by the thing it self which he wills, or by the effects of his
will: as when a thing does fall out which was before unknown. As for example:
a man does not know (before it come) whether he shall be sick or not, or of what
disease, or when, or how long: but when all these things are come to pass,
then it is manifest what was Gods will before concerning that matter.

Q. Show me what is our duty in respect of this secret will of God.

A. Our duty is two-folde. First, we must not curiously search after the
knowledge of it, but worship and reverence it. Secondly, before it be made
manifest by the effects, we must generally rest quietly in the same.

Q. Show me how by an example.

A. Thus, A Christian must resolve with himself, whatsoever the Lord will do
with me, whether I live or die, whether he make me rich or poor, etc. I rest
content with his good will and pleasure.

Q. What must we do when his will is revealed unto us?

A. Then much more we must rest in it, and be thankful for it, as Job was,
who said; The Lord has given, and taken, even as it pleased the Lord. and so
forth.

Q. What call you the revealed will of God?

A. The revealed will of God is twofolde. The one is that which is properly
revealed in the law: that is, what God requires to be done of us, and
therefore it is called the law. And after this we must enquire.

The other is in the Gospel, which shows Gods will toward us, and what he
has decreed of us in his eternal council, as touching our salvation.

How God his will is revealed.
Q. God indeed by his Law has made it known what his will is, that of us
must be done and fulfilled. But has he revealed in his word, what is his will
and pleasure toward us?

A. Yea, he has so, and that is proved by these places of scripture following.
Ioh. 6.40. Ephe. 1.5. Matthew. 3.17. Ioh. 5.39. And after the knowledge of this
will of God, we must diligently enquire.

Q. But whether may this will of God be known of us, or no?

A. Yes it may: For as it is revealed in the scriptures, so it is also
confirmed, and sealed before our eyes in the Sacraments, and the daily
benefits which we receive from the Lord.

Q. And is this sufficient to persuade us to believe his will?

A. No, for except the lord does persuade us by his holy spirit; we shall
neither believe it, nor know it, as appears by these places of scripture. 1.
Cor. 2.16. Matthew. 11.25. But if we have the spirit of God, there is no need to
go up into heaven, or to go beyond the sea to know it: because the word is near
unto us in our hearts, as Paul says. Romans 10.16. For touching the matter of
our salvation, the will of God is so clearly laid open, in the preaching of the
gospel, that it needs not to be more clear.

Q. If at any time we cannot know nor understand this will of God as touching
our salvation, in whom is the fault?

A. The fault is in our selves, and the reason is, because we are carnal and
natural, and destitute of the spirit of Christ. 1. Cor. 2.14,
For Paul says, The carnal and natural man cannot perceive the things of
God, but if the spirit of Christ does come, and open our understanding, and
correct our affections, we can no longer doubt of his will. And therefore the
Apostle immediately after adds and says, But we have the mind of Christ.

Gods will revealed to the Elect.
Q. Whether is this will of God made known to every one of Gods children
particularly, or no?

A. Yes it is, For Paul having the spirit of Christ, says, Galat. 2.20.
that this will of God was manifested unto him, when he says, Christ loved
me and gave himself for me. And to the Corinthians he says, But God has
revealed therein ( id est, the joys of heaven) to us by his spirit.

Q. How does this prove that we can have this knowledge?

A. Very well, For if all the elect are led by the same spirit that Paul had,
it will also persuade them of this will of God, as well as Paul.

Q. But how prove you that they have the same spirit?

A. That the same spirit is given to all the elect, I prove it out of the
Prophet Esaias, who says thus, My word and my spirit shall not depart from thy
mouth, Isay 59.21.
nor from thy seed for ever: which is such a blessing, as no blessing can be
desired in this world greaters, more excellent, nor more heavenly. For when we
are once armed with the knowledge of this will of God, we shall pass through
fire and water without any danger, we overcome the world and death, and
triumph over our enemies, Romans 8.38.39.
as Paul did.

How the will of God is but one.
Q. Whether are there more wills in God then one, or no?

A. The will of God in some respects is but one, and in some respects it is
manifold.

Q. How is it but one?

A. For the better determining of this point, we must first consider how many
significations there be of this word, Will, in God.

1 It signifies the faculty or ability of willing: and this faculty or
ability of willing in God, is God himself, and the very essence of God, and
so his will is but one. 2 It signifies the act it self of willing, and if it
be so taken, it is also but one. For God does in one, and that eternal act
will whatsoever he will. 3 It signifies the free decree of his will concerning
either the doing, or the suffering of any thing to be done, if we take it in
this sense, the will of God is still but one, and that eternal and immutable.
Q. May we call the decree of Gods will, the will of God?

A. Yea very well, as the Testament of one (that is deceased) is called the
last will of the Testator, because it is the firm and last decree of the
Testators will and mind, concerning the disposing of his goods. And the
scriptures do make the will of God and the counsel or decree of his will, to be
all one: as appears in these places following. Esaias 46.10. Act. 4.27.28. Ioh.
6.40.

How the will of God is manifold.
Q. How is the will of God manifold?

A. There be two respects cheeflie, for which respects the will of God is said
to be manifold or more then one.

First, for the diverse kinds of things which God does will, and hereof it is
that it is called some time the will of God, concerning us; and sometime the
will of God done by us. The first is his favor and love toward us in Christ
Jesus, in which he wills and decrees, that we shall be saved through his
Son: of this Christ speaks Ioh. 6.40.

The other will which he will have done of us, is that which is expressed in
his word, and that is to believe in Christ, Psa. 143.10.
and to walk in his laws: of which David says thus; Teach me to do thy
will, Romans 2.18.
because thou art my God. And Paul says, Thou know his will, that is his
law.

Q. Which is the other respect, for which God is said to have many wills?

A. Secondly, the will of God is said to be manifold and diverse, for that
those things which he does will, he does seem to will them after diverse
sorts, and not after one, and the same manner.

First, after one manner he does will good things, and after another manner he
does will evil things.

Q. Show how that is?

A. He wills good things properlye and absolutely by themselves, and for
themselves: he wills evil things for another end, Romans 12.2.
and that is for good too, and the first is called the good will of God, and
acceptable to himself: the latter is called the permissiue will of God, or a
voluntary permission in God, because he is not constrained or compelled
against his will, to will them.

Again, some things he wills simplye and absolutely, some things he seems
to will conditionally, and some things he reuealeth at one time, some at
another, and some things he does for which he gives a reason, for some of his
doings he gives no reason: and some things are secret to himself, only
and for ever.

Q. Why then belike you grant that there are in God many wills?

A. No, I deny that, for although in those aforesaid respects the will of God is
said to be manifold for our understanding: yet for all that, in deed and in
truth the will of God is but one only, and that most constant, eternal, and
perpetual.

As for example, he willed some things in the old Testament, he has willed
other things in the new Testament: yet one and the same will in God decreed
both. Again his will was that some things in the old Testament should last for
a time: that is, to the coming of Christ, or as the apostle says, to the time
of correction: he wills that the things of the new Testament shall last to
the end of the world, and yet one will in God decreede both these, from
everlasting.

Again, although God seems to us to will some things absolutelye and
simplye, and some things conditionally: yet in truth to speak properly, al
things whatsoever God wills, he wills absolutely and simply.

And whereas he is said to will some things conditionally, that is to be
referred to the manifestation of his will, for there is not in God any
conditional will, but only in his law, which opens his will in this and that
sort, upon this and that condition, for a conditional will in God is against the
nature of his eternal wisdom and knowledge.

God his precepts are of two sorts.
Objection. God commands many things to be done, which are not done: so
that there is one will declared in his word, and there is another in himself,
forbidding or hindering that, which he commanded in his law: and therefore
there are in God many wills.

Answer. The things which God commands are of two sorts: Some are
absolutely commanded, without any condition expressed or concealed: as, that
Moses should cause all things about the Tabernacle to be made according to the
pattern given him in the mount. Other some things are commanded and set down
with condition, as when Christ said: If thou will inherit eternal life, keep
the commandments. And the law says, do this and this, if thou will live:
and these are propounded conditionally to all, as well the elect as reprobate.

God his absolute will is always one and the same.
Q. And are they propounded to both after one sort?

A. No, not so, for although they be given to the elect with condition, yet the
will of God in them is absolute, for Gods will simplye is, that all his elect
shall be saved, if not always, yet at the last. And because of their own
strength they cannot do the commandments of God, therefore God does give
them strength by his spirit, and because by his strength they cannot do Gods
will perfectlye, therefore it is fulfilled for them by Christ, which is made
theirs by faith, and in whom God does accept their broken and imperfect
obedience, as if it were whole and perfect.

But as for the wicked and reprobates, it is not so with them, for although God
does give them a a law to obey, and does promise them life, if they do obey it:
yet his will to them is not so absolute, that they shall keep them, neither
shall they obtain the promise either in themselves, or in Christ.

Q. But does not God mock and delude the reprobate, when he wills them in
his law to do this and that, which yet is not his will to be done?

A. No, he does not delude them: for although he does show what he will
absolutely have done of them, (which is properly his will indeed) yet by his law
he does teach what is their duty, and the duty of all men; adding moreover,
that whosoever shall neglect and fail in this their duty, he sins
greeuouslye against God, and is guilty of death.

Q. Can you make this plain by some instance or example, or any parable in the
Scripture?

A. Yea, it is manifest in the parable of the kings Supper, Math. 22.
and the bidden guestes. They which were first bidden and came not, were not
deluded by the King, because he signified unto them what he liked, and what was
their duty: but yet he did not command that they should be compelled to come
in, as the two sorts were which were bidden afterward. Where we see that the
kings will was not a like in bidding the first, as it was in the second, for in
calling the latter sort; his will was absolute, that they should come indeed,
and so caused that they did come: but to the first he only signified what he
liked, if they had done it.

Q. How do you apply this to the matter in question?

A. I apply it thus, As it cannot be said, that the first bidden guests were
mocked by the King, although his will was not so absolute for their coming, as
it was in calling and commanding the second sort of guests: so it cannot be
said, that God does delude and mock the reprobate in giving them a law to
obey, although it be not his absolute will that they should come and obey the
law; for it is sufficient to leave them without excuse, that they know what is
acceptable to god, and what is their duty to God, who has absolute authority
and power over them, and over all.

Objection.

God commanded Pharao to let Israel go, and yet his will was to the
contrary, therefore there were two contrary wills in God, one revealed, the
other concelead.

Answer.

It follows not, for the will of God was one only, and most constant, and
that was that Israel should not be sent away by Pharao. And so that was
fulfilled.

As for the commandment given to Pharao, it was a doctrine to teach Pharao
what he must have done, if he would avoid so many plagues, and yet showed him
his duty, and what was just and right to be done, but it was no testimony of
the absolute will of God.

Q. Whether does God will evil, or sin, or no?

A. Before we can answer to this question, we must consider of three things.

1 How many ways sin may be considered. 2 How many things are to be
considered in sin. 3 How many ways one may be said to will a thing.
How many ways sin is considered.
Q. Go too then, show first how many ways sin is to be considered.

A. Sin is to be considered in three ways.

1 As it is of it self sin, and striving against the law of God. 2 As it is
a punishment of sin, that went before: for God does oftentimes punish one
sin with another. 3 As it is the cause of more sin following, Romans 1.26.
for one sin does beget another, as one Devil called 7. Devils. 2. These.
2.11.

Q. Now declare how many things you do consider in sin?

A. In every sin there be 3. things.

1 The action, and that is either inward or outward.

The action which we call inward, is threefolde. either of the mind, as evil
thoughts: or of the heart, as evil affections and desires: or of the will, as
an evil choice, or consent to sin. The actions which we call outward, are
the actions or works of the senses, fighting against the law of God.

The 2. thing in every sin, is the deformity or corruption of the action,
that is, when the action does decline from the rule of Gods law; and this
properly is sin, or the form of sin.

The third thing in every sin, is the offense or guiltines thereof, whereby the
party offending is bound to undergo punishment. This guiltines and obligation
(whereby we are bound to undergo the penalty of sin) has his foundation in
sin it self, but it arises from the justice of God, Romans 6.23.
who in his justice rewards sin with death, as justice indeed gives to
every one his due.

Q. Now come to your third point: and show how many ways one is said to will a
thing.

A. We are said to will a thing two ways, either properly for it self, or
improperly for another end.

Q. What mean you by a proper willing of a thing?

A. We do will a thing properlye for it self, or for it own sake, when the
thing which we will or desire, is of the own nature to be wished and desired:
as for the body, health, food, apparel, and such like: or for the Soul,
faith, repentance, patience, etc. We do will a thing improperlye, when the
thing which we will, is not of it self to be wished: but yet we will have it
for some good that may come thereof, as for example: we will the cutting of
some member of the body, not because of it self it is to be wished, but for
the health of the body, which does follow that cutting.

Q. What difference is there between these two wills?

A. There is great difference, for those things which we will, properly we love
and approve them, we incline unto the^, and we delight in them: but that which
is known of it self to be evil, our will is not carried unto that with love
and liking, but does decline from it: and whereas a man wills a member of his
body to be cut, or cut off; we may rather call it a permission, then a
willing, and yet a willing permission.

Q. You have showed how many ways sin is to be considered: how many things
are to be considered in every sin, and how we are said to will a thing: now
let me hear what you say to the matter in question, that is, whether God does
will sin or no?

A. Before I answer directly to your question, I think it not amiss to show
what every one must carefully take heed of in answering to this question: for
in answering there is danger.

Q. Let me hear what dangers must be avoided in answering.

A. There are two, and every one must avoid them, and sail between them, as
between two dangerous rocks.

The first is this, we must take heed, least we make God the author of
sin, by affirming that he wills sin, as the Libertines do, and as Adam
did: Genesis 3.12.
for that were the next way, not only to put of our sins from our selves,
and lay them upon God; but also to cast of all conscience of sin, and all
fear of God: then the which nothing can be more blasphemous against God, or
pernicious to our selves.

Question. What is the second thing to be avoided?

Answer. The other is this, we must take heed that we affirm not any evil
to be in the world, which God knows not of, or whether God will or no, for
that were to deny Gods omnipotency, and all knowledge.

Question. These are two dangerous rocks, and heresies indeed, but now
Iexpect a direct answer to the question.

Answer. That cannot be at once, but by going from point to point; according
to our former distinctions of sin, and willing.

Quest. Very well. Then declare first of all, what things God does properly
will, which of themselves are to be willed.

A. God does first and chiefly will himself, that is, his own glory and
majesty, as the end for which all things are: and this he is said to will
properly; that is, he loves it, aduanceth it, and delights in it, and to
this purpose serve all those Scriptures which command us to sanctify his
name, and to advance his glory, as in Esai, 48. 11. Pro. 16.4. Romans 11.36. 1.
Cor. 10.31.

Secondly, besides him self he does properly will all other things which he
made, and which he does himself, in so much as he does approve them, and love
them, as appears by these places following; Genesis 1.3.
God saw all that he made, and it was good: and therefore gave a commandment,
that one should preserve another by multiplying and increasing. Again, Psalm.
115.3
it is said, Whatsoever the Lord will, that he does, therefore whatsoever he
does, that he will. And although he hates evil, yet he does properly will
and love that good which comes of evil: that is, his own glory, and the
salvation of his people.

Q. Whether does God will punishments, or no?

A. Yea, his will is the first and efficient cause of all punishment, which is
proved by this reason and argument; Every good thing is of God. Every
punishment, being a work of justice, is a good thing: therefore every
punishment is of God, and he does will it.

Q. What say you then to the words in Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.23.3
I will not the death of a sinner?

A. That place is to be understood only of the elect, for properly indeed God
does not will their death, and therefore to keep them from death, meaning
eternal death, he gives them repentance.

Q. Whether does God will sin, as it is a punishment of sin that went
before.

A. Yes he does, and it is usual with God to punish one sin with another:
as for example, the hardening of Pharaos heart, was a sin in Pharao, and God
brought it upon him, not as a sin, but as a punishment of his former sins.

God does not properly will sin.
Q. You said that in every sin is an action or deed, which is either inward
or outward, whether does God will that, or no?

A. So far forth as it is an action only, God does will it, Acts 17.28
but not the corruption and deformity of the action: for in him we live, move,
and have our being.

Q. But whether does God will sin properly as it is a transgression of the
law, and a corruption in the action, or no?

A. No, he does not, neither can he, for it is against his nature: and to this
effect serve these places of Scripture following, Psalm. 5.5. Hab. 1.13. 1. John
1.4. And reason does confirm it many ways: Zach. 8.17
for look what God does will properly, he loves, and allows it: but God
hates and damneth sin, as the Scriptures witness: and therefore he does not
will it properly,

Again, he has sent his son to take away the sins of the world, and to
destroy the works of the devil: therefore he does not will them.

Lastly, if God should properly will sin, then he must be the author of
sin: Romans 9.14
but he is not the author of sin, for the Scriptures do never attribute
sin unto God, 1. Ioh. 2.16
but unto the devil, and unto men.

Q. But although God does not properly will sin, yet he does willingly
permit it, does he not?

A. Yes. But for the better understanding how God does permit sin, we must
consider how many ways, or in how many senses one is said to permit a thing:
and that is three ways.

1 To permit, is sometime of two good things to grant that which is less
good, as it were against our will: as for example, a man would bring up his
son in learning, rather then in warfare, or any occupation: but because his
son has more mind to an occupation then to learning, and does crave of his
father to go to some occupation, or to be a soldier rather then a Doctor: his
father does grant him his desire, but he had rather have him to be a
scholar: and this is a kind of permission or suffering.

But this permission ought rather to be called a will in deed: for that which
is less good (yet because it is good) he does will it truly, and approve
it, and it is the true object of his will, and it may be called a permission,
in respect of that will, which had rather have had the greater good.

Q. And is God said to permit sin in this sense?

A. No, by no means: for sin (as it is sin) has no show of good in it,
which can be compared with a greater good.

Q. Which is your second way of permitting?

A. 2 Sometimes to permit, is to grant one evil to go unpunished, that
many, and more grievous evils may be prevented: as many times Princes and
magistrates are wont to do. And so some do think that God has granted
some sin to be done without danger or threatening of punishment, least more
and more heinous mischiefs should else ensue.

Q. And are not you of that mind?

A. No, God forbid I should, for the Apostles rule is both general, Romans 3.8.
and true: We must not do evil, that good may come thereof, lest we be damned
justly: therefore no man may by the law of God, admit one sin
(unpunishable) to avoid another.

Q. What is your third way of permitting?

A. 3 To permit, does sometime signify not to hinder and stop evil when
one may: and so God is said to permit sin, because he could by his grace
hinder and prevent sins, that none should be committed, and yet he does
willingly permit us in our nature to sin. That God does thus permit
sin, it is evident by these places, Psalm. 81.11.12. Acts 14.16. That he
does permit them willingly, and not constrained thereunto, these places do
show, Romans 9.19. Esa. 46.10.

Q. For what cause does not God hinder sin, but permit it?

A. Not without cause, but that he may use our sins (which is his infinite
goodness and wisdom) to his own glory, Romans 9.22.23
for hereby his justice, in punishing of sin, and his mercy in pardoning of
sin, is made manifest and known, to the great glory and praise of his name.

Whether Gods will be mutable, or no.
Q. Whether does God alter his will as any time, or no?

A. For the better understanding of this question, we must consider of two
things. 1 How many ways our will is changeable. 2 The causes that move us to
change our wills.

Q. Very well, declare the first, how many ways our wills be changeable?

A. The will of any man is changeable, two ways.

First, when we begin to will a thing which we did not will before.

Secondly, when we leave to will that, which we willed before.

Q. Now show what be the causes hereof, and first why a man does will that,
which he willed not before?

A. The causes of this be two. First our ignorance, because we do know that to
be good afterward, which we knew not to be good before: and then we will that
which we could not before, for, ignoti nulla Cupido; that is, of that which is
unknown, there is no desire.

The second cause arises from the alteration of nature, as if that which was
hurtful to us at one time, becomes profitable to us at another time: then
we will have that at one time, which we would not at another. As for example,
In summer our will is inclined to cold places, but in winter our will is
altered, and does affect or desire the warm.

Q. Whether is there any such cause in God to make him change his will, or no?

A. No, neither of these causes can be in God. Not the first: for that he
does most perfectly know al things from all eternity. Not the second, for
there is nothing in God, for the which any thing may be found to be
profitable or hurtful, he is always the same, having need of nothing: and
therefore he cannot will any thing that is new to him, and consequently his
will is unchangeable.

Q. But what say you to the 2. way of changing our wills (that is) of
leaving to will that which before we had determined? whereof comes that?

A For this there may be yielded two reasons.

First, we do change our wills of our own accord, because the latter thing
does seem to be better unto us, then the former.

Secondly, being constrained, or against our minds we do oftentimes change
our wills, because our first counsel was hindered by some cross event, that
it could not have his due effect.

Gods Will is immutable.
Q. Whether are any of these two causes in God, that for those he should change
his will?

A. No, God does neither of his own accord nor yet by constraint, change his
will; but his decrees are and always have been, and always shall be fulfilled,
and none shall hinder the will of God: for it does always remain one and the
same, and this doctrine is most strongly guarded and fenced with these places of
scripture. Numb. 23.19. 1. Sam. 15.19. Mal. 3.6. Isa. 46.10. Romans 11.29.

Objection.

Paul says, that God will that all men shall be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth: Tim. 2.4.
and yet all are not saved, etc. Therefore Gods will is mutable.

Answer.

If this place be of Gods revealed will, then the sense is this, that God does
call all men by the preaching of his word, to the knowledge of his truth, and
to eternal salvation, if they will believe in Christ.

But if it be understood of the secret will of God, the sense is three fold.

First, All men, that is of all sorts and degrees, he will save some.
Secondly, so many as are saved, are all saved by the will of God. Thirdly, Romans
5.18. 1. Cor. 15.22.
God will that all shall be saved, that is all the elect: for in the scriptures
this word All, is put sometimes for the elect, without the reprobate.
Of the goodness of God.
Q. Why is God called in the Scriptures a good God?

A. The goodness of God is to be considered two ways. First, either as he is
in his own nature, of himself simply good, and goodness it self: id est, so
perfect, and every way so absolute: as nothing can be added unto him.
Secondly, or else as he is good to others. Both ways God is in himself a
good God, but especially for his goodness toward us, he is called a good
God, as a Prince is called a good Prince.

Q. Show how that is?

A. We call him a good Prince that is good to his subjects: that is, if he be
mild, gentle, liberal, just, a defender of the godly, a punisher of the
wicked, so that the good may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all honesty
and goodness; for he may be a good man if he hurt no man and lives
honestly, etc. But he is not called a good Prince, except he deal otherwise.

So the scriptures call God a good God, because he is not only good in
himself, and his essence is perfect, eternal, unchangeable, most wise, etc.
But also because he is good to others, that is mild, Psalm. 34.9.
gracious, merciful, liberal, his nature is not cruel, sauadge, nor bloody
toward us, Psalm. 16.11.
but to us most mild, pleasant, sweet, and such as may allure all men to trust
in him, to love him, to call upon him, and to worship him.

Q. Is God only himself truly good?

A. Yea: God is not only good, but goodness it self, ^at. 19.17.
and he only is truly good. For whatsoever goodness is in the creatures, it is
of God the creator, and they are so far forth good, as they are made good by
God, and are made partakers of his goodness, which appears to be true by the
scriptures. ^ Cor. 4.7.


^^m. 1.17.
Again, that goodness which is in the things created, whether it be natural
or supernatural is imperfect and finite: but the goodness of God is most
perfect and infinite, and therefore only God is truly good, and goodness it
self: yea, he is Summum bonum, that chief good of all to be desired.

Q. Is the goodness of God extended unto all creatures?

A. Yea it is so, and as this is known by daily experience, so it is witnessed
by these scriptures following. Psalm. 119.64. Psalm. 145 15. Mat. 5.45.

Q Has God showed his goodness to all alike?

A. No: for the things created are of two sorts, either invisible or visible.
Invisible as ange's, unto whom the Lord has given more excellent gifts then to
the other.

Q. And was his goodness parted equally amongst them?

A. No: for some he suffered to fall into sin, for which they were thrust
down from heaven to hell, as Peter speaks: 2. Pet. 2.4.
others he has preserved by his grace, that they should not fall away from him.

Q. Is his goodness alike to his visible creatures?

A. No: for of them some are endued with reason as mankind: some are void of
reason, and therefore is man called a lord over the rest of the creatures.

Q. Is the goodness of God alike to reasonable creatures?

A. No: for of them God has chosen some to eternal life, whom he has purposed
to call effectually in his time, that they may be justified and glorified by
Christ. Others he has (yet justly) left to their sins without any effectual
calling, to perish for ever.

That Gods goodness is far greater to the elect then to the reprobate, it is
manifest in the scriptures. For the Psalmist says, Yet God is good: that is
(singularly good) to Israel, Psalm. 73.1. Psalm. 51.10. Matthew. 13.11
even to the pure in heart: but God makes his elect only to be pure in heart,
and Christ avouches no less.

Q. Does the goodness of God toward all men, turn to the good of all men?

A. No: for in the reprobate, gods goodness is turned into evil, and serves to
their destruction, as Paul teaches: and that is through their own fault, for
they do contemn and altogether abuse the goodness of God. 2. Cor. 2.15. Romans
2.4. Psalm. 106.13.
And for all his goodness bestowed upon them continually, they never trust him,
nor trust in him.

The uses of Gods goodness.
Q. How may we use the goodness of God to our good, and to our salvation?

A. If we have the goodness of God in a true and worthy estimation, if we use
it with fear and reverence, and learn thereby to repent us of our sins, and
to repose all our trust and confidence in the Lord for his goodness: Romans 8.28.
then shall all things, yea even our sins, work for our good.

Q. What use must we make of Gods goodness?

A. It serves to many uses in the Church of God.

1 It teaches us that we have and do serve a true God, for he is no true God
that is not so good as our God is.

2 If our God be so good, we should be ashamed to offend him. As it is
intolerable to hurt an infant, that is innocent and harmeles, so it is most
intolerable to requite the Lords goodness with evil.

3 If God be so good, and goodness it self, we must trust him, and trust in
him: For we will repose trust in a good man, and shall we not much more in our
good God?

4 It teaches us never to lay the fault upon God for any thing, nor to
complain of Gods dealing, for he is always perfectly good.

5 Whereas the goodness of God is not to all a like, that is, to these ends.

^. Tim. 2.20.
1 It serves to the adorning and bewtifying of Gods Church.

2 It serves to the maintenance of mutual love and society amongst men. For
if the goodness of God were to all a like, 1. Cor. 12.20. Ephe. 4.7.1^.
then one could not help another: and to this end serve the variety of gifts.

3 It makes to the greater manifesting of the glory of the goodness of God:
for if all had a like we would contemn this goodness, thinking that he were
bound to be good to us of necessity.

4. From the consideration of Gods special goodness toward us his elect by
Christ, Tit. 3.3.4.5.5.7.8.
to salvation: we must arise to the study of good works, whereby Gods goodness
may be glorified, as Paul teaches.

Of the grace of God.
Q. When you speak of the grace of God, what mean you by grace?

A. This word Grace is used in the Scriptures, and has 3. special
significations.

Sometimes it is put for comelines, Luke. 2.5.2.
stature, meekenes, or mildenes.

Sometimes for free favor, Genesis 6.8.
whereby one embraces another, pardoning former injuries, and receiving the
party offending into favor again.

Thirdlye, Act. 2.23. Ephesians. 4.7.
it is taken for all kinds of gifts and graces, which of this free favor are
bestowed, whether temporal or eternal.

Q. Whether is there grace in God according to the first signification of
grace, or no?

A. Yea, for God is of his own nature most gracious, and grace it self: Luke
5.52. Psalm. 45.
which grace was in Christ Jesus from his infancy (as he was man) and did
every day more and more increase, and amongst all things which were created,
there was nothing endued with such grace as was the humane nature of Christ,
Collo. 2.9.
and that was by the fulness of the godhead, which dwelt boldly in him.

Q. Whether is grace properly attributed to God in the 2. sense, or no?

A. Yea, most properly, for God does justify us, that is, he does account us
for just, through his son Jesus Christ, and that of his free grace and
favor, without any deserte of our parts, or any thing in us, which appears
to be true by these Scriptures. To. 3.20.24. To. 4.16.

Q. What be the causes of this grace or favor of God?

A. Th'efficient cause is his goodness and free will: the final cause thereof,
is the salvation of his chosen children, and the glory of himself, and of his
Son Christ Jesus.

The effects of Gods grace.
Q. What be the effects of Gods grace to us ward?

A. In general, the grace of God (whereof there is no cause in us, Romans 9. and
11. Ephesians. 1 4. Ioh. 3.16. Romans 5.8. Gal. 1.16. Ephesians. 3.9.
but only his own goodness and will) is the first cause, the middle cause,
and the last cause, and the only cause of all the belongs to our salvation.
And particularly it is the cause of our election, predestination, of our
redemption, of the sending of Christ into the world, of our calling, of the
preaching of the Gospel, it was the cause why the Apostles were called to the
preaching of the Gospel, 2. Tim. 1.9. Phil. 2.13.
it is the cause of our faith, of the forgiveness of our sins, of our whole
justification, of our regeneration, of our renouation, To. 12.6.
of our love to God and our neighbor, of the holy ghost in us, of our good
works, of our obedience, 1. Cor. 12.9.
of our perseverance, of the fear of God, To. 3.24. Tit. 3.5. 1. John. 4.9.
Eze. 36.27. Ier. 32, 40.
and of eternal life, and of life it self: and in a word, the beginning, the
continuance, and the accomplishment of our whole salvation, does depend wholly
upon the grace and favor of God, and what good thing soever we have, or have
had, or may have, belonging either to this life or to the life to come, is to
be attributed wholly to the grace and favor of God.

Of the love of God.
Q. What is meant by the love of God in the Scriptures?

A. That we may the better know what the love of God is, it will not be amiss
first to consider what love is in our selves.

Q. Very well, declare then what love is?

A. It is a passion of the mind, whereby we are so affected toward the party
whom we love: that we are rather his then our own, forgetting our selves to
do him good whom we love.

Q. And is love such a thing in God?

A. No, the love of God is not such as our love is?

Q. What difference is there?

A. There is great difference two ways.

First in time, for love was in God before it was in us, John. 17.23.
or in any thing created, for he loved himself, and us also, before the world
was.

Secondly they differ in nature and quality, Romans 9.13.
for that love which is in God is most perfect and pure, without any passion,
but in us it is imperfect, and matched with passions, with impure affections
and greefes of the mind,

Q. After what manner does the Scripture express the love of God?

A. In the Scriptures God does compare himself to a Father, and a mother loving
their Children: to a Hen gathering her Chickens together under her wings: to a
good Shepherd seeking up his Sheep, and to diverse other things.

Q And wherefore serve these comparisons?

A. They are for our profit two ways.

1 To show us that Gods love toward us, is most vehement and sincere. 2 To
make us bold in coming to him and calling upon him.
So, for this love Christ Jesus calls us by all the names of love: as, his
Servants, his kinsemen, his friends, his spouse, his brethren, and by many
names more, to show that he loves us with all loves, the fathers love, the
mothers love, the masters love, the husbands love, the brothers love, etc.
and if al loves were put together, yet his love exceeds them al: for all could
not do so much for us as he alone has done.

What the love of God is.
Question.

If love does not signify any affection or passion in God, as it does in us:
what then does is signify?

Answer.

In God it signifies three things most perfect.

1 The eternal and good will of God toward some body: for the love of God
(suppose toward the elect) is his everlasting good will, or his purpose and
determination, to show them mercy, to do them good, and to save them as in
Romans 9.11.13. 2 The effects themselves of this love or good will, whether they
be temporal concerning this life: or eternal concerning the last life to
come, as in 1. John. 3.1. 3 The pleasure or delight which he takes in that,
which he loves, and so it is taken in Psa. 45.7.23.
Q. What things does God love besides himself?

A. Besides himself God loves all things else whatsoever he made: but he
loves not sin and iniquity, 1. John. 2.16.
for he never made it, as S. John says. Again he loves his son, being
manifested in the flesh, and he loves his chosen Children for his sons sake,
Mat. 3. last.
with whom he is well pleased.

Objection.

The Scripture says, that God does hate all that work iniquity, how then can
God both hate and love one and the same man?

Answer.

In every wicked man we must consider two thing. First his nature, second his
sin: his nature is the work of God, and that he loves: but his iniquity is
not of God, and that he hates.

Objection.

God does afflict his children, therefore he does not love them.

Answer.

Pro. 3.12.
Whom he loves he corrects: and therefore he corrects them because he loves
them; even as a Goldsmith tries his gold in the fire, because he loves it.

Whether God loves all alike.
Q. Whether does God love all alike, or no?

A. No: he prefers mankind before all his other creatures: for which cause
God is called Philanthropos, that is, a lover of men. And this appears by
three effects of his love.

Genesis 1.26. Ephesians. 4.24.
1 He made him according to his own image; that is, in righteousness, and true
holiness. 2 He made him Lord over all his creatures Psalm. 8.5. 3 He gave his
own son to death for his ransom.
Q. Does God love all men alike?

A. No: for he loves his elect better then the reprobate: for the elect he
calls effectually by his spirit in their hearts, when he calls others but
by the outward voice of the Gospel. etc.

Again, amongst the elect themselves, some are actuallie wicked, and not yet
reconciled nor called, as was Paul before his conversion: but the rest are
called, and already made holy by faith in Christ, as Paul was after his
conversion. And of these he loves the latter sort with a greater measure of
love then the former, as the scripture testifies in Pro. 8.17.

Q. What manner of love does God bear to his elect?

A. It has three adjuncts, or properties.

1 It is free, without desert. 2 It is great, without comparison. 3 It is
constant, without any end.
Q. How is the love of God said to be free?

A. It is free two ways. 1 Because nothing caused God to love us but his own
goodness and grace, and therefore Saint John says, 1. John 4.7
that his love was before ours.

2 It is free because God in loving us, regarded nothing that belonged to his
own commodity: for as David says, Psalm. 16.2.
he has no need of our goods, but only to our own salvation he loved us.

Q. Wherein does the greatness of Gods love appear to his elect?

A. It appears two ways. 1 By the means which God used to save us by, that
is, the death of his son: John 3.16
and so Saint John sets forth his love, when he says, Outo, Sic: that is,
so: as if he should say, so vehemently, so ardentlie, so earnestly, so
wonderfully did he love us: that for our salvation he spared not his own
only begotten son, but gave him to the death of the cross for our salvation.

Q. What else does set forth the greatness of Gods love unto us.

Answer.

The consideration of our own selves, for he did not only give his only Son
to death for us, but it was for us being his enemies. And this circumstance is
used by the Apostle to express the same. Romans 5.7.8


Q. Where find you it written that Gods love is constant, and perpetual?

A. That is manifestly showed in these scriptures following: Hose. 11.9. John
13.1. Romans 11.29. For as God is unchangeable in his essence and nature, so is
he unchangeable in his love, which is his essence and nature, and therefore is
God called love in the Scripture. 1. John 4.8


The uses of Gods love.
Q. What use must we make of Gods love?

A. 1 It fills our hearts with gladness, when we understand that our God is so
loving, and love it self: and what is this but the beginning of eternal life?
John 17.3
If eternal life consiste in the true knowledge of God, as our Savior Christ
says.

2 Out of the knowledge of this love, as out of a fountain, springs the love
of God and our neighbor. For S. John says, he that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love.

3 When we consider that God loves all his creatures which he made, it should
teach us not to abuse any of the creatures to serve our lusts, and beastly
affections: For God will punish them which abuse his beloved, as he punished
the rich glutton, Luke 16
which abused the creatures of God.

4 We are taught to love all the creatures, even the basest of all, seeing that
God loves the^; and for the love he bears to us, he made them: and we must
(if we love them for Gods sake) use them sparingly, moderately, and equally or
justly. To this end are we commanded to let our cattle rest upon the Saboth
day, as well as our selves. To this end we are forbidden to kill the damme
upon her neste. And to this end are we forbidden to mussel the oxes mouth
which treads out the corn.

5 We are taught from hence to love mankind better then all other creatures,
because God does so: and therefore we must not spare any thing that we have,
that may make for the safety of his body, and the salvation of his soul: and
for this cause are we commanded to love our enemies, and to do them good, be
cause our good God does so.

6 From Gods love we learn to prefer the godly brethren, and those which
profess sincerely the same religion that we profess, before other men:
because Gods love is greater to his elect then to the reprobate. Gal. 6.10.
And this does the Apostle teach us.

7 Whereas Gods love is freely bestowed upon us, it teaches us to be humble,
and to attribute no part of our salvation to our selves, but only to the free
love of God.

8 From hence arises the certainty of our salvation: for if Gods love was so
free and great when we were his enemies: much more will it be so, and constant
also to us, being reconciled to God by Jesus Christ.

Of the mercy of God.
Q. What do the Scriptures understand by the mercy of God?

A. It is his mind and will, always most ready to succor and help him that
is in misery.

Q. Some say that mercy is a grief and sorrow of the mind, conceived at
another miseries, and therefore that mercy cannot properly be attributed to
God, because in God are no passions nor griefs.

A. Indeed in us it may be such a thing, but not in God, and mercy was first
in God, and from him was derived to us, and therefore God is called the father
of mercies: 2. Cor. 1.3.
and when it came to us, it was matched with many infirmities and passions, but
it is improperly attributed to God from our selves as though it were first in
us.

Q. Declare then briefly what things of perfection are signified by this word
[mercie] in God.

A. By the name of [mercie] two things are properly signified in God.

1 The mind and will, ready to help and succor. 2 The help and succor, or
pity it self, that is showed.
Q. Where, in the Scriptures is mercy taken the first way?

A. Those places of Scriptures are so to be understood, wherein God does
call himself merciful, and says that he is of much mercy: that is, he is of
such a nature as is most ready to free us from our evils.

Of [mercie] in the other sense, (that is, being put for the effects of mercy)
mention is made in Romans 9.15. where it is said, Romans 9.15.
that God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy: that is, he will call
whom he will, he will justify whom he will, he will pardon whom he will,
and he will deliver and save from all their miseries and evils whom he will,
and these be the effects of Gods mercy. Again in Exodus 20.6. it is so taken.

Q. From whence springs this mercy of God?

A. The essence and being of God is most simple without any mixture or
composition, and therefore in him there are not diverse qualities, and virtues as
there be in us; whereof one depends upon another, or one differ from another:
but for our capacity and understanding, the scripture speaks of God as
though it were so, that so we may the better perceive what manner of God, and
how good our God is.

What is the cause of mercy in God.
Q. Well then seeing the scriptures do speak so for our understanding, let us
hear whereof this mercy comes?

A. The cause is not in us, but only in God him self, and mercy in God does
spring out of his free love toward us.

Q. Why do you say out of the free love of God? are there more loves in God
then one?

A. There are two kinds of love in God, one is where with the father loves
the son, and the son the father, and which the holy Ghost bears toward both
the father and the son; and this love I call the natural love of God, so that
the one cannot but love the other: but the love wherewith he loves us, is
voluntary, not being constrained thereunto, and therefore is called the free
love of God.

And hereof it comes also, Note.
that mercy is wholly free, that is without reward, or hope of recompense, and
excludes all merit.

Q. How prove you that the mercy of God arises out of his love?

A. That the love of God is the cause of his mercy it is manifest in the
scriptures, 1. Tim. 1.2. Paul saluteth Timothy in this order. ^. Tim. 1.2.
Grace, mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ;
to show that that peace which the world cannot give, the mercy of God is the
cause of it: and the cause of his mercy, is his grace, and his grace is nothing
else but his free favor and love toward us.

The same order does Paul observe in Tit. 3.4. 5. where he says, Tit. 3.4.5.
When the goodness and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, not by
the works of righteousness, which we had done: but according to his mercy he
saved us, etc. First, he sets down the goodness of God as the cause of his
love. 2. His love as the cause of his mercy. And 3. his mercy as the cause of
our salvation, and our salvation as the effect of all. And therefore there is
nothing in us which may move the Lord to show mercy upon us, but only because
he is goodness it self by nature. And to this does the Psalmist bear witness,
Psalm. 100.5.
saying: That the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting, and his truth is from
generation to generation.

Q. Toward whom is the mercy of God extended or showed?

A. For the opening of this point, we are to consider that the mercy of God is
two fold. First, general. 2. special. God as a God does show mercy
generally upon all his creatures, Psalm. 1.104.
being in misery, Psalm. 147.
and chiefly to men whether they be just or unjust, and so does succor them
either immediately by himself, or else mediatly by creatures, as by Angels, or
men, by the heavens, by the elements, and by other living creatures. And this
general mercy of God is not extended to the eternal salvation of all,
although it be but temporary and for a while. Luke 6.36.
Of this read in Luke. 6.36.

Q. What say you of the special mercy of God?

A. That I call the special mercy of God, which God as a most free God has
showed to whom he would, and denied to whom he would. And this pertains
only to the elect, and those which fear him, Psalm. 103.11.
for he shows mercy upon them to their eternal salvation, and that most
constantly, while he does effectually call them unto himself, while he does
truly and freely pardon their sins, and justify them in the blood of the
Lamb Jesus Christ, while he does sanctify them to his own glory, and does
glorify them only in eternal life: and of this special mercy we may read
in Ephesians. 2.4.5.6.

Q. How great is the mercy of God?

A. It is so great that it cannot be expressed nor conceived of us: and that is
proved by these scriptures following. Psalm. 145.9. Iam. 2.13. 1. Cor. 11.32.
Psalm. 57.10.

Q. How long does the mercy of God continue toward us?

A. Although the mercy of God be great and infinite in Christ, yet for that
mercy which pardons our sins, and calls us to faith and repentance by
the Gospel: etc. there is no place after death, but only while we live in
this world: which is warranted by these places ensuing. Gal. 6.10. Let us do
good whiles we have time, to show that a time will come when we shall not be
able to do good.

Apo. 7.17. Be faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life: to
show that the time which is given unto death, is a time of repentance, and of
exercising of faith and of works: but after death, there is no time but to
receive either an immortal crown, if we have bin faithful, or everlasting
shame if we have been unfaithful. Besides these, see Apoca. 14.13. Mark
9.45. Esaie vlt. 24. Luke 16.24.25.26. Matthew. 25.11.12. Ioh. 9.4.

The uses of Gods mercy.
Q. What uses may we make of Gods mercy?

A. First it serves to humble us: for the greater mercy is in God, the
greater misery is in us.

2 We must attribute our whole salvation to his mercy,

3 We must fly to God in all our troubles, with most sure confidence.

4 We must not abuse it to the liberty of the flesh in sin, for although
we might find mercy with God after death, for the mercy of God pertains
especially to those that fear him. Psalm. 103.11.


5 The meditation of Gods mercy toward us, should make us to love God. Psalm.
116.1. Luke 7.47.

2 To fear God. Psalm. 130.4.

3 To praise God for his mercies. Psalm. 103.2.3.4.

6 It must make us merciful one to another, Luke 6.36. Matthew. 18.32.33.

Of the justice or righteousness of God.
Q. What is meant in the scripture by the righteousness or justice of God?

A. There be four principal significations of the word Justice.

Sometime it is taken for absolute goodness, or for a virtue which contains
al other virtues in it, in full perfection, wanting nothing that they should
have in every part and duty. And so it is taken in 1. Tim. 1.9. where Paul
says. The law is not given to a righteous man. For what law shall be made for
him that is without sin, and is filled with all virtues, both in himself,
and toward all men. Such a one is God, who is most perfectly good, and
goodness it self, both in himself and of himself, and toward others also,
and therefore justice is rightly attributed unto God in the scriptures.

Q. What else is meant by justice?

A. Secondly, it is put only for that honesty, sincerity and uprightness,
which is requried of every man according to his place, state and condition,
wherein he is. And so a man may be good and just in his office, and
unreprovable also and yet may offend in other things.

Q. Make your meaning manifest by some example.

A. A man may be called a just and a good husband, which does not fail in any
point of his duty toward his wife, and yet the same man may be an unjust
father, because he fails in his duty to his children.

Or a man may be a just magistrate, and yet but a bad Christian.

Q. And may it be attributed to God as a virtue which declares one to be just
according to the state and condition wherein he lives?

A. Yea very well, and most properly, for no man does bear himself more
justly and uprightly in his office, then God does in his government, according
to the diverse persons which he does represent: for he has taken upon himself
the person of a judge, of a father, of a teacher, of a spouse, etc. In all
which, and in the rest, God does show himself in such a sort, as no creature
can behave himself. And therefore he is worthelie called in the Scriptures,
not only a righteous god, but also a righteous Lord, a righteous judge, a
righteous father, a righteous king, and Savior, etc.

Q. For what else is justice taken?

A. Thirdly, this word Justice, or Righteousness, is restrained to a special
virtue, which is called particular justice, and it is either distributive or
correctiue: and in one word it gives to every one his right, of which Paul
speaks Romans 13.7 and in this sense it is most properly attributed to God also.

Q. What else is signified by the name of Justice?

A. Fourthly and lastly, by justice is understood truth it self, and
faithfulness in words and promises: and he is said to be just of his word, which
performs so much as he promises, in which (...) sense it is to be taken in
1. John. 1.9. and in Psalm. 31.1. Deliver me in thy righteousness, that is in thy
faithfulness, or as thou have promised.

And in this sense it is most properlye attributed to God also, for none is so
just and faithful, as he is who loves righteousness and hates unrighteousness:
as the Psalmist says in Psalm. 11.5.7. And who only is true when all men are
liers, as it is: Romans 3.4.

How many ways one is just.
Q. Is this sufficient to show how God is properlye called a just God?

A. No, but besides this that has been spoken, we must consider, that one may
be just or righteous (in what sense soever justice be taken) 3. manner of
ways, viz. either by nature, by grace, or by yielding willing and perfect
obedience to God and his law.

Q. How may one be righteous by nature?

A. Two ways, either by himself, and of himself, in his own essence and
being, or else die the benefit of another, to be either made righteous, or borne
just.

Q. Who is just by nature in himself, and of himself?

A. None but God only, as Christ said; none is good but God only.

Q. Who is made just by nature?

A. That was Adam in the beginning, because he was (...) just, and in (...)
whole nature was righteous and good.

Q. Who do you call just by grace?

A. All the elect which are redeemed by the death of Christ, and that two ways.

1. Because the righteousness of Christ, is imputed unto them, and so by grace
and favor in Christ their head, they are just before God. 2. Because of grace
and favor they are regenerated by the holy Ghost, by the virtue of whose
inherent righteousness and holiness, they are made holy and just, and
whatsoever they do by it, is accepted as just for Christ's sake.
Q. Whom do you call just and righteous, by yielding willing and perfect
obedience to God and his law.

A. No man in this world after the fall of Adam, as he was man, ever was, or
can be just after that manner.

How the elect and Christ are just.
Q. Why then are so many called just in the scriptures, as David, Job,
Zachary, Elizabeth, etc, of who^ it is said they walked in the ways of the
Lord, and were just men?

A. They might be called just and righteous four ways.

1 In respects of their wills and endeavors, because their study and endeavor
was to be righteous. 2 In respect of the wicked, by way of comparison. 1. Sam.
12.3.45.
3 In the sight and judgment of men, because the world could not charge the^
with unjust dealing, as was Samuel. 4 They are called just, because they were
accounted just, and their imperfect obedience, (as also of all the elect) is
accepted with GOD for most perfect righteousness, for Christ his sake.
Q. What say you of Christ how was he just?

A. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is most perfectly just and righteous,
every manner of way.

1 As he is God, he is in his own essence, of him self, and by himself, most
just; even as the Father is: and eternal righteousness it self.

2 As he was man, he was just by nature, because he was conceived without
sin, and so was borne just and righteous.

3 By virtue of his union with his divine nature, which is eternal
righteousness it self, he is most just.

4 By receiving the gifts of the holy Ghost, without measure, Psalm. 45 7.
he is most just. Lastly, he did most perfectlye obey the law of God, and most
absolutely did keep the law of God, therefore that way also he is most just
and righteous.

Q. What conclude you upon all this?

A. I conclude, that forasmuch as God only is in his own essence and nature,
by himself and of himself, eternal justice and righteousness: therefore this
attribute of justice or righteousness, does most properly agree to God.

The justice of God is fourefolde.
Q. Well, you have showed how many things justice is put for, as also how many
ways our ways be said to be just: now declare how many sorts Gods justice
is, or how many ways he is just and righteous?

H. Although indeed the justice of God be but one and his very essence, yet in
diverse respects it may be said to be fourefold, or it may be ^oure ways
considered.

Q, Which is the first way that God is just and righteous?

A. First; as the Lord of all things having most free authority, and not bound
to any, he woorketh some things, and those things are most just and righteous.

Q. What things are those?

A. They are these and such like.

1* He decreed from all eternity to create all things.

2 Of his own free will, and according to his eternal purpose, he suffered all
men to fall into sin and death.

3. He decreed eternally to choose some of the^ to eternal life, and in his
time appointed to free them from their sins and death eternal by Jesus
Christ.

4, He determined to cast the rest into everlasting torments, and that most
justly, because his will cannot be unjust: and God himself is justice and
righteousness it self.

5. He does an infinite number of things in his secret will or counsel,
whereof we can give no reason, but only because it so pleased him: as to harden
some, and to soften other some; to elect some, and to reject others: al which
he may by the right of a creator and Lord over all things, and yet remains in
them all, most just and righteous, which also is ratified by these places
following. Psalm. 145.17. To. 9.14.15. Math. 20.15. Romans 9.21.

God is a just judge and yet most free.
Q. What is the rule of Gods justice?

A. His own free will and nothing else, for God does not always a thing because
it is just, but therefore any thing is just that is just, because God will have
it so, and yet his will is ever joined with high wisdom, as for example:
Abraham did judge it a most just and righteous thing to kill his innocent
Son; not by the Law, for that did forbid him, but only because he did
understand that it was the special will of God, and he knew that the will of
God was not only just, but also the rule of all righteousness.

Q. Which is your second way that you say God is just?

A. Secondlye: God does infinite things, as he is the God of all, as well of
the reprobate as of the elect; and all these his works are most just and
righteous.

Q. What works or things are those?

A. As to create all things, to conserve all things, to govern all things, to
cause his Sun to shine, and his rain to fall upon all, both good and bad,
and to do good unto all: for, that God is the God of all, is nothing else but
to be the maker of all, preserver of all, the governor and ruler of all, and a
benefactor to all: So God is set forth in Esaias. 46.4. 1. Tim. 4.10. And this
righteousness of God, is his great and infinite goodness: for it is of his
infinite goodness, that he makes all, governs all, and does good to all.

Qu. Which is the third way that God is just and righteous?

An. Thirdly, God does some things as he is the God of the elect only, and
that is after a more special manner then to be the God of all: and for this
cause is he called the God of Abraham, and of his seed; that is, of the elect.
And when he speaks of the elect, he calls himself not only their God, but
also their father, their savior, their husband, and their spouse; to show,
that after a most excellent sort, he is their God, more then he is of other
men. And therefore he is called their righteous father.

John 17.25
Q. What is this special justice which he shows to his elect?

A. 1 It is his special goodness and mercy, from whence, as from a fountain,
springs our election, calling, justification, and glorification by Christ.

2 It is his special truth, it is the accomplishment and fulfilling of all
his promises made to Abraham, and to other of our forfathers, whereby he bound
himself to save us in Christ.

Q. Which is the fourth respect for which God is called just and righteous?

A. Fourthly, we hold that God does something as a Judge, who gives to every
one according to his works, and so we call God a just God, and a most righteous
judge. And that God is a judge of all, and righteous in all his judgments, it
appears by these testimonies of the Scripture. Psalm. 7.8.11. Psalm. 50.4.6. 2.
Tim. 4.8.

Q. Have you any more to say concerning this last justice, or righteousness of
God?

A. Yea: concerning this justice of God, we must note two things.

1 That it is upright and perfect. 2 That it is free.
Q. What mean you when you say, it is perfect or upright?

A. I mean first, that God as a most just Judge, does not only justify and
acquit the righteous, and condemn the unrighteous: but also does love
righteousness, and hate iniquity: Psalm. 5.5.7.

2 As it is the property of a just Judge to give to every one his due,
setting all covetousness, and all respect of persons aside; and chiefly to the
poor and afflicted: so the Lord does and has promised to hear the poor and
desolate, when they cry unto him, if they cannot get justice amongst men
upon earth: and this he does without reward, and without respect of persons,
as it is in Deuteronomy. 10.17.18. Exodus 22.27.

Question. What mean you by saying that it is free?

Answer. I mean that he is not as a Judge that is sworn; but as a Lord most
free, whose will is justice and righteousness it self, and so may at his
pleasure, either absolve besides the law, or punish a fault more gently, then
the greatness of the fault does require.

Question.

But why does God spare some, and punish some more lightly then their sin
deserves, if he be an upright and a just Judge?

A. Because he is a most merciful God, whose mercy exceeds his judgment.
And to be merciful is proper to God, not as he is a Judge, but as he is a God.

Q. But why does he defer their punishments?

A. Not to let the wicked go unpunished: but, as he is slow to anger; so he
will pay home, and increase the punishment when it does come. Again, there is
one certain day (and that is the last day) appointed, wherein God shall take
just punishment of all the wicked and ungodly, which go to their grave without
repentance.

Q. But seeing that all men have sinned, why is not everlasting death awarded
to all, but to some everlasting life?

A. Everlasting death is not due to all, because some are freed from their
sin by the death of Christ, in whom God has punished all their sins.

Q. If life be due to them, show by what right they shall have it.

A. It is due to them being justified in Christ, and made the children of God:
they are also become heirs of the kingdom: and God, in giving them eternal
life, does show himself, not only merciful: but also just of his promise.

Q. If God be just and righteous in all his ways, why did he will the
Israelites to take away the Egyptians goods, and yet forbids us such things
in his law?

A. These things are contrary to his law, if they be done by men only; but if
God does them, they are most just, and most agreeable to his will: for
creatures are bound one to another, but God is bound to none.

Q. If God be just in all his ways, why does he reward the wicked, and punish
the godly?

A. In the wickedest be some good things, and in the godliest be some evil
things: and God has promised to reward virtue, and to punish sin
wheresoever he finds it. Therefore, he rewards the good (yet his own good)
in the wicked with temporal blessings: and punishes sin in the godly (but
their own sin) with temporal punishments: but eternal torments are
reserved in hell for the wicked; and eternal blessings are reserved in heaven
for the godly.

Q. Why does God so unequally punish the sin of the wicked, and reward the
virtue of the godly; punishing the one with infinite punishment, and rewarding
the other with infinite happiness: when as the sin is finite, and the virtue
is finite likewise.

A. He deals not unequally with them, for their sin is infinite, and
therefore their infinite punishment is proportionable to their sin.

Q. How prove you that their sin is infinite?

A. It shall appear if we consider in sin three things.

1 The object, against whom it is committed; and that is God, whose majesty
and goodness is infinite. 2 The subject in which sin is, and that is the
soul, which is infinite. 3 The mind, wherewith sin is committed, would of
it self never cease, and so infinite. The punishment therefore of this sin
must needs be infinite.
Question.

Why then do not the godly suffer infinite punishment also, for their sin
is infinite as well as the others?

Answer.

Christ has suffered it for them, and therefore they are quitte by Christ.

How Christ's death was equal to eternal death.
Q. The sufferings of Christ were not eternal, for he suffered that, which he
did suffer but a while upon the earth, in the garden, and upon the cross; he
lay three days in the grave, and rose again the third day, and is now in
heaven: how then did he suffer eternal punishment for the faithful?

A. Although his torments were not eternal, yet they were equivalent, or equal
to eternal torments. For as much as neither man, nor Angel did suffer them,
but the eternal Son of God in our nature; his person, majesty, deity,
goodness, justice, righteousness, being every way infinite, and eternal; made
that which he suffered, of no less force and value then eternal torments
upon others, yea, upon all the world besides. For even as the death of a
Prince, (being but a man, and a sinful man) is of more reckoning then the
death of an army of other men, because he is the Prince: much more shall the
death and sufferinges of the Son of God, the Prince of all Princes, not
finite, but every way infinite and without sin, much more I say, shall that
be of more reckoning with his father, then the sufferings of all the world: and
the time of his sufferings of more value (for the worthiness of his person)
then if all the world besides had suffered for ever. And therefore blessed be
his name for ever and ever. Amen.

Of the anger of God.
Q. When the scriptures do attribute anger to God, what must we understand by
anger?

A. Not any passion, perturbation, or trouble of the mind, as it is in us: but
this word Anger, when it is attributed to God in the scriptures, it signifies
three things.

1 It signifies a most certain and just decree in God, to punish and revenge
such injuries as are offered to himself, and to his Church, and so it is
understood in Ioh. 3.36. Romans 1.18. 2 It is put in the scriptures for the
threatenings of those punishments and reuenges. As in Psalm. 6. 1. Hose 11.9.
Iona. 2.9. 3 It is taken in the scriptures for the punishments themselves,
which God does execute upon ungodly men: and these are the effects of Gods
anger, or of his decree to punish them, and so it is taken in Romans 2.5. Mat.
3.7. Ephesians. 5.6.
Q. How long does the anger of God endure?

A. The anger of God is threefold: general, temporal, and eternal. Of the
first Paul speaks, Ephesians. 5.6. The second is such as lasts for a time in this
world, and is common both to the godly and ungodly. The third is proper only
to the reprobate in hell, and due also to all men by nature, for wear all
called by nature the children of wrath: but the elect are freed from the
everlasting wrath of god, by their mediator and redeemer Jesus Christ.

Q. Is God angry with all alike?

A. No: for with his children he is angry but as father; but with the
reprobate he is angry as a revenging judge: as appears in Exodus 32.12.
Psalm. 103.13.

Q. How do the scriptures speak of the eternal anger of God?

A. It is called the wrath to come in 1 Thessalonians. 1. vlt. and not in vain, for
when it is come, it is still to come, and never at an end, but the beginning of
it is in this life, Ioh. 3.36.

Q. Is there not a day appointed for it?

A. Yes, and it is called the day of wrath, in To. 2.5. And they which shall
have it bestowed upon them, are called vessels of wrath. Romans 9.22. to show
that the ungodly men of this world (living and dying without repentance) shall
then be emptied of all their pleasures, and shall be filled with torments, as
a vessel is filled with water.

What sins soonest kindle Gods anger.
Q. What sins do most especially kindle the wrath of God against a land or a
kingdom?

A. All sins do provoke Gods wrath, but some more specially then some, and
they are both against the first and second Table.

Q. What sins against the first Table?

A. 1 Idolatry, Romans 1.23.24.25.26.27.28.29.30. Deuteronomy. 32.21.22. 1. Cor.
10.5.7.14.

2 Tempting of God. 1. Cor. 10.9. Psalm. 78.17. 18.19. Psalm. 106.14.15.

3 Murmuring against God, his works and will, 1. Cor. 10.10.

4 Rebellion against God his laws and ordinances. Psalm. 2.3.4.5.9. Psalm.
106.16.17. Numb. 14.9.11.12. Numb. 16.1.2.3.29.30.31 32.33.41.45.49.

5 Blasphemy against God Hebr. 6.6.

6 Profaning the Sabbath. Nehemi. 13.18.

Q. What sins against the second Table.

1 Contempt of parents and governors. Exodus 21.15. Prou. 30.17. Deuteronomy. 27.16.

2 Neglect of Justice, and abusing the place of Justice, by those which God
has placed there. Psalm. 82.6.7. Amos 6.12.

3 Shedding of innocent blood. Genesis 4.10. For as a father cannot abide to see
his children murdered before his face, no more can God.

4 Oppression of the poor. Exodus 22.22.23. Amos 2.3.6.7.8. Mal. 3.5.

5 Filthy and unbridled lust. Genesis 19.4.5.7. 8.9.24. Ezech. 16.49.50.

Lastly, all sins, or any sin is matter sufficient to kindle the wrath of
God, and to make it to flame out against a land: how much more then shall it
be kindled, when all these are put together?

Q. Whether may the wrath of God be foreseen and prevented, or no?

A. The eternal wrath of God which the reprobate shall feel, shall never be
prevented nor quenched.

Q. What say you to the temporal wrath of God?

A. It may be foreseen three manner of ways, First, by the Oracles of the
Prophets, and by reasons drawn from the law. Secondly, by signs in the
heavens, in the earth, and in the sea. Thirdly, one lighter punishment does
often foreshew a greater to come.

When the wrath of God is thus foreseen, there is no way to prevent it from
coming, or to quench it when it is kindled, Psalm 2.12.
but by true repentance, and a lively faith.

Q. What use may we make of the anger of God?

A. The use of this attribute is three fold.

1 It teaches us that anger of it self is not simply evil, for it is most
properly attributed to God.

Q. When is our anger good?

A. When it is such as the scripture attributes to God, and commends to men,
when it says be angry, Ephesians. 4.25.
but sin not.

How we sin in our anger.
Q. How many ways is sin committed in our anger?

A. Three ways, first when we are angry for no cause, or for a light cause.
2. When we are angry with sins, as they are injuries offered to our selves,
but not as they are against God.

3. When we turn our anger against our brethren and the persons of men, which
is due against their sins.

Q. What is the second use that we must make of it?

A. Secondly: Gods anger serves to raise us up from security.

Q. What is your third use?

A. Thirdly: we must not be slothful when we see the signs of Gods anger
and his wrath coming, but use ordinary means to prevent it.

Of the hatred of God.
Q. Whether may hatred be properly attributed to God, or no?

A. Yes, it may: for the scriptures do say of God that he hates iniquity.
Psalm. 5.5.

Objection.

If love be properly attributed to God; then is hatred improperlie attributed
to him: for hatred is contrary to love, and besides that, hatred is an evil
passion of the mind: and therefore it cannot be properly attributed to God?

A. For the understanding of this question, we must note, that hatred which is
attributed to God, may be considered two ways.

1. As it is such as is in us, and so it is indeed very improperly attributed
to GOD. For in us it is a passion, and a grief of the mind, but in God is no
passion. 2. It is to be considered, as the scriptures do teach it to be in
God: and in that sense in which they do attribute it to him, and if we take
hatred in that sense, then it is properly attributed to God.
Three things understood by Gods hatred.
Q. Declare then in what sense or signification the Scriptures do speak of
hatred as it is attributed to God?

A. In the Scriptures the hatred of God has 3. significations.

1 It signifies his denial of good will, and mercy, to eternal salvation: I
have hated Esau, that is, Romans 9.13
I have rejected him, and have not vouchsafed him that favor and grace, which I
have showed upon Jacob.

And we also are said to hate those things which we neglect, and upon which we
will bestow no benefit, nor credit: but do put them besides other things: and
therefore it is said, If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and
mother, and wife, and children, etc. he cannot be my disciple: that is, he that
does not put all these things behind me, and neglect them for me: so that
the love that he bears to them, must seem to be hatred in comparison of that
love, which he must show to me. And in this sense it is properly attributed to
God.

Q. What is the second thing that is understood by the hatred of God?

A. Secondly, it signifies the decree of Gods will, to punish sin, and the
just punishment it self, which he has decreed: as in Psalm. 5.6. and in Job.
30.21. Thou turnest thy self cruelly against me, and art enemy unto me with
the strength of thy hand, that is, thou do so sore chastise me, as if thou
did hate me.

And in this sense also it is properly attributed to God, for it is proper to
God, to take punishment of sinners, and it is a part of his justice.

Q. What is the third signification of this word?

A. Thirdlye, it is put for Gods displeasure, for those things which we hate,
do displease us: and in this sense also it is properly attributed to God, for
it is the property of a most just judge to disalowe and to detest evil,
as well as to allow and like that which is good.

And this may be confirmed by two reasons.

1 It is the property of him that loves, to hate and detest that which is
contrary to himself, and to that which he loves: for love cannot be without
his contrary of hatred, and therefore as the love of good things does properly
agree to God: so does also the hatred of evil things, Psa. 139.21.22.
as they are evil. 2 It is manifest by David, that it is no less virtue to
hate the evil, then it is to love the good. And this hatred of sin (as it is
a virtue and a perfect hatred) cannot be in us but by the grace of God: Ia. 1.37
For every good gift is from above, etc. And there can be no good thing in us:
but it is first in God after a more perfect manner then it is in us.
Whom God does hate, and whom not.
Q. Now show us against whom or what this hatred of God is bent, and against
whom it is not?

A. God is said in the Scriptures to have hated three things.

1 The reprobate before they were created. 2 The same reprobate when they are
become wicked and ungodly. 3 Wickedness it self.
Q. How is it means that God should hate the reprobate before they were created?

A. He is said to hate them (even before the world was) not simplye, but in
comparison of the elect, for as he is said to have loved the elect because he
would their everlasting happiness: so he is said to have hated the reprobate,
because he would not vouchsafe them the same happiness, but did reject them to
eternal woe, and that in his just judgment, although hidden from us.

Q. How is God said to hate them, when they are created and become wicked men?

A. Two ways.

First, so far forth as he detesteth them for their iniquity and hatred
against God; for he hates not their nature which he made himself, but the
sin which cleaves and dwells in their nature: so God does hate and abhor
the wicked themselves, not as they are men, but as they are wicked and
rebellious, for every one both in soul and body is good, as he is created of
God.

Secondly, God is said to hate the wicked men, when he does punish their
impiety and hatred against his Majesty, with many plagues both spiritual and
corporal, both temporal and eternal. Therefore the Psalmist after he had
said: Thou hate all them that work iniquity; presently he adds in the
next verse: Psa. 5.5.6.
Thou shall destroy them that speak lies, the Lord will abhor the bloody and
deceitful man: to show that for God to inflict punishment upon the reprobate
and ungodly, is to hate them: and to hate them, is to destroy them.

Q. How may it appear that God hates iniquity?

A. That is most clear, for he does destroy it in the reprobate by eternal
condemnation, and he does take it from the elect by justification, yea he does
so hate sin, that to take it away from his elect and chosen Children, he has
laid it upon his own Son Jesus Christ, and has condemned it in his flesh,
as Esaias says: Esaias, 53.5.4.
whereby God has showed not only unspeakable love toward his elect, but also
a most holy and perfect hatred against sin.

Q. Does God never hate and detest his elect and chosen?

A. Indeed he is often angry with them as a loving Father, and does oftentimes
seuerelye chastise them, but he never hates them.

Q. How prove you that he never hates them?

A. I prove it by good reason, for his love toward them is perpetual and
constant: therefore it cannot be that he should hate them at any time.

Again, he does never deny them his mercy, but does show mercy unto them,
after they have sinned; for he does endue them with faith and repentance, and
so does pardon their sins: therefore he does not hate them.

Q. If he does not hate them, why does he so seuerlye afflict them.

A. He does that of his love which he bears toward them, for the Scripture
says, whom he loves he corrects, ^^o. 3.11. Heb. 12.6. Cor. 11.32.
and therefore he corrects them because he loves them, that they might not be
damned with the wicked world. See 2. Sam. 7.14.15. and Psalm. 89.30.31.32.33.34.

The uses of Gods hatred.
Q. What is the use of all this doctrine?

A. First we learn hereby that it is a great virtue, and acceptable to God to
hate wickedness, and wicked men themselves: not as they are men, but as they are
wicked and ungodly, as David did. Psa. 139.21.22.
And we are no less bound to hate the enemies of God (as they are his enemies)
then to love God and those that love him: and if we do so, then we must also
fly their company, and have no friendship or fellowship with them.

Secondly, we are taught hereby, that we must distinguish between men's persons
and their sins, and not to hate the persons of men, because they are the good
creatures of God, but their sins we must hate every day more and more. And
this we are taught by the Apostles precept, in 2. These. 3.6.14.15.

Certain questions and answers, declaring the right use of the Law.
Question.

Having already spoken of the ceremonial and judicial parts of Gods law. It
remains now that we consider of the moral part of Gods law, viz. the ten
Commandments.

But before we come to the true sense and meaning of every commandment: I
would have you to show me why the law of God, that is, the ten commandments
must be rightly understood of us?

A. It is necessary that we should understand every point of the law of God,
that so we may know Christ Jesus to be a Savior indeed unto us, and* that so
we may perceive the length, breadth, and depth of his mercies, and, that so
we may be brought to embrace them accordingly.

Q. And cannot that be without the special knowledge of the law?

A. No; for the greatness of our sin, and corruption discovers the riches of
his mercy and favor toward us.

Q. And shall we see how great our sin and corruption is, by opening the
meaning of every commandment?

A. Yea: and then we shall also see that our affection is an utter enemy to
the obedience required in the same.

Q. And what shall we be the better?

A. We may (if God give grace) be the better for it, two ways.

1 When we see so much rebellion and iniquity as it were bleeding in every
part of us, even to death; it will make us with speed seek to Jesus Christ
the only Physician of our souls. 2 When we shall see and consider how many,
and how dangerous wounds he does cure in us, we will never forget, nor smally
account his death, but alalwaies worthily magnify the greatness of his grace
and mercy toward us.
Q. Why, we all know that we are sick and diseased of sin, is not that
sufficient to make us seek to Christ?

A. No: it is not enough to know that we are diseased, and not well, but we
must know a number of diseases to be growing upon us; every one of which does
threaten present death, before we can be so careful as we ought, in seeking
to Christ.

Q. Then belike it is not enough to say we are all sinners.

A. No: but we must know how many parts be infected, and how dangerous the
infection is.

Q. What mean you by that?

A. I mean that sin must be uncased, and unfolded in us, and all the
branches of sin must be laid open to our consciences, by opening the law.

Q. Does the law only show the greatness of our sin?

A. No: but it will show us also the eternal wrath of God, flaming out against
us: and even hell it self, ready to receive us for our transgression; so
dangerous is our infection, and so necessary is the understanding of the law.

Q. What? is it not enough to see the greatness of our sins?

A. No: but we must also see the infinite punishment of our sins.

Q. Why, this is enough to drive men to despair, Is it not?

A. Not the sight of our sins, but the want of faith in the merits of Christ's
death, breeds despair.

Q. Whether must the law be taught alone, or no?

A. No: not the law only, for then we shall be left comfortless: nor the
Gospel only, for then we will wax too presumptuous: but both must go
together, the one to humble us, and cast us down; and the other to comfort us,
and to raise us up again by Jesus Christ: for whosoever will go to heaven,
must go by hell.

Q. Can we not be truly humbled without the knowledge of the law, and of our
sins by the law?

A. No, for it is with us as it is with some notable malefactor.

Q. How is that?

A. For example: A thief being charged with his theft, at the first he will
stand to justify him self, and will ask no favor of any; but when evidence
and just proof come in against him, and he sees by the law nothing but death:
then will he humble himself, cry for mercy, and sue for a pardon.

Q. And is it so with us by nature?

A. By nature every one is given to flatter himself, and to qualify his own
faults, and to have a confidence in his own works: but when we see our own
miserable estate by the law, we will then give over our hold, and betake our
selves wholly to the mercy of God, in Christ Jesus.

Q It should seem by your speech, that we are not humbled by nature?

A. No: For by nature we all like well of our selves, and (which God does most
abhor) we wax proud of those good things, which God works in us, and by
us.

Q. How prove you this that you say?

A. That it is true it appears: first, by the confession of the Apostle Paul
himself. ^. Cor. 12.7.


Secondly, by the Romish Church, which fights so stoutly in defense of man's
merits.

Q. And what conclude you by these two examples?

A. I conclude, that this doctrine of humbling, and submitting our selves unto
God, will not so easily enter into flesh and blood, and therefore we must have
the law of God opened, to humble us* and so to drive us unto Christ Jesus.

Q. Is there any use of the law after we be driven unto Chist?

A. Yea, for when we see what an infinite number of sins he has cured in us,
from what infinite torments he has freed us, and unto what infinite happiness
he has brought us by his death and passion: we will then labor to show our
selves thankful for so great benefits.

Question. How must we show our selves thankful for his death?

Answer. We must decree to walk in duetifull obedience to his will: and the
law will stand us in good stead to quicken us thereunto.

Q. How can that be?

A. When by the law of God we see the number of things that are to be done of
us, and how backwarde we are in doing of them, it will make us to be more
painful and careful in the same.

Q Is there any more use of the law after we be come to Christ?

A. Yea, the knowledge and meditation of the law of God, will help us forward to
true Christianity.

Q. Show me how.

A. It will teach us, not only what to do, but how to do it, in all our
dealings between God and our neighbor.

Q. Why? is it not enough to mean well in serving God, or to serve God by our
good intents, and good meanings?

A. No: but we must be careful to approve our doings by the laws and
statutes appointed for the same.

Q. How prove you this that you say?

A. It is proved two ways.

1. By plain testimonies of Scripture. 2. By Gods judgment showed upon some
that presumed to serve God otherwise then they were commanded by his word.
Q. By what testimonies can you prove it?

A. By two. One is of God himself, in Esai l. 11.12. The other is of Christ,
the son of God himself, in Mat. 15.9.

Q. What does God say in Esaias?

A. What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices, who required
these things at your hands?

Q. How does this prove that God will not be served with our good intents,
and good meanings, excepts they be directed by his laws and commandments.

A. Very well; For if God could not abide the sacrifices and offerings of the
Jews, which he him self commanded (though they were never so devout in their
service) because their lives were wicked: much less will God abide that
service which he himself never commanded, although we mean never so well in it.

Q. What says our Savior Christ to the matter?

A. He says, In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, men's precepts.

Q. How does this prove it?

A. Very well. For if men's precepts were a vain service of God, when they
agreed not with Gods precepts: then much more are men's intents and meanings in
vain, from whence such precepts did arise.

Q. What are these two judgments which you spoke of before?

A. The one was fire from heaven upon Nadab, and Abihu, for offering other fire
then God had appointed, Leuit. 10.1.2.

The other was present death upon Vzzah, for holding up the Ark from falling,
which was more then God commanded him. 2. Sam. 6.6.7.

Q. Why was the law given in such majesty, and with such fearful sightes, as
was read of in Exodus 19.16.18.19.

A. For two causes: First, because we are given to make but small reckoning
thereof, and lightly to regard the authority thereof. Secondly, to show that
the neglect of the word, is the contempt of Gods majesty and honor.

Q. But the Gospel came not with such majesty, did it?

A. Yes, although not after the same manner, for first it was preached by the
Lord Jesus himself, then it was afterward confirmed by signs, wonders and
miracles.

Q Why was this?

A. To show that to neglect the government of the word: is to tread under
feet the majesty of the Lord. Hebr. 2.1.2.3.

Q. Why does Moses say that God spoke? It should seem that God had a mouth and
was like a man?

A. God is said to speak 5. ways in the scriptures.

1 By secret inspiration to the hearts of his people, Psalm. 85.8. 2 By his
works. Psalm. 19.1. 3 When he will have any thing done, he is said to speak.
Genesis 1.3. 4 When he uses the ministry of Angels and men, he is said to
speak. Hebr. 1.1. 5 He is said to speak when he uttered a voice or caused a
sound, which the people might understand.
Q. And could he do that without a mouth?

A. Yea, for although man could not, nor cannot, yet God can, who made al
things of nothing, to whom nothing is impossible.

Q. Why is the law called Gods law?

A. Because God was the author and giver of it.

Q. Why is it called Moses law. Mal. 4.4.

A. Because Moses was the minister and publisher of it.

Q. Why is it called the Jews law, in Ioh. 8.

A. Because it was first ordained for the Jews.

Q. Why does God begin with these words, I am the Lord thy God?

A. To assure us of all mercy and happiness from himself alone, both in this
life, and in the life to come.

Q. Then if we have any blessings either temporal or spiritual, is it because
the Lord is our God?

A. Yea.

Q. How prove you that.

A. In Psalm. 144.15. Hebr. 8.10.12. Ezech. 36.26.

Q. Why does he say, which brought thee out of etc.

A. To put them in mind of that experience which they had of his goodness,
wherein he did manifestly declare himself to be their God. Deuteronomy. 7.8.9.

Q. Why does God put them in mind of this experience?

A. To make them the more willing to yield obedience to his laws and
commandments.

Q. What are we taught by this?

A. We are taught always to have in memory Gods benefits, especially such
as do prove him to love us as his children.

Q. To what purpose should we do so?

A. Because the remembrance of them will make us do our duty to God with a free
heart, and willing mind.

Q. Then I perceive, that Gods benefits may not be passed over without
consideration.

A. No: for they do greatly persuade us to obedience.

Q. Have any used this help?

A. Yea, Joshua did use it, as appears in Joshua 24.

Q. Why did Joshua rehearse so many benefits bestowed upon the Israelites?

A. To reclaim them from sin, and to stir them up to a willing and a free
serving of the Lord.

Q. And did it any thing persuade the people?

A. Yea: For in the same chapter the people also alleged Gods benefits
received, as a reason why they might not, nor would not refuse to obey him.

Q. Where are we commanded to consider of Gods benefits, that we might serve
him?

A. In 1. Sam. 12.24.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by John Windet for Tobie Cook, 1591.


